

Clk loorp Gate
MARJORIE BARNARD


.
§f
/


*
f
* * * . , ,x \ I
S I
■
\0 \
■
,
’
% - : . ■
'
;


THE
IVORY
GATE


v>
V
/
THE SPECIALTY PRESS PTY. LTD.
174 Little Collins Street
Melbourne
$
ro




\ \ . ‘ 4}.? ./♦- |i?
iwJ liS^lMil^^^^w
The Ivory Gate.


THE IVORY GATE
MARJORIE BARNARD
Illustrated by
LEYSHON WHITE
H. H. CHAMPION,
AUSTRALASIAN AUTHORS’ AGENCY
MELBOURNE
1920


c # ■ VJ
* 7 DEC 1920 '
OF THE ' '
“ "Do ytt? Mtotljer ans Tatter **


44097


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
Frontispiece
Blspeth took her candle and went slowly
UPSTAIRS 10
It WAS A LONG WAY FROM HOME 15
In a great fever he began to make a careful
DRAWING OF Q.P 22
She kicked off her shoes and danced one of
HER OWN LITTLE DANCES 28
Wonder of wonders, one of the high gates
WAS AJAR 36


LIST OF CONTENTS
DEDICATION 4
SHADOWS 9
THE RUNAWAYS 13
THE FIRST KEWPIE DOLL 20
JOY O’NEIL 23
BETTY 29
RUTH-WHO-WAS-MILDRED 40
A LEGEND OF THE BUSH 52
SANTA CLAUS 61
THE LEADEN HERO 66
A POSITION OF TRUST 74
A BUSH WALK 82
HIGH SCHOOL GHOSTS 85
THE UNFORTUNATE WELCOME 89




SHADOWS
‘ ‘ It’s time to go to bed, dearie, ’ ’ said Grandmother. Elspeth
silently began to pack up her playthings.
Why did bedtime always come so soon? How she dreaded
it! The long, cold stairs and the little bare room above that
was no longer bare in the night, but tilled with terrible, grotes-
que shadows that even the candle failed to dispel. Elspeth
even thought it made them angry, for by the wavering light
they danced upon the wall and stretched out their hideous hands.
She knew just how they would look, and cold fear crept up her
little less.
“Good-night, Grandraama,” she said, and lifted a small,
cold cheek for a kiss. She could not tell Grandmother about
them (she always referred thus to the shadows), for Grand-
mother was so strong-minded no shadow would ever dare to
threaten her. Grandmother must never know. She would
say: “Fiddlesticks! The child’s dreaming: Jane, give Miss
Elspeth a good dose of medicine.’ ’ Elspeth had had experi-
ence. Besides, they would be so triumphant and worse than
ever.
To-night, as Grandmother kissed the child, “Why, my dear,”
she said, “you are cold! Run along quickly, and don’t forget
to clean your teeth.”
Elspeth had lived with Grandmother since she was two
years old, for her mother and father lived in far away India.


But lately letters had come over the sea saying that Mother was
coming home—such tender letters filled with longing for “her
baby.” Elspeth was sure, quite sure, it would be all right
when Mother came home, but that did not help matters to-night,
for it was nearly a week before she was expected. “And one
never knows what will happen in a week, ’ ’ Elspeth thought.
Elspeth took her candle and slowly went upstairs. The
fatal door was shut! She pushed it open in an access of blind
courage. The wind from an open casement caught the candle-
flame, and together they struggled for a second; then the candle
went out, leaving the room in darkness, save for the eerie light
thrown by the window.
The door slammed behind her. She could feel them round
her. The puff of wind died down. They had blown it out,
she knew. The candlestick fell from her trembling fingers;
she heard it roll softly on the matting and then, with a clear
tinkle, over the boards. Elspeth dared not recover it, for she
knew just where it lay in the dark alcove, where all the shadows
mustered. Terrible fear gripped her; she was tongue-tied.
Then she gathered her strength for one great leap on to the bed.
With frenzied fingers she pushed down the bed-clothes and
crept beneath them, boots and all.
There she lay quaking, for she knew that they were gathering
round her—hosts of them; she could feel their eyes watching
and watcning. How their fingers were closing round the bed-
clothes to draw them from her—the clothes moved, she was sure.
“Mother!” she gasped. Then there came a great darkness
and a great forgetting. Gradually through the darkness came
a silver light that spread from one point—like great wings
across the blackness. Elspeth saw the silver wings
closing gently and surely about her, but was not afraid, for
between the wings she saw a face surrounded with an aureole
of golden hair, a face she had seen somewhere in dreams long
ago, and the light that made the face so beautiful was Love.
The wings closed about the child, bore her up away—away
through the darkness. Strong, tender arms held her, and there


were kisses on her cheeks and among the soft curls on her brow.
Then Elspeth understood. This was her Mother, who had come
—at last! and she laid her smiling cheek against the gentle
bosom. Fear died, cast out by perfect Love.
All that the Mother-spirit whispered was just ‘‘ My baby!
my baby!” and then, “You shall not be frightened again, my
darling. Mother will show you what the shadows really are.”
Upwards, ever upwards borne on those sure wings that never
for a moment faltered, Elspeth held closely in arms that never
relaxed, they slipped through the Gates of Night into the Land
of the Things that seem. There was the Castle of Dreams, half in
rosy sunlight, half in shade, that stands on the bank of the River
called Sleep. Against the horizon lay the Fields of Fancy, full
of flowers, whose rosy petals, sliding down the air, lie on some
mortal eyes and bring day dreams. Out to the west where
the sun goes down, a great black structure upreared itself against
the sky, sinister and strange. Seeing it the Mother-spirit flew
faster, and her arms crushed closer round the child.
“What is it?” asked Elspeth.
“It is the most unreal of all. Its name is not for you.”
Looking back, Elspeth saw the shadow of a sickle sweeping
downwards to the earth.
Dark walls rose before the travellers and a door well guarded,
but the spirit of a Mother can go anywhere. They entered,
and stood in some vast-work-shop. Shadowy workmen, bend-
ing over cauldrons, separated themselves from the semi-dark-
ness. From the dense shadows of the dome-like roof came a
voice, “Now, let us make Fear:—Take 6 ozs. of Lack of Faith,
3 ozs. of Lack of Will, 2 ozs. of Fancy. Grind these together.”
This was done, each workman toiling in the smoke until it
was all made. “Come and see the shadows,” the Mother-
spirit said, and into an adjoining room they passed unmolested.
Here lay many strange limp black things upon the floor.
“These are shadows. See how harmlessly they lie.”
Elspeth trampled on them, laughing. Presently there came
a workman, bearing a cauldron full of Fear, and began to do a


very strange thing indeed. The Mother-spirit drew Elspeth
aside to watch. He took each shadow and sprinkled it with
Pear. Immediately it stiffened, and became a terrible, moving,
living reality. For a moment Elspeth trembled; then she
remembered of what Fear was made.
“They are not real, ,, she cried in a clear voice. At the
words they reeled and crumpled up to nothing. A noise like
thunder rent the air; the floor quaked beneath their feet; the
dome above cracked; the walls crumbled, and the whole fortress
of dread sank before the denial of a child. Through the riven
roof poured in the glorious sunlight.
Elspeth opened her eyes very wide; their glance fell upon
the well-known furniture of her little upstairs bedroom. Well
known—but yet how different! The sunshine streamed through
the windows, and bending over her was the face of the Mother-
spirit, only this time it was no spirit but real flesh and blood,
and a real mother.
‘‘ My baby !my baby! ’ ’ she whispered. Elspeth clung to
her with one little startled cry, “Mother!”
Mother had come home unexpectedly when the pale finger of
dawn was on the latch of the day. She had come overland
half of the way, and arrived a whole week sooner. Then she
could not spend the night at the old-fashioned inn three miles
away, for a wild longing drew her to her girlhood’s home, the
home of her little one. Nothing would do but she must creep
upstairs to see her own dear baby before she went to bed. She
had found Elspeth under a crumpled heap of bedding, all
dressed, the marks of her deadly fear upon her white face.
Then they had taken off her clothes and put on the little white
nightie and it had been oh! such a long time before the grey
eyes opened that Mother grew paler and Grandmother dared not
meet her eyes.
But now the night had gone, and joy was come with the
morning.
“I knew you had come, Mother,” whispered Elspeth.


THE RUNAWAYS
Robert had been in trouble all day, and he was heartily tired
of it. He had broken Cecily’s doll —that was an accident, and
what were dolls anyhow? Then Cecily had cried—just like
a girl—and Mother had called him a cruel, naughty boy, and
had sent him outside with the sad, disappointed look in her eyes
that made him feel so uncomfortable. He had been set to
mind the baby, and what should the silly little rascal do but
swallow a pebble the minute he turned his back. Of course the
trouble was that Baby did not quite swallow the stone; if he
had no one would have been any the wiser. He had only half-
swallowed it —and then choked.
Robert had only just escaped from the storm that had broken
as soon as the pebble had been recovered, and Mother had some-
what got over her fright.
He kicked stones moodily and plunged his hands into the
depths of his pockets. He knew quite well that Father would
be home at six o’clock. It was four now, and he could hear
already his stern, “What is the meaning of this, sir?” What
was worse, he had a horrid, heavy sense of guilt at the bottom
of his heart. Try as he might he could not conjure up a satis-
factory feeling of injured innocence. So he climbed the fence
and sat dismally on one of the big round posts, one leg in, the
other outside the fence.


A rather shabby, rough-headed boy was coming down the
road, with a newspaper parcel under his arm. He walked a
little lame on his right foot, and seemed a year or two older than
Robert.
“Hullo!” said Robert, who was always friendly, “Where
are you going ?”
“Wherever the road goes,” said the other laconically, and
showed no sign of stopping to talk.
Robert brought both legs to the outside of the fence. He
wasn’t going to be thwarted. “It doesn’t go anywhere,”
he said, “it just goes on, and on, and on, and then it ends in
the bush. Do you want to go into the bush?”
‘ ‘ No, ’ ’ said the boy, pushing back his tow-coloured hair with
the grimiest of paws. Then suddenly he became confidential,
probably because he was tired and just a little lonely. He
came close up to the fence, and almost whispered, “I’ve run
away.” Then he waited for the effect, and he got it.
4 ‘ Truth and honour ? ’ ’ whispered Robert.
The hoy looked important. “I couldn’t stand it any longer,
so I just cut and run. I was alius in rows and there was school,
and the teacher alius telling Dad how stupid I was. Then I
read ’bout Robinson Crusoe, and how he ran away and had adven-
tures, so now I’ve run away too. I don’t know yet when the
adventures are going to begin, hut it’s fine to do what you like, ’ ’
and Dick felt more satisfied with himself and the world than he
had felt since he lost sight of the last familiar landmark.
Robert screwed himself round on the top of the post. “I’ve
read Robinson Crusoe, too,” he commenced, but suddenly he
had an idea. “May I come too?” he asked breathlessly.
“Please do let me come too?”
Dick hesitated; there was only room for a solitary runaway
in the picture, but night was ahead and company would be
undeniably pleasant, so he said, with the air of one conferring a
great favour, “Yes, you can come. Only you gotter promise
you’ll go on to the end, and not turn baby and want your
Mammie when it gets dark.”


WKtKtKttKtKKMKKKStBBtKOBtSKtt^
if IP 111 It# 8 ||| ||| %pm '^:' f 'll •:' •* "'
|L**1 lip * -^'
*B I B "w
. s
Elspeth took her candle and slowly went upstairs.
See ‘Page 10




Robert scorned the idea, and would have jumped down on the
road there and then if Dick had not waved his paper parcel and
bade him get his “swag.” Robert had a faint idea that a
“swag” was something to eat, but he wasn’t going to confess
ignorance, so he jumped down on the home side of the fence
and warily made his way to the house. Dick leant against
the fence and waited. Presently Robert came back armed with
a newspaper parcel, similar to his own. Inside were apples
picked from the tree as he passed, a generous wedge of cake,
a handful of corned beef slices seized promiscuously, an old knife
he found in the pantry, and Robert’s new football. He tucked
it under his arm, scaled the fence, dropped down beside Dick,
and in a minute they were trudging down the road together.
It was all so simple. Robert, when Dick at last fell silent,
began to paint, in the most vivid colours his imagination sup-
plied, the interesting scene that would take place, when he
returned him in about twenty years’ time, a famous man. He
would take Cecily a new doll, and sit with his feet on the mantel-
piece, like cousin George, telling them stories of all the wonderful
things he had done, and they would all be surprised and glad.
Meanwhile the sun was going down and the road had narrowed
to a track. It was a long way from home.
“We’d better camp here,” said Dick, who felt he must
maintain a professional air, tired as he was.
They lit a fire of dry brushwood and turned their attention
to tea. The corned beef had been well pressed into the cake,
and half the icing was adhering to one of the apples, but neither
minded that, and Dick was gracious enough to praise the fore-
thought of the knife. He had his school lunch and some bread
besides, wrapped up in his newspaper with his most cherished
possessions—a dirty copy of Robinson Crusoe, a snake skin, and
a bundle of cigarette cards. They ate nearly everything, and
Robert talked cheerfully of wonders and adventures—he had
not walked as far as Dick.
“Golly, but I’m thirsty,” said Dick, as he threw away his


second apple core. “I’ve walked miles and miles, and I’ve
never had anything to drink. ’’
“So am I,” agreed Robert. “There ought to be a creek
quite near.”
The Bush was beginning to look mysterious and dark, but
they were thirsty, terribly thirsty, so that their throats were
sore, and the corned beef had made them worse.”
“It must be quite near,” pointed out Robert the hopeful.
“D’you know I can almost hear it.”
“Come on,” said Dick, and they plunged valiantly into the
undergrowth.
The ground was rough and seemed to slope. Presently
Robert took Dick’s hand and he didn’t seem displeased.
‘‘ Do you hear it ?” he asked presently. They both stopped,
but it was very quiet. “There’s always a creek at the bottom
of a hill,” urged Robert, and they pushed on, but no creek
appeared. The undergrowth grew thick and it was very nearly
dark. “It’s no good,” said Robert at last, with uneasiness in
his voice. “There isn’t any. Let’s get back to the road.”
They were shoulder to shoulder now, bumping each other at
every step. They plodded on for what seemed to be hours,
then Dick stopped and said, with just a suspicion of a break
in his voice. “Don’t you think we ought to be there now?”
Robert stumbled. It was not only the dryness in his throat
that made his voice hoarse. “It must be the right way,” he
whispered. They toiled on. Then Robert fell and did not
get up. The fall broke down his self-control and he began
to cry miserably, sitting on the ground, “I can’t go any
further,” he wailed. “I’m so tired and thirsty, and—and—
oh, I know we are lost, and it’s dark.”
Dick sat down beside him and held him tight in the dark.
“It’s all right, kid,” he said gruffly. “I’m awfully sorry I let
you come. Adventures ain’so nice, are they? Don’t cry like
that. When it’s light, it’ll be as easy as puff to find our way.
Then we can find somewhere to work a bit. ’ ’
Dick had not quite capitulated yet. Robert went on crying


from sheer weariness, but fell asleep almost at once, he was so
worn out. It was worse for Dick then. It was so utterly
lonely, and the bush is full of strange noises after dark. Dick
sat rigid with watching and listening, but he was tired beyond
words and at last he fell asleep too. When he woke the bush
was flooded with unearthly light. The moon had risen in a
cloudless sky and transformed the world. A fever of excite-
ment seized him. He shook the sleeping Robert.
“Wake up! Wake up!” he cried loudly, so that the sound of
his own voice in all that stillness frightened him. “Wake up,
we must find the road.” He dragged Robert to his feet, blind
with sleep.
“Mummie,” he whimpered, “don’t, Mummie.”
“We’ll find the road; it’s quite light.” Dick repeated,
and Robert, now wide awake, staggered after him through the
bush.
They only stopped once for breath. Then Dick said, “When
I find the road I’m going home.”
“So’m I,” said Robert, and straightway felt better. He
was far past minding any paternal chastisement that might be
meted out to him on account of the doll or the pebble.
“Look! Look!” cried Dick excitedly. “It’s a track, and
tracks always go somewhere! ’ ’
He rushed ahead, regardless of prickly bushes, dragging a
breathless Robert after him. The track was a broad, well-
worn one that stretched white, like a parting through the
shadowy bush. They did not know whether to turn to the right
or the left but they chose the left at random. They had scarcely
walked for five minutes along the path when they suddenly
became aware of something dark lying across the white ribbon
track in front of them.
“It—it’s something,” quavered Robert.
They were both wishing they had turned to the right, when
the something began to move. The boys turned in panic and
fled, but a voice came crying after them, “Help! Help!” It
was such a very human voice that their fear fell away from


them, and when they turned they could see it was a man,
sitting up on the pathway, calling to them.
‘‘Thank goodness someone has come! My horse stumbled
over that log and threw me. 1 think my leg is broken.” Then
he stopped. “How did you boys get here at this hour?” But
he did not wait for an answer. “Can you ride? My horse is
somewhere near; you must go quickly. My baby is ill; I was
going for the doctor and it was so far by the road that I took
the short cut. Can you ride, boy?”
“Yes, sir,” said Dick, who had quite got over his fright now
that the unbearable spell of the midnight bush was broken.
“Go! Go quick, ’ ’ cried the man in a perfect fever. ‘‘ It
might be too late. Follow this track till you come to the road,
then turn to the right and ride straight on till you come to
houses, the doctor’s is the second—a red lamp, you know, and
say Mr. Phillips’s baby is ill and he must come at once—say
very ill. Do go.”
The man tried to rise, but the injured leg sent a stab of pain
through him, and he fell back with a groan. Dick became alert
and eager.
“You stay here, kid,” he said to Robert, “and look after
him,” pointing to the man, “till I get back.”
Dick, leading the horse by the bridle, was soon out of sight
round the bend of the track, fearless now he had his bearings
again and there was a plain duty before him.
It seemed a very long time to Robert and Mr. Phillips before
he returned though he had ridden as fast as he could. This
time he was followed by the doctor and his man, who carried a
light stretcher. Mr, Phillips was carefully lifted on to it, but
he could hardly suffer the doctor to wait to do anything for him,
but urged him to go on. Dick and Robert took one end of the
stretcher between them and the doctor’s man took the other, and
they slowly carried it along the track, peering at the ground to
avoid stumbling in the uncertain light. Robert was tired out, and
his arms ached fearfully. He had fought sleep valiantly all
that long time while Dick was going for the doctor, and now


nothing appealed to him like the thought of his little bed in the
nursery at home.
Robert thought he heard a shout; then he was sure of it;
and within five minutes he caught the flash of a lantern in the
bush.
‘ ‘ That ’ll be your people looking for you, ’ ’ said Mr. Phillips
from the stretcher. Robert had told him all about their adven-
ture. The two boys and the doctor’s man stood still and
shouted.
The light bobbed about excitedly and came nearer. Pre-
sently a very tired and dishevelled Daddy, accompanied by a
couple of neighbours, appeared. Robert would have dropped his
side of the stretcher, had not Dick saved the situation just in
time by taking his place as well as his own. When the excite-
ment subsided the journey continued, but someone else took
the boys’ place at the head of the stretcher.
Robert’s father could not get him home to his Mother quick
enough, and Dick went with them. Mother cried—just as if
she wasn’t glad to see him back, thought Robert—and when
she said, “Oh, Robert, you have made your Mother old in one
night,” he only whimpered, “I’m so tired, Mummie,” so she
put him to bed.
It was a very different home coming to the one he had
imagined. When he was safely tucked in and a bed was found
for Dick, though it was very near the usual getting up time,
Father began to say something about punishing the “young
limb” so that he would not forget it.
But Mother said—as mothers always do—“Don’t be too
hard on him, dear. He has suffered enough' already, and after
all they saved that little baby’s life.”
“That was really Dick’s doing,” said Father, a little
softened. “He’s a smart boy, and I would be glad to give him
a place in the office. He doesn’t seem to like school.”


THE FIRST KEWPIE DOLL
There was once upon a time a most particularly naughty
fairy—he was a boy fairy, of course—and his name was Quince-
blossom Periwinkle, but, because he never waited long enough to
hear anyone say it all, he was generally called Q.P. for short.
It is quite impossible to give you any idea of just how naughty
he was. He tripped the wisest fairies up with strings of cob-
web, and he misdirected the breezes. It is said that it was
he who made the aspens shake by telling them dreadful stories
in the twilight.
He was put to school with the daisies who, as you know, are
saints among the flowers, and wear their halos every day in the
week, not only on Sundays, which shows they are saints of the
very first water. They could no nothing with Q.P., and at the
end of the second day folded their leaves in pious resignation
and sent him home Since then, as no one could be found to
undertake his education, he had been gloriously free to be just
as naughty as be wished.
By far his most daring exploits were several incursions made
into the realm of mortals, where there was an old toy-maker who
lived in a village near by, and made dolls and ships and tops and
kites, but chiefly dolls. Into his workshop sometimes this bad
bold Q.P. would creep of a night through a broken window
pane. He teased the dolls and jeered at them for being


merely dolls, until they were all angry and discontented and their
expressions were quite spoilt. Of course no one would buy ugly
dolls, so they were all what you might call “on the shelf.’ ’
Q.P. even told the very best doll in the establishment that her
nose turned up, and from that hour she contracted a desperate
squint trying to look at it.
At last all the dolls, led by Golliwog and the olfended lady
with the squint, arranged a mass attack on Q.P. next time he
appeared. They waited anxiously every night till at last, very
late one Friday night, they heard his moths draw up at the
broken window—he drove tandem by the way. Then they
heard him, slithering down the window pane and alighting on
the shelf, chuckling all the time. Golliwog’s eyes bulged more
and more, and the talking doll said, 1 * Mama! Mama! ’ ’ and then
they all make an attack on Q.P.
Who knows what might have happened if the lady with the
squint had not toppled right over the edge of the shelf in her
hurry ? The clatter—for she broke her face, poor thing, so that
her eyes troubled her no more—brought in the old toy-maker,
who had been sitting up late in the next room, trying to think
of a perfectly, absolutely new and original toy for a very cross
Princess who had mumps. If the very cross Princess who had
mumps did not have an absolutely new and original toy every
day she had a screaming fit instead, which frightened her royal
father into offering perfectly splendid rewards to people who
could bring new toys to pacify her. So that was what the old
maker was thinking of when he heard the crash, because he
wanted very badly to make his fortune.
He rushed into the workshop with a candle and discovered
all the dolls in a heap at the end of the shelf, except poor Pris-
cilla Anne—who squinted—and she was lying on the floor, as I
said, very badly hurt indeed. He began to pick up the dolls
one by one, muttering to himself. Right at the bottom of the
heap under Golliwog something wriggled; that was Q.P. The
old man in his flurry very nearly mistook him for a mouse. He
bore him off, however, to examine him in the next .room. He


fingered Q.P. all over, and twirled him round by his absurd
ultra-modern little topnot, a head-dress no respectable fairy ever
wears. Then the old man had an idea, and in his excitement
nearly squeezed all the remaining life out of Q.P.
The toy-maker always talked to himself. “I’ve got it,” he
said. “I’ll make one just like it for the Princess with mumps.
I don’t know what it is, but I think it must be new and
original,’' So in a great fever he began to make a careful
drawing of Q.P.
Seeing this Q.P. took heart and put on his most knowing
expression—he was even beginning to like the adventure. Soon
all the drawings were ready for the making of the model, but
there was still a furrow between the old man’s eyes.
“But what am I going to call it?” he inquired of no one in
particular. “It must have a taking kind of name—er —er, let
me see ”
“My name is Q.P.,” interjected that gentleman, now quite
recovered.
“Eh, what?” cried the old man, clutching the tablecloth.
“Q.P.,” repeated the fairykin, gently but firmly, “and now
I must bid you good night,” and he made a very deep bow,
the only accomplishment he had ever learned—and that came
naturally.
A second later he was out of the room and into the next,
scrambling out of the broken window pane quicker than he had
ever scrambled before. The old man was far too surprised to
stop him. For a time the toy-maker was quite stunned, and
sat looking at the book on which Q.P. had stood. Then he took
up his pen and wrote under his drawings “Kewpie.”
Three days later he packed the first kewpie doll into a big
white box, addressed to the cross Princess with mumps, though
he didn’t express it in that way. He had tied an emerald
green sash round its waist, and a big chiffon bow on its absurd
topnot—which was not true to Nature, for the real Q.P. never
wore anything but a neck-lace. Then the old toy-maker smiled
broadly and began to think how he would spend the reward.


JOY O’NEIL
Her face was her fortune —her face and her nimble toes —
and it was practically all the fortune she and her father had
between them. She was Joy O’Neil, aged seven, and her father
John O’Neil, an actor.
He had planned to call himself “Warwick Carmarthen/’
when he rose to be a great actor —but he never rose; in fact, you
could scarcely call him an actor at all, for he never had any
lines to say. He just took the part of footman standing in
the back ground, or w r as one of a crowd who walked on and
walked off, but he managed to see a lot that way, and had plenty
of tales to take home to Joy, even if there was little money. He
had to be both Father and Mother to her, and he did his best.
They were very happy when he was at home, but it was lonely
when he was out, and the one thing Joy never got used to was
being lonely.
When she was left all alone she used to play at “theatres.”
She would put on her little night gown and a tattered old blue
sash with a wreath of paper flowers on her hair —Daddy had
brought them home one night—then she would kick off her clumsy
shoes and dance, little dances of her own, and sing songs she
made up herself to her own tunes. Best of all she liked to


pretend to be a fairy, with her father’s umbrella for a wand. It
was the best she could find, though its clumsiness hurt her. She
would not play this every day, because then it might get just
ordinary and horrid, like bread and dripping, from which it
may be seen that Joy was quite a philosopher. Joy had never
been inside a theatre, but she knew all about it. The great
event of her life happened when her father accepted an engage-
ment to be a farm hand, a footman, and various other things in
a pantomime.
He brought home wonderful stories of little girls and boys
taking part, and of a beautiful fairy, “Golden Wings,” who
took the chief role. The stories of the fairy “Golden Wings,”
so filled her mind that she could not even look at the umbrella
wand, and cried over the tatters in the blue sash and the grub-
biness of the paper flowers that before had seemed perfection.
On the morning of the first dress rehearsal she broke down
altogether. She had never said a word about the wand and
very little about her loneliness, indeed she was always so glad
to see Daddy come home that she forgot that she had been
lonely, but to-day it all came out with many sobs. Daddy said
something she could not understand, and caught her by the
shoulders almost roughly. “You shall come, you shall,” he
cried more fiercely than she had ever heard him speak. Then
he said, “Run along and put on your glad rags and I’ll find a
way for you to see the rehearsal.”
The glad rags being very few and very simple, did not take
a minute to adjust. Despite the fact that they were half an
hour too early, they had to run for fear they would be late.
Joy was so excited that she almost forgot to enjoy herself, and
Daddy had to tell her all his best stories to calm her as they
looked unseeingly into shop windows, waiting for the theatre
to open. Joy and her father were the first there, and he led
her down into the stalls. The very building filled her with awe.
John O’Neil knew it was against all rules to bring her there,
but surely no one would mind even if they did see her—and
he didn’t care. She was going to have this little pleasure.


The loneliness and the umbrella wand rankled in his heart.
He had to blow his nose hard when ever he thought of it.
He chose a seat for her, well back in the shadows, and settled
her comfortably.
“Now, darling,” he said presently “you won’t be lonely or
mind being left here, will you? You must stay right here, as
still and quiet as a little mouse, and when it’s all over Daddy
will come as soon as ever he can and take you home.”
“Yes, Daddy, oh yes, and how could I be lonely when there
are going to be so many people and you up there. 0, it is the
nicest thing that ever happened in all my life after being born
at all, you know,” and she began hugging him anew. But
time was getting on and he gently put her back on her seat and
turned away.
Left alone, Joy looked around. She discovered gilded
cherubs away up in the roof. She was fascinated by the huge
velvet curtain and the boxes, and wondered if the actors got
dressed in there, but decided that it was there they went to
watch the play while they were not on the stage.
The discovery, too, that she herself was actually sitting on a
blue plush seat gave her new thrills. She spread out her short
skirt and posed elegantly, till she was tired; she looked at
everything and was impressed.
Three gentlemen came and sat not far from her and talked.
Then one went away and the light was shut out quite suddenly.
She knew this would happen, but it made her feel very
strange all the same. Something like panic seized her, but
she held on to the arm of her chair, and in a moment a bright
light showed under the curtain and it began to move.
It was like the dream of her whole life come true. She for-
got it was only make believe, and thought she was looking on
the glittering fairy world. She sat, leaning forward with
hands pressed against her throat.
The comic scenes wearied her, for she did not understand
half the jokes, and she wanted to be gazing at the fairy “Golden


Wings’’ all the time. She loved the music, too, and the won-
derful dancing; her feet tingled to be doing it too, till it was
almost a pain.
The climax came at the end of the last act when the fairy
appeared in a chariot shaped like a shell, attended by a crowd
of tiny fairies dancing and singing, while ropes of flowers and
lights were let down from the flies.
Joy stood up, her hands struggling with one another at
her throat, she unconsciously moved into the passage way.
Just then fairy “Golden Wings” stood up and raised her
arms, showing her wonderful glitterings wings, and began to
rise slowly while the chorus sang “To Fairy Land; to Fairy
Land.” There was the sound of light feet racing and a clear
voice, “Take me too, please, take me too!” The song stopped
from sheer surprise, and there was a hush.
Joy stood still in the glare of the stage lights, aghast by a
sudden realization of what she had done. Her arms fell to her
sides, but she stood stock-still, unable to move, more frightened
than she had ever been. Then a big strong arm went round her
and a big, comfortable voice said, “It’s all right, lassie,” as she
was drawn down into the shadow of the seats again by one of
the gentlemen.
It was such a slight, frail body in his arms, and they were
such fatherly arms, that in a minute she was sobbing on his stiff
white shirt front with her arms around his neck just as if he
were her own dear Daddy. The music went on and the fairy
ascended to fairy land and the little fairies were caught up on
the ropes of flowers, but Joy had no eyes for them. The man
said over and over again, “It’s all right, don’t you cry, lassie.
You haven’t done anything wrong, and no one is angry.”
Joy’s father, who had been impersonating a Triton at the
back of the stage, saw everything and was filled with dismay.
That it should happen at all was bad enough, but that it should
happen in the presence of the distinguished visitors, one the
manager of an important theatre, tilt other an eminent theatri-
cal critic, was worse still.


When the act was finished, the curtain ran down and the
manager made all haste from the wings. “What happened?
Who is she?” he gasped. But before the man who held Joy
had time to answer, Joy’s father himself came up. He looked
flushed and apologetic, and he still wore his glistening Triton
dress.
‘‘This is my little girl, ’’ he began. “I’m sorry it happened,
sir. I should not have brought her, but she was so lonely and
I never dreamed ” At the sound of the dear voice Joy had
slipped off the great critic’s knee and flung herself into her
father’s arms.
“Oh, Daddy,” she cried, her voice catching. “I didn’t
mean—l thought it was really true. I want to go home quick,
quick. ’ ’
The manager was not angry. No, not the least bit in the
world. They all did their best to soothe her, and Daddy ex-
plained everything. After a time Joy herself took courage and
told them about the theatre game. The manager watched her
critically, and as the delicate face lit up he thought what an
attractive little figure she would make on the stage in one of the
dainty frocks.
The great critic picked Joy up and set her on his shoulder,
just for all the world as if he had been an ordinary man, and
not great at all, and they all walked towards the stage.
A woman touched the manager’s sleeve, and he turned aside
to speak to her.
“Joy,” he cried, “the fairy ‘Golden Wings’ wants to see
you most especially. Will you go?”
“ Oh! ” was all Joy said, but her eagerness to scramble down
from the big man’s shoulder made him smile, a little painful
twisted smile that no one noticed. She pressed her hands to-
gether in a quick, characteristic way. “Are you sure it’s me
and not one of the other little girls?” Everyone was sure,
and the next minute Joy was following the woman up a flight of
stairs and wondering why she walked so slowly.
When she was gone the manager turned to her father. “If


she were suitable, would you let her take part? It is so hard
to find pretty children!” O’Neil thought for a moment of late
nights and tedious rehearsals, then he thought of the loneliness
and said, “Yes, sir.”
“Very well. Bring her round to-morrow morning and I’ll
see. If she’s smart, she could pick it up in a few days,” and
the busy man was gone.
Joy meanwhile was having a beautiful time, for the fairy
“Golden Wings” was just what the pantomime said she was—
the fairy who loved children. Joy ate chocolates, not the half-
penny sticks she bought sometimes at the corner shop, but big,
dusky ones, in little crinkly boats—and all different inside.
She forgot to be shy altogether, and told the fairy everything.
All good things come to an end, however, and incredibly soon
Joy was trotting home by her father’s side, saying over and over
again, “Oh, wasn’t she beautiful? Wasn’t it all beautiful?”
The next morning Joy made a wonderful toilet that included
the blue sash and the paper flowers, and it took a great deal of
explanation on Daddy’s part to make her take them off again.
Arrived at the theatre, all was hurry, preparing for a rehearsal.
The manager was busy, but found a minute to see Joy.
She kicked off her shoes and danced one of her own little
dances, and sang the only real song she knew in a high childish
treble.
The manager said, “She’ll do.”
Long afterwards the fairy “Golden Wings” used to tell a
story about a very great and popular actress, and I think it was
the story of Joy O’Neil.


BETTY
“Come out of the dust, you naughty boy.”
Rob continued to shuffle luxuriously in the middle of the
road, sending up clouds of dust at every step. Betty stopped.
“Come out ”
“It’s nicer than the path and dust’ll rub off,” he said,
slowly. It was not worth while arguing, so Betty sniffed and
walked on.
Rob did everything slowly. He was rather a stolid little
boy, nearly eight years old, with a round serious face and a
thatch of sandy hair. Betty, who was his twin, but nearly an
inch taller—a matter of secret though deep sorrow to Rob—was
a dark little witch, with bright eyes and imagination enough for
them both. Many a time had she led Rob into mischief he
would never have thought of himself. Betty was always looked
upon as the bright one of the family, and even then her mother
felt that some day her quick mind and brilliant imagination
would bring her something besides endless scrapes. But in the
meantime she had to be fed and dressed, scolded and dragged
up somehow with the rest of her brothers and sisters. There
were five of them too, and only one tired, busy mother and a
most incompetent maid to do everything, and only one dear
worried father to pay for everything.


The suburb where they lived was one of the highly respect-
able, middle class variety. There were a few really big houses
left from the time when the district was divided up into large
estates. One of these houses occupied a corner, barely two
minutes’ walk from Betty’s home. It stood well back from the
road among old trees and an over-grown tangle of garden. It
was a very sad house with many shuttered windows, and a few
that were sometimes open.
It had a grim, tragic look w T ith its closed eyes and neglected
garden. It never took the slightest interest in the pert subur-
ban villas clustering thickly in the streets about it. Betty
loved this house, because nobody else seemed to love or pity it
in its hard, stony grief.
Every day on coming home from school she went to the high
iron gate and peeped in. It was generally silent and desolate,
but sometimes she saw a servant cross the garden, and once or
twice too she had seen a little girl playing there.
On this particular afternoon she pressed her face to the bars
of the gate as usual. The next moment she caught Rob’s hand
with excitement.
“Oh, look!” she gasped.
The little girl was quite near the gate, and she was the most
beautiful person Betty had ever seen. Her hair was long and
shone like gold, her cheeks were pink and she was dainty and
small, no bigger than Rob. Betty knew at once that she was
like the fairies in the big fairy tale book at home. Rob said
“Golly!”
The little fairy girl looked up and saw the children at the
gate and smiled a little shy smile. Betty would have liked to
have talked to her, but she came no nearer and presently a high
voice called, ‘ ‘ Miss Loraine, Miss Loraine, ’ ’ and the child turned
and ran towards the house. Betty watched her until she dis-
appeared. Then she turned to Rob, her face quivering and her
eyes alight with excitement.
“Robbie,” she said, “Oh, Robbie, she’s a princess, and this
is an enchanted castle. Why didn’t we know before? Oh,
Rob, isn’t Loraine a gorgeous name, so princessy?”


Rob’s mouth dropped open with surprise. ‘ ‘ But, but ,’ ’
he began, then stopped.
“Don’t look like that, you silly little boy,” cried Betty. “I
want to shake you, come on.”
“I’m no littler than you,” anyhow,” Rob retorted.
“But you are sillier anyhow, or you would have known that
it was enchanted.”
“How do you know?”
Betty looked vague. “Oh, I know,” she said, “you can
feel it. It’s just like an enchanted castle, very big and
mysterious, and hardly any people there, and—Oh, Rob, she is
the enchanted princess and there is an ogre or a giant or some-
thing there, and we’ve got to rescue her.” Betty’s eyes grew
big with excitement. “And we’ve got to think how and try
to find out about the ogre! ’ ’
“Let’s ask Dad,” suggested Rob, who thought Father the
most wonderful man in the world; “he’ll know.”
“No,” said Betty, “I don’t believe he would. If he did,
he would have rescued her long ago. We are not going to tell
anyone; we ’ll do it all by ourselves. It’s going to be our secret,
or the ogre might hear, and then . ”
Rob filled in the blank with pictures of child-eating ogres,
and promised to be quiet.
Betty could eat no tea. She was burning with excitement,
and yet would give not a reason, so her mother, thinking per-
haps she was sickening for something, packed her off to bed
early.
The children’s room opened on to a little verandah pro-
tected from the winds by bamboo blinds.
The two little beds were on the verandah. Here Betty lay
for a long time in the dark, thinking, wondering, planning. A
hundred plans came to her active brain, but all were rejected.
She was just evolving the hundred and first, when the sound of
voices turned her attention. It was their maid Lizzie talking
to a friend on the path just below the verandah.


“How do you like your new place, Milly?” Lizzie was
asking.
‘ ‘ Oh, I don’t like it at all, and what’s more, I’m not a-going
to stay. I feels like as if I was at a funeral all day with
nothing young or lively save the child. I must say, Liz., I
never seed a nicer child despite her ’landish name. Loraine
they calls her. Her pa’s an ogre, that’s what he is, a real ogre,
and the housekeeper’s a dragon and vicious at that, and every
time I smiles at the blessed lamb it’s ‘Matilda! Why don’t
you get on with your work?’ I told her I wouldn’t stand it,
and I won’t. If I don’t get a move on, I’ll miss my train.
Good night.”
“So long! See you to-morrow,” came the answer. Then
the gate clicked, and the rigid child in the verandah bed relaxed.
It was quite certain now that it was an enchanted castle, and
she must do something at once. She had almost made up her
mind to go that minute, so great was her pity for the beautiful
princess called Loraine.
Soon Rob came to bed and, when Mother came out to kiss
him, Betty shut her eyes and pretended to be asleep, so Mother
tiptoed past her and went away. When she had gone, Betty
slipped out of bed.
“Rob,” she whispered, “are you asleep?”
“Um—yes,” said her brother sleepily.
“Wake up quick. I’ve got something to tell you.” She
slipped into bed beside him and told what she had heard.
“So you see it is all true,” she ended.
“But I say, Bet,” he began doubtfully, “what about the
dragon? It w r ould eat us if it got a chance, and—and the
ogre. ’ ’
“ It’s all quite simple, ’ ’ said Betty, the wise. ‘‘ I read about
it in the fairy tale book. /11 you have to do is to take three
cakes and throw one to the dragon every time it is going to catch
you.”
“Yes, but,” interrupted Rob, “what if it’s going to catch
you four times?”




} £ JB - ■ /'V
VB py|■ p \i ipp 1 1m^&f9Sr m
■H iil h it ?lv I I i MX^M^JSmSA Kfel
• ; !RgLi|,/Jc: ' :
' i jr< . V, , f fly» J? &B^r7-
nB| H SB ;; .. . h. y '
v . I i ■ , \ if-
I Kfl iM^/l
K\' 4Tli ' ft »v"' ? I fMMBjivKJKj| ‘ tj^'
'rftK \ U '■ <\aA fl'i WBi«aHL'~ m fft m I v ,
W|t V V>- '-Vt™it pS*- •; A. *. b j -KiSm •
ijik- ■■”■'' • *-jr* «*••.' ' ’| ' ■ ffi} ''V- ":“■;
It was a long way from home.
See ‘Page 15


1 ‘ Oh, it never happens that way, only we might take four to
be sure. Then you’ve only got to say—
‘Right’s might,
Puts evil to flight,
Aberrouler abolite,
and the ogre shrivels up. Don’t you remember the story about
the big black ogre without any teeth who turned into a piece of
coal when the Princess said that ? I wonder what this ogre will
do! Oh, Rob! p ’raps you ’ll have to marry the Princess! Any-
how, we will bring her home here and she’ll be our sister, and
we’ll love her always, and when we are all grown up ”
“P’raps the ogre won’t shrivel up at all.” Rob was so
matter of fact.
“Of course he will.” Betty was getting a little annoyed.
“But if you’re afraid, you needn’t come. She will be my
Princess when we save her, ’cos I thought of it first.”
“It’s alright, Bet. I’m not frightened. Don’t get huffy.”
Betty was mollified, and became businesslike again.
‘ ‘ Now to-morrow will be Saturday, and we are going to have
cakes for tea. I saw Mother making them—nice little ones
with plums in them. I know the dragon would like them ”
“Aren’t they rather small and mightn’t the dragon have a
big mouth,” interjected Rob, but Betty took no notice.
“Now when you have one, you are not to eat it,” she con-
tinued ; ‘ ‘ but when no one is watching, just put it in your pocket,
and then take another and do the same with that.”
“Can’t I eat any?” Rob was mournful. “They’re awful
nice.”
“No,” said Betty. “Mother only gives us two each.”
“They’re awful nice,” said Rob.
Soon Rob grew so sleepy that it was no use talking to him,
so Betty went back to her own bed and fell asleep despite herself.
The next morning was so bright and sunny that dragons and
enchanted castles seemed quite impossible. There was so much
to do to help Mother in the house that Betty scarcely had time
to think of the great adventure, for when one is the eldest girl


of five children, one learns all kinds of things about house-work
when one is quite little.
The afternoon too was busy, for Father was working in the
vegetable garden, and the children helped. Saturday after-
noon was generally such a happy time for them all, for Mother
brought her mending out on to the lawn, and Daddy always had
plenty of things to tell them while he worked. Then there was
always a bag of lollies in Mother’s lap to reward the “helpers.”
They were all “helpers,” of course, even baby Rex, who rolled
on the weed heaps, tried to eat the earth, and had to be picked
up and kissed vigorously about every five minutes by somebody.
To-day, however, Betty found it irksome. Gardening was
very dull indeed, when there was an enchanted castle just two
minutes’ walk away. Still, she reflected they could do nothing
until they had the cakes.
The afternoon dragged away, and tea time came. There on
the table was the plate piled with cakes, baked brown, and
liberally supplied with currants. Betty dutifully ate two
rounds of bread and jam, then asked, “Please may I have a
cake ? ’ 5
It lay on her plate. She fingered it. Everyone seemed to
be watching her. She took a drink of water to gain time.
Mother was looking at her. Now she took another sip.
Father said he thought there would be a shower, and every-
one looked towards the window. Betty thankfully slipped the
cake into her pocket and tried to look as if she was eating it.
Presently she took courage and asked for another. Mother
said, “Yes, dear; but eat it more slowly. You ate the other
one far too quickly. That looks very greedy, you know.”
Betty took a cake, so did Rob. She watched him out of the
corner of her eye, and, Oh, horror! he deliberately raised the
cake to his mouth.
Betty gave him a sharp kick under the table. He post-
poned the bite.
“What’ch you kick me for, Bet?”


She made a fierce grimace at him, and the forgetful Eob re-
turned the kick.
“Children! children!” called Mother. “Stop quarrelling.
Sit on your chair, Betty, and leave your brother alone. ’ ’
For the second time that evening the weather saved the con-
spirators. The heavy drops of a thunder shower made every-
one hasten out to bring in the chairs and gardening tools. Left
to herself Betty took her second cake and Eob’s second too, and
dropped them into the front of her sailor blouse. Then the
family returned and the little criminal, feeling very conscience-
stricken, made her escape as soon as possible.
On the way home from school on Monday Betty furtively
tried the fastening of the big iron gate of the Enchanted Castle.
It was so high that she could barely reach it, and so stiff that
she could not move it. Eob tried, but he could do nothing.
“It is enchanted too,” gasped Betty. “We must find out
the secret, or wait till we find it open.”
She was bitterly disappointed. Eob was too, but he saw
the bright side. “Then we had better eat those cakes, hadn’t
we?”
Betty looked at him scornfully. “ No! lam not going to
give up,” she said.
Day after day passed until Saturday came again. Betty was
despairing; she had thought of every plan. Eob suggested
a back gate, but enchanted castles did not have back gates, Betty
knew, and even if they did the ogre would not be so foolish as to
enchant one and leave the other open.
Saturday came and Father, as a great treat, took the two
elder boys to the football match. Mother had a headache, and
was lying down. Little Alice was playing with the child next
door. Baby was asleep. There was nothing for Betty to do.
She loitered about, dressed and undressed her doll, began to
look at a picture book, put it down and wandered into the gar-
den again.
It was growing late in the afternoon; already the sun was


dipping. Soon Mother would be getting tea; baby would wake
and the boys come home. Betty suddenly made up her mind
to go for a little walk in the direction of the Enchanted Castle.
Soon she was before the high gates, and, wonder of wonders!
one of them was ajar. Betty’s heart beat fiercely. She stared
at it for a moment to make quite sure, and the next was speeding
home, so excited that her legs knocked against one another as she
ran. Home was still quiet. She ran noiselessly up the path,
crawled under the blind on to the verandah, and then, unnoticed,
slipped into her room. Here in her own special box was the
precious brown paper parcel containing the cakes. She
snatched it up with trembling hands, and a minute later the
gate clicked behind her.
The enchanted gate might never, never be open again! In-
deed, it might be shut even now, so she could not wait for Rob,
though she did wish he was there, and half hoped that the gate
would be shut when she got back. It is very dreadful to have
face an ogre and a dragon all by oneself! But no, the gate
was still open, so she took her courage in her hands and pushed
it ever so little. But it creaked, and she drew back as if
bitten. There was no result. So she pushed a little more and
wriggled her slight body through the crack.
Now she stood on enchanted ground and she felt her blood
thrill. Her fingers were cold and her teeth chattered, but she
was not frightened. Oh, dear, no!
The pines cast ominous shadows and the sun was sinking
fast. The house stared out upon the world in stony sorrow and
the little wind was chill.
Betty took a step upon the gravel. It crunched beneath her
tread, so she walked on to the grass border. She looked back at
the gate. It was still open, and she went on.
If only the beautiful Princess was there now, she would not
mind!
Hideous pictures of fiery dragons devouring little girls,
stories of ogres keeping them in chests or hanging them in his
garden, rose to her mind. She fought them down and went on,


the brown paper parcel gripped tightly in her hand. She took
a side winding path to escape observation from the windows
of the house. All her plans were forgotten, she just relied
blindly on chance. All was going well when suddenly her blood
was chilled in her veins, a deep voice said, almost beside her: —
“What are you doing here?”
She dropped the cakes and they rolled out of the paper on
the ground.
A man, with a book in his hand, rose from a rustic seat
beside the walk. He was a tall, lean man with a sallow face
and bushy eyebrows. The eyes beneath the eyebrows were
kindly enough, and the sad mouth smiled, but Betty could not
see these things for her terror. This was the ogre.
* ‘ Right ’s-might-puts - evil - to - flight-aberrouler-abolite, ’ ’ she
gasped in one confused breath, but the ogre looked at her in a
puzzled questioning way. She would have fled, only the strength
seemed to have left her limbs.
Betty waited, and then asked in a tiny timid voice:—
‘ 4 Aren’t you the ogre ?’ ’
The man began to laugh, then, noticing how white and terri-
fied the little upturned face was, he became serious, and said
gently,
“No, lam not an ogre or anything dreadful. Won’t you
come and tell why you are here and why you thought I was an
ogre? There isn’t an ogre here at all, or anything of that
kind. Won’t you believe me and come?”
He smiled and Betty came.
“I know you can’t be the ogre, ’cos you didn’t shrivel up
when I said the charm. ’Sides, you’re not half ugly enough.”
She smiled, and the colour ebbed back into her cheeks.
“So that was a charm, was it?” he said. “I wondered
what it could be. Now tell me why you are here. This is my
house, you know.”
“I—l came to rescue the Princess from the ogre who en-
chanted her, and the dragon. Do you think you could settle


the dragon while I get the Princess ? 11 Suddenly a light broke
over her mind, “Are you enchanted, too?”
He shook his head. “No, dear, somebody has been telling
you a lot of nonsense. There isn’t an ogre here or a dragon
or even a princess.”
Not a princess! She didn’t care about the other two, but
that broke her heart. She looked down and the tears trickled
down her cheeks. She looked so sad and dejected that the man
suddenly reached out his arms for her and lifted her on to his
knee.
“I did want to rescue the Princess so,” she wept. He com-
forted her as best he could, her brown head pressed against his
shoulder. Gradually he drew the story from her.
‘ 1 So they call me an ogre, do they, and pity Loraine because
of her father?”
Betty thought his voice trembled, but the dusk had come so
thickly between them she could not see his face.
‘ ‘ They did not know you, ’ ’ she said caressingly.
There w r as silence, and looking up at the sky Betty saw a
star twinkle into being in the dusky blue.
“Little Betty,” the man began, “some day you will under-
stand to-night, if you remember what I tell you now. Once
years ago, a man lived here. He was young and happy, and
someone lived with him whom he loved so much that nothing
else in the world seemed to matter. He lived for her. Then
a little baby girl came to live with them, but very soon someone
died and the man was so sad that he did not want to see anyone
or hear anything, so he sent all visitors away and shut his gates.
He did not even have the garden kept tidy, but just shut himself
up with his books. He did not love his baby girl for a long
time, because he thought that he could not love anyone again.
After a time he grew to love her, but never admitted it, even
to himself, and would hardly look at her. Then there came
another little girl, with brown hair and bright dark eyes, who
told him how cruel he was, and opened the door of the enchanted
castle of his heart and let love in again, love for the baby to


whom he had been so cold and cruel. Betty, do you under-
stand?”
Betty did not understand, but she knew that he was sad,
and stretched up a soft little hand to stroke his cheek. It was
dark now.
“Little one,” said the man, “your mother will wonder where
you are. I have kept you too long. Tell me where you live,
and I shall take you home.”
They went together, down the path and through the creaking
gate. No longer was the castle enchanted. The trees, no
longer menacing, loomed soft and dark against the sky, and the
voice in their leaves was the voice of peace and of silence.
There was no scolding for Betty that evening for the man
explained to her mother. He asked, too, that Betty and Rob
might spend the next afternoon with Loraine.
In bed that night Rob wanted to know everything, but Betty
had nothing to tell, though she could never tell why.
Mother lay awake a long time, and thought of the future and
Betty; and once her cheek was wet, for she knew the story of the
big house.


RUTH - WHO - WAS - MILDRED
The Poor Little Rebel
‘ ‘ It looks as if it was going to rain for a month, ’ ’ announced
Mildred from her vantage ground at the dormitory window.
‘ ‘ Oh, don’t! ’ ’ groaned the girl on the floor, ‘‘ it makes it
seem so much worse/’ and she dabbed her eye with a very wet
handkerchief.
Mildred did not turn round, but she knew just the same.
“Do stop crying,” she urged.
Far from taking her advice, the other began to cry in real
earnest, quite indiscriminately into the folds of a clean skirt,
that lay on the bed.
The girl at the window faced about, something like anger
smouldering in her dark blue eyes.
“You don’t know when you are lucky, Ruth Allen, I never
saw such waste.”
“Lucky!” sobbed Ruth. “When I’m going to spend the
holidays with people I never saw! Oh, I know they don’t
want me; they only think, ’cos Mother is in England, it is their
duty to ask me. Oh! Oh! ’ ’ The words were almost stifled in
sobs. “I know I’ll be in the way, and do stupid things, just
because I ought to make a good impression. I can’t go, I
can’t, ’ ’ and she completed the ruin of the skirt by crumpling it
desperately.
“It’s my skirt,” exclaimed Mildred dispassionately, “but
it doesn’t matter. I always hated it.” Then quite suddenly
the outburst came. “You are crying because you are going to
enjoy yourself, and I’m all hot and bitter because I’m going to
have a perfectly horrid time, stuck away in a suburb with
nothing to do, and nobody to care whether I have any fun or


not. All he cares about is that I am clothed and fed and
educated.
“It is not as if it were just these holidays; it is always. No
one cares, because I haven’t any parents—only Mr. Smith, and
he doesn’t even know what I’m like. 1 only saw him once when
I was six, and then I was crying all the time. He’s too busy
being ill and going about to drink mineral waters and things,
even to think of me. Of course he is very good,” and the
defiant chin rose an inch; “if it wasn’t that he pays, I couldn’t
come here to school. I’d have to go to come cheap little place,
but then I would be independent, and,” very slowly, “I could
write and tell him I hated him.”
Ruth had stopped crying long ago, and was watching Mil-
dred with wide, surprised eyes. In the eighteen months that
they had roomed together, and worked together she had never
seen her in this bitter, resentful mood. Yet this was the same
beautiful, clever Mildred whom everyone liked, even if they did
not quite understand her, and whom she adored.
Mildred turned to the window again to hide her face, Ruth
sprang to her side, regardless of her possessions strewn over the
floor where they lay, artlessly waiting to be packed.
“Mildred, darling,” she whispered. “Oh, you poor dear, I
didn’t know—you never talked about yourself—T never knew
Mr. Smith was such an awful brute.”
“He’s not,” choked Mildred.
“I’ve been so selfish. We must do something. “You can’t
go on being so miserable. Oh, Mildred!”
It seemed to be all she could say—just “Oh, Mildred!” over
and over again. But Mildred was herself again now—or
nearly so, and from the comforted she became the comforter. It
was always that way with Mildred.
At last Ruth made the suggestion that had been in her mind
for the last five minutes.
“Won’t you go to Katoomba instead of me? Don’t say
no before you hear the plan. It would be just as easy to man-
age as can be. You could go to Katoomba and I to Summer
Hill, and you’d be Ruth and I Mildred just for a week. You


wouldn’t be nervous and miserable. They would like you ever
so much better than me. Besides, only think what a splendid
adventure it would be! ”
“Of course it would be quite impossible,” said Mildred,
looking away to hide the light in her eyes. Her voice was not
as certain as her words.
Ruth caught her hand impulsively. “No, it wouldn’t. You
know that I hate going there, and you hate going to Summer
Hill. I’d like Summer Hill because there I could just read
and go into town and do as I please. Oh! Mildred, do say you
will change. Mrs. Gale never saw me in her life, and you are
only six months older. They are going back to Adelaide in
three weeks, so I won’t be seeing them again. It’s so easy.
Nearly all the girls have gone this afternoon. Miss Bridges will
take us to the station to-morrow morning. She does not know
or care where we are going, and she won’t notice we have
changed suit cases. Don’t you see how beautifully it all works
out?”
Mildred did see it all more clearly than Ruth herself. The
very outrageousness of it appealed to her spirit of adventure.
She had never had any adventures. Now here was the dazzling
prospect of a week on the mountains at the best of hotels, with
borrowed friends and the right to talk as freely as she liked of a
borrowed family. Quite suddenly she made her decision.
“I will change. I’d love to. Oh, Ruth, you dear, you
dear. Are you quite, quite sure you won’t mind Summer
Hill?” and she flung her arms about her friend. “I know it’s
wrong, but I do so want to be happy.”
At tea that night the remnant of the girls who still remained
wondered at Ruth’s gaiety and Mildred’s excitement, especially
after their morning’s gloom.
After tea they continued their packing. Suddenly Mildred
sat back on her heels, the bitter look in her eyes again.
“How can Igo with these clothes? I’d be ashamed! That’s
the worst of having your clothes bought by the school—and
cheaply, too. Miss Bridges has the very worst taste of anyone
I ever met,” and Mildred laughed ruefully over a badly cut


skirt. “Can’t you imagine me wandering round the Carring-
ton in this—and my shabby boots? It’s quite two inches too
long, and the blue one is worse.”
Ruth hesitated just one minute. To give up her pretty
things meant more to her than giving up her holiday, but then
—there was only one Mildred.
“Of course,” she said quite calmly, “the clothes go with the
part. You’ll look perfectly sweet in this blouse, and the new
voile dress will suit you ever so much better than me. Let’s
try some of them on now.”
“You are a brick, Ruth, but I’m beginning to feel mean.”
“That’s all right,” said Ruth gaily. “I have lots and lots
of dresses, and they will come back,”
They talked and whispered long after “lights out,” plan-
ning and arranging every detail, and even when Ruth had fallen
asleep, Mildred continued to stare at the patch of moonlight on
the wall, swinging between a sense of guiltiness and an irrepres-
sible feeling of glorious excitement.
Jerry Intervenes.
When morning came it was fine, despite Mildred’s gloomy
prognostications of the afternoon before. For the two excited
girls, breakfast, the final preparations for departure, and the
journey to the Central Railway Station passed like a troubled
dream. The chief trouble clouding their minds was how Mil-
dred was to wear one of Ruth’s dresses without detection. But
everyone was far too busy and excited to notice anything un-
usual.
Mildred’s train went out first and Ruth saw her off, whisper-
ing as the train moved out, “Whatever you do, don’t forget that
your name is Ruth! ’ ’ Three hours later a tall, rather pale girl,
with an air of suppressed excitement, stepped out on the
Katoomba platform, eagerly scanning all who passed. A tall
man, who also seemed to be looking for someone, presently
addressed her. “Excuse me, are you Miss Ruth Allen?”


“Yes,” exclaimed Mildred in a relieved tone, “and you are
Mr. Gale?”
He bore her off to the hotel where Mrs. Gale and Frances
were waiting. Frances was the grown-up daughter and, al-
though there were seven or eight years between them, she and
Mildred became fast friends before the first evening was over.
Everyone was so kind and everything went so smoothly that
Mildred quickly forgot the fears that had assailed her in the
train: the memory of her imposture no longer troubling her; in
fact, it lent a glow of adventure to everything. Stolen fruits,
they say, are always sweetest. Many a time she thanked her
stars that Ruth had been such a communicative little person,
all too ready with details of personal history.
The Gales had plans for every day, and seemed bent on
giving their friend’s daughter a good time. The only fly in
the ointment, said Mildred, was her sunburnt nose.
On the morning of the fourth day of her stay Mrs. Gale had
a headache, and Mr. Gale met an old school friend who bore him
off to his hotel, so it was decided that Frances and Mildred
should take a conveyance and go for a short morning drive. The
site chosen was ‘ ‘ Sublime Point, * ’ a long tongue of land, running
out into one of the finest valleys of the Blue Mountains,
whence can be seen a wide panorama, sunny farm lands and
mountain ridges, shrouded in the eternal blue haze.
This wonderful look-out, strange to say, has never been taken
over by the Shire Council, so that it is still in its natural state,
undefended by railings.
When they had almost reached their destination, the girls
noticed an elderly man carrying a camera. His progress was
slow and seemed difficult, for he was bowed with rheumatism,
and walked lame on one foot. He was accompanied by a lively
long-legged puppy, whose breed could only be described as
“fancy, mixed.”
This puppy, after the manner of his kind, took an undue
interest in the horses, and it was not until the driver had applied
his whip and his master called “Jerry, Jerry,” some score of
times, that he could be pursuaded to desist; but at last he


trotted back to the man with an air of conscious triumph that
sent Frances and Mildred into peals of laughter.
Presently, in the wonder of the view, they forgot both man
and dog until Mildred felt a cold, wet nose suddenly thrust into
her hand, and found “Jerry” pawing her enthusiastically. His
master was not far off, setting up his camera preparatory to
taking a picture; he raised his hat.
“I’m sorry Jerry was a nuisance just now,” he said. “I’m
trying to break him of the habit. Perhaps he will learn
wisdom with years. Here Jerry, Jerry, don’t worry the ladies,
sir! ”
“He’s a nice little dog,” volunteered Mildred, “and the
horses did not seem afraid of him.” The girls moved on to
another view-point, but were presently startled by a sharp yelp.
Jerry had disappeared. He had followed them, and a moment
before had been chasing a lizard among some loose stones near
the edge of the precipice.
“Where is he?” said Frances.
Mildred walked to the edge and looked over cautiously. There
sure enough was Jerry. He had fallen about six or seven feet,
and would have fallen a couple of hundred more, if he had not
alighted on a tiny ledge, composed of a point of rock, a tuft of
grass and a thorn bush.
“Oh! look!” cried Mildred. “The poor little thing! A
stone must have given way under him. How can we get him
up?”
“Do come away from the edge,” gasped Frances. “You
might go over too. You can’t do anything. We’ll tell the
man, perhaps he can get him.”
Mildred showed no signs of coming away. “You know he
can’t, he’s a cripple. Jerry has a collar; that’s a good thing.”
“What are you doing?” cried Frances, almost wringing her
hands, but afraid to come any closer herself.
Mildred had taken off her shoes and was testing a stunted
tree that grew out over the precipice.
“We can’t leave him there. Oh! listen to him! It’s
alright, Jerry. Besides, it’s only such a little way down.”


Frances was wearing a patent leather belt. Mildred’s quick
eyes immediately saw its use, and she just as quickly borrowed
it. First she climbed down on to a lower ledge that brought
her within four feet or so of Jerry. Then she attached the belt
to an overhanging tree and slid over the ledge, finding a jutting
point of rock for her feet and, keeping her balance with the
aid of the belt, was able to stretch out her right arm and grip
Jerry by the collar. Happily he was small and light, and with
a great effort she was able to swing him on to the ledge a little
above her. It was not a very great feat. The great drop be-
neath made it seem more difficult than it was. The real diffi-
culty lay in getting back on to the ledge herself, especially as
she was afraid to trust her whole weight to the belt. Still
Mildred had been noted for her daring in the gymnasium, and
w r as very cool-headed. She managed to find foothold a little
higher up that enabled her to reach the ledge with her hand,
and so, with the aid of the belt, to pull herself up.
Once there, the rest was easy. Jerry had finished the jour-
ney by himself, and was barking at her from the top. Yet it
was this last little climb that did the damage. Treading on a
loose stone, she gave her left ankle a sharp wrench, and only
saved herself from falling by clutching a prickly bush. The
next moment she scrambled up to the top with Frances’s help,
quite safe, but with a very painful ankle. The owner of the dog
then arrived and helped to brush her down.
“You shouldn’t have done it,” he was saying, “it was too
good of you. I should have hated to lose Jerry.”
Mildred felt very tearful now that it was all over. Her
ankle hurt her very much. The man was very upset about it,
and helped her to the conveyance as best he could, Frances tak-
ing her other arm.
Mrs. Gale was horrified and declared that she would never let
Mildred out of her sight again, while Mr. Gale called her “little
Miss Quixote” for the rest of the day.
Everyone was relieved to find that her ankle was not even
sprained, and would be alright in a couple of days.


111.
The Photographer Man.
This would have seemed enough adventure for one week, but
it was only a prelude. The next day the whole party motored
to Wentworth Falls. They decided only to go to the top, have
lunch, and then return because although Mildred could walk
fairly well on the smooth ground, she was unable to do any
climbing.
However, when lunch was over and Mildred comfortably
settled on a log seat with a book and a box of chocolates, they
yielded to the temptation to go to another look-out a little lower
down, which Mildred could see from where she sat, and which
was scarcely three minutes’ walk away. “We won’t be ten
minutes, dear,” said Mrs. Gale, “and we won’t go at all if you
don’t promise to go no nearer the edge than you are now.”
Mildred promised gladly, and was left alone; but only for a
minute; scarcely had the bushes closed round her party than
Jerry appeared, to be followed presently by his master carrying
his camera. At first neither noticed Mildred. People are
always more interesting than books, so she laid her novel aside
and limped over to the man. “How do you do?” she began.
“How is Jerry after his adventure?”
The man looked up and his face lit with a smile. ‘ ‘ This is a
great pleasure,” he said. “How is your foot? I was very
worried to think that you had injured yourself for Jerry’s sake.”
“Oh,” answered Mildred gaily, “my foot’s alright—just a
wee bit lame, you know. The doctor only laughed at it.”
Then she noticed how really ill the man looked himself. “I’m
afraid you are not well,” she cried in concern. “Is there any-
thing that I can do?”
“It’s nothing,” he said, “only rheumatism and the old
wound in my leg is troubling me. It was done at Ladysmith. ”
“Were you at Ladysmith?” asked Mildred quite unneces-
sarily, but very eagerly; “my father was killed in the Boer War.
I was only quite little, so I don’t remember it.”
He looked at her with quick sympathy.


“A great many fell then. I had no one to lose but my best
friend, and he was killed.”
“Then you must be very lonely, too.” The sympathy was
deeper in Mildred’s voice, “I’m lonely, because I haven’t anyone
but a guardian, and he does not care ”
“I haven’t anyone at all,” said the photographer, “except
a ward; she is not even my formal ward, but she was my friend’s
child, so it is my duty to look after her. It does not make me
less lonely, because I never see her.”
“Oh! why,” cried Mildred, “don’t you think it mean never
to go and see her? Perhaps she thinks you’re horrid like my
guardian. It’s a dreadful feeling to think your guardian does
not care.”
The man went on fiddling with his camera, and said nothing
for some time, so that Mildred began to wonder if she had
offended him. Then he began slowly. “It’s different; she
thinks I’m a rich man, and if she saw me she would know I
wasn’t; she would find out that I had to wander about taking
photos, for my living, and she would guess how I had to scrape
and pinch to pay for her education. It would be all spoiled
then, and she would be miserable. ’ ’ He could not restrain his
confidence now. “You see it’s this way, before he went to the
war, I persuaded her father to invest in some shares; for a time
they paid alright, but a couple of years after his death the com-
pany collapsed and his widow was nearly ruined; she died, too,
and left this little girl. Her father used to talk of giving her
a good education, and so I determined she mus + have it, —so you
see t’would spoil everything if she knew.”
Mildred put out her hand impulsively and rested it on his
sleeve. “How perfectly noble you are,” she whispered, her
face shining.
He cleared his throat. “Would you like to see the photos.
I took from ‘Sublime Point?’ ” he asked.
Just at this moment the Gales appeared. “Oh, my dear,”
cried Mrs. Gale. “I’m afraid we were a very long time, but
it was such a fascinating path; you really must blame Frances.”
‘‘ I scarcely noticed the time; we’ve been having a chat. ’ ’


r\ w ■ nR3uB^9M^^B*
9 Jh 1 II
8BA t A ®f!rf : > ; ,'•? - J3| 9jg j| 4.
11111 r ”
£ I S: |1
■ / j& \JV wj' 4
In a great fever he began to make a careful drawing of Q.P. See 22




Mrs. Gale looked as if she scarcely approved, but Frances
hastened to explain. The photographs which he had got out to
show Mildred pleased her so much that she immediately wanted
to buy them. The man was willing to sell, so she bore off in
triumph six of his best views.
All the way home in the car Midred thought of the photo-
grapher’s story, and she was so silent that Mrs. Gale feared her
ankle was hurting her, and became concerned.
On the Balcony.
During the evening the views were being passed round, and
Mildred picked one of them up idly and turned it over and over
in her hand. Suddenly a stamp on the back caught her eye,
and she read, ‘ ‘ Photographed by Lennon J. Smith for Gardiner
& Co., General Photographers.” Lennon J. Smith was the
name that always stared at her from the foot of her guardian’s
curt little notes. She went hot and cold, and the knowledge
slowly dawned on her that this man was her guardian. The
story fitted, now she came to consider it, though she had never
known the cause of her father’s financial losses. She hated
herself for her rebellion; her generous young heart yearned with
love and pity; she must see him, go to him that very minute.
She remembered seeing Gardiner & Co.’s shop the day before.
It was but two or three minutes’ walk away.
Everyone was talking, and no one noticed that she slipped
quietly away and hastened upstairs for her hat. Another min-
ute and she was out in the brightly-lit street. Fortunately, it
was Friday night, and the photographer’s shop was open.
Mildred waited patiently till all in the shop were attended to,
and then inquired timidly for Mr. Smith. The young man
returned presently to say that Mr. Smith would come in some-
time during the evening, and that he was going to the coast to
a branch business the next morning.


“I must see him to-night,” she gasped. “May I leave a
message?” The young man brought her pen and paper, and
she hastily scrawled, “Please come to the Carrington imme-
diately and wait in the hall; it is very important. ’ ’
She hesitated for a minute over the signature, whether to
put “Mildred Vaughan” or not. She finally wrote, “The girl
who saved Jerry;” folded the little note, and gave it to the
young man. “You won’t forget to give it to him, will you? It
is so important,” she pleaded.
She arrived back at the hotel, breathless, half-expecting to
find the Gales looking for her, but apparently they had not
missed her.
For two hours she nervously haunted the hall, imagining
that the man had forgotten to deliver the letter, or that after all
her guardian had decided not to come. She wished she had
signed her name—then she was glad she hadn’t. At last she
caught sight of his thin, bent figure and lean, aesthetic face. She
thought he looked very pathetic. “I thought you were never
coming,” she began hoarsely. “I have something to say to
you. It is quietest out on the balcony.”
He looked at her in surprise, but something in her face
quelled his half-formed question, and he quietly and painfully
followed her upstairs. She drew him into one of the niches of
the great balcony. There were lights and people at the other
end, but where they stood it was quite dark. She was suddenly
very nervous.
“I—l wanted to speak to you about your ward and my —my
guardian. ’ ’
He said nothing.
She became desperate. “I am Mildred Vaughan.” She
could feel him start. He put out a trembling hand: she seized
it in her eager one. Then she flung her arms round his neck
and put her head down on his shoulder. “Oh, you dear, you
perfect dear,” she whispered, “and all these years I have not
known you. We could have been so happy together—and—
we’ve both been lonely.”


He held her closely for a minute and something that might
have been a tear trickled on to her hand. “But,” he said
gently, “my little Mildred is at Summer Hill. I could not
afford to give her a holiday like this.”
The crimson blood flooded Mildred’s cheeks. “I shouldn’t
be here. I’m pretending to be someone else. Ruth went to
Summer Hill and I came here. She didn’t want to come, and
I was just dying for an adventure. I’ll have to confess every-
thing now. But it doesn’t really matter —we are going to
begin all over again. I can leave school now and work for you.
Oh,” she stopped a protest, “you don’t know that I am quite
a woman now. I’m fifteen. I hate school now, just hate the
thought of it. I could do such lots of things.”
He took her into his arms again, and they said many in-
coherent things to one another.
Suddenly Mrs. Gale’s unmistakable voice broke upon their
ears. “I can’t imagine where the child can be.” The next
moment the place was flooded with electric light, and to her
amazement and horror Mrs. Gale saw her young charge in the
arms of the photographer man.
“Ruth,” she began in freezing tones.
“I’m not Ruth, ’’ cried Midred with a little hysterical laugh,
“I’m Mildred Vaughan, and this is my guardian, Mr. Smith.”
All Mrs. Gale could do was to murmur rather incoherently,
“I really don’t understand.” Mr. Gale and Frances now
appeared, and the whole story came out piecemeal, and Mrs.
Gale w r as convinced.
She was rather inclined to be angry, which was only natural,
but in the end Mildred’s contrition found its way to her warm
and kindly heart, and it was arranged that Mildred should stay
with them until the end of the holiday. It was furthermore
decided that Mildred should remain at school until the end of
the year, and that then new arrangements would be made,
though this was sorely against her guardian’s will.
That night Mildred dreamed of a new life free from all
bitterness.


A LEGEND OF THE BUSH
The afternoon sunlight was flooding the garden with mellow
golden light. The beautiful Spring day was almost over, and
the world had fallen into that happy quiet, untouched with
Autumn’s melancholy, that is Mother Nature’s lullaby to Spring,
her youngest born. It is clearest in the country, but even
here, in the suburb of a great city, all might feel it and share
in it, if they would.
An old gardener, the grey stubble thick upon his chin, was
digging in an already crowded bed. About him danced a little
fairy of a girl in a white pinafore.
“Do you think it will grow, Turner?” she asked, eagerly
skipping from one foot to the other. “We took such care of
it, coming down in the train. They are just as lovely as can be
when they are big. I wanted to bring a real big one. Teddy
said he could dig it up quite well, only Mother said it wouldn’t
grow. But this one will grow, won’t it, Turner?”
The gardener gave the earth a last pat with the spade, slowly
straightened his old back, and rubbed the earth off his hands
upon his trouser leg.
“Carn’t say, Miss Phyllis. Them bush things is hard to
grow, and a garden ain’t no place for them, but it’s in a good
position, and it may grow—but then again, it mayn’t,” and with
that he picked up his tools, grunting as he stooped, and turned
away.
Phyllis waited after the old man had gone, watching her
new treasure. It was only a little wattle plant, shabby and
faded with the journey down in the train from its moutain
home. One or two brave gold clusters still held up their heads.
The other flowers in the garden were many and beautiful, yet
Phyllis loved it best of all.
Now she bent over it in her quick childish tenderness, whis-
pering to it as if it were a human being. The sunlight fell
upon her golden hair. “You will live, won’t you, dear little


Wattle, and be big and beautiful like the others? You’ll feel
much better in the morning. Dear, dear little Wattle, Teddy
and me’ll love you.”
Then she bent right down and kissed it softly.
Somebody was calling her name in the garden and, with one
more glance at the lonely little plant, she ran away towards the
house through the last long mild rays of the setting sun. Her
white pinafore fluttered in the breeze, and her bright hair
gleamed. There was the crunch of flying steps upon the gravel,
and a delighted shriek of laughter as she flung herself into her
father’s outstretched arms. The sound of her gay chatter died
away and the garden grew still.
With the fast ebbing sunshine the Wattle felt that her life
must go. She stood yet in a little pool of brightness, but the
shadows were near—on every side they crept about her, silent
and sure. Once, in the dear bush home far away, the Wattle
had seen a tree slowly die. There had been a gash in its trunk,
and the red sap had dripped away. Slowly, slowly, twig by twig,
the branches had grown dry, and the bright leaves brown until,
at last, it had stood naked and weird against the sky. There
had been no gentle rustle in its branches, but only a low rattle.
Then there had come a night when a high wind raged, and all
the bush things had heard the tree groaning and creaking. A
stronger gust had brought a long straining groan, and then—a
heavy fall. In the morning the old gaunt tree had lain among
the bracken, dead.
The memory of this came back to the Wattle plant now. She
wondered if these shadows, that drained the life and brightness
from the sunshine, were death?
The sunlight left her roots; she shivered and stretched her
leaves towards it, but it had gone. The sun had dipped and
the western sky was one great waste of golden light, barred by
the dark trunks of the Camphor Laurels.
The strange garden, dim in the twilight, seemed to stretch
endlessly about the little bush plant so pitifully alone. The
heavy scent of flowers oppressed her; their shadowy outlines


against the sky seemed distorted; awful, unknown voices whis-
pered about her in the dusk, and the very soil was strange.
Great round tears of dew fell from her shaking leaves. The
world was so large, and the blue, clear mountains so far away.
Chill fear crept into every fibre of the Wattle as the night came
on, clear, dark and full of stars.
The whisper went about the garden, “There is a stranger
here! ’ ’
The little flowers crowded one another to see, and the big
bushes craned their stems. A tall, graceful rose-bush spoke
first—she was generally the leader in garden affairs.
“Little plant,” she began, “what is your name and where
did you come from ? I never remember seeing anyone like you,
and yet I met most of the plants when I was at the florist’s shop
three years ago.”
“My name is Wattle,” answered the little plant very timidly,
“and I came from the bush.”
“Which bush? There are many here; did you come from
one of them?” The rose-bush’s voice was as soft as falling
petals.
“I mean the great bush where there are many, many trees
and scrub, and beautiful, sandy soil, clinging about our roots,
and a blue sky over head, and my brothers, golden all about me,
and .” Her voice trailed off into silence. The memory
was too sad. The Wattle drew her scanty leaves about her
and seemed to grow smaller, wearier and shabbier in her misery.
The rose-bush bent low over her wild sister, “Dear little
Wattle!” she breathed, and there was that in her voice that is
common to country and city alike —Love. “Dear little Wattle,
be brave! We are all friends here, and soon you will love the
garden as we love it. It is very beautiful, and we are well
cared for. We will all love you and try to make you happy.”
When the flow r ers heard the rose’s words they began to reach
out towards the Wattle plant and whisper words of comfort.
The Wattle looked up again, and lo! in the dark sky above
were the same stars shining clearly, just as she had seen them
often and often before in the bush. After all, she was not so


far away; here was the same sky, the same stars and the same
spirit of Love.
“Tell us about your home and yourself/’ pleaded the Mig-
nonette at her side.
“Yes, yes,” cried all the Sweet Peas together, nodding their
daintily bonneted heads, “tell us a story.”
And the Wattle did tell them many things, gathering cour-
age with every word. On and on she spoke of the clear-voiced
birds, of life-thrilled saplings, of the smooth-holed gum trees
mottled blue, of the joys and griefs and mysteries of the wilder-
ness, until the new world was lost in memory of the old. The
gum trees, after long exile, seemed to throng again the garden,
and the garden flowers who all had known, somewhere back in
their histories, the wilderness and the free life, were thrilled and
all drew closely about the Wattle tree.
When silence fell, they begged for more in whispers, and
asked for the old stories of the bush. The Wattle thought of
the age-old stories that are whispered over the bush at twilight
by the tall trees. Often and often had she heard them when
the whole forest had seemed to sway to their rhythm, and the
perfume of the old legends had intoxicated the bushland, as a
seared giant breathed them forth, standing out against the sky
far above his brothers, like some prophet of old.
“I will tell you the story of the first Wattle flower. It hap-
pened so very, very long ago that not even the oldest trees can
remember the time, but heard it when they were young saplings
from the forest giants before them. I have heard it very often,
because the bush folks love it best.
“Long, long ago, when the bush was first made, there were
no wattle blossoms, or, indeed, any other flowers. There were
just trees —gum trees —everywhere, some tall and some short,
but all striving to grow up straight and beautiful. Now all
trees have one ambition, that is, to reach the sky. They were
much more in earnest about it then, and wasted none of their
height in curves and twists, as they often do now. They never
thought of anything else but just longed and longed for the sky,
and they used to tell the saplings of the great hope, and they
tried, too. I do not know what they expect to find there, but


it will be very beautiful and we of the bush will never know any
sorrow afterwards.’’
Here the Wattle bush gazed up at the heavens, and became
so filled with dreams of the happy time to come that she quite
forgot about her story, until a Snapdragon near by nudged her
gently.
“So it happened that, from always looking upwards, all the
trees grew very straight and very beautiful, but none of them
ever reached the sky. The very tall trees sometimes said that,
when they were saplings, trees of their height would certainly
have touched the sky but that it had moved up higher since
then, and they would shake their leaves in a very perplexed way.
The oldest and tallest tree in the heart of the bush would nod his
slender top, as if he understood it all, and rustle something
about not knowing how high the sky was until they reached it
—or perhaps they had reached what they used to call the sky,
but found they wanted something more. The gum trees did not
know what he meant, but they were always very respectful and
tried to agree. The old tree “saw more sky” than they did,
which was just their way of saying he was much more clever.
They knew he was wise, because they could never understand
what he said, and that is a sure proof, but I expect you all under-
stand it, because you seem to know many things I don’t.”
Thereupon all the flowers in the bed did their best to look
wise and nodded their pretty little heads as if they would say,
“Of course we understand, and he was quite right, too.”
“Well, they w r ere all so intent that they thought of nothing
else, and, as they all had equal chances, there was no rivalry.
There was, however, one plant that had no hope at all. It never
grew very tall, no matter how hard it tried, and its branches
wasted their length in twists. It never imagined that it could
have another aim set before it, but just battled with circum-
stance and Nature, trying to grow in a way that was never in-
tended. So the poor thing wore out its hope and its happi-
ness. The trees christened it “The One-Without-Hope,” and
they pitied it deeply. “The One-Without-Hope” was drab and
ugly, with leaves like mine but very stunted, because it always
tried to grow the wrong way.


“Now when Spring made her first visit to the bush, she was
very disappointed. She came in a cloud of sunshine drawn by
a warm young breeze, just as she came a month ago. She sat
down on a rock, feeling very small among the great trees and
very neglected. They scarcely noticed her at first, and soon
she began to cry, wiping her eyes on a sunbeam so that it became
a rainbow seed. The Australian bush was the very last place
she had to visit, and everywhere else she had been feted and
indulged, covered with pretty flowers and bright leaves. Now
these great trees, living all by themselves, had snubbed her and
made no preparation at all. Why they still had on the leaves
they had been wearing all Winter! At last neglected Spring
grew angry through her tears, and stamped her bright little
foot. Those great still trees should notice her, they should;
they should whether they wanted to or not. The gum trees
were not used to looking down but, peeping through their leaves,
they just managed to see her, and they were warmed'to the very
heartwood by the sight. That made up to them for the dread-
ful cricks they got in their stems. That is very painful, I
believe, although I have never felt it, not having nearly enough
stem yet.
“Well, Spring began to feel that, after all, they were not
so ugly and unfeeling; in fact, they had grown quite strong and
handsome. So she smiled. ‘I came a little early. Perhaps
you haven’t got them ready,’ and she dimpled hopefully. ‘What
does she mean?’ rustled one tree to another. Spring’s pretty
mouth trembled anew. You know how sweet she is when she
is going to cry over a faded flower that she loves? ‘They
always give me flowers and bright fresh leaves and you—you
don’t make any difference,’ and she made another rainbow seed.
“The trees were seriously alarmed, and held a long confer-
ence after she had gone to sleep. They did not even know what
flowers were, so they did not get very far in their debate.”
At this all the flowers in the garden rustled with surprise,
and the Wattle refreshed herself with a drop of dew. Then
she continued.
“When the morning came and beautiful young Spring woke


up very early, they asked her humbly many questions, ‘ Where
are the flowers you ask for, 0 Spring? Where can we get
them ? ’
“ ‘Dear trees,’ she whispered, ‘I would die without them.
Look at the dawning sky. It is the reflection of the fields of
unborn flowers, gold and pink and blue, ’ and she pointed to the
beautiful morning sky, aflame with colour.
“Now all the trees were more troubled than ever, for they
were very simple and had no schooling in fairy lore. There
was not a tree, or ever an imaginative young sapling, that ever
suspected that there was a fairy in the neighbourhood. But
nevertheless there were many who lived in odd corners among
the rocks, and were never seen because the trees looked only at
the sky.
“Fairies are everywhere, unseen and unthought of perhaps,
but still the little angels of the garden and the bush. They are
the baby-angels that have charge of the trees and flowers, learn-
ing to love and to do good. They are not nearly as serious as
grown-up angels and their hearts are made of three-parts sun-
shine and one-part moonshine.
“Well, this was the fairies’ opportunity, so the brightest
fairy came to the solemn council of the trees and perched her-
self on the delicate top of the oldest tree. At first they thought
she was a fallen star.
“ ‘Dear trees,’ she called, and her voice was silver, like star-
light. ‘We fairy folk alone may know all things. Let us help
you and make this dull bush beautiful. ’
“The trees were all surprised, so that none answered until
the eldest tree, who always understood by a feeling in his sap,
bent all his leaves, to her, thanked her softly and bade her
haste. And the others, although they wondered, said nothing
out of reverence for the eldest tree.
‘ ‘ Soon even the most thoughtful tree became aware of an un-
wonted stir, and the ‘One-Without-Hope’ was able to see all that
happened because it was so short and what it saw it told the
trees. ’ ’
Here the little Lobelias chimed in regardlessly:—“Little


plants are of use!” they cried, and had to be called to order
very severely by the Snapdragon.
The story-teller went on:—
‘‘ The fairies lay in wait for a little mountain mist loitering in
a valley and, when they caught it, twisted it into a long rope,
which a kindly breeze hooked on to a great pink dawn cloud.
How they raced up their misty ladder! For all the world
like the first little sparkling beams of the rising sun in the
darkened bush.
“At last they all sat safe and sound upon the cloud, but even
the eldest tree could no longer see them. There they sat and
watched the little clouds drift by. When a gold one came they
stretched out their arms and caught it in a net of rain drops.
It glistened and glimmered and shone as they bore it off to the
fairy work shops.
“Then one more bold than his fellows crept into the home of
the Painter of Sunsets, which is beyond the skies, and stole gold
paint from a crystal jar whilst he slept, dreaming perhaps of
the morrow’s sunset.
“The fairy work shops are hard to find. First you go—as
I expect you all know—by the way of the Woodland that leads
to Things Unseen, then through the Pass of Perfect Faith and
into Impossible Land. That is the way the fairies took with
the cloud, the paint and a clod or two of clay from the earth!
“Long hours they worked, modelling delicate stems and
painting them with gold. Then others ground the cloud into
fine gold dust and showered it about the thread-like stems until
each had a halo.”
All the garden flowers now crowded round the Wattle to look
at the blossoms, but she went on, “Such piles of new-made
flowers there were when all was done! All the world of Fancy
glimmered golden in their light. In the night time the trees
slept, rustling dreamily as the winds brought the new flowers
and laid them in soft bright heaps upon the earth. The scent
stole through the bush, and Spring smiled in her dreams. The
moonlight lay in broken pieces upon the earth, and the voice
of the night spoke in silence.


‘ ‘ The fairies went the way that spirits go. The moon waned
and was lost, but the stars shone on, the trees murmured, the
night throbbed. Only the ‘One-Without-Hope’ was awake, full
of bitterness that all should be strong and tall save it alone.
It could never reach the sky, never be counted noble. The bush
about it grew tense and thrilled, filled with an agony of adora-
tion, with the glory of an unseen presence. The ‘One-Without-
Hope’ seemed alone in that presence; there came a voice, softer
than silence.
“ ‘Why art thou sad, little bush? I never intended that
thou shouldst grow tall like the gum trees. Listen! That
which they seek is here about them and they know it not. Nor
size nor form nor beauty can bring them to the blue sky, but just
the Truth. Thou did’st the best thou knewest and hast suffered
long. The form thou hast is best. Be as thou wast meant to
be, and haply thou shalt find the blue sky yet.’
“The voice was wonderfully tender, and the little plant was
filled with great knowledge. Blue sky seemed all about it. It
was uplifted and it slept.
* ‘ The morning came and the bush awoke with a thrill. Gold,
gold everywhere. It wound amongst the trees and, wonder of
wonders! the shabby plant once called the ‘One-Without-Hope’
was golden, radiant, dressed from head to foot in the new
flowers.
“Thus did the bush pay homage to Spring. Thus did the
Wattle come.”
When the story was done there was silence in the garden—a
long deep silence, then the rose bent to caress the Wattle plant.
The garden thrilled with a new breeze and kindly flower voices
whispered to one another. Cool dews moistened the Wattle’s
roots, and made her leaves shine. The dawn came; then the
sun arose. The shadows of the night were dead and gone, and
the world was young again and smiling.
“There are more ways of living aright than one,” thought
the little Wattle plant, “and this may be as good as the bush.”
The gold blossoms rose again bravely.


SANTA CLAUS
It was hot, extremely hot; perhaps the sun had come nearer
the earth to watch the Christmas festivities, for it was Christmas
Eve.
In the big stone-walled garden the bright flowers drooped and
the smooth lawn was brown, only the sunflowers still turned
their faces towards the sun in silent rejoicing. Beneath the
tall, dark pines that grew in a semi-circle girding the wall the
heat was tempered. The needles were cool and fragrant, and
only little streams of leaf-filtered sunlight found their way
through the thick foliage.
But outside, on the long white ribbon of dusty road, the sun-
shine fell in untempered fury, veiling it in a shimmering haze of
heat. Such a long, bare, uninteresting road, and such long
stretches between the scanty patches of shade! To the small
toiling figure—the only one in sight—the dark shadows of the
pines upon the footpath were as the Promised Land. She had
walked a long way, and the load she carried was heavy for her
small, aching shoulders. The little feet were weary in the
clumsy, ill-fitting shoes, and the child’s face was scarlet and
damp with the heat. With one arm she pushed back the lank
hair from her eyes and moved her load. Only a few steps more
to the shade and she would rest for a moment.
How nice it was to sit down! She pressed her hot cheek to


the cool iron bars of the gate and peered through. How com-
fortable it would be to lie on the soft pine needles and have
nothing to do, but then rich people lived in this house. It
would be grand to be rich and go out to tea and have a dolly with
golden hair, and
“What’s your name, little girl?” An imperious voice broke
in upon her train of thought and, looking up, the little traveller
saw a small, dainty girl in white leaning against the inner side
of the gate. “Pretty as a fairy,” the tired child thought her.
“Maggie,” was the reply.
“I don’t like your name —mine’s Elsie. It’s Chrissymas
Eve, and Santa Claus is coming! What’s he bringing you,
Maggie ? ’ ’
The fairy in the garden whirled round excitedly. Maggie
gazed at her dully. ‘ ‘ Santa Claus don’t come to me. ’ ’
The fairy stopped. “Why not?” she demanded.
“Dunno, p’raps he thinks our place too old for any one to
live in. Dad said he wouldn’t ’ave ’im about the place any-
how.”
Elsie’s brown eyes were soft with pity. What a contrast
the two children were! Elsie so fresh, dainty, and well cared
for; but Maggie, even her mother, had she had one, could not
have thought her pretty. Her lank hair straggled about her
tired face, and the sunbonnet and purple dress she wore were
far from clean and neat.
“Where’s your Daddy?” was the next question.
“Gone away,” said Maggie, “but,” she added hastily, “he’s
coming back and I like being alone.”
Black Bob, her father, was a dour, dark man of evil report
among the neighbours. There were some ugly rumours about
him in connection with missing property, and people shook their
heads over his absences and pitied the little girl who would
never hear anything against her “Dad.”
“Must be goin’ now.”
Maggie dragged herself to her feet looking wearily down the
long, hot road. She took two steps away, but Elsie called her


back. She had climbed on to the gate, and lent over saying in
a half-whisper, “I’ll stay awake for Santa Clans and tell him
to go to you to-night.”
Maggie gasped, “Honest injun?”
Elsie nodded gravely.
“Tell him I want a dolly with real ’air and blue eyes.”
Maggie was all sparkles now.
“You hang up your stocking on your bed, you know,” said
Elsie, the wise.
A cloud passed over the other child’s face.
“I haven’t got no stocking."
“Get your Daddy’s, then.”
“He’s got none either.”
Elsie looked perplexed for a moment. Here was a difficulty.
Then her face brightened.
“I’ll ’splain to him and tell him to put them on your bed,”
she laughed.
And so they parted.
The sun sank and the night, cool, gentle and reviving, came.
The flowers took fresh courage, only the sunflower was sad.
In the big stone house Elsie lay asleep. Hers was the
daintiest little white room in all the world, and the moon, as
usual, peeped in to look at it. Elsie had struggled valiantly
with Sleep but, just when she thought herself least likely to
yield, he had crept upon her, and before she knew it she was over
the borderland into the Country of Dreams.
At the foot of her bed hung her stocking, so crammed with
toys and sweets that they overflowed on to the bed. Santa
Claus certainly loved this little daughter of the rich.
Through the window and across the strip of moonlight stole
a dark figure, a sack upon his back. A very sinister apparition
he would seem to all but innocent Elsie, waking suddenly. To
her he was the wonderful Santa Claus she had waited for. Of
course he was, sack and all complete. He was rather dark, and
hadn’t a white beard or red dress, but never mind.


4 ‘ Santa Claus! ’’ she called softly.
The shadow withdrew among the other shadows. Elsie
slipped out of bed and ran across the room straight up to Black
Bob, for it was he.
“Santa Claus/ ’ she began in a tense, excited whisper, “I
wants you to go to Maggie. You know, you forgot her last
time/’ reproachfully. “She lives in a broken-down house and
wants a dolly with real hair an ’ blue eyes. ’’ She ended, hurried
and breathless with excitement.
Santa Claus seemed dumb.
“ Oh! ’ ’ Elsie gave a sharp little cry as she caught sight of
the empty sack. “All your toys are gone/’ and she nearly
wept with disappointment.
A strange softness came to the hard man’s heart. This
little girl was pleading for Maggie, his Maggie, whom he loved
in his own peculiar way. Why not let the child think he was
Santa Claus? It would be easier.
‘ ‘ Forgot her; well, so I did, ’’ he muttered, not without truth.
“She shall have some of mine.” Elsie was equal to all
occasions. The moonlight fell full on her fair upturned face,
radiant with the pure joy of giving. She drew Santa Claus
across the room to the bed.
“You’re dirty, Santa Claus,” she said.
No one would have credited Black Bob with an imagination,
but he replied ingeniously—“lt’s cornin’ down the chiminies,
you see. It’s so sooty.”
Elsie nodded. She was struggling with the stocking.
There it was—just the very dolly, flaxen-haired and smiling,
robed in pink and blue. Then there were sweets and a tea set,
a wonder of beauty, and a gaily coloured picture book. These
she laid aside for Maggie.
“She’ll like them, won’t she?” Elsie whispered.
“Fine!” said Santa Claus. A growing distaste for his
errand was upon him.
“Put them in your bag, Santa Claus. Quick, quick, and




IM ■ ,;
. ) Lit!T7 g, % MSm mm--' JP ■■ •ak
JT ,' ! » i . M •«!BB' 7 flUUg
i * )r*
.1- ; % r ? 1
y » '. .■ . I I |< f 0 I
Ir
f , 3wBb ? SsbK i(^hmc
i ' '
She kicked off her shoes and danced one of her own little dances.
See ‘Page 28


when you get there put them on the bed. She hasn’t any
stockings,” she whispered.
“Maggie will like them real well,” he said, “and I hope they
will have a chimney. I’ll get through your window now.”
So Black Bob slipped out into the dark with the toys. Elsie
stood at the open window and blew a kiss after him.
Then it was that Black Bob decided to go home. Outside
he cursed his softness, but at heart was glad.
Early woke the sun on that Christmas morning, and never
had it shone so gladly through the windows of a certain tumble-
down humpy, where a child lay asleep in a toy strewn bed.
In a bed upon the floor at the other end of the room a man
lay, awake and watching.
Maggie stirred and saw the doll, the tea set and all. Oh, the
delight of the new toys!
“Father! Father!” she called. “See what Santa Claus has
brought me.”


THE LEADEN HERO
* 1 Battles!” cried the leaden soldier, “Battles! What do
you know of battles?” and he included the whole box full of
brand new khaki soldiers in one scornful glance. “Why,” he
went on, “there is not even a scratch on your paint, not a limb
missing among you, and,” he paused and looked more superior
than ever—if that were possible— “l do not see a single real
military moustache.”
The leaden soldier of course didn’t belong to the same regi-
ment as those in khaki. To begin with, they were the Royal
Tin Fusiliers, and he was one of the Leaden Hussars. More-
over, he was a veteran, and had seen action so often that there
was scarcely any paint left on him. He belonged to another
generation of toy soldiers altogether, and he had been picked
up and dropped into the box for tidiness sake.
“Would you tell us about your battles?” said the commander
of the Royal Tin Fusiliers, who wanted to be polite.
‘‘ I will, ’ ’ said the leaden soldier. ‘ l l intended to all along, ’ ’
and he sat down on a burning cottage that belonged to the set.
“There was a time,” he began, “when I was as young and
as fresh as you, but much, much more handsome, for my coat
was red and my breeches blue, and I had a golden helmet. I


was one of a big set —almost two hundred of us, horse and foot,
and a band and standard bearers. Hardly any of us but had
the rank of a sergeant at least. Besides, there were tents and
cannon, whole villages and railway stations, hedges and trees,
not to speak of a fortress in parts to be fitted together, all
packed in a different box. We were so very expensive that
when we were in the shop and little boys came and looked at us
wistfully, their mothers said, ‘Oh, but darling, you don’t want
those. You would never know what to do with so many sol-
diers, and here is such a nice train. ’
“We thought that nobody was going to buy us that Christ-
mas, and I can tell you that it was terribly annoying to see all
the cheap, trumpery soldiers being sold—l mean, receiving
marching orders —before us. Late on Christmas Eve, just as
they were going to shut the shop, in came an old gentleman,
rather flustered.
“‘I want something for a little boy. ’Pon my soul I for-
got all about the little beggar. No—no—not trains, he has
them—nor books —nor animals—he has everything, oh dear!’
The young lady behind the counter smiled a very tired smile,
because she knew all about people who did not know what they
wanted.
“Then the old gentleman saw us. ‘lt doesn’t matter,’ he
said to the young lady, who was getting down mechanical toys
from a high shelf. ‘These soldiers will do instead. You can’t
beat a box of soldiers? They didn’t have toys like this when
I was a boy, ha—ha, but that was before you were born. Good-
night, my dear, and a merry Christmas.’ With that he tucked
us, all done up in a brown paper parcel, under his arm and
trotted out of the shop.
“Then we got into a motor car and whizzed away through
the dark. The roads got worse and worse, and we jumped about
in our box. I lost my first paint that night. At last the car
stopped and we were bundled out. There were voices and
laughter, and a smell of things to eat that found its way right


through the brown paper and card board. The next thing we
knew a little boy was opening the box and calling us the beauti-
fullest, loveliest soldiers, and crying because he had to go to bed
and could not take us too.
“His mother called him ‘Darling,’ his father called him
‘Son,’ his nurse called him ‘My Lamb,’ and the housemaid called
him a little devil, but I think his name was Theodore. We
thought he was a very nice little boy and afterwards, in the
dark, waved our swords and vowed we would die for him.
“The very next morning our campaigning days began. We
had a Civil War in the morning, and another in the afternoon.
I was wounded five times and killed twice. We had a dress
parade on the dining-room-table, all among the dishes at tea
time, and I fell into the cream, but Theodore picked me out and
sucked me when no one was looking. A couple of plates were
broken, but we had a very good time indeed.
‘ ‘ After tea we had another battle, but things did not go quite
right. Theodore trod on the Field Marshal, broke off his arm
and was fearfully angry with his nurse about it. He knocked
us all over, and finally threw the Field Marshal into the fire—
the gallant gentleman melted and was gazetted as ‘fallen under
heavy fire.’ Mother said ‘Darling’ must be tired and he was
taken to bed.
“Next day we went on to the verandah and held a pass
between two rows of flower pots against uncounted hosts, but it
came on to rain and we were left out all night. It was miser-
able and so cold. It rained all the next day and discipline was
relaxed. We fell where we stood, turning a sickly white over
our paint. Nurse came out and brought us in, but the drummer
boy could not be found. Theodore cried and was angry. I
lost some of my paint because he threw me at the cat, and I hit
the door instead.
“Theodore was always trying experiments. One day he
took the carving-knife and tried to cut off my leg. ‘Poor


soldier, have to have leg am’tated,’ he kept saying. But the
knife would not cut, and his mother saw him and screamed.
Then nurse came and took the knife and I was left lying on the
floor more dead than alive, but not for long, for up came the
puppy and carried me off in his mouth. It was all warm and
horrid in the puppy’s mouth, and I was afraid of falling right
down his throat. Indeed, it might have easily happened if the
housemaid had not seen him and said —‘ That little dog will choke
himself yet. Give it to me, sir! here, pup ! pup ! ’ and I was
shaken out on to the floor. ‘Well, if it isn’t one of those
wretched soldiers —they are the plague of my life, always lying
round,’ and she picked me up gingerly and held me under the
tap. It was worse than the dog’s mouth and the water was
freezing. I thought her a nasty, impertinent girl, but felt
grateful when she dropped me safely into the box among my
fellows.
“Everyone had had a terrible day. Some were ‘missing.’
One had gone down the bathroom plug, and one had fallen out of
a window. Nobody had any news of the Colonel. Nearly all
were wounded. There were loose legs and arms everywhere,
and the handsomest Captain had lost his head altogether. I
had a dint in my chest and another in my leg—l mean wounds,
you know.
“We could bear it no longer. We resolved on a desperate
plan. There was nothing for it but desertion. In the dead
of night, when all our plans were laid, I prepared to lead a
gallant remnant forth. There were only seven of us able to
go. We raised the lid of the box carefully, and propped it
open with the body of the poor, dear Captain, and slid down
on to the carpet.
“The adventures of that night were many. We marched
across miles and miles of velvet pile carpet—it makes very heavy
walking when you sink to your knees at every step—and across
cold slippery linoleum. We got lost quite eight times, and one


after another my companions fainted by the way. One ran
into a table leg and had concussion of the brain there and then.
At last only two were left, myself and the Major.
‘ ‘ In the dawn we came to regions that smelt like the kitchen.
We were so tired we could go no further, and so crept into a
cupboard whose door stood ajar. There was a pile of stove
rags inside and a saucer of blacking. My friend the Major
fell into it—he could not see where he was going—but I pulled
him out by the heels and we, the flower of the army, went to
sleep on stove rags!
“Suddenly the door of the cupboard opened wide, and it was
broad daylight. It was the kitchen maid come for the stove
rags and, of course, we rolled out on to the floor.
‘‘ ‘ Soldiers everywhere! ’ she said. ‘ I wonder however
they got out here. ITI take them to some one as will appreciate
them though/ and we were slipped into her pocket. It was
warm, and would have been comfortable if we had not knocked
against one another so much.
“The kitchen maid, whose name was Annie, seemed a nice
girl, and I do believe she understood our value, because she
seemed quite afraid of losing us, and put her hand down again
and again to make sure we were quite safe. When she was
alone she took us out and smiled. Annie lived at home and,
when the washing up was done, she went out of the back gate
and turned so many corners that we were quite giddy. At
last she came to a tall house with only one or two dim lights
in its windows. Annie ran upstairs, and right on the top land-
ing a door opened and a little boy ran out. He flung his arms
round Annie’s neck and began to kiss her. We military people
don’t believe in that sort of thing, you know, so we pretended
we didn’t notice. She was hugging and kissing him and ask-
ing him questions as we all went into the room.
“ ‘What do you think I’ve brought you, Teddy-boy?’ she
asked as she took off her hat.


“ ‘An appully?’ he cried, pouncing on her pocket, but, she
held her hand over it.
“ ‘No! Guess again.’
He guessed all kinds of things, mostly eatable.
“ ‘All wrong,’ she cried. ‘lt’s something to play with.
See, it’s two beautiful soldiers.’
“Annie had been so quiet all day that we did not know she
could be gay. Teddy-boy thought we were perfectly beautiful.
He nearly went mad over us. Presently his mother came in
and, when we were put through our paces, she was quite im-
pressed and said, ‘Oh, my,’ several times.
“We were taken to review the ‘Army.’ It was a very poor
thing—no soldiers at all, just pieces of wood that he pretended
were soldiers.
“ ‘These soldiers will ’ave to be over all the other soldiers,
won’t they?’ he asked, referring to us. ‘Mummer, what’s the
importantest man in any army called?’
‘ ‘ Mummer said she didn’t know exactly. ‘ I think a sargint
is one of the chief though,’ she ventured. ‘Cousin Lil’s hus-
band, he was a sargint, and to ’ear ’im talk you wouldn’t think
there was anyone more important than a sargint.’
‘‘ So Teddy called us both sergeants—we were not
offended, because we knew he really meant Field Marshal.
“We lived quite happily with him for a long time. He
played with us every day when he came home from school. It
was rather confusing for us, because he was always imagining
things that were not there at all, and his military knowledge
would have made a raw recruit blush. He used to say ‘ Forward
Halt,’ and ‘Left wheel to the rear,’ till our uniforms almost
changed colour—but he was better than Theodore.
“We w r ere born for adventures. One day Teddy took us to
school —he was proud of us, I think. He stayed playing with
the other boys that day after school till quite late. It was get-
ting really dark and time for him to go home, but he didn’t seem


to notice. Then one of the other boys was called by his
mother, and Teddy picked up the Major and myself in great
haste and set off at a run for home. If he had not been in such
a hurry he might have remembred there was a hole in his pocket
but, as it was, he dropped me into it, keeping the Major in his
hand. I did my best to hold on, but the hole was a large one,
and soon he began to run jerkily because he was tired. I had
began to despair of being able to hold on any longer, when he
suddenly bumped against somebody and I was dislodged. I
found myself lying upon the kerbstone of a large and busy
street where the lamps had just been lit. There was a great
deal of traffic, so that the noise of my fall was quite lost. I
could not see Teddy anywhere, so I just lay there and hoped he
would come back to look for me.
“One does not realize what big feet people have till one is
lying on the pavement. I thought every minute that someone
would tread on me. For a time no one noticed me, then I
heard a shrill voice saying, ‘Let me pick it up, Mummie.’
“Somebody answered, ‘No, darling, you don’t want nasty,
dirty things out of the gutter.’
“ ‘But it isn’t in the gutter, it’s on the path. It’s a soldier.
Please, Mummie,’ continued the first voice in heart-rending
tones.
‘ ‘ Mummie seemed to capitulate because she said, ‘ Oh well, if
you will have it, let Mother pick it up and then, when it has been
washed, you can have it if you still want it. Why you should
take a fancy to it, when you have a cupboard full of nice toys
at home, I don’t know.’
“She picked me up very gingerly—as if I would bite —
found a piece of paper in her hand-bag, rolled me up and put
me in her coat pocket. She gave me a dreadful, hot bath —the
water actually boiled —but I think I felt better for it.
“Little Jack played with me quite nicely, and this afternoon
his Daddy came home and brought you, so here I am. Do you


not think mine has been a life of battles? I tell you, sir, none
of you tin things can compare to a Leaden Hussar.’’
All the Tin Fusiliers were asleep except the commander, who
wanted to be polite.
“Thank you very much for telling us,” he said. “I—l’m
sure I’m very pleased to have met so distinguished a soldier.”
Then someone opened the box and turned them all out on the
floor.


A POSITION OF TRUST
Rodney eyed his brown legs with gloomy satisfaction. He
was sitting on the playhouse steps in the sun, reviewing his
sufferings, and the sight of his two bare legs filled him with
melancholy pride, especially the long white scar on the right
knee, which, obscured as it was by the grime of a morning’s
stalking in the back garden, was still a possession of which any
ten-year-old could be proud. Every time Rodney’s mind wan-
dered from his grievances he resolutely brought it back. He
had been thinking of them now for quite five minutes, and
had reviewed the whole situation.
Firstly, he had been sent to stay with Aunt Alice for a whole
fortnight, without explanation or apology. He had worn boots
all day and every day, and had been forced by circumstances
to wash his hands with humiliating frequency—in fact, had had
to maintain his Sunday manners for fourteen solid days. Then
he had come home, with a head full of exciting games, and every-
one had said “Hush,” and they had taken him upstairs, telling
him all the way that they had something beautiful to show him
and that he was just the luckiest little boy.
Visions of a new cricket bat, or even of a Christmas tree out
of season, surged through his mind.


Then they showed him something tiny and bald and pink in
a bassinet, and said it was his little sister. Little sister merely
opened her eyes and wailed, and everyone, Mother included,
straightway forgot Rodney, even though he had been away for
a fortnight, Sunday-behaving like a man, as Father said he
had to.
Everybody, Rodney said to himself, was fussing over that
silly little unfinished thing, while there he was quite complete
—even to the most interesting scar on his right knee —and a boy
to boot, neglected. He gulped—the sense of martyrdom was
becoming too intense to be pleasant. Probably Mummie didn’t
want him any more, now she had that other one. She could
not think much of him, if she let it take his place and preferred
it. Despite his ten years and the sunshine, Rodney was on the
point of tears —a diversion saved him. A shadow fell across
the grass, closely followed by a big jolly voice that said:—
“Any room on the step for me, son?”
Of course there was plenty of room; there was for
Daddy, and presently there was a pair of khaki legs beside the
little brown ones, making them look very thin and small all of
a sudden.
Daddy puffed at his pipe in silence for a minute. He saw
the trouble, and guessed the reason. Then it struck Rodney
that probably he was not the only sufferer. He felt a strong
wave of fellow-feeling for his soldier-father whom he had always
looked on as a comrade, even, let it be whispered, something of
an aider and abettor on certain interesting occasions.
“It’s awfully rough on you too, Dad,” he said in his best
man-to-raan voice. “Can’t we do something about it? About
it’s not being finished, and a girl, you know. Couldn’t you
manage to get it changed, or give it to someone? Auntie Nell
said she would love it. She said so ever so often.”
The captain hid a smile from the blue-grey eyes as best he
could.
“Look here, Rodney,” he began, “you’ve got the wrong end
of the stick altogether. We wanted Baby, and didn’t you


know babies were always sent into the world weak and tiny, so
that we who are big and strong could look after and protect
them? They can’t help being weak and wanting lots of care,
any more than people can help being very old and feeble. It’s
mean to be angry with them. Some one looked after you when
you were tiny and helpless, so you see it’s up to you to help
look after little sister. Why, Roddy boy, Mother was a little
baby girl once. Wouldn’t you like to have lots of people in
the world like her? You will find soon that it’s awfully nice
to have a sister—and, Roddy, this is very serious—you are a
whole ten years older than she is, so you must do your share in
taking care of her and be her protector always. You are going
to be a man, even if you can’t go to the war just yet, aren’t you,
son? When Igo you will be the only man in the house, and
you must keep Mother and Baby safe till I come home.”
“Yes, Daddy,” said Rodney, very seriously, as if he was put-
ting his youth behind him—then, “When do you think she will
be old enough to play with ? ’ ’
Daddy was not going to be serious any longer. He knew
Roddy too well to be uncertain as to whether he had understood
or not.
A fortnight passed, and life for Roddy jogged along much as
usual, but he seemed to be more often in trouble than ever. To
begin with he did not agree at all with Baby’s nurse, and
she was not fond of little boys who were liable to make all kinds
of noises and wake Baby.
No one in the house liked Nurse very much, but then she
had such excellent references, and no one had anything definite
against her, except Rodney, and many cuffings he had from
her, always in private.
She used one dire threat, “If you are a naughty boy, the
big black man will come and take you.” Being ten years old
Rodney, of course, didn’t believe in such fictions, except perhaps
at bed-time, when you must admit such words would strike a
chill into the bravest heart, especially if he had to turn out his


own light. Rodney’s position was made unhappier still by the
fact that now his Daddy was nearly always too busy to play.
It was papers, papers everywhere, and woe betide the little boy
who touched them or interrupted Daddy in the midst of his
calculations. They were such nice stiff papers, too. Roddy
wanted just one for a boat, but Daddy seemed quite horrified.
“No, Roddy, these are the King’s papers. Go and ask Mother
for an old newspaper,” he said.
It was a long time since Daddy made boats, if he thought
newspapers would do.
At the end of a fortnight a lot of men came to see Daddy,
and they all brought papers too, and sat poring over them the
whole afternoon. When they had gone, Daddy seemed very
happy. “It’s all finished now, he said to Mother. “I shall
take them to headquarters in the morning. I think we’ve
earned a little pleasure now, don’t you? Will you come to
the theatre to-night?” Mother smiled and said, “Of course, I
would love to, dear.” Nurse smiled, too.
Rodney watched them go rather wistfully. Daddy promised
chocolates and a picnic, but even that could not quite reconcile
him to being left alone with Nurse, for even Cook, his refuge
in time of trouble, was going to the pictures. He wandered
from room to room and kicked the chairs disconsolately as he
passed. He tried to play soldiers, but the house was uncannily
quiet. He decided that even Nurse was better than no com-
pany, but he could not find her. He was quickly becoming as
frightened as was compatible with the dignity of his ten years,
when she came in at the front door, rather breathless, and care-
fully explained to him that she had just been down to post a
letter. The evening dragged on. Rodney did not mind much
when Nurse sent him to bed early, though he protested on
principle.
That was eight o’clock, and Roddy fell asleep almost straight
away. He slept on the verandah at the side of the house. It
was perhaps a quarter past eleven when he woke suddenly. The


world was marvellously bright, and almost as clear as day, but
cold and still.
All Rodney saw was the black shadow of a man on the
cemented path—the man was hidden. Then there was a low
whistle. Rodney strangled a sob of fear in his throat. It
was such a low whistle. Something in it frightened him —
and there was that black shadow on the path. Then suddenly
he knew it was the black man come to take him. Nurse was
right, after all. He had a terrible vision of cold, claw-like
hands and a dark, unshaven face held close to his—and all the
time he kept his eyes fixed on that ominous black shadow.
It moved away, and Rodney seized his chance. He was out
of bed and racing down the verandah to the door always left
on the latch for him, almost before he had decided what he
would do. Once in the room with the door shut he found it
very dark. He thought he heard a door open and shut, and it
was so very dark. Any of the shadows might be a black man,
with a cold claw-like hand ready to clutch him. Underneath
Rodney was a brave boy. He thought, “If only I can get to
Mummie’s room,” and he made himself walk across the room,
groping and shaking.
He reached the hall, and it was clearer walking. Besides,
there was a faint light from the leaded glass of the front door.
Half-way down the hall there were heavy curtains; beyond
that the stairs and a cross passage leading to Daddy’s study and
a side door. To Rodney the curtains looked menacing. If
only he could get past there, the way upstairs would be clear —
but a black man might easily lurk in those curtains.
He reached them, and then suddenly stopped and shrank
against the wall, clutching their folds. At the end of the pas-
sage was Nurse holding a flickering candle, and with her a big,
black man. The fitful light made him look bigger and more
grotesque than Nature had made him.
He had a white bundle in his arms; he was speaking, and
Rodney could hear all he said, though it was gruff and low.
“They cannot be back before half-an-hour at least, you say.


Then I will he a long way away, the car is waiting. You have
done good service; it shall not be forgotten.”
A great light broke in on Rodney—the white bundle was Baby.
The black man had come for her, because she had cried so all
day, and Nurse was giving her up. He was the only protector
she had. He did not think these things straight-forwardly as
they are written, but all in a frightened jumble. He heard the
guilty pair going down the passage. What Rodney must do
was clear. He must somehow stop that man taking their baby
for half-an-hour; then Father would be home. The car! He
would start the car before the man could get to it. His theory
only provided for one man. There was no more groping. He
was through the house, on to the verandah, and across the green
springy turf of the lawn with the speed of a young hare. There
was the ear, sure enough, standing under the shadow of some
trees at the side of the road. It was not for nothing that Rod-
ney was chums with the Harpers’ chauffeur, and had learned
from him how to start and stop a car.
Happily everything was ready for a speedy departure.
Rodney’s eager fingers found the levers unerringly; the car gave
a great purr; he heard running footsteps. The car purred again
and sprang forward. Then Rodney jumped and fell in the
thick, soft dust. The running feet were on top of him as a
man sprang at the back of the car, but he missed his hold and
rolled with Rodney in the dust.
The car was gathering speed! It was past recall now, racing
away into the night, without lights or controlling hand on the
breaks or horn, ready for any damage. It ran on a steep bank
in the end, I think, and was smashed. Roddy spat the dust
out of his mouth and sat up. A second man had come up,
carrying the white bundle. He was panting and gasping, and
seemed furiously angry with his comrade, though Rodney could
not understand a word they said.
Suddenly both turned on him. A hand gripped him
roughly by the shoulder and shook him to his feet. The voice
}ie had heard in the house said, “Vot you do; we’ll kill you for


dis." Rodney kicked and twisted with all his might, but the
man's arms made him feel small and weak. He would have
cried out, only a great hand was over his mouth, pressing his
head back till he felt his neck must break.
“Hit him on the head, so that he won't wake up for a long
time, and come along," advised the other man.
Roddy was still thinking of the baby. He could see, out of
the corner of his eyes, the white bundle in the other man's hand,
the man who should have been waiting in the car, but had gone
to see if his companion was coming.
The butt of a pistol flashed for a minute poised above Rod-
ney’s head. Then the unexpected happened. There was the
soft whirr of a car, and two great starry lamps showed suddenly
round an abrupt turn in the road. The hand fell from Rodney's
mouth. There was no blow. He shrieked piercingly, and the
grip on his shoulder gave w T ay so suddenly that he fell forward
in the bright pathway made by the lamps. The car had stopped.
Rodney had only a confused idea of what happened next.
Daddy’s voice said, “It's Rodney! What in the world has hap-
pened?" Rodney was picked up and everyone crowded round
him. Daddy saw the white bundle and seized it. When he
looked inside he said something very quickly and began giving
orders to the chauffeur in his military voice.
It was a wonderful night for Rodney. He had never seen
grown ups so excited before, and he found himself quite the
most important person in the house. Every one was asking
him questions and Daddy was ringing up.
Then policemen came up and Nurse was called in to be ques-
tioned, and did and said the queerest things.
Roddy told his story over and over again to his Mother.
“But, darling, it w r asn’t Baby at all that they were trying
to steal, but the King’s papers that were in Daddy’s study.
They were full of the King's secrets, all about the
war, so the Germans wanted to get them. Nurse was a
wicked traitoress, and let the spies in. I don’t know what
would have happened if my brave boy had not stopped them.


»§L;Sir»». itj
|| |p||fe| M
MBS!|^TWffni r / / >S|
IFonder of wonders, one of the high gates was ajar.
See ‘Page 36




Daddy and I met Mr. Harper at the theatre and he asked us to
come home in his car, so we raced the last boat home and were
just in time. But if you had not started their car it would
have been too late.”
Roddy was not going to be her “brave boy” any longer.
He was just a very tired little person, who had been very
frightened and excited, so he began to cry, and was put to bed
just as the cold grey light crept up from the east.


A BUSH WALK
Sometimes there come days in early spring of irresistible
tenderness and beauty, with blue clearness everywhere, and sun-
shine. Such days lure one forth, and make the wandering life
seem all the heart could desire. Such a day has to-day been.
The bright leaves on the gum trees twinkled and sparkled,
the soft murmur of the bush called.
Here in the mountains there is little level walking, but there
are swelling hills and deep valleys everywhere, and all the
variety of the bush.
I bade good-bye to the red road and struck down into the
scrub. It was only scrub at first, tick bush and shapely clumps
of gum no more than breast high, with patches of grass between
and white spikes of some tiny, dainty wild-flower, growing
generously.
Just where the trees had grown and the real bush commenced
on the steep graceful curve of the mountain, a bush fire had
swept and left behind it nothing but a wide, black band, fit
mourning for all the bright leaves and straight young saplings
that had once made it beautiful. A long and barren slope it
looked, the very earth blackened, the trees burnt and hope-
less against the sky and all the little bushes pointing starkly
upwards, stripped of their leaves or clinging to the charred and


withered remains of their green glory. Yet some trees were
already fringed with tender leaves, and the stony blackened
ground was filming over with green, tiny ferns, sprouts of red
leaves and a hundred little eager things, ready to begin again.
The way grew steeper, and there were many rocks —great
masses sculptured into rude forms, as if they had been some
stone gods worshipped by the trees, which since have found their
error and left them forsaken, old and grey. Yet in a crevice
I found a little cluster of scarlet flowers, with scarcely any
earth to grow upon. From the top of one boulder one might
see a long, long way over blue hills, flanked by bluer mountains,
with long deep shadows where the valleys were. Some seemed
grassy, dotted here and there wflth trees; others, deeply wooded,
their sides a rolling mass of sombre green, veiled with bluish
haze. Others still were stern with sides of solid rock, dyed
red, pink and yellow. Over all was the blue, pure sky and a
great silence. Sometimes, as I watched, a bird soared up from
some crevice in a rocky cliff and far down below, ringed in by
trees, was a tiny clearing and a little green house in the midst.
Of all that lonely, silent scene that spot seemed loneliest and
most remote from life.
I turned to the descent again. There was no trace of fire
now, and the trees commenced to grow thickly—beautiful trees,
dappled grey and smooth-trunked, every leaf standing out clear
against the sky.
Soon the way became tortuous and slow, over-hung by high
rocks, and I had to cling to the undergrowth and go carefully.
The bottom of the gorge was now at hand. It was very narrow,
with steep caverned sides of reddish rock on hand.
Between those narrow walls all the beauties of fern and bush
were crowded. Delicate ferns hung from every crevice of the
rock and sprang from the warm moist earth. The trees were
all tall there, seeking the upper air, and one gnarled giant leaned
with his twisted shoulder against the cliff side.
Wattle was golden among the trees. No one could help
loving the wattle, it is so gay and careless, so liberal. It


climbed the rocky sides, gleamed in little hollows and laughed
back at the sun from every eminence. Bright-leaved bushes
crowded one another and half-concealed from view a little
stream, red with iron, and all the red stones around it.
The streamlet whispered many sweet secrets to its lovers,
the bushes, which I could not understand, and the bushes
answered very softly.
Where the ground could be seen for the undergrowth, I
found many smooth pebbles, pure white, pink or yellow, and one
big stone, pink coloured with red veins upon it.
At the narrow mouth of the gorge I saw, beyond the bend,
a little break of blue, and knew that there the valley lay spread
out like a picture, but the sun had set to me, and I must breast
the moutain side again. The sunlight yet lingered on the high
places, and the mountain tops were glorified. At last —and the
way seemed long—l stood upon the red road again and looked
back over what I had seen. The far mountains were now purple,
and only a few bright clouds lingered in the sky. The bush
was changed. It had wrapped itself in the mystery of twilight,
and I was an outcast.


HIGH SCHOOL GHOSTS
The last tram had rattled past in a great hurry. Every
board in the school creaked with relief, and the building settled
itself down on its foundations, under its warm coat of dust and
age, to doze. The fig tree said its prayers and went to sleep too.
The only sound left came from “Class Room B.” It was
the tiniest sound, just a little scratch —scratch —scratch, as if a
Beetle w'ere trying to get out of a match-box. It was a very
solitary sound at first, but soon the whole cupboard was alive
with the noise of the movements of little creatures with hard,
scratchy feet. It came from the Beetle quarters. They are
situated on the third floor, up in the Science Press.
The season was Spring, you see, and everything was thrilling
with life. There was so much life left over that some was
given to the poor dead insects in the cupboard, on the under-
standing that it should only be used at night.
“It is a treat to be alive again,’ ’ said the ghost of a fat
Scarab, stretching his third right leg luxuriously. His near
relatives, Mr. Passalid and Mr. Stag, hastened to help the old
fellow off his back. Then there was a great shaking of antennas.
Soon all the bettles were awake and making merry. The
Weevil, with a proboscis that might be called Roman, was there,
of course —and a very hard case he was too.
A scion of the Cerambycids—whose pet name was Longi-
corn, twirled his long antennae with languid grace, and cast
melting glances at a little Buprestid. “My Jewel,” he breathed.
“My flower beetle, dweller in the trees, where the scented gum
flowers hang.”
Miss Buprestid waved her antennae deprecatingly, but, in a


sudden fervour, Longicorn snatched a dainty antenna and
pressed it to his proboscis.
A Carab and a Tenebrio were comparing back legs, and slyly
eyeing all the succulent small beetles with a mind to business.
The scared little creatures crawled over one another, anxious to
escape.
Suddenly there was a commotion. A lady-like old beetle
ghost, came along, stumbling and shuffling. “Good beetles all,”
she cried. “Have you seen my second back leg anywhere?”
Somebody must have broken it off. It was the best I had, too. ’ ’
“It’s those girls again,” cried a Weevil. “My inside is so
dried up with lying in the open that it is quite unusable.”
“They are dreadful creatures,” snorted a Cockroach. “One
of them drew me upside down, actually—one of my rank! ’ ’
“That’s nothing,” said the Weevil, with meaning, as he
jogged his neighbour rudely with his elbow.
“It would be nothing to such as you are,” rejoined the Cock-
roach tartly; “but lam different. I have some dignity to
lose. I belong to the glorious order of the Orthopteras. I
live in a house, and use the most expensive perfumes. I would
not be here only some foolish girl mistook me for a beetle.”
“She was a silly child,” smiled the Weevil. He was as calm
and sardonic as the Cockroach was bombastic.
“Order, order!” cried the Stag, who really is a most peace-
ful insect and, were it but known, his great mandibles are only a
mask. “We can all agree on one thing—that girls are just the
awfullest insects—they are parasites, I should think.”
“ ’Pon my thorax, they are,” chimed in a Buprestid.
“We must down with them,” continued the chairman.
“Every night someone has lost legs and wings. They squeeze
us and tickle us and pull us. They stick pins in us and label us.
With their recital of wrongs, the fury of the company rose.
They bared their biting-jaws and waved their antennae menac-
ingly.
A sinister-looking Carab embraced the opportunity to devour
an innocent little Lamellicorn.


The vote of censure on the “girl insects” was carried un-
animously, and the meeting became uproarious. Staid, elderly
beetles fell upon the thoraxes of young and sprightly maiden
beetles and embraced them. Antennae were waved, and the
most intricate beetle trots were performed.
When the gaiety was at its height, however, the life current
was turned off, and the ghosts crept back into their bodies and
stood as immovable as ever on their cork stands.
In the next shelf up, another entertainment had been in pro-
gress among the butterflies, moths, and honourable members of
the order Orthoptera.
It was indeed an aristocratic company, far removed from the
bourgeois assembly below. Beautiful young Danai lemon
Papillios, and cloudy grey moths threaded the mazes of the
dance to the thrilling strains of a band. The bandsmen were
mostly Locustids, and there were first and second leg scrapers,
and an old Cicada at the drum.
A little Membracid, surnamed “Nature’s Joke,” was here
in motley, and he hopped about amongst the dancers, making
the quaintest insect jokes.
The matrons, who were not dancing, carried on a spirited
conversation in the recesses of an old box, and an old Archiman-
tis, with bulging round eyes and faded green complexion, was
discussing the upbringing of Mantids with an Earwig. The
latter was a sharp little creature with a rare aptitude for
scandal.
“How do you like the Wasp crowd?” she whispered.
“Well,” chirped the Archimantis, “they have very elegant
figures, but they are too impolite for me.”
“My very own opinion, my dear. It’s their pride. They
can talk of nothing but their life history. It’s so complicated,
you know. Now I can’t say I like the way they wear their
wings—nothing on them at all—so vulgar! I don’t know what
society is coming to,” and the Earwig wore an air of outraged
dignity. “Just look at Mr. Phasmid; he will dance, and he is
so ungainly,” she continued.


“Now how do you like our decorations? They are all living.
I arranged it myself with the junior Grass-hoppers and Phas-
mids. Do you see that twig over there? It’s my nephew; such
a promising young Phasgonurid, ’ ’ cried Mrs. Archimantis, all
in a breath, “and there is our new rector, Mr. Preying Mantis
—such a fine character.”
The Earwig interrupted her. “Oh, do look! Mr. Cicada
is going to sing. How dreadful! Every time he sings I ex-
pect to see him burst with the effort before my very eyes. One
of the Phasmids offended him dreadfully a little while ago by
calling him a Locust.”
The Cicada sang long and loud, rolling his great eyes from
side to side, and clasping his front feet together at the pathetic
parts.
A young lady Cricket performed next. She was not very
popular, poor thing, because she was neither beautiful nor sar-
castic, so it was generally voted that she was plebian, especially
as she was nearly related to the sexton.
“This is a very mixed company,” Mrs. Earwig was saying;
“there are crowds of Hemipterous creatures here. Of course,
though they don’t admit it,” she added very low, “they are only
Bugs. How gaudily they dress, too! There’s a bad creature,
if you like —Mr. Reduvid. Between you and me he is an assas-
sin, and looks it, too! They are all empty creatures. ’ ’
She felt a strange numbness creeping all over her. The
dance flagged, and the band stopped in the middle of a note.
The bulging eyes of the Archimantis were glazing fast. “Oh,
insecticide,” she gasped, which sounds just as bad to the tym-
panum of an insect, as “Oh, poison!” does to us.
A sickly silence fell over the company; the living decora-
tions fell to the floor. A cockroach groaned once or twice, and
a gay wing fluttered.
Then there was stillness and silence. The first tram clat-
tered by. The Figtree awoke, stretched its branches, and
threw a shrivelled and solitary Aglet at the building. It was
morning and the cupboard was full of dead insects.


THE UNFORTUNATE WELCOME
‘ ‘ Roddy! Roddy! Where are you ? Here’s a letter from
Daddy.”
Rodney in the apple tree heard and scrambled to the ground
without method and without delay. He found Mummie sitting
on the top step of the flight that led down from the verandah,
just as if she wasn’t Mummie at all, and she held an open letter
in her hand. She caught Rodney to her as he arrived, breath-
less and eager.
“Oh, darling,” she half-sobbed, “he’s coming home, and they
won’t want him at the war any more, but he’s going to be a
lame Daddy, only that does not matter now he is coming home,”
and she began to cry in real earnest.
Rodney could not understand such behaviour at all. He
wanted to jump and shout, and run about telling every one.
Besides, he had never seen Mummie cry, and it made him feel
uncomfortable. He patted her hair gingerly with his only free
hand and whispered a little huskily:—“Don’t cry, Mummie;
you musn’t cry. We are awfully glad, aren’t we?”
Then Mummie looked up and she wasn’t crying at all, but
her eyes were shining, her cheeks were pink and she laughed
unevenly.
“Of course we are, darling—ever so glad—and Mummie was
a goose.”
So Roddy, feeling assured, wriggled out of her arms and


began a war dance with such energy that Baby on the other side
of the house woke up and screamed.
On the strength of Mummie’s softened mood, Rodney an-
nounced that he was not going to school that day, and forth-
with set out on a tour of visits to tell the good news. Nobody
could be unsympathetic to this shining-eyed little boy, and the
most impulsive women kissed him and felt constrained to offer
him their nicest cake, so that when Rodney arrived home his
appetite had mysteriously disappeared, and he could eat no
lunch.
11 The child is over-excited. Ido hope he doesn’t make him-
self ill,” Mummie remarked to the maid as she cleared away
Rodney’s untouched meal.
In the afternoon Rodney spent a laborious half-hour trying
to convey the good news to Baby, but she only cooed and
chuckled and tugged at his hair.
“Daddy’s coming home, Baby, coming home in a big ship.
Roddy’s so glad. Baby wants Daddy too, don’t you, pet?”
‘ ‘ Roddy play big bears wi ’ Baby. I eat oo all up ef oo don’t
wun away,” she cooed persuasively.
Rodney explained again.
“Dad-dad,” she repeated dutifully, then “Dad-dad tell Baby
a ’tory.”
At last Roddy gave up in despair. He had religiously
taught her to say, “Dad-dad” but, as she could not remember
any “Dad-dad,” she applied the name to anything or anybody
but generally to a dipalidated Golliwog doll.
Next Rodney begged two large sheets of brown paper from
Cook, fastened them together and proceeded, with the aid of his
paint-box, to print on it in huge sprawling letters, “Welcome
Home.” He twisted himself into every conceivable position
and thrust out his tongue, but the letters sprawled and wavered
more and more.
“Daddy won’t be home for nearly eight weeks, Roddy-boy,”
said Mother, as she passed, but Rodney only grunted and toiled
on.


They received word that Daddy had arrived in Western
Australia. Then Mummie broke it to Rodney.
“I’m going to Melbourne to meet Daddy,” she began one
afternoon when Rodney had just come home from school and
was literally in the middle of a large slice of bread and jam. He
bolted an extraordinarily big mouthful recklessly—“ How rip-
ping! When’ll we go?”
“But I’m not going to take you, dear; you must stay and
mind Baby.”
Rodney had had too much experience of “minding Baby” to
find any consolation in the idea. It just stood for pram duty,
and that farce called “playing with Baby” that wasn’t play
at all.
“But, Mummie,” he began craftily. “I’d rather look after
you. Daddy said I must, and it’s an awfully long way to
Melbourne. You’d want me to look after the luggage and ask
the way, and buy the tickets and say, ‘Are you sure you don’t
feel a draught, dear?’ like Father used to.”
Mummie laughed, then she had an inspiration.
“There will have to be some one at home to arrange the
welcome, Roddy, and I’m leaving that to you.” She little
knew how rash she had been. “Cousin Agnes is coming to
keep house for the week I’m away, and she is bringing Geoffry
with her, so you will have some one to play with. Yon won’t
give Cousin Agnes any trouble, will you, dear? I want you
to do everything you can to help her —it’s so very good of her
to come.”
Rodney did not appear impressed. He helped himself to
another round of bread and jam.
“Geoffry is a horrid little cry baby. I like M'aisie better,”
he announced, as he took more jam for consolation.
“Do try to be good to him, Roddy. You wouldn’t like
Father to hear stories of quarrels as soon as he came home,
would you?” pleaded Mother rather weakly. She would not
have liked to have had to play with Geoffry for a whole week
herself.


The eve of departure arrived, and with it Cousin Agnes and
Geoffry. Rodney helped with the packing and felt important.
His superiority in age and attainments overawed Geoffry for
the time being, and all went well. The next evening Mummie
caught the Melbourne Express and Roddy, with her final
admonitions ringing in his ears, waved farewell from the plat-
form.
That night Rodney lay awake for a long, long time, making
his plan for a Welcome Home. The later it got, the more com-
plicated and varied his schemes became.
In the morning he gave Geoffry the slip and walked over
to the Harpers to see Maisie and explain his plans. Maisie
was pretty and innocent to the point of vacuity, but she adored
Rodney and followed him with lamb-like docility. That covered
a multitude of sins.
“It’s to be a real slap-up welcome. I’ve thought it all
out,” began Roddy, after a preliminary somersault on the lawn.
“I’d love to help,” breathed Maisie. Roddy had taken that
for granted.
“There are going to be flags and rockets and beluminations,
and we must have a triumphal arch —they always have them.
We can make it of boughs and things fixed on to the arch over
the garden gate—so that will be all right. We can make the
flags—little peaky ones —we have some red stuff, and I’ll nick
the clothes’ line to string them on. I’ve got 2/2 in my money
box —it ought to buy an awful lot of fire-works. It’s the
beluminations that worry me.”
“You could have our motor car lamps,” suggested Maisie.
“But,” objected Roddy, “there are only two of them, and I
want lots and lots. We could have a bonfire in the paddock.
Bonfires are awfully triumphant things.”
They plotted and planned all the morning, and their ideas
grew and grew. There was to be a colossal bonfire in the pad-
dock at the side of the house, a triumphal arch, “Welcome” over
the door, and flags everywhere.
“We can make the fire-works ourselves —it’s quite easy. You


only have to make the gun-powder, and then—then—just make
the fire-works,” explained Roddy, who had unbounded con-
fidence in his own powers. “Then we can use the 2/2 for a
Union Jack and bull’s-eye—Daddy loves bull’s-eyes better’n
anything, only cousin Agnes never thinks of that. I told her
to get them, and she said, ‘Oh, you ridiculous child, he won’t
want bull’s-eyes,’ just as if he was her Daddy and she knew.”
Maisie loved bull’s-eyes and could sympathize.
Bull’s-eyes are cheap, and so are Union Jacks, but it takes
money to make gunpowder, and Rodney was soon in financial
difficulties. Maisie contributed sixpence—a lady with a large
family of dolls and an inordinate fondness for sweets, could not
be expected to contribute more. Roddy raised threepence by
pealing the potatoes for three whole days. Then they trium-
phantly marched down to the shops and bought the necessary
ingredients.
“We needn’t tell anyone,” Roddy pointed out. “They
would only want us to do it some other way. They always do.”
At last the day came when Roddy could say, “They will be
home to-morrow. ’ ’ He had a strenuous day, and Maisie worked
with him, staunch and grubby, asking innumerable questions,
and taking reproofs and orders meekly. Geoffry was bribed
with one of the precious bull’s-eyes to collect sticks for the
amateur rockets, and to do other odd jobs. Roddy made the
gunpowder with deadly secrecy from a receipt in an old “Boy’s
Own Paper.”
Somehow things didn’t go right. Roddy felt hot and cross
all day and could eat nothing. Cousin Agnes was too busy to
notice his lack of appetitie, but she did notice that he quarrelled
with Geoffry, and did not scruple to say that it was his fault.
He went to bed at last and tossed about unhappily, thinking of
all his preparations and wondering if they were right. Some-
how he could not feel as happy or excited as he thought he
ought to feel—and it troubled him.
In the morning he did not want to get up, but he had not
made the fire-works and there was still much to do. Daddy was


expected at about night-fall. “It will be quite six o’clock before
he reports himself and can come home,” Mother had written.
It was a terribly long day for Roddy, and he was cross. He
reduced even the faithful Maisie to tears, and Geoffry had one
of the worst days of his life till Cousin Agnes swept him away
calling Roddy “a cruel, bad-tempered little boy,” and promising
to tell his Daddy all about it. Then even Roddy himself wept
long and bitterly, and Maisie forgot her grievance trying to
comfort him, and was hurt when he refused a fragment of
toffee she had in her pocket.
After long and earnest efforts he was forced to give up the
idea of the fireworks—they were not easy to make after all, and
his head ached so. He refused his dinner, which Cousin Agues put
dowm to sulkiness, and Roddy wished ardently for Mummie.
The afternoon wore slowly on, and Rodney was heartily
sick of everything. He was not nearly as interested in the
Welcome Home as he wanted to be. The waste of gun-
powder worried him. He thought of the potatoes he had peeled
to help pay for it, and his heart smote him.
“Can’t you think of something?” he asked Maisie, plain-
tively. “Your head isn’t aching like mine.”
Maisie obediently thought her hardest, but it came to nothing.
At five o’clock the gunpowder was still in danger of being
wasted. Then, “Couldn’t we have a salute? It’s a great
honour,” he pondered.
“But there isn’t a gun,” objected Maisie.
‘ ‘ Oh, but we could put it in a kerosene tin and drop a match
in. It would sound just the same—that’s all a salute is, just
sound. ’ ’
“But ,” began Maisie.
“If you don’t think it’s a good idea, you needn’t,” snapped
Roddy, and Maisie subsided with a deep conviction of her guilt.
At half-past six they expected to hear the whirr of the taxi
any moment. They meant to light the bonfire as soon as they
heard it, and then let off the salute as it slowed up, and race
round to the gate to be ready to welcome the hero in solemn


array on the path. Meanwhile Geoffry was told off to keep
Baby awake. “It would be a terrible thing if Daddy came
home and she was asleep,” quoth Rodney sententiously.
He shivered and played with the match-box nervously. Why
didn’t they come? He thought he heard the car a dozen times.
‘ 1 If they don’t come soon it will be too dark to see the flags and
“Welcome,” and things, and Oh, look! Crips has gone and
chewed off his new collar. You catch him, Maisie. I’m all
stiff and funny.”
So Maisie caught the dog and arranged his ornaments in a
violent hurry, lest the car should arrive before lie was ready.
Then they waited.
The unmistakable whirr of a car sounded down the road,
and Roddy unset the matches in his hurry. The bonfire of dry
bushes blazed up, and he lit the paper squill peeping through
the hole in the gunpowder tin just as the motor drew up at the
gate. Somehow that paper burned through quicker than was
expected. There was a terrific explosion. Maisie and Rod-
ney rolled together on the grass in a spray of earth and grass
roots, while a singed, terrified Crips departed as quickly as ever
he could put his four feet to the ground.
When Rodney sat up, spitting out the earth, big snakes of
fire were twisting through the dry grass and a great hole was
torn in the earth. Somebody was calling him in a frightened
kind of way. He staggered to his feet, and Maisie with him.
Their faces were blackened with powder and their clothes
singed. By that time everybody had rushed into the side pad-
dock and Daddy was telling the motor car man to get the hose
as quickly as possible, while Geoffry was bellowing at the top of
his voice with fright. In a minute the whole lawn was alight.
“Out of the way, kiddies,” called Daddy, and Roddy slunk
inside, while Maisie sat down on a distant bank to cry from
sheer fright.
When the excitement was all over, they found Roddy under
his bed in a crumpled, miserable heap.
“I’ve been a naughty boy,” he sobbed, when Daddy drew


him out, “and I only meant to welcome you p—p —properly.
We did such lots and lots of things, and then it all went wrong.
Oh, Daddy, Daddy,” and he clung to his father desperately.
“It’s all right, old man, it’s all right, I know,” soothed
Daddy. One can afford to be magnanimous when one has
just come back from the war and Roddy was so sorry. “Why,
Roddy-boy, what’s the matter?”
“Only my head hurts, and I’m not comfy, and it all went
wrong. ’ ’
“You are in a high fever.”
Lame as he was, Daddy managed to gather Roddy up into
his arms and carry him into the next room. He looked
anxiously at the unnaturally flushed face.
“Here, Mother,” he said; “you must put this little man to
bed. There is something wrong. ’ ’
“We’re so awfully glad to get you home,“ whispered Roddy.
Daddy kissed him, and went to ring up the Doctor.
“Measles!” said the Doctor. “There is no need to worry.
It’s only a slight case. Keep him warm and have this prescrip-
tion made up and he will be all right. You will be looking
very handsome to-morrow, young man.”
“Fancy having measles just when Daddy has come home,”
moaned Rodney, but then he reflected that after all they had
saved him from the punishment that must otherwise have been
his for burning the lawn. Just then he was too ill to care.
“Daddy,” he whispered hoarsely in the night, “there are
some bull’s-eyes for you in the toy cupboard. They aren’t
spoilt anyhow.”


*


1508
01697465


Date Due
_:i i I


»
1
"'V I • 1 ..
< , t -? l y. ■:< 4
■
, ’ ■ ' ■
7.
- ■ - , :V , „ , : / ‘V ■ .* - ■ ' V*
i'. %' y &h-
■' .. . 7'-, . i •;.* *. ■ . • ■; ■ 7, . ,/v - »• . \. ;
* , V; -p : '" r -. . V ■ is- ■' ■■" 7 .... . '■£
' O'V-v
• . . ■ ■
• . ’ •••;:,.■■'
;;;
*
■
-
i
'
■■
’ ■ » • • • .. ' • ' 7 - ;
• * ; .v . v. 7 ■ 7 ,7 7 $7- -, v f
rt y , r
. ' ■ ' >. .^,7V' ; >
-i .
— ■ ., ■ ' . ■ , ■
■'.-■■■■■ ! . .■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■.
77, ■'■ ,v„- -r ... ■ ■- , ... . ' «'.T 7>-S: v> -i'.,
•
.
,
i
w -ir< k >: •
V A ■
V ,. • ■ ’ :
'
.-." • ■ ,. ■
■
V. -
■
7 '7 vv.
■ lii.®;!:: Hi ; ; 7: I'i:
i • r v ' -■• r 7 ■-•. "..v
■
v ■> ■• - ■ L- : >r- i' • , '. v7 f;ii fr . - •'. ’
/ - . - ■ ' . 5 • ' ' ' .'
K. k ••: • . • , 1 /• ' ' >■'- '• y . v -; .vt. i-’ >
. . 1 ■■- .v.' - V ' ; 'ih-r. . > v ♦ ■ • r ; ‘' v^
■ v. ' ; .
-
•
.
■
•v . *- ’ \ '» '; -'.f '■ ■ ■, -v* ' K ' i: . :
■
. * ' ■' ■' .. - - ■■ “•■•.'* :• ■ '- ■ -V--
r ' r ' - <• • -'s . ' ' . 7- . -
.
■
'
-
'
•
. , 7 . ; .■-■./■■ ■ ' t' .." ■
■
, • K \ • .. V ■ . *7 ’ ' • s - - .*S?\ :r -• . r \ v - M
.J --V /-■ 7 v -x 0 , ■ ' ,
•ftlijniiiittil 1 ;'’"
■
- ■ : ■ 7 ;
UliStst J H'i* liiliiii-iiiii' 1 Iffi
iiiiiiiiiiiiii
'Sts- ... •’ H.
'
*S ■ V— - ■ l y.
-
a:" , v\;
•
, '•■ • ,• 1, . . . ■ 7
.
> ■ • • ■ ■ „. • ■ '.
ig!
