

Musings of a Nephalist,” &e,
Proceeds to be devoted to the Church
Funds.




Sunday Evening
LECTURES
LARRIKINISM
The Rev, R. K. EWING,
St. Augustine’s Church,
Inverell.
Author of “ Moses and Colenso,” “ Filings of Time,”
Proceeds to be devoted to the Church
Funds.
BUCKLETON & JAMIESON, “ARGUS” OEEICE,
1888




SUNDAY EVENING
lectures on larrikinism.
THE
Rev. R. K. EWING, St. Augustine’s Church, Inverell.
LECTURE EIRSX.
Prov. xiv. 34,
The word I have chosen to designate these lectures is now applied
in a much wider sense than when it was first used. Then it was
intended to express indulgence in loose speech, and cowardly
acts by an idle, loafing, and mischievous class, consisting chiefly
of young persons. But like most coined words of the slang
genus, its original meaning has been gradually widened, so that
it may now be regarded as a generic term, signifying the practice
of any and every vice, by persons of any age, and in whatever
class of life. It comprehends a state of mind pervading society
which affects the highest interests. In this respect, the word
may not imply actual vice, but that rowdyism—that vulgar
indifference to the amenities which, in reference to dress, is
said to consist in being “ loud,” in reference to manners is called
“ fast ” —that indifference to wants and claims outside the narrow
circle of self, which needs no criminal act to express its jaunty
regardlessness of others. The word “ larrikinism ” may therefore,
be said to include that lawlessness in every degree, by which per-
sons are moved to think and act, as if they were to themselves
final law. It points to conduct in the national life, and to phases
in the national character against which it is impossible to shut
one’s eyes, and which demand from every one who has the wel-
fare of his fellow-men at heart, close and earnest inquiry.


In the book of Proverbs, xiv. chap., 34 verse, it is written :
“ Righteousness exalteth a nation, but sin is the shame of any
people.” These words define the basis of national and permanent
greatness —that is, the love and practice of what is just and pure ;
and they also point to the origin of national weakness and decay
—sin, or, as I would paraphrase it, selfishness, possessing and
governing the whole body politic. Ancient and modern history
interprets and illustrates the Bible passage quoted, with a
force and fulness which make dissent from the principles it
contains impossible. Unless belied by those who can speak with
authority; unless deceived by our own senses and powers of
observation; unless misled by that vast engine for gathering and
disseminating news—the press—such ai’e the damaging represen-
tations made, and such is the nature of the facts coming ever
and multitudinously into view, that we are painfully forced to the
admission of sin, or, as I say, selfishness—Larrikinism—so wide-
spread, so unblushing, so insidious and so active, as to compel
the question : Is it in multiform power, so really, so universally
and practically in the ascendant in this young, grand country, that
like developing tubercolosis in budding manhood, it points—how-
ever skilful measures may retard the evil—to certain, premature
national decadence ?
It is necessary to state the case before it can be dealt with.
What are the features in the colonial life of which so much is
heard and known, and that in relation to the future conditions of
Australian society, awaken a strong foreboding despondency? It
is impossible in a recital of characteristics, or of events indica-
ting the tendency of either political, social, or religious life, to
preserve logical sequence. To group and tabulate them under
the various groups would be wearisome to all, and be liable to
inexactness. The differential method, I fear, would be like paint-
ing a landscape in geometric squares, and putting some special
object in each square. Better to follow the arrangement of nature
when locating form and colour on the canvas. So in this case;
it is better to pursue the same method in following the many-
featured sin, the selfishness —or as the generic term has it—the
larrikinism rampant in the land.
In its elementary forms, it is everywhere, and easily recognised.
It is represented by the idlers, who, about the streets, morning,


noon, and night, are ready for anything that may turn up, from a
frolic in which some silly mischief, or, mayhap, something more
serious is concerned. You can detect the larrikin by the cut of
his coat, his trousers, the set of his hat. The “ dudes ” and
the “ mashers ” in any class of society unmistakably reveal what
they are. By her jaunty gait, her saucy looks, the bent of her
conversation, and the character of the large number of words
that she uses, the female species reveals its identity. Her dress
may be a faultless imitation of the sedate and good, but fails,
nevertheless, to disguise that something in look and manner by
which her quality is known. In a want of courtesy to equals,
of deference to superiors; in the assertion of an equality with
any one ; in the absence of the feeling of reverence, and of that
spirit of kindliness which gives beauty and sweetness to the
character; in the presence of the tendency to tease, to inflict
pain, or cause discomfort, rising through an ascending scale from
impudence, and insult, and jostling, to blows and cruelty, the
spirit of larrikinism is abroad, restricted to no locality, and con-
fined to no class of society. The elementary life grows and matures
into a variety of forms, about which there can be no mistake.
Some of them I shall endeavour to indicate.
Juvenile offences and rowdyism, it is said by the police authori-
ties, are greatly on the increase. That, I conclude, means by
persons considerably under the legal majority age. They con-
sist in pilfering,—in every species of petty larceny—in the use
of filthy language to respectable people, especially where the
thoroughfares are full —in coarse insults to young females, and
when remonstrated with, the resort to personal violence. These
characteristics are not confined to the youths known as street
Arabs. They exist extensively in the classes considerably above
them. Young apprentices, and youths from other classes, may
be seen at night in city and rural towns congregated at street
corners, in the society of their seniors, imitating their jaunty or
slouching manners—showing by their language what apt scholars
they are in acquiring a hideous vocabulary; and by their coarse
boisterousness, and their rudeness to passers by, how well they
have mastered the alphabet of larrikinism. They are the young
plants of a poisonous nightshade, thickly scattered throughout
the land, which will hereafter seriously affect colonial character.


Under an universal suffrage system, they will be the men into
whose hands—when not in prison—the sacred political power of
voting in great public interests, will pass. As paraphrased by one
of our poets, the conditions referred to are not hopeful—
“ Ah ! how will crime engender crime, throw guilt,
Upon the soul, and like a stone cast on
The troubled waters of a lake
'Twill form in circles, round succeeding round,
Bach wider than the first.”
The practice of profane swearing obtains to such an extent as
to have fixed on these colonies a world-wide bad notoriety.
Have not distinguished travellers and authors had their
attention arrested by the universality of the vice, together with its
varied and repulsive vocabulary ? Men who have visited every
continent, and who have heard swearing in every civilised language,
pitched and varied in every key of profanity, do not hesitate to
give these colonies the palm for bold and original depravity in
relation to this vice. It prevails in every class, penetrating down-
wards through artizan apprentices and labourers’ helping boys to
the gutter child. As an ascent is made to the better and upper
ranks very much of its grossness and offensiveness, it is true,
disappears, and it assumes forms of imagined gentility and
harmlessness, supposed to give emphasis to perfume and broad-
cloth. These statements are but echoes, not only from the press,
from every workshop, from counting houses, from the common
transactions of business, from the ordinary conversation, but also
from the highest and most representative assembly in the land.
This vice is utterly incompatible with either an elevated national
character, or with true nobility of personal manhood, and purity of
soul. Bishop Louth says : “It is no mark of a gentleman to
swear. It is disgusting to the refined ; abominable to the good ;
insulting to those with whom we associate; degrading to the
mind; unprofitable, needless, and injurious to society; and
wantonly to profane His name, to call His vengeance down, to
curse Him, and to invoke his vengeance is perhaps of all offences
the most awful in the sight of God.” If not the outcome of a
really low caste of taste and thought—to say the least—it seems
to indicate a kind of go-as-you-please in relation to morals and
principles ; and is not therefore an encouraging characteristic on
which to rest our hopes of future high social and political health
throughout the community.


In taking a bird’s-eye view of colonial life, wife-desertion, and
the low and selfish way in which the sacredness of the marriage
tie is regarded, cannot be overlooked. As an offence the enormity
of the former is great; and as a domestic and social vitiating
element, the latter is fraught with the gravest consequences. I have
no means of stating statistically the extent to which wife desertion
exists, for it is an offence which comes more generally under the
notice of benevolent committees, and persons, and church officers
than of police authorities. In speaking from my own long personal
observation and knowledge as a clergyman, I can, and do testify,
that it exists to an extent most painfully suggestive, I am sure
that every clergyman in all the denominations ; that the members
of benevolent committees, and that persons who give time, and
thought, and means to kind and humane purposes, can give
similar evidence to the statements I have made. In relation to
the contracting of marriage, the bonds of peace, purity, and
continuance, are so lightly esteemed as in every class of society to
be welcome topics for mirth and banter :
“ If you would have the nuptial union last,
Let virtue be the bond that ties it fast.”
In utter disregard of the truth handed down by experience, and
taught by even one of the ancient poets: “If you wish to marry
suitably, marry your equal,” many of our men in position, lured
by gaslight beauty, or by lust, marry beneath them. Our young
women have so caught the commercial spirit of the age, that in too
many instances, marriage means nothing more than the securing
of a home, or the winning of a settlement. With means more than
enough to ensure all the comforts of married life, too generally,
the eligible men regard matrimony as an institution whose chief
attractions consist in the opportunity it affords of angling for
money. So, with the sexes it is diamond cut diamond. The
outcome is a sad mixture of engagements and breakage ; of
flirtations on both sides, which deprave the finer sentiments ; of
concubinage ; of marriage followed by mutual separation, or
desertion, and often by the divorce court. Say if these utterances
be not based on facts of which you do yourselves know much ?
The description I have given is not local. It is general to the
colonies; unpleasant no doubt to hear, more unpleasant still to
admit. But the person who has lived many years in the colonies,


and travelled and read much, if rash enough to deny what I have
said, must have lived and travelled with his ears stopped, and his
eyes shut.
The want of reverence for seniors, and the impatience of
control among our colonial youth, have impressed visitors, and
are continually spoken of on public occasions. The causes of
these, and other phases of young colonial life, do not at present
come under consideration. Further on 1 shall endeavour to
account for them, and trace the origin of conditions desirable to
have changed, but which at present cannot be denied. In the
streets of cities and suburbs, and of country towns, and gathered
in groups at street corners, youths ranging from mere urchins up
to 14 and 16 years of age, are to be seen either aimlessly
wandering, or on mischief bent. Not here and there a solitary
few, but in such numbers as to fix attention, and in the society of
their elders, with whom they rollick on terms of perfect equality,
imitating their manners, imbibing their tastes, and acquiring their
language. At their age, at night time their proper place is home.
Even amongst comparatively respectable families, when this phase
of young Australian life is inquired into, the too general complaint
is, that there is a want of respect for the person and opinions of
their elders; and also an impatience of control, which rebels
against restraint. You know the result. The mixture of classes,
the indolent, the mischievous, the criminal, and the respectable
is inevitable ; and the outcome is too often recorded either in the
annals of crime; or as they grow older, it is seen in the violent and
ignorant agitations of licentiousness against law, order, and every
institution hallowed by time, or made sacred by religion. In the
very best society youths in their early teens —who should be at
school-work and school recreations, with early hours to bed—
mingle with their seniors on the equality of men, associate with
them at the billiard table, and in the whist room; join in their
trials of skill; attend them with all the airs and importance of
grown-up people to the theatre and the race-course, and affect to
speak and act as if they had long passed the legal-majority age.
No wonder parental authority loses force, that when obedience is
demanded, it is met by impatience of control; and that the
respect which should be shown by youth to seniority—so
necessary to the health and harmony of domestic and social


life—entirely vanishes. The phrases expressive of the dearest
relationship, now so popular and bandied with self-complacent
irreverence, such as “ Boss,” “ Governor,” “ The Maternal,’’
indicate conditions in the juvenile life of the colonies, which, in
relation to the cultivation of veneration, of deference so essential
to an elevated state of the national mind, do not inspire hope.
To avoid amplified reference to other phases of the particulars
under consideration, I desire briefly to affirm, that there is not a
secular or religious teacher of our youth in the colony who cannot
bear me out in saying, that the constant contention—too often
encouraged by parents themselves—is against the want of respect
for seniors, and the impatience of control of which I have in-
adequately spoken.
Breach of trust, embezzlement, and fraud are phases of crime
with which we have become familiar ; and the familiarity is not in
any manner on the decrease. These offences necessarily appear
among the respectabilities of commercial life, for it is there that
the money trust must chiefly exist. There—from causes to which
I shall hereafter refer—the temptation to violate confidence, and
become dishonest, operates. Scarcely an occupation, calling, or
profession is exempt from the stain they cause. From the small
shop, where the lad behind the counter has access to his master’s
till, upwards among counting houses, among our great monied
institutions, and upwards to the most extensive land and business
companies, either the trail of proved guilt has been left, or the
most painful conviction has been stamped on the public mind.
Even in the highest institution in the land, where the intelligence,
the worth, the decency and honesty of the population are
supposed to be representatively assembled, is it not written in the
book of “ Hansard ” that charges—called infamous—of swindling,
dishonesty, and corruption are frequently and freely made ? The
leading journal of the colony says :—“ There is room for the
suspicion that the House has an unconscious relish for this sort
of thing, rather than a distaste for it. And what is worse, no
efficient restraint is placed upon the making of infamous charges,
by an overpowering regard for propriety, feeling of self-respect, or
intolerance of abuse on the part of the House.”— S . M. Herald ,
July 23rd, 1887. They who make the charges know best what
in a parliamentary sense is meant by them; but we, of the


outside public, are in possession of data enough to form our own
opinion. What wonder if the opinion should be strongly adverse,
since “ the political world in the colony, is described in the
leading journal as a “world of irregularities, eccentricities, and
monstrosities, and the rules that are recognised in a clearer
atmosphere can only be applied here conditionally and with
limitations.”— S. M. Herald , July 23rd, 1887, To pass—even
with disgrace—through the Insolvent Court, being no bar to
immediate and successful business, points to defective commercial
honesty somewhere. To appear so repeatedly in that Court as to be
in a sense, “ habit and repute,” and finally to come out a man of
actual wealth, may be due in a measure to organic defects in the
laws by which that Court has to be administered ; nevertheless it is
a feat —however skilfully executed it may be —of business dis
honesty, and of moral depravity, with which in this colony we are
not unfamiliar. Unless we are deceived by the “ News of the
Day,” the offences spoken of are not unfrequently occurring, and
only here and there under special conditions. They are ever
coming on us, not as minute guns at sea, but as fusillades from
every quarter of the land; in classes of society, and under
circumstances, which on the well-known truth, that influence
percolates downwards, do not inspire hope in relation to the
future national life and character.


LECTURE SECOND.
Prov. xiv. 34.
In relation to both the number and nature of serious crimes
committed, this colony of ours occupies no second-rate reputation.
It would be as needless as unseemly to catalogue their names. It
is enough for my present purpose, and for the end of truth, in
uttering warning and admonition, to speak in general terms, based
on what I have ascertained during a long residence; on what I
read in the newspapers, and on the frequent comments of the
press. Crimes, devilish in conception—crimes of unspeakable,
foulest abomination—crimes that could only have been committed
by human beings whose conscience had been steeled by the fires,
and whose feelings and thoughts had been steeped in the pollu-
tions of hell; crimes that, by their enormity and hideousness,
have made the civilised world look at us aghast, have been
perpetrated in city, suburb, and inland town. Not once, but
often, and by young men ; not solitarily, but in groups ; each
person in each group signifying such a multiplication of com-
panionship in depravity —though not of complicity in the
particular crimes to which I refer—nevertheless implying such a
numerical extension of vice as must appal the most superficial
thinker. Who that reads the daily press but must be shocked at
the frequent reports of infanticide, and the concealment of
recently-born infants. For any one who has a taste for noisome
research, the records of our courts in relation to serious crimes of
every kind, will afford rebuking disclosures. Amidst our remote
populations, scattered throughout the vast interminable forests,
dense moral darkness, licentiousness, and domestic demoralisa-
tion obtain to an extent that makes patriotism weep. After a
long residence in Australia, during which I have travelled much,
read much, heard much, and observed, such are the conclusions,
in relation to the point under consideration, to which I have been
unwillingly forced. It may be said that these are the conclusions
drawn by only one person; drawn from defective data, and
strained ; and that statistics are the only proof admissible. My
calling has been favourable for learning the state of society in all
its phases. It is remarkable that men occupying the highest


positions, and to whose deliverances the community at large gives
heed ; who have had less colonial experience than myself, and
very much fewer and more limited opportunities of reaching to a
correct conclusion on the point in question, but who have had
the courage to say what they have seen, and what they have
learned ; have seen and learned enough to impel them to say just
what I have said to-night. If, however, the authority of statistics
be deemed essential to preserve our good name in competitive
contrast with other countries, I am willing, when the figures are
produced, to submit the foregoing statements to the test. Mean-
while, the following figures will perhaps let in some sunlight on
what I have said, and foreshadow the result of further statistical
research. I learn from the Australian Record , of July 16, 1887,
that the drink bill of the United Kingdom of Great Britain was
£'3 7s. 6d. for each person ; in New South Wales it was £4 19s.
6d. The Sydney Morning Herald, of August 13, 1887, informs
its readers that in 1884 the arrests for drunkenness were 30,000,
and the drink bill for the same year was ,£3,131,000. The first
part of the drink commission says that our drink bill is £5 ns.
Bd. per head; larger than that of Victoria, New Zealand, the
United Kingdom, or the United States. In 1884 the arrests for
drunkenness, and drunkenness with disorderly conduct in the
United Kingdom were 198,274; in this colony, with a population
some thirty-six times smaller, they were 28,539. At the same
rate, had our population been equal to that of the United King-
dom, the arrests would have been 1,127,404 “In 1885 the
Coroners’ inquests in which the verdicts were attributed to drink,
were 384 in the United Kingdom. In Sydney alone there were 232
such instances.” If it be true, as is asserted by the leading
journal of the colony, that intemperance is not an Australian vice
—meaning, I presume, that it is not a vice of the native born—
we are forced to the conclusion, 1. That extreme drunkenness
must be indulged in by the whole emigrant population, to make
the drink bill of New South Wales what the figures quoted show
it is per person, and 2. That the emigrant population must drink
much more heavily here than they did in the old country, seeing
that the difference against them is £1 12s per person. But I
think we may in all justice dismiss the idea that the drink bill of
this colony is run up almost exclusively by the emigrant popula-


tion. The strain of the responsibility is distributed, I conclude,
with average equalness. In reference to the increase of the drink-
ing habits of the larrikin class, the commission says that their case
seems too often to be little short of hopeless, and their vicious
habits so confirmed, as to leave little hope of reformation. They
are almost all of them natives of the colony. That, I think, is con-
clusive evidence against the statement that drunkenness “is not
an Australian vice.” If it be true, as it is said, statistics prove,
that the intemperance of a people is a gauge of their tendency to
crime of every kind, to serious crimes, a fertile source of poverty
and misery, a stimulus to sensuality and general immorality,
then the lesson taught us by the figures quoted, strikes heavily
against our self-complacency, and should not only lead all right-
minded persons to ponder, but also to direct legislation in the
matter.
To affirm that the colony is intensely given to pleasure-seeking,
and to gambling, needs neither the convincing ground of figures,
nor a very deep acquaintance with society. The facts so lie on
the surface that “he who runs may read.” Among the cares and
competitions of life, that periodical cessation from their pressure
should be obtained ; that rest, recreation, and pleasure should be
sought to recuperate weary or overtaxed brain and muscle, is
both a law of nature and a necessity of the times. In respect
of pleasure-seeking, the “ Puritan” and the “ Cavalier” are equally
apart from nature. I would neither be a “ Roundhead ” nor a
follower of the Charleses. Muscular Christianity is a natural and
biblical truth. There are limits beyond which even legitimate
pleasure-seeking becomes a sin. lam not a Sabbatarian in the
puritanical sense of the word, yet I dare to affirm that one day
in seven is the natural law of rest. Do I need to assert what all
must know, that it is violated to a national extent by using that
day in sheer pleasure-seeking, unto utter weariness, and the
indulgence in orgies? That state of things, so disastrous to both
brain and muscle, is in godlessness, in utter cupidity, zealously
encouraged by caterers to the mere animal tastes, and by the
traders in every means of locomotion. The frequency of holiday-
making during the secular days of the week, as well as on the
sacred day, is not surpassed if equalled in any other portion of
the civilised world. To participate in their merriment, and to


meet their demands, implies amongst the labouring and artisan
classes loss of wages, and monies, besides heedlessly abstracted
from what is loudly demanded for domestic comforts and neces-
sities. Hence often arise the pinchings through which children
suffer; family feuds spring up ; idle habits are produced ; poverty
comes in; and the intoxicating drink is sought to sooth or to
drown the cares so self-produced. To such an extent is every
form of pleasure-seeking being carried, that the serious aspects of
life are being greatly lost sight of, and, as a people, we are rapidly
drifting into Parisian frivolity. Who, with any colonial experience
and observation, can be ignorant of the fact that holiday-making
and gambling are in too many instances interchangeable oppor-
tunities ? I should like to know what pastime special to holiday-
making is not used ostensibly for betting, for gambling purposes ?
Is the manly game of cricket, the trial of skill and endurance in
aquatic encounters, and the exciting struggle at athletic sports,
crowded after and holidays made for them on their merits only,
as tending to exhibit skill, calmness, courage, and patience—to
develop to the highest the physical structure of man? Every
person knows that it is not so. The honour of the “laurel” is
trampled in the dust. Their dignity and uses are turned to
money speculations, and base commercial ends. There was a
time when they were nobly used, because their nobility was
recognised. Now manipulated by backers, touters, and betters,
they have greatly degenerated into attractive opportunities for
gambling. I do not desire here to say one word on either the
merits or demerits of the turf—of horse-racing pure and simple as
such. But what Ido say of it in its present conditions is, that
but for the opportunity it affords of betting—of gambling—horse-
racing as a national sport would not exist for five years. And I
also say, that, there is not any country in the world where it is
carried on to the extent to which it is in these colonies. Every
country hotel, every roadside inn, every village and town through-
out the colony has its races two or three times every year. In
our large cities the frequency of horse-racing becomes wearisome
to follow; whilst the richness of the stakes to be run for, and the
enormous sums risked in betting clearly reveal the impelling
power of the whole. The Melbourne Daily Telegraph published
the report of an interview with the chief betting man of the


colonies in which the following words occur :—“ In Adelaide
where they had it (the totalisator) in full swing, there was till-
robbing going on right and left, and it got more people into
trouble and gaol than it is possible to estimate. Such a little amount
is necessary that everybody has a try at it, and they go on with it
to an awful extent. In South Australia it increased to such an
extent that it went up from a day to over on a
single meeting, and mind you this represented only the earnings
of poor people.” The Rev. Mr. Fitchett, who has recently gone
into the question of gambling—especially in connection with the
turf —with great care and boldness, affirms that the amount of
money which changes hands in betting annually throughout the
whole of Australia verges upon 000, 000. He says : “The
Parliament which passes laws for the suppression of gambling,
adjourns on Cup Day, that it may gamble.” The concomitants on
the ground, together with the temptations to youth to err, the
losses and miseries consequent on a sport which rests solely on
betting, which engrosses so enormously the national thought, and
occupies such an undue portion of the people’s time, is such a
phase of that sin—that selfishness which is a shame to any people
—that in its continuance I apprehend nothing but rapid moral
deterioration to the national mind. In no sense can it be said to
possess either the elements on which greatness or permanence
rests, or any direct tendency to elevate, purify, or give manliness
to the man. The licensing laws forbid any licensed victualler to
permit gambling with cards, or otherwise, on the premises.
Wherein the defect lies—whether in the skilfully laid plans of the
landlord, or defective vigilance on the part of the police—l pre-
tend not to divine ; but I do say that the law is successfully
evaded to an extent appalling as it is unaccountable, and compels
painful suspicions. You who hear me know, every portion of the
community everywhere knows, that betting, gambling in every
conceivable form, has struck its barb deep into the national life;
that its insidious power is destroying honesty, is seducing the
thoughtless and the young to danger and ruin ; is blighting homes
and breaking loving women’s hearts. In relation to the future of
young Australia now growing into manhood, these are not hope-
ful signs of true and permanent greatness in the. high and noble
sense.


The subject on which I am addressing you to-night, as you
know, is “ Larrikinism.” From the broad sense in which that
word is now used, it is intended—according to the event and con-
ditions to which it is applied—to express every kind and every
degree of rowdyism and lawlessness. In relation to the national
phases to which I have directed your attention, it has its appro-
priate significance. For it must be admitted that, in a more or
less aggravated form, they comprise either separately or collec-
tively indifference to the decencies, violence, looseness of speech,
ribaldry and profanity, deception, regardlessness of consequences,
brutal self-will, and the prostitution of what is worthy in itself to
mean and demoralizing purposes. If there be in the land one
class of persons amongst whom any of the characteristics we
lament should receive no countenance; and where by propriety
in speech, by a manly observance of the courtesies, and by
an unostentatious determination to do righteously, the people
should be exampled and rebuked concerning the evils of which
we complain, it is by the men—supposedly —representing the worth,
energy and intelligence which I know exist extensively in the
colony, when in Parliament assembled. For there the status is
of the highest, and the duties to be done control and affect every
person, and every interest. But is it so ? If there were exhibited
the exalted enthusiasm, the fierce energy, the bold, chaste langu-
age, and the daring, yea, even the wild tempest of true debate,
in contending for the rights of either the people or the Crown, we
could look and listen —however anxiously—to admire and ap-
plaud. Is it so on the floor of “ yonder senate house,” which has
in its power the most awful interests of the community ? Bitter-
est acrimony—mutually mean and painfully suggestive recrimina-
tions —charges boldly made, most damaging to the truth, justice
and honour of those who, in their place, as “ honourable members,”
like Caesar’s wife, should be above suspicion;—utter selfishness
and place-seeking—so-called debate bristling often with slang,
personalities and irreverent language —scenes of acted burlesque
and of personal threats and violence, not of occasional but
repeated occurrence, and during a series of years which have
compelled deprecation by the press, and lamentation from the
pulpit ;—these are the examples flung broadcast from such high
places among a people needing to be steadied and taught. If


such things be “ done under the green tree, what will be done
under the dry ? ” If the principle be true that Parliaments are
as the people make them; that morally as well as politically, they
reflect the conditions of the national mind and character ; then
with a logic irresistible we are driven to the conclusion that the state
of things of which I have spoken must be rampant in the land ;
seeing that, by its tremendous power at the ballot box of universal
suffrage, it can, and does secure, such jubilant and crushing
representation in Parliament. “ Righteousness exalteth a nation,”
truly, but in relation to such facts as have come under our notice
in their bearing on the country’s future, surely sin is not only
“ the shame,” but the danger of “ any people.”


LECTURE THIRD
Prov. xiv. , 34.
In my remarks I have not attempted to draw comparisons
between the state and society of England, and here. If the con-
trast were drawn, methinks it would be against us, for the reason
that, as John Bright says: “We stand on the shoulders of our
ancestors.” We started national life in the colony in possession
of the slowly-gathered experience and literature of the past ages ;
and having such beacons to guide us in the “ struggle for
existence,” such examples from the beginning must not be
lost sight of. If our social state be not, not only equal to, but
better than that of England, then we have signally failed in the
right use of our possessions. My present contention is on merits
—on things as they are—and considering our advantages, as they
should be, not on contrasts. It is illogical, and begging the whole
question—as has been done by the leading journal of the colony,
July 9th, 1887—to set off the “ roughs ” and “ rowdies” of Eng-
land, and the “ hoodlums ” and “ galoots ” of the United States
of America against the larrikins of the colony. Two blacks do
not make a white, and two and two do not make five. To say
that the state of society here is not worse than it is in England,
is to claim little in our favour; nor does it prove that the state of
things we all lament does not exist to the extent affirmed. The
tu quoque argument is a false method of trying to place oneself in
a favoured light. The words I have quoted do not express, as
used in America and England, a spirit pervading society , as the
word larrikinism does in the colonies. They apply to specific
classes that can be separated and labelled. When our vices and
shortcomings are roundly and honestly spoken of, is it either wise
or right, or just criticism —for the sake of appearance at a distance
—to blunt the edge of a rebuke by any euphuism such as this :
“ Because we do not take our pleasures quite so sadly as those of
the more frigid zone of Great Britain, it does not follow that we
are given over to the hands of the spoiler, and are the slaves of
a habit, more honoured in the breach than the observance ” (S.
M. Herald , July 9, 1887.) To proceed to the violence in Great
Britain at elections of which we read, and which I have witnessed ;
or to stand in the rain for hours in crowds of 30,000 to look at a
review, is strange evidence that the people who do so, take their


pleasures, or aught else, sadly. To say the truth requires often
that unpleasant things shall be spoken; and to say them cannot
surely imply either felt or intended cruelty or censoriousness.
On the principle that he who spares the rod, when needed, helps
to spoil the child, when truth is sought and good intended, he is
without controversy the least censorious and the kindest and
justest teacher, who, instead of balancing with his periods, and
whittling with his sentiments, until he gets rid of the rod alto-
gether, bravely seizes on facts, and speaks of conditions as they are.
In dealing with the subject before us, I accept with all readiness
the saying that “ human nature is but fallible ; ” and therefore
I may err in either statement or deduction ; on true evidence to
the contrary lam prepared to acknowledge and retract. But it
may be again, as has already been said, July 9, by the leading
journal of the colony, when speaking of the state of society :
“ The Christian leader does not always stand in the best position
to measure accurately the conditions of life.” That is just one of
the many-sided statements used by the secularist, by which it is
sought to denude the Christian leader of his true position as a
man and a colonist; and, in the eyes of the community, to fritter
into insignificance the great opportunities which his leadership
gives him of “ measuring accurately the conditions of life. His
leadership brings him into contact with them in all their variety;
in the drawing room and the hut; in the gaol, the hospital, and the
asylum ; in the sick room and the social joyous gathering in every
rank of society. Regarded as an average intellectual man, and
when taken in connection with his mental training and education,
surely he may be expected to observe as keenly, to gather up
statistics, and to draw conclusions as accurately as other average
men can. Neither the party politician, nor the journalist—just
average men like the “Christian leader ” —is more favourably placed
for “ measuring accurately the conditions of life ” than he is. Is
it not, therefore, unjust criticism to endeavour to lower the
pressure of his utterances, when dealing with the “ conditions of
life,” by calling in question both his ability to do so, and the
opportunities which qualify him for doing it ?
Let us now glance at the state of benevolent and religious
life in the colonies. In so far as they are concerned, it
is a safe rule to estimate the spirit pervading society, by the


money support they receive, and the time and labour given
to them. We know what the nature and extent of the interest
taken by any individual man is, in any cause, by what he gives
to it. The principle applies to a whole community. There is an
impressive outburst of giving and working under feelings strongly
acted on, and under the pressure of external excitement, which
may lead to false conclusions. Both of these conditions are—in
a good sense—highly contagious, and may be mistaken for, and
much extolled, as the proof of an exalted state of both philan-
thropic and religious life, which, nevertheless, may be at a com-
paratively low ebb. The evidences of true life in both cases must
be sought for in a conscientious, and steady supply in giving and
working, based on known existing necessities. What is galvanised
by any passing cause whatever into spasmodic and temporary
activity, cannot be accepted as an expression of the real continu-
ous life, pervading the two conditions of it in society now being
considered. There are instances in response to suffering, in the
history of our colonial life of large and general liberality. There
are also instances of sad desolation, which have evoked, in com-
parison, but scant return; whilst in other cases of disaster the
appeal has been either entirely in vain, or comparatively so. We
are said to be a people who do not take our pleasures sadly ;to
that mere excitability of temperament, therefore, in connection
with suffering; to the source of the first impulse to awaken
sympathy, and the adroitness with which that impulse is subse-
quently turned to account, we can greatly trace the causes of that
philanthropic fitfulness to which I have referred. But, in the life
of colonial society, how fares the supply needed to meet the ever-
present, and pressing necessities of poverty and sickness on the
one hand, and the propagation of divine truth on the other hand ;
necessities real, and deep, and silent to whose help, weekly,
monthly, yearly, mere impulse and excitement are inadequate ?
At this point the true test of the state of benevolent and religious
life in our colonial society comes in. There are everywhere
throughout the colony, every kind of institution required by every
kind of suffering to which humanity is heir. How is a
large number of them supported ? Chiefly by heavy subsidies
received from the Central Government. Now, is it not a fact,
concerning which complaint is ever being made from one quarter


or other, that the local voluntary contributions needed to secure
Parliamentary help, are—as a rule—not only grudgingly given, but
are utterly inadequate to the securing of such Government aid as
may keep them in effective existence ? Consequently, excitement
and selfishness are called in to supplement the duty that humanity
should and would do, if it had a real power of life amongst us,
Balls, concerts, bazaars, and sports are resorted to for the raising
of funds, that a straight appeal to sympathy for the suffering can-
not secure. That is, the funds needed to keep our benevolent
institutions in existence cannot be raised unless an equivalent—
real or supposed—be offered in the shape of excitement, or
pleasure, or both. Meantime, useful, nay, indispensable institutions,
which do not receive Government aid, drag on a languishing
existence unequal to their avowed purpose. The following
extracts from one of our colonial newspapers have a significance
bearing on these remarks :—“ It is stated that more than twenty
millions of pounds change hands every year over horse-racing in
Australia. In Melbourne alone not less than five millions pass from
hand to hand, and yet less than 10,000 can be raised for hospitals.”
“ The retiring Mayoress is to be presented with a very valuable
souvenir, costing several hundreds of pounds.” “ Considerable
destitution exists in the suburbs, hundreds of persons being
scarcely able to procure a crust of bread.” These paragraphs
from the same column of a newspaper are very suggestive.
In colonial religious life the same state of things obtains to a
painful extent. It is admitted that the Church in the colony must
partake largely of a missionary character. But that is only a
reason additional to its otherwise divine claims for receiving
adequate money help for its work. So small is the proportion of
the population opposed to Christianity, that in a sense the whole
may be said to be nominally Christian. Yet the cry of the Church
is for workers and money, most inadequately forthcoming, to enable
her to cope with existing evils, and to carry on her moral and
evangelizing plans. In the face of an all but universally professed
adherence to the teaching of Christ, the cry of the Church is,
that attendance on His ordinances, and the rendering to Him of
worship in obedience to His will, is only fractional in number.
The cry of the Church is, that the law of self-denial He enjoined
is treated as a dead letter —an antiquated and unfashionable


theory—for which is substituted self-indulgence to weariness, and
waste of time in every vapid and expensive gaiety, holiday-making
and excitement. The cry of the Church is, that the veneration
for sacred places, duties, and things, and the deference due to
sacred offices which are the manly outcome of a pure and high
state of religious culture, are treated as relics of the dark ages;
and such feelings of respect as linger in the colonial mind are
given chiefly, to either the holder of such political power as can
confer a benefit, or to others by whom wealth has either been
realized, or exists in anticipation. Reverence is practically trans-
ferred from God and his worship, from sacred things and truth to
mammon. In consequence of all that, the Church has to toil on
against odds in the work of Sunday schools, and every other
department of Christian industry, with such stray workers as can
with difficulty often be gathered together. She has ignominiously
to pander to the pleasure-seeking, the excitement-loving, and the
mercenary selfishness of her own professed adherents, to raise the
necessary means for her teaching and reforming plans, which
should be cheerfully and sufficiently given from consideration of
the wants of erring humanity, and from love for divine truth.
In this colony, the number who are in either comfortable cir-
cumstances, or entirely independent, or possessed of large fortunes,
is relatively large. When persons so placed die, each one still
lives in his will, for therein he continues to operate on the
material interests of society. How many realize that, by the
leaving of legacies to benevolent or religious purposes ? So few
are they who do so, that, when the fact appears, it comes as a sur-
prise. Is it an evidence of either patriotic, philanthropic, or
religious life that, in the making of that last solemn document, no
generous thought of the wants and claims of humanity and
religion in the land of either their adoption, or of their birth,
where their position was reached; no feeling of kindly remem-
brance of its helping institutions, no true gratitude to God the
“ Giver of every good and perfect gift ” is manifested ? If the
conditions indicated arose from either prevailing poverty, or the
lack of strong and intelligent persons to work, my remarks would
not only be blameworthy, but “fall foul of fact.” In the teeth,
however, of what we all know, that for every variety of pleasure-
seeking, holiday-making, and betting ; for every kind of self-indul-


gence among all classes of society, the means denied to
philanthropy and religion are ever ready; that for every demand
of secular activity, clear, common-sense intellects are forthcoming
—with abundant time at their disposal—but who stand greatly
aloof from the higher work of God and humanity—l stand by the
integrity of my statements. The following facts speak for them-
selves. During the last twenty-six years forty-one millions of
English capital have been brought to the colony, and now form
our national debt. Some one hundred millions of money have
been raised by revenue, apart from the great sums that have flowed
into the Treasury chest from the sale of the people’s lands.
There are at the present moment over eight millions of pounds at
deposit for daily operation in business in the banks ; and over
twenty millions of pounds are lying at fixed deposit; whilst there
are nearly three millions of pounds in the Savings Banks, placed
chiefly by the working classes. When speaking at Deniliquin on
July 22, 1887, our justly popular Governor, Lord Carrington,
said : “ Eight hours here are considered long enough working
hours instead of the ten, twelve, sometimes seventeen in England.
Men unable to find are provided with work by the Government,
and education is practically free.” Now, in connection with the
statements I have made concerning philanthropic and religious
life in the colony, how do these facts point ? Do they indicate or
suggest such a general and desolating state of poverty and oppres-
sive toil, as may sufficiently account for the perpetual resort
everywhere to the stimulating, and unhealthy methods for raising
the requisite means to carry on our benevolent and religious
organisations ? Do they point to so real a want of leisure on the
part of the intelligent and the competent, arising from the dire
necessity to use every working hour in the battle for bread, that
no time is left to work in the cause of either Christ or suffering
humanity ? No, verily no. In the face of facts from which there
is no getting away, we must go deeper to ascertain the cause of
the phases in life, of that larrikinism to which reference has
been inadequately made. It is inherent to, and the natural out-
come of that spirit pervading society expressed by the name of
these lectures.


LECTURE FOURTH.
Prov. xiv., 34,
That I may neither be misrepresented nor misunderstood, it is
necessary for me to say that the purpose of these lectures is to
deal only with the phases of colonial society, expressed by the
word “ larrikinism.” It does not fall within the scope of my
subject to refer to the business energy—the intellectual vigour—
the religious activity contending against heavy odds —the spirit of
hospitality—the taste for the fine arts—the love of adventure,
and the general character of the press. My silence concerning
these aspects of colonial life does not arise from either want of
appreciation, or a desire by saying nothing to suggest deprecia
tion, I have had many opportunities of knowing of their
existence, and when the occasion required, I have not hesitated
to express the commendation deserved. My references, therefore,
to the larrikinism pervading society, and my silence touching the
higher aspects of colonial life, must be regarded as neither
originating in a love for exhibiting unpleasant truths, nor from
any sinister desire to lower—in so far as my words may receive
attention—the character of the community. This is the land of
my adoption, the land in which I have lived so long, that, by the
effect of time and a true conception of my place and duty here,
the patriotism due to my normal nationality, as a deathless prin-
ciple,hasnot ceased to affect me; buthas—asrighteously it should in
the life of every colonist—transferred its earnestnesss and strength
to aid—however humbly—in building up the history and greatness
of an Australian states-federation. It is the birth-place of my
children, for whose good I hope they will be themselves good >
and of which I trust they will yet be proud to say—
“ This is my own, my native land.”
It is consequently obvious that I have taken up the subject before
us in a somewhat full way, because it leads me to treat of evils
needing to be dealt with, and because that in ray place as a public
teacher, “ warning every man,” I ought. If we are to be guided
by the preaching of Christ, and the apostolic teaching in the


New Testament, Evangelical preaching comprises the exposure of
vice, and the denunciations of wrongs in social, political, and
commercial life, as well as the declaration of salvation by faith in
Jesus the Saviour of all mankind. I make these remarks not as an
apology for my subject, but as a bold defence of its fitness for the
pulpit.
To diagnose is to examine with a view to ascertain a cause, so
as to be able to apply a remedy. Examination hitherto has not been
entirely pleasant; nor has it exhausted the subject. We have
considered only such outstanding and salient characteristics as
were enough for my purpose. The inquiry now before us is : To
what cause or causes, can we trace the rise and progress of a state
of things in our midst over which all right-minded men and
women must lament, but which none can deny ?
There is an element in the basis of the character of the
population special to this colony, to which I have not found any
reference made by any who have written on the evils of larrikinism.
I refer to it from no mere desire to recall an unpleasant historic
fact, but because it has played an important part in the formation
of our colonial character, and that phase of it especially to which
1 have been referring. To shut one’s eyes against a truth, or to
stop one’s ears against the hearing of it, because it offends our
personal or national complacency; or because it brings up
unsavoury associations, neither gets rid of its place in history, nor
obliterates its effects on the character of society. An evil can be
better endured, and, mayhap, overcome, when its nature and
extent are known, than when the imagination is left to mystify
and exaggerate. To know the cause of an evil is the key to a
knowledge of its cure. During the first fifty years after this
colony was founded, a very large number of persons landed on our
shores were not emigrants, their coming was not voluntary. With
ghastly wit one of the number wrote —
“ True patriots we ; for it be understood,
We left our country for our country’s good.”
They passed through every stage of crime, from comparative
innocence to deepest guilt. There were cases—and no doubt many
—where the offence was of such a nature, that now —under more
humane laws—the mildest punishment for similar offences would
be administered. Nevertheless, in those days they were subjected


to the awful condition of associating with criminals of every grade,
and thereby were brought to such knowledge of wrong-doing, and
received such taint of evil, as afterwards could be neither
eradicated from their minds nor fail to deteriorate their character.
The thousands of persons so sent here in the course of time dis-
persed, and followed such pursuits as they were capable of.
Under the facilities which then existed for acquiring property,
many of them had the shrewdness to turn their former predatory
habits into the channels then open to them for money making,
and succeeded in either building up an independence, or a fortune.
Some lived on the level to which they had fallen, and many sunk
to still lower conditions. Time brought about the usual result of
marriage, not only within their own class, but by the numbing
influence of prosperity and the glitter which it gave, into classes
morally and socially far above them. Multiply that state of things
by many thousands of instances, and there is disclosed an
element in the basis of population so widespread and so active,
that its effects at the present day on the colonial mind and
character should be as real, is in close harmony with scientific
truth.
When history was young, Moses first announced the great
principle that the sins of the fathers are visited on the children,
and which, in the teaching of modern science, is called “ the
hereditary transmission of identical qualities." As there is no
getting away from that law, we are compelled to the conclusion,
that the qualities of mind and character instituted during fifty
years, under the conditions just referred to, have become
hereditary, have been transmitted, and are still being transmitted
with a force sufficient to identify the descent. Other influences,
meanwhile, have come into operation ; but whether they have
been sufficiently strong either to correct the transmission, or whether
they have tended chiefly to modify without purifying the stream of
transmission, I shall have to ascertain further on. Meanwhile, there
exists an unquestionable fact, that the objectionable qualities of
mind introduced during the first and early stages of colonial life,
acting, and being acted on by ever shifting—and in some important
respects demoralising—conditions extend deeply and extensively
into the life and growth of our colonial society, for they have
not died out.


In obedience to the well-known natural law of accom-
modation, they have during a lapse of time but adapted themselves
to the new state of things. So that whether among the lower
stratum of society, the commercial and political world, or the
higher ranks they are in strict keeping with natural law, reappear-
ing in the varied forms comprehended in the meaning attached to
the word “ larrikinism.” Though doubtless greatly altered
during the process of adaptation, there is sufficient genealogical
likeness left to warrant us identifying the descent.
After the facts stated had been leavening the social life for
years, another cause came into extensive operation, whose influence
on the popular mind has certainly been great—l mean the
discovery of gold, and the impetus it gave to population. It was
said by a certain preacher at the time, and shortly afterwards by
an eminent member of the Legislature, that the gold discoveries
had precipitated us into a kingdom, and hastened our progress a
hundred years. Let the commercial and political truth of that
statement be admitted. In no sense does it affect the line of
thought lam pursuing. lam not speaking from either a political
or money-making standpoint, but from a consideration of its
moral results, and—as linked to the conditions just mentioned—
its consequent effect on the national character. That, you will
perceive, is apart from whatever impetus it gave to politics and
national wealth. The influx of population from every part of the
world consequent on the discovery of gold was immediate and
great. The impelling motive being neither the love of adventure,
nor of exploration, nor of patriotism ; nor, all other things equal,
to better one’s condition in life, but the bald sordid love of gold
for its own sake, was not—humanly speaking —calculated either
to purify or elevate the conditions of society as they existed at
the time. It is not for me now to inquire into the divine wisdom
in permitting, or using one of the low forms of human selfishness
to disperse population, where appeals to higher motives had no
effect. The final purpose of infinite wisdom and love, lying
behind, we cannot reach, for “ it is the glory of God to conceal a
thing,” (Prov. xxv., 2) and He makes even the “ wrath of man to
praise Him.” The impelling motive, to a great extent, fixes the
moral value —as a factor in moulding the national character of a
young community—of the coming of the thousands who crowded


to our shores. Ido not say one word for or against the political
wealth results, but I do say that the very wonderful thing which
precipitated our material progress one hundred years, tended in
all respects to isolate men from their fellow-men ; and when it led
to their congregating, it tended to awaken dangerous suspicious-
ness, and to intensify the spirit of selfishness and worldliness.
Its direct effect was to gradually obliterate the feeling of God’s
presence, and the sense of His claims ; to produce ultimate
indifference to His sacred day and His service; and to bring out
in strong relief what is self-willed, hard, and vicious in human
nature. All who know much of life on the goldfields in the early
—and in the later days—must bear me out in these statements.
The spirit of mere excitement, and risk to gain money, which
hurried thither the strong and the weak, like an electric current,
passed through the whole community, It affected high and low,
the professedly religious and non-religious. Speculations stimu-
lated by the formation of companies whose data existed on paper,
transferred from heated imagination and unscrupulousness ; or by
bewildering reports, sometimes real, often fictitious exaggerations,
lured people on —as the gambler is—till finally disaster, material
and mental—awoke them to their true condition. So deeply and
extensively —at re-current periods —did this state of things prevail,
that the word used as best expressing its effect on the popular
mind and character was —fever — mania.
“ It was a gibing, laughing, sneering crowd,
Devoid of truth, faith, love, and earnestness,
Except a horrid earnestness for gain ;
Fierce love of lucre, which, if one had not.
He was despised and trodden down of men ;
Which, if one had, he was adored of all.
Placed on a pinnacle to be admired,
Flattered and filled with other rich men’s gifts ;
His overflowing fulness, made more full,
His vulgarness, though choice gentility,
His vices, virtues, and his prejudice,
Wisdom innate, his coarse words, oracles,
And he a chief and model of mankind.”
Here, then, is a state of mind in which recklessness, selfishness,
rowdyism in every form, irreligousness, unsettled habits, the love
of roaming, the love of gold for its own sake, greed, intemperance,
improvidence, and immorality, which during many years, became
widespread and active in the community. As a strong current it
met and flowed among the conditions referred to in the former
part of this lecture. Not as a purifier of sentiment, not as a


mitigant of existing objectionable transmitted qualities, but as a
force calculated and tending to impress on existing qualities the
features of its own special worldliness, daring and indifference to
all but self-interest. Ido not think that objection can be taken
on the ground of either fact or logic to this state of things as con-
tributing to a second radical cause in the origination and develop-
ment of the spirit now prevading society, called “ larrikinism ; ”
and to whose varied manifestations I have already referred.


LECTURE FIFTH.
P/ov. xiv. , 34.
As a third cause cumulative on the two causes already mentioned,
I confidently point to the land laws of the colony passed in 1861.
The monopolizing of the land at the time, together with the great
accession to the population which had taken place, originated the
demand, “ unlock the lands.” I claim no prophetic vision, but
basing my conclusions on the will of God as known in his revealed
word, and on the natural rights of men and nations, I do say —
regretting that it may be unpleasant to any one—that unless such
changes take place in the management of the lands of the country,
as shall place them on a basis more consistent with the purpose
of the great God who created the land, and with natural justice
than is now the case, there will be hereafter —and sooner probably
than such governments as we are accustomed to imagine—fully
awakened, a power at present only half slumbering, to compel it.
and which neither the diplomacy of cabinets, nor political
intrigue will be able to withstand. It is surely significant, that
by the operation of the Land Act of 1861, no less than 15,000,000
of acres have passed —at a fractional price—as freehold into the
possession of only 417 persons; 9,000,000 of acres being held by
only 97 persons. And if the land act now before the country
passes into law, its direct result will be for the “ benefit of
monopolists, and the detriment of the people.” The whole
tendency is, that the lands shall be occupied by the few, and not
by the many; that there shall be created a mere “ landed aris-
tocracy in a second Ireland beneath the Southern Cross.” It
needs no prophetic vision to foreshadow the state of things which
must, and will follow ere many years have past.
The demand to “unlock the lands,” was answered by
throwing open certain areas near to and remote from the
capital to be purchased conditionally—that is, to become the
freehold possession of persons after a prolonged credit, and final
payment.


It is not my intention to refer in any way to the political
phases of the point before us. The politician looks only for the
revenue—for income from some source. He gives no consideration
to the moral bearing on the people, of his acts in Parliament.
Though being—as men in my sacred calling are too generally
spoken of by our high-minded legislators—only a parson, never-
theless I presume to ask —is it the best legislation which disregards
the moral and social effects of acts of parliament? However
disregarded, they, notwithstanding, present themselves, and often
in very serious forms. I shall, therefore, as concisely as the topic
will admit, follow the operations of the Land Act of 1861, so as to
ascertain what part it played in relation to the spirit pervading
society, called larrikinism.
The appeal it made was direct to selfishness. It held out
such deceptive attractions as were well calculated to seduce the
masses—who follow an impulse and do not think—to enter on an
enterprise whose final bearing on the highest interests of
themselves and families was lost sight of under the impelling
power of land-hunger. Persons and families selected rapidly,
and numerously over an enormous area. They removed them-
selves and families beyond all sacred, and civilizing agencies.
Possessing as a rule but very limited means, it was speedily
expended in scant clearing of the eternal forest in which they had
isolated themselves, and in the construction of the most primitive
forms of dwelling for shelter. They were left, in what I may call
their voluntary exile, without the means of communicating with the
outer world. It is not for me in this place to say how the moneys
paid by them in deposit, and time payments of interests and
principal, which should have been expended in giving them roads
to their rude homes, and to market, were squandered by govern-
ments. For is it not the main duty of the legislators to raise
revenue, and to spend it ? How, Ido not enquire. T oiling on
with lion hearted industry in all weathers, such were the difficulties ?
such was the arrant and demoralizing drudgery, and in consequence
of the want of roads, such was the all but impossibility, in too
many instances, of turning the products of their labour into money,
that in numberless cases they become a prey to that class of
persons known as “ land sharks,” or to the money-lender at
usurious rates of interest. Compelled thus to fight a hard


up-hill battle, either to hold their place, or to regain lost position,
there was soon left little of heart or means to extend improvements;
so that the bark or slab dwellings as originally put up, were made
in too many cases inadequately to shelter increasing families, and
preserve the decencies. All these difficulties were embittered by
the antagonism which arose—antagonism consequent on the Land
Act itself —between the new comer with a fee simple in prospect,
and the former crown tenant, and which frequently took the forms
of reprisal and litigation. In their entirety, these things tended in
the case of the adults to deteriorate the best, and to give activity
to the worst part in their nature. In the case of the young, what
with the ignorance in which they grew up, the rudeness of manners,
and the reckless self-will consequent on isolation; and what with
the rough bush work and the loneliness of shepherd life, to which
they were put at the earliest possible age, there existed for years,
a state of things so tending to demoralise, that, little wonder if
there grew into manhood and womanhood vast numbers, who, in
regard to religious sentiment, to the claims of society, and to the
most common-place amneities of domestic life, rose little above
a state of mere heathendom.
In addition to all these evils inherent in the principles and
working of the Land Act of 1861, it acted as a poison to the moral
nature of the community, by the facility it offered for the com-
mission of perjury and deception; and on which immoralities, by
means of dutnmyism , in many instances great freehold possessions,
have been built. As time rolled on these evils were exposed by
the good and the patriotic. What feeble efforts were made to
legislate for their prevention, seem unaccountably to honest souls
outside the magic circle of political intrigue, but to have made the
commission of them more easy—at least not more difficult. The
canker had, year after year, eaten too deeply into the body politic
to be eradicated by any mild, so-called, remedial measures.
Though based on perjury and deception, the profits of dummyism
and land jobbery, and the pleasure of possessing permanently the
acres of the public estate were so sweet, that, schemes were ever
ready by which to break through a law organically defective; and
men were ever coming forward to offer, and others ready to accept
a consideration for complicity in an offence, which because of the
gain it brought and its frequency, came to be regarded as no


offence at all. The sacredness of an oath was treated as nought,
and the conscience became indurated. With logical precision,
these facts, and the state of things which has arisen out of them
direct attention to one cause among others, painfully accounting
for that spirit now prevading society known as larrikinism. For
they point to what has been demoralizing in its effects, to what has
tended to produce recklessness and violence, and to what has
given rise to perjury and deception ; —rendered the more awful
from the complicity of parties necessary to their perpetration. The
sin of that selfishness to which I referred in my first lecture, and
which enters into the very essence of larrikinism, is the tap root
of the evil consequent on the operation of the land act of which
I have spoken.
What the primary rocks are in geological science, the three
causes I have indicated are in relation to the spirit prevading
society, of which we have too much reason to lament.
They are fundamental. Reasoning a priori we are forced
to the conclusion, that, they could not have been in active
and widespread operation for many years, without—obediently
to natural law producing and establishing most objection-
able qualities in the national character; and without by the
same law, transmitting the produced qualities throughout every
class of society. And reasoning a fortiori. , we are driven in
this direction. Such facts exist so generally, and so numerously,
proving the existence of a chronic and most loose state of colonial
life as cannot be accounted for by the action of causes—however
depraving—that have come into operation during comparatively
few, and recent years. We must go much further back, and
investigate much deeper to find the beginnings of that life—that
spirit—prevading society, against which none can shut their eyes.
The germs exist deep down in, and are vitalized by, past conditions
to which I have inadequately referred.
Besides what may be called the three primary causes spoken
of, there are others which may be regarded as secondary causes
fiercely at work. In a sense they are the effects of pre-existing
objectionable qualities, that in time have become causes, and tend
to evolve new, varied and hateful forms of the evil in question.
There is in the foreground a prevailing defective discipline in
the parental home. Let none think that I am singling out him or


her. During my long ministry I have avoided that practice, and
I hope I shall ever be guided in doing so. To deal with
prevailing sin, and with such weakness or actual evil as meets one
in every day life, is legitimate procedure in the pulpit; even
though in general statement it may—as an arrow shot at a
venture —press heavily on particular persons. There are causes
at work such as pleasure-seeking, holiday-making, intense devotion
to business and money making; and in country life such free and
easy roaming out door habits, as tend either to diminish attention
to the care of the mind and manners of the children, or that
induce carelessness or indifference, so that children who should be
under maternal care, are either in indolence or selfishness handed
over to the oversight of servants. When education is sought,
no watchful eye is kept on the youth to note manners,
companionships, or progress. The whole tendency of things
is to produce indifference to religious training. The only qualifi-
cation kept in view is, what will best fit him for making money.
Parental curbing of self-will, and the use of the disciplinary rod are
laid aside. The following statement, contained in a letter to one
of our periodicals, is significantly true: “ I have seen parents
allow their children to be greatly disobedient, and even impudent
to them, and yet not offer a word of rebuke—yea, rather if the
child be very young, that the disobedience or impudence is treated
as a good joke. And yet they complain in after years that they
can do nothing with their boys and girls.” In one of our country
towns recently, about a dozen youngsters whose ages ranged from
6 years up to 15, appeared before the local Bench, charged with
burglary and theft. The local paper in reporting the matter says
that, the “ Police Magistrate severely commented on the culpable
carelessness of parents in allowing their children to run about
the streets at night, apparently without any control. He pointed
out that one of the darkest spots in the social life of the colonies
was the utter absence of parental control over the young.” The
effect of want of true discipline in home life, in allowing the
youngsters to select their own companions, to leave home and
return as they choose, no questions being asked, is fairly illustrated
by the foregoing case. In the upper classes to a large extent the
same want of discipline obtains. Supplied with pocket money in
improper sums, the young people frequent amusements, and


mingle in the society of their elders with all the airs and im-
portance of grown-up persons. The outcome of all that is not
difficult to divine. The letter already quoted from says truly, “if
the rising generation are not taught respect and obedience at
home, where else will they learn it; and how can we expect them
to be otherwise than breakers of their country’s laws when they
have never learned submission to the government of home ? ”
Extending along the line of secondary causes, there are
numerous others which claim attention. I can, however, select
but a few, and instead of using my own words to describe them,
I shall quote the statement made by men of standing who formed
part of a deputation from the “ Social Purity Society ” that
waited on the Premier, as reported in the S. M. Herald of 13th
August, 1887. One gentleman said : “ There was indisputable
evidence to show what a frightful source of immorality the private
bars were ; ” of “ the conditions of life that obtain in connection
with our factories he had heard stories that would make one’s
heart sad, both for the afflicted families, and the social welfare of
the community.” “ The benevolent asylum has become a
resort for women who had fallen again and again.” Another
speaker said : “As a medical man, he testified that there
was literature in circulation which was exercising a most prejudical
effect on society generally.” “ Our newspapers also were full of
matter that was injurious to morality.” One gentleman drew
attention to the very bad state of some of the Sydney bars (I
think he might safely have taken a much wider range) and sug-
gested, that they could not possibly pay the large rents they were
expected to, and keep things going with the profits from the drink
alone. He also endorsed what had been said concerning the
pernicious influence of dancing saloons, and alluded to another
evil, that of houses of assignation. One gentleman said that :
“During the last ten years, 12,350 illegitimate births had been
recorded in the colony; and that the annual report of the Sydney
Benevolent Society showed that 371 of the children born there
during the year were illegitimate.” He referred to the “ obscenity
of the pictures which were displayed in the windows of a certain
class of tradesmen, as a factor in demoralizing young men ; and
these were flaunted in the most public part of the city.” He
quoted from the report of the Inspector-General, Mr. Fosberry, for
c 2


1886, to show the evils arising from dancing saloons, factories,
workshops, and common lodging-houses, “ in not being subjected
to strict and adequate supervision.’ These are a series of
startling statements. What lies behind them, and what they are
leading to, must when thoroughly pondered over, oppress the
heart of everyone who loves his country. They point to evils that
are eating corruptingly into the body politic, and are the outcome
of the conditions, of the deep-seated causes, to which reference
has been made.
Operating in the direction of larrikinism, there is another
element —an import, and a comparatively modern one—which
in the category of second causes cannot be overlooked, I
refer to the doings of the so-called “Salvation Army.” I am
quite prepared to give full credit for whatever praiseworthy motives
to reach the lowest class of outcasts, and to socially reform them,
may have prompted in originating the said “ Army and also for
any solid and permanent achievements that may be said to have
been accomplished in that direction. But the so-called “ Salvation
Army ” now takes up far higher, and very different ground. It
poses as a distinct religious sect, in connection with which alone,
salvation is to be found ; and therefore calls upon the respect-
abilities in society, as well as the gutter sinners to join the ranks.
It works in direct antagonism to all the denominations, and leaves
no characteristic effort untried to proselytize from any one of
them. In respect therefore of its new claims as a religious sect, I
am confronted with certain phases in its procedure, to which in
their more than questionable tendencies and effects, no clear
minded observer and thinker can be indifferent. In what the
“Army” is pleased to call its worship of Jesus, rowdyism pre-
vails. In its marchings, and its “rings ” the same thing comes out
in the most grotesque forms, accompanied by an uproariousness
which makes
“ night hideous ”
with that disorderliness and noise dear to the heart of every true
larrikin. There is a ruthless bandying of the divine names,
utterly destructive of the sacredness and solemnity with which God
claims they shall be spoken ; a rollicking, bawling indifference
to the awful meaning which in the sacred volume we are taught
to attach to the holy name of Jesus. There is in the testifyings


and confessions—which often consist in depraved and depraving
revelations—before mixed audiences, a flippant hilarious deal-
ing with what the Bible teaches us, and what the holiest
and the best in all the ages have treated, as the most
personal, spiritual, and private concern ; that is what relates to soul
experience, and the intercourse between the individual conscience
and the great sanctifier of the heart, the Holy Spirit of God.
The end and aim of all true religion is to elevate; but such
proceedings level it in form and spirit down to the gutter. Youth
and mature age lose all veneration for the holiest of all names, and
come to use it with a familiarity and frivolity—incongruously
associated with publicly announced claims to moral and spiritual
perfection on the part of the persons who do so bandy the name
of Jesus —whose culpability I am not anxious to characterize.
In all that, the spirit of larrikinism pervading secular life is met,
not only unchecked, but by whose boisterousness—by whose
disregard of the views and sympathies of others—by whose vulgar
and pharisaic self-assertion —by whose stentorian shouting and
pitiable caperings in streets and on platforms it is practically
encouraged. For these are some of the marked and well-known
features of the larrikinism we lament; and in relation to a so-
called worship, look very much like the doing of very questionable
things that some fancied good may come.
The following extract from the Australian Record of August
27th, 1887, is painfully corroborative of what I have said ; “The
nigger-minstrel business in aid of church funds is utterly alien to
the tone of the preaching of the Gospel by our Master or by His
Apostles. But a country newspaper informs me to-day of what
seems a still lower depth. To preach the religion of Jesus in an
imitation of a nigger minstrel entertainment, is the latest device
of a branch of the Salvation Army in a town which has lately had
the privilege of an Ethiopian entertainment. It is true that the
‘ Hallelujah Minstrels ’ as they style themselves, did not go to the
extreme of blacking their faces (the Captain observed that there
was something more wonderful to look at —black hearts made white),
and the report does not mention any interspersed conversation
between Tambo and Bones. But the minstrels marched round
the platform in the orthodox Christy way ” —a combination of


shuffling, hopping, skipping and walking—“ while singing one
song or hymn ; and every one was pleased at the chorus—
Some folks hate our noise,
Some folks do, some folks do ;
They’re down on the glory, boys,
But that’s not me nor you ! ’
While the willingness of the audience to offer a collection was
pleasingly shown by pelting the ‘ bones ’ with coins from all parts
of the hall,” This is from a friendly account communicated by a
soldier. Can we wonder that the Salvation Army is said to cause
larrikinism ? Is this Evangelical Christianity ? “ Surely it is far
from being the way in which by our Saviour * the poor had the
Gospel preached unto them.’ St. Mark xii.,37, says ‘the common
people heard him gladly.’ ” His preaching consisted in calm, yet
powerful, dignified appeals to their understanding and their
affections. In that manner he exhibited his own Gospel to the
poorest of the land; and they and the people of the common
classes listened with joy and thankfulness to his pure, peaceful
and elevated addresses It is surely a pitiable travesty of his
method and noble style in speaking to clothe his sweet message
of love in every buffoonery of manner, and vulgarly to play with
His holy name in every kind of uproarious irreverence. For the
sake of the growing youth of the colony, among whom secularism
is doing its level best to root out every feeling of reverence, every
sentiment of religion, it is to be lamented, that, in matters pro-
fessedly Christian, anything savouring of the larrikin element
should find a place.


LbXTURE SIXTH.
Frov xiv, , 34.
Having considered larrikinism in its nature, manifestations and
causes, I have now to enquire, what measures may be adopted so
as to prevent its extension, and if possible to root it out of society.
It is contended that Education, Free, Secular and Compulsory, is
sufficient for that purpose. Those who hold that view, seize upon
every opportunity to show by statistics, how it has caused,
during a given number of years, the percentage of persons who
can read and write to increase. On secular utilitarian grounds
pure and simple, and also on the ground of education being
attainable, “ without money and without price ” —notwithstanding
the pauperising spirit of the thing—that view is accepted as satis-
factory, not only by the unthinking masses, but also by persons,
who, from their place in society should regard the matter from a
higher, holier, and more patriotic standpoint. To rest civilization,
morals, and the practice of the virtues on an exclusively secular
foundation is just what Greece and Rome did. Their history is
full proof of what that leads to. The growing youth will be the
future occupants of our places. Let them be taught that the
religion of Jesus Christ is a thing apart from education, and every
day life; that by means solely of reading, writing, figures and
extensive technecalisms in every branch of the arts and sciences,
men can rise in life, and civilization can be steadily impelled up
an interminable incline, and there is spread abroad among them
a worldliness, a selfishness, and an expediency which is merely
heathenism, and contains within itself the elements of ultimate
national feebleness, and decay. That, I think, is what history
proves; I know it is the teaching of the Bible. The education
which does not rest on, and is not interwoven with, the teachings
of Jesus Christ and His Apostles in the New Testament, is
incapable of contending against the evils spoken of in these
lectures, and of which we have too much reason to lament. It
has yet to be shown that, crime of any, and of every kind, has
diminished in a corresponding ratio to the alleged increased per-
centage of persons who can read and write. A sub-leader in the
S. M. Herald of April 23d, 1883, admits that: “by many


striking examples, no less than daily and general observation,
there is something wanting in the childhood and youth of the
colonies, —something that a perfect system should supply.” It
admits the fact that mischiefs which “ work on, and make no
sound or sign, are in fact only to be discovered by close obser-
vation.” It admits that the great corrective wanted is “ morality
and discipline in teaching.” It admits further that the system to
which the colony is trusting for the true education of the youth
is only “ a polishing ” system, dealing with the surface, and
leaving the inner life of the child’s nature untouched. These
admissions from a source which has always been the advocate of
a purely secular education, are enough tor me at present. The
state of things which evoked the article quoted from is intensified
since it was written, and so strengthens my statements. A merely
secular education, instead of either purifying or elevating, gives
keenness and expertness, where without the religion of Jesus Christ,
there is only selfishness—whatever the civilization otherwise.
That kind of culture —if I may so use the word in this place—
but enables the person with a more subtle grasp, and in a form
more carefully draped to carry on his operations; and in a greater
variety of ways calculated to lull suspicion of wrong. We must,
therefore, dismiss secularism in every sense, as unfit to act either
as a corrective, or as a deterrent of larrikinism.
The first remedial measure must be taken in the homes of the
people. It is now a trite saying of the poet that—
“ The child is father to the man.”
You are all familiar with the words of Solomon : “ Train up a
child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it.” (Prov. xxii. 6). That truth reaches directly to
the evil in question. As I have formerly pointed out, home
discipline is either so relaxed, or it has so completely passed into
delegated, and too often venial hands, that its restoration on a
true basis is essential to the future welfare of society. Let parents
and guardians become, as they should be, both the heart com-
panions, and the acknowledged and obeyed rulers at home. Let
them teach the law of love and obedience; let them teach the
duty, and the beauty of respect for others, and of reverence
towards seniors. Then, if needs be, command, and if necessary,
compel obedience. The wilfulness, or the fretfulness of the


child must not be allowed either to override, or to sway, what he
imagines is a hardship, but which is at the time a real, though
unrealized good This means, that, the youth shall not be
allowed to make an indiscriminate association with others; but
that he shall seek for and associate with his equals. This means
that he shall not be allowed to roam by day, or during evening
hours at his own will, but that, when called on he shall be able satis-
factorily to account for his whereabouts; and that when the
“ shades of evening ” begin to gather, he shall be found either
under proper supervision, or under the roof where there is best
safety, love and care. This means that so long as the child is
under age, home rule, home manners, and home authority must
be observed. Do you not see how all that would empty the
streets at improper hours of those whom it pains the right minded
to see there, and save them from danger? Do you not see how
this would tend to terminate that wandering abroad during, and
that mischievous use of the Sabbath, to which too many have in
after life traced their loss of caste, and their downward career.
Let not that mistaken love, the misleading sentiment, that youth
is but youth, and must have some allowance made, give up
discipline. “He that spares the rod,” is said in a sense to hate
the child. I speak for myself to-night, that lam none the worse,
but I believe much the better, for having that Bible truth practically
applied. Discipline is safety. Authority kindly and intelligently
exercised is quite compatible with all the freedom and enjoyment
needed by youth. Indifference to these views is the letting of
authority slip at the tears or solicitations of the child; leaves
many an opening for evil influences to possess the young heart
and by which at last, homes have been draped in sorrow, and
society damaged. As a safeguard against the beginnings of
larrikinism, look well to your homes; maintain a keen scrutiny
into the companionships of your children ; restrain them in the
tendency to ape the manner and speech of men and women;
and see that at night-fall they are gathered under your own pro-
tection ; and that as need be they have teaching, or amusement,
or both. Need I say that if these views are practised
in the true spirit of religion the safety of your children
will be doubly sure, and the home remedy for larrikinism
will be eminently successful. Faith in God ruling a house


and love to Christ influencing the heart, have the divine
guarantee of a blessing on everything about it. If against your
prayer and your example the child should afterwards, from outside
influences, catch the objectionable spirit spoken of in these
lectures, you may nevertheless hope, that as truth is imperishable,
the good seed you sowed will break through the overlying crust
of evil, and bear fruit.
Another remedy must be the restoration of a real connection
between the secular education of our youth and Bible teaching.
I know well —in the present state of universal selfishness —how
unpopular that view is, and how hopeless just now it seems. But
I am not despondent. As great revulsions as the restoration I
speak of have more than once, and in my own lifetime, taken
place in public opinion, and the policy of Governments, The
very evils admitted to be steadily growing out of the existing
system, may and I believe will, yet reach to such a crisis as will
open men’s eyes, and lead to a reformation. Evils have before
this in a sense cured themselves.
It does not fall within the scope of my present utterances to
combat the fallacy ; let the Church teach the young religion, and
let the state give them secular learning. The fallacy comes with
doubtful grace from a professedly Christian people, who, by their
representatives in parliament, in the possession of might against
right, stripped the Church of the means necessary to carry on her
great mission of teaching the young, of combining religious and
secular learning ; means granted by Imperial acts; means con-
firmed by colonial legislation ; means possessed and hallowed by
possession during nine-tenths of a century. Secular education
pure and simple, as the existing system is, amounts to the
education of our youth in nothing higher than civilized heathen-
dom :—that is in so far as the relation of their studies and them-
selves to Christ, to the Bible, and to the present higher, and the
future life are concerned. Nothing short of an education for our
youth which entwines the life, and love of Christ with learning,
and the affairs of every day life; which rests patriotism, morality
and the practice of the virtues on the distinctive example and
teaching of the Nazarene, can preserve our youth from the subtle
influence of that larrikinism against which mere secularism is not
only powerless, but—as admitted by its friend, the leading journal


of the colony—is an encourager and producer of it. These are
principles on which
“ A virtuous populace may rise the while,
And stand a wall of fire around our much-loved isle
A leading remedy for larrikinism consists in the power of
example possessed by the people themselves. In the centres of
population, and throughout the “ eternal forests,” the right
thinking, and the professedly Christian are called on by their
example to throw up a wall of defence against its encroachment,
and around the proprieties. If they will steadily and self-deny-
ingly set their faces against the dissipations of fashion, and the
cankerous spirit of idling and holiday-making; against the
desecration of the Sabbath to which I have already alluded; if
the bush selector, and the great squatter will bravely discounte-
nance the Sabbath hunting and other sports, the riding about and
wild pleasure-seeking so rampant, and so demoralizing throughout
the country; and if employers of mechanical labour would act
in the same spirit towards their employees, there would be brought
into operation a power of a most real and practical kind, whose
effects, ere long, would more than compensate for any fancied self-
denial needed in carrying it on. The diminution of the larrikin spirit
would be felt in the altered tone of the feelings of their subordi-
nates towards themselves as their superiors—for example is power
as well as knowledge. This is a portion of the remedy so
completely possible by the complaining people everywhere, that
no reason can be assigned for its non-use except that of selfishness,
that unwillingness to exercise any self-denial for the good of others,
and for the body politic, which constitutes the very essence of
larrikinism. If the heads of establishments throughout the bush,
and the influential classes in the centres of population, set their
faces strongly to the discountenancing of the inane frivolity, and
the evils, of which they do, at least in their results loudly complain,
the power of their steady high example would react beneficially on
their own interests, and finally be esteemed by the very persons
who at present are encouraged in—let it be admitted —mild forms
of larrikinism by the example set them.
What the late eminent Dr. Chalmers called “ the expulsive
power of a new affection,” is an engine that may be brought
into play against the evils of which we complain. That


exuberance of animal spirits, that love of amusements, that
precocity of thought and manners, and that rollicking love
of out-door life so characteristic of Australian youth, I would
neither crush nor chain; but I would lay hold of them
intelligently, firmly, systematically —as we do the electric
force —turn them from the wild courses into which they run, into
manful and useful ones. Try to expel the old evil, by creating a
desire to expend its force in new and better directions. Give
full encouragement to schools of art, with their reading rooms,
and the opportunity in connexion with them of every kind of in-
door games. Foster technical schools for ge:ting an early
acquaintance with matters scientific and mechanical. In our public
and private schools let a portion of time be devoted to natural
history and geology in the open fields of nature. Go in for good,
and sometimes for free and easy entertainments; let manly sports
be countenanced not only by the lower but by the better classes of
society scrupulous care being taken on all and every occasion,
that betting be disallowed—that rowdyism in manner and coarse-
ness and profanity in speech shall be promptly put down, and if
persisted in be punished by disqualification. All that means, that,
from patriotic and unselfish considerations, the large number who
now stand on their dignity shall feel they have high moral and
national functions to discharge as well as personal ones; that
their existence is not to be passed in utter selfishness and money
making, seeing that God has laid on each his personal share of
responsibility in looking after the good of others. The effect of
putting into a practical form these views would be steadily mani-
fest. For influence is felt from above. The general and kindly
action of those who are looked up to, would not be wholly thrown
away. And if the well-disposed among the working and middle
classes would themselves on private occasions, when mingling with
their compeers, as well as on public and festive occasions, frown
upon, oppose, and put down everything savouring of profanity in
speech, and violence and rudeness in manner, the result, we
may hope, would ere long be both real and satisfactory. These are
not Utopian views. They are practicable; but they mean such a con-
sensus of action amongst different classes against a common and
growing evil as cannot fail to be highly beneficial without in the least
tending to make a breach in the necessary barriers of society.


The well-disposed complain of the ravages of larrikinism, but
until public opinion has been fully awakened and brought to bear
on it, complaints will be made in vain. The laws do, I know,
provide some repressive measures for certain classes of larrikin
offences. But public opinion is as yet too indifferent to have the
laws enforced, and consequently the police are only, not stimu-
lated, but in a sense discouraged from the vigorous and impartial
discharge of their duties. A section of—let it be admitted—
well-meaning, but I do affirm mistaken humanitarians, denounce
what they say savours of severity—such as flogging—in dealing
with either the juvenile or adult larrikin. You know that a very
few years ago in the old country, garotiing had become such a
prevailing crime as threatened to produce a new “reign of terror.”
It was, however, stamped out. No mode of punishment could
cope with the evil but that of flogging. Public opinion—despite
the protests of some humanitarians —gave the weight of its influ-
ence to the law; and success followed in the securing of safety to
the law-abiding. If the larrikin will continue as he is doing, to
defy mild punishment, it is really humane to him, and just to
society, that the force of public opinion, through the strong arm
of the law, shall be laid on him with heavier blows, and in such
form as it is well known he shrinks from. Like colours in nature
imperceptibly blending, so-called humanitarianism may glide into
such an actual sympathy with the persons , whose acts are pests and
dangers to society, that public opinion must draw the line some-
where, whereby the majesty of law shall step in so as to secure
protection and safety- In relation to the lawless, punishment is a
dreaded necessity, to be executed by the law-abiding, and in
proportion to the nature and extent of lawlessness, graduated
severity is neither a cruelty nor an injustice. That consensus,
therefore, of public opinion, which will bring about the framing of
such laws —however severe they may seem —as are needed for the
suppression of various phases of larrikinism, and which will not
remain indifferent to, but countenance the firm administration of
them, is a prime ingredient in the remedies needed.
The various religious denominations, through their professed
adherents, have it in their power, if true to their God and them-
selves, to bring an over-mastering moral force against the larri-
kinism confessedly rampant. But, alas ! professed religionists are


greatly responsible for the encouraging of Sabbath-breaking in
various forms ; such as the inordinate thirst for pleasure—the
misguided love of mere amusement and fun; that lust of money-
making for its own sake ; that gambling, betting, and neglect of
home discipline, and so forth, to which I have directed your
attention. I make this statement with sadness. It gives me pain ;
because it brings up that insincerity and lukewarmness; that for-
mality and indifference; that vain effort to serve God and self,
which are so much of a shame and sin in modern Christianity,
and concerning which it is said : “ I know thy works, that thou
art neither cold nor hot; I would thou wert cold or hot. So then
because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue
thee out of my mouth.” (Rev. 3-10.) Though, perchance,
unpleasant to hear, I make these statements fearlessly, because I
know, and you know, they are true. What, then, is wanted?
This: that the Church shall recognise the value, and second the
efforts of Sunday school work. After some hundred years’ exper-
ience, the Sunday school has been proved to be a power for good
which cannot be over-estimated. It is to the young we must look,
not only for the political guidance, but also for the moral grandeur
and stability of this great country. Let professors of Christianity,
therefore, if possessing one spark of patriotism—one true feeling
of religious manliness —one smouldering sentiment of unselfishness
rouse out of their lethargy, their formality and indifference, and
give to the Sunday schools not a passing recognition only, not
cold patronage, not a miserable dole to help the laborers in their
struggles and “ labour of love but shower on them a cordial
sympathy, give their practical help, their blessing and their prayers.
They are places of youthful religious culture, where character is
greatly affected, the foundation of holy principles are helped to
be laid, the good influences of home teaching and discipline are
aided, and the numerous outside allurements to evil are opposed.
This, now, is needed as a counteractant to the spirit of larri-
kinism pervading society, secular and religious : that the Church,
that all the denominations shall awaken to a true, practical, and
spiritual sense of their privileges, their responsibilities, and their
power. Their privilege is to be one with Christ here, and to be
with Him for ever hereafter; their responsibility is, so to be fellow
workers with Him, that the time may speedily come when all shall


know Him, from the least to the greatest. And their power is
twofold : first, spiritual, then material, which if quickened into
“ a life hid with Christ in God,” is fully capable of coping with
the forces of the world. Do not all the churches, nominally, make
up nine-tenths of the population ? Do not they, therefore, possess
nine-tenths of the moral influence and material wealth of the land ?
What is needed, consequently, is, that the Church shall be quick-
ened into true spiritual life. Then shall her influence and her
resources be consecrated to do battle against the evils, and the
prevailing spirit of selfishness spoken of in these lectures. The
great agent in making the dry bones live, in clothing them with
flesh, and breathing into them life, is the Holy Spirit of God, as
the Rebuker, the Teacher, the Sanctifier, promised by Christ.
Let His presence and power in the Church, in faith and prayer
be sought, and we have the divine pledge that the cry will be
graciously heard. It is His work to produce the new affections,
which will compel that consensus of action in relation to all the
measures required, in rooting out larrikinism from the land, and
whose expulsive power will be so complete, as to leave no other
than love to God, manifesting itself in love to man.


Inverell;
BUCKLETON & JAMIESON,
“ Argus ” Office.
