

CONSTITUTION,
Statutes,
EXAMINATION REGULATIONS
THE SCHOOL OF MINES,
B.A.XjIEi.A.A.rR.A.T,
VICTORIA.
Inaugurate 26tlj October, 1870.




Constitution,
STATUTES,
EXAMINATION REGULATIONS
School of mines.
BALLAABAT, VICTORIA.
INAUGURAL ADDRESS
DELIVERED BY
pis porarr Sir Jrimwmfr Ikirro,
On Wednesday, October 26th, A.D. 1870.
BALLAARAT:
EVANS BROTHERS, STATIONERS. PRINTERS, AND ENGRAVERS.
1870,


4


©fficc fearers:
Visitor.
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR.
|lresident.
HIS HONOR SIR REDMOND BARRY.
thcc-|)rcsibcnt
R. W. NEWMAN, ESQ.
Crushes.
HIS HONOR SIR REDMOND BARRY.
SOMERVILLE LIVINGSTONE LEARMONTH, ESQ.
RIVETT HENRY BLAND, ESQ,
Council
The President and the Vice-President.
*The Hon. Sir James M'Culloch.
*The Hon. John A. MTherson.
*The Hon. Duncan Gillies.
*The Hon. William M'Lellan.
*F. M‘Coy, Esq., Professor, Univer-
sity of Melbourne.
His Honor J. W. Rogers.
*Harrie Wood, Esq.
J. M. Bickett, Esq., M.M.B.
H. B. de la Poer Wall, Esq., M.A.
J. E. Usher, Esq;
Thomas Gray, Esq.
The President.
The Vice-President.
Harrie Wood, Esq.
J. M. Bickett, Esq.
F. C. Downes, Esq.
H. B. DE LA
*Honorary Councillors,
JAbministratibc
Curator,
POER
Robert Lewis, Esq.
James M'Dowall, Esq.
H. R. Caselb, Esq.
Edwin Trenerry, Esq.
L. S. Christie, Esq,
C. S. Reeves, Esq.
R. M. Serjeant, Esq.
T. D. Wanbss, Esq.
Edward John Bateman, Esq.
*Tbe Chairman, for the time being,
of each of the seven Mining
Boards of Victoria.
Council.
J. E. Usher, Esq.
R. M. Seijeant, Esq.
H. B. de la Poer Wall, Esq., M.A.
H. R. Caselb, Esq.
WALL, ESQ.,




Stlicrol of UltiTCs antr |iibiistiics,
LIBEAET AND MUSEUM,
OF BALLAARAT.
inaugurated 26t|j (Detober, 1870.
ftonstitutitm.
Chapter I. — Of Objects.
1. The primary object of the School is to impart instruc-
tion in the various branches of Science relating to mining, the
theory and practice of mining, mine management, mining sur-
veying, and mining engineering.
2. It is proposed, as soon as practicable, to extend the opera-
tion of the School so as to impart instruction in those branches
of technical Science which may be considered most likely to
exert a beneficial influence upon the prosperity of Victoria.
Chapter II. — Of G-overumeht.
1. The School shall be under the control and management—
as hereinafter provided —of a Visitor, President, Vice-President,
Council, and Administrative Council.
2. Visitor.; —The first Visitor shall be and is hereby declared
to be His Excellency Viscount Canterbury, K.C.8., Grovernor


of the colony of Victoria, who shall continue to hold office as
long as he continues to he Governor of the colony of Victoria;
and every succeeding Visitor shall be elected by the Governors
and Subscribers for a period not exceeding seven years.
3. The Visitor for the time being shall have the ordinary
visitatorial jurisdiction of the visitor of a College or corporate
body.
4. President. —His Honor Sir Redmond Barry is hereby
declared to be the first President, and elected to hold office until
the Annual Meeting in December, a.d 1875.
5. Every future President shall be elected by the Governors
and Subscribers, and shall continue to hold office for a period of
five years.
6. The President shall have the right to preside at all meetings
of the Council or Administrative Council, and all other meetings
of the School, and to present to successful candidates Certificates
of efficiency and of merit, and other distinctions to be conferred
by the School. In addition to his deliberative vote, he shall
have a casting vote at all meetings where the votes are equal.
7. Vice-President.- —The Vice-President shall be elected by
the Council, which shall elect one of its own members to that
office, and shall continue to hold office for a period of three
years; and in the absence of the President the Vice-President
shall have, exercise, and enjoy all the authority, power, and
privileges of the President, In the absence of the President and
Vice-President, a Chairman may be elected by the quorum pre-
sent at any meeting, and such Chairman shall have similar
authority and power —including casting vote —as the President
or Vice-President would have had if present at such meeting.
8. Council. —The Council shall consist of twenty-nine mem-
bers, namely, the President, the Vice-President, six (6) to be
appointed by the Crown (who shall continue to hold office for a
period of five years), the Chairman for the time being of each of


the seven Mining Boards in the colony of Victoria, and fifteen
(15) elective members.
9, The fifteen elective members of the Council shall be elected
by the Governors and Subscribers, and shall continue to hold
office for a period of three years, provided that councillors shall
retire from office by rotation, five at the end of each year. And
at the ordinary meeting of the Council next preceding the annual
meetings of Governors and Subscribers, to be held in 1871 and
1872, the Council shall decide by lot who the five retiring coun-
cillors shall be. Retiring members of Council shall be eligible
for re-election.
10. Members of Council shall cease to hold office if absent from
the colony more than twelve months, or if absent from more than
four consecutive ordinary meetings of the Council without the
consent of the Council, or if they become bankrupt or insolvent,
or be convicted of treason, felony, or infamous crime, or become
incapable of acting by reason of mental or bodily infirmity, and
this rule shall apply to Trustees, except that they are exempt
from attending the meetings of Council.
11. No person shall be eligible for the office of Elective
Councillor who is not an annual or life Governor, and any
elective member of Council who shall cease to be an annual or
life Governor shall thereupon cease to be a member of the
Council.
12. Six members of the Council shall be a quorum at any
meeting thereof.
13. The Council shall frame all Statutes for the government
of the School, and lor the government of the Council and Ad-
ministrative Council, shall grant all Certificates, elect the Vice-
President, Administrative Council, Professors, Examiners, Cura-
tor, Registrar, and Master, regulate by annual or other vote the
revenues of the School, and appoint honorary, life, or annual
Governors in recognition of valuable services rendered or moneys


collected. Provided that no person shall he elected Honorary
Life Governor unless and until he shall have collected from per-
sons not previously Subscribers to the School the sum of £SO,
or have rendered services equal to the full value of £SO.
14. Administrative Council— The Administrative Council
shall consist of the President, Vice-President, and seven members
who shall be elected by the Council from its own members at the
first meeting of the Council after the annual meeting of
Governors and Subscribers, and three members shall be a
quorum at any meeting of the Administrative Council.
15. The Administrative Council shall have entire executive
control of the School, with power, at any special meeting called
for that purpose, to suspend or dismiss the Professors, Exami-
ners, Lecturers, Curator, Registrar, or the Master, provided
that such dismissal or dismissals shall be subject to appeal
to the Council; shall superintend examinations, and have
the control of the revenues of the School and their expenditure,
subject to the annual or other vote of the Council for their
appropriation; shall have and exercise full proctorial authority
over the pupils, including the power of expulsion, but such ex-
pulsion shall be subject to appeal to the Council. The Adminis-
trative Council shall have power to appoint and remove the
porter and all other inferior officers.
Chapter 111. —Or Trustees.
1. The premises lately known as the old Ballaarat Court
House, and now known as the School of Mines, together with
the land and all out-buildings and edifices comprised in a
lease for seven years, dated 7th April, 1870, from the Board of
Land and "Works of the colony of Victoria to Sir Redmond
Barry, Knight, one of the Judges of the Supreme Court of the
colony of Victoria, and Somerville Livingstone Learmonth, of
Ercildoun, Esquire, and Rivett Henry Bland, of Clunes, Esquire,
to be used for the purposes of a Mining School, Library, and


Museum, are hereby declared to be held by the said Sir Red-
mond Barry, Somerville Livingstone Learmonth, and Rivett
Henry Bland as Trustees for the Ballaarat School of Mines,
Library, and Museum. And it is further declared that they, the
said Sir Redmond Barry, Somerville Livingstone Learmonth,
and Rivett Henry Bland, are and shall be the first Trustees of
the said School of Mines, Library and Museum, and shall con-
tinue to hold office during the term of their natural life respec-
tively, or during the continuation of the School, unless their trust
shall be sooner determined as herein provided.
2. In the event of the office of Trustee becoming vacant by
resignation, death, or any other cause, such vacancy shall be
filled up at the next annual meeting of Governors and Subscribers
after such vacancy shall have occurred.
Chapter IY.— Of Governors and Subscribers.
1. A donation of £5O shall constitute the donor thereof
a “ Life Governor the annual payment of £3 3s. shall consti-
tute the contributor thereof an “ Annual Governorand the
annual subscription of £1 Is. shall constitute the subscriber
thereof an “Annual Subscriber.” Honorary Life Governors,
or Honorary Annual Governors, for one or a greater number of
years may be appointed by the Council in recognition of valuable
services rendered to the School, subject to the provisions in
Clause 13, Chapter 11. hereof.
2. The Governors and Subscribers shall hold annual or other
meetings at such time or times, place or places, as shall be de-
termined by the Statutes, provided that the annual meeting shall
be held in each and every year sometime during the month of
December.
3. All ordinary vacancies in the offices of President, Vice-
President, Elective Members of Council, and Trustees shall be
filled up at the annual meeting of Governors and Sub-


scribers. Interim vacancies may be filled np by the Council
pro tern, in such manner as the Statutes shall provide.
4. At each Annual Meeting of the Governors and Subscribers
there shall be presented by the Council a report of the operations
and proceedings of the School, together with a duly audited
balance-sheet of the receipts and disbursements.
5. The order of the business at the annual and other meetings
o
shall be provided for by the Statutes, and pending the adop-
tion of Statutes for that purpose, the usual rules by which well-
regulated public meetings are governed shall be observed, and
the ruling of the Chair upon all points of order shall be final and
absolute.
6. Honorary Life Governors shall have all the rights, powers,
and privileges of “ Life Governors,” and “ Honorary Annual
Governors” shall have all the rights, powers, and privileges of
“Annual Governors.” At all meetings of Governors and Sub-
scribers, Life Governors shall have two votes each, Annual
Governors and Subscribers one vote each ; and any corporate
body shall have power to exercise—through its duly appointed
representative —all the functions of a Life Governor. And
Governors shall have power —subject to the Statutes—to
present pupils for admission to the School free of entrance fees,
namely : —Life Governors, two pupils in a year ; and Annual
Governors, one pupil in a year.
Chapter Y.—Of Professors akd Masters.
1. The Professor or Professors, Master or Masters, and all
other teachers shall be appointed by the Council and may be sus-
pended or dismissed by the Council, or by the Administrative
Council.
2. The Master shall attend the School daily during such hours
and shall impart to the pupils instruction in such branches of
education and science as the Council may either by Statutes or


written resolution, from time to time determine, and until the
Statutes shall otherwise provide he shall instruct so far as to pre-
pare the pupils for the Professors’ Lectures in—
Arithmetic, Greometry, Algebra, and Mechanics.
Mensuration, Surveying, Drawing, and so to apply these as to enable
the pupils to read plans, to plot from field books, and to take mining surveys
both on surfacennd below ground.
Engineering.—As applied to mining in all its branches
The Theory and Practice of Mining. —To include periodical attend-
ance with the pupils at mines.
Chemistry, Gieology, and Metallurgy.
3. The Council shall create Professorships and appoint Pro-
fessors of such and so many of the various branches of Science as
the Council may determine, provided that the first Professorships
which shall be established shall be in Chemistry and Geology.
4. The Professors shall deliver lectures upon such subjects,
on such days, and at such hours, as shall from time to time be
determined upon by the Administrative Council, and may also
act as Examiners.
5. Examinations shall be held so often and upon such subjects
as shall from time to time be fixed by the Statutes.
Chapter Yl. —Of Pupils.
1. All persons desirous of entering as pupils will, unless
nominated by a Governor, be required to submit their names
to the Administrative Council, when, if eligible, they will be
entered on the roll on paying the entrance fee.
2. All pupils will be required to pay such term fees as shall
be fixed by Statute for instruction and lectures.
3. All persons nominated by a Governor will be entitled, with-
out the payment of any entrance fee, to be enrolled as pupils on
presenting their nomination to the Master or Registrar but will
have to pay the same annual or term fees for instruction and
lectures as non-nominated pupils.


4. All pupils must on entry sign the pupil's roll, and submit
themselves to the discipline of the School as provided by the
Statutes or otherwise.
Chapter YII. — Of Certificates.
1. Certificates shall be granted for efficiency in such branches
of Science as may from time to time be provided by the Statutes,
particularly in Mining Engineering, Chemistry, Assaying, and
Mining Surveying.
2. All Certificates shall be sealed with the seal of the School,
and be signed by the President, Vice-President, and Regis-
trar ; shall be in form as prescribed by Statutes, and each Cer-
tificate shall contain the signature of the person to whom it
shall have been granted.
3. In no case shall Certificates be granted without the consent
of the Council.
4. The Council shall have power to substitute for attendance
upon lectures at the School, attendance upon lectures at any
University or School of Mines.
5. The Council shall charge such reasonable fees for Certifi-
cates as shall from time to time be fixed by the Statutes.
Chapter VIII. — Of the Name or Title.
The name or title of the School shall be “ The School of
Mines and Industries and Library and Museum of Ballaarat,”
but in all legal and other documents it may be cited as “ The
School of Mines, Ballaarat.”
The foregoing Amended Constitution was adopted at a
Meeting of Governors held at the Office of the School
on the 1 6th day of December , 1870.
R. W. Newman, Vice-JPresidenf.
1 4


Stbool of Uliius nub |nbustrixs,
LIBRARY AND MUSEUM,
OF BALLAAKAT.
JJtatttt.es.
Chapter I. — Of the Councils.
1. The Council shall meet at the hour of eight o’clock p.m., on
the third Thursday of the months of December, March, June,
and September of each year, for the despatch of business, and
shall have power to adjourn to any intermediate period. Pro-
vided that if the third Thursday shall fall on a public holiday
the Council shall meet on the following Thursday.
2. The Administrative Council shall meet on the second Thurs-
day of each month, at the hour of eight o’clock p.m., and shall
have power to adjourn for any intermediate period. Provided
that if the second Thursday shall fall on a public holiday the Ad-
ministrative Council shall meet on the third Thursday.
3. All proceedings of the Council and of the Administrative
Council shall be entered in a journal.
4. The minutes of the preceding meeting shall be read at each
meeting of the Council or Administrative Council, and confirmed
or amended thereat, and the presiding chairman shall sign them
as confirmed or amended.


5. The President or Vice-President shall have power to call a
special meeting of the Council or Administrative Council for the
consideration of business which either may wish to submit to the
Council or Administrative Council as the case may be.
6, The President or Vice-President, or, in their absence, the
Registrar, shall convene a meeting of the Council or Adminis-
trative Council upon receiving a written requisition of four
members of Council setting forth the objects for which the meet-
ing is required to be convened, and the meeting shall be called
within seven days after the receipt of the requisition.
7. Each member shall be supplied by the Registrar with a
written or printed notice of all matters to be considered at the
next ensuing meeting of the Council or Administrative Council,
whether special or ordinary, and such notice shall be delivered
or transmitted by post at least two days before the day of
meeting.
8. The Registrar shall insert in a book, to be called “ The Notice
of Motion Book,” the date of each notice of motion, that of its
discussion, and the final result. And no member shall make any
motion initiating a subject for discussion except in pursuance of
notice given at least three days previously.
9. If a quorum of the Council or Administrative Council be
not present within half an hour after the time appointed for a
meeting, whether ordinary or special, all business which should
have been transacted at such meeting shall stand over for the
next ordinary meeting and take precedence thereat.
Chapter II. — Of the Seal.
The Seal of the School shall be entrusted to the President or
Vice-President, and shall not be affixed to any document except
by order of the Council or of the Administrative Council.


Chapter 111. — Of Terms.
The year shall be divided into four terms, commencing respec-
tively January, April, July, and October. There shall be two
vacations in each year, namely, two weeks at mid-summer and
two weeks at mid-winter, and public holidays shall be observed.
Chapter IY. —Of the Proctorial Board.
1. The Administrative Council shall form a Proctorial Board
for the consideration of all questions relating to studies and
discipline.
2. The Administrative Council shall arrange the days and
hours of all lectures and examinations, and prescribe the subjects
of examination.
3. The Administrative Council shall make regulations for the
maintenance of discipline among the students, and shall have the
power of inflicting punishments by fines, or expulsion, for
breaches of good order and propriety.
4. The Administrative Council shall make regulations for the
management of the Library and Museum.
5. The Administrative Council shall regulate the duties of the
porters and servants, and shall have the power of punishing
them by fine or removal.
6. The Administrative Council shall furnish to the Council
such information as may from time to time be required.
Chapter Y.— Of the Registrar.
1. There shall be a Registrar of the School, whose duty shall
be to prepare and have charge of the records of the School, to
keep all Registers and books of account which maybe requisite,
and to conduct all correspondence and answer all inquiries con-
nected with the School.


Chapter YI. — Of Curator.
1. There shall be a Curator of the Museum appointed by the
Council, who shall have the charge of all the minerals and speci-
mens belonging to the School, and who shall also perform the
duties of Librarian.
Chapter YII. —Or Certificates.
1. No pupil shall be admitted under the age of fourteen years,
unless and until he shall have passed an examination.
2. Every student shall upon entrance sign his name in the
School roll-book and make the following declaration: —
“ I do solemnly promise that I will faithfully obey
“ the Statutes and rules of the School, so far as they may
“ apply to me, and that I will submit respectfully to
“ the constituted authorities of the School.”
3. Pour classes of certificates will be issued, namely: —
Ist. Mining Engineering.
2hd. Chemistry.
3rd. Assaying.
4th. Mining Surveying.
4. Students who shall have fulfilled all the conditions pre-
scribed by the Statutes and Eegulations for any Certificate may
be admitted to that certificate, at a meeting of the Governors
and Subscribers.
5. Pupils shall be divided into two classes: one for senior
and the other for junior students, which classes shall respectively
attend, at the appointed hours, the lectures of the Professors.
6. Students shall be examined half-yearly, and no person shall
be admitted to any Certificate in the Ballaarat School of Mines
and Industries till he shall have signed the following declara-
tion in the roll-book: —


“ I do solemnly promise that I will observe the Statutes
“and regulations of the Ballaarat School of Mines and
“ Industries, and that I will not make use of the privi-
“ leges now about to be conferred upon me, so as in any
“way to cause injury to the School.”
7. The fees payable by students and candidates shall be—
For Instruction , including Lectures —
Entrance .Fee
Juvenile Pupils, per quarter
Adult do. do.
Extra Charge for Chemistry or Assaying,
per quarter ...
For Certificates —
1. Mining Engineering
2. Chemistry
3. Assaying
4. Mining Surveying
Payable in advance
£3 3 0
3 3 0
2 2 0
110
£3 3 0
2 2 0
2 2 0
110
8. Regulation for Attendance. —~No candidate for any cer-
tificate shall be qualified to present himself at any examination
without a written statement from the Master or Lecturer, to the
effect that he has attended two-thirds of the lectures in each
quarter, unless by special permission of the Council, and pay
such special fee for examination as the Council may determine.
Chapter VIII, — Of Meetings of the Governors
and Subscribers.
1. The Governors and Subscribers shall meet in the Lecture
Hall of the School, in the months of December and June of each
year.
2. The President or Vice-President shall have power to con-
vene a special meeting of the Governors and Subscribers.
3. The President or Vice-President shall, within fourteen days
after receipt of a written requisition signed by ten Governors or
Subscribers, setting forth the object for which the meeting is to
19


be convened, convene a special meeting of the Governors and
Subscribers.
4. Every sucb special meeting shall be convened within one
calendar month, not less than fourteen days from the date of the
notice thereof or the receipt by the President or Vice-President
of such requisition, and in the event of the President or Vice-
President refusing or neglecting to convene a special meeting
within the time prescribed, the requisitionists shall have power
to convene such meeting.
5. The Governors and Subscribers shall have power to ad-
journ anv of their meetings, general or special, from time to time.
Chapter IX. —Of Prizes.
A sum of money, to be voted for that purpose by the Council,
shall be expended each year in the purchase of prizes.
Adopted 7th December, 1870.
P. AV. Newman, Vice-President.


Srjwrol of Hfiiics ahir |nhusfncs,
LIBRARY AND MUSEUM,
OF BALLAARAT.
HUplations.
For Examinations.
1. The subjects for entrance examination for pupils under
fourteen years of age shall be—
Ist Book of Euclid.
Arithmetic to Decimals.
Algebra to Simple Equations.
2. Candidates for Certificates in Surveying shall, subsequently
to their entrance, pass two examinations and complete one year.
The subjects for examination shall be—
The first six books of Euclid.
Algebra to Quadratic Equations.
Logarithms.
The subjects for the second examination shall be
Those of the first examination, and
Trigonometry.
Description and use of Mathematical Instruments.
Drawing, including Plans and Sections, with Plotting from
Field Book. b
Mining and Land Surveying.
Levelling.
Calculation of Areas and Quantities.


3. Candidates for Certificates in Assaying stall, subsequently
to tbeir entrance, pass two examinations in Assaying and com-
plete one year.
The subjects of the first examination will be —
Inorganic Chemistry,
Mineralogy.
Analytical Chemistry,
The subjects for the second examination will be —
The subjects of the first and Practical and Theoretical
Metallurgy.
4, Candidates for Certificates in Chemistry shall, subsequently
to their entrance, pass two examinations and complete one year.
The subjects for the first examination shall be—
Inorganic Chemistry.
The subject for the second examination shall be —
Organic Chemistry.
5. Candidates for the Certificate of Mining Engineer shall,
subsequently to their entrance, pass four examinations and
complete two years.
The subjects of the first examination shall be—
First six books of, Euclid.
Algebra to Quadratic Equations.
Trigonometry and Logarithms.
Inorganic Chemistry.
Mineralogy.
The subjects for the second examination shall be—
Those of the first, and
Use of Mathematical Instruments.
G-eology, as applied to Mining.
Levelling.
Surveying.
The subjects for the third examination shall be —
Those for the second, and
The Principles of Mining, including Ventilation of Mines.
Drawing of Plans and Construction of Machinery.
Selected Specifications.
Mechanics —Theoretical, and applied with Calculations of
Strength and Strain of Materials.


The subject for the fourth examination shall be —
Those of the third, and
Natural Philosophy, including Heat, Hydraulics, Hydro-
statics, the Steam-engine.
Metallurgy.
Adopted 7th December , 1870.
E. W NEWMAN. Vice-President.
N.B.—The Text Books to be used by Students shall be such as may be from time to
time prescribed by the Administrative Council.




ADDRESS
ON THE
(©pmmg of % School of ||lincs,
B A L'L AARAT, VICTORIA,
DELIVERED BV
His Honor Biv Eodmonxl Earry,
On Wednesday, 26th October, A.D. 1870.




ss
W
THE OPENING
THE SCHOOL OF MINES,
BALLAAEAT, VICTORIA,'
DELIVERED BY
SIR REDMOND BARRY,
On WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 26th,
A.D. 1870.
Ballarat:
EVANS BROTHERS, PRINTERS, STURT STREET,
AND COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.


■


ADDRESS
THE OPENING OF THE SCHOOL OF MINES.
Mr. Chairman, Ladies anno Gentlemen— We assemble this
evening to elect directors for the management of the School of
Mines for Ballarat. It affords me much pleasure to assist on
the occasion. My good fortune has associated me before this
with the inhabitants of Ballarat in furthering the cause of volun-
tary mental improvement. Their zeal, discretion, and persever-
ance prepared me for the exhibition of similar invaluable
qualities in the members of your provisional council: that
expectation has been completely realised; and their exertions
ably regulated by the good judgment and unwearied assiduity
of your provisional vice-president, Judge Rogers, have matured
wdthin a short time, and in the face of many difficulties, the
plan for the organisation of the school.
My first duty is to thank very heartily the gentlemen who
initiated these proceedings for the honour they have conferred
on me by naming me the provisional president, and to assure
them, as well as the members of the provisional council, that I
am very sensible of the distinction. Indeed, these gentlemen
have left me nothing more to do now, and but little to say,
because as the school has become, in the phraseology of the day,
an accomplished fact, it may be presumed that everything


connected with its establishment and maintenance has been
thoroughly debated and determined upon. Nevertheless, it is
quite possible for an entire community to accept the conviction
that it is expedient and desirable to open such a school, and yet
it may not present itself to the minds of all that the maintenance
in a perfect state of efficiency will require something more sub-
stantial than their meed of approval of the project.
You may already have considered the advisability of making
this a proprietary establishment. Such a system possesses
numerous advantages, not the least of which is the direct pecuni-
ary interest which the proprietors have in the good management.
This has a talismanic effect on the regular attendance of directors.
You may reasonably expect tbat tbe Government will belp
you, more particularly as in other countries where such schools
exist they originate with and are supported mainly at the cost
of the State, and especially as you have proposed to give to the
Crown the power of nominating six of the members of your
council. You may for the like reason look for the support of
the seven mining hoards. You may further rely, and with reason-
able confidence, on the sympathies of many of the general public.
Still something more is required. Liberal salaries must be pro-
vided for your masters, lecturers, and teachers; a library must
be formed; collections of minerals, models, &c., must be made ;
other things indispensable for the course of instruction must be
got together.
You will doubtless see the advantage of founding exhibitions
for the encouragement of your pupils : the question of mainte-
nance becomes consequently one which addresses itself earnestly
to a much wider circle than the audience who honour us with
their presence here to-night.
Although it be not probable that in this community, so forward
to avail itself of opportunities to assist in enlightened movements,
any will be found actually opposed to the establishment of this
school, there may be some persons indifferent to change, and of
that timid disposition which shrinks from the responsibility of
supporting any novel scheme ; or perhaps there may still linger


amongst us a few of that courageous old conservative stamp who,
long since driven from their outworks by the advancing waves of
general education, still hold the citadel in defence of the practical
man, and contend strongly that all goes on well enough as
it is.
The first will meet us with the inquiry—What is the use of
such an institution ? When such questions were put to Benjamin
Franklin, not unfrequently in the vein of petulant interrogation,
depreciating the value of his scientific pursuits, the philosopher
replied by asking another, “What is the use of a baby P” Indeed’
as an abstract proposition it is not easy for any person, except
the idolising mother or proud father, to pledge himself prospec-
tively for the eventual utility of any individual infant. Yet
Wordsworth has said :
“ The child is father of the man ; ’
Or, as was sung before by Milton—
The childhood shows the man,
As morning shows the day.
And truly the culture of this scion, which is to be developed into
a rational, accountable member of the body politic, clothed with
his rights and duties, and his responsibilities here and hereafter,
is deserving of our solicitude.
Those who have meditated on the subject have been made
uneasy by the growing tendency to obliterate childhood—to
hurry on our youth either to drudgery for which the physical
powers are unequal, or to occupations which induce an impatience
of parental control —an independance for which it is not ripe;
and disquieted by the fatal propensity to sharpen youths, who
should be boys, into imperfect men. In no regions can uneasiness
on this point be more keenly felt, than where the population lives
in that state of chronic excitement caused by the search for gold,
amongst which speculation is so rife, so stimulating, so contagious.
Nowhere can the compensating influences of education be more
required to moderate these precocious inclinations ; and no kind
of education can be devised better suited to calm the juvenile
enthusiasm, to steady the volatile, and give a wholesome discipline
to the mind, than a sound training in moral and physical science,


in mathematics, engineering, geology, mineralogy, chemistry, and
metallurgy, which we undertake to teach.
This simple statement would, of itself, suffice to show that the
school is one of the best and most useful that the community could
project. Your excellent prospectus, which has, it is hoped, had
an extensive circulation, declares the uses which this school is
expected to serve. Quoting from it with your permission, it
states : —“The object sought to be obtained is the combination of
the highest scientific with the most practical training for all men
engaged in the enterprise of mining in its various branches—
whether so engaged as mining managers, engineers, surveyors,
mechanists, working miners, directors, or promoters of com-
panies.”
“ Hitherto in this colony no means of scientific education in this
most important occupation has been provided. The result has been
an enormous waste of capital, time, and labour. Indeed, it may
be fairly stated that the present depression in the mining mar-
ket, and the distrust of mining property as an investment, may in
great part be traced to the numerous failures of enterprises
either ignorantly entered upon or unscientifically conducted.
The scientific education of those engaged in mining pursuits
would, it is believed, not merely render gold-mining a safe and
generally more productive speculation, but would bring into
profitable prominence and activity many branches of mining now
wholly neglected, or distrustfully, and consequently unsuccess-
fully, pursued.”
Here, then, is an exposition which completely exhausts the
subject, and puts the question beyond the reach of controversy.
Tor institutions, political, social, and educational, there is, as for
mankind, an infancy; and you may be congratulated on the
rapidity with which this has emerged from its swaddling clothes.
The sum of £6OO, wanted to enable you to commence operations,
has been subscribed. The Grovernment has so far recognised
your movement as to grant you a lease, at a nominal rent, of the
house in which we are met, formerly the building in which
were held the sittings of the Supreme Court. It has been


repaired and adapted to the requirements, and you are now
ready to set to work.
If there be amongst us any indifferent to the movement on
account of its novelty, to them may be said, with all deference for
striking on so low a chord—You cannot afford to be listless—
your self-interest demonstrates the imperative necessity for
action. Your calling, whatever it may be, is so interwoven with,
so dependent on, the mining for gold, which has enlisted so large
a part of the population of the district, that the question is
brought home to you in a serious light. You cannot decline to
move on with the times.
Only sixteen years ago, when the valleys around this spot were
crowded with upwards of 10,000 stalwart diggers, working amidst
the alluvial drifts with an energy almost incredible, an admoni-
tion was given, which sounded prophetic, and was consequently
disregarded; yet the verification of this has come upon us in our
generation with a startling and unpleasant truthfulness.
Many a one of you, when consulting the author of Siluria, for
guidance in your operations, to which his profound and philos-
ophic investigations have imparted such pre-eminent value, may
have paid but scant attention to the conclusion of the sixteenth
chapter. Let me read it to you. Speaking of these alluvial
workings, he says: —“Now, as every heap of these broken aurife-
rous materials in foreign lands has as well defined a base as each
gravel-pit of our own country, it is quite certain that hollows so
occupied, whether in California or Australia, must be dug out
and exhausted in a greater or less period. In fact, all similar
deposits in the old or new world have had their gold abstracted
from heaps whose areas have been traced, and whose bottoms
were reached. Not proceeding beyond the evidences registered
in the stone book of nature, it may be therefore affirmed, that
the period of such exhaustion in each country (for the deposits
are much shallower in some tracts than in others) will, in great
measure, depend on the amount of population and the activity of
the workmen employed in each locality. Anglo-Saxon energy, for
example, as applied in California and Australia, may in a few


years accomplish results which could only have been attained in
centuries by a scanty and lazy indigenous population, and thus
the 'present large flow of gold into Europe from such tracts ivill, in
my opinion , begin to diminish within a comparatively short period”
These italics are his own. You may answer whether undue
emphasis be thus given to the passage. What is the obvious
moral to be drawn from this pregnant sentence ? Does it not
show that what has occurred on this spot within this short time,
under our own eyes, proves amply that, in this quarter at least,
the era of the cradle and the tin dish has already passed away
into an antiquity as dim and distant as the age of Tubal Cain;
that the present epoch of deep leads to reach the banks of what
were at some remote geological period superficial streams, or to
follow out, what may be of still more or less ancient formation,
gold-bearing veins of quartz, demand agencies wholly different
from those which hitherto sufficed; that while you will still
rejoice to possess the help of the miner’s brown arm, the time
has come when the calculating and inventive brain and the culti-
vated intelligence must play their part; and that you now must
enlist higher forms of sagacity, employ auxiliary forces, and that
these forces must be directed to suit the altered circumstances
which have arisen.
But our old and valued conservative friends, who conceive that
new-fangled ways and contrivances are all weariness and vexation
of spirit, and who rest their faith on the proverbial “ practical
man,” will allow me in all amity to remind them that the prac-
tical man does not want to be pampered and coddled, to be
nurse-tended and protected after their fashion. Self-training,
practical experience, hard-earned knowledge, and other similar
expressions, worn threadbare long since, are captivating to some.
Nevertheless, the self-trained practical man who rises to eminence
—after all, one in many hundreds of his order —is the last person
in the community to be seduced by them. He knows that nature’s
precepts are the same as they have been before all worlds, and
that while none can claim a monopoly in them, no one can appro-
priate them without a long and earnest servitude to acquire them.


He recognises the truth announced by the poet’s description of
gravitation:—
“ That very law which moulds a tear,
And bids it trickle from its source,
That law preserves the earth a sphere,
And guides the planets in their course.”
He knows that he has had to earn his knowledge by studying the
same laws of nature and physics, and gaining the same general
information which others do who have attended schools and uni-
versities —a privilege denied to him. He feels that he has had
to struggle alone under a thousand discouragements to reach by
rugged and circuitous tracks the same goal; that he has been like
one trying to decipher unaided a secret writing, who has had to
compare symbols in different positions and under different com-
binations, obliged to conjecture many a time and oft what their
meaning may be, until, after a multitude of fruitless experiments,
he comprehends their separate and relative significations. No
such man would decline the help of teachers familiar with every
branch of science he desires to master, or the use of a library,
collections of properly classified minerals which you will doubtless
cause to be assembled, or of apparatus to illustrate for him at
once problems, by which he has been a long time perplexed.
Apart, however, from this, let us view the matter in a broader
light, and strike a key more in consonance with the liberality of
sentiment with which you wish this matter should be treated.
When we reflect on the distinction between science which collects
principles, and art which applies them, we may acknowledge the
force of the more rational persuasion of enlightened men of every
age, that theory and practice, instead of being hostile, are only
different phases of the same form of thought, that to impose on
them the ban of celibacy is for practical purposes the most
impracticable of things, and that they should be allowed to
continue undivorced, for ever bound together in indissoluble bonds
of holy matrimony.
While discussing this, your attention may be called to the
opinion of Hobert Stephenson. He was, as you know, son of
George, father of railways, who, when the unknown brakesman of


Killingworth, disputed with Davy of world-wide reputation the
priority of invention as well as usefulness of the safety-lamp, and
who stinted the indulgence of his days of sparingly-requited labour
in order to give his son the best education to enable him to aid his
own acknowledged deficiencies. Writing from South America in
1825, whither he had been sent to superintend the working of
gold mines at St. Anna, he says : —“Practical men are certainly
to be esteemed as such, but I am far from attaching the import-
ance to them which our masters appear inclined to do. Indeed,
in the working of gold and silver in veins in this country it is
absolutely essential that theory and practice should be united and
go hand-in-hand.”
It is difficult indeed to know how to repress this natural pro-
clivity to innovate, or by what rigour to restrain this stationary
mediocrity so erroneously attributed to the practical man. He,
himself, rises in rebellion against the favourite code prepared for
him, for no sooner does he allow his genius to soar above his
mechanical occupations, and to speculate on some improvement
on his servile toil, than he becomes himself a theorist—one
of the obnoxious body of philosophers looked upon as idealists
or dreamers.
Is it not manifest then that when a knowledge of mathematics
and mechanical principles affecting the direction and pressure of
forces, an ability to estimate the strength, the elasticity,
other properties of materials, with a view to economy,convenience,
safety, and durability, has been gained by a man before he enters
on the practical application of the principles of construction, and
sets himself to build a house, &c., he will have an immeasurable
superiority over the one whose performances have been for years
chiefly imitative, who has not been able to find time to learn, or
find others with leisure or inclination to teach him those princi-
ples calculated to simplify or expedite his unvarying handiwork,
but who has been obliged to rest on the actual experience of his
own working hours. Might we not as well expect to find a
person skilled in the art of navigation who is ignorant of the
science of astronomy ; or of mensuration, who knows not geome-


try; or of logic, who was unacquainted with the science of
reasoning; as an engineer, who had not mastered the science of
mechanics ; or one able to direct the search for, and profitable
working of minerals, to whom geology, chemistry, hydraulics, and
other cognate sciences were not familiar.
The question is sometimes narrowed as to what are the best
means of acquiring technical proficiency, and it is asserted that
the practical details of civil engineering may be best learned by
pupils ,in the field, and in the offices of engineers engaged in the
execution of extensive works —in fact, dealing with the profes-
sional man as with an ordinary tradesman, and insisting that he
should be taught as is the apprentice to the shoemaker or hatter.
Now, we are not obliged to admit or deny this proposition, for it
embraces only one portion of the general subject, and the conclu-
sion drawn from it, that private tuition, under an exceptionally
favourable state of circumstances in both master and pupil, is, or
may be, that best calculated to ensure a certain proficiency, is
not the true issue. What is required is—not a partial adept in
some one branch, or a few branches of work, but a man with
comprehensive learning, which embraces the wide range of philo-
sophic theory, the precepts of which invigorate the understanding,
and keep him from the perpetual blunder and mischance into
which the practical empiric is so prone to fall; and who, in
addition to this, can apply those precepts with readiness and
aptitude. Yet even on this point it may be well maintained that
isolated pupilage amongst seniors of different dispositions, en-
grossed with their own. independent responsibilities, more
prompt to ngglect or chide than to instruct, cannot be so con-
genial to the young man as the association with his fellows of
the same age, all mutually bringing to bear on each other in
honourable rivalry the knowledge which they daily acquire.
And as it is in a great degree a parent’s question, the school
presents the protection of superintendence, the exercise of moral
restraint, and the absence of temptation to idleness and dange-
rous self-indulgence, not so well insured against in the early
emancipation of the other system.


But what testimony can be more eloquent than the lamenta-
tions of our most distinguished practical workers, at their not
having been blessed with the benefit of education in early life ?
What more touching than their struggles, what more worthy of
respect than the spirit of enquiry and perseverance by which
they were animated? what more convincing than the care they
took and the expense they incurred to secure for their children that
early instruction the want of which was by them so feelingly
deplored ? However profitable it might be to exhibit instances
of this, displaying in almost every variety of form, intelligence,
strength of character, firmness of purpose, frugality, intense
sensitiveness, and many a manly virtue —such would be more
suitable for another occasion.
It is not to be imagined that those invited to give their sup-
port to this institution are to be stirred solely by appeals to self-
interest, or by an exposition of the fallacies of obsolete preju-
dices. Members of an intelligent community when in search of
reasons to guide them at such a juncture will look back upon
the experience of the past to guide their actions, forward for a
motive for their conduct.
How, there is in history, perhaps, nothing more deserving
attentive consideration from the point of view we are now
regarding it than the astonishing impulse given to all the indus-
trial and mechanical arts since the beginning of the present cen-
tury. That this is to be ascribed in some degree to the increase
of population and the very augmentation of wealth which redu-
plicates itself, is true ; nevertheless far the greater portion of the
prosperity is due to the improved means of intercourse, the dis-
coveries painfully elaborated by means of the singular intel-
lectual activity of the age, the spirit of inquiry, and the bold
and persevering researches of scientific men. While nothing is
so truly surprising as to observe the rapidity of development of
several of these grand implements of pacific revolution swelling
from the tiny nucleus which was seen on our own horizon to the
gigantic proportions which they have already assumed.
Chemistry, enfranchised from the superstitious trammels of


alchemy, had moved forward for some time with halting steps
and slow; but it is within our own day, so to speak, that she has
enlisted the services of those utilitarian workers, unnecessary to
enumerate by name here, who investigated the mysteries of
nature, evolved from inert matter a host of elementary sub-
stances, the existence of which as such was unsuspected before,
capable of forming new alliances, and in simple compound or
allotropic forms delighting us by the unexpected nature and
energy of their action, their usefulness, and their beauty. Opera-
tions in most of the industrial arts, including the cultivation of
the soil, where now conducted upon true principles of economy,
are largely indebted to the discoveries of chemists, and it is well
known that some, productive of no inconsiderable gains, could
not be worked profitably but for the appliances thus obtained.
At the same time, in the more speculative walks of science, it is
with her help that astronomers, now learned in the laws which
govern the composition and relations of the rays of light, and
using the spectro-scope, are enabled to determine the primary
constituents of planets which lie beyond the limits of space
reached by the best optical instruments employed by their
immediate predecessors.
Electricity, but recently deemed a pursuit only for the amuse-
ment of the curious, has been enlisted as an additional servant,
obedient to man’s behests, and exhibits its tractability to perform
offices of the most various kinds. The years 1793-4 witnessed
the contention between Gralvani and Volta',* which established
the distinction between animal and contact electricity, and now
we hear of electro-magnetism, diamagnetism, magneto-electricity,
magno-crystallic action, diamagnetic polarity, and hundreds of
other wondrous things which wait on Dr. Tennant like attendant
Ariels on the magician Prospero. The electric light irradiates
the blackness of darkness with its peculiar effulgence. The
* Gralvani attributed the contraction of the muscles of the frogs’legs to
anima l electricity. T olta accounted for the phenomenon by the contact of
the heterogenous metals, zinc. &c., with the muscles. Galvani replied by
showing that the contraction may be produced without metals. Yolta re-
torted by producing electricity without frogs.


telegraph wires, conveyed by land and under the sea for hundreds
of thousands of miles, flash messages everywhere —already almost
round the globe —a circuit which it is expected will be complete
in less than three years; and powerful magneto-electric machines
worked by steam generate heat which yields a current of electricity
used to produce a chemical change in the precious metals, and de-
posit gold and silver on moulds with a delicacy and precision in-
capable of achievement by the hands of the most practised goldsmith.
Steam, substituted for the uncertain powers of water and wind,
and for the muscle, sinew, and nerve of man and beast, saved from
waste, or called from a dormant state into existence as a labour
agent, and directed at will,now accomplishes more work than could
be performed by the united operation of the adult male members
of the human race; and the daily growth of perfection in the
construction of machinery, as also the adaptationand adjustment of
each kind to its special duty, so augments the power of production,
in a ratio of such velocity, as to set completely at defiance the sobriety
of calculation of what it may reach within the next fifty years.
Or take the advance of engineering science in the improvement
of means of locomotion, from the canals of Brindley, Bennie, and
Telford, to the railroads which now traverse continents, scale
mountain ranges on gradients, within our memory deemed im-
practicable,* perforate Alps through tunnels excavated by methods
of applying the forces of water and of air, as new as they have
proved effectual. It may be observed incidentally that this pro-
cess is now being worked at Walhallah, near the Tangil mines of
Gripps Land. Also to cross straits and rivers by such bridges as
those of Menai, of Montreal, of Briburg, of Niagara, or valleys
by such viaducts as the Indre, Nogent Sur Marne, or of Congle-
ton, or our own highly creditable Moorabool, only 66 feet shorter
than the great wrought-iron tubular Britannia bridge.!
* The Semmering between Gratz and Vienna, 1 in 40 ; the Bohr Ghaut,
between Bombay and Poonah, 1 in 37 ; the Blue Mountains, between Sydney
and Bathurst, 1 in 30 ; Mont Cennis, 1 in 13.
fl. Menai, 570 feet long, feet above the water; 2. Britannia, 1488 do.,
do.; 3. Montreal, 6592 do., do.; 4. Priburg, 880 do., 180 do.; 5. Niagara,
800 do., 350 do.; 6. Indre, 2463 do.; 7. Nogent S.M., 2722 do.; 8. Congleton,
2870 do.; 9. Moorabool, 1426 do.


Or consider the progress made in providing for means of
accelerated intercourse on the ocean, the highway of nations,
from 1802, when the first steam-tug was launched on the Clyde,
and compare her lilliputian apparatus with the engines used in
many a Cornish mine, or those which worked the pumps, with
cylinders 144 inches in circumference, employed to drain the
lake of Haarlem, Or contrast the first steam passenger vessel,
the “ Comet,” which plied on the same river in 1812, with the
“ Great Eastern,” 619 feet long, or 87 feet longer than St. Peter’s
at Pome, registering 18,914 tons, with a capacity of 25,000, built
of iron, a species of engineering Cosmos, containing within her-
self an example of almost every improvement in construction
known when she was built, moving through the water under two
independent systems of propulsion, paddle-wheels and screw, of
the power equal to the combined strength of 8400 horses, as
large, in fact, as 300 vessels of the size of that in which Chris-
topher Columbus ventured to cross the Atlantic.
A leap like this is almost as great as was accomplished in naval
architecture in three thousand years, from the launching of the
good ship Argo ”i to that of the “ Comet.”
1 The Argo is described as a penteconteros, propelled by 50 oars ; she
carried 50 heroes, as some authors say, or 100 according to others. ’ The
pseudo-Orpheus* sings, that after Jason had taken the golden fleece he passed
up the Tanais, and the ship was transported by land to the head waters of a
river which flowed into the Baltic. Hence she made her way through the
German Ocean by Ireland to the Straits of Gibraltar, and up the Mediterra-
nean to her port of departure. She must thus have been of light construction,
and a tolerably good sea boat. Othersf tell us she returned bv the Southern
Ocean, which, to meet the exigencies of that version, flowed from the Red
Sea across what is now the dry land of Northern Africa. Prose Authors,]; to
whom of course the least credit is given, suggest as likely that she came back
the way she went. Unravelling the meaning of traditions, respective events
said to have happened about a generation before the siege of Troy, may
amuse antiquarians and perplex historians, but is not very profitable to us.
Still you may be detained for a moment, as one of the interpretations of the
objects and results of this expedition goes to show the antiquity of one of the
contrivances employed in gold-washing ; and that it has been perpetuated by
the like means and by artificial substitutes amongst various people, separated
from each other by distances of time and space. We may suppose that the
people of Colchis were in the habit of collecting the particles of fine gold
washed down from the Caucasus by placing sheepskins in the stream, as is
now done in fcouth America by using ox-hides for that purpose; or as it is
. *° f 'T ay Bunking are also Timaeus and Seymnus of Chios,
t Pindar, Pythic Ode 4. + Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus.


No attempt is made in this cursory retrospect to present to
you anything not known to all of you. My desire is to suggest
done daily at every quartz claim here by placing baize or blankets on your
shaking-tables or ripple-boxes, to the pile or filaments of which the laminated
gold adheres. The strictness with which they preserved the secret, and the
jealousy with which they protected their treasure, may account for the fable
of the golden fleece guarded by dragons. Chrysomalius, the gigantic ram,
engendered by the god Neptune and Theophane, daughter of Brisaltis, King
of the Island of Cremissa, may then be sobered down to a sagacious old
gentleman who combined the operations of sheep-farmer and alluvial digger
—who depastured his numerous flocks on the banks of the Phasis, between
Trebizond and the Straits of Kertch; and turned his fleeces to a double pur-
pose —subject, nevertheless, to the royalty imposed by King Aectes; that
Jason, a buccaneering young Greek, invaded the country, and contrived to
outwit the monarch, eased him of his two chief staples of export, wool and
gold, eloping at the same time with his daughter, the fair enchanttess Medea.
Another instance of the similarity of the method of mining in ancient times
and in modern days, when resort is had to simple means unaided by scientific
appliances, is furnished by Monsieur Caillaud, the persevering mineralogist,
who recently discovered the famous emerald mines of Mount Zeborah, in the
isthmus which separates the Nile from the Ked Sea; and confirms in all res-
pects the testimony of Strabo and other writers. Worked during the
dynasty of the Ptolemies more than 2000 years ago, excavations following the
veins of mica, talc, and schist, were driven for many hundred yards into the
granite mountain. Subterranean canals, huge causeways, and other massive
structures, show on what an extensive scale, and on what rude and unin-
formed principles, the work was carried on. It would seem that, the opera-
tions were suspended, and the miners withdrawn suddenly; from what cause
is unknown (not improbably from a panic fear of ghins, ghouls, or evil genii
entertained by the superstitious workmen), for ropes, baskets, levers, grinding
stones, vases, lamps, tools, and utensils, in all respects like those in use by the
Arabs of the present time, were found lying about as though the owners had
retired five minutes before these implements were found.
The Latin version of the portion of the Argonautica of the pseudo Orpheus
relating to this ( ineert. auct.), is given:—
Inde sub Arctois angusto rapta meatu,
Finibus oceanum versus prolabitur Argo,
Defessi noctesque novem, e totidem quoque soles
Linquimus bine atque hinc ignotas nomine gentes,
******
Atque übi diva diem jam clarum Aurora revexit
Ehiphaeas valles attingimus, inde repente
Prosilit angusti puppis per littora ponti, ,
Oceanumque intrat, Saturnius ipse vocatur
Pontus Hyperboreis a gentibus, et mare mortuum,
Unde etiam lethum fugiendi nulla fuit spes,
Ni puppim validis Ancaeus viribus actam,
Innixus pulchra temonibus arte dolatis,
Dextra coegisset cursum per littora ferre.
* * * * *
* *
At multa Ancaeus temonem dirigit arte,
Insulaque ante omnes offertur lernis, et Argo
Insequitur metuens atram non stulta procellam,
Nelaque franguntur.


by this brief recapitulation an idea which arises out of it. Each
of these sciences, with many others to which no allusion has been
made, are the willing handmaidens of the art of mining. Know-
ledge of the suitable locality in which to sink your shafts, and of
the direction in which to push your drives—how to support them
with due regard to economy and safety in working them, to
drainage, lighting, ventilation, and the precautions for the pre-
servation of health and life, the expulsion of foreign substances
which detract from the value of the ore and interfere with the
direct action of your quicksilver on gold, or of the fluxes and re-
agents employed for refining other minerals, even the means of
speedy carriage to the port of departure and transit to the
ultimate market —concerns you all; and though it may not enter
into the calculation of the gentlemen who with such eagerness
ply their vocation in the sale of scrip at your “ Corner,” igno-
rance, or the misapplication of ill-digested science in the elabora-
tion of any one of the stages of the lengthened series of opera-
tions, may make a sensible difference in the actual tangible
amount of the dividend promised when you associate yourself
with the latest “ floated ” company, professing to be conducted
on the most approved scientific principles.
We have glided so imperceptibly into the enjoyment of many
advantages, comforts, and luxuries, the offspring of these dis-
coveries—we have familiarised ourselves so complacently with
the results—that we do not fatigue our minds to investigate how
these results have been brought about; nor do we reflect as
attentively as we should do as to what the future of this country
is to be, and how those who succeed us must acquit themselves.
Our most accomplished geologists assure us that the area of
auriferous drift is far from having been yet explored ; that the
extent of gold-bearing rocks is wholly unknown; that the depth
to which they may be profitably worked is still undetermined;
that unmistakable indications announce the presence of other
minerals of no mean value; while the natural products already
so abundantly cultivated, and those capable of bearing acclimati-
sation, display unbounded resources to employ industry, and for


manufactures demanding a higher order of scientific and technical
instruction than has been hitherto available for their judicious
development. For it is not by wrestling against the inflexible
laws of nature, which compel the industry of man to conform to
the conditions of soil and climate, and the limits of his own
knowledge ; nor by ill-advised competition with the capital of
older communities, employed under circumstances which give it
an overwhelming superiority ; nor by a contest with the stubborn
principles of political economy, that we can expect to establish
the permanent prosperity of our adopted land.
We are not, even in our time, satisfied to import the discoveries
of others, and to invite the man of science and the skilled artisan
to direct their operations. Australia can point with a modest
satisfaction to the invention of Osborne in photo-lithography,
and the test for blood by Dr. Day; to the cure for snake-bite by
Professor Halford ; to the method of removing pyrites, that in-
veterate enemy of the metallurgist, as well as the native alloys
from gold, and toughening the metal by the use of chlorine gas,
by Mr. Miller, of the Sydney Mint; to the scientific preservation
of the meat of our redundant flocks and herds, so largely ex-
ported ; and also to many others, mention of which would detain
you too long, the omission to specify which will be pardoned, and
not deemed invidious by the able and zealous men to whom the
community is so much indebted.
Far be it from me to depreciate the benefits to be derived from
sitting at the feet of those great masters who instruct mankind
in Europe, or to underrate the incalculable advantages to be
gained by travel in expanding the mind, making it receive readily,
almost involuntarily, impressions of the most improving descrip-
tion. Still, it is not to be supposed that parents will sever them-
selves from their children, or that they can afford to incur the
risks and expense of educating their sons in another hemisphere,
when it is possible to procure for them, all things considered, a
good training in this busy human hive ; where, in the midst of
mines, factories, and workshops, with gifted operatives in every
branch of every trade at hand, opportunities for the technical
44


illustration of every department of theory exist, such as it is rare
indeed, if not impossible, to find assembled in any other spot in
such close proximity. We should not, then, ungraciously under-
estimate the faculties of our young men, and deem them in-
capable of holding their ground with their own relatives resident
in the countries from which we have come. We should not act
towards them in a manner at once ungracious and unjust, by
denying them means to prove their ability and to try their con-
stancy.
As the ranks of the learned professions become more densely
filled, other sources of equally useful and honourable employ-
ment must be sought for those who come after. Your surveyors,
your engineers, your architects, must be called into existence
here, and the time will come when Victoria may, with pride,
address to her own sons the mandate—
“ Bid harbours open, public ways extend,
Bid temples worthier of Grod ascend,
Bid the broad arch the dangerous flood contain,
The mole projected break the roaring main,
Back to his bounds their subject sea command,
And roll obedient rivers through the land.”
Let those, then, who desire that such things should be, come to
the front, and with good will and open hand support your school.
It is not my intention to delay you by dilating on the detail
of the course of study to be pursued here, already mapped out
with much discernment from those of the great schools of
Europe, our safest guides. You would not, however, excuse a
neglect to acknowledge gratefully the obligation we are under to
the eminent geologist, Sir Roderick Murchison, the venerable
director of the Jermyn-street School of Mines, for the advice with
which he has kindly favoured us, and the donation of books which
form so acceptable a contribution to our library. That he should
express, as he has done, a lively interest in the formation and
success of this school is natural, when so many references are
being constantly made by him to the geology, natural history,
and peculiar characteristics of this portion of the globe. In his
address to the Royal Geographical Society in May, 1868, he
made especial allusion to the subject when passing on Sir Charles


Lemon (a name honoured by every true Cornishman) a well-
deserved eulogium, of whom he says: —“ In a word, no man of
my time was ever more generally respected and beloved and
adds —“ in the year 1846, being president of the Eoyal Greo-
logical Society of Cornwall, he invited me, his guest, to attend
an anniversary meeting of that body, and say something which
might give encouragement to the tin-miners, who were at the
time in a suffering state, and many of them out of work. It was
then —referring to what I had been speculating upon in our
own society and at other places in the two previous years, as to
the auriferous character of the Australian rocks when compared
to those of the Ural Mountains —that I ventured to counsel
these tin-miners to emigrate to Australia and dig for gold. Some
of them took my advice, and in 1848 I was in possession of small
specimens of ore sent home by them. Thereon I took more
courage, and warned her Majesty’s Government of the great
event which was about to be fulfilled. I will only add that the
so mis-called discovery of gold, i.e ., the diggings on a profitable
scale, were not opened out till 1851, and that my much earlier
letter to the Colonial Secretary is printed in the Blue Book on Gold.”
Having, as it is my apprehension, already trenched too largely
on your indulgence, you will allow me, in conclusion, to add that
there is one principle which cannot be too forcibly recommended
to you, in the value of which the rational concurrence of the
council may be expected. It is, that the standard of the educa-
tion to be given in the school be fixed sufficiently high at first,
and kept up, unrelaxed by a too ready compliance with ill-judged
solicitation or remonstrance. You are aware that the teaching
is to be special —of a nature to unfold the most active faculties
of the pupil’s mind —not by dwelling exclusively on the ideas of
others, but by enlarging the circle of his own thoughts, and
inculcating an habitual self reliance. The teaching must there-
fore be thorough and honest, or it may not only be useless, but
mischievous and dangerous.
We charge ourselves with the training of young men, to whom
may eventually be entrusted the expenditure of considerable


sums in preliminary inquiries and trials, on which wall depend
the investment of capital (to form, perhaps, in some instances,
the source of maintenance for persons who cannot labour), the
preservation of property liable to injury or destruction, the
winning of minerals under circumstances of uncertain and unex-
pected danger, and who will consequently be responsible for the
safety of the lives of many human beings. Such training is
different in quality from that in other schools, in which the pre-
cision exacted by physical science is not enforced. There are no
degrees of mathematical accuracy—the results must be correct,
or they are wholly vicious. Moreover, the admixture of subjects,
practical and theoretical, to be taught here will have a peculiar
use in enabling you to resist any such attempts—the pupils
hand will be busied in forwarding the improvement of his under-
standing. When employed in tracing, fitting, moulding, verify-
ing, and putting together the parts of machinery, in making
drawings, working plans, &c., calculating quantities, he will have
to think out the process by which he directs the instruments he
uses, in a manner very different, on the one hand, from committ-
ing to memory languages or the theories of philosophers; on the
other, from the traditionary practice of the hereditary artisan.
Facilities will be thus afforded for testing the soundness of his
work at every stage of his advance. This will, to a great extent,
correct the unwholesome system of “ cramming.” This will show
those who imagine that loading the memory with dates, events,
maxims, and rules will suffice, that something beyond a super-
ficial varnish of accomplishments is expected here, and that, as
vhen they become professional men it will be required of them
that they will not permit vamping or scamping of work to pass
with their approval, so it is their duty now to prepare themselves
for the discharge of those responsible functions by a faithful
devotion to the course of teaching laid down for them here.
Another feature in this school fortifies the position you may
assume. There will be, as it strikes me, something eminently
agreeable to the well-constituted mind of a youth who is to
attend this school, to behold the full-grown man—perhaps father


of a son of his years—applying himself after the exhausting
labours of the day to the drudgery of self-improyement. If any-
thing can be conceived more likely than another to arouse the
indolent, to abash the trifler, to restrain the irregular, to en-
courage the diffident, to stimulate the ardent, it should be such a
prospect —manhood voluntarily placing itself under the ferule,
and labouring by the voluntary cultivation of the intellect to
make itself more useful, more trustworthy, more respected. If
there be anything more than another more likely to instil into
your young men that reverential feeling towards their parents,
and to cherish a due regard for the feelings, the wishes, and the
affections of their seniors, without which virtues whatever
be the material wealth of the country it will not be fit to live in
—it is this; if there be anything more likely than another to
make them sensible of the wisdom of your strictness and the
justice of your severity—it is this. Better for them that our
young men should be warned betimes of their inaptitude for the
profession they seek to join, by reason of want of capacity,
or power of sustained attention which is to qualify them, so that
they may fit themselves for some more congenial occupation,
than that they should be permitted to lounge through your
school empowered to practice on public credulity under the
colour of your certificate.
When Kapoleon I. decreed that a university should be estab-
lished, he proclaimed, “ The Emperor wants a body whose teach-
ing may be free from the influence of the passing gusts of
fashion —a body that may be kept moving even though the
Government be lethargic.” It is not for us in the modesty of
our humble efforts to promulgate such a manifesto ; but we may
remind ourselves that all who feel an interest in the success of
this school, and look forward hopefully to its sending out in full-
ness of time a band of well-educated professional men, expect
that the of proficiency once established will not be
lowered without substantial reason ; also, that such improve-
ments in the system as may be suggested by the intelligence of
others, or dictated by our own experience, be adopted without


delay. The cautions reiterated on this head by many persons
competent to offer unprejudiced comments have been numerous ;
to multiply quotations would be superfluous, when the principles
accord so completely with common sense. It is right, therefore,
at the outset, to dispel any expectation which may be entertained
by the pupils that the standard of qualification is to fluctuate
according to the scale of their shortcomings. The announcement
will be the best means of inspiring them to do what is demanded
of them.
It is well also to remember that in cases of imperfect training
under a system tolerated by supine administration and weak con-
cessions, the discredit will not fall exclusively on the pupil :
much will be expected from our teachers, much must be left to
our examiners, in whose firmness and discrimination faith must
be reposed —a faith which ought not to be lightly shaken. Much
will depend on the council of directors you proceed to elect
to-night. If it be not unbecoming me to say so, the assurance
given by the ability with which the provisional administration has
been conducted, justifies me in expressing a belief that the gentle-
men who.are to become the objects of your choice will enter office
convinced of their responsibility, and determined to do their duty.
If, then, these precautions being taken, our efforts be crowned
by the success we invoke—to the reputation for enterprise and
energy in acquiring wealth, as well as for liberality in applying
it to the worthiest uses, which was won by your Maiden Citv
before the recently-conferred honours were bestowed upon her,
you will add the cre'dit of founding an institution calculated to
meet a peculiar want of the country and of the age. You will
thus elevate her to the level of those venerable seats of learning
which, though wanting in many of the natural sources of material
prosperity which exist on the surface of the soil around us, and
altogether destitute of those found in the earth beneath our feet,
are rescued from geographical insignificance and obscurity, and
deserve an honourable pre-eminence by reason of the encourage-
ment they afford to literature and to arts of that becoming order
which lend a grace to life.


(COPY.)
Jehmyn Street, London,
March VSth, 1870.
Mr Dear Sir Redmond, —
I was much pleased to receive your letter of the 4th January,
in which you do me justice in stating that I took especial interest in the
Mineral Branch of the Victorian Department of the Great Exhibition here
in 1862, and I willingly accede to your request —to give you my opinion
regarding the best system to be adopted in the establishment of a new Mining
School at Ballaarat, in Victoria.
I think that with a slight addition and a certain modification the curricu-
lum of studies here may be very efficiently applied to your colony ; but you
must add to the studies Elementary Mathematics, or at all events Arithmetic,
Algebra, and Trigonometry, which we presume to be acquired by our students
prior to their admission.
In a mining colony like Victoria I think that Surveying, both above and
below ground, might with advantage be substituted for a course of Natural
History ; for Geology, including Palaeontology and Mineralogy, as well as
Metallurgy, being taught, pure Zoology is scarcely called for in your Ballaarat
school. Ido not see that this curriculum need in any way interfere with tDe
University at Melbourne.
I send you by this packet whatever books are at my disposal, which are tew
in number, as our Government limits presentation and authors’ copies to fitly
for the world at large.
I remain,
My dear Sir Redmond,
Yours most faithfully,
(Signed) ROD. MURCHISON.
To Sir Redmond Barky


Borough Council, Ballaarat West, ...
S. L. Learmonth, Esq.,
Hon. John Gumming,
Hon. John Gumming,
Chines Borough Council
Ballaarat Shire Council
|ust of Subscribers.
Francis Summers, Esq.,
Thomas 1). Wanliss, Esq., ...
His Honor J. W. Rogers
Robert Lewis, Esq. ...
.1. M. Bickett, Esq., M.M.B.
F. C. Downes, Esq., C.M.8....
Robert Lamb, Esq., M.M.B.
W. L. Jones, Esq., M.M.B. ...
Andrew M‘Donell, Esq., M.M.B
Edward Nettle, Esq., M.M.B.
James Eddy, Esq., M.M.B. ...
Isaac Wheeldon, Esq., M.M.B.
E. J. Croker, Esq., M.M.B.
Henry Elmslie, Esq., M.M.B.
Harrie Wood, Esq., ...
Walter Cotchett, Esq.,
J. P. Usher, Esq.,
Hon. Phillip Russell,...
Andrew Anderson, Esq.,
William Robertson, Esq.,
Band of Hope and Albion Consols ...
Robert Gibbs, Esq., ...
James M‘Dowall, Esq.,
R. W. Newman, Esq.,
Thomas Gray, Esq.,
H, R. Caselli, Esq., ...
L. S. Christie, E5q.,...
Thomas Whitelaw, Esq.,
C. S. Reeves, Esq., ...
H. B. De la Poer Wall, Esq.,
Edwin Trenerry, Esq.,
Parkyn Lee, Esq., ...
R. M. Serjeant, Esq.,
Charles Wale Sherrard, Esq.,
A. H. King, Esq.,
Robert Davidson, Esq., (valuable service
rendered as Architect ...
Donation £lOO 0 0
Life Governor 50 0 0
Donation 20 0 0
Annual Governor 3 3 0
Donation 10 0 0
„ 10 0 0
10 0 o
„5 0 0
Annual Governor 3 3 0
3 3 0
„3 3 0
„3 3 0
„3 3 0
3 3 0
3 3 0
3 3 0
3 3 0
3 3 0
3 3 0
3 3 0
3 3 0
„3 3 0
3 3 0
3 3 0
3 3 0
„3 3 0
„3 3 0
„3 3 0
3 3 0
„3 3 0
3 3 0
„3 3 0
3 3 0
„3 3 0
„3 3 0
„3 3 0
3 3 0
„ .330
„3 3 0
3 3 0
Annual Subscriber
110
Annual Governor
51


Page
Chap.
Sec.
Office Bearers
5
Constitution —...
... 7
i.-viii.
When Adopted
... 14
Of Objects ...
7
i.
1, 2-
Of Government
7
ii.
1-15
Of Trustees ...
... 10
iii.
1, 2.
Of Governors and Subscribers
... 11
iv.
1-6.
Of Honorary Governors...
... 12
iv.
6.
Of Professors, Masters, &c.
... 12
V.
1-5.
Of Pupils
... 13
vi.
1-4.
Of Certificates
... 14
vii.
1-5.
Of Name or Title
... 14
viii.
Statutes —
... 15
When Adopted
... 20
1-9.
Of Councils ...
... 15
Of the Seal...
... 16
ii.
Of Terms ...
... 17
iii.
Of the Proctorial Board...
... 17
iv.
1-6.
Of the Registrar
... 17
V.
Of Curator ...
... 18
vi.
Of Certificates
l
... 18
vii.
1-8
Of Meetings, Governors, &c.
... 19
viii.
1-5.
Of Prizes
- ... 20
ix.
Regulations foe Examinations
... 21
When Adopted
... 28
1.
For Entrance
... 21
For Surveying
... 21
2.
For Assaying
22
3.
For Chemistry
22
4.
For Mining Engineer ...
22
5.
Inaugural Address
... 29-49
Letter from Sib Roderick Murchison
50
Subscription List
... 51-
| litre*.
