

f~- 6 o
COMMONWEALTH BILL.
ANTI-BILLITES AT MOUNT MORGAN.
SPEECHES BY MESSES-
0 LET IS,
KIDSTON AND STEWAET.
A meeting under flife auspices of the An ti-
Commonwealth Bill League was held in the
School of Arts, Mount Morgan, on the 18th
instant. Dr. A. C. Mackenzie Occupied the
chair, and the building was filled through-
out. In addition to the speakers there
were also on the platform Messrs. J. H.
Lundager, T. Wightman, Sutton, C. Homan,
and E. W. Keily,
The CHAIRMAN said the Mount Morgan
Federation League had laid before the com-
munity many reasons which, to the mind of
that League, were sufficient to induce the
Mount Morgan people to vote for the adop-
tion of the Commonwealth Bill as it stood
at present, but as reasonable beings they
naturally wanted to hear both sides of the
question. With that end in view Messrs.
G. S. Curtis, W. Kidston, and J. C. Stewart,
MM.L.A., representatives of Rockhampton
and Rockhampton North respectively, and
members of the Anti-Commonwealth Bill
League, had come up to Mount Morgan to
address the electors and lay before them
some very cogent reasons why Queensland
should not accept that Bill as it stood at
present. He would first call on Mr. Kid-
ston.
to give the matter the very fullest considera-
tion before entering upon such a bargain.
While the bill might be readily understood
by any ordinarily intelligent man, yet the
consequences of the bill were so far reach-
ing and so complicated, and the advantages
and disadvantages were so varied that men
equally intelligent might well come to have
different opinions about the matter. For
that reason he did not think any good pur-
pose would be served by calling names over
a matter of this sort. They might, as
Bishop Daiwes had told them, be narrow-
minded provinteialists and lacking in ordi-
nary (intelligence ; but that kind of talk
affected the truth of the matter no more
than the talk of a drunken man at a street
corner.
(Mot Anti-federalists but Anti-billites.
The first point he wished to make
clear was this, that the question they were
discussing that night was not whether fede-
ration would be a good thing for the Aus-
tralian colonies or not. Most of them were
ardent federalists. He himself had been
a federalist ever since he came to Australia
seventeen or eighteen years ag'o. (Ap-
plause.) The question before them that
night was simply this. Whether the Con-
stitution Bill was such that they should
accept it, or whether it would be wiser to
reject it.
MR. KIDSTON’S SPEECH.
Mr. KIDSTON, who was received with
applause, said he had come with Messrs.
Stewart and Curtis to discuss with the
Mount Morgan electors whether they
should accept the Cbmonwealth Bill. The
question was one of such great importance
as to merit the very fullest considera-
tion and discussion. If they accepted
the bill they entered into a bar-
gain that they could not get out
of again if they found they did not like it,
(Hear, hear.) Therefore it would be wise
Federalists at Any Price.
There were some people who seemed (to
have allowed their imaginations to run
away with their judgments on this ques-
tion. These people were described as being
federalists at any price. He was not a
federalist at any price. But a federalist
who believed it was. their duty to


closely scrutinise the bill, and if they amusing if one only paused a mo-
saw " a chance of making it better ment and remembered the previous records
and more adapted to their circum-
stances to use their best efforts to that end
before accepting it. It was surely mu°h
wiser for the electors to closely scrutinise
ithe bill now than to blindly and hastily
rush into an indissoluable partnership of
this kind, and find out when too late that
they had made a ruinous and irredeemable
mistake. These federalists at any price
would have accepted the constitution as it
was framed by the Convention of 1891. a
constitution that was now admitted on all
hands to be defective in many important
particulars. They must remember that those
men who refused to accept the constitution
of 1891 and also that of 1898 made it pos-
sible for Australia to get a better constitu-
tion. (Applause.) That was what they
wanted to do in this case —(hear, hear)
to make it possible by rejecting this bill on
the 2nd of September to get a better bill.
(Applause.) Of course it was admitted by
both friends and opponents of the bill that
there were many advantages in the bill and
many admirable features in it. On the
other it was admitted there were many
faults in the bill. As federalists lie said
that if those faults were merely matters of
detail, then he considered it would be their
duty to recognise that they would not per-
haps get a perfect bill and to accept it with
many lesser faults. But if they found the
faults in the bill were such as to threaten
the very vitals of democracy, then it was
their duty to reject the bill. (Applause.)
For instance, suppose the Government
brought in a. bill to give them One-man one-
vote, and included in that bill a stipulation
that Parliament should be elected every ten
years instead of every three years
—then he would oppose such a bill. (Mr.
Lundager; “Certainly.”) He might be said
then to be opposing One-man one-vote. Of
course he would oppose it, because it was
mixed up with something which would take
away the advantage of One-man, one-vote.
It was the same with this constitution.
A Fatal Blot.
There was a fatal blot in this constitution
which, so far as progressive democracy wa;s
concerned, would do away, and more than
do away, with all the advantages of the bill.
and for that reason it was his duty to seek
to have the bill rejected. They
had been hearing a great deal of
talk about democracy lately. It was
of those men who were now gushing over
with democratic sentiment. (Laughter.)
There were the Hon. John Ferguson, Mr.
Charles Hardie Buzacott, Mr. John Murray,
and Mr. B. V. Reid going about the country
and asking the electors to accept this bill
because it was so democratic. (Laughter
and applause.) But t was a very simple
kind of bird that would be caught by such
empty chaff. Democracy meant this —
government by. the people. It did not matter
how liberal the provisions of any particular
measure aught (be, if it did not tend to give
the people a more direct and immediate
control of their own affairs it was not de-
mocratic. (Hear, hepr.)
Two Essentials.
For the effective and good govern-
ment of an immense territory like
Australia he considered that two
things were essential. The first of these
was a strong Central Government. The
second was provision for subdivision of the
present large and unwieldly colonies wher-
ever the population and general conditions
of the particular districts warranted them
in being entrusted with the management of
their own local affairs. (Hear, hear.) The
first of these things—the creation of a
strong Central Government for Australia; —
was not necessarily democratic. They
might have an absolute despotism in Aus-
tralia and a strong Central Government.
Where the democracy came in was in giving
them more immediate and more effoctree
control of their own local affairs. Now this
constitution which we were asked to accept
did provide for the establishment of
a strong Central Government in Australia,
but he emphatically declared that it did
not provide for the giving of effective con-
trol over their own local affairs or for the
proper development of that principle in the
future. (Hear, hear.) This blot in the
bill dealt an invidious (but none the less
deadly IbHotw at anything like democratic
progress in Australia. (Hear, hear.)
Comparison With Other Federations.
The advocates of the hill pointed out
how successful the four great federations
of Switzerland, Germany, the United States,
and Canada had been. Now, when they
carefully considered the political condi ion
of those four countries what was the one
great feature common to them all, and
which was clearly seen to he the root of so
2


much of their success ? It was this. The solely in the discretion of the Federal Par-
number of small self-governing states in f o
which each of them was divided. (Hear,
hear.) That was the vital democraticising
element in the constitution of each of
those federations. Let them take Swit-
zerland. It was a small country of 16,000
square miles. The whole Swiss federation
was included in that, and it was divided
into twenty-two self-governing states. Ger-
many had an area of 211,000 square miles,
The great federation of Germany was in-
cluded in an area less than that of CentreJ
Queensland and was divided into twenty-
five self-governing states. (A voice: “What
about the population ?”) The population
of Germany was considerably more than
Central Queensland as yet. (Laughter and
applause.) They must remember that this
constitution which they were discussing was
not a constitution for next week or for next
year, but it was a constitution for ever, and
was indissoluble. (Applause.) The
thirteen states which originally formed
themselves together into the United States
of America —putting the thirteen together—
were just the size of New South Wales —
namely, 312,000 square miles. The area of
the seven self-govening provinces of Canada
was 822,000 square miles. That is, the
whole seven of them put together were a
little larger than Queensland and a litt’e
smaller than South Australia. Now the
immense territory of Australia, amounting
to 2,946,691 square miles, was at present
divided into five great unwieldly colonies,
and the great blot in this bill from a demo-
crative and progressive point of view was
that it not only made no provision for any
needful and healthy subdivision, but actu-
ally placed an insuperable bar in the way of
all progress by placing the power of sub-
division exclusively in the hands of the
people who would be interested in prevent-
ing that subdivision. (Hear, hear.)
Federal Parlament Could Not Alter It.
And the worst feature of the matter was
that, however objectionable or hurtful the
123rd cluause was found to be, yet the
whole Federal Parliament could not alter
it. There was a gentleman in Rock-
hampton the other day speaking
to a young men’s meeting. H?
evidently thought they were very young
men. (Laughter.) This gentleman denied
what he (Mr. Kidston) had just stated.
This gentleman said that the 123rd clause
of the Constitution Bill could be altered
Lament. (Mr. Stewart; “Nothing of the
kind could happen.”) That was a clear
statement that had been made. It was not
a matter of opinion but a matter of fact.
He (Mr. Kidston) thought that any boy of
fourteen years of age who would take the
trouble to- read the Constitution Bill for
himself could tell them differently. This
was what the constitution said about the
matter itself. The 127th clause of the
Commonwealth Bill made provision for the
alteration of the constitution, and this was
what it said: —“No alteration increas'ng,
diminishing, or otherwise altering the limits
of the state, or in any manner affecting the
provisions of the Constitution in relation
thereto shall become law unless the ma-
jority of the electors voting in that State
approve of the proposed law.” Nothing
could be plainer and clearer than that. If
they entered the Federation under that
Commonwealth Bill then no subdivision of
Queensland could take place unless the ma-
jority of the electors of Queensland
voted for such subdivision taking
place. (A voice : “ How could it be done
then ? ) He would ask that gentleman
not to try to mix up two questions. Mix-
ing up two questions did not tend to settle
either of them. He would take the ques-
tions one by one. He asserted that in
entering the Federation under this bill it
was impossible without a revolution or
without a violation of the constitution to
divide Queensland into two or three states
without the consent of the majority of
(A voice: “The majoritv
™ust rule.”) That statement that the
H3rd clause could be altered at the discre-
tion of the Federal Parliament was made
loi a purpose. It was made to induce them
to accept the bill in the hope that if they
accepted it they could appeal to the Fede-
lal Parliament and have this obnoxious
clause altered. (A voice: “No.”) When
they found a member of the Legislative
Council of Queensland, a gentleman who
was leading the crusade in favour of the
Commonwealth Bill in Rockhampton, who
was the mouthpiece— so far as he (Mr. Kid-
ston) could make out-of the billites hi
Rockhampton, when they found him mak-
ing a statement of this kind that was so
manifestly and so transparently at variance
with the facts of the case, what else could
he do but suppose that this gentleman made
this misstatement for that purpose. Not
only had the Federal Parliament no power
3


to subdivide Queensland under this consti- doubtless, knew of the enormous financial
tution, but if every Parliament in Aus-
tralia, if every elector in South Australia,
New South Wales, Victoria, and Tasmania
and every elector in Central and Northern
Queensland voted for such an alteration in
the constitution, it would be of no effect.
Someone talked just before about the ma-
joity rule. That was majority rule for
them. (Applause.) If they were going into
the federation they should let the federa-
tion rule this matter. (Applaulse.) If such
a provision had been in the con-
stitution of New South Wales fifty years
ago would Victoria have got Separation ?
Would Moreton Bay have got Separation ?
They knew that the people of New South
Wales fifty years ago opposed Separation
to the utmost of their power, and it
was only the intervention of the Imperial
Parliament that gave Port Philip and More-
ton Bay the benefits of self-government.
The Benefits of Self-government.
It was unnecessary for him to dwell upon
the advantages that resulted from the
Separation of Moreton Bay and Port Philip.
He would give them some statistics. Dur-
ing the first ten years after Victoria got
Separation her population increased 500 per
cent, and her exports increased 900 per cent.
During the first ten years after Queensland
got Separation her population increased 400
per cent, and her exports increased 500 per
cent. That was not only the case with Vic-
toria and Moreton Bay. The same lesson
had been taught throughout the whole his-
tory of British colonisation. Should they
then, in this critical period of their national
life, disregard all the experience of the past,
all the lessons of colonial history, and per-
mit the centralising desires of Sydney and
Brisbane to smother that great instinct for
self-government which had made the British
race the most virile colonisers the world
had ever seen. And that is what they would
do if they were foolish enough to accept the
present hill, which placed a bar—a cast iron
bar —in the way of all future subdivision.
They should never forget that it was the
small self-governing states, where the people
had immediate and effective control over
their representatives that had always been,
and always would he,’ the nurseries of true
democracy. If their desire was to see Fede-
rated Australia become a great and pro-
gressive democracy, then it was their duty
to accept no constitution which placed an
insuperable bar in the way of all healthy
subdivision and progress. Many of them,
advantages which would accrue to the people
of Central Queensland if they got Separation.
How for many years baick the surplus re-
venue drained out of this division averaged
about £200,000 a-year. That meant
out of Mount Morgan alone some-
thing like £20,000 a-year. Did they
not think that it would be of enormous
practical benefit to the people of Mount
Morgan if that £20,000 a-year was
left in Mount Morgan instead of
being taken away year by year ? (A
voice : “It avould go to Rockhampton.”)
Well, it might go to Rockhampton.
(Laughter. Mr. Curtis : “Some of it.”)
When 'they came to Rockhampton they
might get a share of it then, hut at the
present time it all went to Brisbane
and they got no return whatever for
what 'was taken laiw'ay from them. Why
he mentioned this matter was for this rea-
ison. The people who were trying to per-
suade them to accept the constitution as
it stood —to put themselves into such a
position that they would never Ibe able to
get rid of this enormhus drain upon their
darnings —had the assurance and the cheek
to talk about the hard cash advantages
they would get if they accepted the bill.
It would take a great many hard cash ad-
vantages to make up for it. The financial
aspect of Separation had never appealed
to him personally. ((Cries of “Oh.”) Ex-
cept aJs (all of them ‘would benefit in
a financial sense by Separation he would
nbt benefit by it. (A voice : “Corner lots
would though.”) Perhaps Corner lots would
benefit, but unfortunately he did not own
any corner lots, though iperiiaps if he did
he might have been more earnest in the
matter. The advantages that 'would come
from Separation would be by having a
closer form of government, and more effec-
tive control over the people 'who repre-
sented them. They would have more control
over the Government that would manage
their own affairs. It would make an
enormous increase in the prosperity of Cen-
tral Queensland, just ais it had done in
Queensland, m Victoria, and wherever the
experiment was tried an a British colony.,
and it would also (mean an immense growth
in democratic development. This 'blot in
the bill barred all progress in that direc-
tion. For that reason (they ought to re-
ject the hill.
What Voting Against the Bill Means.
It -might he -asked if they
4


voted 'against 'the (bill, had they any hope state, and consequently it would then
of doing ‘any better ? Some gentleman in
the hall had asked that. In this matter
they had been asked to accept .the (bill just
as it stood, and then after they accepted
it they could iaisk the Imperial Parliament
to amend it. Never since he had taken an
interest in political affairs had he ever
heard or read of such an absurd and such
utterly ridiculous advice offered to in-
telligent electors. He .Would not like to he
the man who went home and asked Mr
Chamberlain to alter the hill after all Aus-
tralia had accepted it, themselves included.
(Laughter. The one interest that Mr.
Chamberlain had in this matter was to
get Australia federated. And once
they accepted the bill, Mr. Chamber-
lain’s interest ended, and all chance
of Separation w T as gone. But if
they rejected the bill —it was under-
stood .that if Central Queensland went
against the hill lit Would (be lost. (A
voice: “No.” Another voice: “Yes.”)
He was in Brisbane three or four diays ago
and while there more than one gentleman
asked him with a good deal of interest
how the electors (were going to vote
in Central Queensland. (A voice:
“‘Mote for it,”) He told tbe'se gen-
tlemen he believed that the people of
Central Queensland after they had cton-
sidered the (matter would almost certainly
give a large vote against (the bill. (A
voice ; “No.” Another voice : “Yes, three
ito one.”) He thought at (any rate that
the people of Central Queensland had in-
Iteffigence enough — (laughter) —(and enough
regard for their own interests to reject this
bill when they (fully considered it, and he
believed that now. He might be mistaken,
but that was his belief. The proof of the
pudding would be in the eating, and they
would see who was right. If it were seen
on referendum day that the bill was de-
feated chiefly through the adverse vote of
Central Queensland, then there might he
some sense in going to Mr. Chamberlain,
for Mr. Chamberlain and the Imperial Par-
liament would then have a motive in
amending the bill, the motive of inducing
them to enter the federation.
Their Case Practically Won.
But apart from Mr. Chamberlain and the
Imperial Parliament they must remember
this, that whenever Queensland refused •:o
accept the bill, their case would be practi-
cally won. In that case Queensland
would not go in as an original
depend upon the Federal Parliament
to say whether she should enter as
one state or three states. He appealed
£o those 'who claimed ito he 'federalists whe-
ther they were not prepared to trust the
federal Parliament. They who were called
anti-federalists were willing to trust the
Federal Parliament, and they wished this
case to be 'submitted to the Federal Parlia-
ment. They must remember that once the ■
Southern colonies federated, land this mat-
ter eam'e before the Fedenal Parliament,
the Federal Parliament would have no bias
against Central Queensland at all. It
would have no interest in preventing Cen-
tral Queensland from obtaining justice.
Another thing to consider uvlas this. When
they appealed to the Federal Parliament
for Separation, all those who were inte-
rested in the matter, and all tholse who
were (sincere federalists in Southern Queens-
land would have an interest in giving
them iwhat they wanted, because they
would .find that they would not get federa-
tion unless they came to reason on this
matter. For this reason he thought there
was ample reason for the elec-
tors rejecting this bill on the
2nd of September, and ample ground
for believing that in rejecting this bill
it would be to their advantage. As the
“ Morning Bulletin ” Said, in this matter
they stood (absolutely on velvet. If they
rejected the bill and failed to get any ad-
vantage and had afterwards to come in,
then they would he in exactly the same
position as if they accepted the hill now.
Whereas if they rejected the bill in the
first instance and succeeded in their aims
then they would not only get all the bene-
fits of federation hut all the advantages of
Separation as well.
Biltite Arguments.
He was reading in the paper th' l .
fiber day a report of a biilite meeting held
n Rockhampton last 'week. The thing
that struck him in reading the speeches of
be .advocate's of the bill, was the -way in
which they ignored all legitimate argu-
ment for federation. It whs 'astonishing
bow icarefully they abstained from all real
attempt to get the people to accept the
Constitution Bill on what might he called
re'al and valid grounds for Australia fede-
rating. They found these reasons were iso
vague thfit they did hot 'appeal to the gods
as it were, so they adopted a line of argu-
ment which they doubtless hoped would
5


likelier
catch.
What were the reasons they were
now giving why the hill should be ac-
cepted. (A voice ; “Democratic princi-
ples.”) Because it would give them One-
man, one-vote. (A voice: “Yes, and old
Cige pensions.”) Yes, and old age pensions.
It would also abolish Mach labour, and
give them cheap Iboots, cheap food, cheap
timber, and icheap vbeer. (Laughter. A
voice : “ That is what we want.”) The
Chairman of that meeting tried to ner-
suade his audience to vote for the bill be-
cause it would give them cheap bear.
Cheap beer ! Vote for federation and cheap
beer ! Then Bishop Dawes got up and told
them how broad-minded and how lofty were
the aspirations of the billites. (Laughter.)
It was really interesting to learn that
men like the Hon. John Jerguson and
Bishop D'a/wes (had suddenly de-
veloped ‘an interest in the ques-
tion of One-man, one-vote. They
told the electors to federate because
it gave them One-man, one-vote. Was that
their reason for federating ? All he could
say was that if these gentlemen had a wild
desire to see One-man, one-vote carried
into effect, they had managed to
keep it very dark hitherto. All these
arguments which these gentlemen said
were in favour of the bill were
r ;t in flavour of the bill at all. Dor this
•eason, that federation whatever its advan-
tages would also have its disadvantages.
Everyone of these things could be got
without federation. If these gentlemen
who were now so anxious to give
them One-man, one-vote only helped
the Labour party, ‘they would soon
get One-man, one-vote. (Applause.) Those
who read “Hansard” would remember
quite well that when this Enabling
Bill was under discussion the Labour
party tried to get a vote for every man in
Queensland, and who defeated it ? (A
Voice : “Lallan.” Laughter.) The very
billites who were now going about Queens-
land telling them to federate because it
would give them One-man, one-vote. If
they accepted ’this Commonwealth Bill
twenty times over it would not alter the
electoral roll of Queensland or give
one single man a vote who had not got it
now. More than that, it was extremely
doubtful if, even in regard to the elec-
tions for the Federal Parliament, the bill
even abolished plural voting. (A voice : “It
is only a red herring.”) He was not going
crowd, ito dogmatise on the matter, but the hill
was contradictory. It was a doubtful
point, and any of those who were inte-
rested if they looked at clauses 30 and 41
Would see that it was an extremely doubt-
ful point if it even abolished plural voting.
He was hot going to enter into that. Ail
he claimed was that if all these men who
professed to be anxious to get One-mlan,
one-wote would help the Labour party they
could gbt it /without federating at all. It
was the slame with cheap boot’s, cheap
food, and cheap beer. He wais in favour of
all those things, ‘even to cheap beer, al-
though he did not think it was a reason
for federating. For if those men who pro-
fessed to be so anxious to help them to
get those desirable things would really help
them they would get everyone of them in
three months. The Treasurer could wipe
out every intercolonial duty in three
months. If these gentlemen professing de-
mocracy helped the Labour party, they
could get all the products in from
the other colonies free without any of
the disadvantages of federation. It
was the same with the old age pension.
The Federal Parliament had the power to
pass old age pensions, but was that any
guarantee that the Federal Parliament
would pass it ? The Queensland Parlia-
ment had the power for the last forty
years to introduce a scheme for old age
pensions, but did it do it ? The Mount
Morgan Hold-ininiing Oomp'any had the
power to raise their wages £1 a-week all
round, but did they expect it ? (A voice :
“There is no comparison between the
two.”) How ridiculous it was to appeal
to people, and tell them that because the
Federal Parliament had the power, to bring
in old age pensions, they should favour the
bill. If these gentlemen who professed to
have such faith in democracy would only
help them they Would have old age pen-
sions next session. (A voice : “ And lose
t when you go over the border.”) He was
not arguing that the Federal Parliament
should not do these things. He
was only showing that they could
get it without federation. It might
be said that if they accepted
this bill and federated, the very next
morning the sun Would rise in all its
glory. Of Course it Would. And at would
also rise in all its glory if they rejected
the bill. They could get old age pensions,
and have black labour abolished without
accepting this bill. (Applause. A voice :
6


“ The black labour iwill wine in for the that the arguments which had been used
Northern Territory then.”) The Go i- by those who were supporting the bill had
Bt'itution gave the Federal Parlia-
ment power to legislate on the
black labour question. But the
Queensland Parliament had also the power
to legislate on the black labour question.
(A Voice : “There is no getting away from
that.”)' The people of Queensland had ab-
solute control over this matter. The peo-
ple of Queensland could elect every one of
their representatives opposed bo black la-
bour if they wished to. They already had
the power to do it without incurring a
great, many disadvantages to get it. In-
deed it was extremely doubtful whether
the Federal Parliament was at all likely
to abolish black labour. In any case many
of those interested in the sugar industry
did not believe that the Federal Parliament
would do anything of the kind. For in-
stance, the Hon. A. S. Cowley, the ex-
Speaker, a gentleman who was certainly as
competent to give an opinion on the ques-
tion as any man in Queensland, did not
seem to think the Federal Parliament was
likely to abolish black labour. Speaking in
the Legislative Assembly on this matter Mr.
lOotwley Said : “ There is another questio a
“(Which I should like to touch. upon, and
“that is the sugar industry, ais it will he
‘ affected :by federation. I -should certainly
‘have liked to have heard something from
“the Premier on this important subject,
C| l am hot one of those —'and I do not ,wish
‘ to mislead the committee —who think
“ that under federation the sugar-planters
“'will be able to entirely do without black
“ labour.” If was therefore foolish for any-
one to believe that accepting the Bill
gave the slightest guarantee for the
abolition of black labour. They could
get One-man, one-vote, old age nen-
sionls, cheap food, cheap hoots, all the
advantages of freetrade, the abolition if
black labour, and all these things if they
were so minded, without federating -at ad.
As a matter of fact the Labour party
would, in a few years, secure all these
things in Queensland, federation or no
federation. (Applause.) There were two
other speakers, and he had already taken
ran toO much of their time. He had tried
to point out to them what he honestly be-
lieved was a serious blot in this consti-
tution, and every democrat -in Queensland,
particularly in 'Central Queensland, where
it immediately affected them, should vote
-against the bill. He tried to show them
nothing to do with the matter ; that they
were simply an attempt to catch them with
chaff. He sincerely trusted that not only
in Mount Morgan, but right through Gen-
tral Queensland, they would give a dis-
tinct majority against the bill. (Applause.)
MR. CURTIS‘S SPEECH.
(Mr. CURTIS, who was received with ap-
plause said he hiad much pleasure in com-
ing there that night in conj unction with
the other two members for Rockhampton,
for the purpose of addressing the electors
of Mount Morgan on the Commonwealth
Bill, or rather he should say with reference
to one or more of its leading features, par-
ticularly those provisions which vitally af-
fected —or were likely to vitally affect—
Central Queensland. It would be impos-
sible within the limited time at his dis-
posal to give an elaborate analysis or ex-
position of the Commonwealth Bill, and it
Was not necessary.
123rd and 127th Clauses Fundamental.
If the bill were absolutely per-
fect in every other respect, the two
clauses which had been spoken of —lor
rather the three clauses—l 22, 123, and 127,
which were vital and fundamental —would
justify every man—-every elector —in Cen-
tral Queensland in voting again'st it. (Hear,
hear.) Principally for this reason. Like
the previous -speaker, if it were only a sub-
ordinate matter in connection with the
subject, he certainly would he inclined to
vote for the bill, but these were not sub-
ordinate matters or matters of detail. They
were vital and fundamental, arid went
down to the bed-rock —to the root —of the
(subject itself. The billites were those who
were advocating the acceptance of so-
called federation at any price, and they
were endeavouring to confuse the issue.
To speak plainly, the billites were trying
to humbug the people, were trying to hood-
wink them. (Voices : “ No.”) He said
yes. The billites were endeavouring to
confuse the issue, and tried to make the
debtor's believe that because the members
for Rockhampton opposed the bill that
they opposed federation. (A voice; “So
Von do.”) After they heard -what he had
to say they would find that such was not
the case. (Hear, hear.) The three clauses
'which he spoke about were vital and fun-
damental in reference to this question. Like
Mr. Reid and Mr. Barton, leaders of the
7


bill, and other .professed ardent advocates people seemed helpless in their hands. The
of federation, he (Mr. Curtis) was also in
favour of federation, and like them also he
Was no't in favour of federation
atr any price. (Hear, heiar.) If
the people of the other colonies only
knew what they were committing them-
selves to they would never have voted for
the hill. It Was not the thing they ima-
gined it to he at all. From the remarks
he had heard fall from people when dis-
cuslsing this matter, they really believed it
was Something else. They believed it ,was
the union of the people of Australia, but
it was nothing of the kind. It was not a
union of the people of Australia, but a
union of colonies which were federating
hy means of this bill, to convert the colo-
nies into .sovereign states. That was the
foundation of the whole thing. If the
people understood that, and knew the
meaning of it and the difference between
the real union of the people of Australia,
■they would not have voted for the bil 1 ,
they Would rather have waited a little
iw'bile. 'Mr. Wise, one of the representa-
tives of New South Wales at the Conven-
tion, and one of the most intelligent and
intellectual members of that Convention,
■Said the people wanted union, but the poli-
ticians were always hostile. It was a
politicians’ and lawyers’ (bill. Mr.
Dflakin, one of the representatives of Vic-
toria, said that if another convention were
called it might and probably would result
in unification.
Unification and Federation.
He Would explain the difference
(between unification and federation
He was rather in favour of unification. In-
stead of the Federal Parliament
being stahlished as proposed hy
this bill, it would be far better for the
welfare of Australia and for the people if
they had. a refilly National Government,
supreme in all Australian matters. The
present colonies should he conver-
ted into provinces, and not into
states. They .should all be provinces with
a supreme Government which would have
the power of subdividing them from time
•to time,, not in the interests of iany parti-
cular part of Australia, but in the inte-
rests of the whole of Australia. That Was
What he would like to see done, and that
was what the people wanted if they could
only give expressions to their sentiments.
The politician’s had the people bv
the wool at present, and the
fact «f the matter was this. Under this
bill each state was to Come into the fede-
ration armed for the assertion of it's vested
interests as opposed to those of the Aus-
tralian people. It was this that caused
the great civil war in the southern states
of America. The southern states of the
United States desired to perpetuate the
dreadful institution of slavery, and based
their claim to do so upon the doctrine of
state sovereignty. He 'maintained that
no state had rights, if (those so-
called rights conflicted with those of the
nation. Instead of a federation on the
states right basis, he would prefer to 'see
a federation of the people, that was to
say (there should be a National 'Govern-
ment for Australia, supreme in all things
appertaining to all Australia, just as the
Imperial Parliament of Great .Britain Was
supreme in all matters affecting the inte-
rests of the Empire at large. The national
Parliament being the supreme power Would
be able in it's discretion and wisdom to
divide the large provinces from time to
time. The doctrine of State right's might
not have been of so much importance had
an - antidote been provided in the shape
oif provision of the division of
the . large colonies, or for the
general power to divide being vested in
-the Federal Parliament. By these means
they would genre -a greater distribution
■of political power, and thus minimise the
danger of too great centralisation. That
doctrine of -state -rights was embodied in
the present Commonwealth Bill. He fore-
saw great danger in it, as in the future
it might create too grelat injustice and
great civil Strife, and possibly civil war.
(Laughter.) They might laugh —some of
them —-but that wais the cause of the whole
trouble in America. The germ of the trouble
■was the sovereignty of the states. The
southern states wished to perpetuate this
slavery, and based their right to do so on
their sovereignty. If there had
been an unification of the states there
would have been no . civil War it/
America. The “Sydney Bulletin,” one of
the most democratic papers in Australia,
said this clause might eventually lead to
bloodshed, and condemned it right through.
The .doctrine of state rights embodied in
this constitution might not have so much
objection to it if a provision (were made
in the constitution to enable the Federal
Parliament to divide the larger colonies
8


from time to time as the wishes and con-
veniences for settlement required it. If
the larger colonies -were divided from time
to time, and then came in la's states, there
would be great distribution of power
throughout the Commonwealth. That doc-
trine, accompanied by the three clauses he
had quoted, was the greatest blot in
the bill, and that as he said before
if consummated would cause great trouble
in Australia.
Mr. Buzacott’s Little Plan.
Under this Bill, as had been pointed
out by the previous speakers, no • new
state could possibly be erected without
the consent of the people of the particular
states proposed to be divided. Mr. Buza-
cott, one of the members of the Upper
House, had propounded a beautiful
little scheme by means of which
he could get over the difficulty. He was
endeavouring to make out that not-
withstanding the amendment of the 127th
clause that was embodied in the bill at the
direction of Mr. Eeid in order, as he dis-
tinctly stated, to secure an absolute guaran-
tee that the boundaries of New South Wales
or any other colony could not be altered
without the consent of the Par-
liament and the people of the
colony proposed to be divided. Mr.
Reid stated that the amendment to that
clause was for the purpose of making their
boundaries inviolable so that they could
not be altered without the consent of the
people of the Parliament concerned. Mr.
Buzacott was wrong in what he said, and
he (Mr. Curtis) would prove him to be
wrong before he sat down. (Applause.)
There was only one Parliament in the world
that could alter it, and that was the Im-
perial Parliament, and once this colony was
federated under that bill the Imperial Par-
liament would never again interfere in such
matters in Australia. (Mr. Kidston : “It
could not without breach of con-
tract with the colonies.”) Mr. Buza-
cott said : “ Obviously by enter-
“™g the Federation as an original
“ state —after having protested by petition
“against both the 123rd and 127th clauses
“ —*we should be morally as well as legally
“ entitled to press the Federal Parliament
“to divide Queensland into three states.
“ The Federal Parliament would also be
“ free to consider our case simply on its
“merits. We assume that such Parliament
“ would pass a bill modifying the amend-
ing clause just as the New South Wales
and Queensland Parliaments passed bills
“ modifying the two-thirds amending
“ clauses of the existing constitution.” Mr.
Buzacott forgot one thing. The eases were
not parallel. If they entered Federation
they would enter under a solemn compact
one with the other and agree to certain
things as a deed of partnership, and one of
the things they would agree to was that
the Federal Parliament which they were
establishing shall not interfere with the
territorial boundaries without first getting
the consent of the Paliaments of the colo-
nies proposed to be altered. Mr. Buzacott
was too clever. (Laughter.) Mr. Buza-
cott also forgot when he was making this
proposal the Supreme Court that was
going to be established here, the Federal
Judiciary which was to be the guardian
and interpreter of the constitution. He re-
commended clauses 71 and 74 to Mr. Buza-
cott in connection with his little scheme.
If the Federal Parliament passed any law
which was in violation of the constitution,
such as an amendment of the 127th clause
would be if amended, without the consent
of Queensland, then it would be held as in-
valid and of no effect. It would be seen by
clause 1 4 that there could be no appeal from
the Supreme High Court of Australia.
There could be no appeal to the Privy
Council on a matter in which
the meaning of the Federal Con-
stitution is in question. The Su-
preme Court of Australia was to be the
guardian and interpreter of the constitution.
That clause relating to the Supreme High
Court was copied from the United States
constitution. Lord Salisbury, in the course
of a speech, said that he envied the United
States Judiciary. It was an original idea
with the United States and it was the ad-
miration of the world ever since the estab-
lishing of 'the Supreme Court of
the United States. If the Federal
Parliament passed any law, and if any state
challenged its right to do it 'that law would
be sent to the Supreme Court of Australia
and whatever decision 'the Supreme Court
came to would settle the matter. The Fede-
rat Parliament would never consider such
a proposal as Mr. Buzacott suggested, ii,
would not entertain it for one moment. If
the Federal Parliament did pass it and it
was presented to the Governor-General he
would refuse to give his assent to it know-
ing that it was a violation of the constitu-
tion—of the compact come to between the
states. Suppose Queensland was the colony
9


proposed to be dealt with, Mr Buzacott
assumed that the Federal Parlia-
ment would pass the Bill and submit
it to the vote of the coloaies. Mr. Buza-
coti said if a vote were takmr which
showed a majority of the electors of the
whole Commonwealth were in favour of the
bill, and were found also on examination to
be a vote in a majority of the states of a
majority of the electors, then notwithstand-
ing that Queensland voted against it the
Amending Bill would be carried and become
law. It would then, Mr. Buzacott said, re-
ceive the Governor-General’s assent, and
Central and Northern Queensland would be
forthwith divided into three states. The
Governor-General would do nothing of the
kind, and the Federal Parliament would not
receive it unless it received a majority of the
people of Queensland in favour of it. Even
if the Governor-General gave his assent the
Parliament of Queensland would invoke the
aid of the judiciary of the Federation —the
Supreme High Court —and that Court could
only rule one thing, and that was to say
that it was unconstitutional and could not
be done. He defied Mr. Buzacott to get
rid of that. He recommended Mr. Buza-
eott tc clause 71, under the heading of Ju-
dicature, and he also recommended him to
read clause 74, which said that there was to
be no appeals to the Privy Council, and no
appeal from the Supreme High Court of the
Federal Judiciary as to the meaning of any
matters affecting the constitution. The
Supreme High Court would say it was a
violation of the constitution and it could not
be done. Mr. Buzaeott’s plan could only
be carried out by means of a revolution.
(Mr. Kidsiton : “It is absurd. Air. Buza-
coit is simply poking borak at us.”) Yes, it
was absurd. Mr. Eeid got that amendment
inserted in the 127th clause to secure the
inviolability of the boundaries of New
South Wales and to secure also the boun
daries of the other colonies.
The Colonial Boundaries Act.
_ When he came into the hall that
night he saw some pamphlets dis-
tributed at the door about the Colo-
nial Boundaries Act, which it was stated
affected Separation. The pamphlet assured
them that they could be in no worse posi-
tion under the bill than they were at the
present moment. The pamphlet wanted to
prove that the Imperial Parliament had
parted with its prerogative and right to
divide the colonies, and that they might
federate and be in no worse position than
they were before. He took the trouble to
look into the matter, and it had no applica-
bility at all to the point. (Hear, hear.)
The bill was introduced into the House of
Lords by Lord Pipon, who in a ten minutes’
explanation said it was a non-eontentious
bill which was passed for the purpose of
allowing mutual agreements to be come to
between the colonies to validate the annexa-
tion of small islands to New Zealand and
such like. The standing orders were sus-
pended to allow it to go through next day,
and no one else spoke on it. It was passed
merely for the purpose of validating what
was done and to facilitate any arrangement
that might be come to between the colonies
for the readjustment of the boundaries one
amongst the other. It was never intended
that if this bill were passed the Imperial
Parliament would part with its prerogative
in the matter of the existing colonies and
in the creation of new ones. That would
be a serious mater. If anyone in the House
of Commons and in the House of Lords
imagined for one moment that such an
interpretation was placed upon it and that
it would be used as it was at the present
time then it would have been amended so
as not to place such an interpretation on it.
He would draw their attention to this mat-
ter. This bill was discussed in the Conven-
tion when the Light Hon. C. C. Kingston,
Premier of South Australia, and a Queen's
Counsel, and the Hon. I. A. Isaacs, Attor-
ney-General of Victoria, were present. Mr.
Isaacs said the Colonial Boundaries Act of
1895 was not applicable, and had nothing:
to do with the matter. (A voice : “ Charm
bferlain’s reply seems to show different.”)
The Example of the United States.
The framer of the United States ConstitUr-
tion, foreseeing how necessary it was, made 1
ample provision for new states to be carved!
out of the other states. When the State of
Texas, the largest state of the Union, ap-
plied to be admitted to the Union the United
States Senate refused to admit her until she
agreed to amend her constitution allowing;
for the subdivision of the state into four
states at the discretion of the federal au-
thorities. (Mr. Kids ton : “They were-
democrats in the United States.”) There
was no doubt about it the great stability
of the United States at the present time —
containing forty-five states in all—was;
caused by there being so many;
states which gave a fairly equal
distribution of political power through-
out the whole Commonwealth., Now
10


the constitution they were asked to adopt
was called democratic. It was rather ab-
sorb to understand how it could be called
democratic when they found that in the
Senate unequal populations were repre-
sented equally. There was a. great differ-
ence in the population of the colonies, yet
all were to be represented equally in the
Senate. That did not seem to be demo-
cratic.
Amending the Constitution.
It was a written constitution, and was not
easy of amendment. Mr. Ferguson said it
could be easily amended. He (Mr. Cur-
tis) said 'that notwithstanding the
modifications that were made at the
Premiers’ /conference in Melbourne, the
majority of the people of Australia could
ibe overridden by the minority. A majo
rity of the states with the minority of the
people could override the majority of the
people in the other states. The statement
made by Mr. Ferguson, President of the
Federation League, that the constitution
could be easily altered was not correct, and
it had a tendency to mislead the people.
He noticed that Mr. Bnzaioott, ,and all the
other enterprising advocates of this Bill,
had said the same thing. It w'as not
likely to prove so easy. It was siaid that
it was easier of amendment than the con-
stitution of the United States. That might
be, lbnt, it was not very much easier, and
would still, he very difficult to obtain. The
great difficulty of amending the United
States constitution was the cause
of great trouble. It was many years since
any amendment had been made in the
constitution of the United States, although,
the people felt that there should be ‘amend-
ment in some respects. The people were
never able to get the amendment they re-
quired. In consequence of that difficulty
of amendment. although there were
50,000,000 or 60,000,000 workers in the
United States, they 'Were not able to get
a single representative in the Congress.
The statement that this constitution was
easy of amendment was not therefore ab-
solutely correct. The minority of the
people of Australia could prevent the pas-
sing of any great reform that was required
by the majority of the people of Australia.
Suppose Queensland joined the federation,
she would have very little influence and
power in it. She would only have six
Senators in what he believed would be a
weak Senate. Queensland would only have
ten members in the House of Represent i-
lives against twenty-six for New, South
Wales, and twenty-three for Victoria. Each
colony had six members in the Senate, and
where would Queensland be when it came
to voting on some important question,
when perhaps the interest of Queensland
was not in unity with New. South Wales.
('Mr. Kidston : “The settling of the tariff
for instance.”) The ‘tariff was a question
which New South Wales and Victoria
could make it what they wished. Victoria
and New South Wales would settle the
tariff, and where the interests of Queens-
land clashed with New ,South Wales and
Victoria, Queensland would go down, and
go down .badly.
Position of Central Queensland.
Sir Hugh Nelson in bis letter to him (Mr
Curtis) gave the position of Central
Queensland as to how it Would be affected
in this matter. Sir Hugh Nelson pointed
out with reference to the representation in
tire House of [Representatives that the
quota of the Central Division would be
one and a fraction. That was the repre-
sentation Central Queensland would be
entitled to. If they found it impossible to
obtain their requirements in a House of
seventy-two members in Brisbane, how
were they going to fare in a House so far
away ? Suppose they had two members
then they would not be much better off.
Speaking of the Senate, they could only
have their share, perhaps one out of the
six, and it appeared to him that they
should be very .small fry in the business
look at it how they would. They had
55.000 people in the Central Division now,
but it did not require any specific number
of British people to form a self-governing
■colony. They could do it with 5000 people,
and manage as well as they would with.
50.000 people perhaps. (Mr. Kidston :
“They have done it before now.”) Look
at its resources. As far as the value of
the exports of Queensland 'was concerned it
would compare favourably with mlany por-
tions of the British Umpire. He
was sorry Sir <S. W. .Griffith wais not able
to give effect to Mis proposals in 1892 to
divide 'the colony into three self-governing
provinces—north, centre, and south. Un-
fortunately the Upper House as usual
when any measure of reform was brought
before them'—especially if they did not
hear much about it —rejected it. (A voice>
“ Buzaoott.’B He believed 'that it was a
wise proposal of Sir S. W. Griffith’s. Sir
S. W. Griffith proposed to divide the .col-
11


ony into three provinces, estalblSabing a
federation which would merge into the
federation of Australia, as three states.
There would not have been the slightest ob-
jection from the Southern colonies then
aibout the colony entering the
federation as three states. Then
Queensland (would have eighteen
'Senators—six for each province—because
they were giving ,a small island like Tas-
mania six representatives in the Senate.
Tasmania had only an area of 29,000 square
miles and its resources did not compare in
any way with those of Central Queensland.
These proposals of Sir S. W. Griffith were
supported hy Sir Thomas MTlwraith and
the whole of his Cabinet. If reason-
able men would only consider it they
would say that Central and Northern
Queensland —as the “ Brisbane Courier”
put it were entitled to self-govern-
ment as a matter of right. Sir
Thomas MTlwraith told the people in
Sydney that provision would have
to be made to admit Queensland
as three states. Those who said it
was unreasonable for Queensland to
ask to come in as three states did
not understand the position. If the
people of Central Queensland had any
consideration for their interests, and if they
acted wisely, they would vote against this
hill. If they voted for this hill they
voted away their political birthright under
the present constitution, the Colonial Boun-
daries Act notwithstanding. They would
vote away their political birthright and
place their business in the hands of the
people of Southern Queensland, who would
always be hostile to anything in the way of
self-government in Central Queensland, and
Who would dominate over them more than
ever. (Mr. Kidston: They have an interest
in keeping the Centre.) He had been re-
minded of the resources of Central Queens-
land. For the last ten years the people of
Central Queensland had abstracted from
their surplus revenue the sum of something
like £2,000,000. He said that deliberately.
There was no community under the British
Empire which was robbed and plundered to
the extent that Central Queensland was,
and the people here did not know it. Per-
haps because most of the taxation went
through the Customs House made it like
what the Frenchman said - enabled the
goose to he plucked without it crying out.
It was a policy of taking away everything
and returning nothing. He was asked the
other day, “ What have the people of Rock-
hampton got to complain about? Look at
the money they are spending in buildings
here, look at the bridge over the river.”
But it was not their money that was being
spent in the buildings. It was loan money
borrowed from England. He believed that
something like £32,000,000 had been bor-
rowed, and not a blessed sixpence of
it had been returned yet. (Laugh-
ter.) They were not complaining about the
spending of the loan money in this district,
hut they complained about the abstraction
of their surplus revenue. Every year
on an average £200,000 was taken
away from Central Queensland after
paying the cost of government. They
paid all the cost of the civil ser-
vice in the Central Division in ad-
dition, and they had also to pay the in-
terest on every blessed sixpence of loan
money spent in the Central Division. Mr.
Dickson said he was going to divide the
colony into six districts. One of the motives
for doing this was that Mr. Dickson and
the rest of his Ministry, for some reason,
were desirous of destroying the iden-
tity of Central Queensland. He be-
lieved that was one of the reasons. If they
voted against the hill they would stop all
that. Let them Hasten slowly. This was
an irrevocable deed of partnership. It was
a marriage without divorce. Once they
went into the federation they would never
get out of it. It would he a trap. If they
kept out of it by voting against the bill and
preserving their rights under the ex-
isting constitution then a hundred
things might happen, any one of which
would place Queensland in a better
position politically. If Queensland polled
heavily against the hill, Mr. Chamberlain
would see that the people were anxious to
have the management of their own affairs,
and he would see that something was done
in order that Queensland should be incor-
porated with the other colonies in this great
federal bond of union. If they en-
tered into the federation there would
be a great dislocation in the finances.
They would have to make up the de-
ficiency in their revenue either by a land
tax, an income tax, or by the sale of Cen-
tral lands by auction. It was very likely
to he hy the sale of Central lands in large
blocks hy bogus auctions. It would be
easier to sell the Central lands than to ask
the people to put their hands into their
pockets and pay a land and income
tax. If the Southern people had
the alternative of selling the lands
12


or paying taxes they would say
to sell the lands. That was a serious mat-
ter because it would result in their lands
being locked up in the interior of Central
Queensland, and they would have absentee
landlordism to deal with. That would block
settlement and retard the progress of Cen-
tral Queensland. In conclusion, he urged
on them to consider the matter well. His
advice was to vote against the bill. Let
Queensland stand out in the meantime, and
they could see later on what terms the
Federal Parliament would give to have
Queensland come into the federation.
Queensland could not possibly enter into
the federation on worse terms than was pro-
posed under the present constitution. They
had nothing to lose, and everything to gain,
by standing out in this matter. Any man
who voted for that bill voted away his
political birthright under the present con-
stitution, and helped to hand over the busi-
ness of the great Central Division of the
colony to the people living in the Southern
Division of the colony, and in the other
colonies south of them. (Applause.) He
thanked them for the patient hearing they
had given him and he hoped to again have
the pleasure of speaking to them at Mount
Morgan on this subject. (Applause.)
MR. STEWART’S SPEECH.
Mr. STEWART, who was received with
applause, said at that late hour of the even-
ing, and after the able, eloquent, and ex-
haustive speeches they had just listened to,
he did not intend to detain them at any
length. Federation was undoubtedly the
most important question that could be dis-
cussed by any section of the Australian
people. As had been pointed out by pre-
vious speakers it was a marriage from
which there was no divorce ; and it was
not even a marriage from which death
would release the parties, because even al-
though the people who were living in Aus-
tralia now would certainly die, the states
would continue to live. (Mr. Curtis : “Go
on for ever.”) That being the case they
ought to consider very seriously and very
intently the conditions of the bargain upon
which they were asked to enter. It was
urged against the anti-billites that they
were anti-federalists. No man with the
slightest reason in his head would be an
anti-federalist. They believed in federa-
tion in the same way as they believed in
having a decent house to live in and a de-
cent suit of clothes to cover them. Though
he believed in federation he did not believe
in ibis bill. Suppose he wanted a new coat
and went to the tailor to get measured for
ft. If the tailor came along a few days
afterwards and said it was the finest coat
ever made, the materials were the best
he could possibly get, and the workman-
ship was the finest obtainable ; but if in
trying the coat on he found it did not fit
him, what earthly use was the coat to him ?
It was 'the same with the constitution. A
great many people thought it was the most
perfect constitution ever devised, but what
did that matter if it did not fit the people
of Australia.
Other Federations.
They were told about the federation of
Switzerland. Switzerland, as Mr. Kidston
said, was a small territory of 16,000
square miles. Switzerland waited 300 years
before it federated. They made various at-
tempts at federation, but did not succeed
until they adopted the federation which
existed now. The German federation and
the federations of the United States and
Canada were also referred 'to as being paral-
lel with that of Australia. If the Conven-
tion of Australia had taken a lesson from
the federation of the United States they
would have done well. Let them take the
Lnited States for example. There were
thirteen states in the original union, all of
them being clustered on the eastern sea-
board. What did they find, but that the
states of the interior, away from the sea-
board, were dominated by the same lust for
territory as that which dominated the Aus-
tralan constitution at the present day.
These states wanted their boundaries ex-
tended to the Pacific Ocean, to the coast
where San Francisco now Stood. Those
living in the east saw that if this were
done the expansion of the United States
would be hindered, and the result was that
the vast territory outside the thirteen states
was placed under 'the power of the Federal
Government. That was a very wise pro-
vision. It was constituting a new terri-
tory. As the population increased and
Separation went on portion after portion of
it was constituted into a state, and there
were now either forty-four or forty-five
states in the American union and three ter-
ritories. The United States of America was
only slightly larger than Australia. It
would have been exceedingly wise if, in
adopting the letter of the United States
constitution for Australia, the spirit of the
constitution of the United States had been
13


ga
r fi
also adopted, and the 123rd clause left out al-
together. He could find a great many faults
with the constitution, which, as he had
said already, he would let go, as he had no
desire to keep them. The only point which
he had any desire to refer to was one which
affected them most seriously in Queens-
land. That was the point which had been
gone into fully by the two gentlemen who
had preceded him —thepower to subdivide
the different states.
What Was the Position ?
What was the position ? At this present
moment they were merely local self-govern-
ing bodies deriving ‘their authority from the
Imperial Government. The Imperial Go-
vernment vested certain of these powers in
them and reserved certain powers for itself.
One of the powers which the Imperial Go-
vernment reserved was the power to sub-
divide any territory. All he and the other
anti-billites claimed was that this power of
subdividing the various colonies should be
transferred to the Federal Parliament. He
thought that was a very fair and reason-
able request to make. Every state in which
the subject had been discussed had looked
at the constitution from its point of view.
Hew South Wales stood out until it got its
own terms. Victoria saw that the consti-
tution suited her before she accepted it.
Tasmania and South Australia did likewise.
In Queensland they would only be following
the example of these other colonies of Aus-
tralia in considering whether this constitu-
tion was going to fit them or not. If the
constitution did not fit Queensland in one
particular point and she Considered that
point was an essential one, then she was
entitled to stand out. Surely they were
entitled to say whether this iron dwelling
they were about to enter suited them or
not, whether this constitution suited their
circumstances or hot. He contended that
this constitution did not suit their cir-
cumstances. A constitution that contained
provisions for the establishment of a strong
Central Government, but which did not also
contain provision for the establishing of
strong self-governing states was fatal to
the democratic aspirations of Australia.
Look at the map of Australia. The total
area of Australia was somewhere about
3,000,000 square miles. That of Queens-
land was 600,000 square miles ; South Aus-
tralia, 900,000 square miles ; and Western
Australia, 900,000 square miles. So that
three states monopolised 2,400,000 square
miles of this continent, and yet they could
not under this constitution subdivide any
one of these states without the consent of
the Parliament of each state. (Mr. Curtis :
“The people living in the capital cities.”)
Yes, that was it, without the consent of the
people living in the capital cities. Theix
progress depended as much on Separation
as federation. (Mr. Curtis: “ Hear, hear.”)
They should separate and federate,
and federate and separate. They
could put it in whichever way they liked.
The whole thing could be done in a nut-
shell. If one question in Australian poli-
tics was more distinct than any other it
was upon this question of the subdivision
of the states. As had been pointed out, if
the Imperial authority had not intervened
the whole of the eastern coast of Australia
would that day, be one state governed by
Sydney in the interests of Sydney. That
was what a number of the present billites
would like. He asked them if Queensland
and Victoria were still attached to Hew
South Wales would they be so developed
as they were now. He did not think so.
If the subdivision of these colonies had re-
sulted in increased progress and prosperity
and in increased development then it was
only fair to suppose that further subdivi-
sion would have the same results in future.
This constitution not only did not provide
for any subdivision but it absolutely" placed
an Obstruction in the way of it. Any con-
stitution that placed an Obstacle in the way
of something which was considered good for
the development of Australia, was a con-
stitution it would not be wise for the people
of Queensland to adopt. When they took
up this attitude they were not fighting for
the people of Queensland alone, but they
were fighting for the whole of the people
of Australia. When Mr. Curtis talked about
the probabilities of civil war he was laughed
at. They might laugh, but it was within
the range of possibilities. He would tell
those people who laughed that if the Im-
perial Government had not intervened be-
tween Hew South Wales and Victoria there
would have been a civil war. The time
might come if this constitution were adop-
ted without provision being made for the
subdivision of states when civil war would
result. If provision were made for sub-
division there was no fear that such a result
Would follow. Why not take the safe
course ? Why not take the course which
the teachings of the past guided them to
take, one which would promote the happi-
14


ness and comfort of the people of Australia,
and not adopt a course 'which so far as they
knew would not help the people of this
continent in any way. The gentlemen who
had spoken dealt very fully with the rea-
sons why they should not adopt this Fede-
ral Constitution.
The Cheap Beer Argument
They were told that the constitution
would give them cheap boots, cheap food,
cheap timber, and cheap beer. The Chair-
man of the billite meeting must have im-
agined that he was talking to a lot of
wooden-headed people when he dwelt so
long on the cheap beer argument. Vote for
federation and in return they would get
cheap beer. They might be like Esau of old
and sell their birthright for a mess of pot-
tage. But they might be worse than Esau,
for they might sell their birthright and not
get the mess of pottage at all. He did not
think they would get such cheap food as
they had been told. The duty of £1 a ton
would be knocked off the flour, but would
that reduce the price of a loaf of bread ?
No, it would not. That £1 a ton
would go into the pockets of the merchants
and bakers. He did not think the bakers
would get much of it. The merchants would
get it all. Then he was not sure that the
merchants would get any bentfit by it,
because the American flour which w 7 as com-
ing into the freetrade port of Sydney now
would be shut out and it would cause the
price of flour in Australia to go up. Then
with regard to potatoes. The duty was
15s. per ton or 9d. per cwt. It was the
same wflth that. The duty would be taken
off hut the price would not he any the less.
It did not matter what article of food they
considered it was all the same. Let them
take clothing, furniture, hoots, or any of
the thousand and one necessaries of life and
it would be just the same. They would
have intercolonial freetrade but they would
also have protection against the world.
Did they not see why New South Wales and
Victoria were so anxious to federate. They
found their manufactures were growing and
they wanted a wider market. When they
got that they would immediately raise a
high tariff wall against the outside world.
That meant that they would have to pay
as much if not more after federation as
they did now. And they would get a worse-
article than they got at present. At the
present time they had England and Ger-
many sending goods to Queensland on the
same terms as Victoria and New South
Wales, and they had the United States
sending all kinds of machinery on the same
lines as Victoria and New South Wales.
He was patriotic enough to forego all that
for federation. (A voice : “ Give us some
of the good things.”) He thought the con-
stitution might be much improved. He did
not pretend to be much of a statesman, but
he could sit down and draw up a better
constitution than that. (Laughter.) He
would show them one reason why they
were being hurried into this constitution.
It was because the Conservatives knew that
if federation were deferred for another
eight or nine years they would get a better
federation. Mr. Curtis showed how a mi-
nority of the people of Australia could suc-
cessfully resist any alteration of the consti-
tution. Where did the one people one des-
tiny come in ? If they were going to
federate, let them trust the people of Aus-
tralia. Do not let them have a constitu-
tion that would let the small number of
people in the minority coerce the majority.
Amending the Constitution.
Mr. Buzacott told them that the consti-
tution was one of the most easy of altera-
tion in the English language. That was
not saying much, as there were not many
constitutions in the English language. The
constitution of the United States was so
difficult to alter that the people of that
country never attempt it. In fact the only
alterations made in the United States con-
stitution in the last fifty years were made
just after the civil war, after 900,000 or
1,000,000 men had perished in battle, and
after millions had been spent in crushing
the rebellious south, and while a number of
states were occupied by the victorious
troops at the point of the bayonet. That
was how the constitution was altered. So
difficult was it to- alter the constitution
that people abandoned the idea and let it
stand as it was. They did not want a con-
stitution that they could only amend by
the sword. They wanted a constitution
that could be altered to suit the people of
Australia and one that could be altered at
any time they so desired. That was the
constitution they desired and not one that
was extremely difficult to alter. He did
not propose to go into those matters that
night. He would accept the constitution
as it stood if it did not contain that special
blot which was fatal to the Central Division
and to the Whole of Australia. They heard
something about Separation that night and
some gentleman in the hall jeered at it.
15


Wliat Local Government Means.
As Mr. Curtis and Mr. Kidston told them,
the Centre handed over to the south
£200,000 every year after paying the cost
of Government. One gentleman said the
money might go to Rockhampton if they
got Separation, and Mr. Kidston told him
that they might see some of it in Rock-
hampton again but they would not see it
again if it went to Brisbane. He would
show them how it would benfit Mount Mor-
gan to have Separation. He visited one of
their schools that morning and he found
the school had little accommodation. He
saw 150 children standing outside on the
vera’ndah being taught on that cold win-
ter’s day. (Mr. Lundager : “There were
300.” The Chairman : “ It is true.
It is a shame.”) There were those children
standing on the verandah on that cold bleak
winter’s day simply because the Brisbane
Government were so parsimonious that
they would not give them sufficient money
to accommodate the children on the Mount.
That was one instance of what good Separa-
tion would do for them, and if he had time
he could mention a good many more. He
was as urgent a federalist as most of them.
He desired to see a federation that would
do the people good. What did it matter to
them if they had a great army in Sydney
or if they had a great navy there. It was
not a question of wdiether they would be a
great nation, with one people and one des-
tiny. What the working men had to con-
sider was whether they w r ould get more for
their labour or would their lives be worth
living any better than they were now with-
out federation. If they went into the con-
stitution as it was they would hand them-
selves over body and soul to slavery.
(Laughter.) If they federated and sepa-
rated that would be a blessing to Aus-
tralia and under the Southern Cross they
would grow up a happy, prosperous, and
contented people. (Applause.)
Mr. LUNDAGER said it gave him great
pleasure to move a vote of thanks to the
three gentlemen from Rockhampton and to
the Chairman for presiding that night. He
thanked those present for the hearing they
'had given the speakers. There were two
sides to every question. He hailed the re-
ferendum with delight because it was demo-
cratic. He hoped they would all think the
matter over and use their votes according
to their consciences on the 2nd of Septem-
ber. He was sorry they could not get a
Bishop or a parson, or priest or ex-parson
to speak for them. (Laughter and ap-
plause. )
The motion was passed amid applause.
The four gentlemen named briefly
thanked the audience for the compliment
and the proceedings terminated.
Printed at “The Moening Bulletin” Office, Rockhampton.
16
