

F/oi4-0
ADDRESS
BY THE
HON. WILLIAM EDWARD HEARN, LL.D., M.L.0.,
ON THE
AMENDMENT OF THE LAW.
I am fortunate in having an opportunity of addressing this
section at a time when great questions of law reform are under
discussion in our Parliament. The attention of the Legislature
has during the current session been invited to the present
state, both of our substantive and of our adjective law, to the
reconstruction of the one, and to still bolder changes in the
other. These questions have thus passed the stage of specu-
lative enquiry, and have assumed their place in the list of
practical legislation. It cannot then be inopportune if, in a
meeting of jurists, which, though its primary object be light,
yet also hopes for fruit, I leave the sterile field of declamation
and the dry light of abstract philosophy, and invite your
attention to those media axiomata of our art, those large and
important questions in which both the public and the profession
have a deep and immediate interest.
First, then, I must congratulate you upon the prospect of
the speedy adoption of the English Judicature Acts. How
far that great experiment which those Acts contain has been
practically successful lam not now required to consider. Nor
indeed should I venture —at such a distance and with such
imperfect means of knowledge—to pronounce upon such a
question any opinion. But the necessity for the administration
of both law and equity in the same suit has long been apparent.
Were it not that we know that nothing in law owes its origin
merely to its utility, we might well wonder that this system
of parallel courts could have arisen, or, if some accident had


produced it, have continued. Of course its origin was altogether
historical, and was due to circumstances which are now well
ascertained. Yet it was a hold act to make so great a change
in long-established systems. When an organism has attained
a certain degree of growth and of development, it is not always
possible—it is not always even desirable—to reconstruct it,
or even to change its conditions of existence. We may wish
that it were other than it is ; we may know the causes that
have marred the symmetry of its form ; but for the most part
we are fain to accept it as it exists, and to modify our conduct
to its structure since we cannot change its structure to our
wants. It was thus a truly great undertaking to break up the
habits of three centuries, and to merge courts which had
flourished for more than twice three centuries in one new and
untried tribunal. We cannot wonder if so great a change
were not effected without some inconvenience ; if it did not at
once produce all the results that were expected from it ; if it
did produce consequences which no person had foreseen. Such
things are incidental to every great change. Happily for us
our difficulties, though far from inconsiderable, are much less
formidable than those which the law reformers of England had
to encounter. Eight-and-twenty years ago, in the very infancy
of the colony, we started with that single court for which
Bentham and his followers so long sighed in vain. Our insti-
tutions were indeed at that time in advance of our public
opinion. Instead of following to its legitimate results the
advantage that we thus had gained, we hastened to retrace our
steps. We dreaded to be in any way in advance of England.
We insisted that law and equity should be administered
separately. With a sort of feeling that it might seem almost
ridiculous to have two systems of law in one court, we proceeded
to divide our single court. We made a special judge for equity.
By degrees we established other superior courts. We set up a
court of mines ; we set up a central criminal court, and courts
of assize. We multiplied courts of inferior jurisdiction. So
servile has been our imitation of English fashions in law, that
we have narrowly escaped having divisions of the Supreme
Court, so that it thus might correspond with the divisions of
the High Court of Justice at Westminster. It is with fear
and trembling that we venture to make any alteration of an
English rule. Such imitation seems more worthy of the artists
of China or Japan, who are said to reproduce even the flaws
and cracks in the works of art that are given them to copy,
than of the members of a learned profession who understand
the principles upon which they work, and know how to adapt


these principles to new combinations of facts. However, the
nnity of our court is at length about to be re-established. We
are to have one court, and one method of procedure in that
court. Power, too, will be given to the judges to modify by
rules of court this procedure until they succeed in bringing
it into good working order. For the success of such a system,
especially in its earlier days, the co-operation of the men who
have actually to work it is essential. Ido not mean the
decorous acquiescence with which every act of the Legislature
is received; but I mean that we need the hearty and cordial
and sympathetic support of the judges. It is therefore an
omen of the highest hope that not merely the commission who
advised the new Judicature Bill, but the committee of that
commission who framed it, sat under the presidency of that
true law reformer, the Chief Justice, and enjoyed the mitis
sapientia of Sir Redmond Barry.
I have said that ample legislative powers have under this
Bill been given to the judges. But they have another charge
to which I wish to direct your attention. In England a
council of judges has been established, to report from time
to time upon the working of the new system. So far as I
have been able to learn, and I have made all the enquiries
within my reach, although seven years have elapsed since
this council was formed, no such report has yet been pub-
lished. Care has consequently been taken in the present Bill
to make the duty of furnishing an annual report imperative
upon the judges. At the same time, the province of these
reports has been extended from mere practice and procedure
to the whole law which the judges administer. By these
necessary reports, and by this extended criticism, there will be
accumulated year by year a body of observations and sug-
gestions which cannot fail to command public attention, and
to provide materials for constant improvement in legislation.
At present the great experience of the judges, and their
unequalled opportunities of observation, are, so far as regards
the improvement of the law, absolutely wasted. It is not the
place of a judge to volunteer opinions on such matters. If he
were to do so frequently, his motives would surely be misunder-
stood or misrepresented. If he sees things going very wrong
he may write to the Attorney-General, and in due course will
doubtless receive the orthodox reply. But the Attorney-
General has usually other matters before him. Acrior ilium
cura domat. A man who is absorbed in striving at the risk
of his official life to maintain his balance upon the giddy
tight-rope of party politics has little inclination, upon a mere
A 2


semi-official intimation from a judge, to engage in a new and
perhaps extensive and difficult enquiry, which will only benefit
the public, and not even in the least degree himself or his
party. So the judge’s letter shares the fate of all such letters,
and its writer does not care to repeat such correspondence.
But when our new Bill becomes law, it will henceforth he the
business of the judges to report and to reiterate their reports.
These reports will be laid before Parliament and discussed in
the newspapers, and in these circumstances the Attorney-
General of the future will soon begin to discover that such
reports contain much profitable reading, and will exert himself
accordingly. Thus the public will succeed in obtaining what
they want a steady and skilled and continuous and cheap
amendment of all their law.
There is one other observation which I desire to make on
the subject of technical law reform. The reaction against the
old system of pleading has been so violent that we are likely
to run into the opposite extreme. The tendency now is to
throw the whole case down before the judge, just as it is stated
by each of the parties, and to leave him to do with it what
he can. But the old practice, whether that which prevailed
before the Prsetor, or that which was followed by the pleaders
in our own courts, was intended to avoid any such result.
Whatever errors may have been inherent in these old systems,
or have been in course of time produced in them, they pursued
one common object. That object was to make the parties do
most of their own work. The judge was thus relieved from
that preparatory treatment of materials which every com-
plicated question involves, and was free to give his whole
attention to the decision of the case when it was properly
presented to him. Indeed, the word decision itself, as Pro-
fessor von Ihering has remarked, denotes the breaking of the
complex contention into the various simple questions which it
involves. “The English system of pleading,” says Mr. Justice
Markby (Law Mag. and Bev., 4th series, vol. 3, p. 396), “ did,
in fact, afford a security against confusion from which we are
only protected at present by the intellectual capacity of the
judge. It is not too much to say that every step taken in the
simplification of the rules of procedure is an amplification of
the difficulties of the decision. The difficulties of a legal
enquiry are as indestructible as matter itself; they may be
shifted to one side, but cannot be altogether wiped out.”
There is, in short, a certain quantity of work which in every
legal dispute must be done. If the parties do not do it, the
judge must; if the judge does not do it, the parties must.


In other words, we must have either a self-acting system of
pleading, or all our judges must he first-rate men. But
great judges are few and far between ; and when we have
found one, it may well be doubted whether it is good economy
to set him to unravel a tangle of facts, or of mixed facts and
law, which a good system of pleading would readily have
disentangled for him. At all events, amid all our satisfaction
at the introduction of the new system, it is good to bear in
mind its inevitable cost. u Surgit amari ahquidß If we get
rid of the evils of the old pleadings, we thereby enhance the
difficulties of the decision. Such in effect is the opinion of one
of the latest and the ablest German writers upon Roman law,
Professor von Ihering, of Gottingen ; and such, too, is the
opinion of one who for us is a still better witness, Mr. Justice
Markby, late of the Supreme Court of Calcutta. The latter
very learned author thus writes :
“Numberless are the mistakes which would have been avoided by law-
makers if the real relation of the rules of pleading to the office of judge
had been always kept in mind. I cannot remember a single instance in
which, when discussing a legal reform, it has not been taken for granted
that by simplifying the rules of pleading you relieved the whole discussion
of a useless burden. When you have allowed a plaintiff to lay before the
Court in his own language the tale of all his wrongs, and have permitted
the defendant to state, not only all that he has to say by way of reply,
but to bring all his counter-charges, a triumph of simplicity is commonly
supposed to have been achieved. In truth, confusion has been only
worse confounded. Perhaps upon this topic I may be allowed to refer to
my own experience, having had special opportunities for observing the
results of such a system. Nothing can exceed the bewildering confusion
of an Indian lawsuit, in which full advantage has been taken of this so-
called simplicity; and every Indian judge knows how frequently Indian
tribunals, with little professional experience and very limited professional
assistance, are overwhelmed by the difficulties of disentangling the real
points of decision from the mass of allegations before them.”
It thus appears that the tendency of the present changes is
to increase the labor and the responsibility of the judges.
We must wait for specific experience before we can determine
how far in this country the strain can be safely borne. If,
unfortunately, it should prove excessive, it is at least well to
know the weak point in our system, and the direction in which
we shall have to seek the appropriate remedy. Although the
late commission on the Judicature Bill did not venture to
attempt the preparation of a complete code of procedure, they
have at least greatly facilitated that very desirable undertaking.
They have proposed to repeal all the Acts and parts of Acts and
all the rules of court that treat of the same subjects as those
for which provision is made in the new system. Thus there


will not be now two laws, or, at all events, two possible laws,
over which the unwary may stumble. Probably, as the com-
missioners intimate, it is not possible at present to do more
than this. We must wait for some practical experience of the
new system before we attempt a more orderly arrangement of
our whole law of civil procedure. But we have no reason on
this account to be disheartened. Procedure is the easiest and
the most convenient part of the law to codify, but at the same
time it is the part in which the necessity for codification is the
least urgent. It deals with matters with which the public can
never be familiar ; and professional men, until the evil becomes
unendurable, are not much troubled by mere defects of language
and of form. The case is far otherwise with the substantive
law, that is, the main body of law, which governs the conduct
and ascertains the rights of every person in the community.
No phenomenon in national life is more remarkable than the
continued incognoscibility, as Bentham used to call it, of our
law. It has arisen, as I think, from historical causes which it
would be tedious now to retrace. But it continues from a
feeling of sheer despair that has led men to accept it as a
natural evil which we cannot remove, and to whose burthen
we must broaden our backs as best we may. Hence, from that
well-known tendency of our nature to convert mere means into
actual ends, many persons have come to regard this jural chaos
as in itself admirable, and to resent any attempt towards
setting it in order as something visionary at best, and not
improbably impious and unnatural. Yet this introduction of
order is a task which our art and the honor of our profession
demand. It is the problem which nature itself has set to the
jurist. Until it has been solved, the advance of jurisprudence
is necessarily retarded, and its development is rendered abnor-
mal. The task, moreover, is one in which every member of the
community has a direct and deep concern. The maxim that
“ ignorance of the law excuseth no man ” is indeed not merely
convenient, but necessary for the administration of justice. Yet
that maxim is but a cruel mockery when no possibility exists
for even an intelligent and thoughtful man outside the pro-
fession to obtain any accurate knowledge of what it seriously
concerns him to know. It is an easy matter to point out the
difficulties in any such undertaking, and even to show that the
most successful efforts are likely to fall short of absolute per-
fection. But the certainty that we cannot at once do all that
we desire is no reason why we should do nothing at all. “ Est
quddam prodire tenus si non datur ultra.” The completion of
a perfect code, if such a thing be possible, must be the result


of many successive generations of workers. But important
additions to the structure may from time to time be made, with
a clear gain to science and to the no small comfort and advan-
tage of the generation that makes them. Already, for many
years, in the mother country preparations for a systematic
revision of the English law have been in progress. Commis-
sion after commission has labored upon various parts of the
law. Amending legislation, sometimes of very great import-
ance, has been effected. Many great consolidating Acts have
been passed. The Statute-book has been cleared of the accu-
mulated dust and rubbish of centuries. Some of the acutest
minds have devoted themselves to the study of the elementary
principles of jurisprudence and to the application to law of the
methods of scientific classification. Legal education, too, is at
length assuming a character becoming the preparation for a
great and liberal profession, and the lawyers of the future are
no longer regarded as apprentices to a mere legal handicraft.
A serious attempt—not by any means the first, but the most
promising of its kind—is now being made in England to include
in one Statute the whole of the law relating to indictable
offences. It is therefore possible that we, in this country,
should, even if it be not given to us to complete the work,
make an advance in the cause of true law reform far beyond
anything that was possible for our fathers. In this country,
although all the higher kinds of literary work are necessarily
conducted under very unfavorable conditions, we have for our
present subject one great compensating gain. The vis inertice
is less here than it is in an old country. There is some hope,
if not a very strong hope, that among us such an attempt may
be actually accomplished. Victorians do not bear such insen-
sate breasts, nor does Sol yoke his steeds so remote from our
Tyrian city, that we should not feel some thrill of pride if it
were indeed the case that the great work of codification, which
for a hundred years has been talked about in England, and about
which the talking is there still going on, should to some con-
siderable extent be actually carried into effect in Victoria. There
is now a Bill before our Parliament which—all imperfect as it
doubtless is, and needing in its numerous details correction
from more learned and skiful pens than its author could supply
—at least professes to deal exhaustively with one great division
of our law. No English Bill has ever ventured upon so wide
a field, and the measure, while it is complete in itself, may
serve hereafter as the first chapter of the code of Victoria. It is
not for me to discuss in this assembly either the merits or the
defects of that Bill, but I will take advantage of this occasion


to lay before yon the opinions which I entertain, and upon
which the Bill is framed, regarding the classification of law and
the preparation of a code. Ido so because classification is a
matter upon which it is essential that our views should be clear
before we even make the attempt to construct a work of the
highest legal art, such as a perfect code must be. If the general
principles of our scheme be correct, or even approximately cor-
rect, the completion of a code becomes only a question of time
and labour, or, in other words, of the money which that time
and labour imply. If these principles be not correct, we have
built our house upon the sand, and all our labour is lost.
In considering the best means of the formation of a code, we
must disregard all theories as to the origin of law, or as to
its history, or as to the form of its evidences. An immense
mass of materials is laid before us, and we desire to arrange
them in an orderly and coherent system. It will not help us
to speculate whence these materials came or how they got
there. It is not essential for our purpose whether the evidence
on which their undisputed claim to recognition depends is oral
or written. Nor are we bound by the provisional attempts
which, for the purpose of giving some kind of order to the
materials which they had in daily use, practitioners have from
time to time for their own convenience adopted. A scientific
classification, and none other will suffice for such a purpose as
that which we contemplate, rests upon very different principles.
In other words, analytical jurisprudence must be distinguished
both from historical or comparative jurisprudence, and from
the exigencies of the ordinary practice of the profession. It
accepts as they exist, and without demur, the rules of our actual
law; and it aims, at least so far as my present purpose is
concerned, at the orderly exposition and the intelligible state-
ment of those rules in the like manner and by the like methods
as those which the biological sciences adopt. Classification
is indeed a matter of practical convenience, and therefore, in
some sense, whatever method best satisfies the exigency of the
moment is best. But the rough-and-ready rules of daily life
soon fail when they are applied to the large and complex
requirements of science. In any circumstances classification
is evidently not an arbitrary thing. According to the old logic
it must fulfil two conditions. It must be adequate, and it
must be distinct. That is, it must cover the whole ground,
and its parts must not overlap. As to the latter condition,
there is an important practical qualification. The parts of a
division must in thought be as distinct as if they were parallel
lines. But this rule is not violated, only because it is difficult


to determine to which part of the division a particular case
belongs. That is simply a matter of fact. If the disputed
instance contain the characteristics of the first part, it belongs
to the first part. If it contain the characteristics of the second
part, it belongs to the second part. The difficulty in deciding
this question is not due to any want of precision in the rule,
but to the uncertainty as to the facts to which the rule is
applied. There is a third principle of scientific classification,
a principle upon which, in fact if not in thought, the principles
of adequacy and of distinctness themselves depend. We must
take as the basis of our classification some fundamental fact
in the structure, and not merely in the form, of the organism.
The reason is that the structure governs the form. Our basis,
then, must be a remote, not a proximate antecedent, an ante-
cedent which determines the whole train of consequences, and
which is not itself dependent upon any other immediate cause.
Such an antecedent cannot always be discovered by simple
inspection; and it is therefore only by repeated generaliza-
tions, by including one scheme of arrangement after another
in some ever-widening method, that success can be slowly and
gradually attained. Such has been the case conspicuously
with the biological sciences. Such, we may be well assured,
will be the case with those still imperfect sciences that deal
with human society. We may therefore expect that the basis
of the classification of law must be sought not in its external
and more obvious phenomena, but in some more intimate
principle of its nature.
It is therefore necessary to consider the ultimate analysis
of that which we call law. I use the word in its strict sense.
I speak now only of law such as lawyers use, of that law which
is administered in courts of justice, and which forms one of the
standards of human conduct. I do not refer to any other
standard of action ; much less do I refer to any metaphorical
use of the term, or to those observed uniformities of physical
sequence which are commonly described as laws of nature. I
mean by law the commands of the State for the regulation of
the general conduct of its subjects. It is with these commands,
with all these commands, and with none but these, that ana-
lytical jurisprudence is concerned. This description of law will,
at least in its general outline, hardly be disputed. Let us now
examine it somewhat in detail. There are many cases of com-
mands—that is, of intimations of enforceable desires—which are
distinct from, and are sometimes even opposed to, law. Many
such commands closely resemble law; and they do so of neces-
sity, because the only real difference between the two classes of


commands is that of the authority from which they emanate.
The orders of a master to his servants, the rules of the jockey
club, the rules of an unlawful secret society, the customs
regarding dress to which we give the special name of fashion,
are commands or expressions of enforceable desires ; but they
are not commands of the State, and they are not, therefore, in
the strict sense laws. There may be commands of the State
which are not laws. The order of a judge in any particular
case, the proceedings of the Executive in the administration
of the law, are commands of the State, but they are usually
regarded as distinct from the general rules of which they are
the practical application. Looking at the general rules which
the State imposes on its subjects, or which, to speak more
accurately, a society of free men establishes through its proper
organs for its own guidance, we observe certain facts. One is
that every command implies at least two parties—the party
who gives it, and the party who receives it. The former is said
to issue the command ; the latter is said to be under the duty
of obeying it. There is also the connotation that in the event
of disobedience—that is, of a breach of duty—consequences
painful to the delinquent will follow. Thus law, in the sense
with which we are concerned, means that the State—that is,
the legislative organ of society—prescribes certain rules of
conduct; that the subjects of the State —that is, the members
of that society and any other persons over whom the society
has for the time being control —are under a duty to obey these
rules ; and that, in case of disobedience, the State will hold the
person breaking his duty to be liable to penal consequences,
involving in the last resort the application of force. Two or
three observations suggest themselves on this analysis so far
as it has gone. First, there is a clear distinction between the
duty and the means by which its performance is enforced. The
former is the primary object of the command. The latter is
merely a contrivance for giving effect to that primary object.
We thus have at the outset a division of law into the duties
themselves, with the appropriate warning attached to each, and
into those arrangements which the State thinks fit to make for
the enforcement of violated duties. This distinction Bentham
calls substantive and adjective law; and although Austin does
not look with favour upon these terms, they at least forcibly
express a leading division of our subject. Secondly, the duty
rests upon a person, and that person is necessarily other than
the party who issues the command. We shall presently see
that the duty may acquire a further extent, but so far as we
have gone it begins and ends with the person on whom it is


imposed. Thirdly, this duty consists in acts or in forbearences,
that is, the party subject to the duty is commanded to do
certain acts or to observe certain forbearances. Acts and
forbearances, then, are the proper subject-matter of laws ; but
these acts and forbearances may be qualified in various ways.
They may be limited by considerations of time, of place, of
person, or of circumstance. They may be, and practically are,
still more rigorously limited by the state of mind of the party
from whom they are required. It is comparatively seldom that
an act is forbidden absolutely. The prohibition generally goes
to an act done with knowledge of certain circumstances, or
with, though much more rarely, a given motive, or with a given
intent, or with rashness, or with heedlessness, or with negli-
gence. That is, as to the four last-mentioned states of mind,
the act or the forbearance is prohibited, when there is present
with it either an expectation of its consequences, actual or
implied, whether these consequences be or be not desired; or
an advertence to the consequences, but coupled with an unrea-
sonable belief that they will not in fact occur; or when the
act is done or omitted in mere thoughtlessness, whether that
thoughtlessness relate to an act, in which case it is heed-
lessness, or to an omission, in which case it is negligence. I
need not remind you how great a part the adverbs “ knowingly,
maliciously, and negligently ” have played in our law. Yet
this adverbial form of itself indicates the true position in legal
theory of the notions which the terms express. Fourthly, it
appears that duties and commands are correlative ; each of
them implies the other. Every command creates a duty. No
duty can arise without a command. We have here, therefore,
a natural basis for jural classification. If we arrange the
commands of the State according to the duties which they
generate, we have at once as our basis a fundamental fact in
the very structure of law. We know further, that our division
must be adequate, and it is our own fault if it be not distinct.
Such, then, is the first and simplest form of law—a duty,
whether to act or to forbear, with or without limitations,
imposed upon indefinite persons. An element of complexity
here presents itself. That duty may terminate with the person
upon whom it is imposed. But it may also go further. It may
have been imposed for the benefit of some third party. That
third party may be empowered, in the case of a breach of duty,
either to do some act otherwise forbidden, or to invoke the
assistance of the State. In such a case this third party is said
to have “ a right.” I need not enlarge upon the interminable
confusion to which this unlucky word has given rise. It is


enough, to say that law is concerned not with right hut with
rights ; and that the latter word (which is the plural of “a
right ”) means exactly what I have stated, and nothing more.
I only add that my words, “the duty is imposed for the
benefit of a third party,” were meant to distinguish a right
from a power. It is not exact to say that a judge has a right to
order a criminal to he hanged, or that the prisoner has a right
to he so sentenced. There is indeed in such a case a duty which
relates to a third party; but that duty is not imposed for the
benefit either of judge or of prisoner. It is a power as regards
the one, and a liability as regards the other. Further, the
matter to which the act or the forbearance so to be done or
observed for the benefit of a third party relates, may be of
three different kinds. It may be a thing in the ordinary sense
of the term, or a person, or a right. The Romans expressed
this subject-matter of a right by the word Res, and this word
bore not only this extended meaning but also the common
meaning of a thing. Consequently, as it was used to express
the whole of a notion and also a part of the same notion, it
was inevitable that much confusion should be the result. It
does not conduce to clearness to speak of a person as a thing,
or to characterize certain things as intangible and incorporeal.
The confusion was the more unfortunate as the Roman lawyers
could have readily found distinct names for these various subject-
matters. At least such a power may be inferred from their
use of the words Res, opera, nomina, that is, commodities,
services, and credits. But I cannot now enlarge upon this
subject. I only observe that the distinction to which I refer
may probably be found useful in the theory of property, and
consequently may occupy a larger space than it has hitherto
done in the elements of Political Economy.
We thus obtain the first great division of duties. Duties
either relate to third parties or they do not. In the latter
case, where no right is present, they are called absolute. In
the former case they are called relative, since they relate to
some person other than the original parties to the duty.
Relative duties may be subdivided according to their extent
They relate either to all men or to some men. In other words,
they are either general or particular. They concern either
indefinite unascertained persons, or definite ascertained per-
sons. This is the well-known distinction of jura in rem and
jura in personam, or rights which correlate duties as against
the world, and rights which correlate duties as against
specific individuals. These expressions were not used by the
classical jurists, but the ideas they convey were expressed in


the former case by, as I think, the word jus alone (as appears
by such passages in the Digest as “ Placet enim ejus rei judicem
jus facere ,” xxv., 3,3; “ Jus facit hoec pronuntiatioj' xxx., 1,
50), in the latter case by the word obligatio. It is noteworthy that
both these words express the duty as well as the right. By a
strange chance, their meanings have in English been curiously
transformed. We always translate jus as right, without the
corresponding notion of duty; while obligation with us always
denotes a duty, to the entire exclusion of a right. Three great
classes of duties thus present themselves —absolute duties,
general duties, particular duties. It may perhaps be useful,
as a matter of practical convenience, to add another division,
that of public duties ; but, strictly speaking, public duties are
included in either absolute or general. These divisions com-
prise the whole of the criminal law, in whatever court it may
be administered, the whole of the law of torts, and the whole
of the law of obligations, whether arising from contracts either
expressly or by implication, or from causes other than con-
tracts, that is, the so-called quasi contracts.
Absolute duties, as I have said, do not connote rights; general
and particular duties do connote them. These two last-men-
tioned classes, however, do not deal with the rights themselves,
but only with duties towards the persons invested with those
rights. It therefore becomes necessary to consider these rights,
their nature, and the modes of their acquisition, of their termi-
nation, of their alienation, and of their devolution. We thus
reach the law of property. Into that wide field I cannot attempt
even to enter. I shall only remind you of two points. First,
the word property correctly means not the right, but the subject-
matter of the right—not ownership, but the thing owned;
second, property in the usual sense—that is, material objects
in respect to which jura in rem exist—is not the whole of this
branch of the law. That which is commonly called the law of
property means the learning of certain kinds of rights in rem.
But such rights in rem exist in relation to many subjects
besides things. These subjects are the “ res incorporates” of
the Roman law, the incorporeal hereditaments in the less objec-
tionable though still imperfect language of our own law. Thus
rights in rem exist over the surface of the earth and its pro-
ducts, over the subsoil and its contents, over tame animals,
over wild animals when in possession, over goods, over ease-
ments and profits in another’s land, over profits in another’s
goods, over services, over offices, pensions, and dignities, over
franchises and privileges, over ships, over negotiable instru-
ments, valuable securities, stocks, shares, and credits. As to


all these matters the law prescribes various rules concerning
the quantity of interest, the time of enjoyment, the number of
persons interested, and their respective investitive and divesti-
tive facts; that is, the events upon the occurrence of which the
rights become vested or are taken away.
So far I have spoken of duties and rights which affect the
persons only upon whom the duty is imposed or the right
conferred, and which do not extend in their operation to any
other person. I now proceed to those considerations that are
implied in the familiar limitation, “ heirs, executors, adminis-
trators, and assigns.” These words suggest three great groups
of subjects, the devolution of rights after the death of the person
for the time being invested with the right, the alienation of
rights inter vivos, and that partial or temporary alienation
which is used for the purpose of securing the repayment of
pecuniary loans. For the codification of the first of these
subjects we have important help in the Indian Succession Act,
an Act which was prepared by a commission of eminent English
judges and lawyers, and became law with, I believe, less local
change than any others of the great Indian Statutes. Of the
other two subjects, I must speak less hopefully. They are, in
themselves, the part of the law that is most difficult to codify,
and they are also the part in which we have the least assist-
ance from without. It may be, however, that in this case,
as in so many other cases, difficulties will disappear when they
are resolutely met; and I trust that, when the time for dealing
with these divisions of the law has arrived, the advantages of
the earlier part of our code will have become so apparent that
there will be no lack of laborers or of enthusiasm for the
accomplishment of the work. To these three Statutes a fourth,
of a kindred nature, must be added. Men may incur duties
and acquire rights, and may deal with these duties and rights,
not only by themselves but by others. Thus the learning of
vicarious liability, and of vicarious acquisition and enjoyment,
makes its appearance. Were time to permit, there is no sub-
ject on which I would more gladly address this section than
on the law of agency. No division of our law has, I think,
had a greater part in the development of modern society. No
such division brings into a more marked contrast the funda-
mental differences between modern and archaic life. The
lateness of the appearance of agency in Roman law, the slow-
ness of its growth in that system, its wide adoption in modern
times, and its application in England to political purposes,
afford matter for much serious consideration. But these are
subjects into which I must not now enter, and I have only to


mark a Statute of Agency as one of the needful chapters of a
code of general law.
These seven great Acts—the Statute of Absolute and General
Duties, the Statute of Particular Duties or Obligations, the
Statute of Rights, the Statutes of Succession, of Transfers, of
Securities, and of Agency—comprise, I think, the main body of
the general law—of the law applicable to all persons, at all
times, and in all places. To these, perhaps, an eighth should
be added—a Statute of Interpretation, comprising not only a
glossary of technical terms or of abridged expressions, and a
statement of the rules for the interpretation of written instru-
ments, but also a collection of those maxims or rules of law
whose existence is presupposed in the administration of justice,
and by whose light all acts of the Legislature must be read.
There still remains behind an immense body of limited or ex-
ceptional law, which applies only to particular classes of persons,
or is limited to particular localities, or is only temporary in its
operation. This is what has some times been called the law of
status, and what Austin more appropriately calls the law of
special conditions. Its place in a system of law is defined by the
very nature of the case. It must follow the general portion of
the law, because it consists in a modification of the provisions of
that portion. It may be divided generally into the law relating
to public conditions, and the law relating to private conditions.
The former division would contain all our public law, including
the law relating to the Prerogative, to Parliament, to the various
departments and offices of the public service, to corporations,
municipalities, and other public institutions. Under private
conditions would be arranged all the various laws relating to
particular persons and places and occupations. It follows that,
in the preparation of a code, this special part of it should not
be taken in hand until the general part has been completed;
and that when it was constructed it would contain a large
number of enactments, each referring more or less to the general
code, but, as regards others of the same class, each complete
in itself, and unconnected with the rest. There might be some
provisional consolidation of some of these divisions, but their
final treatment must wait, as I have said, for the completion
of those general rules which they are intended to vary or
restrict.
We can now, I think, review our position, and consider what
with any reasonable prospect of success may be hoped for in
the matter of law reform. There are, if I may so speak, three
great continents of law; one is technical law, the second is
special law, the third is general law. The reform of technical


law is proceeding as favourably as we can perhaps expect.
We can indeed, from time to time, effect many improvements
in it, and in all such improvements we ought to bear in mind
our ultimate end—a code of procedure. But, on the whole, in
dealing with it, we shall probably act most prudently in
hastening slowly. Special law is, as I have said, from its
nature, posterior to our third leading division, and its con-
sideration must, therefore, be temporarily postponed. Its time
has not yet arrived. But for the final survey of our third
continent, for the completion of the code of general law, all our
efforts are now required. That is the work to our hands at
the present time, and if we succeed in it, the rest is both
easier to be done and is certain to follow. It is necessary,
therefore, briefly to consider our resources for the undertaking,
and their sufficiency for our requirements. As to one of the
seven subjects of general law which I have enumerated —and that
subject not the least in magnitude or in interest—the subject,
namely, of absolute and general duties—a Bill, as I have already
said, has been prepared, and is now before Parliament. The
most difficult portion of that Bill, that portion of it which
declares the common law, has had the great advantage of
being, so far as circumstances admitted, taken from or
assimilated to the code of indictable offences settled by the
commission of judges over which, two years ago, Lord Blackburn
presided. But as the Victorian Bill includes all duties and
their breaches, whether these breaches are punishable or sound
in damages, and, if punishable, whether they are indictable or
are the subjects of summary jurisdiction, its sections are
considerably more than twice as numerous as those in the
corresponding portion of the English code. As to the Statute
of Obligations, a draft Bill might, I think, if there were any
encouragement to proceed with such a work, be prepared in the
course of a few months. It is possible that a Statute of
Successions might also be in readiness in the same time. It
is not likely that the Statute of Agency would present any
very formidable difficulty. But as to the time which the pre-
paration of the other Statutes would require, I cannot venture to
speak with any confidence. In any case, however, the method
of dealing with all these subjects seems tolerably clear. I
assume, of course, as a condition precedent of the scheme, that
Parliament, if it does not think fit to reject these Bills when
they have been finally settled, will be prepared to accept them
without alteration. Such Bills are in truth not legislation in
the ordinary sense of the term ; and no legislative body in the
world has either the time or the skill to criticise such measures


in detail.* Whatever the faults of our Parliament may he,
both Houses have always shown a generous confidence to
undertakings of this nature, and have been content to accept
consolidation Bills on the faith of the Minister who introduced
them. To justify such confidence all possible precautions
should be taken for the proper execution of the work. The
course that seems to me the best is as follows:—First, each
draft Bill should be prepared by one person if possible, or at
all events under the immediate direction and superintendence
of one person; second, this draft should be revised throughout
by at least two other counsel, who need not necessarily be the
same for each part of the Statute, and the whole should be then
settled by them in consultation with the author; thirdly, when
the draft is thus revised and corrected, it should be examined
by a commission composed of persons in whom Parliament and
the country might be expected to confide. I am, of course,
aware of the difficulty of obtaining such a commission in this
country, where every person has his own work to do, and often
finds the day all too short for doing it. If we were to invite,
as would naturally be done, the assistance of some of the
judges, it would, I conceive, be necessary while they were
engaged upon the commission to relieve them, as seems to
have been done in the English commission, from some at
least of their judicial duties. I have sometimes thought that
in such a work as the formation of a code, we might go further
afield, and not confine our choice of commissioners to the
boundaries of our own colony. The other colonies are not less
interested than we are in the codification of a law which
substantially is common to us all. If such a code were success-
fully established here, there is little doubt that in at least its
main provisions our neighbours would speedily adopt it. In
the event, therefore, of any such attempt at a code being made,
would it not be well if we were to invite the assistance of
those neighbours ? The work is not of such a nature as to
necessitate frequent meetings, and in such a cause it might be
* “Early this session” (1833) “I” (Lord Campbell) “re-introduced my Bills
for abolishing fines and recoveries, for allowing brothers and sisters of the half-
blood to succeed one another, for regulating the law of dower, and for fixing at
twenty years the period of possession which shall give a right to real property.
They quietly passed through both Houses of Parliament without one single
syllable being altered in any of them. This is the only way of legislating on
such a subject. They had been drawn by the Real Property Commissioners,
printed and extensively circulated, and repeatedly revised with the advantage
of the observations of skilful men studying them in their closet. A mixed and
numerous deliberative Assembly is wholly unfit for such work.” —Lord
Campbell’s Life, vol. ii., page 29.


hoped, and not, I think, in vain, that some effort would readily
be made. If, then, a commission were formed for the purpose
of criticism and final amendment of the revised draft Bill, and
if this commission were to contain the Chief Justice and the
Attorney-General, or other representatives of each of the neigh-
bouring colonies, I believe that confidence would be created
both in the public and in Parliament, that the task would be
conscientiously and efficiently performed, and that a sentiment
of, if I may so speak, national interest would be aroused in the
first great precedent of united Australian action.
I had meant to have said something upon legal education, and
upon its state and prospects in this country, but time fails me.
I shall only observe that our law school has borne, and is
still bearing, good fruit. Under the present rules of court
every barrister must now take his degree of bachelor of laws ;
and every solicitor must matriculate, and must also success-
fully study four specified subjects of the course for that degree.
We labour indeed under one great difficulty, but that is a
difficulty to which legal education is in every university sub-
ject. Law is essentially an art, and an art can be learned only
by practice. But practice is the very thing which a university
cannot supply. I never pass the hospital without a feeling
very near akin, I am afraid, to envy, when I think of the ad-
vantages which medical students enjoy, but which do not exist
for students of the law. Still, so far as book learning goes,
and that learning, though not the whole, is an essential part
of our profession, we have no cause of complaint. We require
from our young men as a preliminary for their work a good
school education, as shown by their passing the matriculation
examination. They then pursue their general studies to an
extent equivalent to about half the course for the degree of
bachelor of arts. In my judgment the time has now arrived
when we may safely advance a little further, when we may
extend by another year the period of study for the bar, and
require the degree in arts as a condition precedent to the
study of law. After the completion of their general studies,
our young men study the ordinary subjects of legal education.
These subjects do not call for any special comment. I may,
however, observe that we give perhaps more time than is
usual in other law schools to the great subjects of jurispru-
dence and of Roman law. Few studies afford a better prepa-
ration for the commencement of so intricate and difficult an art
as law than a careful analysis of its principal notions, and an
examination of the mutual relations of its various parts. Juris-
prudence, in fact, bears to law the same relation that anatomy


and physiology bear to medicine. Further, our maxim tells us
that “ the reason of the law is the life of the law j” but the
history of the law is, in very truth, the reason of the law. For
this history, if for no other purpose, we must go to the great
original source, to u Roma p atria legum ” —to Home, the father-
land of law. It is something that in this new country, amid
all our haste to get rich, and all the bustle of the present, the
study of the past has not been forgotten, and has not, I think,
been found by our Australian youth to be destitute of charms.
Nor can I deny myself the gratification of adding that those of
our students who have completed their studies in London have
not been undistinguished among competitors who have enjoyed
greater educational advantages than they. But it is not for the
purpose of maintaining even a successful rivalry with European
schools of law that the study of the law is essential to us. In
new countries, or in countries whose development is not ad-
vanced, that study assumes unusual importance. The law is that
one of the learned professions which is most akin to public
business; and consequently, where leisured classes do not exist,
it furnishes the most numerous and the best-trained leaders of
public opinion. “ The law,” says Burke (vi., 367), “ should
be the leading science in every well-ordered commonwealth.”
Undoubtedly it has been such in most. All the great cham-
pions of English liberty were either themselves men of the
law, or acted under the constant advice of lawyers. In America
the law has supplied most of its leading statesmen. In this
country it used to be a maxim that the law officers were the
eyes of the Cabinet. I believe that for many years to come
the law will furnish the most skilful and most influential of
our public men; and that therefore the improvement of the
law and the promotion of legal education are matters not of
professional or temporary interest but of deep and abiding
public importance. On our profession then in our country
rests no small honour, but likewise no small responsibility.
Yet, as every man has his besetting sin, so every occupation
has its own peculiar failing. It has long been recognised that
the practice of the law tends to develop intellectual sharpness
at the expense of breadth; perhaps I may say that it encou-
rages an undue regard to petty details and to mere machinery,
to the neglect of those great ends which these details and that
machinery were meant to subserve. All such natural weak-
nesses the wise man will recognise, and will take heed therein
lest he fall. No method of precaution against such tendencies
is, I think, so sure as a constant recurrence to the fundamental
principles of our art, and to the history of the growth and


development of law. It is these studies that give its true
character to the science of jurisprudence, that science which,
in the words of Edmund Burke, is “ the pride of the human
intellect, and which, with all its defects, redundancies, and
errors, is the collective reason of ages, combining the principles
of original justice with the infinite variety of human concerns.”
“For what,” as the same great writer elsewhere (vi., 366) asks,
“ can be more instructive than to search out the first obscure
and scanty fountains of that jurisprudence which now waters
and enriches whole nations with so abundant and copious a
flood—to observe the first principles of right springing up, in-
volved in superstition and polluted with violence, until by
length of time and favourable circumstances it has worked itself
into clearness ; the laws, sometimes lost and trodden down in
the confusion of wars and tumults, and sometimes overruled
by the hand of power; then victorious over tyranny, growing
stronger, clearer, and more decisive by the violence they had
suffered; enriched even by those foreign conquests which
threatened their entire destruction, softened and mellowed by
peace and religion, improved and exalted by commerce, by social
intercourse, and that great opener of the mind—ingenuous
science.”
APPENDIX.
A Bill “To declare, consolidate, and amend the Law concerning the
Duties of the People,” and with the short title “ The Statute of Duties,”
was passed by the Legislative Council on the Ist of December 1880, and
was read a first time in the Legislative Assembly. It is arranged in Parts,
Divisions, and Subdivisions as follow: —
Paet I. —Absolute Duties , or duties vjhich do not relate to other persons ,
and the breaches thereof.
Division 1. —Self-regarding duties.
~ 2. —Household duties.
Subdivisions. —( a ) Management; (5) Marriage; (c) Birth;
(d) Maintenance.
„ B.—Duties concerning occupations.
Subdivisions.—(a) Observance of Sunday ; ( b ) Licensed
occupations; (c) Medical profession; (d) Printing and
newspapers; \e) Factories and mines ; (/) Pecuniary
transactions.


Division 4. —Duties concerning importation and exportation.
Subdivisions.—(a) Influx of criminals ; ( b ) Imports and
exports,
~ s.—Duties towards tbe aborigines.
„ 6, —Duties towards and concerning lower animals.
Subdivisions. — (a) The treatment of animals ; (5) The
slaughtering of tame animals; (c) The diseases of tame
animals; (d) The registration of dogs; (e) The preser-
vation and capture of game; (/) The preservation and
capture of fish.
Paet ll.— General Duties, or duties which relate to indeterminate 'persons,
and the breaches thereof.
Division I.—Duties relating to the person of others.
Subdivisions. — (a) Duties relating to life ; ( h ) Breaches of
duties tending to loss of life; (c) Breaches of duties
tending to bodily harm; [d) Duties relating to security;
(e) Duties relating to chastity; (/) Duties relating to
the disposition of the dead.
„ 2. —Duties relating to the feelings of others.
Subdivisions.— (a) Defamation; (b) Insults and threats ;
(c) Blasphemy.
„ B.—Duties relating to the family of others.
Subdivisions.— (a) Members of the family; (b) Domestic
and out-door servants; (c) The home.
„ 4. —Duties relating to the property of others.
Subdivisions.— (a) Duties towards property; (b) Civil
remedies for breaches of duty towards property ; (c)
Criminal breaches of duty in taking property ; ( d )
Criminal breaches of duty in damaging property; (e)
Summary jurisdiction in offences against property; (/)
Summary jurisdiction in offences against Crown pro-
perty ; (g) Restitution of stolen property.
„ s.—Duties relating to the privileges of others.
Subdivisions, —( a ) Offices and franchises ; (5) Copyright;
( c ) Patents ; (d) Trade marks.
~ 6.—Duties of veracity towards others.
Subdivisions. —( a ) Fraud; ( b) Personation; (c) Forgery;
{d) Preparations for forgery; (e) Criminal breach of
trust.
„ 7. —Duties of diligence towards others.
Subdivisions.—( a ) Use and management of property; (b)
Conduct and control of business; ( c) Personal circum-
spection; (d) Remedies.
Paet 111. — Public Duties, or duties which relate to the State, and their
breaches .
Division I.—Duties of allegiance.
„ 2. —Duties concerning public servants
„ 3. —Duties concerning elections,
„ 4. —Duties concerning the administration of justice.
Subdivisions.— (a) The conduct of justice; ( b ) The facili-
tating of justice; (c) Abuses of justice; (d) The officers


of justice; (e) Arrest; (/) Jurors; {g) Witnesses; {h)
Prisoners.
Division s.—Duties concerning the public peace.
Subdivisions.—( a ) Breaches of the peace ; (6) Unlawful
assemblies ; (c) Biots.
„ 6.—Duties concerning public decency and good order.
Subdivisions.—( a ) Public decency ; ( b ) Disorderly houses
and gaming ; (c) Vagrancy; [d) Dangerous persons.
„ 7.—Duties concerning the public convenience and safety.
Subdivisions.— (a) Common nuisances; ( b ) Use of vehicles;
(i c ) Use of fire ; (d) Public health.
„ 8. —Duties concerning coins, weights, and measures.
Subdivisions. —( a ) Coins; ( b ) Weights and measures.
~ 9. —Duties concerning the revenue and its protection.
Subdivisions.—( a ) Customs ; ( b ) Excise; (c) Post office;
( d) Stamps.
Part IV. —Accessory duties and their breaches.
Part Y. — Exculpation.
Division I.—Matters of justification.
Subdivisions. — (a) Legal commands and powers ; (b) The
preservation of the peace; (c) Self-defence; (d) Defence
of property.
„ 2. —Matters of excuse.
Subdivisions.' — (a) Defective intelligence ; (b) Mistake,
consent, and accident; (c) Triviality; (d) Coverture.
Paet YL— Sanctions.
Division I.—Compensation.
„ 2. —Punishment.
„ 3. —Execution of capital and other sentences.
„ 4. —Commutation, mitigation, and remission.
A Bill “ To declare, consolidate, and amend the Law relating to Obliga-
tions,” and with the short title “ The Statute of Obligations,” was read a
second time in the Legislative Council on the 28rd March 1881. It is
arranged in Parts, Divisions, and Subdivisions as follow :
Part I.— Obligations arising from all contracts.
Division 1. —The legal effect of contracts.
5 , 2.—The formation of contracts.
Subdivisions. — (a) Proposal and acceptance ; ( b ) Form ;
(cj Consideration.
8. —The avoidance of agreements.
Subdivisions. — (a) Mistake; (b) Illegality; (c) Method of
avoidance.
„ 4. —The rescission of contracts.
Subdivisions.— (a) Incapacity; (h) Misrepresentation and
fraud; (<?) Duress and undue influence; (d) Method of
rescission.


Division s.—Contracts of imperfect obligation.
~ 6.—The operation of contracts.
~ 7.—The interpretation of contracts.
Subdivisions.— (a) Eules of evidence; (b) Eules of con-
struction.
~ B.—The discharge of contracts.
Subdivisions. — (a) Discharge by agreement; (b) Discharge
by performance; (c) Discharge by breach; (d) Discharge
by impossibility of performance ; (e) Discharge by
operation of law.
„ 9. —The enforcement of contracts.
Part ll. Obligations arising from particular contracts.
Division 1. —The contract of bailment.
~ 2. —The contract of hire.
~ 3.—The contract of sale.
~ 4. —Contracts against loss.
Subdivisions.— {a) Indemnity; (5) Insurance; (c) Guarantee.
„ s.—The contract of service.
„ 6.—The contract of carriage.
„ 7.—The contract of partnership.
Subdivisions.— (a) The liabilities of partners ; (I) The
mutual relations of partners; (c) The dissolution of part-
nership; ( d) The winding-up of partnership affairs.
„ 8. —The sale of goodwill.
„ 9. —Negotiable instruments.
Subdivisions.— (a) The transfer and indorsement of instru-
ments; (b) The payment of instruments; ( c ) Bills of
exchange; (d) Cheques; (e) The dishonor of instru-
ments ; (f) Protest; (g) Acceptance and payment for
honor.
~ 10. —Banking.
Subdivisions.— (a) Banks and their customers; (5) Holidays.
Part lII.— AT on-consensual obligations or quasi contracts.
Part IV.— Obligations arising from foreign law.
Division 1. —Foreign contracts.
„ 2.—Foreign judgments in personam.
„ 3.—Foreign bills.
by Authority: John Ferres, Government Printer, Melbourne;


■W;«W
6<&LtO
f/0340
A/ c+QKsf
