

Wm. Marshall & Co. Printers, “ Lorgnette” Office, Melbourne.


ONE OF THE LARGEST AND BEST CONSTRUCTED PIANOS
EVER MANUFACTURED.
FULL TONED.
BEAUTIFUL QUALITY.
PERFECTION OF TOUCH AND FINISH.
MANUFACTURED SOLELY AND EXPRESSLY FOR
GUARANTEED FOR SEYSN YEARS*


EDOUARD REMENYI
“ The Liszt of the Violin.”
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS,
A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.
The London Examiner of July 28, 1877, supplies the following
correct biographical sketch of Edouard Remenyi. The great violin
virtuoso, says that journal, is about forty years of age, and was born
at Miskolc, in Hungary. His master on the violin at the Vienna
Conservatoire, where he studied music, was Joseph Bohm, the same
who instructed another Hungarian violinist—Joseph Joachim,
His artistic career, which he began very early, was interrupted by
the Hungarian rising in 1848, in which Remenyi, then quite a boy,
took an active part. After the defeat of the insurgents he had to
fly his country, and resolved to go to England. But on his way to
this country lie made the acquaintance of his celebrated countryman,
Franz Liszt, who at once recognised his genius, and became his
friend and artistic adviser. In 1854 the young artist came to
London and was appointed solo violinist to the Queen. In 1860
he obtained his amnesty and returned to Hungary, where some
time afterwards he received from the Emperor of Austria a similar
distinction to that granted him in England. In the meantime he
had made himself famous by numerous concerts in Paris and other
European capitals. After his return home, he seems for a time to
have retired from public life, living chiefly on an estate he owned in
Hungary ; but two years ago he resumed his artistic career in Paris,
where he was received with open arras, and has been living since.


Towards the end of the present season he came to London, too
late to appear much in public, but not too late to prepare for him-
self an enthusiastic welcome on his return next month, when he is
engaged to play at the Covent Garden Promenade Concerts. As
an artist M. Remenyi combines perfect mastery over the technical
difficulties of his instrument with a strongly pronounced poetic
individuality. His whole soul is in his playing, and his impulse
carries him away with it as he warms to his task, the impression
produced on the audience being, consequently, always on an
ascending scale. He never tires, and one never tires of him.
Nothing more impressive could well be imagined than hearing and
seeing M. Remenyi perform one of the stormier pieces of Chopin
transferred by him from the pianoforte to the violin, or a short
fantasia of his own composition, aptly called the “ heroic.” But
tenderer accents ai-e not wanting. The nocturnes of Chopin or of
our own Field are given with the tenderest dreaminess, interrupted
at intervals only by more impassioned strains. His rendering also
of Schubert’s well-known Barcarole is a masterpiece of sustained
legato playing. Another important feature of M. Eemenyi’s style
is the national element. He strongly maintains the genuineness of
Hungarian music, and has shown himself thoroughly imbued with
the spirit of that music by writing several Hungarian melodies,
which have been mistaken for popular tunes, and actually adopted
for such by other composers. The same half-Eastern spirit is
observable in the strong rhythmical coloring of M. Remenyi’s
execution', seldom or never attained by artists of Teutonic origin.
Such are the most striking features of the violinist’s style, but it
must not be thought that these qualities debar him from the serious
and congenial interpretation of classic master-pieces. His repertoire
comprises the names of Beethoven, Mendelssohn and Schumann, as
well as those of Chopin and Paganini, and we look forward to seeing
M. Remenyi officiate as the leader of the quartet at the Monday
popular concerts should he revisit London next season. In that
position, also, we feel sure he will hold his own by the side of
Joachim and Wilhelm].
Since the above was written , M. Remenyi has made a triumphal
tour of the United States and Canada, and has played in over 903
different places


AN I TPRaSSIVE PERFORMANCE.
Eeferri g to Remen yi’s performance at the Paris Exposition, the
■correspondent of the Boston Journal writes, in July last: Eemenyi is
positively the greatest violinist I have ever heard, He has Ole Bull’s
intense spirituality, and he has added to it something 1 which does not
belong to the North—the voluptuous rhythm and melody horn of Southern
moonlights, and the perfumes of rich blossoms. I have seen Eemenyi in
parlors, and ad red his talent; but never have I seen him appear to such
advantage, Semenyi has the face of a priest; there is nothing secular
in his aspect; he seems apart from the world; a certain austerity in his
manner contradicts the sensuous poetry in his nature. He was born a
musician; no culture could ever have improved or in any sense reformed
his temperament. Poet and artist, expression is for him an absolute
necessity. In his presence the crowd, which has been rather noisily
applauding the Tsiganes, becomes tranquil and hushed. There is a
sentiment of reverence in the stillness. Eemenyi begins. At first he
plays only a simple melody over and over, until people, puzzled, look at
each other and murmur. But that repetition is for the purpose of fixing
the melody in our minds Now, with lightning rapidity, he has darted
into a series of infinite variations, through all of which we still hear the
refrain returning with matchless precision Then be pours forth a long
current of appealing cries, of inarticulate moans of the spirit, of the
thousand things which the soul thinks, but cannot utter for itself; and
at last finishes with a mad dance, in which it requires but little fancy to
convince us that we hear the clatter of the tambourine the wail of the
guzla, the clink of spurs as cavaliers dance on the hard baked floors of
rustic cabins with pretty maidens. Loud is the applause. Eemenyi bows
and begins anew. The Tsiganes, who have accompanied him in the
previous composition, now look puzzled, smile, and shake their heads.
Eemenyi is improvising. And what glorious improvisation it is. It
is the very climax of passionate expression of the charm and beauty of
existence, a wild nature revelling in the mere enjoyment of life. Even
the Gipsies are inspired by Eemenyi’s inspiration; one by one they join
in the music, and so gradually form an undertone to the master’s inter-
pretation. He plays on and on, regardless of time, space, people, every-
thing and anything in the world, until at last the inspired moments have
passed, and he finishes the noble composition with a little madrigal, the
measure of which causes the gipsy faces to light up with the warmth of
recognition of a familiar air.”
THEOPHILE GAUTIER ON REMENYI
[ln the Moniteur Universal .
Eemenyi played a Polonaise by Chopin, and Liszt’s “ Ehapsodies
Hongroises ”in a really marvellous manner. Under his bow these strange
and charming melodies took on a profound, sympathetic and penetrating
accent—an accent exotic for ourselves, but national for the performer,
and of irresistible effectiveness. As we listened to them we thought of
the gipsies of Lenau. Nothing could be weirder, more capricious, more
romantic or more deliciously wild. They contain themes of adorable
suavity, freshness and tenderness, which sound like cradle-songs of the
world in its childhood, and swing to and fro in a hammock. Others flee
suddenly like deer through a forest of trills, arpeggios and grace-notes,
and re-appear at intervals in the interstices of the musical embroidery.
Eemenyi possesses an irreproachable accuracy of intonation; the most
risky tones in the most rapid movements, when the dishevelled bow leaps


deliriously over the string's, come forth, always clear and pure, and he
renders the most difficult music in the most masterly fashion. We asked
Eemenyi, after the Polonaise, to favor us with the “ Eakoczy March.”
He again took up his violin and commenced a sort of prelude overture,
full of muffled rumors, indistinct shuddering, vague lamentations, stormy
sounds, the clank of armour, the galloping of horsemen, the clash of
swords, the clink of spurs, the rolling of chariots, and all the distant din
prophetic of war. Through the threatening tumult a few persistent notes
foreshadow the theme of the March; and appear to seek to lead in this
tempestuous harmony. Then the March itself breaks forth, with its
stirring melody, its irresistible rhythm, its heroically-rebellions ardor.
Who could hear this terrible chant of a fierce independence without being
moved ? When he plays it, Eemenyi himself, so placid, so inimical to
all feigning in art, becomes strangely exalted.
A PATRIOT’S REMINISCENCES.
A Hungarian nobleman writes to the New York Sun the following
touching letter :—Edward Eemenyi, the coming genius of harmony, is
a Hungarian by birth and education. He enlisted as a soldier
in 1848, and fought brilliantly. He became an aide-de-camp to General
Gyorgey when the latter was appointed Commander-in-chief of the hero
army of Hungary. The writer was aide-de-camp also, and ranked Eemenyi.
We all loved and admired Eemenyi so much that we used to drive him
away from the fields of battle in order to spare the world a masterpiece of
creation in music. Incidentally I will mention that on the 11th day of
July—one of the bloodiest Austro-Eussian and Hungarian battles—
Gyorgey forbade Eemenyi to follow us. Eemenyi followed us, neverthe-
less, and appeared among us in the white heat of the conflict. Gyorgey,
on noticing him, ordered two hussars to drag him off the bloody field,
under arrest. What Eemenyi is now as a musician, I leave an intelligent
public to judge. But I will mention that though at the time only a little
lieutenant of sixteen summers, Eemenyi used to delight us old veterans,
and make our hearts glad and brave for the next day’s fray. His playing
on the violin is a bouquet of the most beautiful flowers. lam positive
that he will delight New Yorkers to the full of their expectations if only
God will spare him and bring him safe and strong to our beautiful shores.
TOPLANY.
LATEST LONDON TRIUMPHS.
Previous to sailing for America, Eemenyi played at Covent Garden,
London, on October 11th, in Eeviere’s grand classical concerts. The
notices of the principal London newspapers are appended.
[From the Times, October 12.]
Among the solo performers of the first part, that of Mr. Edouard
Eemenyi, the Hungarian violinist, deserves especial mention. As regards
volume and beauty of tone, M. Eemenyi ranks with the first masters of


his instilment. In addition to this, he has all the verve and rhythmical
•decision peculiar to his nationality, and in the rendering of his native
Hungarian airs he is absolutely unsurpassable. On the present occasion,
however, he showed that his talent is not confined to one specialty, and
his performance of Spohr’s eighth concerto for the violin was full of
breadth and classical repose. We expect to meet with M. Eemenyi’s
name in many concert programmes during the coming season. Last
night he earned warm and fully deserved applause.
[From the Daily Telegraph, October 12].
The distinguished success of this portion of the concert was achieved
by M. Eemenyi, in his own fantaisie caprice, “ Les Huguenots.” The
great Hungarian violinist has lost none of his power, and he held his
audience spell-bound not only while dazzling them with bravura, but
when appealing to their feelings by the truly vocal quality of his canta-
bile. M. Eemenyi should be an immense attraction during his engage-
ment, for there are very few such performers as he.
[From the Daily News, October 12].
M. Eemenyi—whose indisposition prevented him from appearing on
the opening night (as already recorded) —gave a superb rendering of
Spohr’s so-called “Dramatic Concerto’’ for the violin, written avowedly
“in modo di scena cantante.” In his execution of this fine work the
eminent Hungarian violinist was equally successful in the difficult bravura
passages of the first and last movements (including the elaborate cadenza
in the latter with its tenths and ‘'double stops”), and in the vocal
expression of the recitative phrases in the first “allegro” and the melo-
dious cantabile of the following beautiful “ adagio.” To the most highly
finished mechanism —both as regards expertness of finger and flexibility
of bowing—M. Eemenyi adds the command of a resonant yet pure and
liquid quality of tone and perfect intonation. His truly admirable per-
formance fully deserved the enthusiastic applause which it elicited.
[From the Morning Post, October 12].
Among the most powerful attractions of the concerts have been the
splendid performances of Herr Eemenyi, the celebrated Hungarian
violinist. His playing is an excellent combination of intellectual art
with mechanical dexterity of the most astonishing kind, and while his
delivery of cantabile phrases delights the most refined musical taste, his
execution of tows de force is a marvellous display of technical power.
[From the Evening Globe, October 12].
The miscellaneous selection which formed the second part of last night’s
concert was chiefly remarkable for the splendid violin playing of Herr
Eemenyi, who introduced his own fantasia on themes from “ Les
Huguenots.” The composition is skilfully and tastefully constructed,
and afforded occasions for the display of Herr Eemenyi’s powers as a
cantabile player, and as a brilliant executant of bravura passages. The
contralto air, “Nobil Donna,” and the tenor air, “Ah piu bianca,” were
■“sung” by him on the violin with a purity of phrasing and a grace of
expression equalled by few operatic vocalists, and his execution of florid
passages was simply marvellous. On several occasions during his masterly
performance the audience manifested their delight by bursts of cheering,
and at the conclusion the demands for an encore were enthusiastic and
unanimous.


AMERICAN PRESS.
[Prom the N. Y. Tribune, November 12].
The Hungarian violinist; Edward Remenyi, who made his first appear-
ance in America last night at Steinway Hall, is one of those phenomenal
artists who can he measured by the standard of no other men. Compari-
son, in most cases, is but a pinchbeck criticism, and with such an excep-
tional and original performer as this it is entirely useless. All his work
bears the mark of his own strong character; and in everything that he
does, whether we consider the intellectual conception of the piece or the
technical execution of it, the differences which separate him from other
violinists are differences not so much in the degree of merit as in the kind.
In mere technical facility he yields to no one. In the power of expressing
a certain order of emotions we do not believe he has a rival. In fire,
brilliancy and daring, he reminds us of the accounts that have been
written of Paganini. His first selection last night was a part of
Mendelssohn’s violin concerto —the second and third movements. The
andante was very purely and beautifully played, with no excess of senti-
ment to say the least, rather quicker than we are accustomed to hear it,
and with perhaps an unexpected degree of composure. It was not until
the rondo was reached that the violinist showed his quality, illuminating
the whole movement with a strange fire at which the elegant Mendelssohn,
if he was aware of it, must have stared in amazement. A still better
display of his characteristic powers was afforded by a group of Chopin
pieces whose romantic spirit and freedom in rhythmic structure
seemed just suited to his temper. How far the fancy of the performer
corresponded here with the purpose of the composer is a question into
which it would be unprofitable to enter. There are some artists who must
be swayed entirely by their own fancy. The elegance, precision, and
neatness of Remenyi’s work is not less notable than its brilliancy. A
touch of extreme fineness, a gossamer delicacy and exquisite double-
stopping, are among the excellencies which called forth last night the
most enthusiastic commendation. The countrymen of the performer
seemed to be largely represented in the audience, and the warmth of his
reception must have been all that he could possibly desire.
[From the Chicago Tribune, February 8, 1879].
The leading event of the week has been the appearance of the
remarkable Hungarian violinist, Remenyi. He has played in three con-
certs with his own combination, and also the second of a series of Mr. Pratt’s
symphony concerts, and has met with the greatest popular success ever
achieved by any violinist upon our concert stage.
[From the Boston Evening Transcript, Thursday, November 21, 1878.]
Edward Remenyi, the Hungarian violinist, was seen and heard for the
first time in this city, on his present visit to America, last evening at Music
Hall. His playing proved to be of the kind to complete the capture of the
public —neat, facile and delicate, full of graceful and tricksy ornamentation,
based upon a tone of remarkable fineness, purity and sweetness.
[From the Boston Post, November 21, 1878.]
Edouard Remenyi, the eminent Hungarian violinist, made his first
appearance before a Boston audience in Music Hall on Wednesday evening.
The hall was well filled, and the audience was an exceptional and very
enthusiastic one. The fame of the violinist, which had preceded him, was
in itself enough to draw the music-loving public of the city, and the desire
to listen to him was supplemented by a natural inclination to compare the


musical ability of this artist with that of one who made his dfebut in the
city a short time since. To draw a comparison between the two violinists
would be almost as difficult and as unjust as to compare either one with a
cornetist, as they represent two widely different schools of playing. In
appearance and manner on the platform no two men could be more unlike
than Wilhelmj and Remenyi. The former is shy and diffident until the
first touch of the bow upon his instrument, and after that everything but
the music is apparently forgotten. Remenyi, on the other hand, comes
upon the platform with all the self-possession of a man accustomed to
appearing in public, and during his play he does not for a moment lose
himself in his art. He is the same easy-mannered gentleman from first to
last. While Wilhelmj draws from his violin tones of wondrous sentiment
and feeling, as well as purity and delicacy ; tones which arouse the deepest
feelings in his audiences, Remenyi produces dilicious harmony and music
of remarkable sweetness, entrancing his audience rather than moving them
to deep feeling, while his execution is something the like of which has
scarcely been heard before in this city. While not by any means a
mechanical player, Remenyi apparently interprets a score in a most
thoroughly scientific manner, with little regard for himself, his art or his
audience, and it would seem as if he had made a life-long study of the
science of producing music rather than the art of interpreting it.
[From the N. Y. Herald, November 12.]
Notwithstanding the great interest attending the first appearance of
his fair compatriot last night, the Hungarian violinist was honored with
the presence of a large audience at Steinway Hall. In appearance, this
player has the semblance of a priest rather than that of an artist, although
a phrenologist would find the frontal development of his cranium re-
markably strong in the musical faculty. In stature the artist is short,
in figure stocky. With his style of playing physique is all important,
for it is the embodiment of suppressed intensity, fired in flashes with the
wildest abandon. Comparisons will, of course, at this time be sought of
the Hungarian, with the German artist who so recently preceded him.
Such cannot fairly or satisfactorily be made. Wilhelmj’s school is in
the lofty mould of the classics. Remenyi’s is of form and kind, less
classic, but absolutely his own. His face marks him as sui generis, and
his playing is the reflex of the subtle power, the matchless self-command
that speaks from his eloquent eye, and lurks about the corners of his
expressive mouth. He is a master of his instrument, and no other
violinist has ever inspired greater confidence, or shown such absolute
certainty of attack. His rendering of piano passages is exquisitely
delicate. His cantabile playing is singularly sweet, and not once in the
seven widely varied numbers given, did he make a harsh note, or “ saw ”
the strings, as even the best artists may at times permit themselves to
do. His touch is, in fact, marvellous, and the effects that he makes in
dimenuendo passages are surpassingly beautiful. He seems to make his
instrument a part of himself, and it glows, and burns, and flames under
his master-hand, ever en rapport with the strange magnetism of the
artist’s powerful individuality. That these attributes would not assert
so emphatic an effect in music of the purely classic school, where the
artist is, necessarily, restrained somewhat, must be at once evident, and
in the grand concerto by Mendelssohn, played in the first part, they were
suggested rather than exhibited. It was not until Remenyi got to his
transcription of the Nocturne by Chopin, that he began to show his full
powers, and they gleamed forth with cumulative strength in the Hungarian


melodies that followed this number. For the encore to this group of
transcriptions, the artist played Schubert’s “ Serenade.” His closing
numbers, Capriccios Nos. 21 and 24, by Paganini showed his technique
and his fine tone in their best estate. Eemenyi was received with the
strongest demonstrations of favor, both after his solos and at the end of
the concert. He achieved a great popular success, and is destined to
make a sensation wherever he appears.
[From the N, Y. Times, November 12.]
The appearance of distinguished violinists this season before New York
audiences has been among the leading musical events. Last evening,
notwithstanding the threatening weather, Steinway Hall was crowded
with a brilliant assemblage, desirous of witnessing the debut of Edouard
Eemenyi. How a violinist looks is always interesting, for between the
instrument and the performer we are apt to create certain imaginary
sympathies. Edouard Eemenyi for all the world looks like some good
French Abbe, who could better intone a mass, than draw the delicate and
bewitching tones from his instrument. This artist's manner, as far as
pose goes, is exceedingly quiet and deliberate. Once the instrument is in
the violinist’s hands, the somewhat lethargic face of the performer
changes, though imperceptibly. His eyes rarely look at the audience.
Entirely absorbed in the music he is producing, his whole being seems to
be centred on his instrument. It is not necessary to listen to the first
few bars of Mendelssohn's concerto, to be satisfied that the istrumentalist
was a virtuoso of the first order. Eemenyi’s tones are wonderfully clear
and delicate, and with a sonority which is absolutely perfect. One marked
peculiarity of his style is his method of bowing. Effects of the most
minute precision are produced by the archet touching the strings,
while the bow apparently does not move an eighth of an inch.
"When the bow is put on the cords and taken off cannot be heard. It is
the wonderful sentiment, the passion, the feeling, which distinguish
Edouard Eemenyi from any violinist we have yet heard in the Hnited
States. The instrumentalist had given him last evening no less than
three entrees in the programme. Mendelssohn’s concerto, the andante,
and the rondo; three solos for the violin, (the nocturne in E flat of Chopin,
with “Mazurka’’ and “Hungarian Melodies,”) concluding with two
strange caprices of Paganini, the numbers 21 and 24. The well-known
Mendelssohn’s concerto was, as to the andante, produced by Edouard
Eemenyi in rather slower time than we have been accustomed to hear it.
We suppose this concerto, considered properly as belonging to the modern
classical school, was introduced in the programme in order that a critical
audience should at the start become assured of the power of the violinist.
It was played with wonderful charm and exquisite feeling, and at its con-
clusion, the performer was applauded to the echo, and recalled four times.
Familiar as we are with Chopin, Eemenyi’s production of this great
master was a revelation. If the “ Nocturne ” was fully appreciated, the
“ Mazurka,’’ played with an abandon and passion, brought from the
foreign element in the house the wildest tokens of delight. The “ Melodies
Hongroises,” were equally well received. Here the apparent quiet nature
of the violinist seems to loose its restraint, and as the national lyric was
brought singing from the strings of the Stradivarius the effect was
magical. On an encore, Schubert’s “ Serenade ” was played. The peculiar
“Caprices” of Paganini were most charmingly rendered, and a whole
flood of delicate harmonies was produced. Eemenyi’s success is assured.
His playing will touch many hearts.


[From the A 7. Y. World , November 12.]
Notwithstanding the great attraction at the Academy, the Hungarian
violinist, Edouard Remenyi—who has been called “the Liszt of the
violin,” but who would better be described as its Chopin—found a large
audience waiting to welcome his first appearance in America, at Stanway
Hall last evening. Mr. Remenyi introduced himself through the medium
of the Mendelssohn concerto, and afterwards played two selections from
Chopin: a nocturne (op. 7, No. 2.) and a mazurka (op. 7, No, 1), and a
transcription by himself, of a well-connected string of Hungarian melodies.
As an encore for these, he played an elaborate arrangement of Schubert’s
“ Serenade.” His success was emphatic. The concerto showed him as a
musician more than a violinist, although in that respect, of course, there
was very little to find fault with, his technique being remarkable. He
played it with respect and in rather a subdued way, not aiming at the
display of virtuosity at the expense of a truthful int erpretation. Wilhelm]
and Remenyi belong to different schools, and are of different tempera-
ments Wilhelmj is coldly classical; Remenyi fervent, impassioned, and
brimful of human sympathy and its concomitant, an enlarged sense of
humor. Hence he is bound to become popular wherever he goes. In the
interpretation of the particular class of music for which he is best fitted,
he could hardly be surpassed. The Chopin Nocturne differed from
Wilhelmj’s transcription, in that he has more closely followed the spirit
•of Chopin. In the Mazurka, on the other hand, he has exaggerated all
the humor in it, and given an entirely new meaning to it. His perform-
ance of the Hungarian melodies was faultless—a wonderful, stirring,
most interesting performance. The concert ended with his playing of
Paganini’s Capriccios, 21 and 24, and of course, he was applauded
tremendously.
[From the Evening Post, November 12.]
Edouard Remenyi, the Hungarian violinist, made his first appearance
before an American audience last night at Steinway Hall, and proved
himself to be. in some respects, the greatest player that has yet appeared
in this country. The programme was arranged apparantly with a view
to show his mastery of all styles, containing as it did, compositions by
Mendelssohn, Chopin and Paganini He began by playing two movements
of the concerto by Mendelssohn, and as he walked on the stage in a quiet
unassuming way, he was greeted with a hearty welcome. Simply in a
musical sense, Camilla Hrso and Joseph White have done as well in the
Rondo, but none of them could equal the grace and delicacy of Remenyi’s
playing. His second selection was a group of three pieces—Nocturne in
E flat. Opus 9, No. 2, Chopin; Melodies Heroiquesand Lyriques Hongroises,
transcribed by Remenyi; and Chopin’s Mazurka, Opus 7, No. 1 The
Nocturne gave an opportunity for a display of the merits of his playing,
and was a revelation. His tone is sympathetic, penetrating, nervous,
tremulous with feeling. In the Nocturne his phrasing, the exquisite
delicacy and grace of his execution, and the tender and loving treatment
of the melody, were simply perfect. The impression he had produced
was deepened by the Hungarian melodies and the Chopin Mazurka, the
audience being roused to a state of enthusiastic excitement. After several
recalls, he played Schubert’s “ Serenade” with much sweetness and eager
intensity. The concert closed with two of Paganini’s Capriccios—the first
a slow movement, designed to show the artist’s tone and strength of
repose, and the second, a brilliant show-piece containing a difficult passage
in harmonics, full of turns and other grace-notes, which was splendidly
done. Remenyi’s superiority consists in his great delicacy and grace, his
crisp scale playing, the clearness and evenness of his trill and double trill,
and the firmness and purity of his double stops, but above all, his intense
musical sympathy, and his power of carrying you with him and impressing
his feeling upon you.


[From the Evening Express, November 12.]
_ The expectations raised concerning M. Edouard Eemenyi’s talent as a
violin virtuoso—expectations, be it said, which rose considerably above
the plane of agreeable anticipation, inasmuch as Liszt, Theophile Gautier,
and the leading musical critics of France and England have long been
unanimous in his praise—were all fulfilled by his performance in last
evening’s concert at Steinway Hall. His appearance was greeted with
uncommon enthusiasm by an audience which filled the house to overflow-
ing, and before the first part of the concert was ended, it was clear that
the new comer had scored a great artistic and popular success. His in-
terpretation of the Mendelssohn concerto was followed by four recalls, in
which cheers mingled with plaudits, and the minor pieces which he
subsequently rendered, literally took the spectators by storm. M. Eemenyi
is not only a master of technique, but a violinist in whose playing
sentiment, elegance, poetry, and expressiveness are unusually conspicuous
elements. His instrument is a very palette of sound, on which every color
and shade lie within summons of his magic brow. Where his work calls
for pure cantabile, his execution is apparently of the utmost simplicity;
where the theme is embroidered by the composer’s fancy, it takes on a
picturesque grace which adds largely to its effectiveness. In the lovely
adagio of the Mendelssohn concerto, for example—in which he took the
time much slower than less impressible violinists are inclined to do—his
manner was of unimpeachable tranquility and dignity ; in the vivacious
rondo, on the contrary, his bow arm appeared to catch something of the
fairy-like designs of the composer, and the bow fairly danced over the
strings with a lightness and playfulness befitting a frolic of elves in a
moonlit glade. Some “ points ”of M. Eemenyi’s playing, while their
beauty and eloquence were plain enough not to require analysis, deserve
attention That his tone is of exquisite sweetness goes without saying,
but it is particularly beautiful from the fact the performer’s power to
sustain it is practically unlimited. The change from bowing—from an up
bow to a down bow, and vice versa —it is never to be detected by the ear,
and thus some marvellous effects are obtained by the virtuoso. Then
M. Eemenyi’s staccato is of unequalled brilliancy of timbre and evenness,
and his use of the bow in producing it—the length of hair employed being
scarcely perceptible—is as delightful to the eye as its tones are pleasing to
the ear. It seems a pity to dwell upon the technicalities in speaking of such a
performance as the Hungarian artist supplied last night. A record of its
charms is of far easier preparation, and, doubtless, of more general
interest. Suffice it, then, to mention that, after M. Eemenyi had securely
established himself as a first-rate classical player by his interpretation of
Mendelssohn’s concerto, he succeeded in quite carrying away his hearers
with his less pretentious but, if anything, far more “ telling ” pieces. In
respect of artistic phrasing, feeling, and light and shade, his execution of
Chopin’s E flat nocturne (op. 9, No. 2) was a matchless achievement,
the delicacy of the performance and its admirable gradation being
only paralleled, in our recollection, by Anton Eubinstein’s “Euins of
Athens ” march, with its astonishing diminuendo. Of a totally different
nature were the violinist’s “ Hungarian Airs,” which were full of spirit
and strength; and different again from either of the two foregoing
compositions, was Chopin’s Mazurka, op. 7, No. 1. A storm of applause
followed these pieces, and in deference to an encore which was not to be
disregarded, the artist had to play Schubert’s “ Serenade,” in which a forte
of intense passion was reached by a splendidly managed hurrying of time
and crescendo of tone. M. Eemenyi closed the evening with two of
Paganini’s c< Capriccios,” which were also received with hearty applause,
and before the audience dispersed he had to come forth and bow his
acknowledgments again and again.


[From the Evening Mail, November 12.]
The Hungarian violinist made his first appearance in New York at
Steinway Hall last evening, and fully confirmed the reports of him which
had reached us. A master of the technique of his instrument, his playing
is full of delicate feeling and refinement. His first piece, Mendelssohn’s
Grand Concerto, we did not hear. But in the second part, he played first
a Nocturne, by Chopin, with infinite poetry, sweetness and refinement, and
in some of the passages with a tear in his string. This was followed by
some Hungarian melodies, of which the strains, at times wild and weird, were
delivered with a glow and passion which stirred the auditors profoundly.
Equally excellent was a Mazurka by Chopin, which followed, and had in
it a touch of humor. His tones cannot be surpassed in purity and sweet-
ness, and his mastery of his instrument is used not to show what difficulties
he can surmount, but to increase the sentiment of the pieces he performs,
which was evident in two Capriccios by Paganini, with which he closed the
evening.
[From the Evening Teglegram, November 12.]
The Hungarian violinist, Remenyi, made his debut in this country at
Steiuway Hall last evening. The announcement of his coming led the
public to believe that no ordinary genius was to be heard, and the public
was not disappointed Remenyi is one of the few in whom the sacred fire
has been lighted, and in whom it has reached the fulness of its blaze. The
audience was a brilliant, though coldy critical one. When the debutant
appeared, he was received in a manner commensurate with the great
reputation he bears, and no prima donna ever had more bravos shouted on
her than were bestowed on the distinguished Hungarian when he came
upon the stage. His very appearance indicated him .to be no ordinary man,
and his efforts during the evening bore this impression out. His first
number on the programme was the Mendelssohn Concerto for violin. The
first notes of the andante came through the accompaniment of the orchestra
like the murmurs t of an iEolian harp, and throughout it was played smoothly,
sweetly and correctly. In the rondo we had the first intimation of the
artists’s peculiarities. The Hungarian character tinged it, and its render-
ing was unlike any heard before. It was not until the second part had
been reached, however, that Remenyi’s distinctiveness made itself apparent.
The playing of the “ Melodies Heroiques et Lyriques Hongroises ” stamped
him as being peculiarly alone in a style which can be measured by no rule.
They were a genre picture. All that we remember of Paganini came float'
ing back as we listened to the Hungarian’s interpretation of his country’s
music. Fire, brilliancy, warmth, and especially coloring, impressed them-
selves in a manner not to be forgotten. Their novelty, fancy, romance and
wild abandon were charming, The transcriptions of the “ Mazurka,” opus
7, No. 1, and the “Nocturne” in A flat, opus 9, No. 2, of Chopin, may be
said to have become assimilated to the author’s own self, so thoroughly did
he mark them with his character. At the close of the concert he gave
Paganini’s “Capriccios,” Nos. 21 and 24. Remenyi’s technique is perfect ;
his articulation of sound is always clear ; his piano passages brought to the
shade of a whisper. The success of last evening was pronounced. Few
have ingratiated themselves with an audience so instantaneously, and few
have given so much delight.
[From the N. Y. Times, November 14.]
The second appearance of this very remarkable Hungarian violinist was
welcomed yesterday evening by a crowded audience, Steinway Hall, with
the extension and the galleries, being filled. Remenyi’s art is of a kind
which is essentially original. We have had before this clever violinist,
who gave us their conceptions of what they deemed was the climax of an
impassioned musical thought, but there is a peculiarity in. Remenyi, a,


poetic passion and fevex- which is unsurpassed. Race differences may
account in part for distinct appreciations of either the classic or romantic
schools, but a true musical genixxs, such as undoubtedly Remenyi is, sweeps
before him all such word-barriers. In the first portion of the programme
Remenyi played the concerto of Beethoven. It was conceived in a style of
his OAvn, singularly beautiful There is a cadenza in this concerto, where
the violinist is at liberty to give such interpretation to it as he pleases.
All poetical license is pei’missible. Remenyi performed this cadenza with
the most original effects, the violin resting for some time unsupported save
by an occasional tap of the kettle-drum. With the weirdest accompani-
ments on the strings of his violin, the motive was strangely woven in. In
the three violin solos—the “Nocturne de la Rose” of Field, Schubert’s
Barcarole, and Chopin’s well-known Valse, (No. 64) —the exquisite sentiment
of the artist predominated. Nothing could have been more delicate than
the first subdued opening to the waltz and the dreamy expression Remenyi
gave to it. Chopin imposes, of all composers, the least restrictions as to
tempo. You may play this greatest of Polish composers as you will, or as
your sentiment guides you. One feels satisfied that Remenyi performs
Chopin as that master would have had it. Encore on encore followed when
Remenyi gave the mazurka from Chopin with marvellous beauty. The
task of concluding the programme fell on the violinist, who gave an
“ Introduction Guerriere ”to the Rakoczy “ National March.” The intro-
duction, a conception of the violinist, was all that descriptive music can be
made to express. Clans were gathering, trumpets were blowing, bag-pipes
were crooning, when out bursts the most martial, the most stirring of all
national airs. With a passion, a frenzy, by no means stimulated, a string
on the violin snaps, but in an instant Remenyi has taken another instrument
from the hands of a performer in the orchestra, and catching the measure,
amid a salvo of applause, intones the martial air. The distinguished success
Remenyi met at his debut has been more than sustained at his second
performance.
[From the W. Y. Sun, November 14],
Remenyi has been called the “ Liszt of the violin,” and it is one of those
catching phrases which, once uttered, go wandering about the world with
as good a grace as though there were really some sense in them. If there
is any sort of foundation for the simile, it is in the fact while Liszt pro-
duces the most wonderfxxl effects with the piano, Remenyi, in a totally
different way, produces wonderful effect with the violin. We shall some
day, perhaps, hear of the Beethoven of the flute, and with about equal
significance. For Mr. Remenyi has quite sufficient merit of his own
without making it essential to fit him with another man’s reputation.
His second concert brought into stronger prominence than at first his very
curious individuality. He is not only unlike Liszt, but he is unlike any
other violinist whom we have heard, unless it be Yieuxtemps, whom he
greatly resembles in his quiet and diffident manner. Of course he is
brought naturally into comparison with Wilhelmj, so recently here and
so soon to be heard again at Steinway’s. But the instrument is handled by
the two men in a way so totally different that the points of contrast are
more numerous than those of similarity. It is perfectly possible to admire
both, yet for perfectly different reasons—Wilhelmj for his nobility and
dignity of style, the breadth and simplicity of his conception, and Remenyi
for his subtle delicacy and grace of his playing, and the fanciful and
poetic sentiment with which he surrounds the work that he interprets.
Tastes differ. The men who stand before the great canvasses of Couture
and thrill with emotion at his grandeur of outline, breadth of handling,
and bold massing of light and shade, would perhaps turn with dissatis-
faction from the minute and almost microscopic finish and exquisite


delicacy of treatment which characterises Meissonier. And so the con-
trary is true—the admirers of Meissonier’s perfection of detail will aver
that Couture paints too much with his thumb. It is not worth while,
therefore, to try to reconcile 'these conflicts of taste, but to take each
artist for what he is at his best. And Eemenyi is a true poet. The charm
of his playing is in his sensibility, the silky texture and evenness of his
tone, the beautiful shading and rounding of his phrases—in a word, in a
certain gentleness and winning graciousness in his treatment of those
compositions that follow with such delicate beauty the graceful sweep of
his bow. Of these pieces he played four last evening—a nocturne by
John Field, known as the “Nocturne of the Rose;’’ Schubert’s famous
barcarolle, Chopin’s Waltz in D flat, and, upon a recall, a mazurka by
Chopin. The perfection of finish and the unexpected effects that he
wrought into these compositions made them very fascinating, and brought
down a storm of applause. The Eakoczy March he played with marvel-
lous wildness and verve, but unhappily, at the very climax a string broke,
and the effect of the piece was marred, though the player concluded it
upon a violin borrowed from one of the orchestra. With Mr. Eemenyi’s
conception of the Beethoven concerto, one movement of which he played,
we are unable to agree; but the cadenza that he introduced was a veritable
masterwoi'k, and also a network of ingenious difficulties beautifully sur-
mounted. It was the player's own cadenza, and reflects great credit on
his talent in that direction. The rhythmic and solemn stroke of the drum
furnished a background to the elaborate organ point on which the cadenza
was built.
[From the N Y. World, November 14].
The second appearance of Edouard Eemenyi, the great Hungarian
violinist, was welcomed at Steinway Hall last night by as large an audi-
ence as the first was, and the opinion expressed on that occasion as to the
probability of his future great popularity in this country was confirmed
by his performance as well as by the enthusiasm it created. Unquestion-
ably he is a virtuoso of the highest rank, and next to his virtuosity his
strong sense of humor is his most striking characteristic. His success
was enormous. In Field’s c< Nocturne de la Eose” (A major. No, 4), the
Schubert Barcarole, the Chopin Yalse (op. 64, No. 1), and his own trans-
cription of the Chopin Mazourka (op. 7, No. 1), in all of which he has
given free play to his quaint fun, he was simply unsurpassable, whether
for his delicate little flourishes, his wonderful pianissimos, or his down-
right humorous expression and comical treatment. He afterwards played
the “ Eakoczy March,” with a descriptive introduction of his own com-
position, full of humor again, which excited the audience to even greater
enthusiasm than had already been exhibited.
[From the Evening Express, November 14],
The attendance at the second Eemenyi concert at Steinway Hall, last
evening, was so large that it was found necessary to throw open the
smaller hall to accommodate the audience. The distingushed virtuoso
again displayed the same attractive qualities which were so noticeable on
the occasion of his first appearance, and evoked the same enthusiasm. A
second hearing proves him to be an artist who possesses in a peculiar
measure the power of securing the sympathies of his auditors, and appeal-
ing to them through the tenderness and sentimentality of his art of ex-
pression.


[From the N. Y. Herald, November 15].
Great interest centred in the playing of Spohr’s concerto dramatic©.
No. 8, op. 47, by M. Eemenyi. Again the artist threw his whole soul into
the work, and evolved from this by no means great concerto effects hitherto
undiscovered in it. Again he charmed by his delightful pianissimo and
touched the tenderest chords in his hearers by his cantabile playing of the
montif melancholique that runs through the piece. He was recalled again
and again, and finally responded with the fascinating transcription of the
“ Chopin Nocturne,” played at his first concert here.
[From the Evening Telegram, November 14.]
The second Eemenyi concert, was given last evening, and its success
was fully as pronounced as its predecessor. The house was larger, and
even more brilliant and critical. The faces that smiled approval at
Gerster on Monday lighted up with surprise and delight as the wonderful
Hungarian’s bow drew sweet sounds from his violin. There is no instru-
ment to which one can so impart his personality as to the violin, and no
one so capable of interpreting the flow of soul. This remark may be par-
ticularly applied to Eemenyi. As soon as the first note is heard his mind
dissipates itself in his music, and the wealth of true coloring he produces
shows how deeply the spirit has taken hold of him, and claimed him for
its own. Poesy, soft rippling whispers which break out suddenly into
heroic measures and startle with their weirdness, a fine articulation of
sound, and above all a magnetism that holds the listener spellbound are
marked characteristics of his playing. That he has made a great success
is not then to be wondered at. He played the first movement of
Beethoven’s concerto for violin. Field’s “ Nocturne de la Eose ” in A major.
No. 4; a barcarole by Schubert, Chopin’s valse, opus 64, No. 1; an original
(( Introduction Guerriere ” and Eakoczy’s “Marche Nationals.” In the
Beethoven concerto he introduced an original cadenza, the playing of
which called forth “bravos,” as did also the rendering of the barcarole,
valse and nocturne.
[From the Evening Post, November 12.]
The Chopin waltz was a marvel of fairy delicacy. The “Eakoczy ’’march
with which he ended the concert s was to our thinking quite as much a wonder,
owing as much to the manner of the violinist as to any musical excellence
in what he did. His excitement was intense and catching. The audience
caught it and applauded him wildly. It was in some degree a blending of
fiery and queer but exciting violin playing. A crescendo, by the way, at
the beginning of the march motive was instinct with dramatic force, and
was admirably done. Take him all in all, Eemenyi is a wonder. Some one
said when Rubinstein left us that we were losing a great composer who
happened to play on the piano. Paraphrasing this notion we might say,
that in Eemenyi we have an intensely dramatic man, full of personal
magnetism, who happens to play on the fiddle. Last night in the most
exciting part of the “ Eakoczy ” he broke his E string ; quick as a flash he
threw his instrument away, and seizing another from one of the orchestra,
he went on in his headlong way; what did it matter to him or the audience
whether or not it was all out of tune ? Who cared ? There was dash, fire,
almost frenzy; he made the violin shriek, howl, groan and bellow, and
when he wound up with a crash the audience literally yelled with delight.


THE PARISIAN PRESS.
[From Paris Journal, January 18, 1877.]
Like Liszt, to whom he may be compared, Remenyi was bound to show
a strong inclination toward a musician whose enthusiastic nature was most
in accord with his own, and with which he had affinities of more than one
kind. It happens that Chopin did not write for a violin so, the attraction
becoming irresistible, the violinist translated into his own language the
Polish pianist. As a matter of principle, we do not approve these licences,
which, when many composers are concerned are genuine profanations.
Under the magic bow of Remenyi, however, they are but poetic licenses
which we readily accept, so great is the enjoyment derived therefrom. If
we did not fear to wound Chopin s faithful followers, we should even say
that Remenyi lends him a new charm and more real eloquence, the defects
of the I olish master disappearing and only leaving the beauty and charm
of his style apparent. Besides, Remenyi, in his flights of passion in his
enthusiasm, becomes possessed of every work which inspires him. It is thus
that, mastering Schubert s Serenade, he attains to such effects, to such an
intensity of sound, fougue and passion, that no one can listen to it without
being deeply moved and transported to giddy heights. Remenyi, as he
sings this Serenade upon his violin, communicates to the hearer the most
powerful sensations and irresist ble impulses. He is merely a charmer
through sentiment, but also a conscientious and faithful interpreter of the
classical masters His right hand astounds by the boldness and vigor of his
attack, while the left satisfies by its unimpeachable precision. The
composer s thoughts and rythm are piously respected by the great virtuoso.
[From the Paris Monde Illusive, January 22, 1875.]
We have now in our midst a great artist, the solo violinist to his Majesty,
the Emperor of Austria and King of Hungary M. Edouard Remenyi. He
visited Paris last year and played in the presence of Marshal McMahon.
His concert at the Italiens Theatre, in April, was extremely successful.
He interpreted during its progress, and in a manner to which we have long
been unaccustomed, Mendelssohn, Bach, Schumann, Molique, Paganini,
and his own admirable transcriptions of Chopin As our eminent confrere,,
B. Jouvin, wrote at the time, ‘‘ His bow weeps sings and sighs.” He was
then christened the “ Liszt of the violin ” We shall henceforward hear
nun frequently, not only in Paris but in all the large cities of France, as
the soloist in the chief Philharmonic Concerts. During his brief sojourn
here in 1865, he was intimately acquainted with Heller. Berlioz and
Iheophile Gautier. Let us hope that his present stay will be more pro-
tracted, so that dilettanti who love true music, may copy and applaud a
Molinist who has adhered to the worship of the classics, interpreted as an
artist and a poet.
[From the Paris Union, April 12, 1875.]
He transported us with enthusiasm in the Mendelssohn concerts and in
Paganini s Capriccios. Alfred Ruidant, the celebrated pianist, exclaimed,
<l I have heard Paganini, and think I hear him again.” In truth many
persons execute the Capriccios of the Genoese virtuoso, but Remenyi
■cilone has translated, and understood them. ]NTo living artist has carried
faither than he the science of the violin ; he draws from his instrument
sounds which the human ear never heard. His masterly bow caresses or
ill-treats the strings, weeps, laughs, sighs, grows angry and scolds. But
what distinguishes Remenyi is his wit; he is witty as Rivarol. as Chamfort,
as \ oltaire. It is impossible to endow a composition wdth more grace and
coquetry than he has infused into Chopin’s mazurkas ; one can fancy a
Magyar, prancing a la Murat upon a plumed steed.


[Jules Claretie, in the Petit Journal, March 28, 1877 ]
Remenyi is not one of those long-haired and thin-faced musicians, who
affect an inspired air and assume fantastic manners. He is content to be an
incomparable artist, and to resemble sans facon everyone else. And yet.
when he takes his violin, he resembles no one else. He plays upon it with
superb maestria. He makes it sing, sigh, and weep ; no nightingale in the
woods, no hengali in the foliage, gives out more tremulously its notes to the
warm breeze. Sometimes Remenyi’s violin appears to keep time to the
heroic gallop of Magyars brandishing their swords and spurring on their
horses to the echo of the “ Rakoczy March ” Sometimes it makes one
think of gentle flutter of wings over a crystalline stream. It was a heroic
march ; it has become a murmur, a sigh, a kiss, a dream. A few minutes
ago the steed was champing and neighing, the warrior was uttering his war
cry ; now behold the butterfly, seeking, apparently, to make no noise, not
to wake the sleeping fairy, whose slumber it quiets by the imperceptible
fanning of its wings. Ah ! what a wonderful artist ! what a lovely and
fairy-like evening! In the midst of Hungary and the beautiful Danube,
rolling proudly through the vast plains, a matchless vision, a refinement of
pleasure, something intoxicating and irresistibly impulsive as a battle, and
again as vaporous as a dream.
Wm, Marshall & Co., Printers, “Lorgnette” Office, Melbourne


CLOUGH & WARREN
Excel all others for Quality and Quantity of Tone.
The onl y Reed 0r 'J an made > 1 giving the nearest possible approach to the
Tone of the Pipe Organ.
SOLE AGENTS:
NICHOLSON & CO.


NICHOLSON & CO.’S
—FAMOUS
4 • mighstont * ►
PIANO
IS THH! WOWDEB OF THE -A-O-E.
Contains every Improvement in Value. Is Iron-framed,' Overstrung
(Double-oblique).
THE GRANDEST PIANO OF ITS SIZE EVER INTRODUCED IN AUSTRALIA.
Fof> Seven ysA^s.
Manufactured Solely and Exclusively for
MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY
