

BEYOND THE GRAVE:
A LECTURE
v v,c
DELIVERED AT THE TOWN HALL, ON TUESDAY, 15th NOVEMBER, 1870.
BY THE
REV. J. E. BEOMBT, D.D.,
PRINCIPAL OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND GRAMMAR SCHOOL.
The Lecturer, who was introduced by the Chairman, Edward Cohen,
Esq., M.L.A., said :
You are of course aware, that at the request of the Early Closing
Association, I consented to take my turn, along with others, in their last
winter-series of lectures. The audience may be said, in the main, to
consist of men of an inquiring order of mind : of men, Avho do not, “ as
others use,” devote all their spare time and money to indulgence in so-
called pleasures; but are found sometimes increasing their physical
vigour by gymnastic training, at other times practising their intellectual
exercises in the arena of intellectual controversy. Such men would
hardly be satisfied with a lecture of mere platitudinarian truisms, and to
be told in the peroration to go home and be good boys. -The lecturers,
therefore, have as a rule discussed topics which are of such a character as
stimulate thought, which open out vistas through the regions of history
and science, and throw into clearer light questions which have awakened
interest in the highest order of minds. It matters very little what it was
in my own case which dictated the particular topic I selected, hut
I may mention that an actual incident guided my choice. Ihe lecture
was in due course delivered and published; but the result personally to
myself was anything but agreeable. Had I accidentally kicked over
HfiSop’s proverbial hive of bees, I could not have been in a less enviable
predicament; so thick was the swarm of uncomplimentary epithets
which buzzed around my head, and not without an occasional infliction
of the sting. In short, many worthy men, whose good opinion I would
gladly retain, have come to" regard me in all sincerity as not a whit
better than an infidel. . . .
But I do not wish in the slightest degree to complain of this; it is
exactly as it should be. So very undesirable is it that established modes


of thought in matters of religion should be rashly disturbed, that great
obstacles ought to lie, as they do, in the way of whosoever makes the
attempt. If a man ventures upon the perilous experiment, he ought to
have fully counted the cost —the cost not only to himself, but also to
others. His innermost convictions ought to be strong and well-matured ;
for less learned believers ought not to be exposed to be blown about with
every wind of doctrine for the mere gratification of one or two men’s
fanciful speculations. And thus it has been that in all ages good men
have shrunk from meddling with the prevailing religious errors of the
vulgar, so long as the essential verities of Christianity were not imperilled.
St. Paul, for example, was fully persuaded that an idol was nothing in the
world, and that the meat of the victims which had been sacrificed in idol
worship differed in no way from any other meat; yet, rather than shock
the conscience of a weaker brother, he would incur the risk of confirming
the erroneous belief that an idol was a potential reality. In such cases
a man’s conduct is guided by the rule of expediency. But it should ever
be borne in mind that the rule of expediency is a dangerous principle to
act upon, and requires extreme caution in its exercise. St. Peter,
if we may judge by St. Paul’s energetic protest, seems to have
strained the principle of expediency too far. At all events, the one
Apostle, although himself ready to be all things to all men, yet with-
stands the other to his face, for an injudicious sacrifice of principle, as
he thought, in the attempt to conciliate the Jews. Besides which, the
connivance at error must have a limit; for if error is never to be pro-
tested against it may go on increasing by small degrees from generation
to generation, and its cumulative amount may actually warp whole
portions of the Christian creed; or, what is more common, as science
advances and general knowledge permeates the masses, religion, by
adhering to venerable errors, may present the aspect of growing obsolete
and out of date; or, as St. Paul describes the Mosaic dispensation, as a
thing ready to vanish away. In certain stages of the Church’s progress
mumpsimus would do just as well as sumpsimus as a vehicle of pious
adoration, whether said or sung; but when congregations acquire a slight
knowledge of Latin, they are made very uncomfortable by such flaws in
their formulary of prayer. And the same thing is true also of many
current notions which, though only floating in the minds of believers,
have come to be looked upon as a portion of the Church’s creed, and
which, yet, are at once rendered exceedingly questionable by a more
extensive acquaintance with the original languages of Scripture, or by
the progress of scientific discovery. This is one reason why inquisitive
minds have never been popular with ecclesiastics. People of an inquiring
turn of mind are. a kind of enfnnts terribles in the sacred household, and
are always asking of their spiritual pastors and masters questions which
cannot well be pooh-poohed, and which yet are sometimes very incon-
venient to answer. The consequence is that, from time to time, they
catch many a severe castigation, administered, no doubt, with the very
best intentions, but not always to the edification of the Church. When
the Roman poet, Horace, was travelling from Rome to Brindisi—a road
which now lies on the shortest mail route from London to Melbourne—
he had to perform part of the journey by canal boat; and in the middle
of the night, he tells us, the roguish muleteer took advantage of the


passengers being asleep to tetber bis mule and take a nap. But no
sooner bad be begun to snore, when up jumps a peppery fellow—
cerebrosus prosilit unus —and lays about him most unmercifully with bis
cudgel. This is a very apt image of the great ark of the Church floating
down the stream of time; its ministers are disposed occasionally to nap,
and it is as well that there should be some cerebrosus homo, some one, I
don’t say with more brain than his neighbours, but with more activity in
it, who should supply a stimulus to both thought and action.
Well, then, a question has arisen (no matter who raised it) respecting
what becomes of the great majority of the souls of men when they die.
Many good, sincere and intelligent Christians have not been satisfied
altogether with the general creed of the churches respecting this point,
nor with the method in which the sacred Scriptures have been
interpreted respecting it. They have stated their difficulties fairly, and
are entitled to have them fairly discussed. When, in apostolic times, the
righteousness of God was called in question by the Jews, in that the
Gentiles were made equal participants in his favour and fellow-heirs of
his promises, St. Paul felt himself bound to vindicate God’s righteousness
and truth, and to prove out of the Scriptures what, from the first, God’s
intentions and declarations had been. So, I say, if the justice or the
benevolence of God is called in question now, the challenge ought to be
accepted. The accredited ministers of the gospel ought to be able to
show that the great Jehovah is not an unrighteous and merciless despot,
or, at the least, to prove that none of his acts are inconsistent with the
assumed hypothesis of his being both merciful and just. My revered
diocesan, of whom T shall always think and speak in a strain of the
highest respect and esteem, both for his goodness of heart, his
clearness of head, his extensive learning, and the depth of his religious
convictions, while acquitting mo of any desire to misinterpret Scrip-
ture, laments that I should have agitated such a subject at all,
and expresses his opinion that, with reference to it, it is not our
part to vindicate either the justice or the benevolence of God. Per-
haps, had the question been altogether dormant in the world, it might not
have been expedient to stir it up. But inquiries of are rife on
every side, and Universalisra is openly preached. The time, therefore,
cannot be inopportune for those competent to the task to make a careful
review of the statements of the written word, with especial reference to
this subject. The immediate object of my last lecture before the Early
Closing Association was not to discuss this topic, but rather to harmonise
the newest discoveries in physical science with the belief in a personal
Creator, which the language of certain writers seemed to call in question.
The soundness of the main argument has not been impugned; but one
single sentence has been forced from its context, and made to bear a sense
which was never intended, and which the context shows it cannot bear.
When I spoke of dying men passing painlessly into non-existence, it was
perfectly obvious, from the context, that these were extreme cases, and not
the general case. For example, there are very various degrees of pain
by which bodily life is extinguished. Some persons gently fall as it were
asleep; others die after much suffering. If we begin to date a drunkard’s
death from his first attack of horror, and estimate the accumulated pain
he endures till the crisis comes, when in his raving agony he can bear


life no longer, and he gashes his flesh as a positive relief compared with
the gnawing madness which tortures him at the very seat of life, then is
there a sum of suffering in this one bodily death which makes our blood
curdle to contemplate. And what is true of the body, there is a strong
ground for believing is true of the soul. The different degrees of agony
accompanying the death of a soul may probably admit of limits far wider
apart than are those of a dying body. So that, at the great day of wrath,
when righteous judgment shall be delivered by the Vicegerent of the
Almighty, there will be an enormous difference between the sentence
passed upon a mere unbaptiscd infant (supposing it to appear there) and
that sentence of indignation and wrath, of tribulation and anguish, upon
every soul of man that has done evil—upon him, who, knowing the will
of God, resisted that will, and did despite to the spirit of grace.
The maximum amount of suffering which will be endured by the
wicked in the future world is beyond the finite faculties of man to con-
ceive. Our sense of it is expressed in Scripture language as “ a certain
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation.” “Itis a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God.” Some faint idea may be
formed of what the wicked may expect in the next world, by what we see
with our bodily eyes of some of the Lord’s judgments in this. How
awful is the horror which overtakes a man, as I have just now pointed
out, who surrenders himself to the dominion of strong drink! Fearful,
then, must be the agony to be apprehended by those “ who sin wilfully
after that they have received the knowledge of the truth.”
But when we come to estimate the lowest limit of Divine punishment,
I reason thus: —If every man is to be judged for the things done in the
body, and is to receive according to his deeds, what, I ask, has the
infant of a day old done in the body, that it should be condemned to
everlasting torment ? And yet clearly it has not complied with the
Scripture conditions for obtaining everlasting life. Let us then look
fairly at the phenomena which God’s world presents. Vast numbers of
human beings are born and die without ever having a chance of obeying
those conditions upon which an immortality of happiness is promised.
If, then, the failure to obtain an immortality of happiness means in all
cases an immortality of misery, then do we find ourselves involved in the
necessary conclusion, that the great mass of mankind who are born into
the world, some living for a few hours, some for only a few minutes, are
jet doomed to an eternity of woe. There are said to be about
1,000,000,000 of living human beings in this world, and of these not
much above one quarter are at this moment either of the original stock
•of Abraham, or really or nominally grafted into it. The remainder, more
than 700,000,000 are, in a religious point of view, utterly benighted.
There is no light in them, and no spiritual life. Now, when we consider
how very little originality there is in the world, that is, how few really
think for themselves —that the children of Episcopalians, for the most part,
grow up Episcopalians, the children of Presbyterians grow up Presby-
terians, of Wesleyans, Wesleyans; and that, too, even when they live
side by side, and where there is great interchange of thought, how much
more inevitably must this be true of Mohammedans and Buddhists, and
the huge mass of savage heathen! • I may fairly assume, then, that the
ancestors of these 700 millions of men have all been Pagans for at least


some three or four thousand years. How many billions of human beings,
then, have we here who have been horn and died without ever hearing of
the promises of God. Now, if it be true, as statisticians record, that, taking
the world through, one quarter of those born into the world die before
seven years of age, we have got, without reckoning a single adult, thou-
sands of millions of human beings who died in Pagan childhood, and who,
according to the current theory, are to be kept in a state ot conscious
torture to all eternity—“ salted with fire”—for faults which they them-
selves did not commit, or, at all events, Avere helpless to avoid. It is next
to impossible for a man, exercising his ordinary powers of reflection, to
admit the monstrous conclusion that such could have been the ordinance
of an all-merciful God. But without going to Pagan countries,
let us take an example from our own. One of my critics, an able
and eloquent man, the Rev. Mr. Fraser, of Geelong, adduces the
case of a girl he saw in the Yarra Bend Asylum, who was blind, and
deaf and dumb, and, as he believes, without the sense of touch or smell,
and who, to use his own words, was “ a mere breathing mass of human
pulp.” What then have we here ? A human creature utterly incapable
of appreciating any notion beyond those of the commonest animal appe-
tites. If the Apostle’s aphorism be true in any of its senses, “ How shall
they believe in Him of whom they have not heard?” here is one who
cannot believe, and therefore cannot be saved; and yet she has done no
wrong. The most natural thought on contemplating such a case is that
it is an exceptional one. But if any one once admits an exceptional case,
he surrenders the whole position. For, it may be asked, what are all
infants just born into the world but breathing lumps of human pulp, and
myriads of them never grow to anything else. They are like bubbles on
the stream, which rise and burst. They die before a single idea reaches
their sensorium. They must, of course, all be classed as exceptional
cases too. This being granted, the question ceases to be one of principle,
but becomes one of degree only. If, on the other hand, the pitiable specimen
of humanity in the Yarra Bend is not exceptional, but is of necessity an
indestructible soul, then have we this strange result —a creature born with
far less of intelligence and perception than a dog, predestined to an eternity
of conscious torture, just because it was an abortive birth of human
parents. The conclusion is on the very face of it And yet,
logically, it does not differ from any case in which a human being is born
into the world “not sufficiently gifted to be a good Christian,” or from
the case of one, ever so highly gifted, if placed in circumstances which
utterly preclude such gifts from being matured. A selfish and unfeeling
man does not stumble at this difficulty. As long as he can persuade him-
self that his own salvation is secured, he can quietly repose in the
goodness of God; and as for the eternal suffering of his human brethren
in that other place, that is no concern of his. Some even go so far as to
say that the happiness of the blessed may possibly be heightened by the
sufferings of the finally lost, just as I suppose a man enjoys his fireside
comforts the more when the storm is howling outside in all its fury.
One of my critics, the Rev. John Cooper, takes this view. In a
pamphlet lately published,*' (p. 17,) he writes “There is a continual
“ Eternal Pv.nisl ment.”


waste and destruction going on on a large scale in the providence
of God,” but “in the destruction of the inferior life there is
benefit to the superior, and in accordance with this analogy” —rather
an inconsequential analogy —“ the suffering of the finally lost may minister
to the well-being of the loyal intelligences of the universe, in the con-
spicuous illustration it will afford of the wisdom, goodness, and grace of
of God in the creation of His intelligent offspring and self-sacrifice of the
divine.” This is rather hazy writing; but I take it to mean that the
imprisoned sufferers of eternal torture in the future world will be a kind
of menagerie on a large scale, kept open for the intelligent gratifica-
tion of the loyal, who will be privileged to visit it under the
conduct of some celestial hierophant, and to have duly pointed
out to them properly sorted illustrations of wisdom, goodness,
and grace, “ ever and anon ” gnashing their teeth —(p. 9.) And then
he goes on to say that there is neither philosophy nor theology in
doubting this, “ unless it can be shown that the misery of the lost will
surpass the blessedness of the unfallen and the redeemed.” Now, to say
nothing of the theology of this passage, though, for myself, I cannot find
the term “ unfallen ” anywhere in my copy of the Bible, nor in any
commentary with which I am familiar, let us look at the philosophy of it.
It amounts to this—lf by roasting you alive I feel more gratification
than you do pain, it is very good philosophy that I should roast you alive.
But the justice of the transaction is utterly ignored; it does not seem to
have ever entered the writer’s head. If the sum of happiness is increased,
in which he takes his share, that is enough. Such reasoners seem to
have no idea that any one can have the wish to vindicate the honour of
God even for the comfort and satisfaction of his own contemplations.
Richard Baxter, in his great work “ The Saints’ Everlasting Rest,” has
an argument for eternal punishment, which he also takes for an analogy.
“ Thou makest (he says) nothing of killing a flea if it do but bite thee;
yea, a hundred of them, and yet never accusest thyself of cruelty.
And must it yet seem cruelty that the Sovereign Creator, who is ten
thousand times more above thee than thou art above a flea or a toad, should
execute his justice upon such a contemner of his authority.” Strange
that a man of so much thought and acumen as Richard Baxter should
not see that this proves nothing about the eternal duration of punishment!
Time is no element at all in the reckoning. If the argument had been
put thus—Man tortures a flea for a thousand hours because he is a
thousand times greater than a flea, therefore the Sovereign Creator
must torture a sinner to eternity because He is infinitely greater than
a sinner,—the analogy would hold. But even then the important fact
would be left out of consideration that man did not create the flea, nor,
when he kills it, is he executing justice upon the flea.
One ugly feature exhibited by such reasoners is, that they always take
for granted that they are among the redeemed, or, what is better still,
among the unfallen. There mingles with their creed a large and lament-
able amount of the Pharisaic spirit, “ Come not near me, for I am holier
than thou.” If a man manifests any repugnance to the doctrines of
eternal torment, they intimate to him pretty plainly that the reason is
because he knows well enough he is in for it himself; and they charge
him with “ bringing the doctrine of the gospel into accordance with the


likings of the carnal mind,” (p. 1.) I feel convinced that a great
deal of harm is done to the cause of Christ by such harsh and savage
teaching. One cannot, of course, but give full credit to the teachers for
the best intentions. They wish to frighten the timid sinner into the
paths of righteousness by the intensity of the punishment they threaten;
but they forget the shock they may give to the credibility of all Chris-
tianity by the unscriptural extravagance of their doctrine. Besides
which, spasmodic impressions on the conscience are by no means generally
lasting, and are sure to leave an increasing callousness against any future
attempt to move it. Doubtless, all who hear the voice of Christ must
first hear the cry, “ Flee from the wrath to come;” but if a man have
ears to hear and a heart to understand, there is quite enough in that
solemn warning, without insisting that all who have never heard that
voice, or who, in the words of Scripture, have not an ear to hear it, should
suffer an eternity of torment. Such an unrighteous sacrifice of the many
for the benefit of a favoured few, supposing it were for their benefit, is
neither taught in Scripture nor is consonant with the noblest instincts of
our nature. Besides which, how does Mr. Cooper know but what he
might find some of his nearest relatives in those dread ergastula of God.
Would that heighten his happiness in the next world?
It will be quite impossible for me, within the limits of a lecture, to
answer in detail all the objections which have been urged against me
during the last few weeks. They vary much. Some are contemptuous
sneers at the incompetency of my intellect. Others involve sound reason-
ing, or are replete with eloquent declamation. That in which my critics
have given me most pain is the idea they entertain that I wished to set
aside the express declarations of Scripture, and that I held the written
word in disesteem; and by way of antidote they fill whole pages with
eloquent panegyrics upon the holy volume, with every now and then an
exsufilation directed towards myself, as if I were the impersonation of the
Wicked One. Allow me, before I proceed further, to assure you in the
most positive terms that I yield to no man in respect for the Bible ; but
I hold that such respect is best shown by a reverent and submissive
endeavour to unravel its meaning, and then by God’s grape to strive to
act as closely as we may, in accordance with the light and truth we thence
derive. Respect both to persons and things is shown very differently in
different ages and countries, according as knowledge and liberty is
developed. An Oriental may fancy that the most expressive mode of
showing respect to his sovereign is to hit his forehead hard against the
ground, nine or ten times in succession, in presence of the potentate he
worships. In a land of liberty, respect to the Crown is thought to be
best exhibited by the observance of law and order, and by civility to all
around us who are joint participants in the great benefits of properly con-
stituted authority.
So, again, in the East, respect is shown to the written word of the
Koran, by believing that every word and letter was brought down ready
written immediately from the throne of God, In the Western world, the
intelligent Christian respects the letter of his Bible solely for the spirit
which it breathes: and such respect he best shows by an honest
endeavour to ascertain exactly what the letter really means. \\ hat a
man ignorantly worships is little better than an idol. Of a Christian is


required what the apostle terms a reasonable worship. He should pray
with the spirit, but he should pray with the understanding also: he
should sing with the spirit, hut he should sing with the understanding
also. But the principle of association is always strong in every man, and
a religious man cannot avoid deeply venerating even the bare accompani-
ments of religion—the sacred day, the sacred fabric, the sacred hook.
But we know, on the very best authority, that such associations are liable
to abuse, and to become superstitious. Our Saviour entered his protest
many times against a superstitious observance of the Sabbath. I suppose
a similar protest is intended by large sections of the religious community,
now-a-days, who habitually secularise their sacred edifices; though,
unquestionably, they often lose thereby in the matter of reverence. In
the same way it becomes necessary, at times, although at the risk of
incurring the charge of infidelity and scepticism, to enter a protest against
a superstitious veneration for the mere letter of Scripture. For however
amiable and praiseworthy such a feeling is, yet when in excess, by
placing Scripture out of the reach of sound and sensible criticism, it not
unfrequently clouds its meaning. The slightest deviation from a
customary interpretation is resented as profanity, as an unholy dese-
cration.
I was once present at a clerical meeting in a rather remote locality,
which was attended by a stranger of some note, who had come as a
deputation from a distance. Being a privileged man he was laying down
the law rather dogmatically. You must always take Scripture, he said,
in its most literal sense —its most literal sense. If you once begin to
give figurative interpretations to Scripture, one man may interpret one
way, and another another, and where then is Scripture truth ? In the
place of inspiration you get merely human wisdom. Ihe logic seemed
perfectly irresistible; but some one quietly asked the question, “Do you
then suppose, Sir, that when the Psalmist was surrounded by fat bulls of
Bashan on every side, they were really fat bulls?” After a somewhat
painful pause, the presiding clergyman adroitly got out of the difficulty by
observing, that that was not the subject they were met to discuss. The
real fact is, that Scripture has been written just a,s other books on such
subjects would be written at the time, sometimes in poetry, sometimes in
prose ; and as far as the letter goes, that man will always be the best
interpreter who is the most familiar with the way in which the people at
the period were accustomed to express their thoughts. But some persons,
in their extreme reverence for the written word, by which they mean the
received translation, right or wrong, will not allow themselves to question
the correctness of any view of it to which they have been accustomed. It
seems to them a kind of sacrilege to do so. And this feeling, however
estimable in itself, operates detrimentally in the elucidation of its
statements. A platform orator once declared, that he believed in the
inspiration of the Bible to the very dots of the i’s and the crosses of
the t’ s. He might just as well have said, he believed in the inspiration
of St. Paul to the very tip of his nose and the points of his toes.
While protesting against such a palpable absurdity, let me repeat
once more, that I most deeply venerate our sacred Scriptures as the great
vehicle of saving knowledge—the inspired records of God s covenants
with man.


I will now turn for a moment to the September number of the
Wesleyan Chronicle. I shall not occupy you long. The editor,
in what appears to me a somewhat puerile manner, condescends
to find fault with even verbal expressions, such as “painless non-
existence.” He could have understood, he says, what non-existence
is, but what are we to understand by painless non-existence ?
But, I ask, in reply, did the editor never come across such a figure of
speech as pleonasm?—a figure to which all writers have recourse when
they wish to emphasise a particular idea. The Frenchman, we know,
captiously finds fault with the Englishman when he says, “ I have a pain
in my r leg. “ Pain in your leg ?” says he. “ Why, surely you didn’t
expect to feel a pain in anybody else’s leg ! You should say a pain in the
leg.” Of course, the Englishman’s expression is redundant, but there is
nothing unintelligible in it.
But the editor is not only lame in his verbal criticism ; he is equally so
in his logic. I had asserted that the necessary immortality of the soul
was not a Christian dogma. The editor, after first complaining of the
want of clearness in the phrase ‘‘'‘necessary immortality,” takes upon him-
self to alter it to natural immortality, and then proceeds to argue as if I
had actually used the latter phrase. Whereas they are not only very
different, but upon the difference really hangs the whole question at issue".
If you were asked what was the natural length of a man’s life you would
say about seventy. “ The days of his years are three score years and ten,”
but it is not necessarily seventy. Man is often cut off in the midst of his
days, i.e., in the midst of his natural life. The following example will
suit our purpose still better. Every working bee is naturally, as naturalists
tell us, a queen bee; and only requires to be fed while in the larva con-
dition with certain food, which the bees instinctively know of, to become
a queen bee. So that we see that the larva of the common bee is naturally
a queen bee, but does not necessarily become one. The great majority
do not. Just so, I say, if I read my Bible right, men are naturally
immortal, but not necessarily immortal. The great majority fail to become
so This is what I meant when I stated that the necessary immortality of
the soul is not a Christian dogma.
The almost uniform manner in which the Scriptures speak of the
pei dition of a soul is so marked, as contrasted with the few passages out
of which eternal torment can be constructively elicited, that the advocates
of the latter theory naturally feel called upon to show that the word
perdition does not necessarily mean annihilation. The way in which
they do this is rather amusing. They collect a number of passages
from the New Testament, where the original word occurs, and then
translate it by annihilate, making themselves merry at the ludicrous
figure which the newly-worded passages cut. Here are two or three
examples. “ What woman having ten pieces of silver, having an-
nihilated one piece, doth not light a candle,” &c. Again, “ Gather
up the fragments that nothing be annihilated.” Again, “ The bottles
break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottles are annihilated.”
But what is all this but clever legerdemain?—the pea shifting
dexterity of the thimble expert? In the first place I never used the
word annihilate at all, and, therefore, they have no right to substitute
it in this fashion as an argument against me; and in the next place they


are so far from pnoving that it can ever mean, as they assert, eternal
torment, that if the same trickery were resorted to, and eternal torment
put in these very passages, they would look a vast deal more ludicrous.
Thus: “ What woman having ten pieces of silver, having eternally tor-
mented one piece, doth not light a candle, &c.” “ Gather up the frag-
ments that nothing be eternally tormented.” “ The bottles break, and
the wine runneth out, and the bottles are eternally tormented.” No:
that is not the way to establish truth. All words have more meanings
than one. and many shades of meaning; and the only way to ascertain
their meaning in any passage is first to become familiar with the general
language of a writer through the whole of his works, and then to see what
meaning the particular context requires. A lost sheep is not an annihi-
lated sheep; it may be found again. But neither is it an eternally-
tormented sheep. In the Scripture parable the plain and honest meaning
is that if the lost sheep had not been sought and found, it would have
perished on the mountains. So in the other quotations, losing life ,
losing one's rewar a, &c., the meaning palpably is that under the implied
conditions, the things spoken of would be lost for ever.
I now turn to a lecture by the Rev. T. Mackenzie Fraser, of Geelong, a
gentleman of large powers and extensive information. Having accepted
an invitation from Melbourne to stand forward as a kind of champion to
check the supposed dangerous tendencies of my lecture, he not unnaturally
assumes the style and tone of the professional advocate; and in that
capacity feels it to be his duty to make his weapons of rhetoric, which he
is evidently powerful to wield, tell to the best effect. But such weapons
are often a snare to a man: they tempt him beyond the bounds of fair
argument; and thus, while producing a temporary effect, leave the reason
of the sincere inquirer unconvinced.
Among sundry artifices of his rhetorical skill, Mr. Fraser has recourse
to that which is popularly known as building up a giant of straw for the
purpose of knocking it down. Here is a specimen. I had mentioned
the well-known fact that St. Paul, in speaking of the doom of the wicked,
uses the word perdition. But this I did merely as an accessory argument.
This was perfectly legitimate on my part; for conviction ought to be
established in the mind not by one fact, but by the cumulative force of
many, each contributing its quota of evidence. Mr. Fraser knew this,
and did make some attempt to answer the single fact; but, straining after
rhetorical display, he wanted to make it appear that he was knocking
down a huge booby, who had built a magnificent theory upon a single
word. So the straw-stuffing process begins, humorous parodies of Scrip-
ture are thrust in, and the whole is spangled over with the tinsel of
Greek and Hebrew type: and when the uncouth monster is complete, tilt
he goes at it, lance in rest, with this spirited sentence, —“ Rash is the
theologian, and unsafe the spiritual guide, who would build a hypothesis
so momentous upon so uncertain a foundation.” Down, of course, goes
the imaginary giant, and the deluded audience innocently fancy that it
was I that had built such an hypothesis upon a single word; • but I had
done nothing of the kind; it was the giant.
I will adduce but one more example of Mr. Fraser’s rhetorical skill.
He gives the view of Scripture I was maintaining a nickname, and calls
it the annihilation gospel. Now, had he contented himself with the


term annihilation theory, it would not have been so much amiss, although
then it would have been a misrepresentation ; but he insinuates that I am
introducing a new gospel, the annihilation gospel, and places it in direct
antagonism to the gospel of immortality. Of course, any one hearing this
would conclude that I had surely been maintaining the Sadducean
doctrine of no resurrection (in fact, the word Sadducee is among his vitu-
perative epithets,) and that I had in some way expressed a want of faith
in that glorious immortality which was brought to light in Jesus Christ.
But what is the fact ? I had placed this new and immortal creation as
amongst the most glorious of God’s works. I had called attention to the
circumstance that, great as may be the interest with which we men study
the boundless phenomena of God’s natural works, this is that which the
angels themselves stoop from their abodes of bliss to watch the progress
of with intense delight. It was not, then, the Scripture immortality to
which my statements were opposed, but to a certain clumsily devised
eternity of torment, which might very fitly be denominated the immor-
tality of brimstone.
What, then, becomes of that fervid burst of oratory with which Mr.
Fraser closed his eloquent lecture about the gospel of immortality
being enforced and expounded and vindicated aud illustrated at Carthage,
at Hippo, at Cmsarea, at Nazianzus, by Cyprian, by Augustine, by Basil,
by Gregory, and finally thundered forth in glorious Greek by John
Chrysostom beneath the domes of Byzantium? Whereas it has not
been shown that any single one of these celebrated worthies ever made
the remotest allusion to the brimstone theory at all. The immortality
they preached was the immortality preached by Jesus Christ and his
apostles, and has nothing whatever to do with the eternal torture of
helpless impotency.
I now come to the philosophic aspect of my subject; but here I must
part company with my reverend brother. He is far too excitable a man
for the cool atmosphere of philosophy, and cannot restrain his righteous
indignation in presence of such a heretic as he regards myself. He is,
however, a strong proof how much times have changed for the better
during the last three centuries. His great master Calvin would have
roasted me alive in the market-place of Geneva, whereas Mr. Fraser
merely sends me to sit at the feet of the Bev. Mr. Henderson, at Ballarat,
to learn metaphysics. But I am sorely afraid that the judicial sentence
will not prove exactly so penal as he imagines; for I feel perfectly certain
that as soon as ever I present myself before my inquisitor at Ballarat, he
will push me into an easy chair and bring out his best bottle of beer.
As for metaphysics, Mr. Fraser differs far more from Mr. Henderson
than I do.
Let us start now from the apostolic definition of a perfect man—body,
soul, and spirit. But before proceeding a single step further, I would
observe that the Bible is not a philosophical treatise; that words are not
used by every writer in exactly the same sense; and that we have two
languages to deal with, Hebrew and Greek. In the earliest chapters of the
Bible, where creation is first described, the phrase “ spirit of man” does
not occur. Of his two component parts, body and soul, body is the mere
framework of earthy material, which became a living soul by God’s cre-
ative act of breathing into his nostrils the breath of life. But it is just


the same with every other animal. No verbal distinction is made be-
tween the soul of a man and the soul of a beast; the difference is only in
our translation. In Gen. i. 24, the words literally translated are, “ Let
the earth bring forth the living soul after his kind, cattle, and creeping
thing, and beast of the earth.” The phrase translated “ living creature ”
in our version is here exactly the same in the original as “ living soul” in
ii. 7, “ Man became a living soul.” In the language, therefore, of Genesis,
man is created a living soul, and so is an oyster, each after his kind. Our
translators, being chary, as it would appear, of man’s dignity, call the
animal not a soul, but a creature. So, much later on, when David says
that the Lord had delivered him from the hand of a lion, and from the
hand of a bear, our translators interpose there also in favour of man’s
dignity, and call the creature’s hand a paw. Professor Halford would
point out exactly the peculiarity of the muscle which constitutes the
difference between a hand and a paw, but Scripture does not do this. So,
in like manner, mental philosophy discriminates with precision the
various properties and functions of the soul; but Scripture takes only a
broad and general view. We have no reason to believe that anything
has been especially revealed on this subject, nor can we ourselves expect
to penetrate very deeply, nor to say exactly of the three constituents of
man where one begins or the other ends. By the aid, however, of such
writings as have come down to us through the Christian Fathers, in their
controversies with the Gnostics, I think I am correct in the following
statement of what would be understood by body, soul, and spirit, at the
time St. Paul wrote: —The body is that wonderful mechanism which wo
have in common with the beasts that perish. Along with the material
of which the body is composed, the definition includes the many instincts
and propensities whereby the bodily life is nourished and continued.
Hunger and thirst, which stimulate to search for food; sudden wrath,
which prompts to self-defence; fear, which shuns a coming danger;
drowsiness, which seeks for rest; all the properties, in short, which
Scripture calls carnal, but which we usually denominate the animal in-
stincts, constitute the body.
The soul is that superadded and apparently immaterial organism which
distinguishes man from the lower animals. It is in a high degree intel-
ligent. It enables him to live in society, as a member of a body politic,
and under obedience to written laws. It is fitted, when incorrupt and in
perfect health, to control the lower propensities, and keep them in sub-
jection. As the body is endowed with instincts, so is the soul with
passions, which are of course instinctive. The beasts of the field, when
their animal wants are satisfied, have no further desire. They have no
worldly ambition, no love of wealth, no love of power, no love of praise;
or, if the rudiments of such passions should exist, they are too feeble to
make it worth while to take them into account. Man, on the contrary,
is capable of ambition and of pride; is fond of admiration; eager in the
pursuit of wealth. Love, moreover, with him is not as with the animals,
an instinct of the body only, but also an affection of the soul. And all
these passions, had not sin distorted their fair proportions into deformity,
were a beautiful sample of Almighty workmanship.
The spirit, again, is something superadded to the soul. It is as distinct
from the soul as the soul is from the body. It is that faculty by


which we are capable of knowing and of loving God. It makes us sons
of God and heirs of his kingdom. In this world, it is the seat of the
consciousness which man has of righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost. But as the kingdom of God, of which the spirit makes us
members, extends also to another world, we cannot tell to what in the
life of the spirit we may eventually grow. “It doth not yet appear what
we shall be.”
The body and the soul are born into the world together, though at
first in a very undeveloped state. Not so, however, with the spirit. A
man’s spiritual birth never corresponds in time with his natural birth,
but is always posterior to it. On this point not only are all Christians
agreed, but Scripture is verv express. A man must be horn again. He
is a new creature. But the how, and the where, and the when, are
involved in inpenetrable obscurity. Believers, for whom the mysteries
of revelation must always possess an intense interest, have often attempted
to resolve the question, nor can their desire to know more be stigmatised
as an unholy curiosity, provided they do not make themselves wise above
what is written.
In connection with this definition of the perfect man, it is not without
interest to remember that the Second Man, the Lord from Heaven, who
was tempted in all points like as we are, had three separate temptations
in the wilderness, and that these three temptations correspond with these
three constituents of our nature. When he was an hungered, the
tempter would have Him profane His miraculous powers in order to
satiate an animal appetite. And that this appetite of hunger is made to
stand for all the rest of the animal appetites is well seen in Hcb. xii. 16,
where we read, “ Lest any fornicator or profane person as Esau, who
for one morsel of bread sold his birthright;” where we see that all
fornicators are classed with Esau, who gave way to the temptation of
gluttony.
The second temptation of our Lord was addressed to the soul —it
exhibited the glory of this world’s kingdoms. Most of us who live
a quiet and retiring life are hardly in a position to appreciate the
extraordinary attractions which the glories of this world have. The
dazzling splendour of courts, the homage paid to exalted rank, the
command of victorious armies, with all the pomp and circumstance
of glorious war, the conquest of subjugated nations, the triumphal
return, the mad enthusiasm of worshipping myriads, the soul’s intoxica-
tion when thousands roar applause, the sense of empire, and the posses-
sion of authority which no mortal man dare question or resist—these
things have for the soul of man extraordinary charms.
But now for the third temptation. “Cast Thyself down, for it is written
angels shall bear Thee up in their hands.” This temptation is manifestly
addressed to the spirit, and is consequently enforced by what the
spiritual man will always respect, the authoritative sanction of Scripture.
In what, then, did this temptation consist ? It consisted in an insidious
attempt to engender an overweening confidence in spiritual privileges.
Good as it is to trust in God, and to believe that what we ask in prayer
we shall receive, yet the ordinary laws of nature are far too important
to allow of being disturbed for inadequate causes, still less for the grati-
fication of spiritual pride.


The threefold division of man into body, soul, and spirit may not be
minute enough for the purposes of the mental philosopher, and yet of
immense value for the practical purpose of Christian self-examination,
especially when studied in connection with the temptations of Him who,
in His human nature, was both constituted and tempted in all points
like ourselves. The carnal* 4 man, the psychical man, the spiritual man,
are characters in which fleshly lusts, worldly-mindedness, and heavenly
aspirations respectively prevail.
At this point I will ask leave to make a small digression. I used in
my lecture the expression, “ The spirit is the life of the soul, just as the
soul is the life of the body,” in which aphorism the words body, soul,
and spirit are obviously not employed in the exact significations
defined above. There is, in fact, a play upon the word life, as
when our Saviour said, “He that will save his life shall lose it;” and
it was perhaps ill-judged on my part to introduce in a philosophical
disquisition, language calculated to produce confusion of ideas. The
words are a reminiscence of my old college days —uttered by a venerable
pastor of the English Church named Simeon, of whom perhaps some of
you may have heard. He was as remarkable a man at Cambridge in his
time as Wesley was at Oxford; and though not gifted with the great
organising powers of John Wesley, yet by his unwearied exertions in his
Master’s service he wrought a wonderful change for the better throughout
the Church of England. When he first began his ministry at Cambridge,
he was so unpopular that it was necessary for him, after evening service,
to escort his undergraduate congregation home to their several colleges
to protect them from the dead rats and rotten eggs with which they were
usually assailed. Yet such is the force of high principle even in this
world, if persevered in, that when Simeon was carried to his grave at a
good old age, the funeral procession was the most imposing sight that
had ever been seen in the place, being attended not only by all the
dignitaries of the university, but by hundreds of clergy who had come
up from all parts of England to do honour to his bones. In writing, then,
that portion of my lecture the words of the venerable man which I had
heard from the university pulpit, after the lapse of forty years recurred
to my memory, and I dovetailed them into my text.
But though Mr. Simeon by body meant only the material body, yet his
utterance is so far to the point that he exhibits the spirit as a second life
to the soul. Against this, however, it has been objected that unspiritual
persons, even savages, have aspirations after immortality. Ihe polished
Greek, we know, longed for Elysium and the Happy Islands. The rough
Scandinavian looked forward to the boisterous joys of the Valhalla, ihe
red Indian yearns towards the happy hunting grounds of his forefathers.
There is no denying this fact; and in my lecture I took account of it
when I spoke of the capacity of man at his original creation, and pointed
out the difference between capacity and fulness. One remarkable feature
in God’s creation is, that as we contemplate the series of animated beings
from a mollusc up to man, we see sundry powers foreshadowed before
they are actually bestowed in their fulness. Just as many things in the
old Mosaic dispensation are types, i.e., outline sketches of what is pre-
* Called by the Gnostics hylic, from v\7), matter. They thought gross appetite inherent
in matter.


destined eventually to take place, so in the great onward march of creation
“ coming events cast their shadows before.” For example, reason and
other attributes of the human soul have their foi eshadowings in the
brute creation. It may be true that man is pre-eminently a reasonable
being, as contrasted with the lower animals, who seem to act almost
entirely upon impulse and instinct; yet all who have studied the subject
know full well that within narrower limits the more intelligent brute
beasts unmistakably exercise reason. An elephant will go most sagaciously
to work to help his master; he will devise ingenious modes of resenting
an affront, and will even bear malice for a long time, almost like a
Christian. In this way, then, I say, and to this degree, a savage man
exhibits in his vague longings for immortality, a shadow of that strong
faith by which the spiritual man comes to regard this life as but a
pilgrimage, and his citizenship to be in heaven. It may, however, be
said that the parallel does not hold; for an elephant or a gorilla can
never become a man, whereas a savage can become a Christian. I answer
that we have had no opportunity of seeing how man was first created;
for the Scripture statement that he was made out of the dust
pf ground is no revelation of the mode of operation. but
we have some opportunity of studying how souls are drawn to
Christ, partly through the statements of the written word, partly
by external observation, partly by our own introspection. And,
therefore, we may fancy that the one is a simpler process than the other.
All I can say is, that Scripture does not so represent the matter.
Scripture speaks of Christianity as a new creation, and as requiring the
actual personal interference of the Creator himself. Each individual
Christian is spoken of as being born again. And what is the whole
Scripture story of the Atonement, but a narrative of the direct inter-
position of the Creator ? I laid very great stress upon these astonishing
facts, and, as I thought, added to their credibility by observed analogies
in the visible world. My views have, indeed, been objected to, yet no
attempt has been made to explain what the new creation of Scripture is
in any proper sense of the term.
I am afraid, my friends, that the necessity under which I have lam of
answering the most salient objections from various quarters, has given
my present lecture a very desultory character. In order, therefore, to
add to it something of definiteness and unity, I will employ the brief
remainder of my time in exhibiting the general view which Scripture
presents of future life and punishment. But first, I will make a remark
or two upon the difference between the letter and spirit of Scripture.
The occurrence of discrepancies in the original Scnptuies, the admitted
interpolations of some passages, the serious divergences of ancient
translations from the present text, and the various readings of manu-
scripts, not only warn us, but command us, while we deal reverently
with the letter of the sacred text, not to surrender ourselves to servile
and superstitious fear, when our duty calls upon us to criticise it.
Perfect love we know ®asteth out fear. hile, theiefoie, we can say,
“ O, how I love thy law!” let us also in the words of the same Psalmist
add’, “ I will walk at liberty, because I seek thy precepts.”
That all Scripture is God-inspired no Christian doubts: for that we
have direct authority. But God-inspired does not mean exactly, as our


translators have it, given by inspiration. It is replete with spiritual
influence. Besides ’ enlightening the understanding with revelations
which we could not otherwise obtain, its historic parts provide food for
our spiritual nurture, quite irrespective of the accuracy of mere historic
detail. When the Spirit speaks it is always in terras of most general and
comprehensive import. “No prophecy is of any private interpretation.”
The language of prophecy is therefore, as might he expected, figurative
and allegorical. Individual transactions may indeed come within the
range of prophetic notice, but then only do they acquire significance and
speak to the spirit of man when they are typical, i.e, when they are
adumbrations of great events of universal interest to the Church of God.
The first grand truth of this order after the creation is the indissoluble
bond of marriage. But that this great truth was originally communi-
cated in prophetic vision Ave see at once, by the terms of Scripture itself
—the deep sleep falling upon Adam, the extraction of his rib and the
closing up of his flesh." Another comprehensive truth of a like order, but
told in very few words, is that it is a man’s duty to clothe his nakedness.
The allegorical form is seen in the circumstance that God Himself is
represented as making the dress of skins.
Having premised this much, I proceed to introduce that deeply-
significant allegory, the temptation in the Garden of Eden. There can
be no question whatever about its being an allegory, for the terms
employed in it are unmistakably figurative. A tree of knowledge and a
tree of life never grew in garden mould. And what is the lesson it
conveys ? It teaches that there was an immortality provided for man
from the very first. The tree of life grew in the garden ; and it was not
a forbidden tree, although man did not then eat its fruit. It stood, as it
were, as the glorious prize of innocence and faithful obedience. Man
must work out his own salvation with reverential fear and trembling
obedience. Proving himself unequal to this task, he is driven out of
paradise for this especial reason, lest he should put forth his hand and
take also of the tree of life and eat and live for ever. Of that tree of
immortal life he never did eat; and the consequence was, as St. Paul
tells us, that death reigned from Adam to Moses Even when men did
not sin, after the similitude of Adam’s transgression, i.e., when they did
not sin as Adam did, in direct violation of a conscious knowledge of God’s
will, yet they died.
The next question, then, is—What does death here mean? We know
that death is used in Scripture in two senses: as we see in that celebrated
saying of our Lord, “ Let the dead bury their dead,” corresponding with
the two meanings of the word life. It becomes then a question in
which of these two senses did all those die who passed out of life through
Adam’s fall. The evidence in the Old Testament is exceedingly meagre ;
but what there is goes to prove very strongly that some will come to life
again, and others not. I will first open the Bible at Psalms xlix. This is
a most striking, I may say most startling, composition, proclaiming as it
does, in such positive terms, the promise of everlasting life, of which the
Hebrew writings in general say so little. It is evidently written for the
encouragement of the poor believer under the tyranny of the proud
oppressor. It announces, in ringing tones, that neither wealth nor
honours give their possessors a title to eternal life. Like sheep they


are laid in the grave;” “ death feeds on them;” “they shall never see
light.” “ Man that is in honour, and understandeth not, is like the beasts
that perish.” In somewhat the same strain is Psalms xcii. 7: “ When
the wicked spring as the grass, and all the workers of iniquity do flourish,
it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.” And also Psalms cxlvi. 4:
“His breath goeth forth; in that very day his thoughts perish.” I cannot
a moment doubt but the Jews understood, by these words, the ultimate
extinction of all life; at the same time that thus “to lie in cold obstruc-
tion and to rot” was to the spiritual-minded among them, one of the most
horrible ideas they were capable of conceiving.
I turn now to Daniel xii. 2. It is quoted both by the Bishop of Mel-
bourne and by Mr. Fraser, in proof of a general resurrection to judgment,
and runs thus ;—“ Many of tnem that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake.” But surely the passage does not prove a universal resurrection.
Many is a very feeble term to express the conntless millions of human
creatures, past, present, and future. It seems to me that if a text can prove
anything, stronger evidence could not have been adduced than this one
to disprove a universal resurrection. Many (it says) shall awake: there-
fore not all. But it is urged that in the corresponding declaration of our
Lord, the word all, and not the word many, is employed. “ The hour is
coming in which all that are in the graves shall hear His voice, and shall
come forth—they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and
they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation.” John v. 28.
Here we have the word all. But all who ? Whom does this all include ?
Our Saviour does not say all that ever lived shall hear His voice, but all
that are in the graves. But if the general tenor of Scripture renders it
probable that a large class have perished in utter extinction, then such
would not be in their graves at all. And how could those who had gone
out of existence as living beings, hear a living voice ? And with this
idea agree the words of St. Paul before Felix. (Acts xxiv. 15.) He
does not say that he believes there will be a universal resurrection, but
simply a resurrection of just and unjust men. The best MSS. leave out
the word dead. So that our Saviour’s language harmonises with that of
the prophet who went before him and of the apostle who came after.
And now, what have we before us ? Two distinct divisions of man-
kind. The first is far the largest—Pagans who never came into covenant
with God—the 700,000,000 who live in heathen countries now; with
countless multitudes more, Avho have been heathens for untold centuries
before the flood. Such children of Adam may have some inert capacity
for knowing God, —may feel an undefined sense of futurity and of the
spirit world, but their capacities remain undeveloped. Like the myriads
of acorns which, season after season, rot at the base of the oak, so these
myriads of human beings are similar waste products of creation, to be
utilised in ways which we at present know not of.
Then there is a second division of mankind of an altogether different
character —men who come into covenant with God, and with whose
destinies alone Scripture may be said really to deal—children of Seth —
men with ears to hear, and eyes to see, and hearts to understand —sons of
that Adam who, in the earliest parable, heard the voice of the Lord God
walking in the garden in the cool of the day—men who were the first to
feel themselves naked in the sight of God, and would fain hide themselves


from his searching and consuming glance—who began to have knowledge
of good and evil, who had rules of conduct which their conscience
approved, but which the lusts of the flesh were ever prompting them to
break. It is this class alone with which Scripture is almost wholly
occupied, and of this our Saviour is speaking when he says, “ They shall
hear his voice and shall come forth.” Some to the resurrection of life,
others to the resurrection of damnation.
Nor does it matter to our present question how men got into this class,
whether by Gospel law, or the law of Moses, or patriarchal law, or
whether they Avere a law unto themselves. If only they had ears to
hear, they became amenable to judgment, and to that righteous law
which says, “ To whom much is given, of him much will be required.”
Next let us turn to two or three parables of our Lord.
When the net was cast into the sea, it did not bring up all the fishes
of the sea, but it gathered of every kind, bad and good; and at the great
day of judgment the angels are employed in separating only what are
in the net. Of those left behind in the sea no account is taken.
Again, in the parable of the tares of the field; the tares are not what
we call tares now, but a grass closely resembling wheat, and which is,
indeed, sometimes called bastard-wheat. But what we have particularly
to observe is that these tares are not the spontaneous weeds of the soil.
No account is taken of such. But the tares are specially sown there by
an enemy with malice prepense. And the reason assigned for not at
once pulling them up is, lest the wheat should be pulled up by mistake,
they were so much alike. lam quite prepared to allow, with my
reverend brother Fraser, that the terms of a parable cannot be applied
with logical precision, yet I maintain that when the main features of
these figurative representations of our Saviour are looked at, a strong
case is made out for the resurrection of those only who had spiritual life
of some sort ip. them in this world.
And now let us take a hasty glance at the judgment scene in Matthew
xxv. The parable opens with the statement that when the Son of Man
shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with Him, all nations
shall be gathered before Him, and He will divide them into two parts
only—those who have done kindness to the least of His brethren and
those who, when they had opportunity, did it not. But surely this
cannot include all the men and women, infants and sucklings, who ever
lived. There are palpably and unmistakably a vast mass of persons who
have been passed over sub silentio. From the very nature of the case,
the vast mass of mankind cannot be among the number of those who
have had the opportunity of showing kindness to Christ’s followers,
whether small or great. The parable is clearly a figurative expansion of
what our Saviour has elsewhere declared, “Whosoever shall give to drink
unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold water only, in the name of a
disciple, shall in no wise lose his reward.”
So much, then, for the parables. But when we come to study our
Lord’s plain declarations, on several occasions, the case becomes very much
stronger. I will ask you to turn to John vi. 53, 54—“ Verily, verily, I
say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink His
blood ye have no life in you. Whoso eateth My flesh and drinketh My
blood hath eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.” Implying


that if men did not eat His fiesh and drink His blood (no matter in what
way we interpret these figurative expressions,) they would not be raised
up. “ Not as your fathers did eat manna and are dead; he that eateth of
this bread shall live for ever.” In what sense dead? Lost their natural
lives ? Why, no : or else what difference would there be between them
and Christians ? For Christians lose their natural lives. But the one
would be raised up and the other not. Physical death has no power
over him who has the resurrection life. When our Saviour was called in
to see Jairus’s daughter, he came apparently too late. The maiden was
already dead, i.e., naturally dead, and the hired minstrels were already in
the house chanting the funereal dirge. But Jesus declared that she only
slept, being aware by His divine knowledge that her soul was still alive.
We may well conceive that He who on earth was the source of all
spiritual life, should recognise at once the germ of spiritual life, even in
that pallid corpse before Him. The same conclusion may be drawn in
the case of Lazarus, of whom Jesus said, “ Our friend Lazarus sleepeth, and
I go to awaken him out of his sleep,” and yet Jesus himself said plainly,
“Lazarus is dead.” See also John x. 28, xvii. 2, and I may say the
whole of St. Paul’s Epistles. Unless this view be taken, many passages
of St. John’s Gospel and of St. Paul’s Epistles lose all their meaning.
On the whole, then, I conclude that Scripture testimony is almost
irresistible against the doctrine of necessary or inalienable immortality.
You will observe that I have not employed the term annihilation.
Such a term involves a totally different question, about which the Scrip-
tures say nothing. A thing may cease to be without being annihilated.
Throw an old hat into the fire, it will not be annihilated, but it will
cease to be a hat. The materials of which it was composed, after having
first been aggregated in Nature’s laboratory, were then put together by
the art of man ; the fire resolved them into different combinations. In a
somewhat similar way, we observe a soul growing from childhood to old
age, gathering thoughts and reminiscences, and principles and affections
—love to God and love to many human souls. The identity of a soul
may be said to depend upon its reminiscences and peculiar partialities.
How otherwise could we recognise a disembodied spirit ? But love may
be alienated and turned to hatred; memory may decay. And if a soul
were to be deprived of all its former memories and associations it would
be destroyed—that is, its identity would —and yet it would not be anni-
hilated. I need hardly say that we have no basis for any such speculation
in Scripture, and therefore the word annihilation ought never to be used.
I come now to the last remaining question—What will become of the
wicked after the day of judgment? This is a question of far more
practical impoi’tance than the former one. For upon the mode in which
a man realises the awful fact to his own mind, Avill depend in great
measure his sense of his own responsibility. Scripture, it is true, is not
lavish in its statements on this head; but its images abundantly fore-
shadow the ineffable woes which will attend our condemnation at the
dread bar of heaven; and, besides, our most deeply-seated instincts set
their seal to the plain declarations of the Inspired Word. When once
we come within the range of moral law, we feel that this world is not
the whole of man’s destiny; and daily experience confirms this, by
showing that man is not punished and rewarded in this world in propor-


tion to his deserts. There must, therefore, be a hereafter, in which a
Righteous Judge will rectify all the inequalities of this (2 Thess. i. 6.)
As for the theoretical question, whether the punishments inflicted on the
wicked at the day of judgment will be eternal or not ? I beg to say that that
is not a question which I ever raised. The painless non-existence of which
I spoke, had obviously reference to other classes than the wilfully wicked.
As, however, the question is before us, I will say a few words about it.
In the older Scripture, the term “ for ever” is vague in the extreme,
and often means anything but eternity. It is always affected by such
limitations as the nature of the case implies. I will give but one
example, viz., the prophet Samuel’s denunciation to Eli (1 Sam. ii. 30.)
“ Wherefore the Lord God of Israel saith, I said indeed that thy house and
the house of thy father should walk before me for ever : but now the
Lord saith, Be it far from me. For them that honour me I will honour,
and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.” Exceedingly little
information, therefore, can be gathered from this phrase in the ancient
Scriptures. When we come to the New Testament, we find the curious
fact that the writers there generally borrowed their expression for eternity
from the Gnostic philosophers. The proper Greek word for eternal, cU'ho<;
occurs only twice —once in Rom. i. 20, as an epithet of the power of the
Supreme Being, and again in Jude, eternal chains. Hie Gnostic word is
diuvioi, and does not strictly mean eternal. The Gnostics fancied
that everlasting time was divided into periods of enormous duration.
Man not being able to form any conception of infinity, approximates to it
as best he can. A day is measured by the turning of the earth upon its
axis, and is soon gone. The year, with its revolving seasons, expands the
notion of time. Years added to years bring round a century. A century
contains the history of a family, the father, the grandfather, and perhaps
the great grandfather. Revolving centuries contain the history of a
nation. The history of many nations makes the history of the world.
But the world itself will have an end, and its whole duration is measured
by a single aion. But the Gnostics did not stop here. Aions themselves
revolve as time advances. There are aions of the aions; and this is the
very expression which the New Testament writers have adopted to repre-
sent as much of eternity as the most powerful human mind can conceive.
In apostolic times the Church had no great need to dwell in detail
upon eternal punishment. It was not wanted as a controlling power over
the consciences of men. for the Apostolic Church consisted of those only
who were really earnest and sincere, “ whose hearts” (in Scripture phrase)
“ the Lord had touched.” Over such as these the law which preceded
the Gospel may be said to have already done its work. When our
Saviour lifted up his eyes over Judea, the fields were already white
for the harvest, and the first reapers entered into the labours of
others. In order to carry out practically the discipline of the Church,
the earliest bishops and presbyters would find adequate penalties in the
temporary or permanent excommunication of the offender.
When, however, Christianity became the religion of the state, the position
of the Christian Church was greatly changed, for it then became responsible
for the religious education of the whole people. Christian sentiments and
Christian obligations had to replace those strong feelings of superstitious
reverence, which held such potent sway over the ancient world, ihe


early Latin race was deeply imbued with the religious instinct, to which,
indeed, may be traced the growth of its greatness and its mastery over
the civilised Roman magistrates well knew the value of religion
in carrying on the work of government, and to every Roman soldier was
administered the sacramental oath of allegiance, long before it was
adopted by the Christian Church.
How then was the new religion to gain a hold upon the public mind ?
It cannot be supposed that when the empire became nominally Christian
by the fiat of Constantine, that all his subjects became ipso facto advanced
Christians, yet the Church became responsible to the State for the reten-
tion of these vast multitudes in something of their ancient reverence for
religion. The Church did the best she could. She reconsecrated the
ancfent basilicas and temples, and threw them open for Christian worship.
She established ceremonials which might reach the mind through the
channels of sense —litanies, i.e., processional services, and such other
liturgical offices, musical or otherwise, as were intelligible to the people,
and in which they could take their part. We may, if we please, stigma-
tise much of this as too sensuous, as addressed too much to the eye and
ear; and we may blame the Church for giving sanction at this stage of its
growth to practices which we know to have been since abused. Rut just
so might we blame Moses for much of his ceremonial law, and David and
Solomon for that “ beauty of holiness ” with which they surrounded the
services of the sanctuary. It is of no use ignoring the essential instincts
of humanity, which God has implanted for man’s benefit. And this considera-
tion brings us to the particular instinct we are now discussing, that of fear.
The mode which the early Church adopted to obtain an influence
over the religious fears of men, for the sake of turning them into the
paths of righteousness, was Purgatory. Purgatorial punishment in the
infernal regions the Church found ready to her hands. It was current
both in popular belief and in the schools of philosophy. The word Hades
was already on the pages of the written word; and the parable of Dives
and Lazarus furnished an example of the judicial exercise of the tor-
menting flame. Thus, then, we find that, as early as the year 593, Pur-
gatory was pronounced by authority to be an essential doctrine of the
Church, I have no intention to discuss the validity of the doctrine; but
I may say, in passing, that it rests upon far better Scripture grounds than
Universalism, and upon quite as good grounds as the inalienable immor-
tality of the soul, and it has the advantage of giving facility for expatiating
upon the severity of God without compromising his goodness. A common
notion with us now is that Purgatory is a kind of escape from hell fire;
but this is owing to the abuses which crept into the Church at a compa-
ratively recent period, such as supererogation and indulgences. In earlier
times, it was an engine of great potency in the work of conversion, and in
securing ecclesiastical obedience. A great deal of the efficacy of the
mediaeval preachers consisted in their highly coloured pictures of the
horrors and agonies of the damned, and in the skill and eloquence with
which they dwelt upon the torments in store for the wicked in the future
world.* 4 When preachers of power could not be got, then the same lesson
* I have no doubt myself that the vulgar English owe their horrible habit of coarse
swearing to the reiteration of these topics by the preaching friars.


was conveyed directly to the eye by dramatic representations. Hell was
always one scene in the “ miracle plays.” Ideas thus engendered have
remained in the popular mind to this day. A brother minister of mine
once told me the following story. He had been attending an old sailor
on his death-bed, and in return for his spiritual ministrations was some-
times treated to a yarn. This is a specimen. The old tar had been in
China; and, in the overflowing charity of his heart, which covers a mul-
titude of sins, he was maintaining that the Chinamen were not so bad
after all: they were industrious and orderly, and an ingenious people;
“ and I can tell you, sir (he added,) that they are not such heathens either,
for they believe in a devil, just as we do, who has a tail and horns.”
There is no doubt about the efficacy of the style of mediaeval
preaching among a rude and bucolic people, and it has found an exact
counterpart in that practised by the revivalists in America. Here is a
description given by Mrs. Trollope of what she witnessed at one of these
revival meetings. We might fancy we were listening to a preaching friar
of the middle ages. “ The sermon,” she says, “ had considerable elo-
quence, but of a frightful kind. The preacher described, with ghastly
minuteness, the last feeble, fainting moments of human life, and then the
gradual progress of decay after death, which he followed through every
process up to the last loathsome' stage of decomposition. Suddenly
changing his tone into the shrill voice of horror .... he bent
forward his head, as if to gaze at some object beneath the pulpit .
the pit that seemed to open before him.” Then followed the description
of hell. “No image that fire, flame, brimstone, molten lead, or red-hot
pincers could supply, with flesh, nerves, and sinews quivering under
them, was omitted. The perspiration ran in streams from the face of
the preacher, his eyes rolled, his lips were covered with foam, and every
feature had the deep expression of horror it would have borne, had
he in truth been gazing at the scene he described.” I cannot but
think if punishments of this order are to be dwelt on at all, it is far
better thus to do it in detail than to speak of infinite extension. People
cannot comprehend infinity. Even Calvin thought it advisable to
produce a clearer notion of what infinite punishment meant, by burning
Servetus at the stake. It is confessedly upon very inferior souls that this
kind of motive powerfully operates, and they never look very far
forward.
Among the many criticisms with which I have been favoured, since
the delivery of my lecture, was one very sensible one in a Bendigo
newspaper. The writer, who signed his name “ John,” asked me why,
instead of preaching to fashionable congregations, I did not stand on the
banks of the Yarra and stop some of the wretched beings from plunging
week after week into suicidal death? No doubt it is my duty,and the
duty of every Christian, to do his best in this matter. But one man
cannot command both banks of tfiat long and winding stream. What is
the machinery then to be put in motion? What the kind of terror which
shall convert “the thousands of thieves, prostitutes, drunkards, and
rakes,” who infest society, from their filthy ways ? Shall it be by such
preaching as Mrs. Tiollope has described ? I trow not: and I’ll tell you
why. Men’s ideas of the unseen are always modelled upon such pictures
as are presented to the senses. When, as in ancient times, men were


scourged to death, cut in sunder, stoned in the public streets, and
crucified in such numbers, that hundreds might be viewed at times
blackening the roadside trees with their ghastly and rotting carcases,
then Mas there imagery at hand for terrifying “ cowardly humanity ”
into flying from the wrath to come i So also did Tophet of old, with its
ever-blazing fires of burning offal, furnish a picture of unclean things
undergoing violent decomposition. But in these days such preaching
would produce but small result, except in a very simple-minded
community. The bulk of the listeners would simply be amused. It is
quite true that the Law must precede the Gospel; but as a feature of the
times, the age of the Law is past: the regeneration of the world is to be
effected now by the spread of the Gospel-leaven. The tone of education
and of prison discipline is entirely changed from what it was of yore. It
is not now thought wise that servant maids should quiet naughty children
by mysterious knocks beneath their bed at night. Neither prison
dungeons, nor bedlam hospitals present any longer the supposed imagery
of hell. The personality of the devil, as an executioner of divine
vengeance, is seldom ever alluded to in polite society, even from the
pulpit. The mention of the wicked one is expunged from the Lord’s
Prayer, and abstract evil put in his place.
Lacking, then, all this graphic imagery, all these sensuous appeals,
how shall we reach the consciences of the more brutal order of sinners ?
How stem the apparently increasing flood of ungodliness and vice ?
To answer this question fully, would require very much more time and
thought than lam capable of bestowing; but I will venture to blurt out
one or two crude ideas.
1. The more intelligent in the community must exert themselves to
improve their less favoured brethren, and bring them under the influences
of religion. But it must be borne in mind that religion can never be
forced upon a man. “ The wind bloweth where it listeth.”
2. Education should be made compulsory through every class of
society. If a parent neglects to educate his child, the State should inter-
pose and provide the education that is needed. It would be the State’s
duty to punish the parent, and reimburse itself.
3. Education should recognise religion as its basis. “ The Tear of God
is the beginning of wisdom.” Man is essentially a religious being, and
it is notorious that even godless parents prefer a school which recognises
religion to one where religion is ignored. Such recognition of religion
should be made in every school by reverently opening its daily work with
a general prayer or hymn of praise. Dogmatic teaching may safely be
left to the Sunday; but not a day should pass without God’s presence
being recognised and his blessing sought. Need I add that godliness of
character should be looked for in the schoolmaster as rigorously as it is
looked for in the minister of religion ?
4. Prison discipline should be much more systematic, and, upon the
whole, much more severe than it is. But a merciful consideration for the
unhappy prisoner should be manifested, and his earnings, if he be under
long sentence, made available for his benefit after the expiration of his
sentence. Much more is wanted than has ever yet been attempted in the
classification of offenders, according to their age, the nature of their
offences, and their previous character and habits.


5. Then there should be a National Church. Such words may appear
like as of them that dream. But it would be an inestimable blessing.
By National Church, I do not mean the Church of England, or the Church
of Home, or the Church of Scotland, but the Church of the People—the
Parish Church with its minister and deacons. For such an object
Christians who have the welfare of their country at heart, and who expect
their posterity to continue here, might well sink their puny differences
and economise their strength. I know how strong the objections are in
many quarters against a National Church, but they are almost all diawn
from its abuses, and from the idea that such abuses are inseparable from
it. I think this idea erroneous. The same ntelligent care which has
purified civil government from so many of its abuses, would avail to pro-
duce an ecclesiastical system, not indeed perfect, yet equally free from
what is chiefly objected to. .
6. Ministers of religion, addressing themselves to their work with the
sanction of the State, would have their hands greatly strengthened.
They would speak with more authority ; they could visit at every house
without being chargeable with impertinence. In their several districts
they would be able to act as State almoners; on the one side as the poor
man’s friend, administering to the wants of the indigent, on the other
side by an intimate acquaintance with the locality, assisting the State in
checking a misapplication of charitable relief. The parish minister would
be one in whom every man, however humble, would have a legal light
to look for Christian sympathy, and in whose aid he would find his best
chance in escaping from any degrading vice. Being on the watch for a
favourable moment for speaking a word in season, as sickness, death, or
other accident in the family gave him opportunity, the accredited
minister of religion would be the great reformer would receive the
drunkard’s pledge, and help him to keep it. ,
It is all very well, as at present, to send our home missionaries through
the back streets of the city, and to distribute tracts by the thousand; but,
for the object in view, the machinery is utterly inadequate. The man
properly qualified to do such work ought to lie a highly gifted man.
But as matters stand, the talented ministers we import from England, at
high salaries, are for the pulpit only, and they sometimes even stipulate
that they shall not have this kind of missionary work to do; but the
missionary himself, or tract distributor, we pay but poorly. >
7. Lastly, the State ought to provide buildings of adequate and
convenience for public worship—buildings in which something of t e
beauty of holiness” should be realised, and to which the poorest man
should have as free access as he who rolls in wealth. If the Church on
earth be symbolically the gate of heaven, then, seeing that hea\en is
freely open to all, there should not be, as in private residences, a back
gate for the poor and a front gate for the rich, or outhouses, so to spea ,
for the poor to worship in, but handsome edifices, representing the re i-
glous feelings of the nation, wearing something of the fair face of heaven
on their portals, pointing to heaven with their spires, and open to all alike..
Fergusson and Moore, Fruiters, Flinders Lane Fast. Melbourne.
