

AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT
OF SCIENCE.
SOME ROCK PICTURES ADD CEREMONIAL
STONES OF THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE ABOVE ASSOCIATION
BY
R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
Associé étranger Soc. d' Anthrop. de Paris.
BRISBANES :
BY AUTHIRITY: ANTHONY JAMES GUMMING, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1910.




6.—SOME ROCK PICTURES AND CEREMONIAL STONES OF THE
AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
(WITH ILLUSTRATIONS.)
By R H. MATHEWS, L.S.
A number of interesting - aboriginal carvings are found 01: the
Burnett River, parish of South Koian, county of Cook, in the State
of Queensland. The drawings are cut upon some flat rocks k, the
wide channel of the river, at the junction therewith of Pine Creek.
This point may also be defined as situated a little over 14 miles in a
direct line south-westerly from the town of Bundaberg.
The rocks containing the carvings are a kind of hard sandstone,
which during the greater part of the year are quite dry, but in
times of flood are covered with water. Most of the figures are small,
varying from a few inches in length to upward of 2 ft., representing
native weapons, animals, human feet, and several nondescript devices.
The outline of each figure is defined by a groove cut into the hard
surface of the rock to a depth varying from to of an in. The


width of the groove ranges from less than in. in the smallest to
about in, in the largest specimens.
The mode of execution adopted by the native artist was to make
a row of indentations or punctures along the outline of the drawing
with sharp-pointed pieces of hard stone. The spaces between the
punctures were subsequently chipped out, so as to form a continuous
groove. The positions of the punctures are still discernible. Mr. W. H.
Franklin, of Bingera, who first brought these carvings under my
notice, has known of their existence for more than thirty years. He
says they were then somewhat plainer than at present, although still
quite distinguishable.
One of my kind friends chiselled out a fragment of the rock con-
taining part of a very distinct carving of a human foot with five toes,
and sent it to me. The native drawing showed the entire foot, 6|- in.
long, but the heel end of it was broken into fragments in endeavouring
ABORIGINAL CARVING, BURNETT RIVER.
(Natural Size.)
to remove it. I have made an exact copy of the part of the foot
which is in my possession. The broken line across the face of the
drawing defines the boundary of the missing part of the foot. My
drawing is exactly the same size as the carving on the rock.
494
PROCEEDINGS OF SECTION F.


ROCK CARVINGS IN THE BURNETT RIVER.


ROCK CARVINGS IN THE BURNETT RIVER.
ROCK CARVINGS IN THE BURNETT RIVER.


Certain remarkable stone objects, chipped and ground into shape
by the aborigines, have been discovered over a large area of north-
western New South Wales, which have not been observed in any other
part of Australia. The principal tracts in which these prepared stones
have been found are along the Darling River and adjacent country,
from about the town of Bourke down to below Menindie; on the
Warrego and Paroo Rivers from their junction with the Darling
upwards to the Queensland frontier; and in the extensive region lying
between Tibooburra, Mount Arrowsmith, Broken Hill, &c., and the
Darling River. Isolated specimens have also been met with south-east
of the Darling, almost as far as the Lachlan River. A specimen in
the possession of the late C. S. Wilkinson was said to have been
picked up about 1884, between the Narran and Barwon Rivers —the
Darling being known as the Barwon in that part of its course. The
latter is the farthest point east where such stones have been reported
from.
In order to give the reader a clear conception of what these
stones are like, I have made careful drawings to scale of seven out of
SEVEN CEREMONIAL STANES, N. S. WALES.
495
ROCK PICTURES AND CEREMONIAL STONES.


a considerable number of specimens in my possession, illustrating
differences in size and shape, and in the character of the material;
including also some which are rather profusely marked, and others
which contain no inscriptions.
Fig. 1 is a long, nearly cylindrical piece of clay-slate, 18f in.
long, its greatest diameter being 2 in. A large amount of chipping
and grinding has been done by the native artificer to bring this
implement into its present shape, especially at the pointed end, and
also near the base. About the middle of the shaft the original surface
of the stone is seen in a few patches some inches in extent. Commenc-
ing a little over an inch and a-half from the base, there are numerous
marks, both horizontal and slightly oblique, all the way to the apex.
About half an inch from the point one of these incisions reaches all
round the stone. At the middle of the shaft another inscribed line
encircles it; but the two ends of the cut, instead of meeting, overlap
each other about 2 in., and are from a quarter to half an inch apart.
There are a large number of incisions scattered over most of the
surface of the stone, about ninety of which are reproduced on the side
seen in the drawing. In addition to these there are many other marks
which, although distinguishable, are but scratches, and have never
been anything more. They are of the same character as the well-
defined cuts, but much shorter, and are not the result of accidental
injury.
Fig. 1 a gives a view of the base of the stone, in which there is a
saucer-like depression, the perimeter of which is shown by the inner-
most of the two irregular circles, having an average diameter of nearly
an inch and a quarter. This concavity has been made by picking into
the surface with some sharp instrument, such as a pointed flake of
hard stone, the remains of the punctures being still plainly discernible.
After the picking was done the surface was rubbed or ground until it
was fairly smooth. The depth of the hollow formed in this way is a
little more than a twentieth of an inch. The specimen was found near
an old native camp on Buckanbee run, Darling River, and weighs 3 lb.
12 oz.
Fig. 2 is a soft decomposed sandstone, 16f in. long, with a
practically circular shaft, the greatest diameter of which is 2f in.,
from which it evenly diminishes to a well-defined point. Extending
back from the apex are six vertical lines, and at in. from the point
are two slightly curved parallel incisions, cut well into the stone, with
two similar marks on the opposite side, which are not, of course, visible
in the drawing. These comprise all the marks on this specimen.
From the thickest part of the shaft to the base, the diameter
slightly decreases, until the basal diameter (Fig. 2 a) averages a little
over If in.' The diameter of the depression in the base averages nearly
2 in., and its depth is one-eighth of an inch. The stone was picked up
on Kallara Run, Darling River, and its weight is 3 lb. 14 oz.
Fig. 3.—Another specimen of a soft sandstone, 12-| in. long, 2-| in.
in its greatest diameter, and circular in section. Fig. ‘ia represents
the base, into which is picked and ground a concavity seven-fortieths
of an inch deep in the centre. It was found on Kallara Run, fronting
the Darling River on the northern side; 4f in. from the base there is
a cut which may have been intended for part of a barbed spear, If in.
in length. Weight of the stone, 2 lb. 7 oz.


Fig. 4 is another implement of decomposed sandstone, 16f in. in
length, which, by coincidence, is the same length as Fig. 2. At the
thickest part the diameter measures in,, and a section through any
part of the shaft would give an almost circular outline. _ On the face
selected for illustration there are five pairs of incised lines and two
single marks—one of the latter reaching round nearly half the circum-
ference. On the other side of the stone, not visible in the drawing, are
twenty-one marks, comprising triplets, pairs, and cuts. _
Fig. ia represents the base, whose diameter varies from If m. to
91 i n ° The usual saucer-shaped concavity has a mean diameter of
nearly U in., and its depth is one-twentieth of an inch. This well-
shaped specimen was found on a sand ridge on Moira Plain Run, about
50 miles south-easterly from Wilcannia, and weighs 4 lb. 8 oz.
Pip. 5—A. fine-grained sandstone, Ilf in. in length, with a
maximum diameter of 24 in. The shaft is slightly curved or crescent-
shaped, which gives variety to this specimen, but there are no incised
lines now visible upon it. The concavity m the base, Fig. oa, is three-
fcrtieths of an inch deep. This stone was discovered on Culpaulm
Run, about 16 miles below Wilcannia, Darling River. Weight, 6 lb.
10 °Fig. 6, a soft sandstone, 10 in. long, with a diameter of 3| in. at
the thickest part of the circular shaft. The depth of the concavity- in
the base, Fig. 6a, is fivofortieths of an inch, and the weight oi the
stone 3 lb. 7 oz. It was found at Tonga Lake, north-west of the Paroo
River, in approximate latitude ,30| degrees, and longitude
degrees. There are a few scattered inscriptions which are too much
weathered to be decipherable. „
Fim 7 is made of sandstone, and comes from Prdgamurtee Run,
near Cobham Lake, about 50 miles southerly from Tibooburra, in the
north-west corner of New South Wales. The length is 9 m and the
greatest diameter 3± in. The side of the specimen illustrated contains
eighteen horizontal incisions, some of which are in pairs, one has three
lines, and the remaining eleven are placed contiguous to one another.
There are a few similar marks on the other side of the stone. This
specimen is interesting from its great thickness in comparison with its
length, and from its symmetrical conical outline.
Fio-. 7 a shows the base of the stone, which is represented by two
slightly s oval outlines, the external one giving the size of the base and
the innermost showing the perimeter of the concavity. The concavity
stopes regularly from the margin towards the centre, Avhere the
greatest depth "is three-twentieths of an inch. Weight of specimen,
2 lb. 15 oz. , i j •
The stones above described have ceased to be employed in the
ceremonies of the remnants of the Darling, Paroo, and other tribes,
and, therefore, it is not easy to obtain much information respecting
their meaning and uses. An old aboriginal, named Harry P e *?T>
whom I have often met at different places on the Darling, of which
river he was a native, gave me the following information ••—He sai
he had never seen the stones used, but his father and other old blacks
had told him that they were employed in ceremonial observances con-
nected with the assembling of the people at the time the nardoo seed
was ripe Adiaoent triblets would be invited to participate in the
harvest, and met at the appointed place, bringing with them various


articles for barter with their hosts in exchange for the grass seed,
leiry also said that such stones were used in incantations for causing
the supply of game and other food to increase, for the making of rain,
and other secret ceremonies. This statement was confirmed by another
old man, who said the stones in question were kept by the head men,
or “ doctors,” the women and uninitiated not being allowed to see
them. On the death of the owner, they were hidden in the ground
near an old camping place of his, or else near his grave.
A station manager on the Darling River told me that some
thirty-five years ago he was one day drafting cattle on a sand ridge on
his property. He was assisted by his white stockman and a black-
fellow, all of them being on horseback. The trampling of the hoofs
of the stock disturbed the loose sand and brought one of these curious
stones to the surface. At lunch time, the manager picked up the
stone, which was nicely marked along the shaft, and expressed his
intention of taking it home to the house as a curio. The blackfellow-
mterposed, saying that if such a stone as that were taken to the
house, and any woman should see it, all the blacks would die. He
accordingly took it away and covered it in the sand where it had been
found. It is to be regretted that the manager, who was not then
taking much interest in the customs of the blacks, did not make in-
quiries. The above incident is a corroboration of the sacred character
of stones of this kind.
At a meeting of the Linnean Society of New South Wales, in 1884,
one of these implements was exhibited on behalf of C. S. Wilkinson’
10 in. long and 4 in. in diameter.* In 1888, another specimen was
shown on behalf of Rev. J. M. Curran, 11| in. in length by a thickness
of in.f In 1898, W. R. Harper described some similar stones.| In
1002, Wm. Freeman exhibited a specimen 17 in. long and 3£ in. in
diameter, at the Hobart meeting of this association.§"
Proc. Linn, Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. ix„ pp. 507-508.
+ Op. cit., vol. xxiii., p. 43G.
+ Op. cit ., vol. xxiii., pp. 420 sq.
§ Rep. A. A. A. Science, vol. ix , p. 539.




