



HANDBOOK
of
the
AUSTRALIAN SCHOOL OF PACIFIC ADMINISTRATION


PLEASE NOTE
The system of decimal numbering of sections
and paragraphs has been adopted so as to allow for
easy and progressive amendment* As amendments
become necessary, they will be forwarded with
directions indicating the sections or paragraphs
to be replaced. With the co-operation of those
who hold copies, the. Handbook may thus be kept
continually up to date, and there will be no need
for complete new editions.
Because of the work and expense involved in
keeping copies up to date, it is requested that
recipients who have no further use for the Hand-
book return it to
The Australian School of Pacific Administration,
M 0 S M A N.
SYDNEY.


INDEX
1. Function of the School.
2. The Council of the School,
3. Administration of the School.
4. The Staff of the School.
5. Courses of Study:
50. General.
i
51. The Course for the Diploma
of The Australian School
of Pacific Administration.
52. The Induction Course,
53. The Course in Native
Education.
54. The Course for Specialist
Officers.
55. Refresher Courses.
56. Other Courses.
6. Extension Activities.
7. The Hallstrom Pacific Library.
8. Board and Accommodation.
9. Student Activities and Welfare.


1. Function of the School
10* The function of the School shall be to provide
special courses for the education of officers and
prospective officers of the Territory and of such
other persons as are prescribed. (Papua and New
Guinea Act (1949-1950) Part VIII Section 66(2).
11, The persons for whose education the School may provide
special courses are, in addition to officers and
prospective officers of the Territory, persons
included in any of following classes
110. Persons employed or to be employed by the Common-
wealth or an authority of the Commonwealth, and
nominated by the Commonwealth or that authority;
111* persons nominated by a Christian Mission
operating in the Territory with a view to their
receiving education for the purposes of the
Mission;
112, Natives whose standard of education fits them
for higher training;
113, persons whose admission to the School would, in
the opinion of the Minister, be of benefit to
the Territory; and
114, persons for whose admission to the School arrange-
ments are made with the Government of a country
outside the Commonwealth,
(Australian School of Pacific Adminis-
tration Regulations).


2. The Council of the School
20, Provision for the Council of the School is made in the
Papua and New Guinea Act (1949-50),-
21, The Council consists of the following members
210, The Secretary, who is Chairman of the Council;
211, The Administrator;
212, The Director of the Commonwealth Office of
Education;
213, a person nominated by the Chairman of the Public
Service Board;
214, a person nominated by the Secretary to the
Department of the Treasury;
215, a person nominated by the Director-General of
Health; and
216, The Principal.
(Australian School of Pacific Administration
Regulations),
22, The members referred to in 813, 214 and 215 are appointed
by the Minister, and hold office during his pleasure.
(Australian School of Pacific Administration
Regulations),
23, In addition to the members specified under 21, the
Minister may, after obtaining the advice of the Council,


appoint one other member to hold office for a period
not exceeding two years, and a member so appointed is,
on the expiration of the period of his appointment,
eligible for re-appointment.
(Australian School of Pacific Administration
Regulations),
£4. The following are members of the Council:-
241. Mr. C.R. Lambert Chairman (under 210);
£42. Brigadier D.M. Cleland (under 211);
243, Mr. W, J. Weeden (under 212);
244, Dr. P.W. Curtin (under 213);
245, Mr. H.J, G-oodes (under 214);
246, Professor E. Ford (under 215);
247* Mr. C.D, Rowley (under 216).
25. An appointment under paragraph 23 has not yet been made.
26, Under the Australian School of Pacific Administration
Regulations, the Council shall
260. Advise the Minister on matters relating to the
administration, conduct and management of the
School and, in particular, as to -
2600 The courses of study to be provided;
2601 The classes and number of persons to be
admitted and the terms and conditions
of their admission;


2602 The courses of study to be taken by
students;
2603 The fees to be paid by students;
2604 The lecturing, instructional, and other
staff required for the purposes of the
School;
2605 The library and other facilities for the
School;
*
2606 The examinations to be conducted by tho
School;
26G7 Tho Diplomas or certificates to be awarded
to students;
2608 The establishment and maintenance of accommo-
dation and catering facilities for students
and the charges to be made therefor; and
2609 The financial provision to be made each
year for the School:
and
261. Report to the Minister from time to time as to
the suitability of any established course of
study and as to the progress made by the students
in all established courses of study,
262, As soon as possible after the close of each
academic year, submit to the Minister, through


the Secretary, a report as to the activities
of the School during that year.
(Australian School of Pacific Administration
Regulations).


3. Administration of the School
30 The responsibilities and duties of the Minister
of State for Territories, the Secretary of the
Department of Territories and the Principal have
been defined in the Australian School of Pacific
Administration Regulations, of 11th December 1951,
made under the Papua and New Guinea Act 1949-1950.
The responsibilities of the Council in this
i
connection as stated in the Regulations, have
already been set out under 26 above.
31 The Minister of State for Territories,
310. The Minister may do such things and give such
directions as he considers necessary for the
administration of the School.
311. The Minister may, with respect to a matter or
class of matters, by instrument under his hand,
delegate to the Secretary, Department of
Territories, any power or function conferred upon
him by the Australian Sohool of Pacific
Administration Regulations (except this power
of delegation and except his powers and
functions in relation to the matters speci-
fied in 3200 and 3201 below), so that the


delegated power or function my, with respect to
the matter or class of matters specified in the
instrument of delegation, be exercised by the
Secretary in the manner and subject to the
conditions specified in that instrument.
312. A delegation under 311 is revocable at will and
no such delegation prevents the exercise or
performance by the Minister of any of his powers
i
or functions under the Australian School of
Pacific Administration Regulations.
(Australian School of Pacific Administration
Regulations).
32. The Principal of the School.
320 The Principal is responsible for
3200 The instruction of students in accordance
with the courses of study approved by the
Minister,
3201 Regulating the conduct of the students and
maintaining discipline in the School.
321 The Principal is responsible for tie execution
of the directions of the Minister or his delegate.
322 The Principal may do all things necessary or
convenient for the discharge of his responsibilities.
323 The Principal shall co-operate with the Council or


any committee established by the Council in
all matters relating to the functions of the
Council,
(Australian School of Pacific Administration
Regulations).
33* The Academic Staff.
330 A member of the academic staff may
3300 require the attendance of students for
»
individual tuition, or at such lectures and
seminars as are necessary in addition to
those provided for in the School time-table;
3301 set such written exercises as are necessary,
specifying the final date for completion of
such written exercises and their handing in
to the Registrar;
3302 set such tests and examinations throughout
the academic year and in addition to the
final examinations as are necessary for the
assessment of diligence and progress of
students,
34. The Registrar of the School.
340 The Registrar may require such action and co-
operation as is necessary for the proper
discharge of his duties. These duties include


3401 The maintenance of all School records,
including academic records,
3402 Supervision of matters related to
board and accommodation at the School,
3403 Supervision of the administration of the
Hallstrom Pacific Library,
3404 Maintenance of School property and
Commonwealth property on loan to the
i
School.
3405 Supervision of payment of officers of
the Territorial services who are students
at the School.
3406 Arrangements for movement of student
officers to and from the School.
35. The Union of the Australian School of Pacific
Administration.
350 The School Union is a purely voluntary organization,
with its own Constitution (see 91) and office-
bearers, As the democratic organization repres-
entative of student opinion, the Union has
important functions to discharge for the proper
and effective administration of the School,
particularly in an advisory and consultative
capacity with respect to 3201.


351 The following are among the matters in connection
with which the Union plays an active part in the
administration of the School
3510 The maintenance of proper standards of
general conduct, dress, and deportment of
members in the precincts of the School.
3511 The representation to the Principal of
student opinion where necessary, or recom-
i
mendations of the student body, on matters
related to the administration of the School
or its academic activities.
3512 The organization of such activities as are
necessary for the comfort and convenience of
members, particularly within the students T
common room area and living quarters,
3513 The organization and supervision of social
functions,
3514 In co-operation with the Principal and the
staff, the reception and entertainment from
time to time of distinguished visitors.


4. The Staff of the School
40. Principal -Mr. C.D. Rowley, M.A.
41. Academic Staff:
410. Government.
Senior Lecturer - Mr. J.P. McAuley, M.A.
Lecturer - (To be appointed)
411. Anthropology.
Senior Lecturer - jDr. K.E. Read, M.A., Ph.D.
Lecturer - (To be appointed)
41 a. Law.
Senior Lecturer - Mr. J.P. Mattes, LL.B.
413. Education.
Senior Lecturer - The Hon. Camilla Wedgwood, M.A.
Lecturer - (To bo appointed).
414. History.
Lecturer - Mr, J.A. Miles, B.A,
415. Geography and Land Use.
Lecturer - Mr. J.P. Reynolds, B.Sc.
42. Registrar - Mr. V.H. Parkinson (Acting)


5. Courses of Study
50. General.
500 For classes of students for whose education
the School may provide special courses, under
the Australian School of Pacific Administration
Regulations, see 11 above.
501 Applications by intending students other than
those falling within the classes for whom courses
t
are specially designed, to attend courses at
the School, will be considered. Inquiries and
applications should be addressed to the Registrar.
502 Students are required to attend lectures,
seminars, group discussions and interviews which
appear on the time-table, or which are arranged
and duly notified by members of the academic
staff. Regularity of attendance is necessary
for proper progress by all students: it is
specially incumbent upon officers who are in
receipt of salary and allowances to attend
courses.
503 Where a student is prevented by circumstances
from attending a lecture or other duly notified
course activity, he is expected to notify the
Registrar.


504 As far as possible, course time-tables will be
so arranged as to provide for daily periods of
unbroken study.
505 All written exercises set in accordance with
3301 above must be handed in to the Registrar
by the date specified.
5050 The member of the academic staff concerned
may however, pxtend the period for such
work, where circumstances justify such
action, on application by the student.
506 The Academic Year*
5060 The academic year of the School is divided
into three terms, with seven week's
vacation in the Christmas period, and two
vacations each of seven working days at the
end of the first and second terms respect-
ively.
5061 Terms in the 1953 academic year are as
follows:-
First Term
Commences: 3rd February - Concludes: 7th May.
Second Term
Commences: 19th May - Concludes: 7th
August.


Third Term
Commences: 18th August - Concludes: 24th
Decomber.
5062 Terms in the 1954 academic year will bo
as follows:-
First Term
Commences: 16th February - Concludes: 6th May
Second Term
Commences: l&th May - Concludes: sth August.
Third Term
Commences: 17th August - Concludes: 16th
December.
51. The Course for the Diploma of the Australian School
of Pacific Administration.
510. This course has been designed specially for the
purpose of training field officers of the
Department of District Services and Native
Affairs, Territory of Papua and New Guinea. It
occupies two complete academic years.
511. The following subjects of study arc included in
the course:-
5110 Government (Colonial
Administration) - 6 terms.
5111 Anthropology - 6 terms.
5112 Law - 6 terms.


5113 Geography & Land Use - 4 terms.
5114 History - 4 terms.
5115 Tropical Hygiene - 1 term by
arrangement with the School of
Tropical Hygiene, University of
Sydney.
5116 Mapping and Survey - 2 terms,
5117 English Expression - 2 terms.
512 The award of the Diploma will be made to
students who satisfy the requirements of the
examiners in t'he subjects set out in 511 above.
513 Provision will be made from time to time for
students in the Diploma course who so desire,
and who are considered by the Principal to
possess the necessary aptitude, to study
Linguistics at the University of Sydney. Requests
to study other optional subjects not taught at
the School will be considered on their merits.
514 The scope of the various subjects necessary for
the award of the Diploma is set out below:-
5140 Government.
G-overnment and Culture Contact.
The Main Problems of Undeveloped
Tropical Territories,
Survey of Pacific Territories.
Political Development and Constitutional
Questions.


Local Government,
General Economic Policy.
Community Development and Education.
Co-operatives.
International Institutions.
Social Background of Land, Labour, and
Agricultural Policies.
Land Tenure,
Labour Policy,
The Organization of Agriculture.
Missions,
5141 Anthropology.
Three periods a week (2 lectures and one
seminar) are devoted to this subject
throughout the two years,
Term I Man as an animal: importance of
heredity and environment; different
physical types and a consideration
of the significance of ’’racial
differences”.
Introduction to the Study of Social
Anthropology: kinship groups and
marriage, local groups, age-grades
and age-sets, status groups,


occupational groups; the position
of women.
Term II The ritual life: Magic and sorcery
and their roles in the social and
economic life. Religion-what it is.
Cult of the Dead; cult of Spirits;
Totemism, Religion in daily life -
e.g, transition rites and in times
of'crisis. The concepts of mana and
of tabu.
The economic life: the native and
his land; land ownership and land
utilization; ownership of livestock,
trees, goods and chattels, etc.
Native methods of working.
Term 111 The Economic Life (contd). Native
concepts of "ownership”. Native
"valuables". Significance of food
and other gift exchanges. Native
trade and its organization. Native
political systems: centripetal and
centrifugal tendencies. Leadership:
how it is acquired and the role of
the leader. The maintenance of "law
and Order": positive and negative


sanctions, organized and
unorganized.
The Second Year is in the main devoted to
the subject of Culture Contact and problems
of acculturation among the "backward”
peoples of the world today. A special
study will be made of the effects of culture
contact in Papua and New Guinea,
Two essays of approximately 4,000 words
i
each are required during the first year;
at the end of the second year the students
have to submit a thesis on a subject
approved by the lecturer,
5142 Law,
Introductory Studies:
The English Legal System;
Its expansion overseas;
Constitutional Law;
The Territories and the Commonwealth;
The Law of the Territories,
Less Intensive Studies:
The Law of Contracts;
The Law of Torts;
Mercantile Law;


Land Law;
Civil Procedure,
Intensive Studies:
Legal Interpretation;.
Criminal Procedure;
Criminal Law;
Evidence;
Law affecting Natives,
5143 Geography and Land Use.
Geology and Physical Geography:
First Year.
Geology - Rocks, minerals; their
occurrence and recognition.
Earth movements and geologic
structures.
Minerals and rocks of
economic importance;
occurrence, mining and use s
Importance of geologic
formations and structures
with reference to quarrying,
road making, building.
Topography - Topographical features
i
developed in tropical
regions.


Soils - Soil types; recognition,
formation, utilization.
Soil erosion; causes and
control.
Vegetation - Vegetation types, commer-
cial timbers, forest
preservation.
Climate - Climate in the tropics and
its influence on activity.
i
Micro climatology.
Meteorology - Principles of tropical
meteorology.
Agriculture - Controls exerted by natural,
physical conditions on
agriculture in the tropics.
Second Year.
Land Utilization.
Factors to be considered and investigated
when determining land use policy.
Importance of a well planned and far-
sighted policy on land utilization.
Present land use in the Territory of
Papua and New Guinea.
Discussion of policy behind present land
use in the Territory of Papua and New Guinea,


Comparison of land use policies of various
countries.
Regional concept of land use and
development•
Consideration of future land use develop-
ment in the Territory of Papua and New
Guinea,
5144 History,
History of Modern Colonization,
i
History of the Colonization of the Pacific
Islands area.
History of New Guinea,
History of another Colony,
5145 Tropical Hygiene,
(Details to be notified later),
5146 Mapping and Survey,
Second Year,
The course in Mapping and Survey will
cover two terms. It will consist of a
series of lectures and practical exercises &
Students who have some knowledge of
surveying will not be required to attend
the first term lectures, but will be
expected to pass in a final examination
based on the work covered in the two terms,


Term 1.
Map Reading - Importance of maps and
instruction on interpretation of data
shown on a map.
Elementary Surveying - Instruction in the
use of prismatic compass, chain, plane
table, range finder.
Traversing and land subdivision.
Term 2.
Use and Interpretation of aerial photo-
graphs.
Surveying and Levelling - Use of Theodolite,
dumpy level, sextant.
Plane and Geodetic Surveying - methods
employed.
5147 English Expression.
Tutorial work in the writing of reports,
official correspondence, the making and
organization of notes for learning and of


memoranda for official action; exercises in
the choice of words, in sentence and para-
graph structure; corrective work according
to individual need shown in written work in
the main subjects of the course - Government,
Law, Anthropology, History and Geography and
Land Use; the use of books for reference and
for learning.
515. Examinations are held at the end of each of the
»
two academic years.
52, The Induction Course,
520. This course has been designed specially for
Cadet Patrol Officers newly recruited by the
Department of District Services and Native Affairs.
It is of six week*s duration only.
521. Instruction in this course is not followed by a
full scale examination. However, the work of
students is assessed progressively on the basis
of written and practical work set.
522. If a Cadet Patrol Officer fails to satisfy the
examiners, the Principal of the School recommends
to the Secretary, Department of Territories, that
he is not suitable for the duties of a Cadet
Patrol Officer and therefore should not be sent to
f
the Territory.


525, The scope of the various subjects in the
Induction Course is set out below:-
5230 Government
Administration influenced by the geograph- .
ical and cultural background.
International institutions affecting
Papua and New Guinea,
Relations between the Commonwealth and
the Territory.
Structure and functions of government in
Papua and New Guinea,
Native Affairs.
Economic problems: finance, development,
land alienation, land use, the roles of
native and non-native groups.
Social and economic problems of native
labour.
Social Services,
Missions.
5231 Anthropology, >
The native peoples of New Guinea: physical
type. True and false ideas about ’’race’'
and race differences. Whence did the people
of New Guinea probably come? General


account of their manner of life: social
organization, economic life, religious and
magical beliefs. Consideration of some of
the ways in which the presence and act-
ivities of the white man in New Guinea have
affected the native manner of life. Some
types of natives met with today: the
sophisticated; the villager accustomed to
I
the white man; the i? bush ,? native,
5232 Law
Introduction to Law,
Court visits,
5233 Geography and Land Use,
Physical Geography of New Guinea:-
Climate; Topography; Vegetation; Soils,
Land Use: Native subsistence agriculture,
Plantations and other commercial agric-
ultural projects; agricultural experi-
mental work; Forest conservation.
Land use problems.
Meteorology:- Introductory meteorology
and instruction on collection and
compilation of meteorological data.


5234 History
The course consists of 20 lectures and
covers the following subjects
History of British interest in the
Pacific•
History of British New Guinea and
Papua,
History of German New Guinea and
i
the Territory of New Guinea,
History of New Guinea under
A.N.G.A.U.
5235 Mapping and Survey,
Importance of maps. Map reading.
Elementary surveying - use of compass,
chain, plane table,
Traversing,
Land purchase and preliminary land
division surveying,
5236 English Expression,
Corrective exercises, with tutorial and
individual work in written English, The
work in English Expression is closely
related to needs revealed in written
exercises undertaken in all subjects of
the course,


5237 First Aid,
Provided by the St. John .Ambulance
Association.
5238 Tropical Hygiene.
Provided by arrangement with the School
of Tropical Medicine, University of Sydney.
5239 Practical Administration.
An introduction to the duties of Cadet
Patrol Officers, provided with the help
of Patrol Officers of the Department -of
District Services and Native Affairs who
are students at the School.
53. The course in Native Education,
530. This is a course of one year f s duration designed
for Education Officers and Education Cadets of


the Education Department, Territory of Papua
and New Guinea.
531. This course follows a course of teacher training,
completed at a Teachers» Training College.
532. The details of this course vary from year to
year according to the number of students and to
the type of professional experience which they
have had. The following indicates in general
the subjects studied:-,
Anthropology: The course covers the same ground
as that given to officers of District Services
during their first year but in less detail.
Approx. 40 periods.
Government: The course covers much the same
ground as that given to officers of District
Services during their first term; and in
addition some attention is given to the subjects
of co-operatives and development schemes.
Approx, 20 periods.
Tropical Health and Hygiene with special reference
to general hygiene in the tropics, nutrition and
child welfare as applicable to native welfare and
development.
Approx. 20 lectures.


Provision is also made for those students who do
not hold a recent certificate for First Aid to
attend a course in this subject,
Basic Geography with special reference to funda-
mental problems of tropical agriculture and soil
conservation as applicable to native welfare and
development,
Approx, 20 lectures.
Native Education with special reference to Papua
and New Guinea, Lectures and Seminars to take
about 90 hours and the following are the main
topics dealt with: The aim of native education;
»
policy and programme; problems connected with
enabling a non-European people to understand and
adapt themselves to the ’’modern” world and to
develop politically and economically. Pedagogic
problems of syllabus and teaching methods in
relation to the special needs of native children
in primary and post-primary schools. Vocational
and technical training including the training of
native teachers; adult education, with special
reference to Community Development and Mass
Literacy. The history of native education in
Papua and New Guinea; the work, organization and
policy of the Department of Education; the
educational policy and work of the Christian
missions today.
The Teaching of English as a Foreign Language:
The lectures and classes total about 40 hours
in the second and third terms. The course falls


into 3 main parts:
(i) The study of language as a part of a
people's culture and an expression of
that culture; the social and emotional
significance of language.
(ii) Elementary work on phonetics; and some
elementary understanding of the nature
of grammatical concepts, grammatical
processes and types of language structure
with special reference to the Melanesian
languages.
(iii) The teaching of English to native
peoples: an examination of the special
problems as met with in Papua and New
Guinea; and an examination of modern
techniques which have been developed to
meet these and similar language teaching
problems.
Note. For students having a definite aptitude
for or interest in Linguistics, arrangements can
be made by courtesy of the University of Sydney
for a more complete and less elementary course
than that covered in (ii) of the above.


54. The course for Specialist Officers.
540. This course is arranged for specialist officers
of the professional departments (other than the
Department of Education). It is of twelve week*s
duration, and is intended to introduce persons
with specialist or professional qualifications
to the problems that arise in the practice of
their specialities or professions in the Territory
of Papua and New Guinea.
541. Details of this course may be varied according
to the special needs of the group concerned.
The course includes the following subjects:-
5410 Government (
1 )
A survey, involving comparative study of
Papua and New Guinea and other tropical
territories, of -
(a) the problems of colonial government,
(b) the social and economic problems
common to undeveloped tropical areas.
5411 Anthropology ( i
General introduction to the native peoples
of Papua and New Guinea; the structure of
their society; their economic life


(including agriculture, methods of work,
concepts of wealth and of ownership, the
fundamental principle of reciprocity of
services and gifts); their political life
(leadership, maintenance of "law and order"
etc.); their magical and religious beliefs
and practices; the effects of culture
contact and some of the major problems
arising from it in the life of the natives.
The amount of time spent on the different
aspects of this subject will be adjusted
according to the specialist requirements
and interests of the officers attending
the course.
55. Refresher Courses,
550. Refresher courses for senior officers of the
Territories services will be arranged as
required,
56, Other Courses.
560 External course arrangements arising out
of Territory of Papua and New Guinea
Regulation No* 15 of 1950, para, 55,
5600 Under this Regulation a Patrol
Officer of the Department of District


Services and Native Affairs shall not
be advanced beyond a salary of £471
per annum unless he has
56000 Satisfactorily completed a two
year course (see 51 - The
Course for the Diploma of the
Australian School of Pacific
Administration) at the Aust-
ralian School of Pacific
Administration; or
56001 passed an examination in
560010 Native administration;
560011 General administration;
560012 Law;
560013 Anthropology;
560014 Tropical Hygiene;
560015 Mapping and Surveying
and such other subjects as are,
from time to time, determined
by the Public Service Commiss-
ioner of the Territory,
(Territory of Papua and New
Guinea Regulation No. 13 of
1950 - First Schedule).


5601 Following consideration of the position by
the School Council and the Public Service
Commissioner, the Minister approved a
recommendation that the School provide
correspondence tuition in
56010 General and Native Administration.
56011 Law.
56012 Anthropology.
5602 Under the scheme approved the Public
Service Commissioner and/or the Director of
District Services will call for applications
from officers wishing to undertake external
courses. Of those applying, not more than
30 will be selected, priority being given
to the more senior officers who will be
affected first by the salary bar referrod
to in 5600 and who will be unable to
commence the Diploma Course (see 51 and
56000) before being so affected.
5603 The methods of external tuition will include
56030 Assessing written assignments and
discussion by correspondence of these
assignments by correspondence channels,
56031 Assessment of progress through
examinations•


56032 Answering questions by correspondence
56033 Provision of personal tuition where
possible.
560330 by special arrangement within
the Territory
560331 by lecturers from the School
during their visits to the
Territory
560332 at 'the School for external
students on leave who wish to
make use of School facilities
5604 The syllabi of the three subjects in which
the School provides external tuition are
as follows:-
56040 General and Native Administration.
Section I General Administration
A, Charter of the United Nations, Chapters XI-XIII
Trusteeship Agreement for the Territory of New Guinea.
Papua and New Guinea Act, 1949,
DDS & NA Circular Memoranda and Instructions,
Treasury Circulars,
Restricted Areas Ordinance, 1950.
B. One of the following groups of legislation:-
Papua
Land Ordinance, 1911-1949
Land Regulations, 1938
Prisons Ordinance, 1923-1938
Prisons Regulations,
New Guinea
Land Ordinance, 1922-1950
Land Regulations
Prisons Ordinance, 1919-1930
Prisons Regulations, 1919,


Section II Native Administrati on
A. Native Labour Ordinance, 1950
Native Labour Regulations
Native Village Councils Ordinance, 1949
Native Village Councils Regulations
Co-operative Societies Ordinance, 1950
Trading with Natives Ordinance, 1946,
B. One of the following groups of legislation: -
Papua
Native Regulations, 1939,
as amended.
Transactions with Natives
Ordinance, 1893-1935,
New Guinea
Native Administration Regulations,
1924, as amended.
Natives’ Contracts Protection
Ordinance, 1921-1936.
Section 111 General and Comparative Study of Administration
Books and Papers for study:-
L.P. Mair: Australia in New Guinea.
C, Belshaw: Island Administration in the South-west
Pacific.
W.R. Crocker: On Governing Colonies.
Report of the United Nations Visiting Mission on New
Guinea, 1950.
P.M. Keesing: The South Seas in the Modern World.
f? South Pacific" for the current year.
56041 Law,
The general outline is based on the syllabus for the
corresponding examinations in the Territory of New Guinea
immediately before the war.
Part 1, GENERAL
Brief introduction to the legal system and the
Constitution. Sources of law in the Territory. Relevant
rules of International Law, Legal Interpretation.
Part 2, POWERS AND DUTIES OF JUSTICES.
Magisterial duties in summary and committal pro-
ceedings. Coronial duties. Principal judicial and ministerial
functions in other connections.


Part 3. CRIMINAL LAV/ AND PROCEDURE,
The Criminal Code and other criminal legislation.
General criminal procedure. Police and prisons.
Part 4. EVIDENCE.
The law of evidence generally, with special emphasis
on evidence in criminal cases.
Part 5. CONTRACTS.
An outline of the law of Contract and the more
important parts of Mercantile Law.
In each case the law will he studied as it is in
force in the Territory, embracing Territory legislation, and
directed to the particular needs of D.D.S. and N.A, Officers.
It is assumed that students will have access to a
complete set of Territory legislation. Notes will be issued
as a basis for study, and as a guide to the use of the
prescribed text books.
A more detailed syllabus for the guidance of students
will be prepared after consultation with the Crown Law Officer
and the Director of District Services.
56042 Anthropology.
The course is mainly concerned with the study of
the structure and functioning of human societies among the
,f backward" peoples of the world, with special emphasis upon
those of the West Pacific, After an introductory section which
treats briefly of man as a physical being, the oourse falls
into three sections:
(a) The Social Structure and its organization:
groups and the principles upon which they are formed (kinship,
locality, age, sex, rank, occupation and various types oi
voluntary association); how membership of these groups regulates
the behaviour of individuals towards each other; what are the
forces (organized and unorganized) which keep these groups
stable by providing "sanctions” for the regulations which control
the behaviour of the individual in his society; what are the
forces which make for social instability and breakdown.


(b) The Economic Life of ’’backward" peoples: their
concepts of ownership in relation to different types of property,
particularly an examination of their attitude towards the
ownership and use of land; different types of economic activity
fe c food getting: house and canoe building; various craltsj
and how they are organized; the native attitude and incen ives
to work. Native conceptions of "wealth"; the social and
economic significance of gift-making and exchange of goo s.
(o) The Life of the Spirit:
(i) Magic: creative and destructive; how it is
believed to operate; its psychological and sociological
importance in the daily life of the people; sorcery and the
problem which belief in it presents to the Administration,
(ii) Religion: how does it differ from magic. The
relation between religion and ethics among "backward" P 00 ]? 1 ®®?
Certain types of religious belief and practice commonly found
in the West Pacific (totemism; cults of the dead; cults of non-
human spirits). The importance of religious beliefs in the
social and economic life of a people. The fundamental diffi-
culty of understanding what a religion really means to its
adherents and therefore of understanding its essence.
(iii) Art: its close association with. religion.
Difficulties in studying an alien art: because it is an
expression of an unfamiliar culture and because. of its unfamiliar
"style". Different channels of artistic, expression: carving an
painting, music, dancing, etc. The sociology of art,in the-
West Pacific.
Of these sections (a), (b)'and (c), the first is the
one to which most time will be given. Throughout the student
will have his attention drawn to changes in the life and out-
look of these "backward" peoples as a result of the coming oi
the white man to their oountry.
5605 Details concerning tuition in Tropical
Hygiene., and in Mapping and Survey, for
the examination prescribed in para, 55,
Regulation 13 of 1950, have not yet been
determined. When they have been, they will
be stated in this Handbook,


561, See section 11 for other courses which it is
the function of the School, under its Regu-
lations, to provide.


6. Extension Activities
60. Extension activities of the School include a regular
publication, the provision of general assistance- on
matters within the School T s competence to field
officers of the Territorial services, and the provision
of such courses by correspondence as shall be author-
ised (see 560),
600 The School’s monthly publication, "South Pacific",
i
is supplied free to officers of the Territorial
services. Others wishing to receive it should
communicate with the Editor, "South Pacific",
C/~ The Australian School of Pacific Adminis-
tration, Mosman,
6000 The purposes of "South Pacific" are
60000 to publish original articles on
matters of interest concerning
tropical and dependent areas, espec-
ially Pacific territories; and in
particular to publish material
contributed by workers in the field
in Papua and New Guinea.
60001 To publish news of special value.
60002 To reprint important articles from
other journals.


601 Officers of the services of the Territories
may ask for assistance in matters related to the
fields of study covered at the School, This
assistance includes provision of information
and guidance in courses of reading,
602 For Extension Courses see 560.


7. The Hallstrom Pacific Library
70 The Hallstrom Pacific Library has been so named
in gratitude to Sir Pdward Hallstrom, whose gift
to the library is thus commemorated.
71 The library is open for staff and students of the
School from 9 a.m. till 5 p.m. each day, with the
exception of Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays
and such other times as the Principal may declare.
710 in order to render the greatest possible
library service, it has been decided to
make special arrangements to keep the
library open under the supervision of
stewards appointed by the School Union and
approved by the Principal, for reference
work only, "
711 A Steward will accept the key of the library
from the librarian and will sign for the key.
The steward so doing will be in charge of the
library for the period after hours for
which he accepts responsibility. If for
unforeseen reasons he cannot take charge, or
remain in charge, he will close the library
or hand over the key to another steward, who
will sign for it.


712 The steward has a right to the full co-
operation of all students during the
period of his responsibility. During such
period all the rules as to borrowing books
and other rules will apply.
713 The steward should if possible work near
the entrance to the library.
714 There is a duty book to be handed over by
the librarian with the key to the library.
Stewards are requested to note in the book,
with their signatures, the hours during
which they were on duty in the library.
72 The library may be used and books borrowed only
in strict accordance with the rules of the
library. It is the duty of each member of the
School using the library to make himself fully
acquainted with these rules.
73 The following are the rules of the library.
They have been drawn up by agreement between the
Principal, Librarian and the School Union, and
will be effective in maintaining the library as
an asset to the School and to future students in
training only by the full cooperation of all
members of the School.
Borrowing of books.


7300 Not more than four books may be held on
loan by a student.
7301 A book may be held for two weeks ohly. If
a student desires to extend the period of
loan he must return the book with a request
for extension. The extension for up to two
weeks may be granted, provided that the
book has not been requested on loan by
another student.
7302 The borrower is 'responsible for books taken
out on loan. If the book is lost he is
responsible £or the cost of replacement.
Until the book is returned, or payment for
replacement made to the Registrar, the
student may be prevented from using the
library.
7303 Books on loan must not be passed to other
students, but returned to the library for
discharge and re-issue,
7304 A book may not be taken from the library
until the person who wishes to borrow it has
filled in and signed a borrower’s card and
has handed the card to a member of the
library staff. This card will be retained


in the library until the book is
returned. All books must be returned to
a member of the library staff to be marked
off,
7 305 Books may be borrowed only between 10 a.m.
and 5 p.m.
731 Silence must be observed in the library.
732 Certain books, including dictionaries, atlases,
encyclopaedias, law reports, periodicals and
those books marked ”for use in library only” may
be used only in the library reading room,
7320 An exception to 732 is that not more than
one volume of a law report may be taken
at any one time to the typing room for
copying purposes. The book must be returned
promptly and must not be left in the typing
room.
7321 Eventually all material held in filing
cabinets will be included in the list given
in 732, Until the Librarian has had time to
classify that section of it which should be
on the shelves, it is available for borrowing.
Students are especially requested, however,
to use this material as far as possible in
the Library as, until it is properly indexed,


such borrowing results in added work for
the Library staff.
733 Books, other than law reports, taken from shelves
for use in the library during study periods should
not be replaced on shelves, but left on the tables.
Law reports, however, should be returned to their
correct places on the shelves promptly after use.
It will be a duty of the permanent staff of the
i
library to replace all other books and periodicals
in their proper places,


Board and Accommodation.
80. Accommodation for single men is available at the
School. It is hoped that in time accommodation
for married students will be available. Until this
comes about, the Registrar will do everything possible
to assist married students to obtain suitable
accommodation.
81. Full board or meals may be obtained at the School.
For the provision of this service, the School retains
under special contract a caterer, who lives on the
School premises.
82. Charges for accommodation and board are as follows
820. Accommodation (weekly) 10/-
821. Full board (weekly) £3/3/-
822. Breakfast (per meal) 3/6
Dinner (per meal) 3/6
Tea (per meal) 3/6
83. Students who live in are responsible for the cleanli-
ness and proper care of their own rooms and for
furniture and equipment provided.
84. There is no hospital accommodation at the School.
See Section 91 below.


9. Student Activities and Welfare.
90. The School Union
900. The Union of the Australian School of Pacific
Administration is a voluntary organization which
elects its own President and office-bearers.
901. The following is the Constitution of the Union:-
ARTIOLE I. NAME.
There shall be a body known as The Australian School
of Pacific Administration Union hereinafter referred to as the
’UNION'.
ARTICLE 11, OBJECTS.
The objects of the Union shall be:-
(1) To promote cultural, social, and sporting activities
amongst its members.
(2) To provide a forum for the expression of members’
opinions on all matters affecting the activities of
the School and the Union.
(3) To provide an unofficial link between members of the
Union and officers of the Administration of Papua and
Nov; Guinea.
ARTICLE 111. MEMBERSHIP OF THE UNION.
(1) The Union shall consist of ordinary and honorary
members.
(2) The following persons shall be eligible for ordinary
membership of the Union:-
(a) Students attending courses at the School.
(b) Former students of the School who desire to
maintain their association with the Union.
(c) Members of the academic and administrative
staff of the School.


(3) Membership shall continue until determined in any
of the following ways:-
(a) By resignation provided -
(i) All sums due from the resigning member
have been paid.
(ii) A notice of resignation signed by the
resigning member is received by the
Secretary,
(b) By a motion of expulsion carried by a General
Meeting of the Union,
(c) By failure to pay the membership fee within
twenty-eight days of the due date.
i
(4) The Committee may admit any person to honorary
membership of the Union for such period as it thinks
fit.
(5) The Secretary shall keep a register of members
containing the names and addresses of all members of
the Union,
ARTICLE IV. MEMBERSHIP FEES.
(1) The annual membership fee shall be five shillings
(5,0 d.) for ordinary members except as provided in
Clause (2),
(2) Persons attending the School for a period of less,
than throe months may become members for that period
upon payment of two shillings and six pence (2,6 d,).
Such persons may continue their membership after
leaving the School by"payment of the balance of the
annual membership fee.
(3) The annual membership fee shall be payable upon
joining the Union and thereafter on the Ist March
of each year.
(4) The annual membership fee shall be payable to the
Treasurer but if at any time there is no Treasurer the
Registrar of the School may accept payment and enrol
members and in such case shall hold any moneys received
until a Treasurer is appointed.


ARTICLE V. COMMITTEE.
(1) The executive body of the Union shall be a Committee
elected as provided in Clause (4) and herein referred
to as the * COMMITTEE*.
(2) Subject to Clause (5) the Committee shall consist of
a President three other members and such additional
members as provided for in para* 7.
(3) The Committee shall appoint from amongst its members
a Secretary, a Treasurer, and an Activities Officer
of the Union.
(4) Members of the Committee shall be elected by secret
ballot at the first General Meeting in each year and
shall hold office, subject to re-election, until the
first General Meeting in t'he succeeding academic year.
Casual vacancies in the Committee shall be filled in
like manner as they occur.
(5) A member of the Committee shall cease to hold office
if he ceases to be a member of the Union, or if he
ceases to attend the School, or if he is dismissed by
resolution of a General Meeting,
(6) If at any time there are no members of the Committee,
the Registrar of the School may convene a General
Meeting for the purpose of electing members.
(7) The Committee may at its discretion invite each or
any course entering the School after the commencement
of the academic year to elect a maximum of two (2)
members and such members shall be eligible to fill
any of the functions provided for in Clause (3).
(8) The President shall preside over all meetings of the
Committee and the Union and shall have a casting vote
in addition to an original vote, and in the event of
the President’s absence another member of the Committee
shall act as President and have all the powers of the
President.
ARTICLE VI. GENERAL MEETINGS.
(1) The governing body of the Union shall be the members
acting in General Meeting.


(2.) The Secretary, or in his absence another member of
the Committee, shall convene a General Meeting when
required to do so by the Committee.
(3) Any five members of the Union may by notice in writing
require the Secretary to convene a General Meeting,
If the Secretary neglects to do so within seven days,
such members, or a like number, may themselves convene
a General Meeting.
(4) Copies of the notice convening a General Meeting shall
be posted on the School notice board and in the Common
Room at least 48 hours before the Meeting.
(5) No General Meeting shall be held during vacation or
on any School holiday.
(6) The quorum for a General Meeting shall be ten (10)
members.
(7) A General Meeting shall not have power to deal with
any of the following matters unless notice thereof
is given in the notice convening the Meeting:-
(a) Election of a member of the Committee,
(b) Dismissal of a member of the Committee.
(c) Expulsion of a member of the Union.
(d) Such other matters as may be prescribed by
regulation.
Any person desiring to bring any such matter before
a General Meeting may give notice in writing to the Secretary,
who shall set out such matter in the notice convening the next
General Meeting.
ARTICLE VII. FINANCE AND PROPERTY.
(1) The Committee shall have power to acquire and dispose
of property; to engage and dismiss servants; to ex-
pend and invest moneys; to open a banking account or
banking accounts; to enter into contracts;
generally shall have the control of the financial
affairs and of the property of the Union.


(2) The Treasurer shall keep proper books of account.
dealing with the finances and property of the Union,
and shall submit to the Committee a monthly statement
of the receipts and disbursements, and shall at all
tines furnish the Committee with such accounts and
information relating to the finances and property of
the Union as the Committee may require.
(3) (a) As soon as practicable after their receipt, all
moneys paid to the Union and all cheques,
promissory notes or bills of exchange payable to
or to the order of the Union shall be paid in
the first instance to the credit of the banking
account of the Union designated by the Committee
for that purpose. Any cheques, promissory notes
or bills of exchange phyable to or to the order
of the Union requiring endorsement shall be.
endorsed by a person authorised by the Committee
for collection through the banking account so
designated.
(b) Cheques shall be signed on behalf of the Committee
by any two of the following office bearers:
President, Treasurer, or Secretary.
(o) Orders for the supply from time to time of goods
and materials necessary for the maintenance of
the current services of the Union may be given
or countermanded on behalf of the Committee by
any person authorised for the time being by
the Committee.
(d) Receipts for any moneys paid to the Union in
respect of any charges made for or in respect of
the services of the Union may be signed on behalf
of the Committee by the Treasurer.
(e) Save as aforesaid, contracts, releases or dis-
charges and documents dealing with the property
of the Union shall be signed on behalf of the
Committee by the President and the Treasurer.
No such contract, release, discharge or document
dealing with the property shall be so signed
without authority of the Committee. Provided
that except as between the Union or the Committee
and its officers purporting to sign with such
authority, such authority shall be conclusively
deemed to have been duly given.


(4) Salaries, wages and other expenses recurring at
intervals of a year or less, shall, as far as possible,
be paid solely out of the annual subscriptions, and
out of receipts from services and undertakings so
conducted by the Union.
(5) The Committee may by regulation appoint permanent
trustees of any property of the Union.
(6) Auditing. The books of account of the Union shall be
audited at the end of each School term, or when
required by a General Meeting of the Union, by an
Auditor or Auditors appointed by a General Meeting,
ARTICLE VIII. REGULATIONS.
(1) The Committee may enact regulations for the purpose
of securing the objects and giving effect to the
provisions of this Constitution and generally for the
conduct of the affairs and activities of the Union.
(2) Regulations shall be eracted by resolution of the
Committee and the following provisions shall apply:-
(a) The mover of the proposed resolution must give
48 hours 1 notice thereof in writing to the
Secretary who shall set out such proposed
resolution in full in the notice convening the
meeting of the Committee,
(b) A regulation shall come into force when enacted
or on such later date as may be specified
therein.
(c) All regulations shall be read out at the first
General Meeting after their enactment, and a
copy thereof shall be posted on the School
notice board and in the Common Room immediately
after their enactment,
(d) A regulation shall cease to have effect if
disallowed by a General Meeting at any time,
ARTICLE IX. ALTERATION OF CONSTITUTION.
The Constitution shall not be altered except by a resolution
passed and confirmed by the Union in General Meeting in the
following manner:-


(i) Notice of the proposed resolution shall be given
in writing to the Secretary who shall set out
such proposed resolution in full in the notice
convening the General Meeting.
(ii) Such resolution shall not pass unless carried by
a majority of two-thirds of the members present
and voting at such Meeting and confirmed by a
simple majority of the members present and
voting at a subsequent General Meeting held at
an interval of not loss than one week after tho
first General Meeting.
(iii) A resolution altering the Constitution which is
passed in the requisite manner shall take effect
from tho date of its passing and shall bo incor-
porated in the Constitution immediately it has
been so passed.
902. For the part played by the Union in tho adminis-
tration of the School, see 35.
91• Illness of Students
910, Tropical illnesses, and particularly malaria,
present a special problem because tho majority of
students have lived in tropical areas.
911. Bocauso of tho lack of hospital accommodation
(soo 84 above) it is essential that each case
where a student residing at the School has to
remain in bed be reported immediately to the
Registrar. This is all the more necessary during
the week-end so that steps may be taken to ensure
any necessary medical or other attention. In
cases of serious illness arrangements will be made
for removal to either a public or private hospital
as the student may desire.


912. Students who are affected by malaria should
report the fact to the Registrar immediately, so
that steps may be taken to inform members of the
teaching staff. It sometimes occurs that malaria
affects students during examinations. Such cases
should be reported immediately in the students’
own interests.




