

THE LATE STABBING CASE
IN
TASMANIA.
TRUTH;
OR,
SEVENTEEN YEARS OF MARRIAGE LIFE.
BY
MRS. D’ARCY WENTWORTH LATHROP MURRAY.
THE DEFENCE OF THE WRITER IN ANSWER TO THE CALUMNIOUS CHARGES
BROUGHT AGAINST HER AND PARTLY GIVEN IN EVIDENCE, INCLUDING
THE TRIAL OF HER HUSBAND,
D’ARCY WENTWORTH LATHROP MURRAY,
(J.P., AND M.P. OF TASMANIA)
BEFORE SIR VALENTINE FLEMING, KNT., CHIEF JUSTICE,
AT THE
CRIMINAL COURT, LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA,
APRIL, 1866;
WITH ALL THE CORRESPONDENCE.
PART I.-THE TRIAL. PART II. —MRS. MURRAY’S DEFENCE.
Tasmania:
PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHORESS AT LAUNCESTON.
MDCCCLXVI.


INTRODUCTION.
In submitting the following facts, the writer of these pages is desirous
that they should be considered simply a defence to the cruel and
slanderous statements promulgated by a husband, whose corrupt
practices and dishonorable associations have rendered him untruthful to
her whom he swore to protect, and whose base passion for others has
induced him to leave his wife, frenzied and desolate, on the world.
The notoriety brought about by the late trial of D’Arcy Wentworth
Lathrop Murray, at the instance of Joseph James Gwynne, for cutting
and wounding, and assault, at the recent sitting of the Supreme Court,
at Launceston, for one of which offences he has been convicted, has
rendered my disclosing the whole truth a circumstance of absolute
necessity, not only for the credit of myself and relatives, but also for
the protection of my children. The foul conspiracy of Gwynne and
Murray, so described by Chief Justice Fleming, who sat in judgment,
may be classed as one standing before the world, unparallelled in
atrocity, particularly when it must be determined that that plot sought
not simply the perversion of justice by perjury to be committed by two
men, the one the husband of the intended victim, but that the wife
should be induced by false statements and misrepresentation to assist
in the destroying of her reputation, and blasting the prospects of her
family. Ihe writer trusts that the narrative may be read impartially,
and that the reader, while so engaged, will peruse it with that attention
which it demands, remembering that it is founded upon a solemn
declaration, affirming its truthfulness. This publication would have
previously appeared but that it should not be regarded as an attempt to
prejudice the minds of those jurymen, whose province it w T as to protect
the interests of society as w r ell as the liberty of the defendant. It is
also a matter of sorrow to the writer that her absolute necessity should
compel her to charge (although triffingly) for this statement of truths,
and which is charged only for the purpose of defraying the printer’s
expenses.


CRIMINAL COURT,
LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA.
SATURDAY, APRIL 28, 1866.
Before His Honor Sir Valentine Fleming’, Knight, Chief Justice.
Crown Prosecutor, R. B. Miller, Esq., Attorney-General.
Immediately upon the opening of the Court and His Honor the
Chief Justice having taken his seat upon the Bench,
Mr. Kocher, on behalf of D’Arcy W. L. Murray requested that his
cases should be disposed of first in order that he might have an oppor-
tunity at once of applying for a postponement of the cases.
The Attorney General having no objection,
D’Arcy Wentworth Lathrop Murray appeared to answer to the charge
of having on 4th February last feloniously attempted to stab Joseph
James Gwynne in the back with a table knife, and with having cut him
in the hand, with intent to do the said Joseph James Gwynne some
greivous bodily harm.
Defendant pleaded not guilty.
D'Arcy Wentworth Lathrop Murray was then charged with having
feloniously assaulted Joseph James Gwynne on 7th February last by
throwing several decanters at him, one of which struck him on the
elbow, and another on the left side, inflicting serious bodily harm.
Defendant pleaded not guilty to this charge also.
Mr. Kocher then applied that defendant might be allowed to stand
upon the floor of the Court instead of in the felon's dock. He made
the application so that communication between himself and defendant
might be more readily had.
His Honor said if Mr. Kocher really considered that this was necessary
to the proper conduct of the case, he would grant the request. But in
a Court of Justice, he must remind the learned counsel that there w r as
no distinction of persons recognised. He would grant the application,
but it must not be taken as a right, for it was the right of no man.
Mr. Kocher then made an application for an adjournment of these
two cases. He made this application on the ground that the prosecu-
tor in the case had made his escape from the colony. It was highly
necessary that the defendant should be allowed the benefit of an exami


nation of the prosecutor. He admitted that an opportunity had existed
during the hearing of the case at the Police Court, but he (Mr. B.)
could assure the Court that since that he had received certain informa-
tion which rendered it impossible to a fair trial for the defendant that
the prosecutor should be absent. If there had been any means of get-
ting at this man he (Mr. R.) would not make the application. It was
only the last week or so that the prosecutor had escaped. This was no
unusual application.
His Honor—Certainly unusual in this case, and such an application
should be supported by affidavit.
Mr. Rocher—l believe the Crown is prepared to admit that the pro-
secutor is absent.
The Attorney General—l admit it; but I must go further; and
that is that I ana in possession of information that there is no chance
of the prosecutor being here.
Mr. Rocher then proceeded to quote certain cases in support of his
application. He referred to a case which had been heard in England
—R. v. John Austin and John Turner. This was a charge for stealing
various articles from Wm. Toole; they were found guilty, and were
sentenced to six years. Wm. Toole not being in attendance at the
trial, it w r as argued that this trial was void. It was on the other hand
proposed that the reading of the depositions taken before the magistrate
were sufficient. The depositions had been taken in the presence of the
prisoners. It was proved that Toole was not absent for any purpose of
the prisoner’s. It was contended by the Crown that although this did
not come within the 11 and 12 Vic., chap. 2, yet the depositions were
admissible. This case was tried on 4th November, 1854, but the ar-
gument was not completed until 9th Jan., 1856. According to the
English law depositions were admissible in the place of a witness in
two cases, namely, where he is dead or seriously ill. One (the
nial) act goes another step and says “or absent from the colony.” In
the case referred to, it was argued for the Crown that the depositions
were admissible. He (Mr. R.) contended that nothing in the present
case would have been applied for had the witness attended. If the
depositions were now received, a very fatal precedent would be esta-
blished of frightful consequences to the public. True, he could find
no case directly in point, but there was certainly no case of an
opposite character. It is quite possible that cases might occur in
which depositions would be received, but this was not one of those
cases, as the personal attendance of the witness was most essential.
We must look for broader principles if it were impossible to produce
the witness; then we must take depositions. In reference to this case,
he (Mr. R.) took Baron Alderson’s view, and that was, that depositions
were only admissible where it was perfectly impossible to produce the
witness. In fairness and justice to the defendant, he (Mr. R.) main-
tained that a postponement was reasonable, for with the prosecutor’s


absence he had not an opportunity of controverting the evidence of this
man. The cross-examination of prosecutor was really desirable. If an
admission of depositions were made in this case there would be no
protection for the public. Any man might come forward, lay his
charge against an individual, state his case at the Police Court, and
then within a few days from the sitting of the Court make his escape.
In this case, after the evidence of prosecutor has been given, it is found
that evidence is obtainable which quite contradicts one of the main
statements; but, from the present position, it was placed out of his
(Mr. R.’s,) power to give that evidence. He must have prosecutor
present so that he could ask him —“ Did you not say such and such p”
“ Did you not tell So-and-So ?” &c. Now, he (Mr. R.) had no means
of doing this. It was perfectly impossible, consequently, that evidence
favorable to defendant could be produced. It was only proper justice
to allow defendant the opportunity of introducing material evidence.
Why, one man might accuse another of murder, and wait a short while
and then abscond.
His Honor : Well, then he could not be convicted unless there was
sufficient evidence.
Mr. Rocher said he only asked that defendant might have an
opportunity of examining the prosecutor. The most material point of
prosecutor’s evidence could be contradicted. This was the ground
upon which he (Mr. R.) applied. All defendant asked was, “give me
until next session that I may have a chance of prosecutor’s presence,
then if he does not appear, I must take the consequences.” Let the
defendant appear before judge and jury and see if he can support his
depositions. It was not with any view of delay that this application
was made. It was most important to defendant that prosecutor should
be obtained; if he were not obtained, evidence most material could not
be produced.
The Attorney-General said he never opposed applications which
would be of any benefit to the party making them, as in Williams’ case
yesterday; but in this present instance he could not see that anything
would be gained by delay. It was just to put the Court in possession
of such information as he had in the mattpr. If it could be shown
to him that a delay would be of any benefit to defendant, he would not
offer the least opposition. If it had been possible to place the man
Gwynne in the box, it would have been done; and if he (the Attorney-
General) thought there was the slightest hope of obtaining him, he
would, for himself, take care to delay in order to get him. But he (the
Attorney-General) found that this person was served with a subpoena
on 7th April; and, subsequently, circumstances having arisen that
rendered it not likely that he would make his appearance at the
appointed time, the Police Magistrate wrote all along the coast to get
information. District Constable Percy then made his report. It would
be as well to read the whole of the correspondence, so that the Court
might know the position of the case


Police Office, Launceston, 16th April, 1866.
Sir, —A man named Joseph James GKvynno, late surveyor at Deloraine, is sub-
poenaed to appear at the Supreme Court, at Launceston, on the 24th instant. He is
prosecutor in two cases of misdemeanor, and has, I learn, left Deloraine with a view
to escape to Melbourne and avoid appearing. It is most material that he should be
compelled to appear. You are therefore requested to take all possible precautions to
prevent his departure, and should you discover him to be in your district, to obtain
a warrant for his apprehension under 19th Yic., No. 9, sec. 16. Immediate action in
this matter is essential.
Yours, &c.,
(Signed) W. GrUNN,
To C. D. C. Percy, Mersey. Police Magistrate.
22nd April, 1866.
I regret to inform you that the man G-wynne, named in your letter, came here on
Saturday, the 14th instant, and was making enquiries for Mr. Field, who was gone to
Woolnorth. lie said he was employed by Mr. Field to open a track from Woolnorth
to the Surrey Hills; but since, I find he went from hero on tho next morning
(Sunday), 15th instant, in a schooner named “Pat the Rover,” to Melbourne, and
went by the name of John Mason. Your letter being a week too late. Tho vessel is
now returned from Melbourne. The master says that he came on board just as the
vessel was leaving the wharf, and requested a passage to Melbourne, and he did not
know who he was.
J. K. PERCY, C.D.C.
To tho Police Magistrate, Launceston.
He (the Attorney-General) also had evidence in his possession that the
prosecutor had been seen in Melbourne.
His Honor : I understand you then that you oppose the application.
The Attorney-General: I neither accede nor oppose. 1 leave it
entirely to the Court.
His Honor should say that there was no case made out for the post-
ponement. In the first place he did not hold that the case quoted as
coming under the English statute was sufficient; that is—our law made
a contingency that that statute did not provide for which is “ absence
from the colony.” In all cases where a witness who had appeared
before magistrates had afterwards gone away, it must be clearly proved
that he has left the colony, and this must be fortified by affidavit before
such an application as that just made could be sustained. The fact of
the absence, and that the prisoner would be injured by that absence.
All this must be shown, and something else, and that is, that if the
application is acceded to, there is a reasonable prospect that the witness
will be forthcoming at the next session. The fact in this case, from
the correspondence just read, was, that the witness had gone to Mel-
bourne. Would Mr. Rocher show that he could reach this witness and
bring him back. There was no law here that could reach him. De-
fendant must show to his Honor that there would be a reasonable
prospect of the witness appearing. His Honor saw no prospect what-
ever. He did not see what exertions could be used on behalf of
defendant or the crown for bringing him back. Was it in the slightest
probable that the same man, who had thus evaded this Court would
come back and give evidence. His Honor failed to conceive upon
what circumstance Mr. Rocher could urge the application. It was not


disputed on the part of the Crown that prosecutor’s absence would
throw considerable difficulty in defendant’s way. His Honor knew it
would, and he was very sorry for it, but he could not grant the
application in the present case. There was nothing to justify him,
except that proper affidavits were presented. He would, therefore, post-
pone his decision until Mr. fiocher brought before him this affidavit,
and if it could olny be shown that there was a reasonable hope that the
man would appear, he (his Honor) would not have the slightest hesita-
tion in granting the application.
Mr. fiocher observed that Gwynne might come back of his own free
will.
His Honor did not think this very probable, considering that he had
already evaded the prosecution.
After an absence of about an hour, during which time the charge of
manslaughter against Williams was proceeded with, Mr. fiocher returned
into Court and read the following affidavit -
In tbe Supreme Court of Tasmania.
REGUNiE V. MURRAY.
I, D’Arcy Wentworth Lathrop Murray, of Launceston, in Tasmania, newspaper
proprietor, make oath and say:
First —That I hare this day pleaded “ Hot Guilty” to two informations filed in this
honorable Court, the one charging me with unlawfully and maliciously wounding one
Joseph James Gwynne, and the other with committing an assault upon the said
Joseph James Gwynne.
Second—That since my committal upon the said charges, I have obtained credible
evidence which will enable me satisfactorily to disprove the charge of wounding
preferred against me as aforesaid, but which evidence I was not aware of when the
investigation took place at the Police Office.
Third—That I shall be debarred from producing such evidence if the said Joseph
James Gwynne is not forthcoming as a witness on my trial, inasmuch as I am now
advised that the same would not be receivable until the said Joseph James Gwynne
had been first questioned as to whether or not he had ever made the statement
respecting the wounding, which I am prepared to show by witnesses he did make, and
which evidence would completely exonerate me from the charge.
Fourth —That it is only within the last five days that I have learned with any
degree of certainty that the said Joseph James Gwynne had proceeded from this
colony to the colony of Yictoria, and, from the shortness of the time, I have been
unable to ascertain whether or not such absence of the said Joseph James Gwynne is
merely a temporary absence or otherwise.
Fifth—That it is within my own knowledge that the said Joseph James Gwynne is
under considerable pecuniary embarrassment, and his present absence from the colony
may arise from such cause, and with a view of avoiding civil process, and not with
the intention of evading appearing as prosecutor against me.
Sixth —That in thus applying for a postponement of my trial until the next
sittings of Oyer and Terminer of this honorable Court at Launceston, I do not do so
with the view of delay, but solely for the purpose of endeavoring, if possible, to effect
the return of the said Joseph James Gwynne to Launceston, and secure his
appearance as a witness upon my said trial, as, without the personal attendance of the
said Joseph James Gwynne upon my said trial, material evidence on my behalf will
be excluded, and the Court and jury not placed in possession of the real facts
of the case.
D’ARCY W. L. MURRAY.
Sworn before me, at Launceston, aforesaid, this twenty-eighth day of April, one
thousand eight hundred and sixty-six.
GEO. BROWNE,
A Commissioner of the Supreme Court of Tasmania.


He (Mr. R.) had just found another authority. (He referred to
“ Roscoe’s Cases, p, 181), where opinions were laid down similar to
those given above.
His Honor: Now, that case cannot in any way presuppose this.
In this case there is one point, and that is whether the witness can ever
be produced. Anything that this witness may have said to anybody,
and all statements, cannot alter the fact that a delay will not cause you
to be in a better position.
Mr. Rocher : I will show—
His Honor : It is impossible to show me.
Mr. Rocher said the prosecutor had in his evidence said, <( the
wound on my wrist was caused by defendant.” If evidence could now
be produced that prosecutor had before this, in answer to a question,
“ What is the matter with your arm ?” said his wrist was wounded in
some other way, he (Mr. R.) maintained that this was material to the
defendant, and should be received.
His Honor: Surely you are in a position to produce that witness to
prove that, instead of the wound being produced by the defendant, it
was caused in some other way.
Mr. Rocher: Am I in a position to produce that before I ask the
prosecutor whether he ever made the statement ?
His Honor said there were two aspects under which evidence might
be received. One was in contradiction of witness. But there was
another in which evidence could be received, and that is to negative a
charge, and in that respect the facts now referred to would be
admissible. If such evidence was produced, it would have a twofold
effect. First, that of discrediting the witness to the extent of the
wounds being caused by defendant. “ Here is a man who says the
wound was not caused by defendant at all. I hen, second, it would
be a question for the jury whether the wound was inflicted by the
defendant. And the defendant would get the benefit of the former,
because it would be some consideration with the jury, that if a man
belied himself in this instance, he may do so in the other part of the
charge. His Honor considered that the third allegation of the affidavit
was a misconception. Hid Mr. Rocher still press his application.
Mr. Rocher : Yes. There might be many reasons for taking the
prosecutor away just now, and he might be induced to return- He
may have gone in consequence of some civil process hanging over his
head. _ .
His Honor had a strong conviction that it would merely be a post-
ponement for the purpose of delay; for he knew there was no law to
secure the witness’s attendance. It would merely be an interval of
delay, and no benefit to defendant. If he had a glimmer of evidence
that prosecutor had gone away from other motives than as an evasion of
the case, then he would see a reasonable hope of return, and would
cheerfully grant the application. lie was anxious that everyone should


have fair play; still the general administration of justice required that
circumstances should be taken-into consideration.
Mr. Rocher said the statements about town, as to the absence
of Gwynne, were so conflicting that the defendant did not know for
certain that he was gone until now. In fact, defendant had been
charged with getting him out of the way.
His Honor: If I thought that was so, I should not listen to the
application for one moment.
Mr. Rocher: It is quite an absurdity. It would be suicide to
defendant’s case.
The Attorney-General again considered the application was inadvised.
They all knew that there was no chance of that man appearing here.
Mr. Rocher: Well, then, defendant says he is ready to take his trial.
His Honor : My conviction is so strong that no motive of defendant
could induce me to yield. As the case at present being heard will
occupy the whole of the day, I will appoint Monday for taking the case,
and, in the meantime, Mr. Murray will be discharged on his entering
into recognizances.
Defendant w r as then bound in his own recognizance of £IOO,
and Messrs. Charles Galvin and John Mitchell, £SO each.
Monday, April 30.
(Before His Honor Sir Valentine Fleming, Knight, Chief Justice.)
The Court opened at 10 a.m.
D’Arcy Wentworth Lathrop Murray appeared to answer to the
charge of having, on 4th February last, feloniously attempted to stab
Joseph James Gwynne in the back with a table knife, and with having
cut him in the hand, with intent to do the said Joseph James Gwynne
some grievous bodily harm.
Defendant pleaded “ Not Guilty.”
Jur) —C. H. Wright (foreman), Thomas Wildguss, W. Atkinson,
Thomas Watts, W. Bull, E. W. Atkinson, S. Bennett, Thomas Attey,
W. Anderson, Alexander Aird, W, Archibald, Thomas Archer
(Esplanade).
Mr. Rocher appeared for the defendant.
The Attorney-General opened the case by requesting that the jury
would not allow anything which had occurred outside to bias them.
He trusted they would forget all personal and public feelings.
Robert Thomas Coghlan Yates (sworn and examined by the Attorney-
General) : I ordinarily reside in Hobart Town, but on 4th February,
and some days previously I was staying at the house of defendant; at
defendant’s house, and elsewhere, I had met and known a Government
surveyor named Joseph James Gwynne, the same person whom I saw
at the Police Office during the time this case was being investigated.
The 4th of February was a Sunday; on the day before (Saturday) I had


been with GWynne at the Launceston Hotel; he there, in the course of
conversation, showed me a photograph; I knew that that photograph
represented the wife of the defendant; I mentioned to the defendant
on Sunday morning that I had seen the photograph; subsequently to
my having this conversation with defendant, Gwynne came to defend-
ant’s house on the Sunday; at the time he came, we were sitting in
the dining-room; the dinner cloth was laid; the defendant was present
when Gwynne came into the room; we had finished dinner, and Mr.
Murray was sitting back from the table; I was still sitting at the end
of the table when the man Gwynne entered the room; he walked up
and shook hands with defendant and myself, we still keeping our seats ;
Gwynne took a seat near the window, and after a minute or two’s
conversation we all changed our positions; I was moving about and I
think defendant was also, but Gwynne remained in his seat; Gwynne
took from his pocket an envelope which he handed to defendant, saying,
“ Here’s your ball ticket;” defendant said, “ Where did you get that
from; 1 think Gwynne replied, “ I got it from Mrs. Murray,” or Mrs.
Murray sent it to you,” I forget the exact words; defendant walked
down the room and placed the envelope on the mantel-piece and
returned to that part of the room near Gwynne; I then walked up to
the mantelpiece and took the ball ticket and remained standing in front
of the fireplace; while I was at the end of the room, some distance
from the other two, a few words of interchange took place which I did
not hear; the next thing I observed was that Gwynne handed a letter
to defendant; defendant examined the letter, and then said to me,
“ This is a pretty letter for a man to receive,” or “ to give it to me,” f
think; he walked towards me and placed the letter in my hand;
Gwynne then said, “ Don’t let him see it—honor, Murray, honor!”
While this was being said I was glancing at the letter; this produced
is the one ; I know the handwriting—it is defendant’s wife’s.
[The Clerk then read the following : —]
My dear, dear Gtwynne.—After all that passed, I do hope you will never doubt my
fidelity. Consider me yours, and lam satisfied. And may Grod direct and bless you
is the sincere prayer of her who prefers you before all the world.
Ever yours,
M. M.
I retained possession of that letter; while defendant was giving it to
me, I think Gwynne said something to the effect that I should not have
the letter; defendant looked very pale with excitement, and replied to
something Gwynne said, “you don’t leave this room alive;” at the
same moment snatching something from the table, with his right hand
I think, he rushed at Gwynne.
By the Judge: There were knives and forks on the table then;
Gwynne rose from his seat; the defendant made a blow at Gwynne'
with his right hand, I think; Gwynne grappled with the defendant; in
the struggle they came pretty close to where I stood on the hearthrug;
Gwynne grasped the defendant’s right wrist with his left hand, and


gradually forced him backwards on to the ground; they came to the
ground, the defendant underneath, and Gwynne above him; I
then for the first time, saw that defendant had a knife in his right
hand; several females then came into the room, and I grasped the
knife from defendant’s hand; they both (defendant and Gwynne) rose
from the ground, and Gwynne ran away out of the room; I did not at
that time notice any bleeding or wound about Gwynne; I could not
say that there were more blows than the one I saw at the commence-
ment, as it became a grappling (mutual) struggle; the knife I saw was
an ordinary one, it was by no means a pointed one; it was rounded
and not at all worn, it was not a carving knife.
Cross-examined by Mr. Kocher: Previously to what I have been
detailing, it was within my own knowledge that defendant and his wife
were separated and were living in different houses at the time; I
recollect seeing Gwynne at the Launceston Hotel, on the Saturday night;
we were in the billiard-room together; the first thing that took place
between myself and him, relating to defendant and his wife, was that
Gwynne said, “ You don’t understand this case yet, Yates;” I think
he then referred to the state of things subsisting between defend-
ant and his wife; my reply was, “ I am afraid I understand it too
well;” it was after that, but not immediately, that he showed me the
photograph; I will not be positive, but I think it was in another room
that he showed me that; we did not prolong the conversation in the
billiard-room, but I feel pretty sure that he renewed the conversation
in another room; he then made the observation, “ I have got her
portrait,” and showed it to me ;” I replied, “ I am very sorry to see it
in your possession;” there was no further conversation that evening on
the subject; that night I slept at defendant’s house, and it was the
next morning that I communicated to defendant what had taken place;
defendant and myself were talking about Mrs. Murray, and then I men-
tioned the photograph; at that time defendant made a request of me,
he asked me to go to where Mrs. Murray lived and see her; he said
that they were now separated, he did not care how long he had to pay
her the allowance he had agreed, but he only hoped she would not
throw herself away on that scoundrel Gwynne, who was already coupling
her name with his about the town; this message was a wind-up of the
conversation; I had, certainly, then told him of the portrait.
By his Honor: The one blow I saw was at Gwynne’s chest and
would take effect on his full front, certainly not on his wrist; suppo-
sing that he did receive an injury to his wrist, I imagine that it must
have been subsequently to that first blow. When that blow w r as made
Gwynne immediately grasped his wrist with one hand and threw his
other round defendant’s body; their chests were pressed together so
that it was impossible to see clearly what took place. In the struggle
they came down sideways towards me. I heard no exclamation on the
part of Gwynne as he rushed from the room after his being wounded.


I have spoken of a message. 1 went to Mrs. Murray's house but could not
gain admittance, so that 1 had not the opportunity of delivering the
message. All this conversation relative to the photograph had occur-
red before Gwynne arrived on the Sunday.
James Coulter, sworn and examined by the Attorney-General:—l
am and was on the 4th and 15th February Bench Clerk for the Town
of Launceston; I was present on the 15th February when the charge
was made against defendant and took the depositions that day. Joseph
James Gwynne was the prosecutor, and laid the charge; he was exami-
ned on oath in the presence of the defendant; defendant was repre-
sented by counsel and prosecutor was cross-examined by counsel. 1 his
(produced) in the deposition; and defendant was then charged with
intent to do grievous bodily harm; that was the charge relative to the
wounding with the knife; at the time of the examination there were
marks of wounds on prosecutor’s hand.
Edward Williams, sworn and examined by the Attorney-General
lam a constable in the Municipal Police at Deloraine; there was in
the present month a government surveyor, named Joseph James
Gwynne residing within that municipality; I served him personally on
the 7th of this month, with a subpoena to attend this court. About a
week or ten days after I served him, he left the township ; I don’t know
in what direction he went; near Deloraine was his usual residence for
the last twelve months.
(Joseph James Gwynne was then’callcd three times in the usual
manner, and was called also upon his subpoena.)
Duncan Weetman, sworn and examined by the Attorney-General :
I am a son of a merchant in this town, and I have known Joseph
James Gwynne by sight for several years; I returned from Victoria on
the 19th of the present month. 1 think on the 17 th, I saw the man
Gwynne in Melbourne. We did not speak, but I recognised him.
His Honor having given permission, the prosecutor’s depositions
were then read by the Clerk to the following effect
Joseph James Gwynne, sworn and examined by Mr. Collins saidl
am a Government Surveyor. On Sunday, 4th February, 1 was at de-
fendant’s house by appointment to deliver a letter to him addressed by
Mrs. Murray to me, and which it had been arranged between defendant
and myself on the previous night I should get from her. I delivered
the letter to Murray at his house on the day mentioned. Mr. Yates
was the only person present. The letter was addressed to me, and in
accordance with that appointment I handed it to defendant. I have
not had that letter in my possession since when I delivered it to Mr.
Murray. Defendant handed it to Fates, and said, Mr. Yates, read
that.” 1 said, “That’s a breach of honor, Mr. Murray.” Upon that
defendant took up a table knife, and said to me, “You won’t go out of
this room alive. It w r as after dinner, and I think defendant took the
knife off the table ; I was sitting in a chair about three or four yards


from defendant. He then attempted to stab me; he rushed at me v
the knife in his hand. At first I scarcely thought he was m earnest,
but being convinced by his manner that he was, 1 closed with him,
wrestled, and threw him down. He several times attempted to stab me
in the back, and cut the back of the coat I was wearing ; I produce
the coat. 11l the struggle I received these wounds in my •
Mr. Yates was in a position to see ail that took place; he was s S
by the fireplace reading the letter. Yates did not attempt to interfere
until after I had got defendant down and was trying to take the: kmte
away, when 1 called upon him. With Mr. Yates 1 assistance! then got
the knife out of defendant’s hand, freed myself from him, and let the
house. I had not to my knowledge given defendant anypro'-oration
I did everything according to his request and advice. 1 s _
dressed by Dr. Ozanne. Mr. Yates took charge of the kn . ■
examined by Mr. Kocher: met defendant accidentally, and not by ap-
pointment .4 the Launceston Hotel No one was present when the
conversation took place. It was about 11 o clock at nigh .
met in the bar room, and then went into the coffee room. comer
satioil was principally about his wife. The conversation commence y
an allusion to the position he was in consequent on his servant g
having a child by him. I can scarcely recollect the exact word but
they were to the effect that he was persecuted by his wife about this
child, and that he detested her; and I inferred from what he said that
it was a false charge against him. He said he was anxious to get a
divorce from bis wife, and said if I would assist him m getting it, lie
would consider me the best friend he ever bad. I distinctly swear that
before this conversation took place I had not shown Mr. Murray a por-
trait. He told me his wife was also anxious for a divorce, and that
there would be no difficulty in the case. I said there would be.a diffi-
cultv, as Mrs. Murray might not enter into it. He said, Oh there
will'be no difficulty at all, and I ought to act for him ; I will do the
same for you, and if you help me T will consider you the best friend I
ever had.” He then told me to get a letter from her which he dictated
to me, and which I was to get her to write to my dictation and he said
that letter would be quite sufficient, together with ray being m the
house at the time. He said he would hold me harmless m the transac-
tion I asked him what the nature of the letter should be, and he
dictated the words to me, and I dictated them to Mrs. Murray on the
next day (Sunday.) I had agreed to do so. I produced a photograj:
during the conversation with defendant. He had told me that he knew
Mrs. Murray was very partial to me, and I would have no di CU J
getting the letter from her. I recollect him asking me if I had any letters
or likenesses from her, and L produced the photograph, but at what
particular part of the conversation I did so, I really .cannot say.
said she had given me the photograph I denied any letters
I was to be the co-respondent in the divorce case; but defendant said


I was to be held harmless. I told Murray I had no letters, and I
had none; we shook hands, wished each other “ good night/’ and
separated. I can’t recollect that I had ever shown that photograph to
any one; I might have shown it to Mr. Yates before I showed it to
Mr. Murray, but I don’t recollect having done so; I went on my mis-
sion to Mrs. Murray between 9 and 10 o’clock on the following (Sun-
day) morning: I saw her and communicated to her the object of my
visit; she consented to write the letter, I dictating the words; I swear
they were the words Murray dictated to me, as nearly as I could pos-
sibly recollect them; I had seen Mrs. Murray early on the Saturday
afternoon before I saw defendant in the evening; I had also seen her
on the Iriday; I told defendant that I had made these visits; on the
first occasion I went to see my sister who was staying with Mrs. Mur-
ray, and on the second occasion I took a message from defendant to his
wife asking her to come back to him; I knew that Mrs. Murray had
left her husband’s house; when I got Mrs. Murray to write the letter
I told her it was for the purpose of obtaining a divorce; I did not un-
derstand much of the divorce law, but 1 knew I was to be the co-de-
fendant, and in fact T asked her to address the letter to me; I made
the letter pretty strong and sweet, as Mr. Murray dictated it himself;
that which you produce is the letter, and I swear that letter is couched
as nearly as I could possibly recollect in the language Murray dictated
to me. (The letter was then read ) I brought this letter to Murray
in the afternoon. It was just after dinner when I called on him. We
first shook hands, and I then took a chair, sat down, handed him a ball
ticket which Mrs. Murray had sent down to him, and afterwards I
gave him the note from his wife. I remained sitting upon the chair
after giving him the note. When Murray had read the letter he gave
it to Mr. Yates, and I then said, “ No, honor, honor, Murray.” I did
so, because Mr. Yates was not to my knowledge in collusion with
Murray and myself, and it had been agreed between us that nothing
was to transpire about the letter till the matter came before the Su-
preme Court. I considered it a breach of honor between me and Mur-
ray, though I am sorry to say there was very little honor in the case.
When Murray first took up the knife he did not seem to be very’much
excited, that he became so when I took hold of him. The knife did
not cut any portion of my under garments, but merely the coat. The
rent on the arm was c a cut. I cannot say whether the other
rent on the back is a cut or a tear. Mr. Murray’s son is a pupil of
mine. I have only been in the habit of visiting the house frequently
during the last two or three months, since the boy became my pupil.
Sunday was the 4th February; I laid ray information on the 12th. I
delayed doing so because I was at the races for several days, and my
lawyer was there too, and for several days from the 7th I was laid up.
I sent a report to the police on the Bth. On Monday, the sth, I did
contemplate laying a complaint, but I required time to consider the


matter before taking action, and I do not think I would have laid the
information had there not have been a second attack upon me by
defendant. Re-examined by Mr. Collins: Whilst I was in conversation
with defendant at the Launceston Hotel on the Saturday night, the waiter
came in two or three times. When I went to Murray’s house on the
Sunday he asked me for the letter; he spoke very low, saying, “ Have
you got that,” which I understood to mean the letter; I said, “ Yes”
and handed it to him. I did not take down in writing what defendant
dictated to me. 1 dictated it to Mrs. Murray merely from memory. —
Joseph James Gwynne.
Joseph Ozanne, a legally qualified medical practitioner resident in
Launceston, said: On the 9th February last 1 attended a person named
Gwynne, the same individual was afterwards examined at the Police
Office; I attended Gwynne for an incised wound on the left hand up-
wards towards the wrist, about inches in length ; the depth was to
the bone therefore dividing the true skin; the wound had evidently
existed a few days as the discharge was already offensive; from the
appearance of the wound it might have been inflicted on the 4th of
that month; it might have been inflicted with a common table knife
rounded at the end; it was a clean cut; there were several slight
scratches on the shoulder blade but they were not material; I saw a coat
at the Police Office and noticed a rent in it; that rent correspond-
ed with one of these scratches; looking at this coat there is one part
looks as if it were cut by an incised instrument; the other is a tear.
By his Honor: The wound on the hand seemed to me to have been
done when a blow was being warded off, as it had the appearance of a
gash.
By a juror: The scratches seemed to be by a knife scraping the
flesh; there was no scratch lower down the body than the shoulder
blade.
Detective Wm. Lanham, sworn, said : I got this coat from Gwynne’s
bag at Mrs. Butterworth’s hotel. It was sworn to by Gwynne as
being the coat which he wore at the time of the assault.
The Attorney-General then put in the defendant’s statement as
follows—
I wish simply to say that a more diabolical plot at the instance of that miscreant
Gwynne was never planned against me. This man Gwynne has charge of my only
son as his pupil, and by this means he has access to my house. I looked upon this
man as my friend, A very annoying charge had been made against myself by a
servant woman in my house, and who a fortnight previously I had requested my wife
to get rid of from the house. I had also written to my wife on the subject of this
woman, requesting her to call in a medical man and if she was found by him to be in
the family way to discharge her. But I found that the day after I left Launceston
this man Gwynne arrived in my house, and has been aiding and abetting this woman
to remain in the house, and be there confined of this child, in order that a separation
between myself and my wife might take place, and that this should be the excuse for
it. From the day I left Launceston till I returned to it, and during the time
the woman was delivered of the child, this man Gwynne was continually an inmate of my
house. He came and met me on the day of my arrival from Hobart Town as a


friend, stating bis partiality for my boy, and asking mo to complete tbe articles of
pupilage, or apprenticeship, or whatever it is called, with a proviso that if he left
the colony (which he intended to do in a short time) he could take the boy with him.
lie wished me to bind the boy to him so as to finish him as a surveyor in another
colony without my interposition. Gwynne remained with me the whole of that day,
and up to Saturday, on which the conversation took place. He, on that evening in
the Launceston Hotel, broached the subject of my wife’s dislike to mo, which he
said he had known for a considerable time. In course of conversation he alluded to
his own wife, who had turned out badly, and ridiculed me for my apparant regret
for the loss of my wife. Subsequently he told me she had been very partial to him,
and that she had given him unmistakable indications of partiality for him for a
length of time. He offered to prove this by letters he had in his possession, and he
showed me her photograph wdiich he carried in a locket on his watch chain. I was un-
willing to believe that my wife had so far forgotten herself, and I would not degrade her
by quarrelling with her, believing that he was endeavoring to deceive me, and that he
had got the photograph from my boy ; and therefore I treated the matter lightly on
that occasion, taking, however, the precaution to ask Mr. Yates to lose no time in
seeing Mrs. Murray, and to beg Mrs. Murray for the sake of herself and her children,
if she had forgotten me, not to allow this man to visit her or to see her. Mr. Yates
did this, and was unsuccessful.in gaining admission. When Mr. Gwynne came into
my room on the Sunday afternoon, I still believed in my wife’s honor, and my feelings
towards him were rather of contempt than anything else, but above all I would not
degrade her by quarrelling with him on her account. I had known her so many
years, and thought she would not stoop so low; and it was not until he put the letter
into my hand that I doubted her for a single moment. But when I saw the handwriting
which I knew so well, and the language in the letter, my passion knew no bounds,
and I committed the assault. That is all I have to say, your Worship.
Mr. Rocher then addressed the jury for the defence: He referred to
the very unfair manner in which defendant was forced to come to his
trial without the presence of the prosecutor. In England, such a thing-
would never take place ; but here, for some inexplicable reason, insertion
was made in the Act of a clause which admitted the depositions being
put in in lieu of a witness. He then mentioned the manner in which
the case had been prejudiced out of doors, and quoted a paragraph from
the Launceston Times, insinuating that Gwynne had been prevailed
upon to leave by an arrangement between the defendant and the
Government. It was a most unmanly and un-English mode of
conducting a newspaper. GWynne’s depositions had been read. De-
fendant, under certain circumstances, admitted the assault. Defendant
was at the Launceston Hotel the night before, casually, and not by any
appointment; and certain conversation took place in which Gwynne
said that he was requested to obtain a letter from Mrs. Murray, and by
other means to insure a divorce between defendant and his wife. That
was the statement of the man who dared not face that Court. Now
defendant said that at the “ Launceston” that conversation took place
relative to a charge of a servant of his having an illegitimate child by
him. Gwynne brought up the subject of the differences between
defendant and his wife, and, in order to hurt his feelings, showed him
the portrait. From the evidence of Mr. Yates, it was clear that the
injuries spoken of by Ur. Ozanne were not inflicted by defendant, as
that witness had stated that the only blow he saw was at the chest and
not at the wrist of Gwynne. That an assault should be made upon


such a wretch as Gwynne, on his coming into the room and proclaiming
himself the seducer of defendant’s wife, was only what might be expected.
And he (Mr. R.) would ask those gentlemen to view the matter as if
they were in defendant’s position. However, he was able to produce
evidence which quite contradicted Gwynne’s version as to how the
injuries were inflicted. He then called—
Henry Alford, sworn, examined by Mr. Rocher, said : I am and was,
on 3rd of February last, a waiter at the Launceston Hotel; I recollect
on the evening of 3rd February last seeing Mr. Gwynne and Mr.
Murray at the Launceston Hotel; it might have been half-past nine or
ten o’clock; they were in the coffee-room; I heard a conversation
between them; Mr. Gwynne took something from his pocket and
showed it to defendant, and defendant said he would not believe it
unless he saw it; I also heard Mr. Gwynne say he had a letter he
could produce; I heard the word tl photograph” used, and Mr. Murray
said he (Gwynne) might have got it from some shop or some other place.
Josiah Pitcher, sworn, examined by Mr. Rocher, said : I am a licensed
victualler at Prospect Village; I knew Mr. Gwynne, who was surveyor
in this colony; I saw him on a Sunday, about 4th February last; it was
about five or six o’clock in the evening; he was at my house —he
walked there; I noticed that his hand was bloody and all plastered up,
and I asked him what he had been doing with his hand; his answer
was, that he had fallen from a chair with a knife in his hand; he did
not say where or what state he was in when he fell; he had on a light
kind of coat.
R. T. C. Yates, examined by Mr. Rocher’: When Mr. Gwynne left
the room on the occasion of the struggle, he had on a black dress coat t
think; I noticed that the left sleeve was partially torn on the top of
the shoulder; my impression is that there were about three inches of
the stitches gone; I don’t recognise that in the coat produced; I don’t
think that is the same coat which he had on at the time; I feel very
confident that there was no perpendicular cut; this tear in the coat
produced is on the left sleeve.
Cross-examined by the Attorney-General: I would not certainly
undertake to swear that this is not the same coat; I only noticed the
rent or tear as he passed me going out of the room; I never noticed it
before. I have a distinct recollection of telling defendant so.
The Attorney-General replied: He said, of course every one must be
convinced of Gwynne’s conduct having been very low and disreputable;
and from reading the evidence over he had formed this conclusion, and
therefore made such representations to his Government that the man
was dismissed from the service. As to the evidence adduced for the
defendant, he (the Attorney-General) did not consider that this
answered the charge. The story told Mr. Pitcher was no doubt an
excuse made on account of prosecutor being ashamed of the transaction.
His Honor then proceeded to deliver his charge to the jury; he said ;
Gentlemen of the jury : the defendant is charged under the statute with
B


a misdemeanor, that being that he did unlawfully and maliciously
wound one Joseph James GWynne on the left hand. That is the charge
against him; but I should also tell you that that charge embraces
within it also a charge of assault. So that, on informations of this
nature, it is always competent to the jury, if a conviction comes to their
mind, either to find the defendant guilty of the full offence of which he
is charged, or with that of assault. Now, a great many observations
have been made in the progress of this case on both sides by the learned
counsel for the defendant, and also in the reply by the Crown relative
to the opinions outside as to the subject of this trial. A paragraph
from some newspaper has been read; and the fact of all this proves to
me that this case has been surrounded by some considerable feeling and
prejudice that might tend to warp your judgment. You will probably
agree with me that these things cannot be helped. There are circum-
stances attached to this case which are incident always to small
communities. Being a charge against a newspaper proprietor, and
newspaper proprietors having different views on many leading subjects,
much attention would be attached to such a charge. This is only one
of the natural consequences in a small colony. But all this is nothing
to do with you, and nothing to do with me. We have a plain and
straightforward course before us. We have a party charged with an
offence against the law of his country. The question for us is, “Is he
guilty, and to what extent the facts establish it?” That is the only
question for you, and the only question for me is, that in the event of
your being satisfied of this, to act in accordance with the law, against
which he has committed the offence by measuring a degree of punish-
ment that the law prescribes. That is all we have to deal with. We
have nothing to do with paragraphs in newspapers. All I ask of you
is this: look upon the defendant without reference to what his position
may be, but as an ordinary defendant charged with an offence against
the law. Deal with this case as you would with any other defendant.
Do not be influenced by his position, or by public affairs, or on any
other consideration. He is charged with a certain offence. lam fully
persuaded that you are a body of men prepared to act in a manner
befitting your position, as simply engaged in the honest discharge of
your duty towards this community. Now, in order to convict the
defendant, you must be satisfied that this Joseph James Gwynne was
wounded. That is the first thing you must be convinced of; the next
thing you must be satisfied of is—that he was wounded by defendant;
and then you have to be satisfied that that wound was inflicted under
such a state of circumstances that constituted it to be an unlawful and
malicious wounding. These are the three things to be considered.
That this Joseph James Gwynne had a wound upon his left hand, from
the joint, extending about an inch and a half, is placed beyond a doubt
by the medical testimony of Dr. Ozanne. Of this, no one can doubt;
and that was on the 9th of February, the transaction forming the
subject of this enquiry having taken place on* the 4th. That on the


9th he was wounded none can doubt. Dr. Ozanue has proved that iu
the left hand, from the middle joint, there was a wound of an inch and
a half ih length, and penetrating to the bone, and accordingly dividing
the true skin, which is all the law requires. Therefore, the first step in
the case, namely, that this man was wounded is clear; and then comes
the second question, was he wounded by the defendant. Now we
must first deal with those circumstances in the case that appear to second
the accusation that he was wounded by the defendant. Of course, if
you were to take the depositions of this man Gwynne, as truthful and
faithfully representing the state of the facts as they_pccurred there, it is
proved. He says he went to defendant’s house on the day in question,
as he was requested. He tells you distinctly that he saw him take up
a knife from the table, rush at him, and that he (Gwynne), in conse-
quence rose up in his defence, which he was perfectly justified in doing.
Such a monstrous notion as to suppose he was not so justified cannot
be entertained for one moment. When one man rushes upon another,
the other is justified in taking all means to protect himself. He had a
right to have felled him with a blow, to prevent mischief to himself
from that knife; and any steps which he might take legitimate to that
object, the law would bear him out in. Therefore, I say that from the
evidence of this man, you would be justified in coming to the conclusion
that this wound was inflicted by defendant upon him with the knife,
because he does not say that in the progress of the struggle that he
struggled against it, or threw up his hand, as in the case quoted by the
learned counsel for the defendant. But he says defendant made several
stabs at him, and in the progress of the struggle he inflicted that
wound. The struggle on the part of Gwynne was perfectly justi-
fiable, because it was in self defence. The act of defendant, from the
moment he rushed at the man Gwynne with the knife or any other
weapon, was unlawful. The act of Gwynne, on the other hand, in
resisting that violence, was lawful; and any injury that Gwynne may
have sustained in the progress of that struggle the defendant is clearly
responsible for in law. If you, therefore, believe the man Gwynne that
that wound was inflicted onhis lefthand by defendant, then unquestionably
the defendant is liable. But this is only on the assumption that you
believe Gwynne, according to the circumstances; and wholly on that
assumption, because you have also to consider other evidence in the
case; and I wish you to consider the other testimony, and then to put
it into juxta-position of the man Gwynne. Now the most valuable
testimony on that point is the evidence of the only eye-witness then
and there present —Mr. Yates. What does he give us with reference
to that wound having been inflicted by defendant ? Does he make it
out conclusively that it was not as Gwynne says ? This is what he saw
—the defendant picked up something from the table—Something!
Now this took place just after dinner, and consequently knives and
forks were upon the table. He saw him pick up something and make
a rush at Gwynne; Gwynne was sitting on a chair, but he rose up as
b 2


defendant rushed forward; and then Mr. Yates tells us that he saw
defendant make a blow at Gwynne, but that it was at his full front—
his chest—and that the blow must have taken effect on the chest and not
on the wrist. Then he says, on the man Gwynne grappling with defend-
ant : Gwynne caught defendant's right arm with his left hand; Gwynne,
according to Mr. Yates’ evidence, seizes the right hand of defendant
with his left hand, and then they become mutually struggling. In this
way they moved sideways towards where Mr. Yates was standing at the
fireplace, and then both fell to the ground. Then it was, and not until
then, that Mr. Yates interposed. Then he took —what from the right
hand of defendant ?—a knife—a table knife; not a sharp pointed .one,
but rounded off at the end. Now, gentlemen, you are, of course,
allowed to bring the exercise of your common sense, in such a circum-
stance as this, with reference to the knife. When you find that Mr.
Yates gives you what comes under his observation; when he tells you
that he saw defendant take something from the table, and after such
struggle, and in the same hand, there is found a knife; what is the
obvious inference ? Why, that the defendant did take a knife from the
table. I cannot think that you doubt for one moment that defendant
did seize a knife. I have said this from Gwynne s evidence, and we
may take it from Mr. Yates’s also. There is not a particle of evidence
from the time of taking the knife from the table that the knife was
ever put away. But, assuming you have conclusive evidence in Mr.
Yates, it is somewhat reasonable to conclude that that wound was from
this knife, and was the wound described by Dr. Ozanne. Now, Mr.
Yates cannot carry it any further, and every reasonable gentleman will
admit that one present in such a scuffle could only tell what he saw in
an instant. He says there was only one blow from his observation, and
that blow could not have been on the wrist. When was it, then, if the
man Gwynne did get the blow on the wrist from the defendant, that he
got it ? It must have been in the course of the struggle. If you
believe that that wound on the man Gwynne was inflicted by defendant
during any progress of the struggle, the action of defendant was
unlawful, and that of Gwynne was lawful. If that wound were
inflicted in any portion of the struggle from the hand of defendant,
he is responsible for it in law no doubt. Then comes the
question of other circumstances. Supposing we take it that
the man Gwynne was capable of concocting this charge against the de-
fendant, affirming that he did wound him and swore knowingly false to
it, how comes it that on the same afternoon at 5 o’clock somewhere in
the suburbs of the town, that self-same Gwynne was at the house of
Mr. Pitcher with his hands bloody and plastered up ? Mr. Pitcher
asks this man Gwynne what had happened, and what was his answer ?
Not that defendant had caused it, but that he had fallen from a chair
with a knife in his hand. Now, gentlemen, the question for you is
which is true. If you can accept this which defendant brings forward
as true it goes to the very root of the charge. The learned counsel


says “ my client is charged with wounding, I will show you that Gwynne
says he got it from another cause.” Was that statement made by the
man Gwynne for the reason stated by the Attorney-General ? Was he
ashamed of the act and told a lie ? And in this way that he did not
like to tell the circumstances under which the wound was actually re-
ceived : what then are the surrounding circumstances that would lead
you to ascertain whether this was a lie or not ? Mr. Pitcher did not
ask when the fall had taken place. Had he done so, and he had replied
that it was in the course of the day, we should have some surer ground.
It was hardly consistent that the wound was inflicted at any previous
time in the way describedj but I think the statement is false; because
if it had been before the affray it must have been observed during the
struggle. A hand plastered up could not have escaped observation,
and therefore it must have been done either at the time of the struggle
or in the interval between that and when Mr. Pitcher saw Gwynne at
five that afternoon. Neither would it be inconsistent with the evidence
of Dr. Ozanne, who considers that the wound could have been inflicted
about this time. Therefore I ask you to exercise your judgment, and
if you believe that this wound was caused in the way Gwynne men-
tioned to Mr. Pitcher, you must acquit the defendant, it, on the other
hand, you believe that he was ashamed of the state of the circumstances
and made a false statement, and you consider the wound was inflicted
during the progress of the struggle, the defendant is liable, buch, there-
fore, is the evidence on the first two points. If you believe it to be a
lie then you will have to fall back upon the evidence of the man
Gwynne. He swears that defendant did wound him in the way de-
tailed, and such is also the evidence of Yates. Now, then, we have
reached these two stages. Then comes the remainder, and by tar the
most important of all—the circumstances under which the wound was
actually inflicted by defendant, if you believe it was inflicted by him.
Because it is from these circumstances you will have to see whether the
remainder of the information is sustained, viz. : was it an unlawful and
malicious wounding ? As far as being unlawfu there can be no ques-
tion, if we assume that the injuries were caused by defendant, if such
be so, I have no hesitation in telling you that it was unlawful. Was
it also malicious ? Because it must be malicious as well as unlawtul.
Malice exists in the mind, and can only be deduced from the language
and conduct of the party. According to the rule of law laid down with
respect to malice it is that there must be an evil intention in the mind
of one man to do mischief to another. Therefore, whenever a man
does it wilfully, it is malicious, because he cannot do it without evil in-
tentions. Therefore you must look at the surrounding circumstances.
What do we find defendant to say immediately preceding the attach—
“ You will not leave this room alive,” and then with this language he
picks up a weapon believed to be a knife. Well, gentlemen, I need
hardly tell that that is sufficientVidence that that ismalicious wounding.
We are told that defendant makes a threat, and then snatches a


knife. And this does not rest on the testimony of GWynne, but on that
of Mr. Yates, and he tells you that contemporaneously with it the de-
fendant picked up something. Therefore the defence to this point of
wounding cannot be sustained. If you attribute the infliction of that
wound to defendant, then it is unlawful and malicious; and I tell you
unfortunately, in law and by the rules of law, this
must be both unlawful and malicious. What, then, are
the surrounding circumstances under which this act was committed ?
Well, gentlemen, the rule of law is plain and clear that no previous
bias by word or act will justify such a malicious wounding. In the
present case the excuse and mitigation are put forward in justification;
and inasmuch as evidence is perfectly barren on the part of the defend-
ant in attempting to negative Gwynne’s statement that defendant
rushed upon him. All circumstances must fall short of justification in
law. lam only here as the expounder of the law, nothing else, to
guide you. I repeat that you have not one particle of evidence, only
the eye witness prior to defendant's act of rushing on this man Gwynne.
What is put forward in defence fails. I must say, as a justification.
Now we are forced to proceed to the painful tale of the remainder of
the circumstances. Painful these are, I know, as bringing up the names
of those absent, and above all the name of the wife of the defendant.
However, this is one of those cases that the law imposes upon us.
What was this assault and wounding for ? You have it stated that
there was a certain arrangement; but how was this brought about ?
The evidence carries you to the night of the 4th. According to
Gwynne's statement he saw defendant the night before the affray, and
became a party to a most vile conspiracy to defraud justice and deceive
a court of justice in this colony. To impose upon it, to deceive it, and
defraud it by presenting a false case. According to Gwynne unhappy
differences have arisen between defendant and his wife, and they were
mutually desirous of dissolving the marriage tie by perpetrating a
fraud upon the Court. For Gwynne lent himself to a scheme or plot
which consisted in that he should get a letter from defendant's wife in
which she acknowledged her criminal guilt. That letter has been read
and put in evidence. Gwynne's evidence was that this arrangement
was made on the night before the assault, and in pursuance of such the
following morning Gwynne went to the wife of defendant and obtained
from her that letter which was to be evidence of her guilt in the ulte-
rior proceedings in the divorce court for a dissolution of the marriage
tie between them, and he said that defendant actually dictated the
terms in which the letter should be written, and then he dictated to her
as near as could be the precise words of defendant. Gwynne, on the
following day having obtained that letter, as he says in pursuance with
the arrangement, went to defendant’s house after dinner and into the
room where defendant and Mr. Yates were, and then he says defendant
asked him quietly “ Have you got that ? " meaning the letter, to which
he replied, “ I have,” and then produced the letter, and handed it to


him. The rest you. know. You have the best of evidence, and that
on which I ask you to rely most for the circumstances under which the
alleged assault was committed, and that is the testimony of Mr. Yates.
The production of that letter handed to defendant, which he showed to
Mr. Yates, causes the action taken afterwards. The man Gwynne re-
monstrates with the defendant, when he shows Yates the letter, say-
ing, “Oh ! Murray ; honor, honor,” and then, notwithstanding this he
(defendant) showed a letter, and said, “ Here’s a pretty letter to give
a man,” or “ for a man to receive,” and he turns pale, according
to Mr. Yates, and burning with passion, seizes the knife—if
you are satisfied it was a knife, —and the struggle follows.
Those are the facts from the man Gwynne, if you believe them to be
true. The opinion to be formed of the man Gwynne, who from his own
statement lent himself to such a conspiracy must be very low indeed.
It is almost impossible to find* language strong enough to denounce the
man capable of such a diabolical transaction, and he receives his deserts
by dismissal from the Government and the colony. A man who would
take it upon his own shoulders and show himself capable of being a party
to pervert the ends of justice is a man no longer fit to be the servant of
the Crown. On the part of the defendant it is impossible to deny that
he is placed before the jury in the most unfavourable light a man can
be in. But would he be justified in rejecting all the statements of the
man so capable of such vile acts, and showing himself to be so by his
own evidence. You must all feel that he is a man of very low and
loose morality, consequently you would be perfectly justified in treating
his statement with suspicion, unless you had something probable to
support it. But then the next question, and it is a question of very
great difficulty, is—are the facts in reference to this man true ? Was
the defendant himself a party to that foul transaction to join a con-
spiracy to pervert the Divorce Court—to perjure himself ? Defendant
says not, and denies all that part of the case, and on that denial puts it
forth as a justification under which the assault was committed. We
shall have to go to the surrounding evidence relative to the man
Gwynne and the conspiracy. It is alleged to have taken place in the
Launceston Hotel. There was no one present actually at that time.
Of course such an arrangement would not be made in the presence of
third parties. Defendant emphatically denies it—Gwynne swears it on
oath. Well, you have the waiter who saw the parties together, and he
certainly states that he heard some conversation passing between defen-
dant and Gwynne, and in the course of that conversation he heard the
word “ photograph” used. He not only heard that but he saw Gwynne
show something to defendant, and defendant say “ that might have been
got from some other place.” And more, he heard something too about
a letter which Gwynne said he had. Now the value of that evidence is
to be taken in connection with defendant’s defence. He said that he
saw the man Gwynne at the “Launceston” on this very night, and that
Gwynne did show him a photograph. The waiter says he showed him


something, and also that he heard the word, but nothing else. And
defendant says he did not desire to quarrel with this man and bring up
his wife’s name. He, therefore, treated it comparatively light. The
waiter, therefore, to some extent corroborates on the part of defendant,
because he does bear out—as far as a looker-on well could—that he did
show him something on this occasion. There is another point, the
waiter heard something about a letter. Mr. Gwynne swore most
positively more than once that he never said he had any letter from his
wife, and never had. And as this waiter distinctly swears that this
man Gwynne said he had a letter, it is certainly strange. True, letters
Mere only mentioned, and the waiter did not know from whom those
letters were said to be received; but it is only reasonable to suppose
that defendant s wife was intended, from the strain of the conversation.
I hat is a contradiction by this waiter. Then the following morning
important events follow, and lead to the question whether it was a con-
cocted scheme about that letter. Was that letter obtained and was that
letter produced in pursuance of that scheme ? We must look at both
sides. It must be remembered that this man Gwynne says that when
he went into Uie room on the following day, defendant asked “ have
you got that, before he actually produced it, and you must remember
also that Mr. Yates says something passed between defendant and
Gwynne, which he did not hear, before the letter was produced, Very
well: then the letter is produced, and handed by the man Gwynne to
the defendant. Now, it seems strange that if nothing had ever taken
place about the letter before, that this man should come and bring such
a letter. And indeed this letter handed to defendant, if nothing relative
to it had taken place before, would no doubt cause instant passion
toward this man Gwynne for bringing it. But then there is the conduct
ol the defendant. Supposing the arrangement was made before, then
the letter being produced was just what the defendant wanted. Looking
at it in this way, why should he be exasperated at Gwynne ? There is
perhaps this explanation. I don’t ask you to adopt it, but merely throw
it out as a suggestion—was the conduct of defendant caused by Gwynne
producing the letter in the presence of the third party; defendant
knowing (jf there was a scheme) that this would utterly defeat it ?
Iherefore can that be looked upon as an explanation of the conduct of
the defendant that he was exasperated because a private arrangement
intended never to see the light until it came before a Divorce Court,
should thus be thrust forward before a stranger. That is one phase,
and there are many phases. It is most significant in GWynne’s state-
ment mat when defendant said, “ have you got it,” and Gwynne said,
y e s> that defendant should not at once put the letter—the very
thing he required into his pocket, and thus cause third persons to be
ignorant of lnstead of that he hands it to Mr. Yates at once. That
again is inconsistent with the phase presented just now about defendant’s
passion at the letter being presented in the presence of third persons.
And then this is relied upon by the defendant, and it is very strong


unquestionably. It appears that before GWynne came into the room
certain conversation had taken place between defendant and Mr. Yates,
and Mr. Yates had told him what had been said about his wife and
himself by Gwynne; and at the conclusion of that conversation defen-
dant makes a request from Mr. Yates to go to his (defendant’s) wife to
say that he did not intend to make any alteration in her allowance,
but wishing her to respect herself, and above all things to keep clear of
that scoundrel Gwynne. That was the conclusion of the conversation,
and that took place before Gwynne came. Ask yourselves, gentlemen,
how that could be consistent with the conduct of the defendant on the
night before in forming the conspiracy. Now suppose that Mr. Yates
had put on his hat and had gone away to defendant’s wife and com-
municated that to her; it would have frustrated the whole case. There-
fore it is put before you, and strongly on the part of the counsel for
the defendant, that Gwynne’s statement of such an arrangement is false.
There are difficulties on both sides. If such an arrangement did take
place then defendant’s conduct is equally to be denounced. If that
letter came as a surprise and that then with anger by the suspicions in
his mind that this very man Gwynne was the seducer of his wife,
anger at what transpired before, angered at what Yates had told him
before, and then at this excited moment and when his feelings had been
heated, Gwynne came in and produced the letter which published the
dishonour of his wife, it would certainly induce the greatest heat of
passion; but even then if exasperated by his feelings the defendant then
committed the act, yet, as I have already told you, it is not a justification.
On this case what I ask you is to be perfectly satisfied that Gwynne’s
injuries were inflicted by the defendant, and if you are satisfied your
course is plain. With that your duty is done; but 1 also ask you to
give me the benefit of your opinion as to the provocation the defendant
was under at the time of the assault; it will powerfully influence me in
the judgment I shall have to make.
The jury then (2.10 p.m.) retired. At about half-past five o’clock
they were sent for, but had then not agreed, so that the Court was
adjourned until 10 p.m. At that hour the jury returned, and as there
was no probability of their agreeing they were locked up for the night.
The Court was crowded to excess.
The defendant was then bound over, himself in £lOO and Charles
Galvin and John Mitchell in £5O each, to appear at nine next morning.
ASSAULT.
The same prisoner was then charged with having on the 7th February
last assaulted and ill-treated one Joseph James Gwynne (prosecutor in
the last case).
Jury—W. S. Allanby (foreman), R. J. Archer, Samuel Yates, E.
Brown, Thomas Brown, Henry Yates, Thomas Bates, W. Wadham, W.
Aldridge, W. G. Angel, James Adams, Thomas Archer.


The witnesses as to the depositions of Gwynne, his departure from
Deloraine, and subsequent appearance in Melbourne were examined to
the effect in the same order as in the previous case.
Myles Mahoney, Superintendent of Westbury Police, deposed to
having been in the bar of the Launceston Hotel on the night in ques-
tion ; saw the man Gwynne enter the room and sit almost immediately
opposite the defendant; the defendant then got up and saying to the
man Gwynne, “ you scoundrel, how dare you come into the
room when I am here?” seized a decanter and threw it at Gwynne.
He missed his aim, and Gwynne struck him a blow with a stick. The
defendant then seized another spirit bowl and hurled it at Gwynne, this
time hitting him on the side; Gwynne then left the room.
Mr. Samuel Henry, who was also present at the time, corroborated
the evidence of the proceeding witness.
Dr. Ozanne who was next examined pronounced the wound in
Gwynne's side alleged to have been received in the assault in question,
as having been very trifling.
This was substantially the whole of the evidence.
Mr. Rocher then briefly addressed the jury on behalf of the prisoner.
His Honor summed up and the jury retired at 5 p.m., and shortly
after returned into Court with a verdict of guilty.
The Court reopens at ten o*clock next morning,
CRIMINAL COURT.— Tuesday, May Ist.
The Court sat again at 9 a.m., yesterday. The jury in the stabbing
case against D. W. L. Murray having been locked up all night, were
placed in the box, when the foreman informed the Court that there
was no probability of their agreeing. His Honor therefore discharged
them. In the assault case against the same defendant, in which a
verdict of guilty was returned, his Honor deferred sentence until the
next sessions. The defendant then entered into recognizances in the
same terms as before to appear at the next Criminal Sittings.


PART II.—MRS. MURRAY’S DEFENCE.
MY MARRIED LIFE.
I was married to D’Arcy Wentworth Lathrop Murray on the 18th day
of April, 1849. Previously, and at the time of my marriage, my father
was induced by him to believe that he, Mr. Murray, had a settled
income of four hundred pounds per year, irrespective of a good home
at Hobart Town. Alas! it was my misfortune to find, on my arrival
at my supposed “ good home,” that it was little else than a miserably
furnished hovel, and that my husband was entirely destitute : the first
effort, therefore, of my married life was used in applying to my parents
for assistance, that both my husband and myself might be rescued from
desolate misery. My father, as soon as he became acquainted with my
forlorn condition, came to Hobart Town, rendered the required assist-
ance, and gave my husband a situation in the office of the Cornwall
Chronicle , at Launceston. Little did I think at this time that I had
married a man who was connected with people of the name of (I think)
Dickson, and who kept the “ Old Kangaroo,” in Liverpool-street,
Hobart Town. If I had known that I had been taken from a kind
father and mother, to be mixed with so base a lot as this, I think it
would have deprived me of reason. The first of a series of troubles
commenced. Mr. Murray became acquainted with a Mrs. Yaux; his
treatment became violent, until my father’s interference drew a curtain
over the first scene of my misery. Mr. Murray gave up his situation
and went to Melbourne; obtained a situation as reporter to the Daily
News. Sometime afterwards this was discontinued, and he then got
employment in the service of La vine and Norman, wine and spirit
merchants. These parties, upon leaving, disposed of their business to
a Mr. Planning, Mr. Murray still retaining his situation, when his
employer assisted in putting him into a public-house, known as the
“ Victoria Public House.” At this time, my health becoming bad and
requiring treatment, I was once more despatched to my father’s care,
whose responsibilities were to pay for all my medical attendance and
nursing. On regaining my health, I returned to Melbourne and found
Mr. Murray the owner of a disgusting low public-house in Little
Bourke-street, living in a state of adultery with a woman whom he
represented to be his wife. My presence at this juncture excited his
displeasure. An excuse was required—the lie was ready—the
statement made that I was not his wife, but a girl with whom he co-
habited, and that I followed him on account of the infant I then had
in my arms, and which was to be denounced as my disgrace. My
remonstrances were ridiculed, and my protestations resisted by the most
brutal treatment, consisting of filthy and loathsome language, constantly
beaten, and comparatively naked turned into the streets in the middle of


the night. Frenzied and maddened with unsufferable misery, continually
contemplating suicide, I determined upon his destruction and my otvn.
Armed with a brace of pistols I attempted the fatal act, and
nothing short of the mercy of God could at that time have interposed
between us and death. The innocent infant then upon my breast
disarmed my resolution to commit self-destruction—nothing to live for
•—nothing to hope for—the bye-word of abandoned women, the victim
of an adulterous husband. On another occasion he returned home in
an advanced stage of intoxication, brutally beat, and threatened to
“butcher me.” with my child. In a weak state of health myself, I.was
obliged to seek the shelter of an old gentleman, a friend of my father’s,
and who was living with his nieces, until he should write to my father.
My father immediately advised me to seek police protection, but when
the case came on for hearing, perjury of the foulest description on his own
part, and suborned perjury succeeded in his getting acquitted. Shortly
after this my father came to Melbourne, and took me once more under
his protection. Such was the state of my mind at this time arising
from continued ill treatment and barbarity, that while on board the
s^™ er > I g ave my child to the stewardess, and plunged into the sea,
and but for a fisherman I should have been drowned. After a short
time, the woman with whom Mr. Murray cohabited, abandoned him for
another paramour : he became insolvent, returned to Launceston, and
wrote to my father begging forgiveness, and attributing his cruelty to
me to the unhappy influence of drink, and with promises that he would
become a better man, I forgave him, and hoped against hope for the
future. Mr. Murray then went to Hobart Town, where he obtained a
situation with Mr. Nicholas, the wine and spirit merchant, until I be-
came unwell, and our apparently necessitous circumstances obliged me
again to return to my parents’ home at George Town, where 1 remained
seven months. During this period I repeatedly wrote to my husband,
stating that I had recovered and was coming home. The
replies to these letters only contained excuses, advising me to continue
where I was, when at last my father resolved that I should go home and
ascertain the cause of his evasive conduct. Acting upon my father’s
wish I went home, when to my horror I found him in league with a
woman, and consequently another breach in our affairs occurred. 1 at
once returned to Launceston, and for the sake of my children, my father
acted once more upon the advice of friends, and in order to break off
his vile connexion, sent for Murray, and gave him employment upon
the newspaper. This state of things lasted well for a short time, when
my troubles and sufferings increased. A female friend came to stay
with me for a few weeks by invitation. On a subsequent occasion to
her paying me a visit, I received an anonymous letter, stating that my
husband and this female friend had been seen under the most revolting
circumstances, in a secluded place in the suburbs of the town, and
known as the “Cataract Hill,” and that he on another occasion had been
seen with his arm around her waist, in the public streets at night. This


having been proved, I again separated from him for eight
months, and again returned for the interests of my poor children.
During this interval of time Mr. Murray became ill, and while in a des-
titute condition (for my parents would not assist him in consequence of
his brutal treatment of me) his particular friend, Mr. J. J. Gwynne,
came to his relief, provided him with a home, until he should recover
from his sickness. While in a convalescent state, Mr. Gwynne had oc-
casion to leave home, to do some work in the country. This afforded
Murray an opportunity to perpetrate his wrongful practices—in a word
he became the seducer of the wife of the man whose house had afforded
him an asylum in his sickness. The knowledge of this affair was con-
fined to as few persons as possible. While living as I was at this time
in a house provided for me and my children by my father, I listened to
his entreaties for forgiveness, he at the same time assuring me that I
was one woman out of a thousand, that would ever countenance him
again. We then removed to the Chronicle office, where for a time I
was disposed to believe that my troubles were ended. Scarcely had I
arrived at this conclusion, when fresh disasters arose. Mr. Murray
decided on giving parties, when new faces allured him to a fresh
pursuit of his illicit desires, and new anxieties caused a return of my ill
health, and for relief I went to Hobart Town, hoping that the change
of air would improve my condition. While there, a letter reached me
requesting my immediate return to Launceston. On my return, I was
surprised to find the whole township in arms concerning his conduct
with a certain lady, the daughter of a javelin man of the gaol—a Miss
G-l-t. Under the influence of his passion for this degraded woman, he
repeatedly told me that, if he thought fit, he could get plenty of oaths
for five pounds to blast my character and “ cook me.” But two years
since, he had the filthy audacity to state that he would give five hundred
pounds (if he had it) to anyone who would take me off his hands, and
from the time that he rendered desolate the hope of his friend Gwynne ,
he has repeatedly taunted me with his name. However disposed I may
have been at the time to rid myself of a man whose life was one scene
of cruelty and slander, my mind resisted the baseness of being regarded
as a bale of merchandise, and a fearful scene ensued, which ended in
my removing to my mothers house. To clear himself from this
disgrace, he pleaded to my mother that at this time he was suffering
from delirium tremens. Three weeks after this, another of his begging
letters arrived, with the usual amount of entreaty that I would return;
and, on his promise of good behaviour, I acceded to his wishes. As
the name of Gwynne has been associated with mine, it is advisable that
it should be known in what manner he was introduced to me, how he
was invariably received, and the circumstances connected therewith:
About eighteen months since, Mr. Gwynne was again introduced to
our house upon the urgent entreaty of Mr. Murray, he having always
declined visiting us, because his name had been mentioned previously in
a manner unworthy of a gentleman. The strong intimacy that existed


between the men resulted in Murray's entering into arrangements that
Gwynne should teach my son surveying. This brought Gwynne con-
tinually to our house, until matters were settled respecting my son.
Murray and Gwynne were seldom apart when they were in town, and
the usual hour for Murray to return home (at times in the
most filthy condition) was six o’clock in the morning, I
having waited up for him the whole night. Mr. Murray
being called away to Hobart Town to the Council, during
his absence, which extended over a considerable period, Mr. Gwynne
called upon me while in town, with letters and messages from my son,
who w r as then under his supervision and care. .From these communi-
cations I learnt that he was exceedingly kind to his pupil, and I
naturally felt grateful for that kindness, and when he was at my house
on any occasion that it was near my usual dinner hour, I requested him
to remain, but never without informing Mr. Murray of the circumstance.
I had determined to publish a number of Mr. Murray’s letters addressed
to me in proof of the untruthfulness of the statements made against my
character by him, and the only reason for my not doing so is the great
expense attached to publishing and my want of means. Mr. Murray
having one day returned to Launceston from Hobart Town, mentioned
to me that my female servant, a respectable girl who had been in my
service nearly three years, was likely to have a baby shortly and that I
had better give her five pounds and send her away, as he was sure to
get the credit of it. I scorned the idea, believing her to be a virtuous
girl, and asked him who told him so, when he named a person who
lived next door. He then begged of me to see my next door neighbour’s
wife, and, ask her if such was the case, but to be sure and not let
her know that he had said anything about it, but to tell her that I had
been told by a friend, and that if it came to Mr. Murray’s knowledge
he would be angry with me. I consulted the neighbour referred to,
who said she had very little doubt. Yet I doubted myself. A few
days after Mr. Murray returned to Hobart Town, but prior to his
leaving Launceston, I questioned the girl and told her if such was the
case, to confess, and if the father of the child was any of the young men
in our office, I would endeavour to get her married to him. The girl
evaded ray questions, and on my so informing Mr. Murray,
he insisted that I should give her five pounds, and send her
home. I refused to do so, until more proof was before me
and I therefore called in a medical man, who doubted whether
the girl was enciente. As a doubt existed I was indisposed to
injure the girl by sending her away under such a pretext. 1 accord-
ingly retained her in my employ, intending after I had finished working
for the bazaar to go to Hobart Town, and if previously to this anything
occurred, to lead me to believe that the matter spoken of her by Mr!
Murray was correct, to part with her then. But three days elapsed*
when to my astonishment, this girl gave birth to a son. I then asked
her, in the presence of the nurse, and a lady friend, who was the father


of the child, when to my horror she declared it was my husband. With
feelings of poignant sorrow, I insisted that she should be positive, assu-
ring her of her dangerous state, telling her that she might be near
death, and not to die with a lie upon her tongue. She persisted that
although she might never rise again that Mr. Murray was the father of
her child. She also told me how, and when the misfortune befel her,
and that Mr. Murray forced her. I immediately wrote to Mr. Murray
informing him of the fact, and stating that I would never speak to him
again, except in a court of law, to which I received the following
telegram : “It is utterly false, and only what I expected, I will write
to-night.” The next day the letter arrived, which informed me that if
I required a divorce, or separation, I had only to apply to a solicitor.
Instead of coming at once to Launceston to clear his character, he sent
his friend, Coghlan Yates, to arrange the affair for him. A deed of
separation was drawn up by a solicitor, and forwarded to Hobart Town,
where it was signed by Mr. Murray, he agreeing that I should have the
whole of the household furniture, and that he would pay me £l5O per year.
An arrangement was also made by Mr. Yates to allow the nurse fifteen
shillings per week, for the support of girl and child during the first
three weeks, and after that the sum of ten shillings per week for the
support of the child. On the day the deed of separation was signed,
Mr. Murray arrived from Hobart Town. I was then preparing to leave
my home and provide another for myself in Galvin's Buildings, Laun-
ceston. Mr. Murray came in at one door, and I went out at another.
It was for this disreputable behaviour, that I was resolved
our parting should be for ever, and not as Mr. Murray
calumniously states, for the purpose of strengthening an im-
proper attachment for Mr. Gwynne. The cruelty of this wicked man,
who for so many years was my husband and the father of my children,
had yet to be exceeded by acts more desperate than those perpetrated
heretofore, and which, as 1 have stated previously in my preface, must
be disclosed for my own justification for leaving my husband's house.
During his stay in Launceston, at this time he was always in company
with Gwynne, to whom he made the horrifying proposal to dishonor
me, and he would give a hundred pounds. Whether the consideration
money was a temptation, or the love of sin, I know not; but the plot
was entered into after this manner—that Gwynne should call on me at
my new residence to see his sister, who was then living with me, and
that he should bring a bottle of wine with him; that on his arrival he
should express his sympathy for me, and say he thought I would have
no .wine in the house and that a glass would do me good, so he had
brought a bottle in his pocket. When I had had sufficient wine, he
would then have no difficulty in effecting his purpose. It would only be
a little gallantry for him (Gwynne). I should then be obliged to regard
him, and he (Murray) would be able to get a divorce. The attempt
was made. The plot was entered into in the morning, and Gwynne
came in the afternoon of the same day. My eyes were very much


swollen. I had been crying the whole morning because Mr. Murray
had removed my little girl. Gwynne said, “ don't cry, lam very
sorry for you; but you will be able to have your child in a few days.
I. desired him to sit down, when he said he was sorry that he had come ;
for when he saw my poor pale face, and my eyes filled with tears, he
was ashamed of his friend Murray. Whether the state in which he
found me caused him to relent I cannot say, at any rate he desisted
from his foul purpose; said I was the victim of a bad husband ; and
revealed the whole plot. He then said, “ instead of being your seducer
I will be your protector,” and regretted that my poor old father was
dead. He bid me and his sister good-bye, and left the house.
On the following afternoon he called again with a message from
my husband, to know if I would return home; I replied, that
I would never live with Mr. Murray again, that I would rather
work for my living; that I had suffered so much his cruelty
and had been so often insulted by his paramours, that nothing on earth
could induce me to go back, and then requested that Mr. Gwynne nor
any other person should ever put such a proposition to me again. Oh
the evening of the same day, I received a visit from a Mrs. Yates, asking
me the same question, at the same time stating that it was only a
trick of Murray's, for that he did not want me back. On the following
morning (Sunday) Mr. Gwynne again called and suggested that if I
would write a letter to be addressed to him (Gwynne), which letter he
would dictate, and which letter Murray had previously dictated to him,
that I should be able to get a divorce in 'the month of August, and
that I should still receive my maintenance, and that nothing
should be heard of the letter until it was before the Divorce
Court. I consented to this wickedness, being at the time in a most
abject state of mind, and anxious to use any means to bring such a
wretched state of existence to a close. I got ray writing materials
among which was an invitation to a ball, which I sent by Mr.
Gwynne to Mr. Murray, to prove my disinclination to attend the ball.
I then wrote the letter produced on the trial, and addressed it to J. J.
Gwynne, Esq. He took the letter as was intended to Mr. Murray.
Between two and three o'clock in the afternoon of the same day, a
person (Miss Emma Pollard) called from the Chronicle office, and in-
formed me that Murray and Gwynne had been fighting. She also stated
that Gwynne came there soon after dinner and handed Murray a letter,
which as soon as Murray had read he made an attack upon Gwynne, and
stabbed him. This girl advised me to leave my house immediately, lor
she did not consider my life was safe. I at once sent Mrs. Smith
(Mr. GWynne's sister) for a car, explaining to her what had happened,
and that I intended to go and stop with an old friend of my mother s at
Westbury, until I could see my mother and ask her advice. Mr.
Gwynne's sister, on her way to procure a car, met her brother and told
him that I was in a fearful state of mind, that a person had called and
told me all about the fight, and had advised me to leave the house,


stating that Mr. Murray was going to take possession and sell
all off. Mr. Gwynne, in reply, advised his sister to return to me
immediately, and that he would send a car up. He also told his sister
that he could not allow her to remain in my house during my absence,
but that he would meet her in the afternoon and arrange where she should
stay. I believe he met her at Pitcher’s, on the Westbury Koad, when
she was returning in the car, after leaving me at Hadspen. I proceeded,
accompanied by Mrs. Smith, as far as Hadspen, intending to send the
car back and to go on in the coach. Mrs. Smith returned to town in
the car, but I stopped in the inn some time, expecting the Westbury
coach to pass, but, on enquiry from the landlady of the inn, I found
that no coaches ran on a Sunday, but that most likely I should be able
to procure a seat in some other conveyance. While on the look-out, I
saw my son pass on his way to town. I told him what had happened,
and that I should most likely be able to reach Westbury that night.
Some time after my son returned and begged of me to come back with
him, which I did, having hired a conveyance. To my great surprise I
was told the other day that Mr. Murray had reported that I had been
seen going out of town in a cab, in company with Mr. Gwynne, and that
he had left me at this house, and had gone on to make arrangements
for me at Heloraine, and that I had stated to the landlady that I
expected Mr. Gwynne to come for me. This is another gross falsehood
of Mr. Murray’s. I positively swear that I never once saw Mr.
Gwynne after writing the letter, and that I never mentioned Mr.
Gwynne’s name, either directly or indirectly, to this woman or any other
person. Mr. Murray has also stated that a silk dress or two would go
a great way in securing evidence against me. I will now relate by what
means Mr. Gwynne became in possession of my likeness. Mr. G. one
day called at the Chronicle Office and saw my likeness on the drawing-
room table. He asked me if I would give him one, at the same time
saying that he had one of Murray’s and would like to have mine.
I told him that I could not, for that I once gave one to
a friend, and that Mr. Murray was very angry with me for
so doing. There was a person (Mrs. Yates) present at the time,
who asked me if I would give her one, which I did. She then said,
this is in a sitting posture, I should like to have one standing. I heard
nothing more of my likenesses, until the examination at the police office,
when a person came to me and told me that she knew how Mr. Gwynne
had obtained my likeness; that Mrs. Yates had givenhim one, and that
this person’s sister, Emma Pollard, had told her so. Mr. Murray has
also stated that were it not for me and my family, he would be the first
man in the town. Ido not know what he means by this, since it is
well known, that I am the daughter of a lady and gentleman, and that,
unlike himself, I was born in wedlock, that my father’s means alone
gave him the position he holds at the present time. What 1 have
stated is the solemn truth, as I hope to meet my God and children in


Heaven. I have a number of letters which I shall be happy to show to
any persons who may be interested in my welfare. I shall also be most
happy to give the names of the kind friends who have sheltered me
when at different times I have been driven from my home. The fore-
going are but a few of the facts connected with my married life; many
scenes that I have passed through being of a nature too filthy aud
abominable for publication. I now close this hurriedly written state-
ment, and leave the public to judge of the conduct and character of the
man, who by law is my husband, and whose enormities have brought
ruin and desolation, upon what might otherwise have been a happy and
comfortable home.
The Declaration to the truth of the statements herein can be seen at
the office of the Publisher.
Printed by E. M. Abbott & Co., next Post Office, Melbourne.
