

TESTIMONIALS
IN FAVOUR OF
The Rev. JAMES BONTHORNE, M.A.
From the Very Rev. Robert Haldane, D.D., Principal of St. Mary's College ,
St. A ndrews.
St. Andrews, March , 1854.
I have very great pleasure in offering my strongest testimony to the distinguished
merits of Mr. J. Bonthorne, who has offered himself as a Candidate for the office of
Head Master in John Watson’s Institution, Edinburgh.
Mr. Bonthorne finished his course at this University in April last, and during the
whole of it he was distinguished for the marked propriety of his conduct, and the most
successful application. He has had much experience in public and private teaching, and
has always given the highest satisfaction to those who employed him. I had daily
opportunities of witnessing, for two years, the admirable manner in which he carried on
an important department in the Madras College here, where he had several hundred
youths under his charge—all kept in perfect order by steady discipline, without the least
approach to severity.
In addition to his Scholarship, which is of a high order, he has many qualities
which are rarely combined in one person—complete command of temper, gravity of
deportment joined with a cheerful disposition, great prudence, and a high sense of duty,
with a readiness to submit to any degree of labour which his duty may require of him.
From all these considerations, I cannot but regard Mr. Bonthorne as eminently
qualified for the situation to which he aspires.
ROBERT HALDANE.


From the Rev. Geo. Buist, D.D., Professor of Ecclesiastical History , St. Mary's College 1
St. Andrews.
St. Andrews, March 4, 1854.
I have been acquainted with Mr. Bonthorne several years. He highly distinguished
himself as a Student at this University, and secured the esteem of the Professors under
whom he studied. He has had considerable experience as a teacher both in public and
private. He acted as assistant, for some time, to Dr. Woodford, in the Classical, and
to Mr. Young, in the English Departments, of the Madras College, with high approbation.
There is no young man with whom I am acquainted that I could more confidently
recommend to the Directors of John Watson’s Institution than Mr. Bonthorne.
GEO. BUIST.
JFrom the Rev. Andrew Alexander, LL.D., Professor of Greek , United College.
St. Andrews.
St. Andrews, March 3, 1854.
I have had the pleasure of knowing Mr. Bonthorne, first as a Student of the
United College, very highly distinguished throughout his course, both in literature and
science, and then as a Student of St. Mary’s, or the Divinity College, where he has
sustained, in all respects, the well-earned reputation he had previously acquired. I have
recommended him as private tutor to families in whom I felt particular interest, and I
have reason to know that he enjoyed their high respect and esteem.
AND. ALEXANDER.
From Thomas Duncan, Esq., LL.D., Professor of Mathematics , United College ,
St. Andrews.
April , 1854.
Mr. J. Bonthorne, being a Candidate for the situation of Head Master in Watson’s
Institution, Edinburgh, has requested me to express my opinion of his fitness for the office.
I understand that one of the branches which he would have to teach is Mathematics. He
held a very high place in all my three Mathematical Classes ; he conducted with success
the Mathematical studies of a number of young men attending the University ; and so great
was my confidence in him, that upwards of a year ago I employed him to carry on the
business of two of my Classes, which he did to my entire satisfaction.
THOMAS DUNCAN.


From William Pyper, Esq., LL.D., Professor of Humanity , United College ,
St. Andrews.
April 5, 1854.
Mr. Bonthorne was a Student in the Senior Humanity Class in the United College
during the Session 1849-50, where he occupied a high place in the first rank of merit;
and I have reason to know that he was equally eminent in other departments of study.
Throughout his whole academic career he distinguished himself by the display of superior
talents, and by his literary and scientific attainments.
WILLIAM PYPER,
From the Rev. Alexander F. Mitchell, D.D., Professor of Hebrew , St. Mary's College .
St. Andrews.
Mr. Bonthorne, when a Student in St. Mary’s College, occupied a distinguished
place in my Class, and I had uniformly occasion to bestow on him the highest commend-
ations for diligence, perseverance, and success in his studies. I remember that at the
dose of his College course he passed with much credit a strict examination in Theology,
Church History, Hebrew, Greek, and Moral Philosophy ; and obtained, in consequence,
the highest prize awarded in St. Mary’s College.
A. F. MITCHELL.
From Edward Woodford, Esq., LL.D., one of H. M. Inspectors of Schools.
Mr. J. Bonthorne assisted me in conducting my Public Classes for a year, and
was for a longer time in charge of my boarders at their private studies.
From ray personal knowledge of him altogether, I have no hesitation in saying that
1 consider him to be eminently qualified by his talents, acquirements, judgment, and
temper to discharge the duties of the office for which he is now an applicant.
LI). WOODFORD.
