

ON THE IN, tHrODUCTION
LOCAL INDUSTRIES
NEW SOUTH WALES.
By SIZAR ELLIOTT, J.P.
“FORTITER ET RECTE.”
Burnham,
Brighton, 1876.
Melbourne
MASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, STEAM PRINTERS,
51 & 53 Flinders Lane West.
MDCCCLXXVI.




The following interesting letters are from well-known
old colonists, and I am much indebted to them for kindly
recollections :
Sydney, May 16, 1873.
Mr. Sizar Elliott,
Burnham Vineyard,
Brighton, Victoria.
My dear Sir,
On my return from Bodalla, whither I have been
located for some months, enjoying very interesting pursuits
there whilst recruiting my indifferent health, I found your
pamphlet on the Introduction of Local Industries into New
South Wales. The perusal of it carried me bach to the time
of your active life in Sydney, and as a not indifferent looker-on
I can testify to your great energy in pushing new industries
along, more particularly those connected with the preservation
of food.
I think you have omitted the name of one gentleman in
your notice in connexion with the utilisation of the sheep by
reducing it into tallow. I refer to Mr. Frederick Ebsworth,
who, if my memory serves me correctly, was the first to shotv
to the merchants of Sydney the process now familiarly known
as 11 boiling down’’ and, to use the poet’s words, to make it 11 a
fact literally rendered.”
With my best wishes for your prosperity, believe me to be
Yours, very faithfully,
THOS. S. MORT.


Melbourne, 30th June, 1873.
Sizar Elliott, Esq., J.P.
Dear Sir,
I very cheerfully accede to your request, and from
personal knowledge, hear testimony to your energy and enter-
prise in New South Wales nearly thirty years ago, in the pro-
motion of what were then really new and novel industries in
the colony.
It was, I think, in 1845 that you brought under public
notice the Lambs' Skins you had prepared for the China
market; and the press of the day justly eulogised your manu-
facture as being very superior.
Again—About the end of 1846, or early in 1847, I was
present at a public exposition of your Preserved Meats, which,
consisting of nearly every variety—even now known—were
pronounced by competent judges to be of excellent quality, and
in proof of this I may add that some of the regular trading
passenger ships between Sydney and London, took stocks of
your tinned Soups and Meats in preference to the London
prepared meats.
That your efforts were not supported and appreciated as
they should have been, was no fault of yoitrs. You were
thought to be somewhat utopian, but in fact you were only a
little in advance of the times.
I am, dear Sir.
Yours faithfully,
H. SELWYN SMITH.


LOCAL INDUSTEIES.
It has been suggested by a member of the Royal Commission
for the International Exhibition, that the present is an
opportune time to review the attempts that have been made
to introduce local industries into New South Wales, and I
have been asked to narrate my experience in such attempts.
The request is flattering, but not an easy one to be
complied with, because of the necessity it entails of speaking
of one’s self, which, even to friendly readers, may seem
egotistical. But it is only human to be proud of the success
of a young nation in which I have passed more than forty
years of my life.
Few of the present generation can rightly understand
the character and composition of general society in the
neighbouring colony thirty to forty years since, and hence
the difficulties then experienced in the introduction of new
articles of commerce into use cannot now be fully appreciated.
I may premise, that my own trifling efforts were wholly
unaided by outward help, and the advancement of my
adopted country was my sole end and aim.
The industry with which my name is mostly identified,
though not the first introduced by me, is that of preserved
meats. To make the reader rightly appreciate why my
thoughts were first turned to this subject, he must be made
aware of the fact that the pastoral interest was then at the
head and front of all progress in the colony, and its depression
or prosperity was felt through all the arteries of trade.
In the year 1845-6 this interest was in so low a condition
that general ruin stared the whole country in the face.
Sheep, in millions, changed hands at one shilling each, and
cattle, in thousands, at 20s. per head. In this deplorable
state of things, a gentleman named O’Brien conceived the
idea of boiling down a few sheep solely for their fat.* The first
attempt to carry out this idea was attended with success, and
after some further experiments, sheep in consequence advanced
to ss. each. The result was that, in six months’ time, some
hundreds of thousands of sheep were thus slaughtered for
* Mr. Mort gives the name of Mr. Frederick Ebsworth as the origin-
ator ; after this lapse of time I cannot dispute him.
-M I^2o-


their fat. It was this vast destruction of animal life which
turned my attention to utilising the lean of the fat sheep.
Knowing, as I did, that in the old country meat was pre-
served in tins, the idea struck me that the same thing could
be done in the new. A few tins of meat were first cooked
by the kitchen fire, but without success. A further quantity
were then boiled in strong brine, and these gave some indi-
cations of keeping, but they decayed in time. At this period
I procured an old copy of lire’s Chemical Dictionary, in
which there were a few lines on the subject, and this infor-
mation convinced me that a greater degree of heat was
wanted in the cooking- process, but the question was, how
was this to be obtained 1 Chloride of calcium was then
unknown, at least to me, and while looking for some liquid
with which to get an increase of temperature, I thought of
oil. My next attempts were alternately successes and
failures, until I cooked my meats in a pan of x-ight whale
oil, and then my tins of provisions kept sound.
My first public exhibition of meats was at an exhibition
of articles of commerce, held 30th September, 1846, at
Sydney, the judges being R. Lynd and Rev. Gr. Turner, and
the award was as follows :
“ S. Elliott—Preserved Meat, Fish, and Vegetables—
Second Class Prize.
Extract from “ Australasian,” 30 th September, 1846.
“ Preserved Mackerel, Beef, and Carrots, in tins, by Mr.
S. Elliott, of colonial produce notoriety.—These articles
promise well, but having been only 22 days made it would
not be right to express a decided opinion as to the success of
the experiment. A second class prize was awarded by the
judges.”
At this period I erected for myself a small factory, and
continued from day to day to gain fresh knowledge and
experience. My pan and boilers were heated by gas ; the
oil answered well, but I found that I was using a commodity
the extreme danger of which I did not fully know.
On one occasion, whilst cooking my tins after being sealed,
I neglected to consult the thermometer, the placid oil
gave no symptoms of its great heat, when suddenly an
explosion took place, scattering the scalding oil far and wide.
The heat, in fact, had melted the solder, and the tins burst
open from inward pressure, and hence the disaster. Fortu-
nately I was at the remote end of the room, and thus escaped
with life, or at least from severe injury. To test the keeping
qualities of the articles prepared in this manner, I then






shelved a small room, and by placing the bottom of the tins
outwards, and using a charcoal fire, I kept the temperature
to what I considered the average heat of a ship’s hold under
the equator. Tins of meat which would not stand this test
were at once discarded. I never knew a single tin to turn
out badly after this trial. During this time I altered the
character and shape of the tins several times. The first tins
had a round hole punched in the top, sufficiently large to
admit a funnel for the supply of stock after partial cooking ;
a small cover was then soldered over it. This plan was not
found to work well, and was discontinued. The second plan
was the one now adopted at all our meat factories, namely,
having the cover in one piece, and after filling soldered down,
leaving only a small opening for steam to escape. The third
plan was a more interesting one, and was largely adopted
subsequently. Inserted in the cover was a soft metal tube
about the size of a large goose-quill, of about 18 inches in
length ; this was kept from choking while in the cooking-pan
by occasionally inserting a wire down it. The appearance
of the pan, with its tins and its hundred little chimneys, all
giving off steam, used to surprise my visitors. When the
cooking was completed each tin in turn was seized by its
chimney, lifted from the pan, the tube bent by the fingers into
the shape of a syphon, the long leg being inserted into a pan
of boiling stock (strong gravy). A little cold water then
applied to the cover, the steam inside, being condensed, formed
a vacuum, the syphon immediately acted, the gravy which
had boiled out of the tin was restored, and the package was
again full weight. A pair of nipping pincers was next
applied to the tube, cut off by another pair, and finally
soldered, leaving only a small knob on the top. The tin
was then ready for the testing room.
At the next public exhibition I was awarded a first-class
medal. The following extract is taken from the Sydney
Morning Herald, of 24th February, 1847
“ A sample of preserved meat, by Mr, Sizar Elliott,
obtained a prize. The article was good, but would have
borne a taste more seasoning.”
Extract from a speech of C. Cowper, Esq., M.C. (now Sir
C. Cowper, Agent-General for New South Wales), at a
meeting of the West Cumberland Agricultural Society, 3rd
March, 1847: —
“ With reference to the preserved meat the judges had
given a most favourable opinion ; and a very old voyager, and
one who had considerable experience in testing the quality
of the article, pronounced it most excellent.”


In October of the same year the following certificate was
presented to me by seven ship-masters :
“ These are to certify that we, the undersigned masters of
ships now lying in Port Jackson, did this day, at the request
of Mr. S. Elliott, select from the stock in his store, for the
purpose of trying their quality, one tin of each of the fol-
lowing descriptions of preserved fresh provisions, said to be
of his manufacture, viz.:—
Beef and Vegetables
Mutton and Vegetables
Lamb and Green Peas
Ox-tail Soup
and having amply tested the same, do pronounce them to be
fully equal to any article of the kind that has come under
our notice. We therefore with confidence recommend them
to ship masters, or other persons requiring this description
of stores. A tin of Beef Suet was also opened, and found to
be fresh and sweet.
“Dated at Sydney, this 25th day of October, 1847.”
In December the following certificate was presented to
me :
“Sydney, December 27th, 1847.
“We, the undersigned ship-masters, having selected a
variety of preserved meats and soups from the stock of the
manufacturer, Mr, S. Elliott, of Charlotte-place, Sydney, do
pronounce them to be of a very superior description, both in
quality and flavour. We intend to supply ourselves from
Mr. Elliott’s stock, and have much pleasure in recommending
all persons going to sea to follow our example.
“ Amelius Cudlip ... ‘Canmore’
“ Henry B. Folger ... ‘ Martha’
“John Canning ... ‘Hannibal’
“ Jas. D. Coffin ... ‘Athol.’”
The object of giving the above certificate is to show that
the manufacture was carried on in commercial quantities,
and not for amusement only.
In March, 1848,1 was again awarded a first-class prize for
preserved fowl.
Having now established the industry, the great drawback
was the want of support from the general public. The
colonial merchant was too much interested in importing for
the market. The English captain would not look at any-
thing made in the colony. None but captains of American
men-of-war, American whalers, and a few others, could be
induced to take the meats, or in any way patronise the


industry. However, the trial had convinced others that
this is the proper country for carrying on the new industry,
and when it was taken up by persons with means sufficient
to ship the product to England, my object was completed.
At the breaking up of my establishment, I reserved a few
tins of meat for domestic use.
Certificates were the only mode by which a tradesman
could convey to the mind of strangers the kind of business
in which he was engaged, and as I was always desirous to
have and to earn a good name, I followed the recognised
method ; among others, received high compliments from com-
manders and officers of the following ships ;
Her Majesty’s ships, “Bramble,” “Thalia,” and “ Driver;”
United States ship, “ St. Louis,”
and some 30 to 40 American whaling ships, all of whom
took my provisions.
In August, 1871, at the annual conversazione of the
Royal Society of Victoria, Mr. R. L. J. Ellery, the presi-
dent, in his report said—“ The preservation of meat pro-
mises to become one of the largest industries in Victoria ;
and although prices in Europe have declined, there can be
no doubt of the ultimate prosperity and extent of the
enterprise as long as the manufacturers maintain the repu-
tation they have already achieved. While on this subject I
might mention that in October, 1857, Mr. Sizar Elliott read
a paper before this society on the ‘Preservation of Animal
Substances/ and opened a tin case of meat which had been
put up ten years previously. The contents were declared by
those present to be of excellent quality. There can be little
doubt that Mr. Elliott may be considered as the Australian
pioneer in this now very important industry.”
It will be seen that although I had done with the industry,
it was still in my thoughts, and I considered this mode of
introducing it to the Melbourne community more likely to
catch the eye of those interested than in any other form.
As the industry is now established amongst us, I may be
permitted to comment upon the quality of the article pro-
duced and its probable success.
Quality. —l have purchased on several occasions samples
at St. Kilda for private examination —soups and meats
taken from the shelves, as intended for public sale; and
must condemn them as very inferior in quality. In this I
am supported by my wife, who assisted me by her advice
in early days ; neither are they full weight, a two-pound tin,
in some instances, only weighing one-and-three-quarter
pounds gross.
The gravies or stock, if any, in the tins are of the


poorest description, something in character to beef-tea; the
surrounding liquid should at all times, except in the heat of
summer, be a jelly, or nearly so. My tins were of this char-
acter, and always held their full weight. A 2-lb. tin would
weigh lbs., a 6-lb. tin 7 lbs. &c. The weight cannot be
had in the present mode of cooking because of the length of
time required in the operation, during which evaporation is
going on and the waste is not restored. We have opened
tins of Mock Turtle, &c. —the material disgraced the name—
and yet daily advertisements are to be seen—“ Winter. Now
is the time for our Soups.” The manufacturer’s reply is—
“ This would be too expensive’’—not so, charge accordingly.
I am speaking here of the quality required for home con-
sumption, the present rubbish may do to go abroad.
In 1866-7 I opened my last tin, then twenty years old ,
at the International Exhibition, and I received the bronze
medal and many complimentary remarks from the jurors.
(See Report, Class 2, Section 5, page 197, which is as
follows : —)
“ The jurors whom the Commissioners have appointed to
decide upon the merits of the respective exhibits in con-
nexion with the Intercolonial Exhibition have now the
honour of presenting their report, &c.
“ This question of preserving fresh meat cannot be cor-
rectly termed a new industry in these colonies, for as early
as 1846 prizes were awarded in Sydney, New South Wales,
to an enterprising colonist, now a resident in Victoria, for
‘ preserved meat, fish, and vegetables.’ This gentleman
successfully carried out the discovery of Liebig in reference
to the peculiar constituents of animal food. The new enter-
prise failed in those days, partly from the heavy taxes upon
the manufacture in the shape of advertising and cost of
tins, added to which a large business firm soon after esta-
blished itself upon the River Hunter, and being able to
import its own tins, completely overwhelmed its smaller
competitor. The jurors had an opportunity of opening a
tin of preserved meat manufactured by this gentleman in
1846, and were highly gratified to be able to testify to its
perfect sweetness and freshness after twenty years’ quietude,
and the jurors think it is only justice to this gentleman, the
pioneer of this art in the colonies, to mention his name—
Mr. Sizar Elliott, now of Melbourne.
“Abraham Lincolne, Chairman.”
The above facts will, I trust, secure for me the proud
position of being the pioneer of this industry in these
colonies. Yet, upon reference to the decision of the Council


of Chairmen of Jurors of Australian Exhibits (see Argus of
10th June, 1867), the Australian Meat Company on the
Clarence River was awarded a silver medal for preserved
meat as a new industry. Now this Company was formed
in 1865, or just nineteen years after my first exhibits. I
may reasonably ask if this is fair % I shall endeavour at the
forthcoming meeting of Royal Commissioners to have this
rectified.
The knowledge I had gained enabled me, many years after,
when a member of the Burke and Wills Exploration Com-
mittee, to superintend the Ghee required for the expedition,
which so well stood the test of a hot climate, while the
Gharque, or dried beef, prepared by an inexperienced man,
became putrid before the first month had expired.
The first to follow me in manufacturing was Mr. M.
Joseph, of Camperdown, near Sydney. In 1848, Mr. Henry
Dangar started a factory at Newcastle, Having visited
both factories, I should judge they were equal in capacity
for manufacturing purposes, and both firms shipped largely
to Europe.
The next industry which I shall mention was entered into
a year prior to that of the meats. The following extract is
from the Sydney Morning Herald , September, 1845 ;
“Lambskins. —Mr. S. Elliott, of Church Hill, is really
deserving of great praise for the manner in which, while
carrying on his own business, he endeavours to assist in the
development of the resources of the colony. Having read
some of the remarks that have been published respecting the
preparation of lambskins for the China market, Mr. Elliott
has turned his attention to the subject, and has had some
prepared, and a beautiful article they are. The short downy
wool of the young lamb is set fast, and the skin itself is made
as white and as soft as a French glove. The specimens are
to be seen at Elliott’s, and are well worthy inspection.
Hundreds of thousands of lambskins have hitherto been
thrown away every year ■ in future they will command a
price which will render it worth while to preserve and send
them to market. It must not be forgotten that the younger
the lamb the more valuable the skin.”
It may not be generally known that in China millions of
these skins are required for the interior lining of Chinese
clothing, and for Tartars’ caps—they are most delightful
things to wear. A waistcoat lined of this material served
me three winters, and the skins were but little chafed when
the waistcoat was put aside. Thex-e are two or three Chinese
gentlemen in the office of Kong Meng and Co., in Little


Collins-street, whose jackets are lined with these skins,
imported from China, and any person taking an interest in
this industry would most probably be allowed to inspect
them.
If at lambing season rain should fall, thousands of lambs
die, and are left to rot in the field. These should be skinned,
and the inner side exposed to the sun; then packed in bales
and forwarded by wool drays to the metropolis. They are
prepared with lime and salt, are exceedingly delicate to
handle, and there are scores of fellmongers here who could
prepare them. I caused one bale to be shipped to China, but
the vessel was lost, and thus ended the industry for that time.
I have on two occasions applied to the Royal Commissioners
of New Industries, sitting at Melbourne, offering to make
explanations and produce samples of the skins, but up
to the present time without effect. An important and
valuable industry, lying at our very doors, is thus neglected
or despised.
Colonial wines received my attention about this time, and
I was enabled to give the public their first taste of them.
Captain Ogilvey, of the Hunter River, and Captain Weston,
of Parramatta-road—two retired Peninsular officers, and
who had probably gained their knowledge of wine-growing
while in active service—kindly favoured me with a few
quarter-casks of red wine of excellent quality. I turned it
out of my cellar in first-rate condition, neatly branded and
labelled. The price fixed was low; but, with the exception
of His Excellency the Governor, the Hon. E. Deas
Thompson, and a few intelligent citizens, scarcely any
could be prevailed upon to purchase, or even taste, a wine
grown at their own doors. Some months after the Messrs.
Macarthur put a small quantity into the market; but, from
hot weather and want of attention, it got pricked—and thus
their first attempt ended. It would be interesting now to
ascertain the exact date when colonial wine was thus sold;
but the Sydney papers in our Public Library do not go back
sufficiently far for this purpose. Brought up in a house
largely connected with the Mediterranean trade, I was much
pleased at the idea of having a new wine, and equally
depressed at my non-success in getting it into use.
During the years 1847 and 1849 several minor industries
were introduced. The indigenous gums of the country and
of New Zealand attracted my attention; samples of all descrip-
tions were procured, and presented to public notice. Some
few hundredweights of the rough gum arabic, from the
black wattle, were exported. The kauri gum of New Zea-
land was first shown, and has been exported to Europe in


large quantities ever since. This article has for many years
past been largely exported to Europe, and indeed is becoming
scarce in New Zealand, so great is the demand. The bleach-
ing and making marketable of large quantities of bees’ wax
I brought under the notice of the public at this time, and
several other small matters, which are not now worth
specifying in detail, were also attempted.
The wax was from imported English bees, which had
swarmed in the bush, and was frequently discovered by the
natives and early settlers The wax to thpm was almost
valueless, and on purchasing I made it a rule to explain a
simple and effective mode of cleaning and bleaching it for
market.
I cannot give a stronger proof of prejudice in a colonial
community than that shown against that useful article, the
axe ; no explanation, no persuasion, would induce any wood-
man or; head of family to use an American axe in preference
to the long, ungainly axe of these days. The few cases of
the article held by the American Consul, Sydney, were
utterly valueless for commerce. In July, 1860, I took occa-
sion to make a display of British and American tools, side
by side—notably, the axe, shovel, pick, and mechanics’ tools
—before the members of the Royal Society, Melbourne; and
one gentleman, when fairly beaten on the merits of American-
made articles, stuck to it manfully that the articles in ques-
tion were made in England, then sent to America, and from
thence exported to us in Australia, and he afterwards tried
to support these assertions by a long correspondence in the
Argus. It will thus be seen the difficulty of introducing
a new idea to prejudiced minds.
In 1850 the Government of New South Wales decided
upon having a Colonial Industrial Exhibition. Upon this
occasion some of the industries were reviewed. I take the
following extract from the Press , of 19th March, 1851.
After pointing out that large numbers of articles in daily
use are of colonial manufacture, but covered with labels,
purporting them to be English, so as to meet the popular
prejudices, the writer goes on to say—
“ Some preparations, however, have got the better of these
obstacles, and their own merits command a market for them.
These are starch, blacking, cordials, beer, farinaceous food,
biscuit powder, preserved meats, and scores of other things
as excellent as any that can be imported. We can recollect
that a few years ago Walker’s patent groats, an article now
in great demand, could not find a retail dealer in Sydney to
dispose of it. Dozens of them turned up their noses at the
offer, and in preference they actually sold old musty, dusty


stuff, merely because it happened to be English. Mr. Sizar
Elliott, now of Lower Geoi'ge-street, but formerly of Charlotte-
place, who has distinguished himself on various occasions by
leaving the beaten path and marking out a new channel for
his enterprise, saw the superiority of the colonial-made groats,
and, regardless of the prejudice, recommended it right and
left, and so continued to buoy up the hopes of the manufac-
turer, that success ultimately crowned his efforts. Conduct
like this cannot be too highly commended, and yet such
compliments, cheap as they are, come very tardily from the
public. We do not hesitate to say that in the forthcoming
arrangements for the Industrial Exhibition, Mr. Elliott is
more likely to be found in the van than those who are
receiving hundreds and thousands of the public money.
Private individuals, like him, appear to advance the interests
of the colony, while those who are paid for that purpose are
sure to be found tugging in an opposite direction. This
shows us, or at least should show us, who are our real
friends and who are false ones—shams.”
Again, March, 1851 —“Glass houses ! Yes, reader, there
is actually under consideration the propriety of erecting
dwelling-houses made of glass bricks. There is clearly no
reason why the outside of a brick house should not be glazed
and made impervious to rain, and there are a thousand
reasons why the present abominable wet-suckers should be
superseded. Mr. S. Elliott, of Lower George-street, very
humorously detailed how the proposal was first broached
by a party to whom application had been made for his
co-operation in the projected Exhibition. On further reflec-
tion, there is no reason to believe but that glass or glazed
bricks can be made from the clay and sand of Sydney as
cheaply as the common sort, and might be not only water-
proof, but almost everlasting, &c.”
In 1853 I left Sydney, and became a permanent resident
in the city of Melbourne. Thus ended my small attempts
to assist the development of my adopted country’s resources.
I have often reflected whether the ten years of my life that
I was engaged in this work were thrown away. And I ask
myself, would I do the same again if I had the time to live
over! I think I would. The difficulties, it is true, were
great, the encouragement none; and the interference with
more legitimate pursuits, and the considerable expense
incurred, were to a man struggling without a helping hand
very severe trials. On the other hand, the inward gratifica-
tion of having done something to make one’s country pro-
sperous, and the conviction that one holds a place in the
domestic history of the land, is a reward well worth striving


for. It is by the time and money so spent in such peaceful
pursuits that nations are built up, and their permanent
progress and prosperity assured.
It is singular how ready persons are to take to themselves
the labours of others, especially if they have been out of
sight for a few short years. The pompous letter of C. G.
Tindal is one case in point. Another occurred only five
years since, when a well-known gas engineer of this city, at
a large party held in the Moubray Gasometer, declared that
44 to him was due the success of the Company by his intro-
duction of colonial coal,” forgetting at the time that I was
not yet dead, and that on the books of that Company a vote
of thanks was recorded to me, dated July 3rd, 1855, for my
efforts to get colonial coal brought into use; but that this
very engineer had repudiated its use and kept it from being
used, and not till some years afterwards was it adopted.
From the 44 Sydney Morning Herald," January 23rd, 1872.
“PRESERYED-MEAT COMPANIES.
“ To the Editor of the 4 Herald.'
“ Sir—As the question as regards 4 priority’ in reference to meat-
preserving may hereafter be one of considerable interest, I should be
obliged if you would allow the enclosed correction of an erroneous
statement, by which I may be robbed of the credit of being the
pioneer of so important an industry.—Yours, &c.,
44 November 29th, 1871. G. G. Tindal.
“ P.S.—I may explain that lam the 4 founder,’ &c., of 4 The Aus-
tralian Meat Company,’ whose operations are carried on at my station,
Ramornie, Clarence River.”
44 To the Editor of the 4 Standard'
“ Sir—Referring to the very admirable and exhaustive article on
Australian preserved meat in your paper of the 14th, would you allow
me to correct one slight inaccuracy ? You state, 4 The Melbourne
Meat Preserving Company was one of the first, if not the very first in
the field.’ The honour of being the first in the field must be given to
the Australian Meat Company, 4 Ramornie.’ This Company was
formed in 1865, commenced preserving in September, 1866, and
landed their first shipment in London on January 30th, 1867. During
the year 1867 the Australian Meat Company landed 430,572 lbs. of
preserved meat, besides a large quantity of extract of meat. It
was the success of the Australian Meat Company, 4 Ramornie,’ that
led to the formation of the Melbourne Meat Preserving Company,
who commenced their operations something like two years after the
Australian Meat Company. As this new trade in Australian meat
is destined to have a most important influence (second hardly to the
introduction of the merino sheep or to the discovery of gold) on the
future of Australia, I trust you will allow me to place the above
statement on record in your columns. —Your obedient servant,
44 The Founder, Manager, & Principal Shareholder in
The Australian Meat Company.
44 November 29th.”


“ To the Editor of the 'Herald.'
“ Sir —Mr. G. C. Tindal, in your issue of sth instant, claims for the
Australian Meat Company the credit of being the first to apply the
invention of preserving meat in vacuo in Australia ; but I feel certain
that it is only necessary to bring the following facts to his notice to
show him and others interested that he has formed a too hasty con-
clusion on the subject.
“ The first concern ever established in any of the Australian colonies
for preserving meat on a large scale in hermetically sealed tins com-
menced its operations at Newcastle about the month of June, 1848,
and closed them in 1855.
“ With the exception of an interval of two months in each year—
generally December and January—the work was energetically carried
on, and about an average of six cattle or 100 sheep was killed daily,
giving in round numbers during the time the concern existed a total
of about 12,000 cattle and 10,000 sheep.
“ The proprietors—and thus the first to establish this important
industry in Australia—were my late father, Mr. Henry Dangar, and
his brothers, William and Richard, both also deceased. Mr. Charles
Gedye, sen., had the entire management, and informs me that ship-
ments of 10,000 tins, varying from 2 to 12 lbs. each, were frequently
made.
“ The quality of the meat preserved was not a whit inferior even
to Mr. Tindal’s, or that from any other factory, as evidenced from
the fact that medals were awarded to it at the Great Exhibition in
London in 1851, and subsequently at the Paris Exhibition ; and so
highly was it thought of by the Admiralty in London that they
applied to the company to send in tenders for 1,000,000 lbs., which
at the time they were unable to entertain.
“ The gold mania of 1849-55 was fatal to this promising concern,
as the continued rise in the price of fat stock, combined with the
difficulty of procuring efficient workmen, even at extravagant wages,
compelled the proprietors, with great reluctance, to close the works.
“ I think I am correct in stating that Mr. Moses Joseph had a
small concern for preserving meat at Camperdown, near Sydney, but
I cannot speak positively as to the date of its formation. I shall be
glad, therefore, if any reader of this letter can furnish us with par-
ticulars. —I am, sir, your obedient servant, F. H. DANGAR.”
(“ Sydney Morning Herald," February 14 th, 1872.)
“ To the Editor of the * Herald
“ Sir—ln your issue of 23rd ultimo there appears a letter, signed
‘ C. G. Tindal,’ who is anxious to have it recorded that he is the
founder of the first Preserved Meat Company, and the pioneer of an
industry which is destined to have a most important influence on the
future of Australia. Will Mr. Tindal be kind enough to read the follow-
ing extract taken from the address of the President of the Royal Society
of Victoria, and read before that body on 14th August last :—‘The
preservation of meat promises to become one of the largest industries
in Victoria ; and although prices in Europe have declined since the
war, there can be no doubt of the ultimate prosperity and extent of
the enterprise as long as the manufacturers maintain the reputation
they have already achieved. While on this subject, I might mention
that in October, 1857, Mr. Sizar Elliott read a paper before this
Society on the preservation of animal substances, and opened a tin
case of meat which had been put up ten years previously. The
contents were declared by those present to be of excellent


quality; and it appears Mr. Elliott had carried on the pre-
servation of meat on a commercial scale in Sydney, New South
Wales, as early as 1846 and 1847, and we see his name mentioned on
several occasions as having obtained first-class medals for his pre-
served beef, mutton, turtle, &c.; and at our Exhibition in 1867 he
received a medal for preserved meat and vegetables twenty years old.
There can be little doubt that Mr. Elliott may be considered as the
Australian pioneer in this now very important industry.’ This takes
us back just twenty years prior to the commencement of Mr. Tindal’s
dates. Some time after Mr. Elliott had introduced the industry into
New South Wales, Mr. Joseph established a factory at Camperdown,
and exported largely. This was followed by a factory of Mr. Dangar,
on the Hunter. So many hundreds of persons are now living that
know these facts that I can only put down the assertion of Mr. Tindal
to the fact that he must be a new chum, and therefore unacquainted
with the rise and progress of our industries.—Your obedient servant,
“ Melbourne, February 2nd, 1872. “Old Colonist.”
With a little further explanation on the necessity of
looking after one’s own laurels, trifling though they be, I will
close my remarks to my friends, and ask them to look with a
lenient eye on the folly of an old man thus trying to keep a
name among those with whom he has struggled in the land
of his adoption, and among those he loves.
The following correspondence will speak for itself, simply
premising that at the date mentioned I was a director of the
City of Melbourne Gas Company, and when in Sydney ob-
tained from the Rev. Ralph Mansfield, Secretary of the
Sydney company, all the information in his power relative
to the working of his company, and of the fuel used in gas
making. He made me a convert to the use of colonial coal.
I, therefore, purchased a cargo from Captain Malcomb, sub-
ject to the approval of my co-directors—the documents I
submitted to them, with the following result.
“ At a meeting of the directors of the City of Melbourne
Gas and Coke Company, held Tuesday, the 3rd July,
1855 (Mr. H. S. Walsh in the chair),
“A letter was read from Mr. Elliott, informing the Board
that he had brought with him from Sydney forms for keeping
gas accounts, and also certain calculations proving the
superiority of Newcastle coals over English coal. These
were laid before the board, and, after some conversation on
the subject, the following was moved by Mr. Geo. Lewis
and seconded by Mr. Pittman :— ‘ That the letter enclosed
from Mr. Malcomb be received, and that the thanks of the
Board be presented to Mr. Elliott for the valuable service he
has rendered to the Company in obtaining these documents


and calculations. Also, that the whole be referred to the
meeting of the Board next week for further consideration,
and to decide what further steps should be taken in the
matter.’ Carried.
‘•'A true copy.— John Scott, Sec.
“July 27th, 1870.”
“Meeting of Directors, July 31st, 1855; Mr. H. S. Walsh
in the chair.
“ The Engineer’s report was read, when the following
matter was discussed : — Coal —That portion of the report on
this subject was read, and Mr. Elliott explained to the Board
what he found to be the experience of the Sydney Gas Com-
pany, but no motion was made on the subject.”
“ A true copy. — John Scott, Sec.”
The reader will observe that up to this period we were
using coal from Europe, and were charging the public 255.
per thousand feet for gas. The question of course was—
Could it be done for less 1
The Engineer’s direct reply I cannot now give; but, as
seen above, the use of colonial coal was not approved of,
and, cold water being thrown on so important a subject, the
matter dropped through.
The subject was re-opened several years after, and my sug-
gestion was adopted.
In 1869, at a lunch given in the Moubray Gasometer—
this same Engineer stated that, to him, the success of the
Company was due to his introduction of colonial coal. (Vide
Argus.) Does it not seem strange that a gentleman so well
known in this city should stand up and publicly make such
statements 1
The “ Anglo-Australian in London,” July, 1876, says : —“ There
are also large importations of tinned meats from Chicago, which, in
so far as preparation goes, general appearance, and flavour, is far
before the Australian importations. Some of the tins of what they
call compressed beef resemble a jelly mould, and, as tins are opened
at the base, the meat slips out in a very presentable form. This com-
pressed beef has something of the flavour of salt or corned beef, and
is a very inviting breakfast relish. There is nothing of ‘ washiness.’ ”
Does this in any way correspond with my remarks at page 9.


MASON, FIRTH AND M'CUTCHEON,
GENERAL PRINTERS,
FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.


