

(JlttEmslantf.
DEPARTMENT OP AGRICULTURE, BRISBANE.
BOTANY ABRIDGED,
HOW TO READILY DISTINGUISH SOME OF OUR COMMON
PLANTS;
TO WHICH AKE APPENDED A PEW ADDITIONS TO THE
COMPANION FOR THE QUEENSLAND STUDENT OF PLANT LIFE.
F. M. BAILEY, E.L.S.,
COLONIAL BOTANIST.
Copies can be obtained free, on application ”to The Under Sooretary
for Agriculture.
BRISBANE:
BY AUTHORITY : EDMUND GREGORY) GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET.
18 9 4.




NOTICE.
The only object tlie writer has in issuing these few pages is that they
may be the means of assisting school teachers to readily name some of the
more common plants which may be brought to them by their pupils ; and if
they in their turn would point out their distinguishing marks to the young,
a habit of observation would be thus engendered which could not fail to be
of service to them in after life. The work claims no botanic merit, and is
only intended as a ready means of distinguishing, by one or two prominent*
marks, some of the more common plants or families of plants with which we
are daily coming in contact.
Should the name by which a plant is known sound discordant to one’s
ear, one must remember that the science of botany is of world-wide impor-
tance ; indeed, the more highly the state of civilisation the more encourage-
ment we find given to this branch of scientific research. It is simultaneously
being worked up by persons of very different nationalities, and thus it may
easily be seen that names euphonious to one may be quite the reverse to
another; but that which may be termed the scientific or technic language
used in describin'; is common to all, be they Russian, Japanese, German,
French, or English. In conclusion it may be stated that any Queenslander
requiring to become acquainted with the science of botany would find all
the information required in the writer’s “ Companion for the Queensland
Student of Plant Life,” the present pamphlet and bulletins, the “ Synopsis
of Queensland Flora,” &c., to be obtained from the Department of Agri-
culture and the Government Printer.
31st September, 1891.
F. M. B.




BOTANY ABRIDGED.
These few pages are published with a view to assist school teachers,
and particularly those residing in the country districts, to some of the
more prominent distinctive characteristics of common plants. lam
not advocating the teaching of botany, but it would be a comparatively
easy matter for the teacher, when the opportunity occurs, to point out
to his pupils one or more of the marks by which one plant is known
from another, and thus in a simple way encourage the young to
observe and thus obtain some slight knowledge of plant life. There
is no other branch of natural history of equal importance to man as
botany; it aids the medical man, the artisan, and the tiller of the
ground ; without it we should not be able to publish to the world the
various vegetable products of a country in an intelligent manner. I
would ask, therefore, the school teacher to observe the common plants
of the field, garden, forest, scrub, and waters near to the school
ground, and encourage his pupils to do likewise. Then in after years
none of them would be found using the words of Carlyle, “ For many
years it has been one of my constant regrets that no schoolmaster of
mine had a knowledge of natural history, so far at least as to have
taught me the grasses that grew by the wayside,” &c. See that you
do not cast words of ridicule and contempt upon the nomenclature used
by the botanist. Use the local names locally, but remember that a plant
may be known by a very different local name only a few miles from
you; therefore become acquainted with the scientific. Point eut to
the young that the scientific name is often characteristic, and derived
from some peculiar feature of the species or genus. Take, say, for
example, the gum-tree, ironbark, and stringybark ; the botanist places
these under the name by which they are known all over the
world. The youngest pupil will see at once, if pointed out to him,
how admirably this name is suited to these trees. Show a flower-bud or
half-expanded flower, and explain that the word used, Eucalyptus, was
so given to these plants because the organs of reproduction, the
anthers and stigma, are well covered, and thus protected until they
come to maturity by the extinguisher-like lid by which they are
covered in the early stage of their existence. Botanic names are also,
in some instances, commemorative, and hand down from age to age the
name of some worker in, or benefactor to, the science. As an exampte of
this class, the name BanJcsia may be quoted, as it is called after
Sir Joseph Banks, one of the earliest collectors of Australian plants.
There are instances where the names will be considered, and justly so,
as far-fetched; and others in which it was a prostitution of a noble
science to attach the name to the plant; but there have been, and
unfortunately are still, sycophants amongst botanists as in other
professions.
It would seem our bounden duty, besides the pleasure we derive
from the pursuit, to study plant life. Plants act a most important
part in the economy of nature, as in their act of feeding they are
fitting the air for the respiration of animals, and in like manner the


animal world is useful to plant life; tlius we see that the one is
essential to the well-being of the other. All plants are of use, be
they considered by us ever so mean; and this alone, one might
think, answers enough to that constant query put to a lover of
plants when he has just met with some new or rare treasure of Flora’s
Kingdom—“ What’s the good of it ? What’s the use of it ? ” Those
persons who are in the habit of asking these questions are the people
whose one only object in the world is to amass money ; gold is their
god, and they are blind to the beauties of nature around them. If,
then, plants are essential to animal life, how thankful we should feel
to the Great Creator who caused them to spring forth so abundantly
over the face of the earth, and gave to man intellect to, as it were,
carry on the creation. The wild man certainly has not used his
intellect to improve the natural plants, but has been usually content
to gather the products which grew spontaneously from the soil for his
food and clothing. But how far different has been the behaviour of
the civilised portion of mankind ! By judicious selection, cultivation,
and other means they have produced, from a grass bearing a grain
which at the present time we should consider very inferior, those
excellent cereals of which we are so justly proud, and from which we
make our bread and other necessary articles of food. And from the
Wild Crab the numerous excellent Apples, and doubtless from the
Almond or some far inferior fruit the luscious Peach and Nectarine ;
and not only have the fruits, grains, and roots, under the directing
care of the cultivator, been greatly improved, Wt kinds have been
obtained which produce their crop at different times of the year.
Thus by planting various kinds one may gather from his garden the
same kind of fruit through several months of the year. Amongst the
indigenous plants are many which we may anticipate, at probably an
early date, being taken in hand by the cultivator and made to produce
some of the necessaries or luxuries of life. At the present it may be
thought unnecessary to trouble ourselves with the work of obtaining
fresh useful fruits, &c., considering the vast number now in cultiva-
tion ; but we should bear in mind that we might obtain strong healthy
kinds which would be found more suitable to our variable climate.
The subject is one that a teacher might at times point out to his
pupils. He could point out that the grain of some of our grasses is
little inferior to wheat; that some of the native Ipomojas nearly equal
their ally the sweet potato ; that a large number of the indigenous
fruits, even in their wild state, are used by the settler, and are
undoubtedly wholesome and agreeable; and that some are more or less
closely allied to the highly prized fruits of cultivation. Attention
might also be directed to the valuable or useful properties of some of
our native plants. This the children themselves in some instances
have observed, and put their knowledge to a practical use, for at times
we find them gathering the leaves of the Red Ash {Alphitonia excelsa)
to use as soap to take from their hands the stains of ink.
Seeing, then, how useful and necessary plants are to our well-
being, surely it will be allowed that some little knowledge of this most
im.portant branch of natural history should be possessed by all. They
are probably the first natural objects which delight our children; so
one might easily imagine that little labour would be required to induce
the young to take a further interest and to acquire some little know-
ledge of their names and the characteristics which distinguish species


4
4
from species, genus from genus, order from order, and class from class.
Teachers must not fancy for a moment that I am advocating that
some additional subject be taught, for really too many things are
attempted already. I am not asking for Botany to be added to the
long list of subjects now taught. lam rather asking, particularly the
country teachers, to look around them upon the wonders of the
Vegetable Kingdom, to make themselves conversant with the plant life
of their district, so that when the scholars bring flower or fruiting
shoots of the plants to the school they may be able to give some
information regarding the same in a casual way, which may have the
effect of awakening iu the young mind a desire to know more of plant
life. Now let us imagine a case or two by way of example : Suppose,
for instance, a shoot be brought of the native Rosella (Hibiscus
heteroph^llus). The botanist places this plant; in an order or family
of plants agreeing in general characteristics with the Mallow (Malva),
whence the name Malvacem. It would be well to explain all these
words whenever used, as by so doing it would make the subject more
attractive. Thus it might be pointed out that the name Malva was
given because of the soft mucilaginous qualities of the plants;
that this property was more or less present in all plants of the
family; that the principal economic value of the plants was as
producers of material for the manufacture of fabrics, as cotton,
which is the hairy covering of the seed of species of Oossypium,
The leaves of some furnish dye, as, for instance, those of the Holly-
hock are said to yield a blue dye like indigo. Brom the seeds oil is
obtained, particularly cotton-seed; the seeds of others are used as
culinary vegetables. The outer envelopes of the flowers are in some
cases fleshy and sharply acid, and then they are utilised for jam, as the
well-known liosella (Mibiscus sabdariffa). Very many of the plants
of this order yield from their bark valuable fibre, and the wood of
several is useful and not without beauty. The medical man finds in
this order also some properties to aid him. A few of the uses of the
plants of the order might be stated to the children to obtain their
attention, after which one or two of the characteristics of the order
might be mentioned, as : that it consists of herbs, shrubs, and trees ;
that the leaves are alternately placed upon the stem or branches; that
they are for the most part toothed, lobed, or much divided ; that the
hairs are most frequently stellate —that is to say, that they resemble
little stars ; that the flowers usually contain both sexes ; that it is
seldom that the male (stamens) are met with in one bloom and the
female (style) in another ; that the stamens are often numerous and
more or less united in a column, the filaments becoming free towards
the top, and each bearing a 1-celled anther, which contains the pollen
or impregnating substance ; that the style, simple at the base, branches
at the top into as many branches or stigmas as there are cells in
the fruit ; that this latter may be dry or even berry-like, may
separate into little fruitlets or keep entire. Having said these few
words about the order, it maybe well to revert to the plant of which
it was supposed a specimen had been brought to the teacher —
namely. Hibiscus TielerophyUus. The pupil might be told that the
name Hibiscus was called the generic name, and in botanic language
agreed with his or her name of Jones or Smith, as the case might
be ; and that the second name was called the specific name, and
agreed with the Christian name of William, John Mary, &c.; that


the name Hihiscus was an ancient name of the Mallow; that this
genua is distinguishable from its allies by the style, bearing 5 branches
at the top, or having 5 radiating stigmas, corresponding to the 5
cells of the ovary or young fruit. The bracteoles or circle of
appendages at the base of the flowers are also 5 or more ; these are
either free from each other or are united, and form a. sort of cup. The
species which is supposed to have been brought for examination —
namely, 11. Tieterophyllus —it may be well to now dissect or notice more
particularly. It will be observed that upon the young growth, besides
the conical prickles with which the whole plant is covered, there is
a close cottony covering of hair ; and upon more closely observing this
it will be found to be composed of minute stars. Thus the botanist
speaks of this matter as a stellate tomentum. Now observe the
leaves; they will be found to be of various shapes : some much lobed,
others not lobed at all. This feature suggested the name Tieterophyllus,
various-leaved. It will be observed that the edge is uneven ; they are
said to be serrulate, or resembling the teeth of a fine saw, or crenulate,
with rounded, not sharp, teeth. Notice the position of the flowers;
they are axillary—that is, they are situated in the upper angle formed
by the attachment of the leaf to the stem ; the pedicels are said to be
short. The pedicel is the stem of the flower. Th& bracteoles are about
10, are linear (having parallel margins) rigid, not ciliate (without fine
hairs) along the margin, as in some other species of Hibiscus. The
calyx or cup of the flower will be found to be deeply divided into lance-
shaped lobes, and covered with starry hairs, or, as it is called, stellate
tomentum. The corolla is composed of 5 petals, white, with a purple
base. The capsule is ovoid-globular and densely setose —bristly or
silky-hairy. The seeds will be found glabrous, or without any woolly
or hairy covering. If it is required to say more about this plant, it
may be pointed out as a producer of strong fibre, which at one time
was employed by the aborigines for making twine for their nets, and
thus is now often known as the “ Kurrajong.” The tender shoots
have also a pleasant acid flavour, and are much relished by stock.
As in the first, vte have supposed a plant of the Mallow Family to
have been brought to the teacher for explanation; and these plants are
placed in the first class. Dicotyledons, so called because the young
plants have two or more seed-leaves or seed-lobes, which are called
cotyledons, from their frequent form being cup-shaped. We will now
suppose that a grass is the plant to be examined, say one most
frequently to be met with in our pastures and of simple construction—■
a Paspalum. It maybe pointed out that the family of Grrasses, or the
order Graminese, as it is termed by the botanist, will be found placed
in the second class. Monocotyledons, the young plants having but a
single seed-leaf. The flowers of grasses are, like many other plants,
hermaphrodite, that is to say, the two sexes, stamens and styles, are
both in the same flower ; or they are unisexual, that is to say, the
sexual organs are in separate flowers. The number of stamens in a
flower is usually 3, but are sometimes reduced to 2 or 1; and in
others there are found 6 or more. The anthers at the end of the
thread-like stalk are said to be versatile, because being so slightly
attached to the top of the filament or thread they readily swing to
and fro. The styles are 2 or rarely 3, and are free or united at
the base into a 2 or 3-branched style, the stigmatic portion being
usually feathery. The fruit is a small seed.-like nut, or utricle. The


outer envelopes of these flowers are called glumes, the inner scales
are the palea and lodicules ; hut in some grasses one or both of these
two last-mentioned organs may be wanting. Grass-stems are usually
hollow between the nodes or joints. The leaves sheath the stem at
the base, and these sheaths are split open from the base opposite the
blade, and often end within the blade in a scarious (thin, dry) or
ciliate —that is, eyelash-like—appendage. This appendage is called
the ligula. Probably no order of plants is of equal value to man ;
some of the products are grains, fodders, oils, material for furniture
and building, &c., &c.
A s we began by supposing that a specimen of Paspalum had been
brought, we will consider the species was P. scrobiculatum, and a few of
the characteristics of both genus and species may as well be noticed.
It is not always possible to give the meaning or derivation of botanic
names, but whenever this is convenient I would advise its being done.
In the present instance it is considered that the name Paspalum was one
used by the Greeks for the Millet, and scrobiculatum was given to the
species because of the furrowed uneven surface of the outer glumes.
The spikelets of this genus 'are 1-flowered and are not awned, and
are arranged in one or two rows on the spikes of the panicle; but
sometimes these spikes are solitary ; the glumes are but 3. The styles
will be found distinct. The grain will be found enclosed in the palea
and third or floweriug glume, but free from them. The species under
notice is a tall coarse grass, usually having some rather long hairs
aboftit the base of the leaf-blade. The spikes number from 2 to 5,
are distant from each other, and 2 or more inches long, flat and some-
times downy near the base, the spikelets with very short or no
stalklets —thus said to be shortly pedicellate or sessile, in 2 rows ; but
in some countries the rows are as many as 4, and then they are much
crowded ;in shape they are ovoid-orbicular-oval or nearly round. The
outer glume or scale will be found to have a prominent midrib, and
sometimes minutely pubescent —that is to say, slightly downy. All
these characters may be observed by the unassisted eye, but to examine
further the aid of a lens —magnifying glass required.
The plants of the third class are called Acotyledons, because they
are without cotyledons or seed-leaves; or cryptogams, because the sexual
organs are obscure or wanting. They have no real flowqrs —that is, with
the usual stamens and pistils —or true seeds, the reproduction being
carried on by means of minute often highly microscopic granules called
siiores. Ferns and their allies are termed the vascular cryptogams.
They have true stems enclosing bundles of vascular tissue, and spores
enclosed in capsule-like cases called spore-cases or sporangia. Of
these beautiful forms of vegetation so much has been written that it
is almost superfluous to mention anything about them ; but, as tbe few
natural orders composing the vascular cryptogams of Queensland are at
times misunderstood, it may be well to give a few of the leading
distinguishing characters of three of them —viz., Lycopodiacese,
Marsileacejß, and Filices. In Lycopodiacese the spore-cases are sessile
—that is to say, stalkless —and situated in the upper angle formed by
the leaf or bract and the stem. Leaves radical, proceeding from the
root or rhizome, or placed upon the stems or branches. The best
known of these plants by Queenslanders are the Lycopodiums,
whose spore-cases are all similar ; and the Selaginellas, whose


spore-cases are of two kinds—the small ones are filled with minute
powdery spores called microspores, the larger contain from 1 to 6
large spores called macrospores. The floating red moss so often seen
upon still water, Azolla rubra, belongs to this order; and so does
that leafless epiphyte, Psilotum triquetrum, which has pendulous
orked branches and numerous globular spore-cases. Marsileaceae has
no true leaves. The fronds are circinate in vernation—that is, in the
young state they are rolled inward, the barren ones often open at the
top into leaflets resembling those of the Clover plant. The fertile
ones are on much shorter stalks or the stalks are wanting, and the
leaflets are recurved, their margins united, and thus form the so-called
involucre spore-cases of two kinds, as in some Lycopodiace®, but
arranged, as in ferns, in sori inside the involucre {i.e., on the under
surface of the recurved frond). The IN'ardoo is a good example. Now
we come to Filipes, or the Ferns. These have no true leaves; their
eat-like expansions are termed fronds, and consist of the stalk or
stipes, m the young state ; except in one tribe these are rolled inwards—
circinate. The leafy expansion is simple or more or less compound. The
spore-cases are usually small and collected into clusters or patches,
called son, on the under _ surface or margins of the fertile fronds,
which are either nearly similar to the barren ones or very narrow,
resembling simple or branched spikes. The sori is either naked
or covered by a membrane called the indusium or involucre. The
Australian tribes of these plants are—
•I Fronds not circinate. The fertile portion
spikelike or more or less branched. The spore-cases globular, opening
by a transverse slit, in 2 rows or small clusters on the spike or its
branches without any ring. Examples : A dder-tongue, Girape Fern, &c.
Tribe Fronds circinate. The spore-cases also with-
out anypertect ring, opening by a longitudinal slit, distinct, sessile or
united in 2 rows, m sori forming marginal lobes to the rhachis or
segment, or placed on their under surface. Examples : Snake Ferns.
Tribe Osmunde^.—Spore-cases globular or nearly so, without
any or with an imperfect or transverse ring, opening in 2 valves or
irregularly, few or solitary, rarely numerous and clustered in sori on
toe under_ surface of the segments or pinnules. Examples: Water
hern, Braid Fern, Parasol Fern, Swamp Tree Fern, &c.
Tribe Htmbnophtllea:. —SjDore-cases depressed, with a trans-
verse ring on a columnar receptacle within a cup-shaped or 2-lobed
mdusium, embedded in or protruding from the frond’s margin.
Examples: The Bristle and Film Ferns.
Ctatheea:. Tree fern. With large fronds; the spore-cases
with a more or less oblique ring, in globular sori on the under surface
01 the trends. For an example see the common tree ferns, Alsophila.
Tribe Polypodies;.— Spore-cases with a longitudinal or scarcely
oblique nog, numerous and stipitate (stalked) in sori or patches on
the under side or rarely the margins of the fronds. This tribe is
divided into two divisions : —(A.) Sori covered, at least when younff,
with an Examples : Woolly Tree Fern, Hare’s-foot Fern
Grass-leaved Fern. Maidenhair Fern, Bracken, &c. (B.) No indusium.’
Examples ; The Polypodiums, Stag’s-horn, and Elk’s-horn Ferns.


With the object o£ assistftig the matter advocated, the following
notes are given, in which the observer is directed to some few of the
most easily to be remembered distinctive characteristics which distin-
guish some of the most common orders of Queensland plants, as well
as a few marks by which some genera and species may be readily recog-
nised. These brief notes should be particularly acceptable to persons so
situated as not to be able to consult works of reference upon the sub-
ject, or who have not the leisure for botanic work in a more extended-
form. The marks which distinguish one plant from another are at
times more prominent than the unobservant may imagine, Talce,
for exaiu2:)le, three of our cultivated Passion-fruits; the number of
those glandular processes at or near the top of the leaf-stalk is alone
sufficient to determine or distinguish one of these from the other,
even without the flower or fruit. Examine a leaf of the small Passion-
fruit {Passijlora edulis), and it will be found to have but two of these
processes. Another species, Passijlora Decaisnemia, known by usually
requiring to be fertilised by hand ; on-this will be found four of these
processes, while on the leaf-stalks of the two large kinds of Glrana-
'dillas — Passiflora quadrangularis and Passijlora quadrangularis,yskr.
macrocarpa —will be found six of these glandular processes. Or take
for another example the two Cruciferous plants so common in our
gardens, Alyssum and Iberis. These are, by those just beginning to
take an interest in flowers, thought to be plants of the same genus ;
but one distinctive feature a child will quickly perceive, and that is,
that the flower of the former (which is known in England as Madwort)
has all its four petals equal-sized, while the latter plant, called Candy-
tuft, has petals of unequal size, the two exterior ones being much
larger than the others.
It will not be found a difficult matter to remember those prominent
marks which separate in many instances genera and species, and thus
avoid confusion in speaking of plants. In the order Pittosporese we
have two genera separated only, one might say, by the form of seed;
the seed of Pittosporum being thick or nearly globose, while in
Ilymenosporum it is flat, kidney-shaped, and surrounded by a mem-
branous wing. Of the first, numerous examples are to be met with both
in the wild state and in garden culture ; but the latter genus is
confined to Australia, and is limited to a single species, and com-
monly met with in South Queensland. Take, for instance, the
orders Malvaceae, Sterculiacese, and Tiliaceie. Isolated genera of
these orders are distinct enough : no one wmuld imagine that the
common Sida-weed, the Bottle-tree, and the Brisbane Quandong
belong to the same order; but all the plants composing the above three
orders have not the same marked distinctions, and we find that with
the orders named, like many others, the distinctive marks which separate
them are but small, as may be pointed out in a few words. They in
common are composed of trees, shrubs, and herbs ; the leaves of all are
placed alternately upon the stem or branches, and stipules are usually
present. In the stamens a distinction occurs. In Malvaceae they are
monadelphous; in Sterculiaceae they are monadelphous, or, if free,
definite and alternating with the petals; in Tiliaceae they are indefinite,
free, or scarcely united at the base. With regard to the anthers
they are 1-celled in the first order, and 2-celled in the second and
third.


It will be found in the Vegetable Kingdom, as in the Animal
World, that as we descend to lower forms their construction becomes
more and more simple until we meet with organisms of a single cell,
and that so minute as to be undiscernible by the naked eye; the study
or which are only dilEcult by their vast numbers, and from having to
be detected and examined by the microscope’s aid. These instruments
now, however, are by no means costly, and it would be advisable for
.every teacher to possess one, so that, whenever time wonld allow, those
pupils found taking an interest in plant life might be further
encouraged by the teacher giving them a glimpse of those exquisite
forms to be met with in the still water-pools, and known as fresh-
Algm ; also the forms of pollen-grains, stomata, hairs, scales, and
other portions of a plant which might prove instructive and attractive
to the young mind.
Gteeaixiace^.—The common garden plants of this order are,
Qeraniv/ni, Tropceolum, Oxalis, and the Balsam. The
name Geranium is so often given in popular language to the Pelar-
goniums in cultivation, that a word or so may here be given on the
subject. The flowers of Geranium are regular, that is to say they are
symmetrical in their arrangement, while those of the Pelargonium are
irregular, that is, they are wanting in symmetry. In the
all the 10 stamens usually bear anthers, bnt in Pelargonium, 5 to 7,
or sometimes only 2 or 3, are found bearing anthers, and adnate to
the pedicels of these flowers will be found a linear adnate spur or
tube. The flowers are also produced in umbels, while in Geranium
the peduncles bear but 1 or 2 flowers.
The Order E/UTACE.a: is of so much importance that I should
be glad to give some short notes to enable these plants to be at once
detected, but so varied are the forms that it would be unsafe to
attempt anything of the kind. It may, however, be remarked that
the leaves are always marked with pellucid glandular dots, such being
oil-cells, from which cause they are strongly scented ; that there are
no stipules, that the disk is within the stamens, that the ovules are 2
in each cell, and the seeds usually solitary in each cell. Some idea of
the diversity of the form assumed by plants of this order may be
obtained when we remember that in it are containedthe lovely Boronia
and luscious Orange.
The Order OnACiNEiE contains plants differing so much in appear-
ance, both in regard to growth and fruits, that one need not be sur-
prised to find plants of the family being mistaken for those of very
distinct orders. I, however, shall only refer to one case, viz., the
climber CardiopteHs lohata, var. moluccana, which grows about the
Barron Biver, and may readily be mistaken, if seen in fruit only, for a
Dioscorea or Yam. The mistake may be found out by remembering
that the fruit of Gardiopteris is superior, while that of Dioscorea is
inferior.
LEGUMiNosiE.—This is one of the most important orders of the
Australian flora. I feel it would be impossible to describe in a few
words those distinctive marks by which the whole of the plants may
be known, yet a little information may be given. As the name of this
order has reference to the fruit, which is termed a legume or pod, it


may be pointed out that this is very variable in form, the usual beiuj?
and opening round the margin in 2 valves, but sometimes
the fruit is follicular, or opening by one suture, or indehiscent. The
order is divided into 3 sub-orders, the first being called Papilionaceo),
from the supposed resemblauce of the flowers to a butterfly. The
common Sweet Pea is a good example; the corolla will be observed to
be of very irregular form, and this has caused the petals of which it is
composed to have different names given to them, the upper oue being
called the standard or vexillum, the two lateral ones the wings or ala?,
and the two lower or inferior ones the keel or carina. The petals are
imbricate, and in the bud the standard is always outside. The second
sub-order is called Csesalpiniese, taking its name from the genus
CcEsalpinia, a genus often containing very prickly plants, one of which
has become naturalised in the scrubs about Brisbane ((7. sepiaria).
The corolla of the flowers in this sub-order is regular or nearly
regular, imbricate in the bud, with the upper petal inside.
sub-order is called Mimoseae, from Mimosa, a common name for the
jlcacia and many allied plants. The flowers are small, regular, sessile
(stalkless), in spikes or heads, or rarely shortly pedicellate (on pedicels);
The sepals are valvate—that is, their edges do not overlap each other,
but are often united. Petals valvate with few exceptions, often
united. The stamens are equal to or double the number of the petals,
or are very numerous. It may here be remarked that the true perfect
leaf of A.cacia is always twice pinnate, and that which serves as the leaf
of the greater number of our Wattles, &c., is only the flattened foot-
stalk of the leaf, which from its resemblauce, and from its performing
the functions of a leaf, is called a phyllodium, but in the young
seedling state the true twice-pinnate leaf is always present. The
Acacia pods are very various as to form. The seed, however, are
peculiar; they are more or less flattened, and usually marked in the
centre of each face with an oval or horseshoe-shaped depression, or
opaque ring or spot. The funicle, or cord by which the seed is
attached to the placenta, is usually thickened into a fleshy aril either
under or round the seed.
To some not well acquainted with the plants, the indigenous
Sensitive-plant (JSfepttinia gracilis) may be mistaken for the true
Sensitive-plant pudica). These plants, however, belong to
distinct tribes of the order. A few words will point out distinctions
enough to distinguish them. Neptunia gracilis, even before the
flowers have opened, may be known by the two little heart-shaped
leaves or, as the botanist would say, cordate bracteoles—at about the
middle of the flower-stalk (peduncle), and if the flowers are open it
will be observed that usually each anther is tipped by a minute gland;
the pod also does not break up into articles. Mimosa pudica is a
prickly plant, has no bracteoles or glands upon the anthers, and the
seed-pod breaks up into articles.
Hamamelide.®. —This is a small order of plants not represented
in the Australian flora. Some fine specimens of one species may be
seen in some of the plantations about Brisbane ; and as this, the Sweet
Gum of America {Liquidambar styraciflua), maybe taken by some for
a Maple, which it resembles in foliage, it may be pointed out that
the Maple has opposite and the Sweet Gum alternate leaves; this,
without other characteristics, will serve to distinguish the trees.


The Order is too important in Australia to be passed
over, but it is quite impossible to point to a few characters by
which its plants may be at once recognised, yet some features
may be mentioned by which some of the genera may be known,
or at least distinguished, from allies. Thus some of the Anqophoras
(Apple-trees) are so Jike Eucalypts that it may be found difficult at
first sight to distinguish one from the other; but if the flowers
be examined, the petals of Angophora will be found to be all free,
while those of the Eucalypts are united or consolidated into an
operculum. In the flowers of the Box {Tristania), stamens are
united in 5 bundles. In Syncarpia the calyxes are connate in some,
but in one species free ; but the flowers are gathered together in
globular heads on axillary peduncles. All these plants belong to a
tribe of the order whose fruit is a capsule opening at maturity at the
summit in as many valves as there are ceils. But in another tribe the
a berry or drupe, and here belong such trees as the Eose
Apple, Brazilian Cherry, and the Guavas. The leaves of Myrtaceous
plants are all more or less dotted with small resinous glands; these
may be scarcely visible if the leaf be of a thick texture. In the
tribe which contains the Barringtonias these resinous or oil dots are
wanting.
as at present understood, is a most important family
of plants. Erom it are obtained many drugs, dyes, fruits, coffee, besides
some excellent timber. Its plants have always opposite or whorled
leaves, and stipules of various form, sometimes mere bristles and at
other times large and leafy. The corolla is gamopetalous (for example
see the flowers of Gardenia and Bouvardia), and the stamens are
equal in number to its lobes, and alternate with them. The fruit will
be found to differ considerably—it may be a capsule, drupe, or berry ;
and the plants may be minute herbs or gigantic trees.
Composite:. —This is a large and difficult family to understand.
The flowers or florets are collected together in heads, each of wffiich is
surrounded by a calyx-like involucre, the true calyx of each floret
being absent or reduced to a pappus. The stamens are the same in
number as the corolla-lobes and alternate with them. The ovary is
inferior, and the fruit, or seed as it is usually termed, is called an
achene. The flower-heads are said to be discoid, 'when wanting the
ligulate or strap-like florets which form the rays of the circumference
of the fiower-head, or flower as it is popularly called; and radiate when
having strap-like florets at the circumference.
STYLiDiEiE. —The plants of this order are often objects of interest
from the column being so frequently elastic as to have caused children
in some localities to name these Jack-in-a-box. The stamens
are 2, having their filaments connate with the style in a column
free from the corolla; the anthers are sessile at the top of the
column, 2-celled, the cells at length divaricate; the style or stigma
entire or 2-lobed, concealed between the anthers or protruding from
them. The sudden movement of the column in many of the above
plants on being touched is of so interesting a nature that it may be
w'ell to mention a few other plants to be found in our gardens, or
indigenous, in which this phenomenon also occurs:—The leaves of the
Sensitive-plant {Mimosa pudica) and the native species {Neptunia


gracilis')', stamens of the Prickly Pear and the English
Berberry; the labellum of the flowers of Pterostylis, Galeana, and
three genera of Orchids. But the spontaneous movement of
the lateral leaflets of Desmodium gyrans will be found the most
interesting. At one time this plant was common in most Brisbane
gardens.
GooDEXoviEiE.— This is an almost exclusively Australian order,
and may be known pretty well by the beautiful cup-shaped or 2-lipped
dilatation, called an indusium, at the top of the style which encloses
the stigma. The style is undivided, except in the one genus
Calogyne.
In the order of true Heaths, Eeicacejd, and that of the Australian
Heaths, Epaceidea:, the same distinction occurs as in Malvaceae and
Sterculiaceae, the first having 2-celled and the last 1-celled anthers,
only, it will be seen, reversed in order. Our garden Azaleas may be
taken as examples of Ericaceae, and that common little heath-like plant,
with sharp prickly leaves, and small white tubular flowers with dense
white hairs in the throat, called Leucopogon juniperina, as an example
of Epacrideae.
Many ornamental shrubs, both indigenous and cultivated, belong-
ing to the Olive family, are met with in this colony ; for instance, the
Jasmines, Lilacs, Ash, Olives, That these are
closely allied will at once be seen upon examining the various flowers
and fruits. It may be some advantage, however, to know that the
steins and branches are usually thickly studded with more or less
prominent lenticelles.
Persons often are found to confuse plants of the orders
Apocynacem and Asclepiadece ; but if flowers are obtainable, and their
anthers observed, the doubts are at once solved, for in the first-named
the anthers are connivent—their tips being close together—round the
stigma, while in the latter they are united to, or, as the botanist
would say, connate around, that organ. Eor the first order the
Allamanda may be taken, and the Bedhead curassavicd)
for the latter.
There is often a doubt in the minds of some as to which of the
two prickly Solanums, so common about Brisbane, the name of Apple
of Sodom belongs. This may simply be decided even without seeing
the fruit. Only take a lens and examine the hairs which cover the
surface of each plant; in one these will be found simple, and in the
other like little stars. This latter is Solanum sodomceum, or the Apple
of Sodom ; the other with simple hairs being Solamim aculeatissimum,
and bearing the brighter coloured fruit.
BiGNONiACEiE. —Of this Order the two genera Bignonia and
Tecoma are frequently mistaken one for the other by amateur
gardeners and others, as one may observe from the labelling seen in
gardens, and, as many of our showy garden plants belong to the
genera, a few of the distinguishing marks may be stated. The
Bigiionias are usually furnished with tendrils, and the partition in the
capsule is parallel with the valves, or, as it is termed, septicidal;
while the Tecomas have no tendrils, and the partition in the capsule
is placed in a contrary direction —that is to say, transverse with relation
to the valves —loculicidal.


I find that persons with some knowledge of plants often get con-
fused over three common Queensland plants, two of which are
naturalised, the other indigenous. I refer to Mivina Icevis and
Phytolacca octandra belonging to the order Phytolaccacese, and the
Amarantaceous plant Deerinyia celasioides. Each bear what are called
red berries in racemes. The following one or two distinguishing marks
may assist in identifying one from the other, viz.:—The Rivina has a
perianth of 4 segments, also 4 stamens, and the fruit is 1-seeded.
The Phytolacca has a perianth of 5 divisions, and usually 8 stamens ;
the berry is composed of 8 united carpels. The Peeringia has a
perianth of 5 segments, 5 stamens shortly united in a ring at the base,
and several seed in each fruit or berry.
Lauehste^.— The leaves of this order are usually alternate, but
they will be found also nearly or quite opposite, and in the Laurel
Dodders wanting. The anthers will be found the readiest guide to plants
of this order, therefore a description of these organs may here be given.
They are adnate, with 2 collateral cells or 2 superposed pairs of cells,
each cell opening in a valve from the base upwards, or in the genus
of which our “ Cudgerie” or grease-nut is a species, from
the inner to the outer side.
Peoteaceje.— Plants of this order have 4 valvate perianth-
segments, with a stamen inserted upon the inside of each. Some idea
of the great diversity in the fruit may be gathered when it is pointed
out that the Geebuug, the Queensland Nut, the Silky Oak, and the
Banksia are all members of this family.
The Spurge Eamily —EupHOEEiACEiE—is a very large and important
order of plants; but the following are the characteristics of the
whole 3-celled, rarely 1-2 or several-celled, with 1 or 2
pendulous ovules in each cell, and as many styles or stigmatic branches
as cells. Albumen usually copious. This order is largely rejiresented
in Queensland, and among the plants will be found some of the
smallest weeds and largest timbers. Many of the latter will be found
described in the Catalogue of Queensland Woods.
It may not be out of place here to say that the many showy plants
cultivated in our gardens and bush-houses under the popular name of
Crotons belong to the genus Codiceum, of which there are but few
species, say 3 or 4 ; but these have produced the large number of
varieties that adorn our gardens. Of the genus Croton 500 or metre
species are known. The following may be noted as a few of the
distinguishing marks in the genera : —ln Croton the leaves are
furnished with 2 or more glands at the top end of the leaf-stnlk or on
the base of the leaf-blade ; the calyx-segments imbricate or almost or
quite valvate in the bud.
The Nettle Eamily— the Spurge Eamily, to the
casual observer might appear to contain too widely dissimilar plants to
be classed in one order, especially when he is told that the botanist places
here the Elm, Hop, Hemp, Mulberry, Eig, and Breadfruit and Jack-
fruit, as well as the lowly Stinging Nettles of Europe, and our gigantic
Stinging-trees. Tet when one looks into the matter there will be seen
much that is common to all, and that when these various plants are
separated into tribes the arrangement will be acknowledged all that


could be desired. In the following particulars, all plants of tbis order
will agree:—Ovary 1-celled, with 1 ovule, and 1 or 2 oblique styles
or unilateral stigmas ; albumen usually scanty ; stamens opposite the
perianth-lobes.
Order CASUAEiNEiE—the family of Australian Oaks. —A few
notes assist in identifying our so-called Oaks {Casuarinas). The
Ilopetail Oak ((7. equisetifoUa) is a coast tree, and the Moreton Bay
variety (var. incana) is distinguishable from other Oaks by its soft
cottony covering. The teeth at the joints of the branchlets are
usually 7, but may be from 6 to 8, and the cones are nearly globular.
G. suberosa. —This name would lead one to suppose that the stem-
bark was of a corky character, but it is less so than some others.
The teeth at joints are also 7, or from 6 to 8, but the cones are oblong
and about 1 in. long.
The Threadybark Oak ((7. inopTiloia) is at once known by the
loose thready character of its bark, resembling in this respect no other
species.
The Scrub Oak ((7. Gunninghamiana) has the same number of
teeth as the preceding species. The cones, however, are nearly
globular, smaller, and the tree is larger.
The “ Billa ” or Swamp Oak {G. glauca) may at once be known
by its greater number of teeth in the whorl around the joints (which
number 10 to 12), its short dense male spikes, and small flat-topped
cones. The form of this species met with inland, however, has larger
cones, which, as stated by Mr. Bentham, resemble the cones of Gasuarina
eguisetifolia.
The Borest Oak ((7. iorulosci) be readily known by its corky
bark ; teeth at the nodes are usually only 4, the cones rather large,
oblong-globular, hairy, and tuberculose.
In the Order CrcADEa:, persons are frequently found confusing
the plants of Gycas with Macrozamia. They would not do so if they
could only remember that species of Gycas have a prominent midrib
to the leaflet, while the leaflets of 3lacrozamia have no midrib, but a
number of parallel nerves.
Orchide.^.-— This is the name of probably the most beautiful order
of plants; in species it outnumbers the grasses, and their forms are
innumerable. The structure of the flowers is peculiar, and one might
imagine that no difflculty would be experieneed in at once detecting
any plant of the order if a flower were to be seen, although to allot
the plant to its particular genus or species might be very difficult.
However, as flowers of this beautiful and curious family may frequently
be brought to the teacher, it might be well on such occasions to
explain to the child bringing the flower, that, like the pea-flower, the
orchid flower has received peculiar names for its parts. The flowers
are said to be hermaphrodite, which is, each flower contains both male
and female organs ; that the flower is superior, above the ovary; that
the petal-like parts—segments—are 6 ; the three outer are spoken of as
tlie sepals, one known as the dorsal, and the two side ones as the lateral.
The two lateral inner ones are the petals ; these are similar to each
other ; the third petal is usually very dissimilar from the others, and


called the labellum ; this is frequently lohed, and upon its face will
often be found beautiful glandular appendages, which are spoken of
as fringe, plates, or calli. In the centre of the flower is what is called
the column, consisting of the combined andraecium and pistil; on this
column, near the top, may be seen the stigma, and at the summit,
under a cap which is easily removed, will be seen the pollen-masses —
this is the anther. To describe thus far would probably cause the
child to take more interest in these flowers, and the above explanations
could be given in a few minutes ; but to go further in dissecting the
flower would require the aid of magnifying glasses, probably not
possessed by the young folks. Still, it might be pointed out to them
that plants of this large family are of variable habit; that those found
growing in the soil are said to be terrestrial, and when found growing
upon the branches or trunks of trees, epiphytal. Some others might
be termed saprophytal. A. good illustration of this kind will be found
in that large climbing orchid Galeola foliafa; this is never found
except growing in old rotten stumps or roots.
Plants belonging to AiiAiiTLijiDEiE, the RippeastrumH and
Grinums, for instance, are often spoken of as Lilies, a mistake which
need never occur if persons would observe the position of the; ovary
alone, for in Amaryllidem this organ is always inferior or below the
perianth, while in Liliaceae it is superior or above the perianth. We
find some persons who have forgotten, and others who know no better,
calling by the name of Crocus that pretty Amaryllidaceous plant so
frequently used in our gardens for edgings {ZephyrantTies Candida),
and whose pure white flowers, w'e are told, suggested the name “ La
Plata” for the American river. That this plant could not be allied to
the Crocus might be at once know'n by counting the stamens, of which
organs there are 6, while in the Crocus, which belongs to Jridese,
there are but 3. In our gardens it is not infrequent that we find
plants of Cordyline labelled Dracoena. It may therefore be stated
that, while there is much similarity in the foliage of the two genera,
the fruit differs considerably ; in the cells of the fruit of Dracaena
there being but a solitary ovule, while they are found numerous in
each cell of the Cordyline fruit. Both genera belong to Liliacese.
TxPHACEiE is the name of the order containing the Bullrush or
Eeed Mace, and Bur-reed, and is only referred to here to correct a
mistake. Thus when persons are collecting bullrush-rods for decorative
purposes, one may often hear the expression that all the rods seem to
have blighted tops. This is, however, not the case, for what appears a
blighted portion of the spike is in reality only the portion which bore
the male flowers.
CvPEBACEJE and Geamine.®. —These two orders of Sedges and
Grasses are often confused by persons having but little knowdedge of
botany. This, might be avoided by paying attention to the
leaf-sheath. In the Sedges this portion has its margins connate —that
is, united on the opposite side of the stem to the blade ; whereas in the
Grasses these margins are free to the base.
It might be interesting if the teacher, after pointing out which
are the male and female organs of Grasses —that is, the stamens and
styles—were also to mention that these often vary both in position
and number in different Grasses. A few examples of this might be


mentioned, only to use species of common occurrence. The most
frequent number of stamens in the flowers of grass will be found to
be 3. {See Summer Grass, Blue Grass, &c.) A pretty little grass often
seen on hillsides, with graceful, drooping panicle, has received no local
name in Queensland, but to the botanist it is known as Microlcena
stipoides. The number of stamens in the flowers will be found to be 4.
Sporoholus diander, a tufty grass often met with on the border of
creeks, is named, it will be seen, from its being usually found to have
but 2 stamens in each flower; while in the flowers of the Itice Grass,
which is most frequently met with in swampy land, will be found (3
stamens in each flower, and in some of the Bamboos this number is
exceeded. In the Maize plant the sexes are separated; we find the
male flowers forming a terminal panicle to the plant, while the female
form a spike at the joints of the stem below ; but, as if to prove that
there is no rule without an exception, many female flowers producing
fruit are at times found in the male panicle, and male flowers at times
also may be met with at the apex of the female spike or cob. There
are many other modifications of these organs, but enough is stated, it
is hoped, to create an interest in the matter. The styles will be found
to vary much in form, but the number is rarely more than 2, and
frequently a single style with 2 or 3 branches.
19


ERRATA.
The following Errata occur in the “ Companion for the Queensland Student of Plant
Life.” Will persons having that work kindly correct same with pen.—E.M.B.
Page 18—For “ Amadon” read “Amadou.”
» 21—In Ater, for “ Atro-purpurens ” read “ Atro-purpureus.”
>j 25 —In CoRNiGERA, for “Datura corniyery” read “Datura cornigera.”
» 29 —First line, for “round” read “ground.”
» 33—In Femineus, for “Sir Thos. Mellington” read “Sir Thos. Millington.”
~ 35—For ‘ ‘ Gabulus ” read ‘ ‘ Galbulus. ”
)» 37 —In Histology, for “ Islos” read “Istos.”
„ 41—In Lepis, for “ stillate ” read “ stellate.”
» 48 —In Parthenogenesis, for “Alcornea” read “Alchornea.”
~ 55—In Purple, for “ Purpurasceus ” read “ Purpurascens.”
„ 57—For “ Rrspiration ” read “Respiration.”
62 —In Sialagogue, for “ Zingeher" read
~ 62—For ‘‘ SiLiGUA ’’read “ Siliqua.”
„ 69—For “ Telentospore ” read “Teleutospore.”
„ 100—Third line after “ Banksia,” read “ the very few Australian plants,” &c.


ADDITIONS
TO THE
COMPANION FOR THE OTJEENSLANI) STUDENT OF
PLANT LIFE.
Amphigenus, Amphigenoes— Growing all
round an object.
Apostaxis —A term applied to unusual
discharges of the juices of plants. This
may arise merely from an extreme
abundance of fluid, which is in conse-
quence discharged, as in the'Vine, from
the serrations of the leaves. If, how-
ever, it is elaborated sap which flows
out, either from injury or weakness of
the tissues, the effect may be injurious.
And this is exactly the case in what
is called gumming—a condition which
may be induced artificially by allow-
ing water to drop constantly over a
branch. This always proceeds from
injured or diseased tissues, and is with
difficulty arrested when once set up,
and, if so, is the certain forerunner
of fatal canker. In some cases, as
in the Tragacanth plant, the gum is
organised, and is derived apparently
from the medullary rays. In Conifers,
allow of resin is often attended with the
same fatal results as gumming in Plums
and other allied plants. In this case it
seems to arise generally from root con-
finement and a consequent check of
circulation.— Bev. M. J. Berkeley.
Aecuatus —That has the jaundice; turning
colour; or it may refer to some part
being bent like a liow (arcus).
Azygospoee Spore produced without
copulation.
Bast or Bass —The inner fibrous bark of
dicotyledonous plants. (See Bark.)
Bipaeiam — ln two rows. Teipaeiam —ln
three rows.
Bulb —An underground bud covered with
scales.
Bulbit or Bulblet—Separable buds in
the axU of leaves, as in some Lilies, also
in the inflorescence of Furcrcea.
Butyeaceus Buttery, from butyrum,
butter.
Byesinus, By’esa —Supposed resemblance
to oxhide, as Polystictus byrsinus.
Byssisedus (from byssus, cotton, and sedeo,
I sit) —As if sitting in a cottony mass.
CjESAeiatus Covered with long hair
(ccesaries).
Edible
The question being frequently put—“
poisonous or deleterious species?” I ta'
M. C. Cooke’s “ British Edible Fungi ”
question:—“The question is often propc
Cakcinomalis —Reseinbliiigf a carcinoma,
a canker or cancer, as the Ant-hill
Fungus, Podaxis carcinomalis.
Catbevaeius Pertaining to companies,
as Lentinus catervarius, or the Blight
Fungus, which attacks the leaves of
Figs, Dothidea catervaria,
Celsissima— Noble, eminent, as Bucking-
hamia celsissima.
Chaetaceous, CHAETACEUS(C'/iarfa, paper)
—Thin,_ flexible, and membranous,
resembling paper or parchment, as the
pericarp of Pimpernel.
OißAEius —Suitable for food (cibus), as
Clathrus cibarius.
CoEONAEius —Forming or adapted to form
a crown or garland.
Ceispa —Crisp, curled, as Clathrus crispus,
Devexus —Shelving downwards, as Tra-
metes devexa.
Dioica —Dioecious, as Phytolacca dioica,
the Bella Sombra tree.
Decipiens —Deceptive; resembling others.
Deeoemis, Depoemed —As the leaves of the
Peach, by Exoascus deformans.
Diseases op Plants —This one writer well
defines as that state of the organism in
which all the organs are not performing
their functions in accordance with
nature. The causes of these diseased
conditions in plants may be classed as
follow:
1. Parasitic fungi and other plants,
such as the Dodder, Mistletocj and
including that curious root parasite
Balanophora fungosa, which attacks the
roots of the scrub trees in Tropical
Queensland.
2. Insects causing galls and fissures
in the leaves and bark, as well as
wounds of any description.
3. Poisonous gases in the air or soil,
as well as any poisonous material so
placed as to affect the nutrition.
4. Atmospheric or other conditions
20 affecting the plant as to alter the
conditions of nutrition by giving a
redundancy or deficiency of air, light,
moisture, warmth, &c.
Under these heads most of the
so-called diseases of plants find a place.
Fungi.
-it—“ How are we to distinguish the edible from
I _ take the opportunity of extracting from Dr.
igi” that great authority’s answer to the same
propounded— ‘ Is there no general rule by which
Many
good or harmless fungi can be distinguished from those which are deleterious ? ’’


attempts have been made to answer this question, but of them are satisfactory
except the negative one, to the effect that no rule can be laid down which shall be of
universal application in the discrimhiation of dangerous fungi. The only safeguard is to
become acquainted, by means of well-defined features, with some of the best of the esculent
species, and by no means to experiment with those which are unknown. It is true that
this process will entail the trouble of learning something, but better far to acquire the
necessary elementary information than run the risk of mishaps. We have always
protested against foolish risk, and cautioned would-be fungus-eaters against cooking
and eating any kinds which they do not know unmistakably. There is no difficulty
in recognising all the hest kinds by means of ordinary intelligence and care, and, when
once known, so as to be distinguished from others somewhat like them, or from all the
rest, then there is no fear of error. Good fungi have usually a pleasant mushrooray
odour, a smell of new meal, a faint scent resembling anise, or no particular odour at
all. Then, again, a fragment broken off from the freshly gathered fungus, if tasted,
should possess an agreeable nutty flavour, with no_ acidity, sharpness, or tingling upon
the tongue. And, further, it is a most suspicious indication of bad qualities if a fungus
when broken, cut, or bruised speedily turns of a. deep blue or greenish colour. Avoid,
therefore, all fungi with a disagreeable odour, a pungency of flavour, and a tendency to
become blue when bruised.”
The following paragraph is extracted from the Grevilleffi for March, 1894:
Production of Mushroom Spatvn. —ln a very interesting pjamphlet
entitled ‘Sur un noveau precede de culture du Champignon de couche,’ by MM. J.
Costantin and L. Matruchot, we have an account of the method by which the spawn
of the edible mushroom can be produced wholesale. The pure spores are collected and
sown in a special sterilised nutrient solution, and forms a pure white cord-like mycelium.
This mycelium is placed on sterilised dung, where it develops abundantly for some
weeks. At this stage it has the appearance and odour characteristic of natural spawn,
and when placed in a mushroom bed grows and produces mushrooms normally. The
advantages of this method are :
“I. The production of a pure from the many diseases, the germs
of which are introduced along with the spawn as at present produced.
“ 11. Choice of varieties. It is well known that certain varieties, especially the
one having the cap entirely white, is most esteemed in the market. By the
method described it is alone possible to perpetuate any variety in a pure
“ 111. Permanent production of spaivn. At present the piroduction of spjawn is
intermittent; by the culture process spawn can be produced throughout the
year, an evident advantage.”
The authors hop>e to apply the same method of cultivation to other edible species
of fungus, as the Morel, Boletus, &c. _ • i j
Believing that the method could be adopted with advantage in Queensland, the
above extract is given in full.
As this is a matter of some importance, the notice may be extended so as to mention
the known wholesome fungi, which at certain seasons, or under special conditions,
abound in Queensland. Doubtless many of those kinds which, so far as at present
known, are peculiar to Queensland or Australia, are esculent; but with one exception
all those here mentioned are given as esculent in Dr. M. C. Cooke’s “ British Itdible
Fungi.” After each name is given the locality where specimens of the species have
been obtained, either by the writer or his friends.
Agaricus {Amanitopsis) vaginatus. Bull. The Sheathed Mushroom ; Indooroo-
pilly and Rockhampton.
A. (Lepiota) procerus, Scop. Parasol Mushroom ; Brisbane district.
A. [Lepiota) excoriatus, Scheff. The Fawn-coloured Parasol Mushroom.
A. [Lepiota) naucinus. Fries. The Nut-tree Mushroom ;in a Brisbane garden.
A. [Amillaria) melleus, Stump Mushroom ; Enoggera Creek.
A. [Clitocybe) cerussatus, IPiies. The White-lead Coloured Mushroom; Albert
Park, Brisbane.
A. [Collybia) fusipes. Bull. The Spindle-stemmed Mushroom; Eight-mile
Plains.
A. [Pleurotus) ostreatus, Jacq. The Oyster Mushroom.
A. [Psalliota) campestris, Linn. Common Mushroom. mv • •
Lactarius piperatus. Scop. The Peppery Lactarius ; Endeavour River. This is
eaten on the continent of Europe and in America, but rejected in England,
, probably from prejudice. .
Cantharellus cibarius. Fries. The Chantarelle; about Oxley Creek. This is
eaten in many parts of Europe, but seems not to be a general favourite.
Panus torulosus, Fries. Islands of Moreton Bay. This species is eaten upon the
continent of Europe, but is only fit for food when very young.
Boletus luteus. Fries. The Yellow Boletus ; about Brisbane.
B. elegans. Fries. The Bright Yellow Boletus; Oxley Creek. _
B. granulatus, Linn. The Granular Boletus ; Eight-mile Plains.


Boletus badius, Fries. The Bay Boletus; about Brisbane.
B. edulis. Bull. The Edible Boletus; about Brisbane.
B. (sreus. Bull. [B. ceneus, Fries.) About Brisbane.
B. cestivalis, Fries. The Summer Boletus ; about Brisbane.
Dr. Cooke says that species of this genus are amongst the most common of
the dried fungi. The stem is discarded, the pores cleared away from the
underside of the cap, and then the white fleshy cap is cut in slices about
the thickness of a penny-piece, and thoroughly dried in the air.
Polyporus turnulosus, Cooke. This species is used for food by the aborigines
at Burpengary. Specimens of this fungus have also been gathered near
Brisbane.
P. intyhaceus, Fries. Near Brisbane.
‘ Hydnum coralloides, Scop. The Cauliflower Spring Cap ; Mount Mistake. All
writers recommend stewing as the best method of cooking Hydnums.
Craterellus cornucopioides, Linn. Horn of Plentj^; Petrie’s Quarries, Brisljane
River. This fungus is by no means plentiful in Queensland, which is to be
regretted, for Dr. Cooke speaks highly of it, and says that he knew a fungus-
eater who would think nothing of a walk of six or eight miles with the
prospect of a dish of Craterellus.
Clavaria flava, The Yellow Fairy Club ; Brisbane.
0. hotrytes, Pars. The Branched Fairy Qlub ; Taylor’s Range.
G. fastigiata, Linn. The Branched Fairy Club ; near Brisbane.
C. cristata, Pers. The Crested Fairy Club ; near O’Connelltown.
C. rugosa, Bull. The Roxigh Fairy Club ; near Brisbane.
C. aurea, Schseff. The Golden Fairy Club ; near Brisbane.
Hirneola auricula-judace, Linn., Jew’s Ear; und H. polytricha, Mont., Jew’s Ear.
On the logs in damp scrubs throughout the colony this fungus, which is so
plentiful during some seasons, seems never gathered in this colony, although
it has for years formed an important export in New Zealand.
Tremella lutescens, Fers., und T. mesenterica, Betz. Brain Fungus. These two
are esculent, but not plentiful, and too small usually to be worth the trouble
of gathering. Like the Hirneola, this is found on the logs in damp scrubs.
Clathrus cibarius, Fischer. The odour of this and allied species is of such a
disagreeable character as to cause it to be rejected by most persons.
Lycoperdonlilacinum, Berk. (Bovista lilacina, Berk.) This Puff-ball is common
to many parts of Queensland. It is used for food in India, but only in a
young state.
Lycoperdon gemmatum, Batsch. Warted Puff-ball, Logan.
L. bovista, Linn. {L. giganteum, Batsch.) The Giant Puff-ball; very abundant
about Milora. This species when properly prepared is said to be universally
relished. The mode recommended by Dr. Cooke is this : Cut the ball in
slices less than half-an-inch thick, cover them with egg beaten up, and sprinkle
with bread-crumbs; fry them until the surface is browned, and then serve.
Of course pepper and salt are better sprinkled over before frying.
Morchella deliciosa, Fries. The delicious Morel, found at Gladfield. This and
others of the genus are dried both in Europe and India, and sold as articles
of food.
Peziza cochleata, Linn. Earth-cups; Brisbane. These are prepared for food by
simply stewing, but Dr. Cooke does not speak very highly of them.
In addition to the above, the following of our Fungi are considered edible in the
United States of America:—
Agaricus {Lepiota) cepcestipes, Sow. This and the var. cretaceus are often
plentiful on garden borders about Brisbane.
Agaricus (Collybia) radicatus, Relh. Specimens have been gathered near South
Brisbane.
Hygrophorus miniatus, Fries. During some seasons this is very abundant on
pasture land, but too small, one would think, to be worth gathering for use.
Polyporus picipes, Fries. On logs in scrubs of Southern Queensland.
Polyporus sulfureus, Bull. On living trunks of trees, Bunya Mountains; a very
large fragile species.
Hydnum Icevigatum, Swartz. Eight-mile Plains.
Hydnum coralloides. Scop. Recorded by Baron Mueller as from Queensland,
without locality.
Clavaria formosa, Pers. Reported as from Queensland.
Leotia lubrica, Pers. The locality forgotten; plant rare in Queensland.
Before closing this paragraph a few more extracts may be given from Dr. Cooke’s
works, but all who are interested in Fungi should possess the works of this great
authority upon this useful and interesting family of plants.
Mushrooms of all kinds pass rapidly into decay, and consequently suffer rapid
chemical change, so that even innocuous species should always be eaten as soon after
they are gathered as conveniently may be. Not even the common mushroom is so


delicate or so excellent at any other period as it is within an hour or two of its being
gathered. Certainly no fungus should be cooked as food after it has exhibited any
symptoms of decay.
Although not used as food by Europeans, surely an article which could be obtained
in such quantities as the Jew’s Ear Fungus {Hirneolapolytncha) in Queensland is
worthy the attention of settlers living near scrub land. The lareparation for market is
of the simplest kind, as it merely requires drying in the open air. The only market for
the article is China, and Dr. Cooke tells us that from 1872 to 1883 the export from New
Zealand of this article amounted in value to ,£79,752. I have before drawn attention
to the value of this fungus for export, but think the subject of sufficient importance to
again refer to it. The plant is cultivated in China, but not in sufficient quantities to
meet the demand.
Exanthemata —A name given to skin
diseases, blotches of leaves, &c.
Exotic —Foreign, as Murraya exotica.
Fimetarius —Pertaining to dung, as the
Agaricus fimetarius, which grows upon
dung.
Fruit Blights— Dr. M. C. Cooke, in
Gardeners’ Chronicle, July, 1893, re-
commends a solution of 2 lb. of sul-
phate of iron in five gallons of water in
preference to the sulphate of copper,
so commonly used, to check the
growth of Glceosporium and similar
blights which attack fruits.
Formica —An ant. Formicarium —The
dwelling of ants, as Hydophytum
formicarium.
Glaciales —Having the appearance of
being frozen.
Gla:osporium pructigenum, 8., or G.
L.ETICOLOR, B. — It is stated in the
Gardeners’ Chronicle of 21st October,
1893, that these can be kept well under
control by two or three sprayings of
potassic sulphide oz. to a gallon of
water), but it must be applied at an
early stage of the fungus growth.
Galbulus —This differs from the Strobilus
only in being round, and having the
heads of the carpella much enlarged.
Examine: Fruit of Juniper.
Gerontog/EOUS Belonging to the Old
World.
Hj3DINUS—Of a kid, as Boletus hcedinus.
Hirneolus A little jug or pitcher.
Applied to some fungi.
Homomallous (from homo, whole, and
mallos, a lock of wool, uniformly bend-
ing or curving to one side) —Secund;
turning to one side. Hetebomallous—
Spreading in all directions.
Illinitus —Besmeared, anointed. Applied
to some fungi.
Intricatus —Entangled, as Sida intricata.
Lucieugus —Shunning the light; growing
in .shady places.
Mammosus , Resembling a breast, or
mamma, as the fungus Tytostmia mam-
mosum.
Mappa (from mappa, a napkin).
Math—An old term for “crop” ; as after-
math, the second mowing, and latter-
math, the last mown crop.
Meros—-A part of anything, in connection
with some numei’al; as pentamerous,
if a flower consists of organs in fives ;
tetramerous, if in fours, and so on.
Mitis —Mild, soft, as Agaricus mitis.
Muscarius Pertaining to flies. (See
Agaricus muscarius.)
Mushrooms— (See Edible Fungi.)
Oblatum, OBLA'tA—a flattened sphere, as
some fruits.
Opsis—The appearance, as Coreopsis, from
the seed resembling a bug.
Penetralis Piercing, penetrating, as
Polyporus penetralis.
Phylloxera —Temporary flooding of the
vineyards with water, or, where this is
not practicable, treating the roots with
sulphuretted carbon, is recommended
in “ Science Gossip” to check this pest
of the vineyard.
Psittacinus —Parrot-coloured, i.e., red
and green, as Gahnia psittacorum, or
Alstrcemeria psittacina.
PuDicus—Bashful, as Agaricus pudicus,
or Alimosa pudica.
Rachodes —Applied to plants whose stems
have the cuticle broken into thin
scales.
Religiosus, Religiosa— Some plants are
so named from being used in religious
. worship, as Ficus religiosa, the Sacred
Fig of India.
Ringbarking— This is performed by re-
mo\dng a ring of the bark, say 2 or 3
feet from the ground, in doing which
cut well into the sapwood, and perform
the operation only when the saii is well
up in the trees.
Robusta—Robust, as Grevillea robustd,
the Silky Oak.
Semitalis— Belonging to or growing on
waysides.
SiMULANS —Resembling; used for a specific
name when the species closely resembles
another, as in Stereum' simulans, a
fungus found on logs in dense scrubs.
Spectabilis, Spectabile— Good-looking.
Sphacelate—Withered or dead.
Spissus Crowded, thick, clammy, as
Agaricus spissus.
SuDORUS —Full of moisture (sudor).
Terrigenus —Born on the ground— i. e. , not
epiphytal.
VuLPiNus—Of a fox, fox-coloured, as
Lentinus vulpinus.
ZooGLiEA —A colouring embedded in a
gelatinous substance, as some Algse.
By Authority: Edmund Gkeggry, Government Printei’, William street, Brisbane.
