

AUSTRALASIAN
LABOR FEDERATION.
EASTERN (N.S.W.) AND NORTHERN (QUEENS-
LAND) PROVINCIAL COUNCILS.
REPORT OF CONFERENCE
RULES.
SYDNEY:
“Worker” Office, 215 and 217 Palmer-street.




EASTERN AND NORTHERN PROVINCIAL
COUNCILS, A.L.F.
MINUTES OF <P(kOCEE(DINGS.
A conference of delegates of the Eastern (N.S.W.)
and Northern (Queensland) Provincial Councils of the
Australasian Labor Federation was held at the Trades
HhII. Sydney, on the 11th, 12th, and 13th June, 1895,
for the purpose of forming the Intercolonial General
Council. The Conference commenced its sittings at 11
a.m. on the 11th June.
The following delegates were present at the first
sitting:—Messrs. J. C. Watson, Hugh Macdonald, R.
Sleath, M’s.P., Sam. Smith, J. Medway Day, Arthur
Rae. Frank Brennan, W. G. Spence, James Curley, and
J. P. Cochran, New South Wales ; and Messrs. Charles
M‘Donald, W. H. Rawlings, M’s.L.A., and Alhe t
Hinchcliffe, Queensland. Mr. Geo. Henderson,
Illawarra Branch A.M.A., intimated his inability to
attend as he was engaged in court in a suit for wages
due to mines.
Mr. J. Chris. Watson, M.P., as President of the
Eastern Provincial Council, which had convened the
meeting, occupied the chair, and extended a hearty
welcome to the delegates present. He alluded to the
interest shown in the proceedings by the delegates.


Delegates, he said, had been invited from South
Australia and Victoria, but it appeared from a
report in the daily press that the Trades Hall Council
in Melbourne had resolved to forward a reply stating
that that body did not see its way clear to appoint a
delegate under present circumstances. Nothing had
been heard from South Australia, though probably
some acknowledgment to the invitation sent would be
received before the close of the Conference. He would
—and he was sure those present would—like to have
seen delegates present from both these colonies.
In reply to Mr. Rae, the Chairman stated that Mr.
Curley was present to represent the A.M. A., Newcastle,
for the purpose of paving the way to make the Federa-
tion more effective. It had been suggested that the
first duty of the delegates after appointing a chairman
would be to decide on the formation of the General
Council. If that course was acceptable to the meeting,
he would at once vacate the chair and allow the election
of a Chairman and Secretary to the Conference to take
place.
Mr. Chas. M'Donald (Queensland) moved and Mr. S.
Smith (N.S.W.) seconded—
That Mr. J. C. Watson be elected Chairman of this meeting.
Carried unanimously.
Mr. J. P. Cochran was elected to the position of
Secretary to the meeting.
The credentials of the following delegates were then
read and accepted :
Mr. M. Reid, M.L.A., Brisbane District Council.
Mr. Chas. M'Donald, M.L.A., Hughenden Branch
A.W.U.


Mr W. H. Rawlings, M.L.A., Irvinebank and
Herberton Branches A.W.U.
Mr. Albebt Hinchcliffe, as General Secretary-
Northern (Queensland) Provincial Council.
Mr. W. G. Spence, Goulburn D.C.
Mr. Sam. Smith, Sydney D.C,
Mr. J. C. Watson, M.P., Young D.C.
Mr. A, Rae, Riverina D.C.
Mr, J. Medway Day, Bourke D.C.
Mr. Hugh Macdonald, M.P., Coonamble D.C.
Mr. R. Sleath, M.P., Broken Hill D.C.
Mr. A. Hinchcliffe stated that Mr. George Kerr,
M.L.A., had been appointed to represent the Long-
reach and Charleville Branches of the Australian
Workers’ Union, but had been detained on his way
down at Rockhampton. These were important Branches
of the Federation in Queensland, and if Mr. Kerr did
not arrive he hoped some of the Queensland delegates
present would be empowered to act for those districts.
Mr. Reid had gone to Melbourne on business con-
nected with the boot trade strike in Brisbane, and would
probably be present at a later stage of the proceedings.
Mr. James Curley stated since the receipt of com-
munication from the Eastern Provincial Council no
formal meeting of the Newcastle A.M.A. had been held,
and he was present for the purpose of obtaining infor-
mation. He had no doubt, with the alterations which
would be likely to be made in the Rules, the miners would
eventually become affiliated with the Federation,
Mr. Rae then moved—
That the delegates present, representing the Eastern and
Northern Provincial Councils, constitute the first General Council
of the Australasian Federation of Labor.


He said that, while not altogether realizing the effect
the formation of the General Council, constituted as his
motion proposed, would have hereafter, the start once
made with Queensland and New South Wales must
ultimately have the effect of bringing the other colonies
into line. It was the first time that the Unions repre-
sented had been brought so closely together, and he
had advised that nothing would be altered in the rules
by that meeting which was calculated to create any
controversy.
The motion was seconded by Mr, R. Sleath, and
carried unanimously.
The Chairman said the next step was the election of
Provincial officers, but after discussion it was agreed to
allow that business to stand over till near the close of
the proceedings, when members of the Conference
would be better acquainted with each other.
Messrs. Hinchcliffe, Spence, and the Chairman and
Secretary, were appointed a sub-commitiee to prepare a
business-sheet, and delegates were invited to send in to
them any suggestions they had to offer for considera-
tion.
The Council then adjourned till 2 p.m. to allow the
sub-committee to prepare the business-sheet.
AFTERNOON SITTING
Present: Messrs. J. 0. Watson (in the chair), C.
M‘Donald, W. H. Rawlings, A. Hinchcliffe, W. G.
Spence, Sam. Smith, A. Rae, H. Macdonald, R. Sleath,
J. P. Cochran, and J. Curley.


-It was agreed that the hours of sitting should be
from 10 to 1 and from 2 to 4 p.m., and to instruct the
Secretary to supply the press with a report of each day’s
proceedings.
The business-sheet sub-committee having presented
its report, the Council proceeded to consider the rules
of the Federation.
Rule 1: “The name shall be the ‘Australasian
Federation of Labor,’” was amended so as to read
“The name shall be ‘ The Australasian Labor Federa-
tion.’ ’
Rule 2 (Constitution) ; “ The Federation shall con-
sist of Labor Unions consolidated for mutual assistance
and the furtherance of the cause of Labor generally,
and shall be governed as hereinafter provided,” was
agreed to without alteration, as was also Rule 3, de-
claring the objects of the Federation.
On Rule 4 (Payments)—providing for the payment
to the District Council by each Union the sum of 4d.
per month from each financial member, and further
providing for payment from this sum of the amount
of id. for the sustenance of the General Council; of
2d, for a defence fund in each District Council; and of
the remainder for management and organization pur-
poses—an amendment was moved and carried as
follows :
Each and every affiliated Union shall pay to the District
Council of the Federation under which it is governed the sum of
not less than 2d. per month for each financial member. Of this
sum at least Id. shall be retained by the District Council, and
the remainder shall be controlled by the Provincial Council for
management and organization purposes.
The Council adjourned at eight minutes past 4 till 10
o’clock the following morning.


SECOND DAY’S SITTING-WEDNESDAY, JUNE 12.
The Council resumed its sittings at 10 a.m.
Present—Messrs. J. C. Wasson (in the chair), Spence,
Rae, Cochran, H. Macdonald, Smith, C. M‘Donald,
Rawlings, Kerr, and Hinchcliffe.
The minutes of the previous day’s proceedings were
read and confirmed.
Mr. Geo. Kerr, M.L.A., presented his credentials
from the Longreach and Charleville Branches of the
Queensland A.W.U., which were read and accepted.
The discussion of the rules was continued.
Rule 5, which read as follows, was agreed to : “ For
the purpose of facilitating the working of the Federa-
tion, its Unions shall be grouped into districts, governed
by District Councils, the District Councils in each
province to be severally represented on a Provincial
Council, which shall be subject only to the General
Council of delegates representing the whole Federa-
tloßule 6, relating to the time of meeting of the
General Council, was amended by the substitution of
the words “ shall meet when called together,” in lieu
of the words “ once in each year.” Subsection {b) of
Rule 6 was amended to read as follows: “To order a
plebiscite upon any question of general importance.”
Mr. Rae moved—
That the following words be added to subsection (6) after the
word “ Federation ” : “ and who may in like manner be removed
by votes taken on demand of any Provincial Council.”
The amendment, which was seconded by Mr.
Rawlings, was carried.


Mr. Eae moved —
That the following words be inserted after the words “ District
Counci',” in line two of the last subsection of Ruled: “On a
scale to be fixed by the Provincial Council in each colony.”
Mr. Spence seconded the amendment, which was
carried.
On the motion of Mr. Eae, seconded by Mr. Eaw-
lings, Eule 6 was further amended by the insertion of
the words, “each delegate to have only one vote,” to
follow the word “ delegate ” in line 4.
Mr. Spence moved —
That the following words be added to Eule 6: “That Provin-
cial Presidents, Secretaries, and Treasurers mar, if authorised
by their Councils, attend the meetings of the General Council,
and shall have the right of speech without the power of voting,”
to follow the word “ attached ” on the last line.
Mr. Samuel Smith moved—
That Eule 7 —“ General Executive” —be amended by the
insertion of the words “shall be elected every third year,” instead
of the words “ in February of each year,” in the third line.
The amendment was seconded by Mr. Eae, and, after
considerable discussion, carried.
Mr. Hincbcliffe moved to amend Eule 7 by adding
the words “ and to suspend any of the general officers
of the Federation,” after the word “ necessary ” in the
thirteenth line.
Mr. Samuel Smith seconded the amendment, which
was carried.
Eule B—“ Special General Executive meetings”—
was adopted without amendment.
Eule 9, defining the provinces, was amended to read
as follows : “ That the Provinces of the Federation
shall be designated by the names of the colonies in
which they are established.”


Mr. Kerr moved—
That Rule 10 be amended by the insertion of the words “ at
least once in each year and at such other times,” instead of the
words “within four weeks,” in the first line of the danse.
Mr. H. Macdonald seconded the amendment, which
was agreed to.
Rules 11, 12, 13, and 14, with their sub-sections,
were, after a few unimportant amendments, adopted.
The preamble was re-committed, and the name
altered from “ The Australasian Federation of Labor ”
to “ The Australasian Labor Federation.” The follow-
ing sentence was also struck out. “ With this end in
view the accompanying scheme of federation is sub-
mitted by the Seventh Intercolonial Trades and Labor
■Congress held in Ballarar, Victoria, to the Libor
Councils and Labor Unions of Australasia.”
ELECTION OF PROVISIONAL OFFICERS.
It was decided that all offices should be provisional
and honorary, and on this understanding the following
members were e'ected to fill the various posts of honor: —
President, Mr. J. C. Watson, M.P. (New South Wales) ;
General Secretary, Mr. Albert Hinchcliffe (Queensland);
General Treasurer, Mr. Hugh Macdonald, M.P.;
Trustees, Messrs. W. H. Rawlings, M L.A. (Queens-
land), Mr. Sam. Smith (New South Wales),
The Council resolved —
That the provisional officers hold office till February, 1896, and
in the meantime the General Executive to arrange for nominations
to be sent in during the month of July, and if more than the
required number of persons are nominated for the respective
offices to get a plebiscite vote of the Federation taken prior to
31st December, 1895.
The General Council is to meet again in February,
1896, at a time and place to be fixed by the General
Executive, when permanent officers will be installed.


QUEENSLAND BOOT TRADE DISPUTE.
Mr. W. G. Spence moved and Mr. R, Sleath, M.L.A.,
seconded—
That this General Council of the A.L.F. desires to place on
record its thorough appreciation of the action of the members of
the Queensland Operative Boot Trade Union in their determined
resistance of the unwarranted attempt of the manufacturers to
make such a sweeping reduction in the rates of payment, and
earnestly hopes that their efforts will be rewarded by a speedy
and satisfactory settlement.
Carried.
THE COLORED LABOR QUESTION.
Mr. W. H. Rawlings, M.L.A., moved and Mr
Arthur Rae seconded—
That this General Council of the A.L.F. enters its strong pro-
test against the introduction into Australia of alien colored labor;
calls upon all Australian Gove'nments to legislate against the
introduction of Japanese or other Asiatic races; is opposed to the
acceptance by the Australian colonies of that portion of the
treaty between Great Britain and Japan which gives the natives
of the latter country the right of residence in Australia ; and
urges the workers in each colony to make this a test question at
every Parliamentary election.
Carried.
The Council then adjourned till the following
morning.
THIRD DAYS SITTING—THURSDAY, JUNE 13.
General Council resumed its sittings at the office of
the A.W.U. in Castlereagh-street.
Present: Messrs. J. C. Watson (in the chair), S.
Smith, Hugh Macdonald, C.M'Donald, A. Rae, W. G.
Spence, G. Kerr, W. H. Rawlings, J. P. Cochran, and
A. Hinchcliffe.


The minutes of the previous day’s sittings were read
and confirmed.
Mr. Cochran, the Secretary, read a letter from the
Secretary of the Trades and Labor Council of South
Australia, Adelaide, acknowledging receipt of letter
from the N.S.W. Provincial Council, inviting them to
be represented, and pointing out that owing to the
short notice they could not possibly comply. The letter
further stated “ that shortly after the meeting of the
Ballarat Congress, at which the Labor Federation
scheme was drawn up, this Council went to a great
deal of trouble in the matter and appointed a Federation
Committee to visit every Society in the colony, with
the result that, with a few exceptions, they were favor-
able to its adoption, and District Councils were formed
at Port Adelaide and Gawler. Some years have elapsed
since then, and therefore it would be necessary to con-
sult both the District Councils referred to before repre-
sentatives could be sent from South Australia. If you
will kindly let us know what decisions are come to by
the Conference, this Council will confer with the other
District Councils, and discuss the matter of Labor
Federation should the Sydney Conference decide to
move in that direction. The position now is altogether
different to what it was some years ago. Hence the
necessity of again ascertaining the views of the labor
bodies here, which takes time.”
The letter was received, and the Provisional General
Secretary instructed to reply.
Mr. A. Eae moved, Mr. G. Kerr seconded, and it
was carried—
That the General Executive be instructed to take steps to brings
the other colonies into line, pointing out to them the liberal
alterations which had been made in the Federation rules.


The General Secretary was instructed to get minutes
of proceedings printed, together with the amended
rules, and arrange for their distribution amongst the
unions of the unaffiliated colonies ; Provincial Councils
to provide sufficient copies for their own requirements.
It was agreed that the expenses of the management
by the General Executive should he defrayed by the
Provincial Councils.
A hearty vote of thanks to the Chairman and Secre-
tary for the satisfactory performance of their duties
brought the first meeting of the General Council of th&
Australasian Labor Federation to a close.
(kULES.
PREAMBLE.
It is desirable for the maintenance and furtherance
of Unionism in Australasia that a definite Federation of
Labor Unions shall be instituted, which Federation,
while leaving to each individual Union or local aggrega-
tion of Unions full self-government in their own
particular affairs, will he a means for securing unity of
purpose and action on all general matters and for
facilitating the mutual co-operation of affiliated Unions
whenever necessary for the common welfare.
NAME.
1. The name shall he ‘ ‘ The Australasian Labor
Federation. ”


CONSTITUTION.
2. The Federation shall consist of Labor Unions con-
solidated for mutual assistance and the furtherance of
the Cause of Labor generally, and shall be governed as
hereinafter provided.
OBJECTS.
3. The following shall be the objects of the Federa-
tion :
(«) To improve the condition and protect the
interests of all classes of Labor throughout
Australasia.
(b) To discuss, consider, and put in force, when
approved, any scheme for the better guidance
and extension of Australasian Labor organi-
zation.
( c) To prevent, if possible, by conference or other-
wise, any threatened strike or dispute between
members of the Federation and their em-
ployers, and lo endeavor by conciliatory
measures to uphold the rules of any federated
body; failing which, to provide ways and
means for the maintenance of the Union
involved.
(d) To secure the direct representation of Labor in
Parliament, and promote such Legislative
reforms as will ensure social justice to Aus-
tralasian workers.
(e) To secure a better advocacy of the principles
and lights of Labor through the press.
PAYMENTS.
4. Each and every affiliated Union shall pay to the
District Council of the Federation under which it is
governed the sum of not less than 2d. per month for


each financial member. Of this sum at least one penny
shall be retained by the District Council, and the re-
mainder shall be controlled by the Provincial Council
for management and organization purposes. Women’s
Unions shall be admitted to full affiliation upon pay-
ment of half the above dues. Provided that nothing
in these rules shall prevent Provisional or District
Councils from making such further financial arrange-
ments for internal government as may appear to them
necessary, so long as such arrangements are not in
contravention of these Rules.
ORGANIZATION.
5. For the purposes of facilitating the working of
the Federation, its Unions shall be grouped into dis-
tricts, governed by the District Councils, the District
Councils in each Province to be severally represented
on a Provincial Council, which shall be the central
authority for the said province, and shall be subject
only to the General Council of delegates representing
the whole Federation.
GENERAL COUNCIL.
6. The General Council, which shall meet when
called together by the General Executive, shall be com-
posed of one delegate from each District Council hav-
ing not more than 5000 members, and for every
additional 5000 members (or part thereof) one addi-
tional delegate. Each delegate to have one vote. The
General Council shall be invested with the following
powers :
(«) To order a plebiscite of the Federation upon
any question of general importance.
(5) To elect or remove any of its officers (except
the General President, General Secretary, and


General Treasurer, who shall be elected by a
plebiscite vote of the Federation).
(i e ) To control the General Council Fund.
(d) To decide all appeals against the decision of
the General Executive.
( e) It may institute legal proceedings on behalf of
the Federation, and may direct the General
Trustees to take legal proceedings against
any officer of the Federation who mis-
appropriates its funds.
(/) It shall see to the carrying out of the objects
of the Federation in strict accordance with
the General Rules,
The expenses of all delegates to General Council meet-
ings shall be defrayed by their respective Provincial or
District Councils on a scale to be fixed by the various
Provisional Councils. The official seal of the Federa-
tion shall be attached to every document issued by the
General Council, and no document emanating from the
General Council shall be received or discussed by Pro-
vincial or District Councils unless the said seal is so
attached. Provincial Presidents, Secretaries, and
Treasurers may, if authorised by their Councils, attend
the meetings of the General Council, and shall have the
right of speech without the power of voting.
GENERAL EXECUTIVE.
7. The General Executive of the Federation shall
consist of a General President, General Secretary, and
General Treasurer, who shall be elected each third year
by plebiscite of the Federation, and of the Provincial
Presidents, who shall hold seats on the General Execu-
tive by virtue of their office. The powers of the
General Executive shall be limited to the superintend-


ence of the Federation in the interim between the meet-
ings of the General Council. It shall take every means
to secure the due observance of the rules of the Federa-
tion, to further its objects, and protect the funds. It
shall direct the action of the Trustees, and be respon-
sible for the rightful administration of the General
Fund in accordance with the instructions of the General
Council. It shall have power to summon meetings of
the General Council, when deemed necessary, and to
suspend any of the General Officers of the Federation.
It shall, on request from any Provincial or District
Council, determine as to the interpretation of any
general rule, or decide any matter on which the rules
are silent. The decision of the General Executive in
all such cases to be subject to appeal to the General
Council, whose decision shall be final.
SPECIAL GENERAL EXECUTIVE MEETINGS.
8. Any Provincial Council, may, by a two-thirds
majority, request the General Secretary to summon a
meeting of the General Executive for the consideration
of special business, the nature of which shall be fully
stated. Such meeting shall be held as speedily as
possible after the receipt of the summons by the General
Secretary, who shall, in convening the meeting, inform
each member of the General Executive of the special
business to be transacted. Should the General Execu-
tive, however, deem the business or object of the
meeting frivolous, the expenses of such special meeting
shall be defrayed by the Provincial Council at whose
instance it was summoned.
PROVINCES.
9. The Provinces of the Federation for the time


being shall be designated by the names of the colonies,
in which they are established
PROVINCIAL COUNCILS.
10. Provincial Councils shall meet once in each year,
and at such other times as they may deem necessary.
It shall be the duty of each Provincial Council to adopt
by-laws dealing with its constitution and functions,
always provided that such by-laws are in strict con-
formity with the General Rules of the Federation.
PROVINCIAL EXECUTIVES.
11. The Executive Management of Provinces of the
Federation in the interim between Provincial Council
meetings shall he entrusted to such officers as may be
instituted by the Provincial Council Rules, which
officers shall be designated as Provincial President,
Provincial Secretary, &c. Provincial Presidents and
Provincial Secretaries shall be elected by a plebiscite of
their respective Provinces.
ORGANIZATION OF DISTRICTS.
12. Districts shall be organized as may seem advis-
able to local affiliating societies, and shall afterwards
he chartered by the General Executive upon the re-
commendation of the Provincial Council in whose
jurisdiction they are situated. The Federation shall
recognize only such districts as affiliated which are
working under such charters.
DISTRICT COUNCILS.
13. District Council Rules dealing with their consti-
tution and functions shall be framed by the respective
districts, but such rules must not clash with the General
Rules of the Federation, or with the rules of the
Province in whose jurisdiction districts are located..


District Executive Officers shall be designated as Dis-
trict President, District Secretary, &c.
ACTION ON DISTURBANCES.
14. In the event of a disturbance threatening an
affiliated Union, such Union shall: —
(i.) Endeavor to settle the dispute peaceably, failing
which it shall submit its case to its District
Executive, who shall act in conjunction with
a committee of the Union involved. The
joint committee shall endeavor to settle the
dispute in a peaceful and friendly manner ;
failing this tbe District Council shall, without
delay, bring the matter before the affiliated
Unions.
(n.) In the event of emergency or trifling dispute,
the District Council may decide by a two-
thirds majority to take action in defence of
the principles of the Federation without
previously consulting the affiliated Unions,
but it shall submit its action to them with all
possible despatch. Under ordinary circum-
stances, before taking action, the District
Council shall place questions involving dis-
putes before the affiliated Unions, and shall
be governed in its subsequent course by their
decision.
(m.) Before the District Council shall pledge its
assistance to any disturbed Union (excepting
in the cases provided for by Section n. of this
Rule) it shall obtain the results of the voting
in the various affiliated Unions, the voting to
be conducted according to the Rules of such
District Council; but in any case a majority


composing two-thirds of the votes cast shall
be necessary before the Council shall pledge such
assistance. Should the threatened disturb-
ance show a likelihood of affecting any other
District or Province, the joint consideration
of the Provincial or District Councils in-
terested shall be given it in accordance with
the provisions of this and the preceding
Section, and none shall act without the
consent of the others affected. In cases o
great emergency a meeting of the Provincial
Councils shall be called.
When it has decided to financially support an
affiliated Union, the District Council shall
make arrangements for financial support to
the extent of a sum not exceeding 20s.
weekly for each financial member locked out
or on strike, such support to be distributed as
the Union in question may think fit. Pro-
vided that in no case shall such support be
given during the first week of any disturb-
ance.
Any decision of a District Council involving
action shall endow that Council with the
following powers of levy, unity, and censure
within its jurisdiction :
(a) To levy a special contribution upon
every employed enrolled member in its
district. Provided that a plebiscite
vote has first decided by a two-thirds
majority in favor of such levy being
imposed.
( b) To strengthen the disturbed Union or


Unions by securing in the name of the
Federation the active co-operation of
the other Unions in other districts,
and to take any other steps for ensur-
ing the united action of the workers
which the urgency of the case may
require.
(c) To censure, in the name of the Federa-
tion, any corporation, firm, or indi-
vidual whose conduct shall, in its
opinion, show them to be unju-t, cruel,
or bitter enemies to Labor; it shall
communicate such censure w here
necessary to its Provincial Executive
for general notification ; and it shall be
obligatory upon members of the
Federation to give effect to that
censure.
The powers provided in the preceding s* ction
shall be exercised by District Councils, which
shall assume control of all disturbances in
conjunction with the Strike Committee ( f the
Union or Union* involved, and shall cease
with the termination of the dispute.
The Federation reserves to itself the right of
with-holding assistance from any affiliated
body entering upon a strike without having
received the sanction of its District Council.
J. CHRIS. WATSON,
Peovisional Peesident.
ALBERT HINCHCLIFFE,
Provisional General Secretary


&\ I o
f b 2.3
Printed at the Worker Office, 215 and 217 Palmer-st., Sydney




