

- '
U)*<u
;
AGRICULTURE
| il I in
South Australia.
<
]
BY THE
>
SPECIAL REPORTER OF “THE LEADER.”
j|
REPRINTED FROM “ THE LEADER.”
v -
I
I-^f
| llfrlbonm:
E. & D. SYME, “THE LEADER” OFFICE, ELIZABETH STREET,
:
(, . FREARSON & BRO., KING WILLIAM STREET.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.




AGRICULTURE
South Australia.
KY THE
SPECIAL REPORTER OF “THE LEADER.”
REPRINTED FROM “ THE LEADER:’
UHHrounie:
E. & D. SYME, “THE LEADER” OFFICE, ELIZABETH STREET.
JMaibe:
PREARSON & BRO., KING WILLIAM STREET.




MsssymT§
Jfzni .
The following Papers are• reprinted from “The Farm” section of the Melbourne
Leader. Ihe Iroprietors of that Journal, while giving due attention to the
varied selection of matter looked for in a First-class Weekly Newspaper, give to
Agriculture a special degree of prominence, such as they deem the importance of the
subject demands. The Papers are the result of a special visit to South Australia by the
“ Leader’s” Travelling Reporter, in accordance with the desire of the Proprietors, that
their numerous readers might have an opportunity of contrasting the position of Agri-
culture in that Colony with what is going on elsewhere in the Australian Group. The
writer left Melbourne on ist September, 1874, and returned on the 30th November.
The' early Papers were written during September, in which month the country round
Adelaide is seen at its very best. The areas were visited during October, and the
return journey, between Adelaide and Mount Gambier, took place during November,




INDEX.
No. I.—INTRODUCTION.
Page
Contents. —Passage from Melbourne to Adelaide —St Vincent’s Gulf—Port
Adelaide —Wharf—Shipping —Railway—Farming along the Line—Adelaide—
Appearance of City and Hills—Glenelg—Railway and Harbour—Farmers
leaving Old Districts for New ...
No. lI.—THE BOTANIC GARDENS.
Contents. —Appearance of Gardens, and comparison with Melbourne and Sydney
—The Class Ground—The Experimental Garden —The Museum—The Victoria
Regia House—Standard Geraniums —The Rosery—Dr. Schomburgk’s Labels—
Out-door Plants—Pot Plants —Cacti and Orchids—Palms and New Palm-house
—The Zoological Department—The New Park—The Directors’ Management... 7
No. lII.—THE OLIVE AND THE VINE.
Contents.— Mr. Davenport’s Residence, Beaumont—Olive Growing and Extracting
the Oil—The Wine Cellars—-The Vineyaixl—Mr. Boothby’s Olive Operations at
the Gaol—The Olive Growing Company—Mr. Crompton’s Vineyard—Mr. Auld
—Mrs. Penfold —Mr. Wurm’s Farm at Unley—Olives—Fruit Drying—Seri-
culture-Olive Hedge—Mr. Chiles’ Oil-making ...
No. IV.—ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HON. THOS. ELDER.
CONTENTS. —Situation and Appearance of Birksgate —The Vineyard and Cellars—
The Reservoir and Observatory—The House and Grounds lit by Gas made on
the place—The Entrance, Verandah, and Fountain—The Conservatory—The
Orangery—The Camels, the Stud, and Stabling ...
No. V.—WINE AND RAISIN MAKING.
Contents.— Bankside, Mr. Hardie’s Vineyard—The Process of Wine Making-
Wine Blending—Exportation —The Process of Raisin Making—Fruit Drying-
Fruit for Jam —Oranges and Irrigation—Almonds—Avenues of Olive Trees —
Peculiar System of Fencing—Cleanliness essential to Good Wine Making
No. VI.—GAWLER.
Contents. —The Railway Carriages—No Locking—Appearance of Farms between
Adelaide and Gawler—Agricultural Implement Factories —Iron and Gold near
Gawler—The Hon. Walter Dufheld’s Residence—-The Flour Mills—The Public
Buildings and Private Residences —Slovenly Farming—Lucerne Growing and
Rotation Cropping, by Messrs. Clement and Rigg—Mr. Kelly’s Horse Farm —
Fallow System, by Mr. Winckel—Flax Growing and Mr. Roedger’s Mills ... 18


No. VIL—KAPUNDA.
Page
Contents. —Description of Farming between Gawler and Kapunda—Bare Appear-
ance of Homesteads—The Murray Flats—The Kapunda Copper Mine—The
Acid Process Agricultural Statistics of Kapunda District Exceptional
Instances of Improved Farming—Superiority of Soil
No. VIII.—FROM KAPUNDA TO KOORINGA.
Contents. —Townships between Kapunda and Saddleworth —Auriferous Indication
on Ranges between the former —Anlaby— Stripping and Burning—Mr. Caskey’s
Farm —The System known as “Land Sharking’’—Kooringa—'The Old Burra
—Change from Mining to Farming—Large Holdings of Fine Land ...
No. IX. —HILL RIVER ESTATE.
Contents.— The Sheep Station—The Wool—The Farming Department—Extent
of Operations—Description of Working—Tree Planting—Rules and Regulations 26
No. X.—FROM CLARE TO THE AREAS.
Contents. —Ignorance prevalent regarding quality of South Australian Soil—
Spinifex preferred for Farming—Great Extent of Good Soil—Large Holdings
Bungaree—Bundaleer—Racing Brood Stock —Shearing Shed—Hundreds—The
Area Townships—Seas of Wheat —Want of Railways—Squatters’ Prophecies—
Remarks upon Droughts and Influence of Settlement upon Climate ... ... 28
No. XI —FROM THE AREAS TO BEAUTIFUL VALLEY.
Contents. — Manner of Selection — The Strangways’ Act — Limited Auction—
Collinsfield —Government Handicapping the Farmers—Facilities of Country for
Railways—Cheapness of Harvesting—Port Broughton—Port Pirie—Napperby
Wool Dumped at the Shed —Port Augusta—Apathy of Government—
Waterworks —Beautiful Valley —Goyder’s Line of Rainfall—Mount Remarkable
—Hughes, of Booyoolie and Dummyism ...
No. XIL—FROM CLARE TO STRATHALBYN.
Contents. —Clare—Seven Hills and St. Aloysius’College—Notable Wine Growers
Hoyleton—Florse Railway—Port Wakefield Yorke’s Peninsula —Character
of the Scrub Lands —Moonta and Kadina—Back to Adelaide—The Tiers—
Variations in Seasons —The Hills Townships—Highercombe—Echunga Diggings
—Remarks on Character of Farming
No. XHL—WILLUNGA AND FLAX GROWING
Contents. —Flax Indigenous to the Colony—lts Cultivation being adopted in the
old Districts —Beauty of the Drive from Adelaide to Willunga—M‘Donald’s Flax
Mill —Process of Preparing the Flax—System of Growing Flax in the District—
The Willunga Slate Quarries ...
No. XIV.—GOOLWA AND HINDMARSH ISLAND
Contents —Milang and Lake Alexandria —The Goolwa or “ Lower Murray ” —lts
splendid Harbor —The Murray Mouth —The projected Goolwa Canal—Hind-
marsh Island—Mr. Price’s Hereford Farm ... ... ...


No. XV.—FROM GOO LAVA TO NARRACOORTE.
Page
Contents. —Lake Albert and the Aboriginal Station —The Coorongand the Eighty-
mile Desert—Kingston or Lacepede Bay—The Harbor —Robe —The Railway to
Narracoorte—Bordertown—South Australia Tapping the Wimmera Country—
System of Selectors’ Commonages
No. XVI.—FROM NARRACOORTE TO MOUNT GAMBIER.
Contents. —Farming at Narracoorte—The Caves —Origin of the “ Strang ways’
Act”—Opposition of Squatters to Agricultural Settlement—Mosquito Plains and
Creek—Vallum Park —Penola—Penola deserted through monopoly of the
surrounding land—Between Penola and Mount Gambier— Dismal Swamp—
Gambierton —Its Beauty—The Lakes —View from the Mount
No. XVII.—MOUNT GAMBIER.
Contents. —Richness of the Mount Gambier Soil —Potato Growing—Moorak,
Dr. Browne’s Estate—Resemblance of Mount Gambier to Lancefield, in
Victoria—The Luxuriance of the Artificial Grasses—The System of Farming—
The want of a good Port—Dissatisfaction of the Inhabitants with the South
Australian Government
No. XVIII.—THE DRAINAGE COUNTRY.
Contents. —From Mount Gambier to Millicent—The Initiation of the Drainage
Scheme—The Plan of' Drainage—The Stoppage of the Works—The Fertility
of the Drained Land—The Gippsland of South Australia—Representative
Farms—The want of a Railway to Rivoli Bay, from Mount Gambier, via Millicent 51
No. XIX.—HOP GROWING.
Contents. Pleasing effect of the Tiers at Work amongst the Hop Vines—The
Natural Drainage of the Mount Gambier District produced by the porosity of
the Volcanic Soil—The Bentley Hop Gardens —Description of Hop Culture ... 54
No. XX.—CONCLUDING REMARKS.
Contents. —Capabilities of the Colony Undeveloped —Statistics of Agricultural
Land and Produce—Comparison between Victorian and South Australian
Management—Vine-growing and other Industries —Scheme for taking Horses for
the Indian Market Overland


\


AGRICULTURE IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
No. I.—INTRODUCTION.
Contents. —Passage from Melbourne to Adelaide—St. Vincent’s Gulf—Port Adelaide —Wharf—
Shipping—Railway—Farming along the Line—Adelaide —Appearance of City and Hills—
Glenelg—Railway and Harbour —Farmers leaving Old Districts for New.
The mail steamer and the Aldinga invari-
ably do the trip between Melbourne and
Adelaide within the forty-eight hours, but
our passage in the Claud Hamilton occupied
from Tuesday morning till Friday night, or
in point of fact till Saturday morning, as,
although she got to the mouth of the port
creek that evening, she anchored with the
pilot aboard, and did not go up to the wharf
and land the passengers till the following
morning. The reasons for our slow passage
were —First, the Claud is not a clipper at
sailing ; second, we had a rough passage ;
third, we had thirty-eight draught horses
on board, for the accommodation of which
the captain trimmed his course ; and, fourth,
we called in at two ports on the way to dis-
charge and take in cargo, viz., Port Mac-
donnell and Lacepede Bay. Both of these
are open roadsteads, and loading and dis-
charging are performed by means of
lighters carrying about six tons, and
which cut through the water under a
large spread of canvas with great rapidity.
Both ports look from the steamer to be about
five miles off, and appear to consist of a num-
ber of white stone houses, lying close to the
beach of the very low-lying coast which ob-
tains the most of the way from Cape Otway
to Cape J arvis, between which bolder head-
land and the equally imposing bluff of Kan-
garoo Island, we pass by the narrow entry
of the Backstairs Passage into St. Vincent’s
GuF. Port Macdonnell is the port for the
Mount Gambier district, and the cargo re-
ceived there was seme flour and a large quan-
tity of fine potatoes, the latter a class of
produce that the district has only lately dis-
covered its peculiar suitability for. Up-
wards of 5000 tons, or more than a third of
the whole produce of the colony of S. Austra-
lia, were grown this year in the Mount Gam-
bier district, the crop averaging at the rate of
nearly six tons to the acre. The Mount
Gambier farmers, finding their wheat yield
falling off, have looked around and dis-
covered a new source of revenue. From
Lacepede Bay a railway is in course of con-
struction eastward towards Narracoorte, the
centre of an important district, concerning
which and Mount Gambier I will doubtless
be able to pick up fuller particulars on my
way back, as I intend to pass through that
country overland to Victoria. Concerning
the draught horses on board it would appear
as if the breeding of that class of stock
would pay South Australians to go in for,
considering that the owner, who purchased
them in Victoria at high prices, pays a
heavy freight, which, together with the risk
of deaths on the passage, and other charges
in Adelaide, must leave a margin in favor of
the South Australian breeder equivalent to a
very heavy protective duty.
The Gulf of St. Vincent, by which Ade-
laide is approached, is, as everybody is
aware, a sheet of water of an average width
of about thirty miles, running from the
ocean about eighty miles due north into
South Australia. About half way along the
steamer turns sharp to the right, into an arm
of still water something like double the
width of the Yarra below Prince’s-bridge.
This is Port Adelaide, between which and
the city seven miles to the eastward commu-
nication is obtained by a Government rail-
way. Port Adelaide is, in a general way,
not unlike Sandndge, with the exception
that instead of a pier, the ships lie along a
wharf extending along the east side of the
creek, the other side being a low shallow
sandy bank, between which and the wharf
large vessels are lying at anchor in the
middle of the stream awaiting their turn at
the wharf, on which the scene is a busy one.
A large emigrant ship is discharging its


human freight, and the donkey engines are
busy unloading some half a dozen of the big
liners of railway iron and the usual varied
merchandise, to make room for the coming
clip of wool. As at Sandridge the wharf is
laid with rails for the waggons, which receive
the cargo, but instead of the locomotive,
these are drawn by horses to the terminus
sheds, along a railway laid along the middle
of the street. The distance is about a quarter
of a mile. The trains run every hour up to
Adelaide. On the arrival of the train, I ob-
served that the passengers entering the car-
riages are not allowed on the platform till
those arriving have left it, and that the doors
are not locked. There are some live or six
stopping places on the seven miles up to
Adelaide, and the passengers leaving opened
the doors themselves and those entering shut
them.
The country passed through between the
port and the city is perfectly level, not a
cutting the whole way, and the line passes
between fields of hay (apparently a mixture of
wheat and oats), the fields fenced in with
wire as a rule without a top rail, and here
and there very patchy and carelessly kept
hedges of the Kangaroo Island acacia. This
hedge, so much thought of in some parts of
Victoria, is in very bad repute in its own
country, the chief fault found with it being
its inflammability. Approaching Adelaide
the land begins to rise suddenly, so that
the city is reached from the terminus
by a flight of steps. From the terminus
to the centre of the city, where the busi-
ness congregates, is about half a mile
to the eastward, the ground gently rising,
and about five miles beyond in the same
direction a grand looking tier of hills run
north and south, or parallel with the coast of
the Gulf at a distance of about twelve miles,
thus leaving Adelaide about midway be-
tween the two. Upon reaching King Wil-
liam-street (the Gollins-street of Adelaide)
the visitor cannot fail to be impressed in the
most favorable manner with this beautiful
city. Its good situation ; its clean appear-
ance ; its very fine public buildings, notable
among which are the Treasury building,
Post Office, Town Hall, the Banks, the
Literary Institute, the Law Courts, the
offices of the Register and Advertiser
newspapers and the churches, of which
there are a great number ; its surround-
ing gardens, and timbered parks, and
the hills already mentioned to the east,
clad along their slope with vineyards,
gardens, and orchards, altogether make Ade-
laide the prettiest city, to my taste, I have
yet visited in any of the colonies. The build-
ings are mostly of a slate-colored freestone,
which, with the white pointing of the mortar,
gives them a peculiarly light and pleasing
appearance. The city proper stands on
something like a mile square, the streets
running due east and west, north and south.
The principal business centre is where Bundle
and Hindley streets, running east, intersect
King William-street, running north. Bundle-
street is the Bourke-street of the city, and
Hindly-street is very much like Brunswick-
street. In Bundle-street, on Saturday night,
a very fair resemblance to a Bourke-street
crush goes on for a few hours, and during
the remainder of the week there is a large
amount of traffic. North Adelaide, a suburb
resembling our Hawthorn, lies to the north
side of the Torrens, an inconsiderable creek,
spanned by an old-fashioned bridge. On the
way to the bridge the Parliament Houses
and the Government House opposite are
passed, neither building in keeping with
the rest of the town, and after crossing a
large recreation park containing a splendid
cricket ground on the one hand, and the
Botanical Gardens on the other, North
Adelaide begins,
Glenelg, the coaling station of the mail
steamer, is an open roadstead in the Gulf,
not so far up as Port Adelaide, and from
this point postal communication is obtained
with Adelaide more rapidly, just as Geelong
receives the mail quicker via Queenscliff than
by sailing round "into Corio Bay. A light
line, lately constructed by a private com-
pany, connects Glenelg with Adelaide, dis-
tance 61) miles. Glenelg has a very hand-
some iron pier, and since the railway started
is growing fast. Glenelg has a resemblance to,
and is evidently intended to be, the Brighton
of Adelaide. This line has several points of
novelty. The train reaches its termini at
either end by running up the centre of the
main streets like an omnibus. Upon ap-
proaching either Adelaide or Glenelg
steam is shut off to about four mi es
an hour, and a boy begins ringing a bell.
Passengers hail the train (which is com-
posed of cars of the American tramway
pattern communicating by a longitudinal
passage with each other), when the driver
slacks off a little, the passenger jumps
up, and away it goes again, just like a ’bus.
The train pulls up in the middle of the street,
opposite the office where the tickets are ob-
tained. It comes up the middle of King
William-street south to the Adelaide ter-
minus, and is stopped by the Victoria Gar-
dens, which block this part of the town off
from the busier centre. It is proposed to
shift these gardens to some vacant land to the
westward, and then permit the engine and
the bell-ringer arrangement to go up to the
post-office, and ultimately be extended to the
various outlying suburbs round the foot of
the hills to the east, such as M‘Gill, Nor-
wood, Kensington, and so on. On this line
the American system of trenches on each
side of the level crossings to prevent cattle
straying on the rails between the enclosing
fences, by which the necessity for keeping


gate-keepers is obviated, is, I notice, also
adopted. The return ticket for the six and
a half miles is Is., or monthly ticket 21s.
The country passed through by this line is
similar to that on the Port Railway, and
about half way is situated the new race-
course, a splendid piece of laud for the pur-
pose. The hitch that has for some time been
between the old Jockey Club and South Aus-
tralian Jockey Club Company has now been
happily overcome by an amalgamation, and
henceforth the Adelaide meets promise to
take a very important position amongst us
in racing matters.
The South Australian farmers have worked
out the old districts by a long continued
wheat cropping, and are gone to the new
lands by the hundred on what are called the
northern areas. Away up many miles fur-
ther northward among the squatters have
these farmers begun operations than was
considered possible some years ago, and most
extensive areas of wheat promising to give
the heaviest harvest ever yet obtained in the
colony are reported by occasional visitors
who have ventured up into these at present
little known localities. In these northern
areas the greatest amount of interest is at
present centred. I propose staying in the
vicinity of Adelaide sufficiently long to ob-
tain notes of wine-growing, olive-planting,
raisin-making, and such other matters said
to be worth inspection not far from the city
when I will take a run up to the north, then
necessarily back to Adelaide, and thence, as
already mentioned, overland to Victoria w
the south-east. 3
No. 11.-THE BOTANIC GARDENS.
Contents —Appearance of Gardens, and comparison with Melbourne and Sydney The Class
Ground —The Experimental Garden—The Museum—The Victoria Regia House Standard
Geraniums—The Rosery—Dr. Schomburgk’s Labels—Out-door Plants—Pot Plants—Cacti and
Orchids—Palms and New Palm-house—The Zoological Department—The New Park The
Directors’ Management.
In the matter of a beautiful public garden
Adelaide has just reason to be very proud.
The Melbourne Botanic Garden, with a mag-
nificent site, has not been fortunate in having
its natural advantages improved by art.
The gardens at Sydney please the visitor
chiefly by the views obtained of a lovely
bay, and a picturesque charm imparted by
age of vegetation bordering on a century.
But Adelaide, by sheer dint of artistic skill,
and in spite of a position lacking natural ad-
vantages, has a gem of a garden. These
gardens are worthy of imitation in the
general design, assuming that national in-
stitutions of this character are intended to
confer enjoyment on the people by their
beauty, while at the same time due atten-
tion is given to the conservation and exten-
sion of botanical knowledge. This is the
leading characteristic of the garden under
notice. The scientific and the useful are
thoroughly attended to, while along with
this a retreat is provided where, within ten
minutes’ walk of the centre of the city, the
inhabitants may roam through parterre and
avenue, the eye resting at every turn upon
exquisite flowers arranged in the most
pleasing combinations. Charming little lakes
containing waterfowl there are also encir-
cled with willows, under the shade of which
the visitor can recline, and the beauty of
these ornamental sheets of water is still
further enhanced by islands containing mi-
niature gardens, with statuary showing
through the foliage. The garden is situated
at the north-east corner of the city, was
founded in 1855, and contains 46 acres, five
of which are water. This area is being at
present increased to 150 altogether, by an
addition being laid out in Government Bark
and to the north, lying in a bend of the
Torrens. The site of the garden is rather
low and flat, but, from a slight rise in the
eastern corner, a fine prospect of the Mount
Lofty ranges, about seven miles off, is ob-
tained. The main drive opens from the
North Terrace of Adelaide, and runs through
the garden from north to south ; Dr. Schom-
burgk’s residence, which is tastefully built,
lies to the left of the main entrance.
Passing the lake in the middle of the garden,
one of the principal botanical departments
is reached, called the class ground. This is
arranged in the form of a hippodrome, and
comprises about 160 natural families, each
family represented by from four to twelve
genera according to their extent. This por-
tion of the garden is used by the students
from the college. Some little distance from
the class-ground is situated the experimental


garden. This department is laid ©ut in
narrow beds running end-ways from each
side of a main walk through its centre, and
contains a numerous collection of grasses,
dye, fibrous, medical, poisonous, culinary
and other economical plants, all well-ar-
ranged and classified. Over 100 kinds of
grasses alone have here been experimented
upon. Of those which the director has
proved to be peculiarly suited for standing
beat and drought, the best are guinea grass
(Panicum maxicum), prairie grass (Bromus
uniolides), Phillip’s grass (Panicum specta-
bile), catstail grass (Phleum pratense), oat
grass (Avena elatior), falling-awn grasses
(Pipthatherum Thomasi and Piptatherum
multiflorum), millet .grass (Milium multi-
florum), cocksfoot grass (Dactylis glome-
rata), fescue grass (Festuca duriuscula),
buffalo grass (Stenotaphrum glabrum), couch
grass (Cynodon dactylon), canary grass
(Phalaris Americana), love grass (Eragrostis
cylindrica), and Job’s tear grass (Ooix
lacryma). Amongst fodder plants which
resist drought best he has found the chief to
be the Cape of Good Hope sheep bush
(Pentzia virgata), the rib grasses (Plantago
major and Plantago lanceolata), and the
small Burnett (Poterium sanguisorba).
Between Dr. Schomburgk’s residence and the
experimental garden is situated a museum
built of rustic work in the exact proportions
of the celebrated Pantheon of Athens, con-
taining about 2000 specimens of the vege-
table kingdom, including seeds, fruits (dried
and in salt water), dyestuffs, drugs, resins,
gums, vegetable products useful in medicine,
the arts, and domestic economy ■ and sec-
tions of woods from all parts of the world.
These are all carefully named. An inte-
resting part of this museum is also a collec-
tion of models from nature of about 400
kinds of fruit made from papier mache.
These are under a glass case, and are so
admirably true to nature that they are the
frequent subjects of bets by visitors, who
at first sight, cannot believe them to be
artificial. These are manufactured under
the auspices of the Pomolegical Society in
Berlin. There is a collection of fungi of the
same material, and a useful department of
the museum is devoted to samples of all
cereals grown in the colony shown in the
ear ; the first prize wheats of Europe shown
in England and France last exhibition; and
colonial-grown hops, tiax, tobacco and other
products. Passing from the museum, the
herbarium and long ranges of conservatories,
stove propagating houses, and fern-houses are
passed on the way to the Victoria regia house.
This building is rectangular, 57 feet long,
40 feet wide, and 13 feet high; the centre is oc-
cupied by an oval basin 36 feet by 26 feet, and
6 feet deep. This exceeds in dimensions the
Victoria tank at Chats worth, considered the
largest erected in Europe for a like purpose.
To keep the water in agitation a small water-
wheel is kept constantly revolving by means
of a jet of water through the ingress pipe.
The water is thus continually Hewing in, and
the overflow goes off by another pipe at the
other end of the basin. The house is kept
at a temperature of from 80 to 85 degrees.
Round the edge of the basin are 12 iron
pillars supporting the roof, and these have
been covered with the bark of the fern-tree,
on which are planted a fine collection of
tender ferns, that grow with great luxuri-
ance, entirely concealing the pillars. The
handsomest climbers have been trained along
the rafters, or in festoons along the ridge,
which, with the variegated leaves, perfection
of growth, and verdant appearance of the
numerous caladiums, dieflenbachias, anthu-
riums marantas, crotons and dracaenas
give a fairy charm to the house difficult to
describe. Prom thßfe part of the garden ser-
pentine paths branch in all directions among
fountains, statues, rustic seats, ornamental
bridges, long covered trellised walks, and
ornamental cages, sheds, and enclosures for
birds and animals. The grass plots and
lawns are planted with buffalo and couch
grass, and are mostly surrounded with stan-
dard roses and fine ornamental specimen
trees, including Pinus, Cupressus, Ficus, and
various European representatives. Groups
of standard geraniums, with stems four and
five feet high, having fine crowns, and
covered with their gay flowers, are nume-
rous, especially those of the double kinds.
The trial to raise standard gera-
niums was made by Dr. Schomburgk some
time since, and has succeeded perfectly,
these fine groups at once striking the eye
upon approaching them. A most tastefully
Hid-out rosery is one of the special features
of the grounds. It contains about 400
varieties of standard roses, planted in amphi-
theatre form, the rows rising one above the
other from the light shades near the
walks to the darker colors in the
background. In the centre of the rosery
stands Kiss’s fine equestrian statue of the
Amazon, An extensive arboretum is planted
with European, American, and Australian
forest trees. Amongst these are some very
fine specimens, and the pines merit mention,
more particularly on account of the very
large number of species embraced.
Dr. Schomburgk’s labels are worthy of
special note. They stand out with a black
and white clearness that led to a particular
inquiry as to his method. The labels are of
sheet iron, and, before painting, a mordant
of composition is employed thus, one part
chloride of copper, one of nitrate of
copper, and one of sal ammoniac are
dissolved in sixty-four parts of water,
to which solution is added one part
commercial hydrochloric acid. The iron
labels are brushed over with this liquid,


which gives them a darkish color. In the
course of twelve or twenty-four hours they
become dry, and to their now dirty grey
surface a coat or two of black oil color will
firmly adhere. When dry the names of the
plants are written with white oil color,
and immediately sanded with white
sand, which dries with the white
paint, and becomes compact. On these
labels, which resist all action of the
weather, Dr. Schomburgk’s rule is to print
the botanical name of each plant, its natural
order and native country. The collection of
out-door and pot plants in this garden is un-
derstood to be the largest to be found in any
kindred institution in the southern hemis-
phere. There are about 8000 species. The
collection of cacti and other succulents con-
tains alone 600 species, and 1 believe a simi-
lar collection is not to be found in Australia.
Many of the pot plants which have lately
appeared in the European market are already
found in the collection, and notwithstanding
somewhat overcrowding in the houses have a
healthy appearance, and show the care with
which they are treated. The orchid collec-
tion is also very fine. In 1870 Dr. Schom-
burgk made the experiment of planting a
palm group at the lower end of the garden
with palms of the following genera ;—La-
tania, Sabal, Chamaeraps, Rhapis, Cocos, and
Phoenix, which seem to have become accli-
matised, and are doing well, considering the
unfavorable climate for tropical plants. The
rapid increase of fine tropical plants in the
houses has reached a point of over-crowding,
which is to be remedied by the construction
of a splendid new palm-house in the vicinity
of the class-ground. This building is to be
on the plan of one recently built of iron in
Bremen, and considered to be one of the
finest structures of the kind in Europe. The
length will be 120 feet, width 49 feet, the
dome or rotunda 40 feet, and the wings 25
feet high, and will be provided with double
glass walls as protection against the hot sun.
The cost is estimated at £l4OO. When com-
pleted the public will have access to it, a
promenade traversing the house, and in the
rotunda an ornamental fountain will be
erected, surrounded by palm and fern trees;
most of these and other tropical trees, in-
stead of being in pots and tubs, will then be
planted in the ground, which will greatly
favor their luxuriant growth, and so display
their noble foliage to greater advantage.
The garden is kept in remarkable order, not
even the remotest corners being neglected.
A refined taste is shown everywhere, espe-
cially in the laying out and planting of the
terraces, parterres, and ribbon beds. Great
pains have been taken in the formation of
the garden walks. They are well formed,
gravelled, and drained, so that after the
heaviest rains they immediately dry. The
annual grant is £3OOO, including the main-
tenance of the animals and most of the im-
provements carried out during the year. The
staff of men employed is one head, two
in door and three out-door gardeners, eight
laborers, two carpenters, one painter, and
two keepers of the animals and birds, of
which there is a total of 500, including the
water and wade birds, which go at liberty.
All the cages and other enclosures are taste-
fully constructed on the premises in Swiss,
Italian, and Chinese style, from designs fur-
nished by the director. These designs con-
tribute much to the beauty of the gardens.
In the new park an addition of eighty-four
acres being laid out, twelve laborers are em-
ployed. This will be a grand supplement to
the garden when finished. Instead of twenty
feet, as is the garden main drive, the new
one will be thirty feet broad, lined with rows
of avenue trees. Midway in this drive a
large open circle will be formed for flower-
shows, concerts, or other popular festivities.
This circle will be surrounded by umbrageous
trees and shrubs. From the large circle
eight drives in stellated form will lead in
different directions through the grounds, and
communicate with a grand carriage-way, sixty
six feet broad, which will also be bordered
with avenue trees, and sweep the outside
border of the grounds in graceful curves. In
other parts will be formed two public
croquet grounds, and groves laid out with
intervening grass plats on which will be
scattered clunfps or single trees, conspicuous
to the eye by their fine foliage or form, be-
tween which in different directions the
curved and winding walks will lead to places
provided with seats, from which the best
perspective views of Adelaide and the back-
ground of hills will be obtained. In this
new work of laying out grounds and con-
structing the palm-house, which is all under
his immediate supervision, in addition to his
personal superintendence of the gardens,
Dr. Schomburgk has no skilled assistance.
His correspondence is also extensive, as is
shown by his stamp-book, showing an
average expenditure of £25 in stamps an-
nually. Considerh g the worthy director’s
age (now over sixty-three), and the fact that
five were spent in scientific travel over one
of the unhealthiest parts of the globe—
Guiana—he is wonderfully hale and full of
energy, looking much younger than his ac-
tual years. The Adelaide Botanic Gardens
generally reflect the highest credit upon their
talented manager, who regards as a compli-
ment the offer made to him by Mr. Casey to
take charge of the gardens in Melbourne.


No. lII.—THE OLIVE AND THE VINE.
Contents. —Mr. Davenport’s Residence, Beaumont—Olive Growing and Extracting the Oil—
The Wine Cellars —The Vineyard—Mr. Boothby’s Olive Operations at the Gaol—The
Olive Growing Company—Mr. Crompton’s Vineyard—Mr. Auld—Mrs. Penfold—Mr. Wurm’s
Farm at Unley—Olives—Fruit Drying—Sericulture—Olive Hedge—Mr. Chiles’ Oil-making.
The olive has been established in South
Australia for many years. In almost every
one of the numerous gardens and orchards
surrounding the city it can be seen flourish-
ing. Little if anything has been done, how-
ever, in the way of utilising its fruit by
extracting its valuable oil till within the
last year or two, during which the hon.
Samuel Davenport, of Beaumont, the presi-
dent of the Royal Agricultural Society, has
directed his attention to the matter. Mr.
Davenport succeeded in making a small
quantity of oil in 1872 with primitive appli-
ances ; next year he improved and obtained
necessary machinery, and has, last season,
produced 150 gallons of oil of excellent
quality. Beaumont is situated about four
miles to the east of Adelaide, on the slope
of the grand looking tier of- hills already
spoken of as running north and south at
that distance from the city. These hills are
thickly studded along their base with the
suburban residences of some of the leading
colonists, and the smaller establishments of
less pretending holders ; but in every case
there is a charming combination of the
ornamental with the useful. The flower
garden and shrubbery, the kitchen garden
and orchard, the olive and the vine, are
intermingled with the mansions of the
wealthy, and the villas of the comfortably
independent, upon a site which, overlooking
as it does Adelaide and the ocean with the
intervening farms and well-wooded parks
for the people, is one, especially in the spring
time, of superlative beauty.
The olives on Beaumont are grown partly
in the orchard surrounding the residence,
and partly in the form of a hedge round a
seven and a half acre vineyard. The trees
in this hedge are four feet apart, being
twelve years old, and having grown up strong
are about eight feet high, and have their
branches knit close in amongst each other,
forming an impenetrable hedge. In growing
olives for a hedge, however, their produc-
tiveness is hindered considerably by closeness
of planting. The 150 gallons of oil made
has been produced from 75 cwt. of fruit, 45 \
cwt. of which were purchased from neigh-
bors at 6s. per cwt. delivered. One cwt. of
fruit produces 2 gallons of oil. The yield
per tree varies according to age and size
from one to 20 gallons, although a cele-
brated olive tree has been known to give 55
gallons. Of course Mr. Davenport’s hedge
is no criterion, as trees planted at the right
width apart ought at twelve years of age to
be about 25 feet high. The olives on Beau-
mont were picked by children at sd. per
two-gallon bucket, and smart pickers on
good trees can make 2s. per day. The ex-
traction of the oil, which takes place in a
portion of Mr. Davenport’s extensive build-
ing for making and storing wine, is as
follows : —The fruit is put into a Chilian
mill of Scotch granite, the two rollers
being 3 feet in diameter and one ton each in
weight, driven by a horse. The crushed
pulp is then put into circular flat coarse mat
bags, two feet in diameter, and built in a
pile enclosed by a circular upright wooden
frame, and subjected to immense pressure
bjt means of a lever. From this press the
oil is allowed to run into a receiver contain-
ing water. This receiver is fitted with a
pipe which draws off the water underneath
the oil which floats on the top. The first,
or virgin, oil is most valuable. After this is
obtained hot water is applied to the pulp,
and a second quality is obtained which is
employed largely in cloth manufacture. The
oil, after standing a month to settle, is
filtered into porcelain jars. The prices ob-
tained by Mr. Davenport are 10s. (whole-
sale) for the virgin oil, and Bs. for the
seconds, with an unlimited demand.
On the same floor as the oil mill, the grape
crushing and fermenting departments are
situated, and underneath are the cellars for
storage. The wine is conveyed after leaving
the grape-crusher down a shoot into four
fermenting vats, two of 2000 gallons and two
of 600, made of slate obtained from Willunga,
in slabs, forming the sides in one piece’
although the large vats require slabs of


seven feet long by five feet broad and four
feet eight inches deep. The cellar contains
25,000 gallons of wine varying from seven
years of age to that of last vintage, which is
stored in one cask of 2000 gallons, four of
1000, two slate tanks of 1000 and 900, and
two of 800 gallons each, the remainder in
a cask of 500 gallons. The 2000 gallon cask
is understood to be the largest in the colonies;
it is nine feet long by eight and a half in
diameter, and was imported from Berlin, at
a cost, including putting together upon
arrival, of £7O. Thebuildingisof slate colored
sandstone, obtained in the neighborhood, and
is roofed with galvanised iron, the water
from which is conveyed to a 35,000 gallon
cemented tank. Between the galvanised
iron and a thin ceiling timber there is a foot
of seaweed to counteract the heat. A small
piece of ground near the cellar is planted
with olive seedlings preparatory to trans-
planting. The orchard round the residence
contains about fifteen acres of almonds,
olives, mulberries, oranges, apricots, loquats,
plums, cherries, quinces, nectarines, peaches,
pears, and apples, which all do well, except
the latter, which suffer from blight. The
soil is a red loam resting at no great depth
upon lime.
The vineyard is in three portions : the first
the one of seven and a half acres referred to
as having the olive hedge, and the secondo f
five. The former has been planted about
fourteen years with mixed kinds of grape.
The vines are planted six feet apart each way
on the quincunx fashion, or triangular, so
as to leave a passage for the plough in
three directions. Trenching was done eigh-
teen inches deep by means of the trench
plough following an ordinary plough in the
furrow. The next portion is of ten acres re-
cently planted in the same way. The pruning
adopted is the spur system without stakes or
other support. An adjoining field of seven
and a half acres has just been planted with
olive seedlings in land prepared as already
described for the vines. The olives have
been put in twenty-four feet apart every way,
triangularly (or quincunx) in May, that
month and J une being considered most favor-
able. When two years old it is intended to
stump the bad kinds and graft them with
the good sorts. The olive takes some time
to bear (about ten years), but after planting
no fruit requires less attention, and taking
into consideration the simplicity and absence
of risk in the manufacture, together with
the demand and price, olive culture promises
to be a most important industry in South
Australia. There are many parts of Victoria
where olives would flourish, and there is no
reason why their culture should not be turned
to account by us extensively and profitably.
Besides Mr, Davenport, one of the earliest
growers of the olive in South Australia is
Mr. Sheriff W. R. Boothby, who has
during the last twelve years utilised the
prison labor at the Adelaide gaol for the pur-
pose. The gaol is situated about a mile out
of town to the northward, and an inspection
of it in company with the sheriff and Mr.
Howell, the chief manager, was a most plea-
surable morning visit. The order and ex-
treme cleanliness everywhere displayed re-
flect the highest credit upon all concerned
in the management of the establishment; and
by judicious treatment of the prisoners a
large quantity of remunerative work is per-
formed, including tarpaulins, ore bag, and
mat making, the picking of oakum (chiefly
by the women) and the breaking of stones
for the corporation. A large amount of
masonry has also been done, and the tree-
planting and gardening which surround the
gaol, giving to the place the appearance of
pleasure grounds, have all been performed by
the prisoners during the last few years. The
olive department consists of an old and
new plantation, the former containing five
acres of trees very thickly planted, and the
latter a twenty-one acre block of younger
plants raised from seed and grafted.
Mr. Boothby’s system is to plant seedling
stocks any time between June and August,
and “ cleft graft” the year after about one
inch under the ground, with approved scions.
The bark of the olive he has found too thin
to succeed with grafting above ground. In
this way has the old five-acre lot been
treated, the seedlings having been obtained
from Captain Simpson, near Adelaide, and
grafted with a variety named the Verdale,
imported from Marseilles about thirty years
since by the South Australian Company. The
Verdale is considered by Mr. Boothby the
best sort, and a mark of its superiority is
the largeness of the leaf and the greyish
white color on the under side. The over-
thickness of planting has been remedied in
the new field, where a similar distance to
Mr. Davenport’s has been adopted, and also
the quincunx method, which admits of the
freest circulation of air. During our visit a
gang of prisoners were engaged in digging
the ground between the old olives, and one
of the guards was engaged in pruning.
between is, however, not impera-
tive where olives are planted wide enough
apart. Inside of the gaol the oil-room was
inspected, and afterwards the finished article
in clear bottles, equalling in appearance the
finest salad oil obtainable. Instead of Mr.
Davenport’s Chilian mill a common corn-
crusher is used for the first process, and an
ordinary hydraulic press takes the place of
the lever. The manner of filtering is by in-
serting the ends of a number of large tin
fillers into holes bored through wooden
covers over tubs, the filtering paper covering
the mouths of the fillers. The quantity of
oil produced from five acres for the last year
was sixty gallons of the first-class sort, the


warm water method for obtaining a second
quality not having been adopted. It is in-
tended to go on with new planting yearly,
upon adjoining park lands of the corporation.
The lands round the gaol are flat, and consist
of red heavy loam of considerable depth,
resting on lime and clay.
For the carrying out of olive culture on a
large scale a company in Adelaide has also
been formed. Capital £SOOO, in £IOO shares,
upon which £lO has been paid up. One
hundred and thirty-five acres of land on the
slope of the hill near Mr. Davenport’s resi-
dence has been purchased from Mr. Cromp-
ton, J.P., who is the secretary. Thirty -
five acres of seedlings have been transplanted
last June from the nursery, where several
hundreds are being brpught on for next
season. Grafting will take place here as
already described in Mr. Boothby’s manage-
ment. Planting has been done at twenty-two
feet between the rows and twenty between
the trees, in holes two feet deep and live
feet square. The soil is of the thin red
loam with lines cropping through that
characterises the slope of this range of hills,
which have, as has been already described, a
westerly aspect, overlooking Adelaide at a
distance of about five miles. In this system
of grafting seedlings Mr, Crompton does not
expect bearing trees earlier than eight years
from date of transplanting. Above the plan-
tation is Mr. Crompton’s residence, vineyard
of thirty-live acres, and extensive wine cel-
lars, w'hich, like those of most of the vignerons
along the slope, have been built so as to take
advantage of the hill. The cellars contain
30,000 gallons of wine, a portion of which
has been purchased from smaller growers, a
system that is becoming general with several
large growers round Adelaide, and by which
the wines are not allowed to reach the mar-
ket before being fit. Along the slope to the
northward a short distance are situated the
large vineyards and cellars of Mr. Auld and
a Victorian company managed by Mrs, Pen-
fold, both of which are by this system also
laboring to elevate the character of colonial
wines. Mr. Crompton’s vineyard has been
planted since 1858, but last year his vintage
was low, on account of wrong sorts put in
necessitating the grafting of those suitable.
The sorts being put in now are the Muscat
and Shiraz (or Hermitage), the former for
table grapes and raisins.
Mr. F. Wurm, whose place lies near Unley,
a suburb two miles south-east from Adelaide,
is another gentleman who has for some time
given his attention to olive culture and oil
manufacture, although as yet only on a small
scale. Mr. Wurm’s system of propagating
is, however, notable as being different to any
yet mentioned. Instead of the seedling and
grafting system, truncheons about sixteen
inches long and from one to two inches thick,
are cut direct from the branches of good
sorts, and planted about six inches apart,
and a third of their length in a loamy soil
prepared with a good admixture of sand.
The truncheons are set in rows about a foot
apart, the soil between being hoed out con-
cave for the reception of a good mulching of
stable manure. In this way they are made
to strike, being watered during the summer,
and are transplanted in the following June.
By this system Mr. Wurm claims to be able
to produce trees beginning to bear within
four years and in full bearing at eight. Mr.
A. Wurm, who is in business as a grain
merchant in town, occupies seventeen acres
altogether round his house at Unley, and this
little piece of land, which has only been in
cultivation about eleven years, is specially
representative of how varied are the capabi-
lities of the South Australian soil, under in-
telligent and industrious management. Four
acres are devoted to grapes, from one acre
and a half of which three tons of raisins
were made last season, for which sd. per lb,
was obtained for the Zante currant, sd. for the
loose muscatel, 7d. for the sultana, and 9d.
for the table variety, wholesale. The re-
maining two and a half acres are not yet
bearing, having been grafted with these three
favorite raisin-making varieties. From 200
bearing olives twenty-five gallons of oil (at
10s. per gallon) were obtained by a corn-
crusher and lever press of the most inexpen-
sive kind. Other GOO trees will soon be in
bearing, and a few new ones are put in every
season. The Lisbon lemon tree is described by
Mr. Wurm as most hardy, rapid in growth,
and bearing actually all the year round,
having at all times blossom, young fruit and
ripe lemons, gives a very large return in
fruit and candied peel, besides lemon juice
forming a delicious drink. For the peel Is.
per lb. is obtained. Another part is taken
up by a grove of almonds, the Brandes Jordan
giving ten cwt., sold at sd. per lb. ; oranges,
forty trees, giving from twenty to thirty
dozen per tree, loquats, citrons, prunes. The
locust and mulberry trees are to be seen in
various directions. The mulberries comprise
lOOOrooted trees, and afewthousand cuttings,
to feed from 40,000 to 50,000 silk worms,
from which upwards of that number of co-
coons are expected. The sericultural prac-
tice of this establishment, which, after many
attempts, bids fair this year to be eminently
successful, is based upon M. Roland’s essay,
as translated in these columns some time
since, and includes the use of the manchon,
for which the trees have been dwarfed. The
frames used by Mr. Wurm are of galvanised
netting, forty-nine holes to the square inch,
and they are in use almost continually, being
constructed to do for all the processes re-
quired. For instance, they are employed in
drying the Zante currants in February, then
the sultana raisins a month later, followed
by the muscatel about April. The olives


then come in, and require to be kept apart
to prevent fermenting while waiting to be
crushed. For this purpose the frames are used,
and then follows the silk worms and so on.
Decidedly the finest hedge I have yet seen is
the olive hedge on this place. It is eight
years old, composed of seedlings planted a
foot apart in a spit deep trench. It is cut
down to live feet high and is two feet wide,
as square and solid as a wall. It is as im-
penetrable to stock as a thorn hedge, and
has the advantage of being green all the year.
Besides, a quantity of fruit is obtained from
it. Another part of the garden has a hedge
of the Buck thorn or Rhamnus Alaternus,
another evergreen and nearly equal to the
olive in strength. This hedge is only six
years old, and is quite proof against cattle.
The site of this little farm is flat, the soil
similar to that described at the gaol, and has
been trenched eighteen inches deep on the
two-plough principle.
Mr. Chiles, who occupies five acres ad-
joining, is also going in for olive planting.
He is at present the largest oil maker near
Adelaide. He has given last season 7s. 6d.
per cwt. for the berries, and nothinheg has
yet tried has paid him, he states, half so well.
No. IV.—THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HON. THOMAS ELDER.
Contents. —Situation and Appearance of Birksgate—The Vineyard and Cellars—The Reservoir
and Observatory—The House and Grounds lit by Gas made on the place—The Entrance,
Verandah, and Fountain—The Conservatory—The Orangery—The Camels, the Stud and
Stabling.
It has been already alluded to how
much nature has done on the hills which
Hank Adelaide on the east in the way of
supplying ites of varied beauty for subur-
ban residences, and when to this is added
all that our colonial millionaires can supply, it
can be easily imagined how like to terrestrial
paradises some of these retreats can be made.
The grounds around Mr. Elder’s mansion
are comparatively new, and have, therefore,
not yet obtained that peculiar beauty which
age of vegetation can only give, but on every
hand wealth is being lavished unsparingly
in the formation of this charming seat. The
place is reached by the main overland road
to Melbourne, which passes the lodge where
it begins to ascend the hills under the
highest peak of the range, named Mount
Lofty, which is 2400 feet above the level of
the sea. The road between the city and
Birksgate, the name of the residence, is
itself an avenue, the drive being along a
beautifully level and well kept metal road,
enclosed on each side by trees planted
by the Corporation along the park
lands (or people’s reserves), which
border the road the most of the way.
This avenue appearance of the roads every-
where round Adelaide is a special feature,
as also is the superiority of the roads, abun-
dance of first-class stone for the making of
which is obtained from the Glen Osmond
quarries higher up the hills beyond Birks-
gate, from whence the most of the building
stone of the city is also obtained. The
trees round the park lands are chiefly red
gums, planted in four rows about twelve feet
apart, and are now, at twelve years of age,
thirty feet high, and upon the average
about one foot through. Tree planting
around fields is also largely carried on by
private land holders in the suburbs. Imme-
diately before reaching Birksgate the fine
grounds of Mr. Boothby on the one side of
the road, and those of Captain Simpson on
the other are passed. In the latter, running
parallel with the road, are two long rows of
very fine old olive trees, under which are
springing seedlings sufficient to plant olive
groves hundreds of acres in extent.
Birksgate contains about 100 acres of land,
in the centre of which, just where the hills
begin to rise, is situated the mansion, con-
servatory, shrubbery and orchard. Further
up the hill, at the back, is a fifteen-acre vine-
yard ; below the house on the flat another
vineyard of four acres, and along the face of
the hills to the southward the paddocks for
the racing stock. These paddocks are tim-
bered with old peppermints, the original
timber of the locality, and are chiefly covered
with Cape weed (Cryptostemma Calendulacea)
which is readily eaten by stock, and on which
they get fat. The fencing is of neatly


strained wire, with painted top rail, and or-
namental iron gates, excepting that facing
the road and hill, which is a stone and lime
wall nine feet high. The wall facing the road
has brick piers at intervals, and is capped
with ornamental iron cast work. The soil
varies from a red loam on the hill to a rich
alluvial deposit in the fiat, and this variety
admits of growing many different kinds of
grapes, from those producing a sweet luscious
wine to others of a dryer character. The
cellars are cut into the solid rock in the
upper vineyard, above the residence, and are
roofed with seaweed between galvanised iron
and a thin deal ceiling, as already described
in reference to the cellars of Mr. Davenport.
The cellars are of two\ stories, and so con-
structed that the grapes can be passed in
from the drays on the upper side of the hill,
down a shoot into the grape-crusher, and
thence down to the vats, thus saving much
labor. The cellars are built and fitted in
the most complete manner, and are kept in
excellent order. They are capable of holding
a very large supply, and at present contain
about 15,000 gallons, the produce of three
vintages, as, although some of the vines are
fourteen years old, wine-making has only
been carried on since 1872. Of the vineyard
on the hill three acres have been recently
planted with Sercial—a new variety, in-
troduced by Mr. Davenport,—and of the re-
mainder a considerable proportion is devoted
to the raising of the muscat of Alex-
andria and the Sultana, which are excellent
table and raisin varieties. The cellar con-
tains many different wines made from the
Madeira grape, the Tokay, Goa, Verdeilho,
the Frontignac, the Shiraz and Malbec, the
black Portugal and Carignan, the Mataro,
the Grenache, Verdeilho and Doradilla, and
the Pedro Ximenes. The wine-making and
viticulture being under the management
of an experienced man, Mr. Potter, the
wines are of excellent quality, and used
by the owner at his own table to a
large extent. In the upper part of the
hill vineyard an artificial lake has been
constructed by damming a gully, and
conveying to it water by a pipe led three
miles up the range to where a spring is in-
tercepted. From the reservoir, which is sur-
rounded by vine terraces on the Rhenish
principle, water is laid on to the house, and
by pipes all over the grounds for irrigation
purposes, the orangery especially receiving a
large supply. Near to the reservoir is the
turret, an observatory thirty feet high, from
which a grand view is obtained of Adelaide
and Port Adelaide, with a panoramic scene of
rural beauty extending from the mouth of
the Gulf to the southward along its shores
northward to Port Gawler, Not only does
Mr. Elder make his own wine, but he has a
complete gas works on the establishment,
by which the house and the various buildings
are supplied, and on party occasions the
grounds and conservatory are brilliantly
lighted up.
The grand entrance to the house, which is
a beautiful piece of Corinthian work, is
approached by a flight of stone steps, with
iron pillars on either hand carrying gas globes,
and a broad verandah and balcony supported
by massive bronzed iron pillars richly
worked sweeps round the western portion of
the building. The western verandah is 14 feet
wide, and 40 feetlong, framed and glazed with
large sized plate glass, ornamented with
brilliant flowers and foliage plants, and when
required is converted into a gas lit promen-
ade. A central position in front of the house
is occupied by a fountain of tasteful design
the water falling into a large granite basin
with a coping of Rath freestone richly carved.
The basin is filled withsweetscentedlilies and
other aquatic plants. On the right and near
the house is the conservatory, standing amidst
shrubs and ornamental trees. This building is
an elegant iron and glass structure of light
and graceful appearance, designed and sent
out to order by J as. Boyd and Son, of Paisley,
Scotland. It is 50 feet long by 21 broad, and
is divided into two compartments—the one
end a cool conservatory, and the other for
growing plants from warmer climes. The
heating is done on the hot water pipe system,
and the floor is of Wiliunga slating. The
house is filled with a very fine collection of
plants, those in the cool end including palms,
ferns, pelargoniums, fuchsias, begonias,
cyclamens, cinerarias, primulas ; and those in
the heated part containing, amongst the usual
varieties of stove plants, some very fine speci-
mens of the crotons, drachmas, caladiums, an-
thuriums marautas, alocasias, dieffenbachias
sanchezias, clerodeudrons, alamandas, gloxi-
nias, and bletia tankervillii. Various clim-
bers are trained to the roof, and baskets filled
with ferns and lycopods are suspended from
iron rods, giving the house a tropical appear-
ance, This end of the conservatory is supplied
with water by a fountain which plays in the
centre. With reference to iron houses for
conservatories in South Australia, however,
the opinion of Mr. Somerville, the gardener,
is not favorable. They are, he finds, too hot
in summer, and too cold in winter. A lean-
to in the rear of the building contain a propa-
gating pit 18 ft. by 10, also heated by hot water.
Detached a short way is another pit, 48 feet
by 10, for growing such plants as cinerarias-
tricolor geraniums, pelargonium and
fuchsias. Near this is a bamboo house, 60
feet by 20, in which are planted tree ferns
and other shade loving plants, while
climbers grow all over the roof, forming a
pleasant and cool shade in the summer
months. The shrubbery contains about 10
acres, and amongst the shrubs and coniferse
found to grow best are the pinus longi-
folia, coulterii, sabiniana, insignis, canarien-


sis; the Aleppo pine, and the stone pine;
the ficus macrophylla and australis, and
the araucaria and sterculia family of various
sorts. The cupressus does not succeed very
well. The kitchen garden, orchard, and
small geometrical garden comprise about two
acres. Among the fruits were apples, pears,
apricots, peaches, almonds, olives, loquats,
mulberries, oranges, and bananas. Straw-
berries were gathered last season for nearly
five months by dint of irrigation from the
reservoir. The more water they obtained
the better they grew, but several young
orange trees planted amongst them were
killed, A fine bowling green and croquet
ground have their appropriate places.
In a portion of the grounds set apart for
them a collection of animals are kept, in-
cluding kangaroos, emus, llamas, Angora
goats, and three camels, one male and two
females, one of the latter having at foot a
young one of some few weeks old. The
manager of the stables has at present three
two-year-olds in hand for the coming races—
Tricohcin, an iron-grey Mahomet colt, out
of a Fisherman mare ; Lorenzo, a bright bay
Lucifer colt, out of Zenobia by Kingston; and
Jessica, a bay filly by Lucifer, out of
Gypsey, by Newmarket. The stallion of the
Birksgate stud is at present the veteran
Corsair by Conrad out of Aconite; and the
brood mares include old Zenobia, Hebe, her
daughter by Lucifer and own sister to Fugle-
man, Bay Gypsey, Parramatta, and
Fishfag by Fisherman. Hebe and Bay
Gypsey have been sent to Talk o’ the
Hill; and Fishfag, who has a clever looking
foal at foot, is to go to Ace of Clubs. The
two-year-olds running out in the paddocks
comprise Vulcan, a black colt by Lucifer
out of Fishfag, Kavensheugh, a chesnut
Leonidas colt out of Yellow Crystal by
Muscovado, and Bay Sea King by Lucifer
out of Mermaid, a Fisherman mare. The
yearlings muster five, of which one is a
Lucifer, and the remainder the progeny of
King Tom, the whole forming a most
promising looking lot of youngsters. The
stabling, like everything else on the place, is
complete, has the water laid on, and is kept
in every detail with the greatest neatness
and order. Upwards of a dozen men and
boys are constantly employed on the place,
including the heads of the three depart-
ments, the vineyard, the grounds, and the
stud, each of whom are capable men in their
several professions.
No. V.—WINE AND RAISIN MAKING.
Contents. —Bankside, Mr. Hardie’s Vineyard—The Process of Wine Making—Wine Blending—
Exportation—The Process of Raisin Making—Fruit Drying—Fruit for Jam—Oranges and
Irrigation—Almonds—Avenues of Olive Trees—Peculiar System of Fencing—Cleanliness
essential to Good Wine Making.
Bankside Vineyard is generally admitted
to be one of the most notable establishments
in South Australia, and its proprietor, Mr.
Thomas Hardy, one of the most skilful of
managers. Mr, Hardy is essentially a prac-
tical man, and ail his operations from the
time he made his first rise (on the early
Victorian goldfields), with which he pur-
chased in its natural state his present pro-
perty, have been throughout worked so as
to pay. Bankside is situated on the banks
of the Torrens, three miles due west from
Adelaide, or about half-way to the coast.
An excellent metal road passes between
hay farms, and past the sale-yards, slaugh-
ter-house, and boiling-down establishment
of Mr. E. M. Bagot, whose stock run upon
2000 acres of gras*, land, upon which expe-
periments are being made in lucerne grow-
ing. The difficulty found with lucerne in
South Australia has been that if kept closely
fed it dies out. This Mr. Bagot avoids by
subdividing his land into ten-acre pad-
docks, from one to the other of which the
stock are shifted, so as to arrange that the
fields will always receive sufficient spell.
This system is also found to have an ex-
cellent effect on the stock. Bankside
Vineyard has altogether 60 acres under
cultivation, 40 of which are under vines, and
the remainder orange, almond, olive and
other fruit trees. The soil near the river is
a rich alluvium, 20 feet deep, resting on
reddish clay, with veins of decomposed
limestone ; at this depth water is found.
The principal grapes cultivated are the
Shiraz (or Hermitage) for wine, and the
Muscatel, Gordo bianco, Sultana, and


the Zante and Cape currants for raisins.
The distance between the rows is from 7 to
10 feet. Planting began in 1855 ; 30 acres
were planted in 1863, and 8 acres, Muscatel,
in 1872. The whole of the land has been laid
out suitable for working with the plough.
Ploughing is done once a year, harrowing
and scarifying when needed, and the strips
left by the plough are dug with three-pronged
hoes. The Hermitage grapes are all trel-
lised with two wires, and pruned on a
modification of the plan described by Guyot.
Instead of one cane, as described by him, four
(two on each side of the vine) are left, from
fifteen to eighteen inches long, and fastened
with small wire to the lower wire of the
trellis, each cane having a bend downward to
the point to ensure the buds breaking equally
the whole length of the canes. These canes
are pruned away with all the season’s growth,
and fresh ones brought down to replace
them. The reasons for the four canes instead
of one are the strength of the vines and their
distance apart. The muscat vines, grown
principally for raisins, are ten feet between
the rows, and five between the vines, and
pruned to from eight to ten short spurs on
trellises about eighteen inches above the
head of the vine to support the season’s
growth and prevent the grapes being
scorched by the sun, which spoils them for
raisins. The Zante currant is cultivated on
high trellises, so as to allow the fruit to
hang clear of the foliage, which is found to
be the best means of securing a crop. Mr.
Hardy is of opinion that as this grape
flourishes well up on the hills it would do
well in Victoria, and it is not difficult to
dry. Wine is made from the vineyard, and
largely from grapes purchased. That from
the produce of the vineyard is made into a
pale luscious wine, the grapes being allowed
to hang until almost dried into raisins, and
the juice pressed off immediately after
crushing in order to get as little color as pos-
sible, white wines being vastly more in de-
mand during late years. The skins are
then fermented in large tanks made
in the cooperage on the establishment, and
give a coarse sweet liquor found useful in
getting up the lower class wines. The white
wines are all fermented in 500 gallon casks
with manholes to allow of thorough cleans-
ing. The grapes purchased from smaller
proprietors last vintage were 262 tons, from
which various kinds of wine were made the
vintage beginning with the Verdeilho, Reis-
ling and ear!y npening kinds from the base
of the hills and other early situations. Some
of these are purchased by the ton, the price
from it! to h’o delivered, and many vineyard
crops are purchased by Mr. Hardy and
gathered and carted by his own staff. The
grapes are usually carted in open quarter-
casks fitted with wire loops for hoisting.
Twelve of these, containing from thirty to
thirty-five cwt. of grapes, make a load.
The grapes, on arriving at the press-
house, which is of three stories, are
hoisted by steam-power to the top floor
and passed through a pair of steam driven
rollers (if for white wine) into shoots, and
conveyed direct to the presses, of which
there are 4, in the lower story. A fifth
press will be required for the coming vintage.
The juice from the press is then pumped
into the fermenting casks in the second
story. If for red wine, the crushed grapes
pass into a long revolving cane mesh and
wood screen, working on the principle of
the cylindrical wheat screen in a threshing
machine, which thoroughly separates the
stalks; the crushed grapes, and juice, pass-
ing downwards into tanks and vats, contain-
ing from 800 to 1500 gallons each, and
allowed to ferment for a time, which prac-
tice Mr. Harding’s experience has found
to be best. The partially fermented juice is
then drawn into clean casks, and the press-
ing kept separate, as a rule, until afterwards.
This wine is then added to other kinds
that require such admixture. The screen
separator, which effects a great saving
of labor, is made octagonal, in eight
sections, coming readily apart for con-
venience of cleaning, and is the invention
of the proprietor. The mill and screen are
capable of passing through 1 cwt per minute.
Racking is vigorously and systematically
carried on, the first racking taking place as
soon as the wine has thrown down the
grosser lees, and continued at intervals as the
wines become bright. Some of the wine
at the time of my visit had been already
racked the third time since the vintage.
The fermenting-rooms are heated to help the
fermentation during the latter part of the
vintage (when the nights are getting cold)
by means of the exhaust steam and charcoal
or coke fires, and the new wines are all kept
above ground in places exposed to all the
changes of temperature, and are considered
to ripen thereby. The stock of wines of
all ages was at the close of last vintage
103,000 gallons, since which 20,000 gallons
have been purchased from other growers.
Wines to suit all classes are kept on sale,
from the low class red wines, sold chiefly to
farmers for harvest drink at 2s. per gallon,
to the finest wines produced in the colony.
Amongst tnese Mr. Hardy exhibits as a
curiosity a wine twenty years of age, made
from the verdeilho. Mr. Hardy’s business is
a rapidly increasing one, from small makers
relinquishing the manufacture of wine into the
hands of these larger makers, thus securing a
great improvement and uniformity of quality.
The art of blending is learnt only by long
experience, and as a profitable commercial
speculation possible only with a large stock,


is successfully carried out by Mr. Hardy.
The wines are mostly sold in the colony, but
considerable quantities of the better classes
are shipped to England, Victoria, and New
Zealand, and to a smaller extent to India,.
China, and other eastern countries. The
wine stores above ground and cellars under-
neath are of great extent. The latter are
excavated and in drives, and their inspection
reminds one of the various subterraneous
ramifications of a Ballarat gold-mine. One
of these drives is for the storage of kegs,
many hundreds of which are in constant
circulation, and down here they are kept from
the sun. During the vintage from 50 to
60 hands are employed, the gathering being
done by boys and girls at Is. per day.
About 15 hands are employed all the year
round, including the foreman, a G-erman of
considerable experience, a Frenchman also,
who hopes soon to be able to make champagne,
and two coopers. The permanent vineyard
laborers are resident cottagers in the locality
receiving ss. and a bottle of wine per day.
At the close of the vintage Mr. Hardy’s
practice has always been to give a treat to
his hands, and these are seasons of great
enjoyment, upwards of 200 persons generally
taking part in the festivities.
The manufacture of raisins and other dried
fruits was begun by Mr. Hardy about 12
years since, and after many failures and
disappointments may be now said to be a
success. The grapes for raisins are allowed
to get thoroughly ripe, and are carefully
gathered, all faulty berries being removed.
They are then dipped in a boiling ley made
from the ashes of the vine cuttings, and
afterwards spread even and thin on paling
trays, 5 feet long and 2£ feet wide, and
exposed to the sun from 8 to 20 days accord-
ing to the weather. These trays are fitted
with 3-inch edgings, so that they may be
rapidly put on top of each other without
crushing the berries, and placed under
cover in case of rain. The trays are
then placed in kilns constructed with
mud walls and roof in the form of huge
ovens, and heated by means of sheet-iron
hues underneath the doors, for 24 to 48
hours to finish off. They are then passed
into a room where the stalks are rubbed off
and, when convenient, put into boxes for
sale. The Sultana raisins dry in from 4 to
6 days and the currants in 3 days. The
dessert raisins are not dipped, but simply
dried in the sun, and from the longer time
required are more difficult to make in moist
seasons. The dessert raisins are sold whole-
sale at Bd. per lb., the pudding raisins 5d.,
and the Zante and other currants 6d. The
flavor of the raisins made from the muscat
grapes is preferred by the Adelaide grocers,
being superior to most imported ; but the
size is smaller than the Eleme, and this is
an objection by consumers who are not
accustomed to their use. Possibly larger
kinds of grapes may be found in Spain, or
the method of cultivation may be different
to what is known yet in South Australia.
Apples and apricots are readily dried, and
require no kiln, from being earlier in the
season. The apricots are grown for jam-
making, and are dried when the price comes
down to 3s. per cwt. About 10 tons of
dried fruits altogether were made by Mr.
Hardy during the past season, and as there
is an increasing demand it is intended to ex-
tend this part of the trade. Lemons and
citrons are grown to some extent at Bank-
side, and sold to manufacturers of candied
peel and marmalade at remunerative prices,
The oranges are grown in the alluvial soil
near the river, in a low portion of land
which must have been a former course of
the river. Of the sorts grown the navel
and silletta are the best, next the Malta.
The mandarin also does very well. The
grove is irrigated by means of a Cameron’s
steam pump two or three times during
the summer. Manure is liberally laid
on the top of the soil round the trees
during the summer, for the purpose of les-
sening evaporation. The quality of fruit is
first-class; the shoots are occasionally
thinned out, but no large branches taken
off. The second crop is removed as
worthless and injurious to the trees.
Almonds are grown in double rows of
fine trees round the fence, and are
highly ornamental as well as useful.
The favorite sort is the Brandes Jordan.
The tree is very upright and hand-
some, the fruit very large, and stands
transit better than any other kind of soft
shell almonds yet cultivated. The almonds
are gathered for Id. per lb. and the crop,
about 3 tons, is monthly shipped to New
Zealand. The wholesale price obtained is from
sd. to 6d. per lb. Olives have been grown
by Mr, Hardy for many years, and in many
respects are a special feature in his manage-
ment. As the vineyard is approached, it is
seen that a greater portion of it is fenced
with olive trees, at intervals of about 12 feet,
the stems acting as everlasting posts for a
four wire fence. This is one of Mr. Hardy’s
hobbies, and he has instituted experiments
extending over many years, to prove that
boring holes through living fruit and other
trees for the reception of wire does not in
any way affect their growth or fruit. The
residence is also approached by a splendid
avenue of old olive trees, thick in the stem
and about 15 feet high. Apart from its
value pecuniarily, a more beautiful avenue
tree than the olive could not be desired. Mr.
Hardy’s method of propagating young olives
is the same as that already described as being
practised by Messrs. F, Wurm, and his


neighbor Mr. Chiles. For wire fencing the
olive is trained to single stems of about 4 feet
high and a substantial fence is obtained
within 10 years. Mr. Hardy’s olive crop was
picked by boys and girls at 2s. per cwt. and
sold to oilmakers at from 6s. to 7s.
The whole establishment at Bankside is
conducted in the most systematic manner,
and that leading essential to successful wine
making, cleanliness, is rigidly attended to.
Facilities for washing and sulphuring casks,
washing bottles, and for the daily scalding of
every portion of the machinery that comes
in contact with the must during the vintage
have all their appropriate places, amongst
the hundred and one appliances on every
hand for the working of the establishment
with the minimum of labor consistent with
due attention required. The finished appear-
ance of the residence, and the adaptability
,of the various buildings for their several
purposes would not convey to the visitor the
idea that everything has gradually grown
from a very small beginning on the principle
of adding a little year by year as means would
allow. This result has been obtained by
starting from the beginning on a defined plan
capable of extension. Visitors to Adelaide
and its beautifulsurroundings should not leave
a drive to Bankside out of their programme'
No. YL—GAWLER.
Contents. —The Railway Carriages—No Locking—Appearance of Farms between Adelaide and
Gawler—Agricultural Implement Factories—lron and Gold near Gawler—The Hon. Walter
Duffield’s Residence —The Flour Mills—The Public Buildings and Private Residences—
Slovenly Farming—Lucerne Growing and Rotation Cropping, by Messrs. Clement and Rigg—
Mr. Kelly’s Horse Farm —Fallow System by Mr. Winckel—Flax Growing and Mr. Roedger’s
Gawler, one of the oldest agricultural
districts in the colony, is situated 25 miles
from Adelaide, to the northward, and is
reached by the main trunk line of railway,
which runs past the town to the Burra
mine, a distance of 100 miles. Shortly after
passing Gawler a branch line strikes north
east to Kapunda, which it reaches in 48
miles from Adelaide. The train, after
leaving Adelaide, passes along a perfectly
level flat of farm covered country running
parallel with the tier of hills lying at the back
of Adelaide, called the Mount Lofty ranges,
which continue right up north, and are sup-
posed to be a backbone reaching quite across
the continent. What has already been re-
ferred to as the American appearance of the
South Australian railways strikes a Vic-
torian visitor up the north line. The loco-
motive, fitted with the American car and
cow catcher, and the ditch contrivance to
save gatekeepers, together with the notice-
boards at the level crossings, warning
the public to “look out for the
train,” contribute to this appearance.
There are first, second and third class car-
riages, The first are hardly so good as those
in Victoria, the second about equal, and be-
tween the second and third class there is very
little difference. For the 25 miles to Gawler
the single fares are, first-class, 6s, 3d.;
second, 4s. 9d.; third, 3s. 3d. As the doors
are not locked the passengers let themselves
out at the stations, and get in again when
the bell rings, with a free and easiness
quite novel to a person used to the lock-up
system. The stations passed between Ade-
laide and Gawler are the Dry Creek, where
is situated the S. A. Pentridge, and Salisbury
and Smithfield, small agricultural villages,
surrounded by farms of red loamy soil,
badly fenced with wire, and bearing indif-
ferent crops. The soil from the train looks
rich but ill-used, and many fields are lying idle
and covered with Cape weed. On the le't, to-
wards the coast of St. Vincent’s Gulf, the
plain has irequent belts of young timber
among the green of the farms, and onthe
right, between the line and the Mount
Lofty range, an intermediate lower tier
of farm-covered rolling country runs,
which, as Gawler Town is approached,
closes in across the track to the north.
In the bight of this rolling country, and
between two streams which come through
these hills from the ranges at the back,
lies Gawler, a really beautiful little town,
Just below the town the two streams called


the North Para aud the South Para join,
forming the Gawler River, which flows off to
the westward into the gulf at Port
Gawler, a distance of about twenty
miles. There is not much business done
with the port, things mostly coming from
Adelaide by rail.
Gawler, as viewed from the sur-
rounding hills, presents a pleasing ap-
pearance, there being some very good
buildings, some ornamental tree plant-
ing in the people’s reserve, varied with
the heavy gums along the two water-
courses, and some very tasteful villas
on the gentle slopes, immediately over-
looking the town. Gawler contains alto-
gether 383 houses, with a total population of
1652. Of these 337 are adult males. The
assessment is £13,069. A special feature of
the town is its agricultural implement manu-
factories, of which there are six—those of
Messrs. Swan and Ivett, J. Allen, J. Jones
Hill and Sparshott, and J. Martin and
Co, The last-mentioned firm, estab-
lished by Mr. Martin twenty-four years,
is now the largest concern of the kind in
South Australia, and is annually increasing.
The establishment is in two portions, the old
and the new, on opposite sides of Murray-
street, the principal thoroughfare. The old
portion consists of an area of two acres,
covered by buildings, viz,, the blacksmith’s
shop, with sixteen forges, steam hammer,
noiseless fan for blast, large and small
punching and shearing machines, press for
shaping comb teeth for strippers ; the
fitting shop, with eight lathes for brass,
iron, and woodwork, one large and two
smaller vertical drilling machines, screw-
ing machines, planing machine, saw
bench, and numerous other appli-
ances, all driven by a powerful steam
engine. Here are also the carpenters’ and
wheelwrights’ shops, paint-shops, counting-
houses and cellars. The new establishment
covers an area of four acres, and contains
three large cupola furnaces, a drying store
for cores, powerful cranes for lifting, patterns
innumerable, and all the requisites for carry-
ing on a large foundry business. A 15-horse
power steam engine in this part drives a lathe
with a 30-loot bed, capable of turning wheels,
&c., over 6 feet in diameter, three fans for
the cupolas and forges, and a saw mill. One
hundred and twenty men and boys are con-
stantly employed turning out annually 200
strippers, 150 winnowers, 100 mowers, 100
waggons, 50 horse rakes, 50 horse powers, a
large number of ploughs, chiefly double-furrow,
chaffcutters, rollers, com-crushers, drays and
carts. In the foundry, besides engine and
boiler work, and the casting of ploughshares,
there has been turned out successfully, at a
less cost than the imported article, a large
quantity of pumping and other gear for the
mines. In the Mount Lofty ranges, calleq
at the back of Gawler the Barossa
ranges, there is an unlimited supply of
good iron stone, a quantity of which
has been successfully smelted on the
works, but the smelting is at present
discontinued on account of the price of coals
and the scarcity of labor. While upon the
subject of these Barossa ranges, although
not connected with agriculture, it may be
mentioned that prospects of gold have been
found at different times during the last
seven years, but latterly several reefs have
been struck, and companies formed to
work them. Amongst these the most im-
portant is the Lady Alice, being now
worked by ten men on tribute, and re-
turning an average of 150 oz. per fort-
night, besides some very rich lodes of
cepper. This mine, started for gold,
has, in fact, turned out also a
splendid copper mine, and it is expected
that heavy gold will be struck at a greater
depth, as there is at present a well defined
gold-bearing reef at a depth of 170 feet,
Gawler possesses three very large and fine
flour mills, two belonging to the hon. Walter
Duffield, who has a princely residence down
the river at Bara Para, and one belonging to
Mr. James Dawson, who took the prize
for flour in London against all comers.
The public buildings of Gawler are of a
superior kind, and built of a slate stone found
abundantly in the neighborhood. Amongst
these the literary institute, museum, and
public reading room, built at a cost of £5OOO
by private subscription of the residents, is
highly creditable to the town. Amongst the
villas overlooking the town from the slopes,
a new residence, built after the Oriental style,
with flat roof and surrounding colonnade,
occupies a prominent position, and has the
side of the hill planted with oranges,
lemons, mulberries, peaches, &c., on walled
terraces, connected with each other by
flights of steps. This place, which belongs
to Mr. Thorup, has a very fine effect. Mr.
Thorup has for some time given attention
to sericulture, with good results.
The general contour of the farming
country round Gawler has a great re-
semblance to the Pentland Hills in Vic-
toria. The soil varies from a red loam on
the hills, with frequent streaks of limestone
cropping through, to black alluvium in the
valleys. The system, speaking gene-
rally, has been for upwards of the
last eighteen years the growing of
wheat year after year without manure,
rotation, or any attempt at restorative farm-
ing beyond an occasional summer fallow.
The farms as a rule have run about 80 acres
each, occupied chiefly by tenants who own
bullock drays, and who were employed be-
tween seed-time and harvest time in cart-
ing ore from the Burra mines, until this was
stopped by the opening of the railway. The


whole district exhibits the appearance of
having been treated as if the annual
harrowing in of wheat, the stripping of it,
and the burning of the straw, were
expected to continue indefinitely. The
temporary nature of the fences, the
absence of gardens, orchards, cow-sheds,
or anything by which an income
might be derived from the soil during the
year, apart from wheat growing, strike
the eye of the stranger.. The olives,
almonds, and other similar products, which
experiments nearer Adelaide have demon-
strated to be capable of the most abundant
and remunerative growth, are hardly to be
seen. In every direction fields lying un-
tilled and covered with weeds are
interspersed with here and there a pro-
mising crop amongst many indifferent ones.
A great many of the tehants who had been
paying from 7s. 6d. to 15s. per acre rent
have shifted northward, and also some of
the freeholders, who have sold out to neigh-
bors at from £4 to £6 per acre.
In this way the land is getting into larger
holdings, and grazing with sheep and cattle
being introduced.
Mr. Clement, who owns 1600 acres
on the hills to the north of Gawler-
has, by the leaving of his tenants for
the areas, resumed his land, which is
in a grain-sick and foul condition, and
is sowing it down with lucerne for
stock. He has 550 acres already
down, the first sown being in its
third year, and firmly established. His
practice is to plough about four inches, then
harrow fine and sow about 3 cwt. of inch
bones, and roll. The seed is then sown at
the rate of 12 or 14 lb. per acre, and again
harrowed. After it is firmly rooted, say
about two years, it receives a good tear-
ing about with the harrows twice a year,
a showery time being chosen for this. Mr.
Clement imports “his seed direct from home in
iron tanks, at a total cost of per lb.
The property being well subdivided, too close
feeding is avoided, and sufficient rest given
to the lucerne occasionally. Mr. Clement’s
stock at present consists of a very fine lot of
breeding mares and young stock of the
strong, active, coaching breed. The keeping
of sheep in combination with tillage has been
for some time carried on by Mr. John Rigg,
whose farm is one of the cleanest in
the district, and by a rotation of grazing he
not only obtains good crops, but is receiving
a remunerative return from the wool and
increase of his flock, which are a cross of
the Lincoln with the Merino. Mr, Eigg’s
experiment is being followed by others. Near
to this farm is that of Mr. P. Kelly,
530 acres in extent, from 300 to 400 of which
have been hitherto under wheat. This the
proprietor has reduced to 100 acres, and uses
the remainder as grazing paddocks for
draught stock, into the breeding of which he
has gone largely. Mr. Kelly’s stallion is Lord
Eedesdale, by Mr. Crawford’s Lord Clyde,
at Malmsbury, Victoria. Lord Redes-
dale was bred by Mr. Coucher,
of Kyneton. and purchased by Mr. Kelly as
a yearling for 100 guineas. He has now de-
veloped, at four years old, into a magnificent
horse, and has beaten everything in South
Australia, including Rantin’ Robin, Mr.
Kelly has eighteen heavy brood mares, all
imported from Victoria, costing, landed in
Adelaide, an average of £5O each. Mr.
Kelly’s stabling and yards are very com-
plete structures of stone and lime.
Mr. F. B. Winckel’s farm, on the banks of
the Gawler river, has been for many years
cultivated on the principle of two wheat
crops followed by a fallow ploughed eight
inches deep in the winter, and about
half that depth for early sowing. His
present practice is to divide his farm of
two hundred acres into two halves,
and fallow and sow with wheat alternately.
By this means he obtains, in ordinary years,
very good crops. Mr. Winckel has also an
old established vineyard, from which he
makes a good white wine from the Tokay
grape, and a red from the Mataro. Flax
during the last season has been sown in
small quantities successfully round Cawler.
A market has been provided by the enter-
prise of Mr. G. C. Roedger, who has
erected a steam-driven flax mill and retting
pits in the town, at a cost of £2500. He
gives £3 per ton, and the yield has been
from 2to 4 tons per acre. The flax is sown
as early as the rains set in, March or April,
and harvesting takes place about October.
About 150 tons were produced in the district
last season. If machinery to reduce the
cost of pulling could be obtained, flax
could be produced very profitably
in the Gawler district. The extent
of land under cultivation in the county of
Gawler last season was 197,193 acres, of
which 138,641 acres were under wheat, pro-
ducing 1,361,898 bushels, or an average of
9 bushels 49 lb. per acre. There will be
this year a decrease in the cultivated area,
but the average promises to be good.


No. YII.—KAPUNDA.
Contents. —Description of Farming between Gawler and Kapunda—Bare Appearance of
Homesteads—The Murray Flats—The Kapunda Copper Mine —The Acid Process
Agricultural Statistics of Kapunda District—Exceptional Instances of Improved Farming
Superiority of Soil.
Leaving Gawler by the first of three trains
starting at 8.20, 12.30, and 6.35, Kapunda,
distant from Gawler twenty-three miles, and
from Adelaide forty-eight, is reached by half-
past nine o’clock, passing on the way the
agricultural villages of Rose worthy, Freeling,
and Ford’s, at which places there are railway
stations. At Roseworthy the Kapunda rail-
way leaves the northern or Burra line, and
strikes into the north-east; or more properly
speaking, the Burra line leaves the Kapunda,
as the latter was the earlier constructed.
The country passed through consists of open
plains of red clayey loam, entirely occupied
by wheat farms of considerable size, indif-
ferently fenced with wire, and showing here
a field with a promising crop, there one lying
untilled and bearing a luxuriant coat of
weeds, and further along one ploughed up
and lying fallow. Occasionally a field is
passed in which the fallowing is going on,
when it is observed that the double furrow
plough drawn by four horses is invariably
used, the single furrow implement being em-
ployed chiefly for striking out. The
bare appearance of the farm houses is a
marked feature of the landscape. They are
built of greyish stone of a soft aluminous
formation abundant in the neighborhood, and
the want of barns or other out-buildings,
gardens, and sub-division paddocks for stock
points to a state of things not in accordance
with an advanced agricultural system. Of
course there are exceptions, but, as a rule,
wheat growing has been carried on upon the
most exhaustive system, including the an-
nual burning of the straw after the stripper,
for the last twenty years. The want of
barn and other accommodation is accounted
for by the fact that this system places the
farmer in a position depending almost en-
tirely upon his yearly harvest of wheat,
which he conveys direct from the field to
Kapunda for sale, or storage with an advance,
or to one of the numerous surrounding mills.
Not only is this the case with the tenant, but
also with the freeholder. Wheat growing and
wheat alone, without regard to any other of
the numerous ways in which a source of re-
venue might be derived from the land while
waiting for wheat harvest, has been the rule;
and thus it has come that the tillers of
the soil, speaking generally, are mostly
in the hands of the storekeepers,
thereby making the prospects of the
harvest the most important subject to
all connected with the commerce of the
country. The railway between Gawler and
Kapunda runs upon such a level that the
sleepers for the most part have been laid on
the surface, but towards the right the coun-
try is more undulating, being a continuation
of the farm covered rises described as ex-
tending to the north-east of Gawler. The
sparseness of timber is a notable feature in
the country all up this way, and there is
very little doing in tree planting or hedging.
The only hedges seen are of patchy un-
tended kangaroo acacia, which in this
condition are neither ornamental nor useful.
Further to the right extends the dividing
range, running northward, which, from a
tier of ranges some 2000 feet high at the
back of Adelaide, falls to a series of low
rolling hills at the back of Kapunda, with
farming going on along their western slopes
and over their summits, down to a vast level
plain to the eastward extending to the Mur-
ray, which runs parallel with the range on
that side at an average distance of about
thirty-five miles. These Murray flats con-
sist of good farming soil interspersed with
large blocks of mallee, which are also good
wheat growing lands when cleared. This
sort of country is obtainable as scrub lands
at an exceptionally low rate, and is being
rapidly taken up.
The approach to the town of Kapunda
reminds one of travelling over the level
agricultural plains from Newstead in Vic-
toria, and arriving at the broken mining
country at Maryborough. From level farm-
ing plains passed through by the line, the
visitor to Kapunda finds himself, after getting


out at a large and well-appointed railway
terminus, within a few minutes’ walk of the
centre of the town, amongst hills of moderate
elevation, and containing the numerous tall
chimney stacks and other features peculiar to
a mining district. The Kapunda copper mine,
whose shafts, pits, whims, engine-houses,
and numerous other buildings for various
purposes, cover an area of about 500 acres
in a basin surrounded by rising ground on
the south-west boundary of the town, is one
of the oldest mines in the colony, having
been discovered in 1843 by Mr. F. S.
Dutton, the present Agent-General for South
Australia, and Mr. 0. S. Bagot, while look-
ing for sheep, in pursuance of their then oc-
cupation as squatters. Since that time this
mine has been constantly worked, and, as
may be supposed, after such a lengthened
period, cannot now produce the rich yields
of former days. Indeed, the remunerative
carrying on of the mine at all at the present
time is the result of an ingenious process
patented by the present manager, Captain
Osborne, by which the ore is extracted
through the agency of sulphuric acid.
By this process, in which stuff contain-
ing a half per cent, of copper can be pro-
fitably treated (providing that a supply
of sulphur or something else from which
sulphuric acid can be produced is handy),
the old workings of the mine have during
the last few years been washed from bottom
to top in a face of 100 feet deep. This pro-
cess, going on at the rate of about 6000 tons
per month, has opened up two vast amphi-
theatres in the centre of the workings, dis-
closing the old shafts and drives, and ex-
hibiting on the sides of the vast walls the lodes
of ore in the form of small green veins run-
ning through a whitish clay. The stuff is
drawn in trucks up a long railway incline, by
a fifty-horse power winding engine, to the
acid works, which are supplied by a powerful
pumping engine, which raises the water from
a seventy-three fathom shaft, at the rate of
200 gallons per minute, to an altitude that
provides pressure commanding the highest
portion of the works. The seventy-three
fathom shaft is the deepest level, and drains
the entire workings. The winding engine is
situated on an elevated part of the mine, so
that the ore in the various processes may
have the advantage of passing from one to
the other down hill. After being drawn up
the incline the clay and ore is first tipped
into a Chilian mill supplied with a stream of
water, from which it passes into what is
called a Dufournels machine, subjecting the
ore to water action similar to that received
by gold in a long tom. From this the ore,
in a form resembling gravel, is passed down
to the acid tanks supplied from the acid ma-
nufactory higher up the hill. In this part
of the works crushed mundic (which abounds
in the mine) is burnt in furnaces, from which
the fumes pass into a leaden chamber 100
feet long by forty wide and twenty high,
where by the action of nitrate of soda they
are condensed into sulphuric acid, which is
conducted by leaden pipes to another tank
where it is diluted with water, and thence
conducted to the tanks containing the ore.
Smelting used to be done on the works, but
had to be discontinued on account of the
scarcity of fuel. The ore is now conveyed
to the smelting works at Port Adelaide.
The remainder of the work on the Kapunda
mine is conducted on the old Cornish prin-
ciple by tributers who work the ground, and
wash and pug the ore produced at the rate
of from ss. to 7s. in the pound value of the
copper after smelting. The average wages
made by the tributers is about £2 per week,
and the men at work on wages receive 375.
per week. The ore produced by the tributers
runs from fifteen to twenty per cent, of
copper, and that dealt with by the acid process
averages about a half per cent. The total num-
ber of hands employed is 106 men and nine-
teen boys, and work begins at half-past seven
and continues till half past five with one
hour’s intermission for dinner. Kapunda is
slightly larger than Gawler, having a popu-
lation of 2273, and is the centre of what has
been the largest wheat-producing area in the
colony. There are some good buildings, of
which the chief are the literary institute,
the banks, of which there are three—the
Adelaide, the English and Scottish, and the
National ; and the churches, representing
the English, Eoman Catholic, Wesleyan,
Baptist, Bible Christian, and Primitive Me-
thodist denominations. The stock sale yards
of Mr, Jenkin Cole are notable for their com-
pleteness and handiness, A large number
of draught horses are here submitted for
sale from Victoria and Tasmania, and realise
high prices, the local farmers not having
made breeding a part of their business.
The county of Light, of which Kapunda
is the chief town, is watered by the River
Light and Julia Creek, and embraces the
districts of Angaston, Belvidere, Flaxman’s
Valley, Gilbert, Hamilton, Mount Crawford,
Nuriootpa, Saddleworth, Stockport, Ta-
nunda, and Waterloo, containing in the ag-
gregate 542,720 acres, of which 518,019 are
purchased, 347,043 held by freeholders,
488,046 enclosed, and 264,624 under culti-
vation, of which 170,600 were last year
under wheat, producing 1,931,678 bushels,
or an average of 11 bushels 19 lb. per acre.
Of the remaining 94,024 acres of cultivated
land 65,494 are in fallow preparation for
wheat next year. This is the improved
system that has been adopted latterly, viz.,
two crops of wheat, followed by a fallow
ploughed up during the winter or spring, so
as to lie exposed to the summer sun, and
prepared for sowing by a second ploughing
or working with the grubber. In some few


instances, upon large holdings of several
thousand acres, such as those held by Messrs.
Shannon, White, Kelly, and Ford, in the
vicinity of Kapunda, sheep are kept in com-
bination with the wheat-growing, with the
very best results both as regards cleanness,
yield of crop, and general remunerative re-
turns ; but on the smaller farms, running from
80 to 200 and 360 acres in extent, wheat-
cropping with the triennial bare fallow is
the rule. I was very much impressed on
my inspection of the lands round Kapunda
with the uniform richness in large areas of
the South Australian agricultural soil, and
with the conviction that the low averages of
the colony are attributable entirely to the
drought of the climate and the unfair treat-
ment of the land by the farmer. The soil is
of the same red clayey loam containing a
large percentage of lime, which is be found
in the St. Arnaud, Upper Loddon, Echuca,
and Goulbourn Valley districts in Victoria,
and would, with sufficient moisture and
reasonable culture, give equally heavy if not
superior returns. The climate is favorable to
the luxuriant production of a large number of
subsidiary crops, the nature of which has been
referred to in previous papers. By attention
to these, together with the keeping of a due
proportion of stock, the South Australian
farmer could place himself in a position to
withstand a bad wheat year, and receive the
largest amount of benefit from a good one.
No. VIII.—FROM KAPUNDA TO KOORINGA.
Contents. —Townships between Kapunda and Sacldleworth—Auriferous Indication on Ranges
between the former—Anlaby—Stripping and Burning—Mr. Caskey’s Farm —The System
known as “Land-sharking”—Kooringa—The Old Burra—Change from Mining to Farming—
Large Holdings of Fine Land.
Leaving Kapunda I struck north-west for
Saddleworth, a small township on the northern
line. Asfaras Saddleworth the country passed
through is of the most beautiful undulating
kind, the tops of the rises timbered with
she-oak, peppermint, and gum, and the
valleys covered with deep green wheat crops
from 6 inches to 18 inches high, and
giving every promise at the time I
passed through of a most abundant har-
vest. In travelling over South Australia
one cannot fail to be struck with the abun-
dance of small townships that everywhere
prevail, as compared with Victoria, which
in many parts is badly off in this matter.
These townships are to be found in South
Australia on an average of about five or six
miles apart, and in such a district as the
one under consideration their prevailing
features are a good flour-mill, hard at work ;
a blacksmith’s shop, surrounded chiefly by
double-furrow ploughs, reapers (of the kind
known by us as strippers), and winnowers ;
a publichouse or two, a school, several well-
built churches, a representative of one or
two of the banks and insurance societies, a
public readingroom and library, and a
number of surrounding cottages, many
having nice gardens. Ten miles north of
Kapunda is situated Anlaby, containing
100,000 acres of purchased land, all of su-
perior agricultural quality, the property of
Mr. Dutton, the Agent-General for South
Australia in England. The property is used
as a sheep-station, and is managed by Mr.
H, T. Morris, late chief inspector of stock
for South Autralia. About half-way from
Anlaby to Saddleworth the road passes over
a piece higher than the others, from the top
of which a splendid view of the surrounding
country is obtained. Down on the left the
line can be seen making its way northward,
with Riverton, a considerable township,
forming the half-way station between Ade-
laide and Kooringa, and about seven miles
further along Saddleworth ; while scattered
round to the right and lying amongst the
valleys of wheat-covered fields in various
directions can be seen Hamilton, Marrabel,
and Waterloo. Hamilton is the first town-
ship passed on the way from Anlaby, and
the farms and country generally present the
appearance of that round Newstead ; the
same flats of rich chocolate soil running
from surrounding timbered ranges of mode-
rate elevation, and having on their crests
quartz and other indications of auriferous
deposits, obtain. Here also a large number
of the farms are lying untilled, and where the
soil is lying in this state the similarity to
the Newstead district is still further in-
creased by the fields being covered with the


same weed (Echthritis quadridentata)
known as cotton weed. The owners of
these unfilled farms are gone, I am
told, to the northern areas. Nearer
Saddleworth, although there is less land
lying in this condition, the same monotonous
wheat field after wheat field continues,
fenced with, as a rule, three wires ; hardly
any stock to be seen in any direction ; the
farm-houses built of the white soft kind of
stone prevalent in the district, and standing
at wide intervals apart in naked loneliness.
No garden, no stacks, no barns ; nothing
evidently but a house to live in, while the
ploughing and fallowing goes on for the pro-
duction of wheat, which, upon its maturity,
is reaped by the stripper, cleaned on the
field, and carted off at once to the mill or
railway station direct, when the straw and
chaff are burnt to make way for the ploughing
and wheat sowing as before. Here and
there an exceptional instance is to be seen,
which proves that this condition of things
arises solely from the negligence of the
farmers, and not from the fault of the soil or
even of the climate. Amongst these in-
stances the farm of Mr. John Caskey, near
Saddleworth, is notable. This farm com-
prises 700 acres purchased land, and has a
tine garden, orchard and vineyard, in which
everything grows luxuriantly. Mr. Caskey’s
system is the summer bare-fallowing of a
third of his land every three years,
by which means he manages to keep
it clean ; and such is the richness and adap-
tability of this red limy soil for the growth
of wheat that, after a course extending over
upwards of 18 years, a good crop can always
even now be depended upon in a moist
season. The only attempt at combining
stock with farming here is the shepherding
of sheep over the cultivated land in a few
instances, but there is a complete absence of
special provision for this important depart-
ment of husbandly as regards subdivision
by sheep and cattle-proof fencing. The land
has been obtained by the present holders by
purchase from agents, who, previous to the
coming in force of the present Land Act,
held the soil in monopoly. These agents
are commonly called land-sharks. Under
the unlimited auction system of the old act
these agents attended all land sales, and
established such a character for running up
all smaller would-be bona fide settlers as
effectually gave them command of the situ-
ation. To these men those who wanted land
were compelled to go and purchase at an
advance often of over 100 per cent, upon
the price at the land sale, but as the agents
were always willing to give easy terms in
the way of deferred payments, they found
plenty of custom in their lucrative trade.
Many of these agents have made large for-
tunes, and it speaks well for the profitable-
ness of South Australian wheat-growing that
even under such a severe handicapping, a
very large percentage of the farmers in
these older districts have in this way pur-
chased and paid for farms such as those
in the district round Saddleworth, compris-
ing from 300 acres to 600, 700, and up to
1000 acres each. The evident ambition of
the farmer in this important district at pre-
sent is to go on increasing his holding by
purchasing more land from smaller neigh-
bors (who are clearing out for the north),
not for the purpose of keeping stock in com-
bination with agriculture, but simply to
be able to continue his triennial bare fallow
wheat-growing system on a more extensive
scale. The price obtained by these farmers
for their land is from £4 to £5 per acre. In-
stead of bare fallow, if the South Australian
farmer would adopt the keeping of stock on
lucerne or cowgrass (perennial red clover), he
would not only grow as much, if not more,
wheat than at present, but he would keep
his land cleaner with less labor, and create
an independent source of revenue, which
would stand by him during bad harvests.
The breeding and fattening of stock and the
growth of wool has been the mainstay of
many Victorian farmers during the last few
years, and in South Australia they have
better prices ; fat cattle, for instance,
averaging from £2 to £3 per head over those
obtained in Victoria.
From Saddleworth I went up the
line to its northern terminus at Kooringa,
the locality of the far-famed Burra
mine. Eight miles from Saddleworth a
stoppage is made at Manoora, a platform for
the wheat of the surrounding district ; and
within the next twelve miles at Mintaro and
Farrell’s Flat are similar stations. Farrell’s
Flat is the nearest point to Clare, which lies
to the left or due west from the line about
fourteen miles. Between Clare, and Farrell’s
Flat lies Mr. C. B, Fisher’s Hill River station
and farm, the wheat from which is brought
to the line at this point, making, with the
produce from other parts of the district, at
harvest time, immense piles of bags about 300
yards along the platform, to get rid of which
extra trains are required running night and
day. From about Mintaro, notable for its
valuable slate quarries, on to the Burra,
the country, while still retaining its undulat-
ing character, changes completely as regards
timber. To the right towards the dividing
range running parallel with the line, and on
the left towards St, Vincent’s Gulf as far as
the eye can reach, rolling downs from five to
ten miles in width between dividing tiers of
higher country running north and south,
without a stick of timber, is the character of
the prospect. From Farrell’s Flat to Koo-
ringa the land on both sides of the line is
equally rich with that lower down, but the
farms are not so numerous, the land being
chiefly in the hands of Mr. Uuffield and


other large pastoral landholders, who have
secured their runs before the new act became
law. The last twenty-five miles of the rail-
way out of the one hundred from Adelaide
to the Burra trends to the north-east, and
thus at its terminus runs close into the range
(already spoken of as dividing Adelaide,
Gawler, and Kapunda, from the Murray).
In a valley of this range and along the
Burra Creek (which flows into the Murray
about sixty miles to the eastward through
mallee countr >) the Burra town is built, con-
sisting of two parts, Eedruth, at the ter-
minus, and Kooringa, about a mile further
along, the Burra mine and the old smelting
works (now unused) lying between the two.
It is said that this creek was formerly
heavily timbered with gum, and the sur-
rounding rises with sheoak, but that every-
thing in the shape of firewood for twenty
miles round has been used by the mine. The
firewood has now to be obtained from the
mallee in the Murray flats, and the treeless
prospect on all hands, combined with the
heavy rains and cold hail storms that pre-
vailed during my visit (the latter part of
September), gave the district a general re-
semblance to the cold bare downs to be found
in Otago, New Zealand. The buildings in
Kooringa are largely composed of long ranges
of low-sized crumbling stone cottages, built by
the old company for the miners, and set
down in the most random way without the
slightest regard to regularity. These are
interspersed with old tumbledown public-
houses, which when the mine was in its glory
were the scenes of dissipation on pay day of
a character that has passed away and given
place to a set of miners who are noted for
their sobriety. Amidst the faded buildings
of this former state of things, there is now
observed a change setting in as the result of
the farming settlement taking place to the
north. Amongst new buildings going up are
two large flour mills, and an extensive wheat
store has been finished by Messrs. Samuel
Drew and Co., one of the storekeeping firms
of the place, for the reception of the coming
harvest, which is expected to be heavy. In
the county of the Burra last year there were
14,203 acres under wheat, producing 181,891
bushels, or an average per acre of 12 bushels
48 lb. This was a considerable increase both
in acreage and average over the previous
season, and this year the larger extent of
land under crop, notably the important dis-
trict of Bryan’s Flat (extending upwards of
twenty-five miles north of Kooringa towards
Mountßryan), and its flourishing appearance,
give promise of the Burra becoming an im-
portant agricultural centre. The Burra mine
is at present employing about 300 men and
boys, the work going on being a washing of
the old workings similar to that described as
going on at Kapunda, with the exception
that the acid process cannot be used for want
of material supplying sulphuric acid. From
an immense abyss 120 feet deep, the earth is
worked by terraces in a face, and drawn in
waggons containing a ton each up an incline
by endless chains, where everything is passed
down through successive stages of crushers,
stampers, and giggers, supplied with water
by a 250-horse power engine raising 11,000
gallons per minute from a shaft sunk seventy
fathoms. In the various processes ten en-
gines from twelve-horse power to that of the
pumping engine are employed, and four
powerful water wheels, besides a number of
smaller ones. Upwards of a million tons of
earth have been subjected to this wholesale
washing process during the last three years,
giving ab«ut 1J per cent, of copper. The
dressed ore averages 18 per cent, copper,
and about 260 tons are sent away monthly
to the smelting works at Port Adelaide. The
men work eight hours, beginning at seven,
and leaving off at five, and their wages
average from ss. to Cs. per day. Beyond
Mount Bryan and to the westward of Koo-
ringa large tracts of the best of the land have
been secured by the early pastoral tenants
before the passing of the late Land Act, and
before the farmers discovered the richness
and adaptability for agriculture of these vast
northern downs. From 30,000 to 100,000
acres of first-class agricultural land secured
in one block mostly at £1 per acre, ex-
cepting where a farmer or land agent has run
up particular blocks to £2, £3, £4, or £5
per acre, is not uncommon, and for a large
portion of the wool from these stations Koo-
ringa is the terminus. From Kooringa pre-
vious to visiting some of the principal
centres of the new agricultural settle-
ment going on between Ports Pirie and
Broughton on the eastern coast of Spencer’s
Gulf, I struck down south-west towards
Clare, to inspect Mr. Fisher’s operations at
Gum Creek Station, comprising 35,000 acres
of agricultural land of the kind already de-
scribed, lies ten miles from the Burra. It
was purchased for £75,000, and fenced with
six wires, at £BO per mile. Together with tree-
planting, superior sheep breeding, and other
improvements are being carried on, under
the management of Mr. John Dow. From
Gum Creek to Hill Eiver is ten miles across
a tier of bare hills, along the top of which a
stone wall twenty-five miles long runs north
and south, dividing the two properties.


No. IX.—RULE RIVER ESTATE.
Contents.— The Sheep Station —The Wool—The Farming Department—Extent of Operations—
Description of Working—Tree-planting —Rules and Regulations.
Hill River estate, the property of Mr. C.
B. Fisher, is situated in the county of Stanley,
two miles eastward of Clare, the furthest
agricultural township to the north previous
to the opening up of the new areas. The
total distance of Hill River from Adelaide is
eighty-eight miles, and railway communica-
tion is obtained by taking the Burra line at
Farrell’s Flat, thirteen mils to the east. The
property is 60,000 acres in extent, lying
north and south id a valley between two tiers
of hills, the eastern tier being, like the
country in that direction, treeless ; but the
western one, together with some of the un-
dulating land in the valley approaching its
base, is lightly timbered with sheoak and
gum. The valley is on an average about
seven miles broad, and the estate extends
about twenty-five miles in length ; the Hill
River, a permanent creek, which takes its rise
to the south, running along the centre. The
valley is composed of a rich deep chocolate
soil washed from the surrounding high land,
which is of a slaty conglomerate formation
set on edge, and running in reefs mixed with
quartz north and south, along the crests of
the boundary ridges. The property, which
is under the superintendence of Mr. G. W.
Pitt (formerly of Victoria), who is general
manager for the whole of Mr. Fisher’s pro-
perty in South Australia, and of Mr. J. Emery,
who is resident manager, is worked as
a sheep-breeding establishment and wheat-
growing farm on a large scale, the latter
being carried on with the ultimate end in
view of preparing the soil for the sowing down
of lucerne and prairie grass, I he station
is divided into four separate establishments,
viz., the woolshed and drafting-yards, seven
miles down the valley to the north ; a new
series of farm buildings, two miles to the
east, being prepared for harvest ; another
large farming establishment nearer home :
and the homestead, a stone residence and
stabling, surrounded by a well-kept grounds,
orangery, and orchard, comprising in all
twelve acres. In the kitchen-garden of four
acres every description of vegetable is pro-
duced in abundance, and this portion of the
establishment is found to be very valuable,
where so many hands are employed. The
drafting yards at the woolshed are of a com-
plete kind for the handy working of the
sheep, and are flagged in the race and crush
pens with slate obtained on the property.
The buildings for the shearers are of stone,
divided into dining, sleeping, and cooking
departments, the latter fitted with the latest
appointments, and a separate stone cottage
is provided for the overseer. The number
of sheep shorn is 50,000, the shearing floor
accommodating forty shearers. The Hill
River wool is of the merino combing descrip-
tion, and for length and strength of staple
combined with weight of fleece has not been
exceeded by any other run in the colony, ex-
cept Bundaleer, Mr. Fisher’s other run fur-
ther north, where the same breed of sheep
are kept. The clip last year ran from 9 lb.
in the wether to 3J lb. in the lambs in the
grease, or an average all through of about
71b. for which an average of 14id. was ob-
tained. Sheepwashing is not usual in
South Australia, through the scarcity of
water, but the chief drawback on Hill River
is its hardness, being brackish and metallic
from the mineral nature of the watersheds.
Amongst some fleeces selected during the
late shearing for the Sydney Exhibition, one
two-tooth merino ram’s fleece weighed 17J
and a four-tooth 21 lb. About 200 cattle,
some of which are of superior shorthorn
blood, have lately been introduced, and the
intention is to obtain a good bull and begin
that department of breeding. The new farm
buildings are being erected handy to the cul-
tivated land, which is about midway in the
valley, the furrows running lengthwise. The
buildings comprise a quadrangle of ten feet
high, stone walling 120 feet long each side,
roofed with galvanised iron, with a slope in-
wards, and divided off into ten by ten loose
boxes for horses, each box containing close
feed manger for the bruised peas, bran, and
cut hay, with which all the horses on the
place are systematically fed. A well and
trough for watering occupy the middle of the
square, which will be built upon further so
as to accommodate 200 horses, the total
number at present employed on the estate.
The other buildings consist of men’s stone
buildings with dining, sleeping, and cooking


departments separate, overseer’s residence,
large hay cutting and corn bruising house,
and barn 106 feet by 34, and 15 feet walls,
with a holding capacity of 60,000 bushels of
wheat, besides compartments at the rear for
two blowers and screens for finishing the
wheat off in a uniform sample after it passes
through the winnowers in the field. These
blowers, which are worked by horse power,
and have self-acting elevators for passing the
wheat from the fans to the revolving screen,
get through at the rate of 700 bushels per
day each. The cultivated land is in large
fields, one of which is three miles long, and
contains this year 4250 acres of wheat, be-
sides 40 acres of peas grown for horse feed
and a quantity of barley, and 1800 acres
new land turned up for fallow. Next year
the land first ploughed will be three years in
crop, when it is proposed to yearly lay down
that which has yielded three crops in
lucerne and prairie grass, and shift the wheat
ground further on to new land. The plough-
ing was performed by thirty four-horse teams
drawing a double plough each, doing from
two to three acres per day, according to the
time lost in travelling to and from the work,
and five single ploughs striking out. It is es-
timated that with the teams nearer their
work acres per day will be accomplished.
One man is allowed to each plough to manage
both driving and guiding. Ploughing is
done eight inches deep at first, so that the
land can be turned over afterwards in the
dry season immediately after the removal of
the crop. The seed, which is of several
kinds to ascertain the best, was sown the
first week in June, with six of Adamson’s
twenty-two feet broadcast machines, sow-
ing under the management of one man forty
acres per day each. The pickling used is
bluestone, and an ingenious dipping apparatus
is used by which a bag at a time can be done
with much rapidity. The lands are ploughed
one chain wide, and are harrowed by fifteen
sets of six-leaved harrows, doing a land in
two turns. The first sets are heavy and
drawn by six horses, and the second, which
are lighter, go across and finish. The har-
rowing is finished at the rate of 500 acres
per day. As harvest approaches two-chain
wide strips are cut by the mowing machines
at intervals, cutting the wheat into 200 acre
blocks, and then strips (upon the removal of
the wheat for hay) are ploughed, together
with strips right round the erop, for protec-
tion against lire. When the wheat is ripe
the strippers are then set to work emptying
on the roads at each end of the 200 acre
blocks. Each stripper is drawn by four
horses, driving and guiding being managed
by one man, and each machine does from
seven to eight acres per day, according to the
weather. Last jfear twenty-seven strippers
were employed, but this harvest ten addi-
tional new ones will be required. About one
winnower to three strippers is required on
the headlands for cleaning, which is done by
piece work, the men obtaining Id. per
•bushel for putting the wheat through once,
and 2d. for twice. From the winnowers in
the field it is carted in bags to the blowers
and screens, from which it is bagged, sewed,
and passed into the barn. The land under
wheat last year was 3050 acres, which yielded
at the rate of fifteen bushels, thirty-five acres
of peas yielding forty bushels per acre, and
sixty acres of barley giving thirty bushels.
The quantity of wheat cut for hay last year
for home consumption was 600 tons, and
this year 800 tons will be required. The
wheat grown on this farm took the challenge
cup, value £SO, in Adelaide, for the best 100
bushels in 1873 ; the prize at the late show
for the best bushel with a sample of purple
straw weighing sixty-eight pounds ; and the
present harvest at the time of my visit pro-
mised to eclipse any former effort. At the
farm steading near the home station, a
similar stable accommodation to that de-
scribed exists, and as the supply of Clydes-
dales increases at another station of Mr.
Fisher’s devoted to breeding, it is proposed
to increase the working capacity of the Hill
River farm by two-thirds, or three steadings
in ail, with 200 horses each. At this stead-
ing there is another series of men’s buildings,
together with chaff house, with chaff-cutter,
cutting one ton per hour, implement yard
and sheds, containing, in addition to the
ploughs and strippers, harrows and sowers,
already mentioned, fourteen waggons, six
scarifiers, four hayrakes, ration carts, wag-
gonettes, and other vehicles and implements;
a blacksmith s shop containing two forges,
carpenter’s shop and saddler’s shop for re’-
pairing, overseer’s residence and a large
number of cottages for the married
men who permanently stay on the place.
Two large dams of water supply the home
station and home farmstead with water, and
there are six others in various parts of tho
run. This work, which is constantly being
carried on, is done by .plough and scoop.
Sixteen acres of trees have been planted in
two-acre blocks in various parts of the run,
the kinds found to do best being the Tas-
manian red gum, pinus insignis and ster-
culias. A large plantation of about seventy
acres for trees is in course of preparation
above the house, and olive planting is carried
on annually. 'lhe large quantity of manure
made by such a quantity of stabled horses is
carefully looked after, and is to be put on the
land along with the lucerne. Pigs are pro-
fitably kept upon the waste wheat, and on a
small experimental farm, maize, millet, and
sorghum have been tried with success, and
various kinds of wheats are planted in drills
to try their relative merits. The purple
straw so far has been found best. On one
portion of the farm also experiments to


prove the efficiency of subsoil ploughing and
other matters are attended to. Amongst the
improvements to be eventually carried out,
a public reading-room and library are to be
added to each homestead, and other measures
of an educative and elevating character are
to receive attention. The hands employed,
apart from shearing and harvest seasons,
average about seventy. When these latter
operations are on the number is over 200.
Young draught horses are constantly being
brought from the breeding establishment
near Adelaide, and broken by means of
waggon, plough, scoop, or other of the
numerous kinds of work constantly going on.
The following rules of the establishment are
posted in the various buildings : —Working
hours : All hands to rise at five a.m., when
the bell rings ; horses to be fed, watered,
and cleaned ; breakfast at six ; all teams to
be a-field at seven ; dinner hour at noon ;
work to commence again at one p.m., to con-
tinue to six in summer and five in winter ;
Supper at seven ; horses to be fed and
watered at half-past eight, and the dining-
room to be cleared and locked up at ten p.m.
Wages : First-class men will be paid at the
rate of 20s, per week ; second-class at 18s. ;
third-class at 16s. Any one by good and
industrious conduct can raise himself to the
highest class. Wages paid every fourth
week, and at no other time. Any one in
charge of horses neglecting to feed and tend
them properly, or found abusing them, will
be discharged at once, and will forfeit all his
wages due. Any one wilfully disobeying
orders or neglecting his duty will be dis-
charged, and will forfeit two-thirds of the
wages due. Any one found in a state of
drunkenness will be instantly discharged,
and absolutely forfeit all wages due. Any
one bringing intoxicating liquors on the pre-
mises, as well as those partaking of them,
will forfeit all the wages due, and be in-
stantly discharged. Any one found smoking
near the stables or stacks will be at once dis-
charged and proceeded against under the Bush
Fires Act. Each man at the time of hiring
is required to sign the above rules, binding
himself to abide by them in all respects.
No. X.—FROM CLARE TO THE AREAS.
Contents. —Ignorance prevalent regarding quality of South Australian Soil—Spinifex preferred for
Farming—Great Extent of Good Soil—Large Holdings—Bungaree—Bundaleer—Racing Brood
Stock —Shearing Shed—Hundreds —The Area Townships—Seas of Wheat—Want of Railways—
Squatters’ Prophecies—Remarks upon Droughts and Influence of Settlement upon Climate.
I have conversed with several people in
the different colonies, and amongst them men
who ought, one would think, to know better,
whose ideas of South Australia amount to
a vague impression that the colony is
generally speaking, avast sandy plain with,
patches of good land where all this wheat is
produced. Perhaps the low sandy coast as
seen from shipboard between Melbourne and
Adelaide, and the fact that there is no map
of the colony to be obtained in which the
hills and ranges are plotted, may have con-
tributed to the creation of this impression.
In travelling over the country one gets to
hear opinions from many different points of
view, and amongst other novel ones I have
heard it advanced as his conviction by a
selector (not by any means “free” according
to his own statement, as he had been four
months endeavoring unsuccessfully to get on
to the land) that this want of a map showing
the topographical features of the colony, and
thereby concealing its superior quality, was a
part of the policy of the squatting party,
whose every effort has been to keep dark the
capabilities of the soil. There is another
circumstance which doubtless has helped to
produce the impression. In Gazetteers and
other publications describing the South
Australian runs, many are described as being
thickly covered with spinifex, or as it is here
termed porcupine grass. This spinifex, it
is well-known, grows in Queensland only on
desert country. In South Australia how-
ever, wherever spinifex grows, that is the
richest wheat-growing soil, and chosen by
the farmer in preference to all others. There
is on the runs already taken up in the areas,
and those further north to be taken up, a
large quantity of spinifex. With reference
to those whose idea is that the good land in
South Australia is patchy, and that the
country is flat, no better way to undeceive
such could be devised than to take the ride
by the north, with off-shoots in various
directions, that I have just completed. From
Adelaide to Gawler, thence to Kapunda,
thence easterly to the rail at Riverton, and
on to the Burra, then northward beyond
Mount Bryan, through the hundreds of
Kingston, Hallet, Terowie, and Yongala, or
a total of 150 miles north of Adelaide, then


back with a slant south-westerly, through
the hundreds of White Anne, Ayers, and
Hanson, to Hill River, (about 90 miles north
of Adelaide), and from there north again
through an area about 100 miles long, by 50
broad, bounded on the north by a line
running due east from Spencer’s Gulf, about
20 miles beyond Port Augusta, (or 200 miles
from Adelaide), and back to the town of
Clare (near Hill River). This immense
tract, with the exception of a few acres of
ranges, is almost without a break first-class
agricultural soil, and of that rolling charac-
ter, timbered in many places with she-oak,
which adds so much not only to the beauty
but the value of the country. Clare, as has
already been mentioned, is the furthest point
north up to which farming was considered
possible, previous to the late rush beyond.
The nortnern area farming is not entered
upon immediately after leaving Clare, for the
reason that the land bounding the town to
the northward has all been secured in large
estates by means of the auction system that
obtained previous to Strangways’ Act of
1869, the first attempt at liberal land legis-
lation made by the country. Of one of
these estates, Hill Fiver, the manner in
which the land is being worked has already
been explained, and it is generally conceded
that if all large landholders worked the
soil in as profitable a way and employed as
much labor, together with the attention
given by Mr. Fisher to the well-being of his
employes, the evil of these colossal
holdings would be considerably modified.
The next estate, running parallel with Hill
River, is Bungaree, containing upwards of
100,000 acres of first class rich undulating
sheoak country, the property of th 1 hon.
G. C. Hawker. The owner of this fine
estate is making a beginning in the way of
working his property on the Hill River
principle Both these properties run on
each side of two rivers, the Hill and the
Hutt, which traverse their entire length,
and then turn westward, emptying
into the Broughton, which then, after
receiving a number of other water-
courses from the east, north-east and north,
runs into Spencer’s Gulf. After leaving the
rich valleys of Hill River and Bungaree,
Bundaleer, Mr. C. B. Fisher’s second run,
joins on at a distance of about twenty-five
miles from Clare, and continues on some
twenty miles further The home station is
situated in a rangy piece of country, where
the Broughton takes its course to the west,
and is understood to have been purposely so
placed by the original occupant to conceal
from visitors the quality of the country.
\V hen once the few miles of ranges round
the station are passed, valleys of the
greatest beauty and richest fertility are
entered upon, and 312 square miles of this
the early occupier used to enjoy at a yearly
rental of £909 18s. 6d., the estimated
capacity of the run being 90,000 sheep.
1 his run is now one of the largest produc-
es agricultural districts in the areas, and
Mr. Fisher, who by judicious management,
during the first working of Strangways’ Act,
managed to “put together” about 80,000
acres in fee-simple, has shorn from that
quantity during the late season 70,000
splendidly woolled Merino sheep of large
carcase and fat. On this property, which is
submanaged under Mr. Pitts by Mr. James
Hill, the stabling is very extensive for the
accommodation of the racing brood stock,
ihree hundred head of horses are kept,
fifty of which are picked brood mares, and
the remainder chiefly their progeny. The
stud horses are Angler and Thalaba, and
amongst the young stock are six very fine
Hon Giovanni yearlings, and several
Leonidas fillies in hand for the show. Eight
hundred acres of wheat for hay and two
hundred acres barley are annually grown
on the station for horse feed. The shed is
very large—made to accommodate sixty-five
shearers. About one hundred hands are
employed at shearing time, and forty the
rest of the year. The buildings are all of
stone, and first-class. The shearers here, as
everywhere else during the late season, were
very scarce, and received 20s. per week and
found. The Bundaleer wool is carted by
the Hill River teams to Farrell’s Flat
station, on the Burra line, a distance of
about thirty-five miles. At the head of a
valley of picked agricultural soil (secured by
the station), down which a spring runs, and
twenty miles north from the homestead, is
situated Jamestown, the furthest area town-
ship east of the seaboard, and the proposed
terminus of a light railway from Fort
Pirie, where the larger quantity of the grain
this year will be shipped. A large share
will go also to Port Broughton, from the
hundreds in its vicinty, and another portion
will go to Farrell’s Flat. The largest share
will, however, make for the seaboard, as
when Farrell’s Flat is reached, after all the
land carriage, it will cost 6id. per bushel to
take it down the line, thence to Port
Adelaide. Port Pirie lies due west from
Jamestown, at a distance of fifty miles, and
Farrell’s Fat about the same distance to the
south. Jamestown is 134 miles from
Adelaide, and situated in the hundred of
Belalie, which formerly belonged to Bunda-
leer station. The term hundred in South
Australia is applied to tracts of land which
bear the same relation to counties that our
shires do. The South Australian hundreds
are however surveyed as nearly as possible
ten miles square, thus each containing one
hundred square miles. The great mass
of the northern area wheat is to be found
in a block of about one thousand square
miles, composed of the hundreds of Belalie,


Caltowie, Yangya, Bundaleer, Yacka-
moorundie, Koolunga, Bed Hill, Narridy,
Chrysial Brook, and Booyoolie, to the west-
ward of a northerly line drawn from
Bundaleer horn station to Jamestown, and
occupying that portion of the Spencer’s
Gulf seaboard lying between Ports Brough-
ton and Pirie. Within this area (whic'i does
not comprise all the farming of the north,
there being farms daily taken up outside
in various directions) are situated the town-
ships of the north, which, with the ports al-
ready referred to, have sprung into existence
within the last three years. Starting due
west from Jamestown, Caltowie is reached
in eight miles, Laura ten miles further on,
and Gladstone seven miles from Laura,
From Gladstone still pursuing a westerly
course Port Pirie is reached in twenty-five
miles, or if the course is changed
to the south Georgetown in eight
miles, Narridy seven miles further
on, Bed Hill twelve miles from Narridy, and
Collinsfield five miles from Bed Hill. From
Collinsfield the road then strikes west to
Port Broughton at a distance of seventeen
miles. At all these townships the scene
reminds one of a rush to a new diggings,
only instead of gold the rush here is for
land. In each township there are prominent
the stripper and plough factories, some
having as many as three, A flour mill at
work is to be found in most, and the hotels
and stores, which are of a more superior
class than might be expected in such new
places, are driving a brisk business. The
number of houses in each township, including
hotels, stores, banks, mills, implement
factories, schools, and churches, vary from
about fifteen to fifty, and rapidly growing.
The buildings are all of the light colored
aluminonus stone which is prevalent all over
the colony, and these give to the townships (as
they are viewed sometimes from a high point
of the road dotted about in the midst of
what may be called seas of waving wheat)
a very pretty appearance, and suggest
thoughts as to the probable future of the
colony with such a vast area of land at its
disposal, whose wonderful capabilities in the
way of wheat growing are only beginning
to be found out. There is no doubt that I
viewed the areas at their very best (during
the last week in September). At the time
of my visit the roads were very bad,
and reports from travellers daily appeared
in the papers as to the necessity for Govern-
ment action in the matter. These reports,
however, did not come from the farmer.
He, hailing with satisfaction the welcome
rains at a season when his wheat was receiv-
ing so much benefit, was busily with his
double furrow plough turning over fallow
land for the coming seed time. Like all
good wheat growing land (as our Wimmera
farmers are aware), the roads in the areas are
so universally bad during a wet winter and
good in the summer that the wisest policy
is to order matters so that all the carting
will be done at a season when these bush
roads, so impassable in winter, are hard,
smooth, and superior to metal. What I found
the area farmers really wanted was for the
Government to push out light railways from
Ports Pirie and Broughton, so that in
harvest they might get their wheat cheaply
and expeditiously conveyed to the seaboard
direct from the winnowing machine. In
accordance with this want light lines have
been begun, but the works are being carried
on in such a languid manner as to give some
weight to the complaint heard everywhere
from the selectors that the squatting and
mercantile influences, which pull the strings
at head quarters, do all in their power to
hin ( der, first, the successful occupation of
the soil by farmers, and second, the attempt
to do anything for any port along the two
gulfs beyond port Adelaide. The passing
of Strangways’ Act at the first, it is averred,
was something like a happy accident, and
every so called amendment since has been an
effort by the squatting influence to hinder
settlement, while the strong commercial
interests vested at Port Adelaide are engaged
in keeping back the opening up of the vast
wheat, copper and producing lands to the
north and north-east, which are naturally
canalled so much of the distance by the
magnificent seaboard of St. Vincent and
Spencer’s Gulf, chief among the ports along
which must eventually be Port Pirie
and Port Augusta. This is the gist
of conversation with the bulk of the
selectors, who, I have found in my travels
through the various colonies, generally hit
the right nail, in their own blunt way, pretty
fairly on the head. My squatting friends, on
the other hand (who by the way like every-
body else in the colony, whether squatter,
merchant, or farmer, treated me with an
hospitality, which I have now found to be a
special characteristic of South Australia
generally, and with whom I found I was not
a bit less welcome because I did not conceal
my sympathy for agricultural settlement as
against squatting where the soil was suitable),
advanced the same generalities I have listened
to from gentlemen similarly situated amongst
the selectors westward in Victoria and north-
ward in Eiverina. “Itis a mistake, my
dear sir, this attempt to farm here. The
soil, I admit, is rich, but the climate won’t
allow it. It’s all very well just now, this is
an exceptional season, but wait till one of
these droughts come that I have seen—sheep
and cattle dying e\ erywhere. Then these
cockies will have to take flight, if indeed
they should have a feather left to fly with.”
There remains, however, the stubborn fact that
ever since the farmer made his appearance
in these northern areas there has been a sue-


cession of four good seasons, and the crops
have been good. There has been the happy
coincidence of these good years beginning
with the opening up of the lands. That the
climate has been influenced by the settle-
ment already, as many suggest, in accordance
with the saying that “ the rain follows the
plough, ” is questionable ; but as settlement
progresses extensively it may reasonably be
expected that a great change to what has
hitherto been the rule will obtain. Many of
the ruinous droughts which have resulted in
the deaths of so much stock north of Ade-
laide may fairly be attributed to the
same causes that produced similar effects in
Queensland and the other colonies —Large
holdings of from 300 to 600 square miles in
extent with no provision for water but a few
wells. In a good year the run over-stocked
in proportion to the permanent water-supply,
but far under-stocked compared with its capa-
bilities if well supplied with dams. Then
the coming of a dry year, the temporary
water drying up, and the whole stock on the
vast territory of a run dependent upon the
few wells worked by station hands, who,
unless strictly watched, shirk the labor of
raising it to the troughs. Thus sheep and
cattle then die in hundreds, not for want of
grass, but for want of water after travelling
over miles of country to get to it. In the
driest seasons thunder showers fall fre-
quently which would fill dams if made in
suitable places and sufficiently numerous,
and by these the stock would water them-
selves without being driven over miles of
country to a well, cutting the grass down
like a road in their course. The truth of
these remarks will be recognised by every
man who, like the writer, has had prac-
tical experience of the matter, and they are
further supported by what is seen going on
every day. In these northern areas it is
found, as it has been in Victoria and Riverina,
that the selector obtains water m many
places and ways that the squatter in the
vastness of his operations passed over. The
selector, after the first year, is never badly
off for water. With the plough and scoop
he makes dams for his stock, and sinks a well,
or makes a tank for his own use. These
dams thickly dotted over a country, together
with the conservation of the moisture by the
ploughed land, must increase evaporation to
such a degree when the settlement extends
over a large area as will, according to natural
laws, have the effect of increasing the humi-
dity of the climate. The manner of selection
in South Australia as compared with that in
Victoria, its working, the working of the
land and its yield, together with other de-
tails of matters as found on these areas, will
have to form the subject of another paper.
No. XL—FROM THE AREAS TO BEAUTIFUL VALLEY.
Contents. —Manner of Selection—The Strangways’ Act—Limited Auction—Collinsfield —Govern-
ment Handicapping the Farmers—Facilities of Country for Railways—Cheapness of Harvesting—
Port Broughton—Port Pirie—Napperby—Wool Dumped at the Shed —Port Augusta -Apathy
of Government—Waterworks—Beautiful Valley—Goyder’s Line of Rainfall—Mount Remark-
able—Hughes of Booyoolie and Dummyism.
The farms in the areas, as has already been
mentioned, vary in age from one to four
years, and a general description of their ap-
appearance at the* abovementioned date
may be summed up as mile after mile of
waving wheat just bursting into ear, in
blocks from 200 to 800 acres in extent,
covering a country with rolling valleys and
hills, some parts lightly timbered and some
bare, and in many places much resembling
the Learmonth district. Large holdings (the
act permitting 640 acres), little and generally
no stock, temporary fences (in most cases
light mallee round posts and two wires),
houses necessarily far apart on such large
farms, and built skillion fashion (with the
white stone already spoken of) evidently with
the intention of adding a main building at
the front by and by, a rough shed for the
working horses, and the usual farming im-
plements. The strippers, winnowers, and
double ploughs, and wheat, wheat, without
intermission, except the new blocks of fallow
land in process of being, or already, turned
up, and here and there a large property in
grass belonging to the squatter who has ob-
tained it by dint of getting the land put up
to auction before the Strangways’ Act, and by
dummyism since. This constitutes the un-
varying scene throughout the block of about
1000 square miles already referred to as at
present forming the most thickly settled por-


tion of what is known as the northern areas.
The leading regulations of Strangways’ Act,
under which the earliest of the northern
farmers have obtained their land, were, first,
the land surveyed before selection, then
opened after being gazetted six weeks at £2
per acre, to fall every week 2s. fid. per acre
while untaken up till it reached the minimum
of £1 ; second, permission to take up 640
acres or up to 700 if required by the shape of
the block ; third, personal residence without
cultivation ; fourth, decision by lot between
simultaneous applicants ; fifth, the payment
of 10 per cent, deposit, interest clearing the
selector for three years, at the end of which
the principal was due ; and sixth, the expen-
diture of 10s. per acre in fencing, dams, &c.,
as improvements. Laud was first taken up
on the Led Hill and Bundaleer Hundreds
four years since by a few adventurous spirits
who, undeterred by the prophecies of ruin
by the pastoral tenants on the one hand, and
the jibes of their friends and neighbors on
the other, emigrated from the worked out
lands nearer Adelaide in response to an im-
pression that such soil as they had visited
in the north could not fail to produce good
crops of wheat. These men received the
land at its minimum of £1 per acre, and
having a good season to start with, they
made money. Next season was not so favor-
able, but at the end of the third or last year
with another good crop they were enabled to
pay for their land, and may be now said to
be independent. Of this class Mr. Collins,
of Collinsfield, near Port Broughton, may be
cited as a representative man. He came up
last February four years, and took up 640
acres each for himself and son at £l, That
year he ploughed 150 acres and had it sown
by the 13th May, and although unfallowed
he reaped thirteen bushels per acre, for which
he received 4s. 3d., the cartage costing 4d.
per bushel for the seventeen miles to port.
In the winter of that season he also fallowed
400 acres, which made the crop sown the
second year 550 acres. This yielded an
average of twenty-four bushels, for which
4s. 3d. was received. During the winter
another 100 acres was turned up to fallow,
which made list year’s harvest 600 acres’
which averaged eighteen bushels, sold at ss.
This season there is 800 acres, promising, as
all the areas did in the beginning of October,
for a splendid crop, but the yield is so easily-
affected by climatic changes that the farmers
do not consider themselves sure till the
wheat is in the bag. After the first and se-
cond crops obtained by these early settlers
the fame of the areas spread like wildfire,
and such a rush set in from the old districts
as taxed the whole surveying power of the
Surveyor-General to supply the demand. In
the interim, however, the work of amending
the Land Act progressed. It is this amend-
ment of the act which the present selectors
complain of. Instead of simultaneous appli-
cants’ claims being now decided by lot, as in
the original measure, the lots in dispute are
submitted to limited auction, that is, auction
confined to the two, three, or more persons
who apply for the same lot ; along with this
amendment there is the increased demand
for the land and a dilatory supply by the
Government, which combination of causes
has produced the present wide-spread dissa-
isfaction which prevails. I have had con-
versations with several farmers, one of whom
has made three separate unsuccessful trips
!}o the areas at much expense, selecting his
land, and upon his return to town has been
run up by the opposing applicants and has
lost it. This farmer expressed his determi-
nation to follow a friend to Victoria who
writes him upon the good quality of the soil,
the superior climate, and the facility of ob
taining land by free selection before survey,
at £1 per sere, paid at the rate of 2s. per
acre per annum without interest. One of the
amendments of Strangways’ Act is un-
doubtedly a good one, that by which it is
rendered compulsory to plough one-fifth of
the area selected the first year, or in default
two-fifths next. This has certainly rendered
dummyism less easy than formerly, but the
limited auction system from a settlement
point of view appears to be a mistake.
Lured on by the successes of the earlier area
men, the new comers argue that it will pay
them to secure the land at a high price, as
they are only required to pay 10 per cent,
deposit on the total cost of their holding,
which clears them for three years. They
do not appear to consider whether they will
be able to pay the principal then or not. In
fact a land panic has set in, and the Govern-
ment are working upon it like brokers. At
a late sale at Mannanerie, a new hundred
north of Jamestown, the lots ran as high as
£7 10s. per acre, at limited auction. The
farmers assert that the Government keeps
the land back to increase this artificial value,
and the manner in which the demand is fed
by driblets would favor the charge. The
land officers assert that the land is being
surveyed as fast as their staff will permit,
and this provokes discussion upon whether
the Victorian system is not best, where, in-
stead of bona fide settlers being kept wait-
ing upon Government surveyors, every
selector is converted into a seeker for land,
and upon finding it has it surveyed right off
by a private surveyor, the fee paid to whom
by the selector goes towards the payment of
his land.
The position of the South Austra-
lian Government in this matter of land
management certainly appears to a visitor
an anomalous one. Professedly they are eager
for population, and practically they hunt
their population over into Victoria. It may
be very pleasant for the Treasury to imagine


that it is going to receive from £5 to £lO per
acre (the latter price has lately been been
bid) for land that until lately was considered
only capable of carrying at most about ona
sheep to the four acres, and of which there it
an almost unlimited supply, but looking as
the matter with a view to settlement the
policy does not seem adapted to that end.
Meanwhile the rush goes on, and the squat-
ters on whose runs the later selectors are
spreading chuckle, and say “ these men only
intend to hold the land as long as the pay-
ment of the interest entitles them. By that
time they will have to forfeit, not being able
to pay the heavy principal; we will then step
in, have the land put up to auction, and buy
it.” Instead of handicapping the bona fide
farmer in a manner that must render his
downfall certain should a bad season or two
come, it would appear to be a wiser policy
for a Government upon discovering the capa-
bility of a new and extensive tract for the
production of wheat to foster settlement by
liberal measures, and by running light tram-
ways or railways from the ports on the gulf,
co-operate with the farmers to help them over
the possible bad season, rather than to work
against them, and into the hands of mono-
polists. The country leading into these
areas is admirably adapted for con-
structing railways cheaply, as almost
in every direction a valley can be
followed and outlet obtained through
the hills to the next without much cutting.
With cheap transit to the coast the farmers
in the northern areas in seasons like the last
four could grow wheat to pay against the
world, not excepting California, where the
producer calculates as profit all he obtains
over 2s. 6d. per bushel. In the areas the
double plough with four horses in new and
three in bro Ken-up land can turn over three
acres per day, there being no expanse for
clearing. The ploughmen receive £1 per
week. The South Australian ploughs are
much simpler than ours, having no lever to
throw the shares out, and they are sold at
£l3 10s. The three-furrow plough is not
used much. They are considered cumber-
some. The great advantage the South Aus-
tralian farmer has over the Victorian is in
the harvesting of the crop with the stripper.
Travelling strippers do £he work at 7s. per
acre, and cleaning is generally done by con-
tract at about 15s. per 100 bushels. The
astonishing saving in harvesting the crop by
these strippers as compared with our Vic-
torian practice of reaping, binding, carting,
stacking and threshing, is brought out by a
statement made to me by Mr. Pinch, of Gul-
nare, near George Town. This gentleman and
his brother have 800 acres of wheat this
harvest, and it will all be put in bags within
a month from the time of beginning with
eight hands. The total cost of getting off a
good crop he calculates at sd. per bushel.
The cartage is mostly done by bullock teams
at the rate of O.j-d. per bushel per mile,
the farmers being busy with their own teams
on their own farms, after harvest, getting in
the new crop. The average distance that
wheat will require to travel to reach ports
Pirie and Broughton will average about
thirty-five miles this season, the furthest
being the Pekina aud Black Bock hundreds,
about sixty miles to the north-east of Port
Pirie. The freight from Port Pirie to Port
Adelaide (260 miles) is 4d. per bushel. The
total quantity of land under wheat in the
areas last year was 43,455 acres, which pro-
duced 772,674 bushels, or an average of
17 bushels 47 lb. per acre. Counting new
areas and additional fallow land under crop
this year there will be at least double this
quantity reaped, which, with a similar
average, would yield 1,545,348 bushels.
To inspect the preparations being made for
the shipment of this probable yield I visited
the two ports. Port Broughton is cut off from
Red Hill and the other areas to the eastward
by a tier of bald hills called The Hummocks,
which run northerly from the head of the
Gulf of St. Vincent to opposite Port Pirie,
a distance of about seventy miles. After
passing westerly through these hills, which
are being cultivated to their summits, the
port is reached in fifteen miles, the first
five through fields of wheat, and the last ten
through mallee, which skirts the coast from
Yorke’s Peninsula to Port Augusta, about
100 miles. The land in which this mallee
grows is deep sandy chocolate, and would, I
think, grow superior barley. It is a mis-
taken notion to suppose the South Australian
mallee country inferior. Most that I have
seen varies from fine deep red clayey loam
suitable for wheat to that Just mentioned.
Port Broughton has one long Government
pier running out about twenty chains into
eight feet of water at low tide. The vessels
lie at the mouth of a tortuous creek, along
which the wheat is lightered from the pier
about nine miles. Several hummocks in the
channel require dredging to enable large
ships to come up. The port is at present in
its infancy, but could be made with some
little expenditure a good harbor. A light
railway of rails 40 lb. to the yard is in course
of construction from the port to the Hum-
mocks, but very slowly. It is expected to
be ready for the harvest of 1874-5. There
are four shipping merchants, Messrs. Darling,
Dunn, Patterson, and Hart, who have com-
modious wheat stores. Port Pirie is thirty
miles further north along the coast, and an
opening for a line to traverse the areas is
presented by a gap fifteen miles to the east-
ward, where the Hummo ks tier ends and
tbe Flinders Range begins. The Flinders
Range is a tier of wooded hills resembling
those which flank Adelaide. They run from
opposite Port Pirie parallel with the gulf


northward into the interior about 250 miles.
The preparations being made for the ship-
ment of the wheat crop at the time of my
visit down to Port Pirie were being
carried on in an extensive manner. The town
occupies about half a mile along a wide
saltwater arm into which the shippers’
wharves run at intervals. These are con-
nected by rail with very large stores on the
edge of the water, from which the wheat is
conveyed to schooners drawing from seven
to eight feet of water and carrying about 100
tons of cargo. As at Port Broughton several
bars hinder the traffic, and require removing.
At both ports instead of waiting on the Go-
vernment to dredge the channels, however,
there is a good opening for a fiat-bottomed
barge and small steam-tug to take out say
1000 bags of wheat. Such a tug with two
barges leaving a full one at the ship unload-
ing while it went up the stream with the
empty one, and doing it for say 6d. a bag,
would make money. There are five shipping
wharves at Port Pirie belonging to Messrs.
M‘Garey and Co., Horner, Stock, Galloway,
and Ferguson and Heaves. The water can
be laid on to the town from a spring that
runs from the Flinders Range at a distance of
about eight miles. In the meantime water
is supplied to the wheat teams by Mr.
Warren, managing partner for Messrs.
M‘Garey and Co., who, in connection with
a very fine flour mill, has a 3000 gallon tank
kept full by a distilling apparatus worked by
a 50-horse power condenser, which drives the
mill. The flour made at this mill and at the
others in the various area townships is of a
quality that may safely challenge the
world.
Before leaving the areas I rode from Port
Pirie up to Port Augusta, a distance of
about 60 miles, to inspect what the country
looked like beyond the much talked of
Goyder’s line of rainfall. Shortly after
leaving Port Pirie, Happerby, one of
Messrs. Bowman Brothers’ homesteads, is
passed ; the resident manager, Mr. Charles
Brandis. This run, which at one time
comprised an area fronting Spencer’s Gulf of
600 square miles, including the agricultural
areas of Chrystal Brook, Broughton, Red
Hill, and Harridy, is being all rapidly taken
up, and the Bowman Brothers are known as
men who have from the first accepted the
situation without an attempt at dummyism.
At Happerby, as the shearing went on, I
noted that the dumping of the wool in the
shed was done after pressing, instead of
carting it in large bales to be dumped at
port. By this practice the dumping is done
cheaper ; is not done too severely, and the
cartage is cheaper because of the handiness
of the bales. This practice of dumping I
observed to be general at all the stations
which were shearing as I passed. The coast
track, Joy which is known the strip ,of
country about seven miles broad between
the Gulf and the Flinders Range on the way
from Port Pirie, passes through Baroota, a
salt bush run belonging to Messrs. Daven-
port and Morphett. This strip of country,
with the exception of occasional patches, is
better adapted for grazing and farming. It
is well watered by spring-fed creeks, running
from the range into the sea. Port Augusta
is decidedly the finest port in the colony.
Six large ships, the Beltana, Goolwa,
Martha Birnie, Canatta, Pak Wan, and
Outaalpa were being loaded with from
3000 to 4000 bales each at the time of my
visit within a short distance of the water’s
edge. With very little wharf accommoda-
tion the wool could be rolled off the bank
into the hold. The shipping business at
Port Augusta is all done by two firms, Messrs.
Tassie and Gibson, and Messrs. Gooch and
Hayward, and about 25,000 bales will be
shipped this season from runs extending
north and east from the port about 300
miles. The town contains about 600 inha-
bitants, and has some good public buildings.
A short distance above the town is situated
the old wharf of the Yudanamutana Copper
Mining Company, and scattered round may
be observed the ruins of the traction engines
and waggons, which represent the efforts
made by a company to overcome the great
drawback to the profitable working of tne
rich mines in the interior, viz., cost of car-
riage. The Yudanamutana is about 260
miles north of the port, and in its vicinity
are the Blinman, Sliding Rock, Daly and
Stanley, and Rondra, all admitted by com-
petent judges to be rich mines, but unwork-
able at a profit on account of the heavy land
carriage. The apathy of the Government in
regard to opening this wealth up by means
of a light railway formed a subject I heard
dwelt upon everywhere. The mail road,
which crosses the range and returns to Ade-
laide on the east side past Mount Remark-
able, passes through similar soil to that de-
scribed in the areas. Hear Horrock’s Pass,
where the road gets through the range to
the west side, is situated the waterworks by
which Port Augusta is supplied. The water
is conducted by a 4-inch main a distance of
fourteen miles from a spring 1400 feet up
the range. The pressure, 210 lb, to the inch,
is broken at different points on the way by
three 120,000 gallon covered tanks, bricked
and cemented. The water is of excellent
quality. The works cost altogether £30,000,
and are under the care of Mr. Wastell. The
range to the north of Port Augusta has
several romantic gorges, amongst which a
notable one is the Pichirichie Pass.
Beautiful Valley run is situated 30 miles due
east of Port Augusta on the western side of
the range, about twenty miles further
north than the average point at which
Goyder’s line of rainfall cuts from west to


east. This line, which was drawn to define
where the dry country was supposed to
begin, so as to provide a base line from
which to determine the value of runs, has,
under pressure from the farmers, been done
away with. This splendid tract will con-
sequently be thrown open to selection as
soon as it can be suiveyed, and, under the
limited auction system, with deferred pay-
ments, will most likely fetch from £4 to £lO
per acre. The grass on this run was the most
luxuriant I had seen since leaving Adelaide,
and m the home station garden every kind
of vegetable grew luxuriantly. This beau-
tiful country, with its rolling valleys and
slightly-timbered rises, reminded me in the
general appearance and quality of soil of
Henty’s Muntham lands at Port Fairy, and
of this there is an area of about 1500 square
miles all ready for the plough, and, with
the exception of one or two large purchased
estates, being held under pastoral lease.
When this magnificent land is thrown open
to selection the greater portion of the wheat
will find its way to the ship through Port
Augusta. Melrose is situated sixteen miles
south of Beautiful Valley head station, forty
miles south of Port Augusta, and 200 miles
north of Adelaide. The township is a very
pretty one, situated at the foot of Mount
Remarkable, the highest peak of Flinders
range, being 3000 feet above sea-level, and
resembling the You Yangs near Geelong,
Near Melrose is Willowie, the station of Mr.
Angas, M.P., who has succeeded in securing
by purchase at the upset price about 60,000
acres of the pick of this delightful country.
From Melrose I passed through Wirrabbera,
the run of Mr. Murray, a young sportsman
who promises soon, from the appearance of
his stud stock, to take a prominent position
on the Australian turf. Through Wirrab-
bera the resemblance to the Muntham
country still continues. Here the surveyors
are also busy, and a new township is being
marked out, as there is also at Beautiful
Valley. From Mr. Murray’s run the road
carries on to Booyoolie, the run of Mr. H.
B. Hughes, past White Forest, a well-tim-
bered part of the Flinders range on the
right, from which the only good fencing
timber is obtainable by the area selectors.
Near Booyoolie head station is situated the
pretty township of Laura, already men-
tioned, where roads to Port Pirie, George
Town, Jamestown, and other area centres
branch off. Mr. Hughes, of Booyoolie (pro-
nounced Bowly), has managed, before the
passing of the Strangways Act, to secure a
similar estate to that of Mr. Angas. In
one place he has 10 miles along the Rocky
River, hemming it on both sides. The
Rocky River, which flows into the Brough-
ton, is, for quality of soil and beauty of
appearance, unequalled in the north. Mr.
Hughes has obtained notoriety as a gentle-
man who has been “slipped up” by his
dummies. This phrase is the one commonly
used to describe the breaking of faith with
the squatter by the dummy, and the con-
version of the land by appropriation or com-
mercial transfer to his own benefit. From
Laura I went through George Town to
Clare on my way back to Adelaide by way
of the Moonta and Port Wakefield districts.
No. XII.—FROM CLARE TO STRATHALBYN.
Contents. —Clare—Seven Hills and St. Aloysius’ College—Notable Wine Growers—Hoyleton—
Horse Railway —Port Wakefield—Yorke’s Peninsula—Character of the Scrub Lands—Moonta
and Kadina—Back to Adelaide—The Tiers—Variations in Seasons —The Hills Townships—
Highercombe—Echunga Riggings —Remarks on Character of Farming.
Clare is situated in one of a series of
valleys in an elevated well timbered strip of
coimtry stretching with an average width of
about seven miles southerly as far as Saddle-
worth. From Clare to Saddleworth is
twenty-three miles, and Saddleworth, as has
already been stated, lies sixty-seven miles
north of Adelaide. The country to the west
of the Clare ranges falls off into that already
described as being traversed by the railway
from Adelaide to Burra, and that to the
east drops suddenly to the level country ex-
tending about fifty miles in the direction of
the Spencer Gulf coast at Port Wallaroo.
The character of the soil and the operations
in this direction are similar to what has been
described on the Broughton areas, of which
this part is the southern continuation. Clare
is the n ost considerable of a number of town-
ships dotted along the ranges. It has a popu-
lation of 1004, of which 207 are adult males,
and the houses, of which there are 207, com-
prise some very fine buildings, amongst which
are a flour mill, several hotels, banks, and
representatives of the various religious de-
nominations. Mr. Ramsay, M.P., has here
also a large agricultural implement manufac-
tory, and in the suburbs are some very
beautiful residences surrounded by tastefully
kept grounds, amongst which that of Mr.


Gleeson, one of the earliest settlers in the
locality, is specially notable. Four miles
south of Clare is situated the St. Aloysius
College and Church, at a place called Seven
Hills. Peeping out from amongst the trees,
which stud the Seven Hills, this establish-
ment occupies a commanding site, and the
surrounding grounds of thirty acres in ex-
tent are kept in the most admirable order.
These include playgrounds for the students,
a vineyard of twenty-four acres, and four
acres of garden and orchard. The vineyard
is upwards of twenty-years old, and the
vines, which are from six to eight feet apart
to admit of plough culture, yield from eight to
ten thousand gallons of superior wines per
annum, besides a quantity of grapes used on
the place. The vegetable garden and orchard
are kept in a high state of tilth, and pro-
duce a supply of all kinds of fruit and
vegetables beyond the requirements of the
establishment, which at present numbers six
fathers, three scholastics, eight brothers, six
novices, thirty-eight boarders, and a large
number of day scholars. Besides the secular
instruction which is imparted without dis-
tinction of creeds, a portion of the establish-
ment is specially for students qualifying
themselves for priesthood in the Roman Ca-
tholic Church. The students come from the
various colonies, and Victoria I found to be
represented by three. The stone with which
the college and other buildings have been
built is obtained on the property, and the
building, quarrying, gardening, and educa-
tional departments are all under the personal
superintendence of members of the brother-
hood, controlled by the principal, the Very
Rev. Sigismund Farlinger. The church is a
very handsome building, ninety feet by
forty, in course of erection, and nearly com-
pleted. The orchard is a very fine one,
yielding abundantly almonds, apricots,
oranges, apples, pears, walnuts, loquats,
lemons, citrons, figs, filberts, plums, and a
variety of other fruits, a large quantity of
which, besides raisins, are annually dried for
sale and home consumption.
The road during the next eighteen miles
passes Penwortham, Watervale, Leasingham,
and Auburn, all beautifully situated amid
the well-wooded and spring-watered hills and
valleys of this part of the country. At
Watervale are situated the vineyard and
cellars of Captain Hughes, which are con-
ducted on the principle of storing the wine
in large quantities until fully matured. In
addition to Captain Hughes and those whose
operations have been more particularly de-
scribed in former papers, the names of Messrs.
Gilbert, of Pewsey Vale, Jacobs, of Moo-
rooroo, Smith, Salter, and Green, of
Angaston, R. I). Ross, of Highercombe, and
Dr, Kelly, of Tiutaro, are also specially
notable as being engaged in producing wines
that will in a few years place South Aus-
tralia in the front rank among the wine-
growing countries of the world. From
Auburn, which is similar in size and im-
portance to Clare, and noted for the excel-
lence of its flower and fruit shows, I struck
across ten miles to Hoyleton, a small wheat
depot township on the western slope of the
Clare range. Here is the present terminus
of a horse railway, three feet six inches
gauge, which conveys the produce of the
district to Port Wakefield. This tramway
is twenty-eight miles in length, and passen-
gers are conveyed twice daily by a single-
horse ’bus at the rate of twelve miles per
hour. An extension is being carried on
thirteen miles further north, when it will
tap and convey to Port Wakefield the pro-
duce from the lower or southern portion of
the areas. The land passed through on the
way to the port, comprising the hundreds of
Hall, Stow, and Goyder, on the right, and
Dalkey, Balaklava, and Inkerman on the
left, are the same rich chocolate wheat-
covered, wire-fenced farms of large extent
as those passed through further to the north.
Occupation being, however, older by several
years, the crops, although abundant, show
on every hand large patches of wild oats,
one of the earliest of the evil consequences
that follow the consecutive wheat growing
without rest or rotation to which the South
Australian as a rule subjects his land during
its earlier career. Port Wakefield has its
wharf arranged along a narrow creek which
forms the extreme northern bight of St.
Vincent’s Gulf, and is essentially a wheat
port, little other business being done during
the rest of the year. Last season 75,000
bushels were shipped here by lighter down
the creek four miles to the vessels in the
Gulf. From Port Wakefield the road runs
forty miles west to the sea at the Moonta
mines, crossing Green’s Plains and some
other valuable areas lately taken up, while
round to the southward that peculiar piece
of land of about 2000 square miles stretching
into the ocean between the two gulfs in the
form of a human leg and foot called York’s
Peninsula has lately been discovered to be
wheat-growing country, and is being sur-
veyed for selection. On the southern ex-
tremity of this peninsula a flourishing new
township called Edithburg is established,
with which communication across the gulf to
Port Adelaide is obtained by a steamer.
From Hoyleton to Port Wakefield and thence
to the three famous copper mining towns of
Kadina, Wallaroo, and Moonta on the
western coast of the peninsula, a good deal of
scrub land is passed through, varying from
narrow belts to the fringe of from ten to
thirty miles wide that borders the coast line
from Port Adelaide to Port Augusta. The
scrub lands of South Australia, north of Ade-
laide, are not, as their name would imply, use-
less. They are thickly covered with mallee,


and consist of three sorts of soil, a rich red
loam with loamy clay subsoil, a hard cho-
colate loam of moderate depth with lime
subsoil, and a sandy soil with stones. Of
the first kind described there is a large pro-
portion, especially on the coast near Port
Pirie, and wherever the experiment of clear-
ing has been made it has been proven to be
the richest and most lasting soil in the co-
lony. The lighter mallee soils would, I
should judge, grow superior barley. The
scrubs round iVJoonta are of the limestone
subsoil, and facilities for their clearing are
presented to the selectors by the large quan-
tity of firewood for which a market is ob-
tained on the mines. Moonta and Kadina
are the locations of enterprising agricultural
societies, and at each place the flower shows
are particularly well supplied with rare and
beautiful specimens, many of the exhibits
being by the miners. From Kadina east-
ward the first ten miles of a tramway has
been begun which is intended to go on to
Port Wakefield and thence, to Hamley bridge.
Hamley bridge is a station on the Burra line
fifty-six miles from Adelaide, and by this
route, when this new railway is finished, the
large mining population (20,000) on the
peninsula will obtain access to the metro-
polis, while at the same time the important
agricultural district of Alma Plains, of which
Hamley bridge is the centre, will be bene-
fited. The character of the Alma Plains
agriculture is similar to that described in the
up-country trip while passing through the
Riverton and Julia Creek districts, which
join here on to the eastward, and the re-
mainder of the journey back to Adelaide is
through the Gawler district, which has also
already been noticed. From Adelaide, start-
ing on the overland journey to Victoria, the
Tiers have to be ascended. The Tiers is a
name given to that portion of the ranges that
lie directly at the back of Adelaide. They are
here highest and most thickly timbered on
their summits. They are also further across
here than northward where they pass behind
Gawler and Kapunda, or southward where
they pass Willunga on their way to the
ocean at Cape Jervis. On the summit of
the Tiers is to be found the farming
country alluded to by South Austra-
lians as The Hills, in contradistinction
to the plains, which, in farming calendars,
have their different directions adapted to
variations of climate. Their variation is very
marked, arising from the sudden elevation.
The Gawler and Kapunda districts are what
have hitherto been counted the plains, and
the difference in season is about six weeks,
the lower country being that much earlier
than the higher. Now that the farming
has spread to the northern areas a third
difference in season has arisen, the area
harvest coming in about a month earlier
than Gawler. Wheat-stripping in the areas
begins early in November. As wheat-
growing advances northward into the Beau-
tiful Valley areas, the harvest will become
earlier still. The Tiers may be ascended by
either of two roads, the one cutting the
range to the north-east leading to Mount
Pleasant, and the other (the overland) to
the south-east leading to Strathalbyn, the
two places respectively being thirty-five
miles from Adelaide. A line then drawn
south from Mount Pleasant to Strathalbyn
will approximately measure other thirty,
five miles and pass through a large number
of the hill townships, prominent among
which are Gumeracha, Mount Barker, and
Nairne. This north and south line would
mark also the approximate boundary of the
range on the eastern side, where the country
begins to change from broken ranges to the
flats leading down to the Murray, which
runs parallel with the range on the east
side, as the St. Vincent Gulf coast runs
parallel with it on the west or Adelaide
side. The Murray fiats on the east side of
the range average about 30 miles in width
and consist of scrub lands of the second-
class or limestone character.
Ascending the Tiers by the Mount Plea-
sant-road the grounds of Mr. R. D. Ross, at
Highercombe, are reached twelve miles
from the city, and by this track, as it winds
its sinuous way up the face of the hill (at
this point about 2000 feet high), some
charming views are obtained. Amongst
these are the Torrens Gorge, through which
the Torrens finds its way to the Adelaide
waterworks at the foot of the range, the
Waterfall Gully, and others of such a cha-
racter as are not to be easily found within
so short distance of any other Australian
city. Upon reaching the crest of the range
the striking features of the country ahead
are precipitous hills, steep gullies, and
hea\fy timber (chiefly red gum) every-
where ; and this continues till the richer,
more gently undulating, and lightly-tim-
bered soil is approached towards the break
of the range on the other side. Mr. Ross’s
grounds, garden, orchard, and vineyard
occupy altogether 200 acres, the remainder
of the estate, 1600 acres, being stocked with
cattle. The grounds are the oldest in the
colony, and the larger number of the Ade-
laide gardens have been originally stocked
from this one. There are 40 acres of vines,
some of which are twenty-five years old,
the stocks, which are spur-pruned, standing
a foot high, and measuring six inches
through. The cellar contains 50,000 gallons
of wine from eight years old downwards.
The striking characteristics of these grandly-
laid out grounds are the picturesque manner
in which the European trees are made to
work in and contrast with the native, and
the astonishing variety not only in the kinds
but in the different sorts of each kind. The


variety of soils, elevation, and exposures to
be found in the broken nature of the pro-
perty doubtless aids in producing such a
variety as is found here, including the
holly, a myrtle hedge, peaches and apples,
olives and nuts, every kind of European
tree, very nearly every kind of fruit, and,
amongst a beautiful and rare collection of
flowers, the lily of the valley flourishing in
the open air. The age of the trees mate,
rially aid in producing the effect which
amongst all the gardens round Adelaide
must be pronounced as peculiar to Higher-
combe. A magnificent Norfolk Island pine
stands fronting the residence, and the hand-
some top fringes of others can be seen
topping the trees all over the grounds.
Stone pines there are 2 feet 6 inches through,
and poplars reaching 80 feet high, with
stems even larger than the pines. One
willow tree measures 18 feet girth, covering
with its branches an area of 1600 square
yards, notwithstanding a third of the tree
has been carted away through being struck
with lightning. A Cedrus Deodara, 3 feet
through in the stem, on which the Duke
of Edinburgh has carved his initial A, stands
unrivalled as a perfect specimen of this
beautiful tree.
On the other or south-east road similar
country is passed through, the ranges occu-
pied by cattle and sheep, and in one in-
stance, that of Mr. Price Maurice, of Cas-
tamboul, very successfully with Angora
goats, under the management of Mr. Sabine;
while the flats at the bottoms of the gullies
are the locales of market gardens, from
which not only is Adelaide but also, by
means of the railway, many places up-
country are abundantly supplied with all
kinds of vegetables. Twenty-one miles
from Adelaide on this road the old Echunga
diggings are passed through. Here the
timber changes to stringy bark, and the soil
to a deep sand, the whole deposit being
analogous to the old Pliocene tertiary gold-
drifts of Bendigo and Forest Creek. These
diggings were discovered in 1853 by two
men who had returned from Bendigo. Up-
wards of a quarter of a million worth of gold
have been taken out altogether, and there
are still parties of fossickers doing a little.
From Echunga I struck north to Mount
Pleasant, and back south to Strathalbyn,
thus traversing what may be called the bulk
of the hill farming country, lying within an
approximate radius of thirty-five miles long
by seven or eight broad, and comprising the
township of Gumeracha, Blumberg, Hahn-
dorf, Mount Barker, Nairne, Callington,
Grunthal, Balhannah, Woodside, Mount
Torrens, Charleson and Macclesfield. Near
Macclesfield is Lashbrooke, the estate of
the Rev. J. B. Austin, who has been success-
ful in growing lucerne for his sheep in con-
nection with considerable farming opera-
tions. On this property there is a hill con-
taining an unlimited quantity of red and
yellow ochre. In some of these townships a
large number of Germans are resident, and
those who are on the land exhibit the usme
careful attention to the smaller remunerative
matters connected with the farm which
characterise these excellent colonists in
Victoria. In this hill district generally I
found a nearer approach to the better class
of agriculture than anything I had previously
met with since leaving Victoria. Here was
more attention to buildings, subdivision,
combination of stock, and variety and rota-
tion of crops ; still there is an evident great
falling off in the extent of the operations
compared with former years. Land on all
hands is to be seen lying in unfilled fallow,
and stock being kept without as much effort
in the way of producing lucerne and rib-
grass (for which the district appears well
adapted) as there might be. The townships
•have a very superior appearance, the build-
ings being of a most substantial and in many
instances of a highly ornamental character.
This is notably the case in Strathalbyn,
which occupies a splendid position on the
banks of the Angas. The Presbyterian
Church of this town is not excelled in Ade-
laide. There is, however, a dulness in these
centres and their surrounding areas. The
land has become foul and partially ex-
hausted according to the old story of colo-
nial farming, and the younger men have
gone, some to the northern areas, some to
Tatiara, and some to Victoria ; many fami-
lies are also selling out and migrating to-
gether. The land is getting into larger
hands, some devoting it altogether to stock
and others keeping more stock than for-
merly and doing less farming, but doing that
little in a better manner.


No. XIII.—WILLUNGA AND FLAX GROWING.
Contents. —Flax Indigenous to the Colony—lts Cultivation being adopted in the old Districts—
Beauty of the Drive from Adelaide to Willunga—McDonald’s Flax Mill—Process of Preparing
the Flax—System of Growing Flax in the District—The Willunga Slate Quarries.
South Australia appears to be peculiarly-
adapted for flax growing. In most parts of
the colony the plant is to be found growing
wild. It has not, however, been adopted by
the farmers (speaking generally) as a matter
of choice, but is in a measure being forced
upon them as a necessity. The South Aus-
tralian farmer as a rule may be described as
having become demoralised by the Ridley
(stripper) machine. That is, the facility of
wheat-harvesting has been so great by
means of this machine that any crop re-
quiring a little more exertion has been
ignored, until the land which, under a
system embracing an intelligent intermixture
of suitable rotations would have continued
clean and in good heart, has at last refused
to produce almost anything, except wild oats.
Willunga is one of the districts in which the
necessity for adopting some different system
has been forced upon the farmers, and where
some steps have been taken in the direction
of developing the flax crop as one profitable
intrinsically, besides being a restorer and
cleaner of the soil.
The drive to Willunga is one of the many
beautiful ones in the vicinity of Adelaide.
Starting due south from the city by a
splendid metal road running along the base
of the Mount Lofty Range, and overlooking
the waters of the Gulf lying some half dozen
miles to the right, the intermediate prospect
being one of undulating farm, garden, or-
chard, and vineyard covered country, the
township of Willunga is reached in thirty
miles. On the way are passed the smaller
places of Tapley’s Hill, Reynella, Morphett
Vale, Hachham, Noarlunga, and MacLaren
Yale, all, with the exception of Noarlunga,
betraying a comparatively deserted appear-
ance. The flour mills stopped, and in some
instances the machinery shifted up north
after the farmers. At Noarlunga, which is
situated on the Onkaparinga, a considerable
river coming in from the north-east, there is
a good mill at work, also an agricultural ma-
chine factory. The river here makes a
turn enclosing the township in the form of a
horseshoe, and is navigable for small craft to
the port, distant about three miles, where
there is a harbor formed by a natural barrier
of reef behind which vessels can ride with
safety in any weather. There is a jetty
about 400 feet long, at which in the early
days of the district, when heavy crops of
wheat were obtained, a large quantity was
shipped. Noarlunga is twenty miles from
Adelaide, and the country to the eastward
as it enters the range changes from rich
rolling country to thickly timbered ravines
and spurs, consisting of in some parts indif-
ferently grassed soil, in some parts of slaty,
in others of limy, and in others of ironstone
formation. The range continues along the
coast to Cape Jervis, overlooking Kangaroo
Island, of which it is supposed at one time
to have formed part previous to the gap now
made by the ocean, and called Backstairs
Passage. Willunga is situated about seven
miles from the seaboard on the slope of the
range, and is one of the most beautiful of
South Australian townships, its buildings,
chief among which are several churches, a
telegraph office, court-house, branch of the
National Bank, and one or two fine hotels,
being interspersed with gardens, containing
trees and shrubs upwards of thirty years old.
At tlie northern end of the township is
situated the flax mill of Mr. T. MacDonald.
This mill has been in operation for about
seven years, and comprises one seed roller
for thrashing out the seed, one breaking
roller, one squeezer for wringing out water,
and the scutching machine of four scutchers
of five arms each. Mr. MacDonald has been
engaged in fostering the industry of flax
growing by supplying the farmers with seed,
some superior samples of which have been
lately sent out at his request by the Flax
Supply Association of Ireland. Last season
about2ootons were grownand supplied to the
mill within a radius of about fifteen miles of
the township, and the present crop promises
an increase of yield, while the area planted
is annually increasing. The mill has at pre-
sent seven retting pits, but these are insuffi-
cient, and will shortly have to be increased,
together with the machinery, four new
scutchers having been lately imported and
lying ready for use. The present machinery
is driven by a ten-horse power engine, and
the flax as received is weighed on the weigh-


bridge, and paid for. The price given last
season was £2 15s, per ton. The flax upon
being received is passed through the thrashing
rollers which stand in the seed shed. The
sheafs of flax are then placed on end in the
water in the pits, where the process of un-
fastening the fibrous matter from the woody
material inside takes from ten days to four
or five weeks, according to the temperature.
It thus follows that where operations are not
conducted upon a system by which artificial
heating of the water can be carried on, the
most profitable way of working consists in
doing all the retting (or soaking) and drying
in summer, and the scutching in the winter ;
more particularly as scutching in hot
weather is accompanied by more waste than
in cold. After soaking, the sheaves are
placed on end, spread over the drying ground.
The drying takes about four days in average
hot weather. When dry the flax is stowed
away in a large galvanised iron shed, from
which it is taken to the breaking and scutch-
ing processes in the mill. These processes
are very simple, the one consisting of passing
the flax through a series of rollers like those in
a chaff-cutter by which the fibre is still
further loosened from the wood, and the
other in the holding of the flax by one man
to each scutcher, so that the rapidly revolv-
ing arms by a sidelong motion strike the
fibre and tow away from the woody matter.
The quantity of marketable flax obtained
from the 200 tons scutched last season was
twenty tons. The price in England varies,
according to quality, from £2B to £2OO per
ton. Mr. MacDonald’s best sample realised
£75.
Amongst the farmers visited in the vicinity
who are engaged in producing flax may be
mentioned Messrs. Joel Collins and William
Mudge. Mr, Collins’s farm is situated on
the base of the range about five miles nearer
Adelaide than Willunga. About 150 acres
are good chocolate soil, varying in depth
from six inches to a foot on the limestone of
the ridges to a greater depth on the clay sub-
soil of the flats. The remainder of the farm
is used as natural pasture in the range, for
300 merino sheep, which are profitably kept
along with the cultivation. The chief crop
grown is hay for Adelaide, the soil which in
former years yielded heavy wheat crops
having become full of wild oats. The only
wheat grown is that following what was flax
the preceding year, and one plot of about
twelve acres, pointed out as having been
grown in this way demonstrated the benefit
to be derived by growing flax as a rotation
before wheat. Although the ground was
stated to have been thoroughly worn out
and foul by about thirty years almost conse-
cutive wheat growing, it bore a crop promis-
ing for not less than fifteen bushels, and very
clean. Mr. Collins believes so implicitly in
the restoring influence of the flax crop on
the soil that he prefers it to a summer fallow
independent of the profit in itself. As a re-
munerative crop Mr. Collins states that
nothing ever paid him better, even with the
high price of pulling. With an implement
to cheapen this part of the work, he con-
siders that flax growing could be combined
in qualities as a rotation with the
wheat, forming a staple industry of
the colony, and at the same time
keeping the land continually clean, and in
good heart. He has this year thirteen
acres in flax, from which he calculates,
judging from present crops, to have about
3J tons per acre. For harvesting he pays
£2 per acre, for hand-pulling the work being
done chiefly by women and children. An active
adult hand does an acre in four days. In
sowing for fibre he has found Tij bushels per
acre to be about right, and f for seed.
The difficulty in hand-sowing is to obtain
regularity, and he proposes to use a sowing
machine on the principle of the turnip drill
in future. Sowing in the Willunga dis-
trict is best done early, say the last half of
April—when this is done the crop is ready to
harvest about the end of October—which
gives the double advantage of avoiding
the hot winds, and the caterpillars, which
usually make their appearance about the be-
ginning of November The land with the
deep clayey subsoil he finds best adapted for
flax, and one of the advantages of the crop
is that it comes in before the hay, so that its
harvest does not come at a busy season.
The farm of Mr. Mudge is some distance
further to the eastward, and consequently
higher in the range overlooking the gulf.
The country in here is patchy, some very
good hills alternating with poor country,
after the manner of the Drysdale district near
Geelong. This farm, from its situation, evi-
dently receives a greater share of rain than
the country to the north of Adelaide, and
contains the greatest variety of crops that I
had seen since leaving Victoi-ia. The holding
in all is 400 acres, 150 of which are arable.
On the grass-hills are kept a herd of fifty
cattle, the increase of which are fattened,
and about ten cows kept by means of
lucerne, rape, turnips, mangels, and similar
crops grown in the cultivated portion of the
farm. The crops grown comprise flax,
barley, rye, wheat, oats, potatoes, peas, and
hay. The hay is chiefly used on the farm
for the stock. Amongst the live stock are
five good draught mares, for which foals are
bred, and pigs in number varying from
thirty to one hundred yearly are profitably
raised and disposed of. An excellent
vegetable garden is attended to, and keeping
of fowls and bees form portion of the
systematic profit yielding resources of the
establishment. On this farm the practi-
cability of farming on proper principles is
clearly shown, as at the same time are also


its benefits. The farm, although one of the
oldest in the colony, and containing por-
tions which have yielded under its earlier
system eighteen wheat crops without inter-
mission, has been brought round to yield
good crops, and very clean. The pea crop
Mr, Mudge speaks of in the highest terms,
as a cleaner and restorer, especially for wheat.
It is also profitable in itself, yielding usually
upwards of 30 bushels, for which he re-
ceives an average of 4s. per bushel of 40 lb.
Flax on the farm has been grown for many
years for the linseed, for horse and cattle
food, and is being grown this year for the
first time as a fibre crop. Mr. Mudge has
always found it a first-class preparation
for wheat, and has been inclined to attri-
bute some of the benefit to the opening up
of the soil by the process of pulling, and
the striking of the roots downward into the
subsoil. His crop of about 14 acres was
just about ready for pulling at the time of
my visit (the Ist November), and looked
splendid. The soil and treatment was
similar to that already described. The
ground is all the better to be well knocked
about and worked fine previous to sowing.
In growing the crop for linseed, Mr. Mudge
said he could obtain Bs. per bushel, and
generally count upon an average of 15
bushels per acre. When grown for seed also
the straw can be utilised for thatch, for which
purpose it cannot be excelled. A plot of
ground under mangels was pointed out by
Mr. Mudge to show the difference in quality
where the ground had been subsoiled 13
inches deep, on the 2 plough system. The
difference in fayor of the deep tillage was
very marked. On various other farms in this
district sheep-keeping and similar manage-
ment to that already alluded to is being
carried on with profitable results to the soil
and its occupiers, and it is a pity that colonial
farmers do not adopt this rational system of
agriculture at an earlier period, thus keep-
ing of the land in heart from the first rather
than letting it run out and become dirty
involving so much additional labor, expense
and loss.
Before leaving Willunga I visited the slate
quarries. These are situated about two
miles westward of the township on the face
of the range. There are four quarries at
work, the Dellabole Co., and Messrs. Ber-
wick's, Bastian’s and Martin’s, The works
being carried on are on a small scale, the
number of hands in each quarry not exceed-
ing twelve. The resources of material are
simply unlimited, as the slate runs north and
south 4 miles in length, by about 600 yards
in breadth, with a westerly dip from the
surface downwards, to any depth, and it is
found that the deeper the slate is followed
it improves in quality. The mode of working
as seen in Mr. Martin’s quarry consists in
the slate being exposed on a face from the
easterly side, when the large slabs, which lie
slanting against each other in layers from
onetothreeinches thick, areloosened out with
the crowbar, a chain passed round and wound
up to the works on the surface by a derrick.
Some of the layers are of a close texture
which will not split, and this goes for
flagging. That used for roofing however
runs off in slates by the simple insertion and
tap of the workmen’s chisels, with the
utmost regularity and cleanness. This
splitting and afterwards the squaring is all
done by hand, by skilled operatives from
Wales with a rapidity quite astonishing. The
slate is conveyed by teams at ss. per ton to
the port of Willunga, a distance of 7 miles,
where a considerable quantity is shipped for
Melbourne, The frieght to Melbourne is £1
per ton, and the prices at the quarry are
for rough edged H inch flagging and
for sawn edged per foot. For roofing
slate 24 x 12’s are £9, 22 x ll’s £7 10s., 21
x 10’s £6 10s., 18 x 9’s £5, and 16 x B’s £3
per 1000. The Government is about making
a tramway to the port, when it is proposed to
work these quarries upon a larger and more
advantageous system by means of a large
company.
No. XIV.—GOOLWA AND HINDMARSH ISLAND.
Contents —Milang and Lake Alexandrina The Goolwa, or “Lower Murray”—lts splendid
Harbor—The Murray Mouth —The projected Goolwa Canal—Hindmarsh Island—Mr. Price’s
Hereford Farm.
From Strathalbyn (thirty-five miles S.E.
of Adelaide) the Murray can be reached by
three roads. One runs due east thirty-five
miles, cutting the river at right angles at
Wellington, a pastoral township and stock
crossing-place. The next is the overland
road to Victoria, which reaches the river in
twelve miles south-easterly, where it forms
itself into the large sheet of water twenty-
five miles long by fifteen broad, called Lake
Alexandrina. At this point is situated
Milang, a considerable and busy township,
with a jetty and accommodation for the re-
ception of wool and other goods forming the
Murray traffic, a large proportion of the
South Australian share of which is landed
here and conveyed overland to Port Adelaide
via Strathalbyn by carrier teams at 255. per


ton for the total distance of fifty-six miles.
At Milang the passengers per overland mail
leave the coach and take steamer across Lake
Alexandrina and through a narrow connect-
ing channel into Lake Albert, which is some-
what smaller, on the southern shore of which
another coach is in waiting at a small town-
ship called Meningie. The passage across is
altogether thirty-five miles, and the fare (10s.)
is a charge levied on the passenger in addi-
tion to the sum paid for a ticket purchased
upon the understanding that it entitles him
to a through passage from Adelaide to Vic-
toria. The third means of communication
from Strathalbyn to the Murray is by a horse
railway running south twenty-five miles to
Goolwa, situated below Lake Alexandrina on
the lowest part of the Murray or part nearest
to the sea. The country traversed by the
tramway, on the left hand stretching to the
river, is mallee on limy soil, moderately well
adapted for agriculture, but chiefly used as
natural pasture ; and on the right, valleys
here and there come down from the Mount
Lofty Range (on the eastern or opposite side
of which we now are from Adelaide) in which
limited areas of good country are taken up for
combined agriculture and grazing. At Goolwa
standing on a rising point overlooking the
Murray, the full grandeur of this noble
stream and its peculiar position in relation to
the sea can be perfectly viewed. Looking to
the eastward the river with its freight of
waters gathered during a navigable course
(including its Darling and Murrumbidgee
tributaries) of over 3000 miles comes on in
a direct course for the ocean, which stretches
away to the west, and from which the
river is cut off by a narrow peninsula of flat
land with low sandy hills. Here on the edge
of the river at the narrowest point of the
peninsula between the river and the sea is
situated the town of Goolwa.
About seven miles up stream at the
western extremity of Lake Alexandrina,
Hindmarsh Island begins. This island
is about seven miles long by an average
of two broad, extending along the centre
of the river from the lakes on the east
to Goolwa on the west. Along the northern
side of the island the navigable channel of
the river flows in a stream 600 yards broad,
striking against the peninsula at Goolwa
with an evident natural inclination to reach
the ocean at that point, and balked by the
obstruction, sweeps round past Goolwa with
a stream giving twenty-three feet of water
close in shore, and after traversing the penin-
sula nine miles along the coast to the south-
east finds its way out into the sea by a narrow
channel through the sandhills, in which the
surf from the ocean and the current from the
river are continually at war. At this point
the water from the lakes round the south side
of Hindmarsh Island also comes in but over
a bar, making that way from the lakes un-
navigable. Here also the extraordinary
piece of back water called the Coorong,
which extends upwards of 100 miles along
the coast to the south has its entrance to the
sea by the Murray mouth. The Coorong is
from half a mile to three miles in width, and
is separated from the sea by a similar penin-
sula to that separating the Murray af Goolwa.
Several of the Murray captains who are used
to the Murray mouth pass out and in from
Goolwa to Victor Harbor, but the passage is
not considered safe, owing to the continued
surf and the shifting of the channel by the
moving sands. The channel, though deep,
is very narrow, and persons who view it in-
variably express astonishment at the vast
volume of the river water finding its way
through so narrow an opening. It appears,
however, probable that a very large quantity
finds its way to the sea by percolation
through the eight miles peninsula of sand-
hills between Goolwa and the mouth, as,
although the peninsula is only an average of
about a mile wide, fresh water from the
Murray can be obtained at any point upon
reaching its level. On this po nt it is also
interesting to note that Captain Sturt
in his journal records that when he first
came down the Murray from New South
Wales he struck the sand hills a short dis-
tance from where the town of Goolwa now
stands, and failing to find any mouth, con-
cluded that the river had no qutlet to the
sea, but lost itself in the sand.
It is impossible to estimate the effect that
the successful completion of the Goolwa
canal will have upon the Murray trade, as
water transit can be conducted so much
cheaper than by rail, and this work, in view
of the vast agricultural and mineral re-
sources yet to be developed on the Darling,
Murrumbidgee, and Riverina country, in ad-
dition to an increase in the production of
wool, as these lands become settled, will be
watched alike with interest in Victoria,
New South Wales, and Queensland. A bill
has been passed by the South Australian
Legislature vesting in the Goolwa corpora-
tion certain privileges and monopolies, which
are being leased to a private company which
proposes to undertake cutting a canal that
will permit ocean going vessels to enter and
receive the cargoes of the river steamers
direct from hold to hold. The surveyed site
is half a mile south of Goolwa, where the
peninsula is three-quarters of a mile broad.
The greater portion of the land here is nearly
level with the river, and the strip of sand-
hill is narrow and not more than fifty feet
high. The canal will require to be taken
out half a mile into the sea to obtain twenty-
six feet of water, and this portion of the
work is proposed to be piled with a semicir-
cular break on the south, leaving a free way
on the other side to prevent sand deposits.
Victor Harbor, in the event of the scheme


being successful, will be used chiefly as a
refuge by vessels making for the canal in
heavy weather, and Goolwa with its nine
miles of deep water frontage close up to the
side, and still as a mill-pond, stands second
to no harbor in the colonies, not excepting
Port Jackson. With reference to the mineral
resources of the Upper Murray, awaiting
development by economy of transit, there are
specimens of copper ore from the Cobar mine
on the Darling of from thirty to sixty per
cent. This mine, which has only been opened
two years, has, according to a late report of
the captain’s, 72,000 tons exposed and ready
to be taken out. Goolwa has about half a
dozen good streets, several good public build-
ings, and superior wharf accommodation, and
stores. Connected with the wharf are the
termini of the Strathalbyn tramway, and
one which runs round the beach, via Port
Elliot, to Victor Harbor, situated twelve
miles distant in the corner of the northerly
sweep made by the ocean between Goolwa
and Cape Jervis known as Encounter Bay.
Amongst the Goolwa establishments Mr.
Graham’s ship-building yards and ships are
worthy of mention as being entitled to the
credit of having turned out the first iron
steamer built in the colony. There was also
just finishing at the time of my visit a fine
double twin screw steamer (the Napier) of
160 tons burden, intended for the Murray
and Melbourne trade through the mouth. At
Mr. Graham’s foundry a quantity of pig iron
is to be seen, constituting some of the first
fruits of a smelting company, who have
begun operations on the Swedish principle
with charcoal in the range at Mount Jagged
between Goolwa and Willunga, distant
twelve miles.
On Hindmarsh Island is situated the
Hereford breeding farm of Mr. Chas. Price.
The island is of an undulating character,
moderately timbered with sheoak and com-
posed of a drift sand similar to that of
the pine ridges of the country round Den-
iliquin. This sand, although apparently in-
capable of growing anything, is, how-
ever, possessed of some peculiar virtue,
as the flourishing crops on the farms
(of which there are ten altogether on
the island) sufficiently demonstrate.
Mr. Price’s farm is situated at the western
or nearest exremity of the island to Goolwa,
and is entered upon immediately after leaving
the ferry by which communication with the
mainland is obtained. Besides the ferry for
passengers there is a punt for crossing the
stock and produce. Mr. Price’s farm is
altogether in extent 1,000 acres, and
although a resident of twenty years as a
farmer and shebp-breeder on the island it is
only of comparatively late date that he has
turned his attention to the Hereford cattle,
with which his name is now associated as
being the most successful breeder in South
Australia. The Prices of Herefordshire are a
well-known family in the annals of Hereford
breeding and it was on the occasion of the
sale consequent upon the death of his brother,
Mr. John Price, of Ludlow, that Mr. Chas.
Price went home and purchased in 1869 the
bull Bringewood, and the cow Maid of Cox-
all, with her calf, Queen of the Ocean by
Matchless (2110). Of these the mother was
unfortunately washed overboard on the pas-
sage, and the remaining two formed the
foundation of the present Goolwa herd, com-
prising 120 head of such animals as are well
worth going many miles to see. Bringewood
(2981) (who, like all Mr. Price’s herd, is a
red with white face) is by Agriculturist
(1842), out of Fairmaid the Second by the
Grove (1764). After producing pedigree
bulls and heifers from Queen of the Ocean,
and some half dozen other cows which were
nicked up without pedigrees, but whose
stock show them to be of the right blood, he
was disposed of to Mr. J. H. Angas, M.P.,
for 117 guineas, to make way for fresh blood
in the shape of Mount Aitkin, a remarkably
perfect bull by Commerce by Defiance, and
purchased as a yearling in 1872 from the
breeder, Mr. Henry Beattie, of Victoria, for
fifty guineas. Defiance was bred by Mr.
Lyall, Frogmore, Victoria. Mount Aitkin
was afterwards sold to Grant and Stokes in
the north for 150 guineas, and the present
bull in use by Mr. Price is Mount Aitkin’s
son, Chief of the Isle, one year and a half
old, out of Queen of the Ocean, Chief of the
Isle is an extremely handsome and level
bull, weighs 1300 lb., and measures already
six feet eight inches in the girth. He took
first prize at the late Adelaide show for the
best yearling, and a sweepstakes of twenty-
five guineas for the best bull of any age or
breed, beating four competitors. He tra-
velled to the show and back, a distance of
sixty miles, and on his return took first prize
at Goolwa. The other bulls are Rob Boy,
ten months, and Goolwa, six months. Rob
Roy is by Hindmarsh Island out of Pigeon,
and in bone, handle, and general style and cai-
riage has all the traits of pure blood and high
breeding. This bull’s sire is by Bringewood,
and his dam Pigeon is one of the non-pedi-
greed cows, but her every point shows her
to have come of a superior Hereford strain.
She was purchased from Mr. C. B. Fisher,
who brought her from Victoria, and is of
great width, depth, and levelness. Hind-
marsh was by Bringewood and was sold at a
high figure. Goolwa is a most promising
calf, also by Hindmarsh Island out of Queen
of the Ocean. The breeders altogether num-
ber forty, having been added to yearly as the
heifers came in, and Mr. Price intends to
make his complement fifty in all, before he
begins selling females to any extent. Of
Pigeon’s progeny by Bringewood, a three-
year-old dark red heifer named Jeannie


Deans, with the white face and white mane
which characterise this bull’s family, is as
near as possible a perfect model. While
good in the touch she is almost everything
that could be wished, being long in the bo Hy,
deep in the brisket, deep and full in the
flank, broad in the loins, very short
in the leg, full in the heart, and
remarkably good on the quarter. She
is in calf to the Chief. Of Jeannie Deans’s pro-
geny, Little Dorrit, a twenty-one month old
heifer by Mount Aitkin, is worthy of special
mention, as is also Maid of the Isle, another
eighteen-month old, by Mount Aitkin out of
Mermaid, who is by Bringewood out of
Queen, and for whom 80 guineas have lately
been refused. These two Mount Aitkin
heifers, in their general style and carriage,
show much symmetry and finish, and were
awarded the first prize for the best pair of
heifers at the Adelaide Show. Little Dorrit
also obtained the first prize for the best
single heifer on her retnrn to Goolwa. Some
very fine heifers have been produced by
crossing the Hereford with the shorthorn,
and of these Lily, a white heifer by Mount
Aitkin, is a very favorable example. Of the
pedigreed bulls sold, the Queen’s progeny
by Bringewood have all brought good
prices, such as Neptune, Alpha, and Mer-
man, who brought 150, 120, and 100 guineas
respectively as yearlings. And the young
stock from the Queen and her progeny pro-
mise to be of a class surpassing anything
already produced. A large number of steers
by Bringewood and Mount Aitkin, out of
non-pedigreed cows, but of a good character,
are disposed of as three-year-olds for £l7
per head on the farm, the butcher driving
No. XV.—FROM
GOOLWA
Contents.— Lake Albert and the Aboriginal
Kingston, or Lacepede Bay—The Harbor
South Australia Tapping the Wimmera (
Station
Couutry
The overland coach to Victoria arrives at
Milang from Adelaide in the evening, and
the passage thence across Lake Alexandrina
is made during the night. By the courtesy
of Mr, Goode, the Mayor of Goolwa, who
sent me up the river in his cutter, I was en-
abled not only to make the passage in the
daylight, but also to inspect the aboriginal
station at Point Macleay. This establish-
ment is situated on one of the two points of
land between which a narrow strait runs out
of Lake Alexandrina on the south side into
Lake Albert. The sail from Goolwa up past
Hindmarsh Island and a number of smaller
islands in these lakes is a most beautiful one,
and the present site of the station is what
them away. Those steers average at three-
years old 1100 lb„, and as the progeny from
the heifers of the Jeannie Deans stamp in-
crease these weights and prices will in all
likelihood advance very considerably. The
quietness and docility of the herd is a very
noticeable feature, each animal permitting
the owner to approach and handle it in any
portion of the field. Also the superiority
of the Herefords over the shorthorns, as
urged by their supporters with reference to
earlier maturity, quicker fattening upon
dry and scanty pastures and general hardi-
ness, would appear to be supported by tan-
gible proofs by Mr, Price’s results. About
100 acres of the farm are devoted to the
growing of hay for winter fodder, together
with a small field of mangels for the bulls.
The mangels grow to a large size and of a
good quality on the island. No attempt at
artificial grasses has been made, the pastures
being largely composed of natural barley
grass, and fresh water is obtained all over
the island by sinking to the level of the
river. Amongst the remaining settlers on
the island the Messrs. Rankin occupy the
whole of the eastern portion, and have some
very well bred long-woolled sheep, and in
connection [with a large dairy fatten off
annually by means of milk, barley, and man-
gels. upwards of 300 two-year old bacon
pigs, for which an average of £4 is obtained
in Adelaide. Mr, Rankin breeds from the
shorthorn, and has a superior bull from Mr.
Angas, M.P., of Angaston, who has lately
imported into his stock superior shorthorn
blood from the herd of Mr. Robert
M ‘Dougal.
TO NARRACOORTE.
n—The Coorong and the Eighty-mile Desert—
—The Railway to Narracoorte—Bordertown—
■y —System of Selectors’ Commonages.
used to be the head-quarters of the once
powerful Murray tribe, when it numbered
8000 and occupied all the country between
the sea and a line drawn from Cape Jervis to
Wellington and from Wellington to Lace-
nede Bay. The mission was established in
1859 by the Aborigines’ Friends’ Association
of Adelaide. It is supported by voluntary
subscription subsidised by an annual Govern-
ment grant of £SOO, and a lease of 1700 acres
of land. The land is similar to that of Hind-
marsh Island, and is cultivated by the na-
tives under the superintendence of a farm
overseer. Besides £132 realised from the
wool and skins of 1300 sheep kept on the
scrubby portion of the station, wheat, oats,


and barley giving a net profit of £292 were
produced last year, while this season a large
quantity of new laud has been grubbed and
cleared, of which 240 acres have been put in
with wheat and oats. Outside of the station
land two married natives have settled upon
farms of their own (granted by Government)
and are working them well. The tribe num-
bers in all now 000, of which an average of
about 130 reside constantly on the station,
including the old natives, the children, and
the farm workers. The others are distri-
buted in various directions, at work chiefly
on stations. In shearing time they are in
great demand. Many of the tribe wander
away in an attempt to live in their old man-
ner, but by reason of the scarcity of game
caused by European settlement, generally
drift round to the station again, which they
look upon as their home always open. The
mission has been from the first under the
management of the Rev. Geo. Taplin, who
is thoroughly master of the language, and
the author of an interesting work on abori-
ginal manners and customs. The buildings
on the station comprise a schoolhouse, dwell-
ing-house, schoolmaster’s house, overseer’s
cottage, chapel, smithy, stables, and twelve
one-roomed cottages, built for the married
natives. There are thirty-seven children
at present in school, and their writing
and general progress js of a very creditable
kind.
Leaving Point MacLeay and reaching
Meningie, a small township on the southern
bight of the Lake, the coach is taken for Vic-
toria, and here is entered upon one of the
most dreary journeys that can possibly be
conceived. For eighty miles the road con-
tinues its south-easterly course along the
edge of the Coorong (or long arm of salt
water with its narrow sand hill peninsula
running along on the other side between
it and the sea), while on the left, stretching
away eastward as far as the eye can reach,
nothing can be seen but a brown unbroken
expanse of mallee and heath growing upon
a desert of sand through which the four
coach horses plough painfully along. About
eighty miles from Meningie the Coorong
breaks up into a series of detached shallow
waterholes, and the intervening strip of land
along the beach gradually changes from bare
sand to sand carrying a little grass, but the
prospect on the left continues unchanged
during the next twenty miles till Lacepede
Bay is reached at a total distance from Ade-
laide of 182 miles. Here the country slightly
improves onwards towards Robe or Guichen
Bay twenty-eight miles further along the
coast. That is it changes from sandy mallee
to numerous swamps, interspersed with
patches of middling grazing country con-
sisting of a thin soil of light loam resting
upon a hard limestone formation cropping in
many places through the surface, and tim-
bered in frequent belts with stunted gum,
honeysuckle and blackwood. About Mount
Benson (between Lacepede and Guichen
bays) there is a patch of fair agricultural
land, but farming is only carried on to a very
limited extent, the surrounding lands being
almost entirely occupied as squattages.
Robe is the oldest port on this part of the
coast and used to be the main outlet for all
the wool from the Tatiara and Mosquito
Plains country to the eastward. The trade
has, however, to a great extent left it for
Port Macdonnell on the one side, and Lace-
pede Bay on the other. This latter port
being the terminus of a railway in course of
construction toNarracoorte is likely to even-
tually take from Robe the most of its trade.
One of the principal shipping firms, Ormerod
and Co., has shifted up to Kingston (the
Lacepede Bay township) and there are other
two shipping firms, Messrs. Guthrie, Bullock
and Co., and Messrs. J. and A. Cooke. The
larger portion of the wool goes to Melbourne,
and the township, which has several good
stores and other well-built stone buildings,
including a superior post and telegraph
office, literary institute, and Presbyterian
Church, is evidently a rising one.
Lacepede Bay has every prospect of being,
when the railway is finished, a very impor-
tant outlet for a large portion of country in
which Victoria is very much interested, viz.,
the sixty miles extending westward of Hor-
sham to the border in the direction of iS'ar-
racoorte. A much larger proportion of this
vast tract between Apsley on the border and
Mount Arapiles near Horsham is freer of
mallee and has more resemblance to the
Wimmera lands already settled upon than
many in Victoria appear to be aware of.
Those resident in Kingston appear to be fully
alive to the value of the lands in that quarter,
and it is mainly to the solid arguments they
have been able to adduce upon two leading
points that the South Australian Govern-
ment have been spurred into beginning this
Kingston and Narracoorte line eighteen
months since, and which is proposed to be
completed in the course of the next seven or
eight. These two points are the superior ad-
vantages of Lacepede Bay as a harbor, and
its much closer proximity to the Wimmera
country than any other point of the seaboard
either in South Australia or Victoria. With
reference to the safety of the Bay the testi-
mony of several captains and pilots has been
published bearing upon the phenomenon that
this port presents. While to all appearance
being an open roadstead giving at most an in-
dent of some ten miles between the light-
house on Cape Jaffa reef south of the town-
ship, and a point about thirty miles along to
the north the water in all weathers is de-
void of surf or rollers, and even when the
wind is blowing from the westward dead on
shore seldom rises above a ripple. The pre-


sent jetty is only short and temporary, re-
quiring communication with the shipping by
lighter, but twenty-four feet of water can be
obtained within three-quarters of a mile of
high water mark. The anchorage is good,
and the captains on the coast run in during
stress of weather for refuge, although to all
appearance driving on to a lee shore, and the
sudden transition from the violent tossing of
the ocean waves, while exposed to the full
force of the storm, is quite unaccountable.
Large piles of rails and sleepers are lying
ready for construction at Kingston. The
line, like those at Port Wakefield, Port
Broughton, and Port Pirie is to be of the nar-
row guage, three feet six inches. The overland
road, described as keeping a southerly course
along the coast from Meningie to Kingston,
at this point strikes due east at right angles
with the sea to Narracoorte, a distance of
fifty-six miles. This is also the course along
which the railway earthworks are being made,
and they run the entire way through the
same swampy stunted gum and honeysuckle,
thin, cold, useless soil with limestone
boulders that extends along the coast from
Kingston to Robe, The track from Robe to
Narracoorte (north-east sixty-two miles) is
also through similar country, occupied by
sheep, and unsuitable for agriculture.
At Narracoorte the country improves, and
the influence of the railway, although only
yet in course of construction, is to be seen in
the new stone buildings going up and the
general air of briskness throughout the place.
At Narracoorte the land rises slightly. The
township is about 200 feet above the sea
level, situated on a small creek running sea-
ward into the marshes passed through on the
road. On an elevated timbered rise above
the proposed terminus stands the new Pres-
byterian Church of art-union fame —a very
fine building—and there are two banks, one
of which, the National, is the finest struc-
ture and most prosperous branch of that in-
stitution out of Adelaide. There is a flour
mill, two good hotels, a large post and tele-
graph office, and a number of good stores.
Although a vast improvement upon the
desert passed through, the land is, however,
only patchy fair grazing country, alternating
with agricultural land of middling quality,
and that as a rule purchased by the squatter.
The district has been a stronghold of the
pastoral lessees, and selectors have in various
detached localities effected a lodgment with
much trouble, the influence brought to bear
in the matters of hindering agricultural set-
tlement, and favoring squatter monopoly,
having been very strong. Within an area of
some fifteen miles surrounding the township
all the best of the land has been alienated
mostly at the upset price by Messrs. J.
Robertson, of Mosquito Plains station, who
own 80,000 acres ; Affleck, about 30,000 ;
Magarey, Narracoorte, 20,000 ; W. Robert-
son, of Moyhall, 20,000 ; Smith, of Hylam,
35,000 ; and so on, the larger portion of
agricultural settlement northward of Narra-
coorte extending in patches fifty miles to
Bordertown.
At Bordertown there is a flourishing town-
ship rising, and Mr. Simpson, the miller at
Narracoorte, is erecting a mill there. East-
ward of Bordertown the land improves, be-
coming more of the heavy, Bay of Biscay
wheat-growing soil peculiar to the Wimmera,
as the Victorian country is entered upon. It
is here that this portion of Victoria, when
taken up, as the Narracoorte railway pro-
gresses, will probably be tapped by South
Australia via Lacepedeßay in the same way
that Eivenna is being tapped by Victoria
at Echuca and Albury. Due east from Nar-
racoorte eighteen miles the boundary line at
Apsley is cut, and within fifty miles further
in the same direction, on Mount Arapiles,
selectors are reached, Tnis is a total dis-
tance from Lacepede Bay of 124 miles, as
compared with 206 from Melbourne, and
points to the necessity for pushing on the
Horsham line, either via Melbourne or Port-
land, if the Wimmera trade would be con-
served by Victoria. The nature of the
selectors’ operations round Narracoorte and
Bordertown|is chiefly the growing of wheat
and the harvesting of it, the way already
described as being peculiar to South Aus-
tralia, with the addition of sheep-keeping
upon commonages. These commonages are
defined by the Surveyor-General according
to the quantity of land untaken up within
the opened hundreds. The rate is 3d. per
head, and where the land is not all arable
some good commonages are obtained by the
selectors. Thus, suppose a limited number
of selectors settle in one hundred, say three
taking 640 acres each, then the remainder of
the hundred is apportioned between these
three as a grazing common while unselected
by others. In districts where the land is all
good the selectors are, of course, numerous
in the hundreds, and the commonage small.
Narracoorte and Robe are situated in the
counties of Macdonnell and Robe, The
monopoly by the squatters in this district is
exhibited "by official figures showing that
after last harvest there were in these two
counties 257,986 acres purchased land. Of
these 14,304 acres only were under cultiva-
tion. Of this quantity 7585 acres were
under wheat, producing 65,849 bushels, and
2587 acres wheat cut for hay, giving 2744
tons. Of the remainder of the cultivation
the greater portion is laid down with
lucerne, which thrives luxuriantly in the
district. The district of Narracoorte, which
is managed by a council, is ninety-two square
miles in area, containing 191 houses, includ-
ing the township. The population of the
district is 922, 218 of whom are adult
males.


No. XVI.—FROM NARRACOORTE TO MOUNT GAMBIER.
Contents. —Farming at Narracoorte —The Caves —Origin of the “ Strang way s’ Act”—Opposition
of Squatters to Agricultural Settlement —Mosquito Plains and Greek—Yallum Park—Penola
—Penola deserted through monopoly ot the surrounding land —Between Penola and Mount
Gam bier—Dismal Swamp—Gambierton—lts Beauty —The Lakes —View from the Mount.
The farm of Mr. Thos. Hinckley, the
chairman of the Narracoorte District Coun-
cil, situated a short distance out of the town-
ship, is notable for the completeness of its
arrangements in various directions for saving
labor. The scarcity and high price of labor
is one of the stock complaints heard from
employers in all parts of South Australia.
Mr. Hinckley combines with his farming
considerable operations in railway and road
contracting, and therefore grows hay chiefly
on the farm, using a large quantity for his
own teams and disposing of a large quantity
in the shape of chaff, at £4 per ton, to the
passing traffic. This traffic consists of every-
thing in the way of produce, wool, and
stores, from the vast extent of the
Tatiara or Upper Wimmera country, all of
which passes through Narracoorte on its way
to and from Port Macdonnell, via Mount
Gambier. The reason the traffic goes in this
direction eighty-two miles to Port Macdon-
nell, instead of fifty-six to Lacepede Bay, is
because there is to the former port an excel-
lent metal road nearly all the way, while the
road to the latter is through an almost im-
passable swamp. Of course upon the com-
pletion of the Narracoorte line this traffic
will be intercepted and sent on to Lacepede.
Mr. Hinckley’s farm contains this year 200
acres of wheaten hay. The land is handled
in a superior manner, and receives as manure
a kind of guano obtained from The Caves,
about seven miles from the township. These
caves are very extensive and picturesque,
forming one of the most notable sights of the
colony. Last year a stack of 700 tons of hay
was obtained, and the stacking is done on
the derrick principle so common in the hay
growing districts in Victoria. Mr. Hinck-
ley’s was, however, the first I had met with
in South Australia. The spar used on this
farm is sixty-four feet high, having a thirty
feet boom, giving a range of fifty feet with
the loads to any. part of the stack. The hay
is pitched from the field into nets in the
waggons, and by their means the loads are
hoisted in the usual manner by horse-power.
The stack is built on top of a set of wooden
rails communicating with the barn. Along
these rails a large hay truck conveys the hay
to one of Bagshaw’s chaff-cutters, fitted, with
elevators and, other facilities for cutting and
bagging ten tons per day. As the cuts in
the stack are made so the tramway is ex-
posed and the truck allowed to always run
close up to the stack. The chaff-cutter is
driven by a small steam engine, which also
drives a saw and various other handy ma-
chines about the farm-yard. By means of
the hay crane from eighty to ninety tons of
hay per day are stacked with a great saving
of labor. A kitchen garden, in which all
kinds of vegetables grow continually, is one
of the specialties of Mr. Hinckley’s manage-
ment. This continuous growth is attained
by irrigation from a well, the water from
which is pumped by a wind-mill constructed
on the establishment. A small Hock of sheep
are kept in profitable combination with the
other operations of the farm, which comprise
successful experiments in the growing of
artificial grasses, prairie grass being found
to do best upon the whole round Nar-
racoorte.
Mr. Hinckley deserves to be mentioned as
the originator of the present South Austra-
lian land law known as Strangways’, as his
letter to the Border Watch of Bth May,
1867, contained the leading suggestions
afterwards taken up by Mr. Strang way’s
testifies. He also has the distinction of being
the earliest Narracoorte selector. In this
capacity he has brought upon himself the
high displeasure of the extensive monopo-
list on whose run he had the temerity to
take up a selection with the view of testing
its agricultural capabilities. For this the
runholder has never been able to forgive
him, and takes frequent occasion to express
his idea of the enormity of the offence.
“D— you, sir,” said the great man, not
long since upon meeting the selector, “I’ll
ruin you.” Amongst the squatting class,
which as a rule is composed of gentlemen,
there are some exceptions, and it is a curious
study to watch the insolence of these vulgar
purseproud bucolic parvenus towards the
first agricultural settlers upon their runs. I
find a Hinckley and his opponent in many
places. In Riverina it was O’Shanassy and
Joachim ; at Horsham some of the Wim-


mera squatters and Robert Clark. These
individuals have held the rich lands of the
Crown so long at a nominal rental that they
have come to actually regard them as their
own, and by means of the very riches thrust
upon them during their easy tenure would
now, if possible, frustrate the efforts of the
country to promote legitimate settlement.
At Narracoorte the overland road makes
another divergence. From the Murray, as
has been remarked, it runs south 100 miles
along the coast to Kingston, thence fifty-
six miles due east to Narracoorte. It now
resumes its southerly course for Penola ; the
boundary line of the two colonies running
north and south on the left hand at a dis-
tance of eighteen miles. Ten miles from
Narracoorte Mosquito Creek is crossed, the
country traversed being gently rising well
timbered sandy loam towards the boundary,
and on the right towards the coast the Mos-
quito Plains. This is an immense flat about
forty miles long by fifteen wide, containing
a rich alluvial deposit from the rising ground
above, but only available in summer, being
under water in the winter. This splendid
land having a natural fall towards the coast
could be easily drained according to a scheme
propounded by the Surveyor-(General, but
as its tendency would be to open the immense
tracts of fine soil extending coastwards in
this direction for agricultural occupation, the
proposal has met with opposition on the part
the pastoral lessees. At Mosquito Creek
the road passes Mr. Robertson’s new house,
a palatial residence estimated to cost
£15,000. From the tower of this building
the owner will be “ monarch of all he sur-
veys” to the extent of upwards of 100,000
acres. The prospect during the next twenty-
two miles to Penola is similar to that wit-
nessed during the last ten from Narracoorte,
namely, beautiful grazing country, alter-
nating with rich chocolate loam adapted for
agriculture, held in monopoly by one or two
squatters employing in the aggregate (ex-
cepting during a few weeks at shearing
time) about nine men and six black boys.
As Penola is approached Yallum Park,
Mr. John Riddoch’s station, is entered upon.
It contains a large proportion of good agri-
cultural soil, and some years ago was farmed
to a considerable extent by tenants who
paid at the rate of 15s. per acre, with the
right of purchase at £5. Mr. Riddoch also
farmed considerably himself, but his own
and that of the tenants have now been dis-
continued. The purpose for which the
whole was undertaken —the preparation of
the soil for the reception of artilicial grasses
—having been accomplished. . The tenants,
upon hearing of the rich land at Horsham,
obtainable in fee simple for ten annual pay-
ments of 2s. per acre, became impressed with
the idea that they could do better at that
than paying Mr. Riddoch 15s. per acre for
the priviledge of clearing and ploughing the
land for his grass seeds, and have left in a
body, heedless even of the liberal offer of
land at £5 per acre, which cost the magna-
nimous tenderer only £l. Thus, Penola,
which set up a flour mill, and for a short time
gave signs of being a place of some business
importance, has settled down to that quietest
and most stagnant of up-country commu-
nities—a squatter’s township. Here are a
mill, some capital stores, two of the best
hotels out of Adelaide, a first-class literary
institute, churches, shops and houses
situated in the heart of a good agricultural
district, everything, in short, but the agri-
culture. Instead of numerous farms sustain-
ing a busy population, the land has been
sold by the Government in one large block
to a monopolist; and the miller has become
insolvent, the mill is shut up, some of the
storekeepers are preparing to follow the
farmers, and the two hotels divide the trade
obtained from the passing visitors by the
coaches. Penola is the junction of three
roads leading to Port M icdonnell (via Mount
Gambier), Melbourne and Adelaide respec-
tively. From Adelaide to Penola is 270
miles, and here the road strikes due east for
Melbourne, via Casterton, 294 miles. The
road to Mount Gambier continues straight
ahead in the same southerly course pursued
between Narracoorte and Penola, and the
distance between both places is equal, namely,
thirty-two miles.
Between Penola and Mount Gambier the
country is for the most part sandy, thickly
timbered, and covered with fern, improving
to the eastward in the direction of the Vic-
toria boundary, and on the westward falling
to swampy flats in the direction of the coast,
where what are known as the Government
drainage lands are situated. From the road
between Narracoorte and Mount Gambier
down to the coast line on the right is on the
average about forty miles. Within about
twelve miles of Mount Gambier the road
crosses a large shallow lagoon of water six
miles broad filled with long grass and rushes,
called the Dismal Swamp. This swamp has
a stream constantly flowing from each end,
the one flowing eastward into the River
Glenelg in Victoria, and the other westward
into lakes on the coast near Rivoli Bay, about
midway between Lacepede Bay and Port
Macdonnell. After passing through the
swamp a view of Mount Gambier is obtained
ahead, standing out boldly as a long fort-like
elevation, with one small conical peak rising
sharply above the rest of the straight hori-
zontal surface line. Within five miles of the
mount the tine metal road enters between the
fences of the farms. The sandy fern-covered
flat country gives place to gentle undula-
tions bearing healthy looking vigorous crops
of all kinds, and the soil becomes richer as
the mount is approached. Gambierton is


an extremely busy and prosperous town,
situated most beautifully among surrounding
farms, and having a peculiar charm imparted
to it by its situation in a gentle valley be-
tween rolling hills on the one side and the
mount on the other. Along the slope of the
mount and overlooking the town are a num-
ber of elegant villas with beautiful gardens,
and further up is situated the hospital in a
commanding position. The town has a popu-
lation of 2600, and the principal street is
about a mile in length running east and west.
The town comprises some good buildings,
including two banks, seven churches, a tele-
graph and post-office, mechanics’ institute,
some half a dozen hotels, two flour mills, and
the various shops are of a superior class and
well stocked. There are two district coun-
cils—Mount Gambier east and west; the one
having control over sixty square miles, and
the other over one hundred. The total
population in the area of the two councils,
including the town, is 5879. The water
supply is obtained from wells seventy feet
deep, from an underground series of streams,
which can be tapped at that depth all over the
district, and are foud to have a current in
the direction of the sea. There is no surface
water in the district within a radius of five
miles of the mount, the heaviest rains finding
their way rapidly through the natural drain-
age presented by the porous volcanic soil to
the subterraneous channels beneath. From
the conical peak or top of the mount, which
is 025 feet above sea-level, and contains one
of the marks of the trigonometrical survey,
an extensive view of the surrounding country
is obtained. To the southward Port Mac-
donuell is visible at a distance of about
eighteen miles, with Mount Schanck in the
middle distance ; to the north the country
travelled over from Narracoorte ; to the
westward the southern ocean ; and to the
eastward dense timbered rises stretching
away over the border towards the Wimmera.
Directly underneath the peak a view is ob-
tained of the lakes, which for quiet grandeur
are, perhaps, unsurpassed in any other part
of the colonies. There are three of these
lakes, each representing a crater of the now
extinct volcano. The largest of these is four
miles in circumference, surrounded on all
sides by banks from 200 to 300 feet high,
and so rugged and precipitous that descent
to the water’s edge is only practicable in one
place, where winding steps have been cut.
The bottom of this lake has never been
sounded in its deepest part, and the surface
level of the water is the same as that of the
wells of the town. Immediately surrounding
the mount are the Gambler farms, n otes com
cerning which will have to form the subject
of another paper.
No. XVII.—MOUNT GAMBIER.
Contents. —Richness of the Mount Gambier Soil—Potato Growing—Moorak, Dr. Browne’s Estate
—Resemblance of Mount Gambier to Lancefield, in Victoria—The Luxuriance of the Artificial
Grasses-The System of Farming—The want of a good Port—Dissatisfaction of the Inhabitants
with the South Australian Government.
There is not a great deal of Mount Gambier
altogether, but what there is of it is very
rich. It is unquestionably the richest bit of
agricultural soil in South Australia. Mount
Gambier is also notable as a district con-
taining a larger number of landholders whose
practice entitles them to the name of real
farmers than any other portion I have visited.
There is an impression among people at a
distance that Mount Gambier is worked out,
because so many left there for the Wimmera,
but nothing could be more at variance with
the state of things as actually found. The
storekeepers are all doing a good business,
and at no period in the previous history of
the place has there been greater prosperity
among the farmers, and consequently more
ready money circulating throughout the
general community than during the last
twelve months. This has been directly at-
tributable to the success of the potato crop,
tried for the first time last season on any-
thing like an extensive scale. It is esti-
mated that 12,000 tons were raised in the
district last season, out of which 9000 have
been exported, bringing in to the community
from this source alone at the very lowest esti-
mate £3O 000. This pecuniary return does
not, however, represent all the good result-
ing from the newly-discovered adaptability
of the district for potato culture. By grow-
ing potatoes the land has been restored to
renewed cereal growing powers, in combina-
tion with the fertilising effects of clover
growing and stock-keeping upon the farms.
It is in this special feature of Mount Gambier
farming that the explanation is to be found
of what has been termed by visitors to the
district the phenomenon of thirteen ton to
the acre crops of potatoes having been raised
last year without manure. Every farmer in
the district grazes sheep upon white clover and


trefoil, which grows with a rank luxuriance
everywhere. Even outside the fences on the
unbroken sod of the roads the clover was to
be seen everywhere throughout the district,
covering the land like snow during the latter
part of November (the season of my visit).
The Mount Gambier farming land lies within
a radius of five miles all round the mount.
That in fact is the extent to which the burn-
ing mountain belched forth from what are
now the three lakes in its interior the
molten matter which constitutes the present
rich volcanic soil of the neighborhood. Close
to the base of the mount the soil is deepest,
and it becomes shallower further off, till
outside of the five mile radius the old for-
mation of sandy loam resting upon a limy
subsoil appears. It was on the outskirts of
this radius, where the soil is poor, that the
deserted homesteads of those who have
migrated to the Wimmera are to be found.
These men were all tenants paying a rental
in some cases up to 18s. per acre for the land
to large proprietors, who obtained it chiefly
at £l,per acre by auction in the early times.
With|poor land and a heavy rent these far-
mers, though hard-working and industrious
in the extreme, found it utterly impossible
to make any head-way, and in the liberal
provision of the Victorian land law ex-
perienced a change from a species of white
slavery to comparative independence. Of
the farmers in the Mount Gambier district
there are very few tenants left. They are
nearly all freeholders occupying the good
farms within the good soil radius of the
mount, and their holdings run from 100 to
400 acres in extent, 300, 350 and 460 acre
farms being the most numerous. The cream
of the district is Dr. Browne’s Moorak
estate, of 8000 acres, occupying a portion of
the mount itself, and all the good land on
its south-eastern side. On this estate,
which is managed by Mr. T. Williams, the
pure Lincoln sheep which are so favorably
known in Victoria are bred, and a consider-
able quantity of farming is carried on. This
year 1000 acres of wheat have been put in,
chiefly for the purpose of preparing the
land for clover, with which a large
portion of the estate has been al-
ready laid down. One hundred acres
have also been planted with potatoes.
These were put in in August, as an early
crop to endeavor to catch the high prices.
They are planted in an elevated site on a hill
near the mount, and in their situation stand
a chance of missing the frost, which is the
great drawback to early planting in the dis-
trict. In connection with Moorak there are
18.000 acres of the sandy timbered country
already described as surrounding the richer
vobanic soil of the district, and with this
supplement to the estate as a winter run,
28.000 sheep altogether are kept. Such are,
however, the extraordinary fertility and
clover growing capabilities of Moorak, that
for several months at the shearing season the
28,000 sheep graze on about 6000 acres and
get fat. About 6000 increase are anually
drafted off, including fat sheep, and fine
woolled ewes and rams, the ewes realising
from £5 to £36 each, and the rams as high
as £9O. What are known as the Moorak
silky Lincoln rams have been sent to
New South Wales, New Zealand, Queens-
land, Victoria, and England. Shearing
was just being finished at the time
of my visit, and the clip was computed to
reach 600 bales, weighing (in the grease) an
average of 3 cwt. 1 qr., for which it was ex-
pected Is. 3d. per lb. would be obtained.
Amongst the farms accessible within about
three miles in any direction from the town,
and on which management of an advanced
and most intelligent character may be wit-
nessed, those of vlessrs. Collins, M‘Arthur,
A. and C. Smith, Plate, Bors, Kenfrey, and
Umpherston are deserving of mention. In
driving round these farms the general re-
semblance of the district to Lancefield in
Victoria cannot fail to strike the visitor. I
mean more particularly as regards the
quality of the soil, and the peculiar
appearance of the fields with the larger
trees ringed and left standing here and
there over their surface. The agricultural
age of the Mount Gambier district is about
15 years. During the first Bor 10 years con-
secutive wheat growing on the well-known
colonial system was pretty generally the
rule. There then set in grass raising experi-
ments amongst a few, which were followed by
such good results that the practice and the
keeping of superior sheep (chiefly Lincoln)
became general, in combination with a
smaller of cereal culture. Then came
the potato discovery. It was found by ex-
perimenting that the only bar to succesful
potato culture in the district, the frost,
could be avoided by planting in November,
and also that heavy yields of wheat could be
obtained by following the potatoes. The
system being pursued now is therefore pota-
toes followed by wheat sown down (with the
crop or afterwards) with white clover and
trefoil for sheep. On each farm subdivision
to admit of this practice has been or is
being on, and a variety of crops,
including wheat, barley, peas, rye and oats,
alternate with the potatoes and the rich
clover pastures, carrying from October to
January from 10 to 20 large Lincoln sheep
to the acre. Along with this there is an
attention to the farm buildings, gardens, and
orchards, and to the breeding of draught
stock, which places the agricultural practice
of Mount Gambier in advance of any other
South Australian district. Nor must the
merits of Mr, J. C. Umpherston as a cattle
breeder be left unnoted. On this gentleman’s
farm, containing 400 acres of the richest soil


in the district, there are to be seen in clover
pastures up to their eyes some specimens
of pure shorthorn breeding which reflect
credit on the breeder, and are an honor
to the district. On this fp,rm the plant-
ing of 100 acres of potatoes was being
busily proceeded with at the time of my
visit. The practice here, as on other farms
also busy, was to plough the seed in, instead
of the usual system of drilling. From thirty
to one hundred acres was the usual quantity
being put in, and it was estimated that the
total quantity planted this season would be
upwards of 2000 acres. With reference to
the keeping of sheep on the farms, the great
drawback complained of was an outlet for
the fattened increase. A very much larger
number than that absorbed by the local
market could be produced by the farmers if
railway communication to the seaboard were
granted to the district. The want of a good
port(PortMacdonnell being one of the worst),
and the general neglect of the place by the
South Australian Government in the way of
transit facilities, is one of the stock com-
plaints of the Mount Gambier residents.
Mount Gambier, in fact, like all the other
places south of the desert, including Kings-
ton, Narracoorte, Penola, and Millicent,
does not acknowledge any sympathy with
Adelaide. All these places are practically
Victorian, their people go not to Adelaide,
but to Melbourne, with Melbourne they have
nearly all their dealings, and they express
without the slightest hesitation their opinion
that as they belong to Melbourne geographi-
cally so they ought also politically. The ex-
pression of this feeling is particularly strong
at Mount Gambier, and it is freely stated that
the reason the Government does nothing for
the district is because, its business being
transacted with Melbourne, Melbourne and
not Adelaide would reap any benefit that
would accrue from its developement. The
great want of the Mount Gambier and Milli-
cent districts is a railway of some fifty miles
over level country to a splendid harbor at
Rivoli Bay. “ VVe would soon get this rail-
way,” say the inhabitants, “if we belonged
to Victoria.”
No. XVIII.—THE DRAINAGE COUNTRY.
Contents. —From Mount Gambier to Millicent—The Initiation of the Drainage Scheme —The Plan
of Drainage—The Stoppage of the Works—The Fertility of the Drained Land—The Gippsland
of South Australia —Representative Farms—The want of a Railway to Rivoli Bay, from
Mount Gambier, via Millicent.
From Narracoorte to Penola is thirty-two
miles in a straight line from north to south,
and Mount Gambier is thirty-two miles
further on in the same direction. When
travelling along this sixty-four miles it has
already been remarked how the land, though
in most places swampy, gradually falls to
the right hand in the direction of the coast.
From the road at Narracoorte a straight line
due west to the sea strikes Cape Jaffa, the
headland of Lacepede Bay, and measures
fifty-six miles, but a similar line at Mount
Gambier only twenty-five, as the coast line
between these two points does not run
parallel with the road but draws gradually
in. From Mount Gambier, still continuing
the road due south, Port Macdonnell is
reached in eighteen miles, and here the
south-east slant of the coast line forms an
acute angle and turns sharp round to the east-
ward towards Portland Bay. Between
Cape Jaffa and Port Macdonnell is one hun-
dred miles along the coast, and Rivoli Bay is
roughly speaking about half-way between
the two. What are known as the South
Australian drainage lands lie in from Rivoli
Bay. The way I went to the drainage lands
was from Mount Gambier. Taking a track
striking north-west and therefore bearing
straight for Rivoli Bay, my way after leaving
the five miles of rich volcanic farms, which
surround the town, entered upon a thick
timbered, sandy, ferny, and slightly broken
country, resembling that on the coast at
Bar won Heads. This continued without
other variation beyond passing through here
and there an occasional squatter’s brush fence,
a small wayside public house, and a bush
sawmill, for other twenty miles, when a
sudden change in the prospect took place.
The dense timber gave place to a view ex-
tending to the northward for miles along a
level flat with park-like belts of trees. The
same to the westward in the direction of the
sea, but the sea not visible, and on the right
hand some miles to the eastward a beautiful
timbered range with bare hills of consider-
able elevation running at intervals. The
most conspicuous of these I afterwards
learned was called Mount Muirhead. Pur-
suing the track (along which by the way
runs the telegraph line to Lacepede Bay via
Guichen Bay) farms covered with golden
wheat just out in ear are seen ahead, and


the sand and ferns give place to a rich peaty
black alluvial soil covered with heavy tufts
of swamp grass and other indications show-
ing that the rich sod which now bears one’s
horse with an elastic solidity has very re-
cently been several feet under water. Ano-
ther mile, and just before the first farmer’s
fence is approached, a large drain some forty
feet wide by seven or eight deep cuts the
track at right angles, upon looking along
which it can be seen coming for several miles
from the Mount Muirhead range on the
right, and carying on towards the sea. Cross-
ing the bridge by which the road spans the
drain the fences begin on each side, and on
either hand wheat fields. A mile or so on
another drain is crossed, the wheat getting
better and better, and then another drain—
three altogether in about five miles—and after
crossing this last one I turned down a road
to the westward, and shortly arrived at a
group of houses standing on a rise, that had
been in view since the flat was first entered
on. This is found to be be Millicent, the
drainage lands township. Millicent is a
prosperous and growing township, and con-
sidering its age (two years) has made rapid
progress. It consists of one good street.
There are two busy stores and two
public houses, flanked by a number of
dwellings, while buildings on all hands
are going up, including a large stone
wheat store, and two churches. Millicent
is thirty-five miles from Mount Gambier, and
twenty-four from Eivoli Bay. The township
is built on a limestone ridge about twenty
feet high, which runs lengthways north and
south, and from this ridge a good idea is ob-
tained of the plan pursued in the draining.
Between the road before referred to, from
Narracoorte to Mount Gambier, a series of
three ridges extend in parallel lines at inter-
vals from the road to the sea. The first is
the Mount Muirhead ridge, which is about
twenty-four miles from the road. The next
is the ridge on which the township stands,
varying from five to ten miles from Mount
Muirhead. From the township ridge is
about three miles over the next, and beyond
that lies a series of lakes extending along the
coast like the Coorong, and emptying into
the sea. Through these ridges there are
frequent gaps, and the drains, after crossing
the flat from the Mount Muirhead range,
empty into another running along the upper
or western base of the Millicent ridge till it
comes to a narrow place where a gap has
been cut, drains again cross the flat at the
back of the township ridge and empty into
another drain along the upper side of the
next ridge till another narrow place is
reached through which a gap has been cut.
This takes the water through to the lake at
the back, and then it goes to the sea. This
is the plan in brief of the drainage scheme,
audit seems incredible that the cutting of
these few drains, which has only served to
open up about twenty square miles of this
district, has taken since the early part of
1867. The idea was first forced upon the
Government by the writings of Mr. W. A.
Crouch, a resident in the district, who was
impressed with the value of the soil and the
extraordinary facilities presented by nature
for its reclamation. Mr. Goyder, the Sur-
veyor-General, then took the matter up and
submitted a scheme to the Government,
which embraced the reclamation of the entire
area between the road lines already referred
to and the sea. Of this an area of 895
square miles are estimated to be equal in
richness to that on which the present se-
lectors are located. Out of this 155 square
miles, or 99,200 acres, are purchased by the
squatters ; but even deducting this there is a
balance of 740 square miles, or in round
numbers half a million of acres, lying wait-
ing to have the water let off and the selectors
let on. The conduct of the Government in
this matter is the cause of a deep-rooted and
bitter feeling of enmity which obtains
amongst the people in the south-east. I have
already remarked upon the Victorian sym-
pathy that exists amongst all the South Aus-
tralian residents from Kingston and Narra-
coorte southwards. The desert effectually
cuts this portion of the colony off from Ade-
laide. The opinion is commonly and fre-
quently expressed that the Murray and not
the 141st meridian ought to be the boundary,
and the authorities evidently endeavor to do
all that is possible to fan the flame of dis-
content. It appears that when Mr. Goyder’s
work had progressed so far that the expendi-
ture of very little more money would have
been sufficient to open up a large quantity
of the richest of the swamp areas, operations
were suddenly and arbitrarily stopped. The
powerful squatting influence of the district,
finding that the scheme was in a fair way of
becoming a brilliant success, became alarmed
at the inroads proposed to be made upon its
domains and is quite well understood to have
been instrumental in strangling further opera-
tions. Several matters contribute to making
the action, or rather inaction, of the Govern-
ment in this business the more reprehensible.
First, when the works were stopped one of the
heaviest undertakings in the scheme had just
been finished. This was the cutting of a
channel through the “ narrow neck,” a gap in
the township ridge eight miles further to the
northward. This heavy cutting lies unused,
and only requires one central drain run east-
ward several miles towards Penola to render
cultivable by the addition of the farmers’
drains about a quarter of a million of the
richest of the land at once. Second, the
fact that numbers of farmers have been forced
to leave Mount Gambier for Victoria, while
splendid land in their immediate neighbor-
hood has been denied them in favor of the


squatter j and third, the proved richness of
the soil.
Before leaving Millicent I was driven
round the settlement, and visited a number
of the farmers. The land would if opened
up, be in richness and permanence of settle-
ment superior to any other agricultural
district in South Australia, not excepting
Mount Gambier itself. The rich, black
vegetable soil formed by the wash from the
country to the eastward and deposited by
the waters which hitherto covered the portion
drained, and still cover the large expanse
still undrained to the northward, rests at an
average of about two feet deep upon a sub-
soil of rotten limestone. This subsoil acts
as a complete natural drainage, drawing the
water from an immense distance if tapped
by good deep main drains leading into the
narrow neck gullets and other outlets sea-
wards through the intervening ridges. The
lands thrown open and selected during the
last three years are situated within a
radius of five miles of Millicent as a centre,
and a drive through these impressed me
with the conviction that this part of the
country is the Gipps Land of South Aus-
tralia. Here are the same wonderful capa-
bilities as in Gipps Land in the way of
growing grasses and fattening stock. The
farms average about GOO acres in extent,
and have been taken up in many instances
at prices varying from £5 to £8 per acre.
The price at which it was gazetted was £3,
to fall ss. per fortnight till it reached the
minimum of £2, but there has been such a
demand created by the policy of the Go-
vernment in feeding the land into the
market in small driblets that the bidding
of simultaneous selectors has forced the
lots up to the prices named. This is, by
the way, one of the greatest of South Aus-
tralian grievances generally, but more par-
ticularly in the south-east—this withholding
of the land from farmers, all ready, with
their families, implements, and stock, to
take it up, but forced by the policy of the
Government over the border into Victoria
or Riverina. By visiting some of the selec-
tors in the district I became convinced that
the class located here are superior in point
of agricultural knowledge and in their
general management of the land to any
other district I had visited, Mount Gambier
only excepted. Although forced to pay
such a high price for their holdings, these
farmers have determined to complete
their purchases during the term over
which the deferred payments extend.
There is, although the settlement is
young, a beginning at substantial stone
houses, the portions constructed showing
that they form portions of a more extended
plan to be eventually worked out. The
fencing is also good, an unlimited supply of
material being at hand in the forest towards
Mount Gambier and along the ridges
running through the reclaimed lands.
Amongst the farmers on the Mount Muir-
head side of the township ridge, Mr. Spehr
may be taken as an average type. Mr.
Spehr had 400 acres of his section at the
time of my visit (20th November) under one
of the finest crops of wheat, just out in ear,
that it could be possible to witness in any
country. It stood about five feet high, as
thick as it could stand, and perfectly level
throughout. This is the third crop, and
Mr, Spehr’s experience is that the land in
these reclaimed flats continues to improve
by working. He began by exposing the
land in bare fallow, and the preceding two
crops, though good ones, averaging over
30 bushels, were not so good as this one
gave promise of. His only anxiety, in com-
mon with his neighbors, was how to get it
off, hands being scarce, and a larger number
being required here as compared with the
dryer climate of the north. The system of
harvesting at Millicent comprises a combi-
nation of the Victorian system of reaping
and binding and of stripping, the latter
operation being only practicable during
portion of the day, and some days not at
all. To harvest his 400 acres Mr. Spehr
estimated he would require thirty men
during the harvest, and these he would not
obtain under £2 10s. per week. One hun-
dred acres of this farm was under rye grass
and prairie grass growing with a luxuriance
that suggested the direction in which the
chief excellence of the district will in the
future consist. On this pasture a large
flock of superior long-woolled sheep were
running, and, as a test of the extraordinary
capabilities of these fen lands to grow
grasses, an experiment, vouched for by
several residents in the district, has been
tried. Eighty-five large sheep were kept
for a week on a patch of two acres without
eating it down absolutely bare. The cattle
and horses on the farm are, like the sheep,
of a superior character, and in this respect
are representative of what obtains generally
in the district. The flat on the westward
side of the Millicent ridge is called the
Wyre Swamp, and was previous to the
cutting of the drain about four feet under
water. Here I passed through the crops of
Messrs. Huchison, Agnew, Hosier, Hay,
Harris, Dr, Wehl, and others, all looking
like Mr. Spehr’s, magnificent. The land
of the Wyre has a greater amount of peaty
vegetable matter on the surface than that
of the Mount Muirhead flat to the eastward.
This has necessitated the burning off of the
entire first plouging. Upon turning the
laud up to fallow it is found so peaty that
when dried by the sun it burns completely
off by setting it alight in several places. In
the ashes left, the seed, whether wheat or
grasses, is then harrowed in at the proper


season and grows luxuriantly. A crop of
wheat of 100 acres on Mr. Hay’s farm thus
treated resembled that alluded to on Mr.
Spehr’s farm, and gave a promise of at least
30 bushels. On Dr. Weld's farm rye-grass
treated in the same way was inspected, and
I have not seen a more luxuriant pasture
anywhere. These fens are eminently a rye-
grass country. If other grasses are sown as
a mixture, the rye-grass displaces every-
thing excepting prairie. Dr. Wehl has also
sheep, and amongst a variety of crops being
experimented upon turnips and rape were
growing as well as these crops could possi-
bly be made to grow anywhere. Potatoes
also were to be seen in every direction
looking well, and in some places peas and
barley, while the various gardens showed
the capabilities of the district in the way
of producing any kind of vegetables. The
district altogether is a magnifient one, and
a few people are settled on one corner of
what might be not only the finest but the
largest agricultural district in the colony.
Amongst other matters agitated for by
Millicent and Mount Gambier, in addition
to the opening up of this land, a railway to
Eivoli Bay from the Mount has been pointed
out as a work that would benefit the south-
east, and be along with the settlement of
this important part of the colony one of the
most reproductive national works. The
same complaints relating to the neglect of
this district by the Government referred to
as being prevalent at Mount Gambier are
also rife at Millicent; also the same sym-
pathy with Victoria, and strongly-expressed
opinions by the inhabitants in favor of an-
nexation.
No. XIX.—HOP GROWING.
Contents. —Pleasing effect of the jTyers at Work amongst the Hop Vines—The Natural Drainage
of the Mount Gambier District, produced by the porosity of the Volcanic Soil—The Bentley
Hop Gardens—Description of Hop Culture.
In travelling through the Mount Gambier
district the visitor is struck with numerous
hop gardens that are passed; some consist-
ing of small plots of half an acre or so in
near proximity to the farm house, and others
reaching to the size of from ten to sixteen
acres, forming an important part of the oc-
cupiers’ operations. These plantations, small
and large, with their forest of poles, amongst
which, as at the time of my visit (late in
November) bands of men, women, and chil-
dren are to be seen busy at work tying the
bines, have a pleasing effect. The intermix-
ture of these plantations with the gardens,
orchards, superior farm steadings, well tilled
fields, and luxuriant artificial pastures
covered with silky long-woolled sheep and
well-bred cattle tends to deepen the favor-
able first impressions made upon one regard-
ing the system of agriculture as carried on
at Mount Gambier. Many would hardly ex-
pect to find hop-growing one of the esta-
blished industries of the Mount Gambier
district, which is popularly supposed to be
rather a dry one. But although there is not
an extra heavy rainfall, the secret of the
district’s extraordinary capabilities in the
way of raising pasture, and adaptablility to
such plants as the hop, consists in the na-
tural drainage of the rich volcanic soil. A
far as the influence of the irruption has ex-
tended round the mount no surface water
ever lies. In a very few minutes after the
heaviest rain has ceased the surface is dry,
the water having sunk into the rich choco-
late loam which soaks up all that it requires
and lets the rest percolate down to the
underground caves. From these caves again
all the water required by the and
their stock has to be obtained by means of
wells and pumps. It is to the heavy dews
produced by the conservation of the mois-
ture brought about by this self-acting drain-
age that Mount Gambier is indebted, along
with the depth and richness of its soil, for
its prolific pastures, heavy crops of grain and
potatoes, and flourishing hop grounds. The
largest hop ground in the district is on the
farm of Mr. Williams, the manager of Dr.
Browne’s Moorak estate. This plantation is
sixteen acres in extent, and has every requi-
site building, including a first-class drying
kiln. Mr. Williams has not, however, made
his operations pay, on account of having had
to entrust the management to others. The
farm, being several miles from Moorak, did
not permit of sufficient personal supervision.
Under these circumstances he has lately let
the grounds to a neighbor, Mr. Norman, at
£7 10s, per acre. At this rental Mr.
Norman, who has a small plantation of his
own, is sanguine of being able to obtain a re-
munerative return from the appearance of
the present crop.
One of the most practical and experi-
enced of the Mount Gambier hop growers
is Mr. James Kilsby, whose establish-
ment, situated nine miles to the eastward


of Gambler ton, is called the Bentley Hop
Gardens. The soil is a red sandy loam rest-
ing on a deep clay subsoil intermixed with
ironstone gravel. The plantation has an
easterly aspect and the oldest plants are
rising five years. Planting out new ground
goes on annually. This season there will be
about eight acres in bearing, which promises
for about 1500 lb. per acre. This is the
highest yield he has yet obtained, and the
lowest 1000 lb. The prices obtained have
varied between Is. 3d. and 2s. per lb. Mr.
Kilsby’s experience has led him to adopt the
following line of practice as best in the new
grounds he lays out. Either an eastern or
northern aspect he prefers, and has the land
cleared of timber in June or July. The
piece to be planted is laid out square with
a sixteen feet headland next the fence to
admit of turning with the horse hoe. A
good coating of manure (well rotted stable
manure preferred) is then spread evenly
over the ground. Trenching is then done
with two ploughs, the first taking a furrow
of seven or eight inches, and the second
with the mould board removed coming along
after and getting as deep as it can go. After
trenching, the whole is worked up very fine
by repeated harrowing, when pegging begins.
Laying the chain down in a straight line one of
a number of prepared pegs one foot long is
driven in at each end, and others at each
brass along the chain. This being done
squarely leaves the pegs at an equal distance
in every direction of about six feet six inches
apart, giving the proper facilities for the ap-
plication of horse-power to the culture re-
quired between. The ground being thus
pegged, planting begins on the Ist of August,
care being taken to obtain good plants from
a well-known hop garden of good kinds,
future success depending materially upon
attention to this point. The sort in the
Bentley Garden is the silver grape, and was
originally obtained from one of the best es-
tablishments in Tasmania. Three plants are
put in at each peg, the peg being removed
for the time ; planting is done with a dibble,
the three plants being put in about three
inches deep triangularly, and in such a way
that the tops of the plants incline towards
each other forming what is called a crown.
The peg is then returned, being inverted with
a slant so as to cover the young plants for pro-
tection. This being finished all over the
plot, all that has to be done during the first
year is to keep the ground clean by means
of the horse hoe, care being taken in the pro-
cess not to displace the roots or damage the
crown. In the beginning of the next August
following the planting, another good dressing
of stable manure is given followed by an or-
dinary ploughing, beginning in the centre of
the rows and turning the furrows inwards
from the plants to as near as the horse hoe
can go without danger to the roots. The
remainder is then done with a four tined
fork. The next process is to open out the
hills, laying bare the roots when the plant is
ready for pruning. This is one of the most
important operations connected with hop
culture and must only be confided to an ex-
perienced hand, or the plant is in danger
of being destroyed. Neither too much must
be cut away nor too little. The soil is then
restored to the roots, covering them to a
depth of about three inches, when the young
runners will appear above ground in about
four weeks, when poling has to begin. The
poles used by Mr. Kilsby are saplings from
fourteen feet to eighteen feet long, obtained
about eight miles off in the vicinity of the
Victorian boundary. Two poles are put in
to each hill,theholes for their reception being
made by means of a steel-pointed square iron
bar. The two poles stand from fifteen to
eighteen inches apart at the bottom. Poling
being finished, and when the runners have
attained the length of from three to four feet,
the selection of runners and the first tying
takes place. This is also a part of the work
that requires practical knowledge, so as to
know which are to be retained and which
rejected. The long jointed blue runners, for
instance, must alwa} sbe rejected, as they
are the first growth. Two runners to each
pole are selected, and trained round the
poles, The runners are then tied with
a sort of tough reedy grass obtained in
the neighborhood, and all suckers cut away
under the surface, excepting one or two good
runners to replace damaged ones if required.
All branches and foliage round the bottom
are also pulled away, so as to force the growth
upwards. As the bines progress on their
spiral joui-ney up the poles between August
and December, frequent tyings are necessary,
and at this work the services of women and
children are availed of to a large extent, as
well as at picking time. Between the tying
times the horse and hand hoe have also to be
kept going at frequent intervals to keep
down weeds and preserve the surface of the
soil in that state of tillage found best for at-
tracting moisture from the atmosphere.
About the middle of December each hill is
moulded up like a potato hill, so as to pre-
pare the plant for resisting the drought and
to keep the moisture round the crowns.
This is pretty well all that is required till
picking time, which takes place in the middle
of February for the earlier sort, and the
middle of March for the later. The hops
being ready for picking, the kiln, a very
complete stone building, wnich cost £250 to
erect, is heated by means of charcoal, and
the picking bins are placed ready among the
rows. Say picking begins on Monday morn-
ing early, the hops are measured at mid-day
and conveyed to the kiln. Hops going on at
one p.m. come off as a -rule at eleven at
night. The next kiln then goes on mid dry-


ing goes on continually night and day
throughout the week, with the exception of
Saturday, when the pickers stop work at
twelve o’clock to enable the last kiln to come
off at eleven at night. The kiln dries at the
rate of 300 bushels every twelve hours, and
last season the pickers employed to keep it
going numbered fifty, who were paid at the
rate of 3d. per bushel. After drying, and
lying for some time to season, the hops are
passed through a trap in the floor to a lower
story, and pressed by a machine for the pur-
pose. Samples are then forwarded to the
trade, and sales concluded. Picking being
over, Mr. Kilsby’s practice is to form tem-
porary sheep-yards in the garden by means
of the poles. In this way some of the sheep
kept on another part of the farm are folded
for three nights in a place. Before the sheep
are let in on the third night mustard seed is
sown, which is harrowed in with the sheep’s
feet. The poles are then shifted to form a
second fold, the process of folding and sowing
repeated, till all the ground has been gone
over. In about six weeks the mustard in
the first fold will be high enough to again
turn in sheep to eat it off, and this goes on
throughout the entire grounds as long as it
will carry the sheep. The land is then
ploughed, and left till pruning starts again
in the beginning of August, when the manur-
ing, ploughing, hoeing, tying, and weeding
operations go on as before. The preliminary
expenses required to get a good hop planta-
tion under way are, according to Mr. Kilsby’s
experience, so heavy as to render an imme-
diate profit not to be expected. But after
the first three years with ordinary care and
attention he is quite satisfied that hop grow-
ing at Mount Gambier will give a satisfactory
return for the capital and trouble expended.
Successful hop growing, assuming that suit-
able soil and other requisites have been
secured, depends, however, in a very large
measure upon the careful and punctual at-
tention to the various processes as their
proper seasons come round. To secure this
the close personal attention of the owner, or
a well qualified and trustworthy manager, is
indispensible. This watchful personal atten-
tion the Bentley Hop Gardens receive from
their owner to such a degree as cannot fail
to ensure success.
No. XX.—CONCLUDING REMARKS.
Contents —Capabilities of the Colony Undeveloped—Statistics of Agricultural Land and Produce
—Comparison between Victorian and South Australian Management—Vine-growing and
other Industries—Scheme for taking Horses for the Indian Market Overland.
In concluding this series of papers upon
agriculture in South Australia, it may be
remarked by way of summary that this
colony may be safely predicted to even-
tually take a leading position among
the Australian group. Her resources are
yet to be developed. These papers have
simply dealt with her agricultural capa-
bilities,. and these have been set down
with much care, to avoid anything
like exaggeration. Her extent and capa-
bilities in this one direction are, I ven-
ture to presume, far in advance of what
has hitherto been supposed by the majority
of my readers. In addition to what has
been narrated on this one subject, a similar
number of papers would be required to do
anything like justice to the other large
interest awaiting development, viz., the
South Australian minerals. The Moonta
mine, by reason of its proximity to the sea-
board, has become known ; but north of
Port Augusta, I have official information
enabling me to say there are multiplications
of Moontas. It is no matter of surprise
that so little is known of South Australia
when her sparse population is taken
into account. With a territory ex-
tending in one direction alone considerably
over 2000 miles, her population does not ex-
ceed that of the city of Melbourne. Her
policy of assisted immigration appears not
to have worked well, while so much dif-
ficulty has been placed in the way of settling
a population on the soil. The country—to
put the matter briefly—has been squatter
ridden. None will attempt to deny the
legitimacy of the squatters’ business in the
earlier history of a new country. Nor will
any right-thinking person withhold any jot
of the credit due to a class that have acted so
well as pioneers in the way of civilisation.
But when a country becomes ripe, and is fit
for, the settlement of a large agricultural and
mining population, and the squatting ele-
ment is sufficiently powerful to be able to
exert an obstructive influence, then it may
be said to be bad for the country. As in
Victoria, so in South Australia, large blocks
of the finest of the national estate


have been secured by wealthy individuals,
who employ little labor in proportion to
their vast extent of valuable territory. Nor
can it be said that the country benelits largely
by the wool produced. There is, however,
yet much fine land still unalienated, and a
more liberal spirit is beginning to permeate
the legislative body.
Taking as the boundary north of which
it may be safely asserted that farming under
any circumstances will not be possible, a
line may be drawn due east from Spencer’s
Gulf at Port Augusta to be extended 100
miles. Thence running south along the
Murray and including the Peninsula, to-
gether with the agricultural land reclaim-
able by drainage in the south-east and the
Mount Gambier district, I estimate the
total agricultural land in South Australia
as amounting in round figures to about
eleven and a half millions of acres. The
total area alienated from the Crown up to
May, 1874, was approximately five and a
half million acres. Of this four and a half
million were sold for cash, and the remain-
ing million on credit. That portion stated
as sold on credit represents the quantity
that has passed into the hands of selectors
under the working of the act which put a
stop to the auction system by which so many
gigantic monopolies were put together.
According to this estimate there are about
six millions of good agricultural soil still
unalienated in the colony. It has to be
admitted, however, that the cream of the
colony has been secured. There are
thousands of acres of land equal in fertility
to that taken up, but its further distance
northward increases the climatic risks, while
the majority of the best water frontages
have also been picked up under the auction
system. The total quantity of land under
cultivation at the taking of the 1873-4
statistics was 1,225,073 acres, and of these
784,784 acres, or about two-thirds of the
entire area, was under wheat, producing
6,178,816 bushels, or 7 bushels 521 b. per acre.
The following table for the decennary ending
1873-4, while giving the average yields, also
shows how the two-thirds proportion of
wheat to the total land cultivated is pre-
served :
Area culti-
Season.
Area
under
Wheat.
Produce [Average
Wheat, per acre.
Bushels,
4,691,919
4,252,949
3,587,800
6,561 451
2,579,894
5,173,970
3,052,320
6,961,164
3,967,069
8.735,912
6,178,816
1865-
1866-
1867-
1868-9.
18t>9-70
1870-1.
1871-2.
1872-3.
555,968
587,775
660,569
739,714
810,734
808,234
850,576
959,006
1,044,656
1,164,846
1,225,073
335,758
390,836
410,608
457,628
550,456
533,035
532,135
604,761
692,508
759,811
784,784
Bsh. lb.
The excessive variations in average are
attributable chiefly to the difference in the
seasons with regard to rainfall. As has
already been remarked in a former paper,
the low averages in this colony are not the
fault of the land, but of the dry climate and
untimely hot winds. With an equal rain-
fall to Victoria the soil is rich enough to
return even a higher yield. But not
altogether to this cause are these ex-
treme variations in average due. A fair
share has to be debited to slovenly manage-
ment. A more slovenly farmer than the
South Australian wheat-grower it would be
difficult to find. There are exceptions of
course, but they are only sufficiently
numerous to prove the rule. Although the
agricultural age of South Australia is in ad-
vance of Victoria, her farmers are far be-
hind in their business. In Victoria some
years ago something like to what is at pre-
sent almost general in South Australia was
somewhat common; but of late years the
former, as compared with the latter, has made
rapid advances. With his Ridley stripper,
which takes the grajp off cheaply, but with
great waste and foul effects on the ground,
the South Australian farmer harvests his
wheat and sends it off to the storekeeper,
with whom he has been running an account
for the necessaries of life during the year.
Then an annual balance is struck. If the
season has been good, accounts are possibly
Just squared; but if bad, then the effects are of
the worst kind on the farmer, the store-
keeper and the country at large. There is
no attempt at living from the farm through
the year by the cultivation of other crops,
dairying or sheep-keeping. Nothing but
wheat, the burning of the stubble, and
wheat again. Of course this must have a
rapidly deteriorating effect on the soil, not-
withstanding its richness. The result will be
observed in the above table between the
number of acres cultivated in 1872t73 and
1873-74. In the latter year it was expected
that there would be as large an increase of
the latter year over the former as there
had been by it over the one preceding.
It has now been found, however, that
the increase in the occupation of new lands
simply means the desertion of the old. And
this is the system, without any sign of im-
provement, that is going on in the new
areas. The South Australian is all behind
the Victorian* farmer in the sowing of
grasses, and the growth of fodder for keep-
ing stock, from which a large return of
cheese, butter and wool is obtained, while
the combination of stockkeeping with his
cereal growing in a rotation system is of
infinite benefit to the soil. Even the
dryest of the South Australian wheat soils, by
reason of their deep clayey character, would
grow artificial grasses. The difference in
the farming management of the two colonies,


in this respect, is shown by statistics as fol-
follows :
Area under Cul- Under Grasses
tivation and green forage.
1873-74. 1873-74.
Acres. Acres.
Victoria 964,996 213,069
South Australia.. 1,225,073 27,989
Not only is stock kept on Victorian farms,
but attention is given to the breeding of the
very best kinds, while the fault of the
South Australian consists in having no stock
at all. The cheapness of harvesting by the
Ridley machine, and the superiority of the
soil, alone permits this system to continue
but it is one suicidal to the colony’s in-
terests, and, unless changed, must at no dis-
tant date, notwithstanding the new land
yet to be occupied, result in bankruptcy.
Some attempts at a better system are being
practised by a few, who adopt a periodi-
cal summer fallow, but this can
only have a temporary effect. It
cannot supply the organic manures re-
quired to restore the elements withdrawn by
the seeds of the wheat*
The cultivation of the vine during the last
few years has experienced a slight check;
many persons who either planted the wrong
sorts, or in the wrong soil, grew impatient,
and have in many instances rooted their
vineyards up. There are, however, several
vignerons, whose judicious management has
demonstrated the capabilities of the colony
in the way of producing a high-class wine,
and this industry may be said to be slowly,
but very firmly, establishing itself. The
total area under vines in March, 1874, in
South Australia was 5217 acres, producing
733,478 gallons of wine. Victoria at the
same date had 5222 acres, producing 562,713
gallons. In South Australia great injury
has been done to the trade by the raw wine
from small holders being forced too early
into the market, thus giving the wine a bad
name. This is being obviated now by the
industry passing into the hands of large
makers, who are able to keep the wine long
enough. These also encourage smaller pro-
ducers by offering a market for good grapes
or must.
The capabilities of the colony for raising
oranges, almonds, and a more varied selec-
tion of fruits than is to be found generally
in Victoria is demonstrated by a
number of gardens in the vicinity
of Adelaide, and on the homesteads
of the large landed proprietors up the
country. This feature is not, however, availed
of by the farmer, whose holdings, as a rule,
are conspicuous by the absence of almost
everything but a bare stone house and a shed
or two. The colony has been proved *by
several growers near Adelaide to be pecu-
liarly adapted for the growth of olives, and
this industry is described by those whose
trees have attained the necessary age as being
one that gives a greater return in proportion
to the amount of labor required than any-
thing else they have tried. The Government
to encourage olive planting have agreed to
accept one acre of olive trees as equivalent
to 6 acres under the requirements of the cul-
tivation clause of the Land Act. This pro-
vision also extends to osiers, mulberries,
vines, apples, pears, oranges, figs, almonds
or hops, but I have not found one instance in
which the selector has taken advantage of it.
The colony is also well adapted for sericul-
ture, and the successful results of several
experiments near Adelaide has given this
new industry within the past year a decided
impetus. What the South Australian Govern-
ment requires to give its attention to with
regard to the average farmer is in the direc-
tion of getting him to abandon his present
wasteful system of wheat-growing. He
requires to be educated to the point
of understanding that a smaller
quantity of land, well cultivated upon a
reasonable plan, that will give a con-
tinuous return throughout the year, is not
only safer for himself than risking all upon
one crop that may turn out a failure, but is
also better for the permanent welfare of the
soil, and consequently of the country gene-
rally.
The extent of territory in South Australia
is such as to leave plenty of room for the
pastoral interest beyond the bounds of agri-
cultural settlement. North of the line al-
ready referred to east from Port Augusta, the
character of the soil and herbage completely
changes, and although unsuitable for agricul-
ture, is eminently adapted for stock. Saltbush
predominates to a largo degree, and opera-
tions for the conservation of water on the
millions of acres of rolling prairies are only
required to enable it to carry stock heavily.
In this direction pastoral settlement has al-
ready progressed along the telegraphic line
towards Port Darwin for a distance of 700
miles nort of Port Augusta. The opening
up of the colony by exploration, and subse-
quently by the construction of the overland
telegraph, has had a marked effect on the
common prosperity. It is estimated that the
cost of constructing this work was paid dur-
ing the first year of its operation by the
increased price obtained by its agency
for the season’s wheat. There is one novel
way in which the great extent of the colony
and the rapidity with which it has been
opened up by exploration during the last
few years may be brought out. 'lt was
brought under my notice by Mr. Boothby,
the Under-Secretary, from whom, by the
way, as I have had to record of many
other gentlemen in this hospitable colony,
I received many marks of kindness dur-
ing my visit. Taking into consideration


the fact that what previous to Robert
M‘Dougall Stuart’s splendid track across
the continent was a few years since a path-
less expanse, and is now a telegraph road,
traversed from ocean to ocean by hawkers’
carts, the following scheme has been
initiated. This scheme has briefly for
its object the supply of the Indian
market with Australian horses overland. Of
course a short voyage will be necessary, but
inconsiderable compared with the present
circuitous and stormy route. The Austra-
lian horse is preferred to all others by the
Indian Government for the remount service,
but there are some drawbacks, the chief of
which are—first, the time required to accli-
matise tbe animals; and second, the evil
effects of the voyage. These facts were
elicited along with a mass of other interest-
ing information by Mr, R. D, Ross, assistant
Commissary-General for the colony, who
was despatched to India as a special com-
missioner on the matter. Mi’. Ross ascertained
that the horses are invariably landed more
dead than alive, though not in appearance,
and do not get fit for active work
under six months with high feeding. It was
also ascertained that the long passage perma-
nently affects the lungs of the horses, and ren-
ders them unfit for heavy service, thus greatly
reducing their commercial value. The Sur-
veyor- General, Mr. Goydcr, has been in-
structed to lay out a reserve as a depot at
Port Darwin, with wharf frontage. He has
reported on a site from which he says the
horses can be walked on board the vessel to
their stalls without slings. Prom Port
Darwin to Calcutta or Bombay the horses
can be conveyed for less than half what it
takes from Melbourne, Sydney or Adelaide,
and across seas at certain seasons uniformly
smooth.
The idea is then to travel the horses
in large mobs along the telegraph route
(distance from Adelaide 1973 miles) in easy
stages, so that the animals will become accli-
matised! on the way across, and at the same
time avoid the ill effects of the present long
voyage. The scheme is regarded with great
favor by the Indian authorities, and its
success may be expected to give an impetus
to horse breeding in the benefits of which all
the colonies may participate.


THE AGE ANNUAL
% political iiifil Statistical Register
OK THE
COLONY ON TICTOBIA
FOR THE run ENDING Gist DECEMBER, 1874.
74 Fp
RIALfO
FIRST YEAR
pq PRICE ONE SHILLING.
E. & D. SYME, “AGE” OFFICE, ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE
THE AGE;
% YlaiLji yaper, |.lublisi)CO in ||klboumc.
POLITICS, LIBERAL.
Circulation : 23,000 Copies Daily.
THE LARGEST ISSUE OF ANY DAILY PAPER IN THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
THE LEADER;
The Oldest, Largest, and Most Widely Circulated
Weekly Journal in Australia.
OIP LIBE PLLL Li L OLITXOS,
And Devoting Special Attention to Agriculture and Mining.
PRICE SIXPEN CB
FREARSON & BRO., ADELAIDE AGENTS,
THE ILLUSTRATED ADELAIDE NEWS.
PUBLISHED MONTHLY,
FOR TRANSMISSION BY THE EN GLISH MAIL.
Contains Engravings of a High Class, Illustrative of Colonial Events, Portraits
Scenery, &c. 7 specially selected for Transmission to Home Friends.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
PUBLISHED BY PREARSON & BRO., KING WILLIAM STREET.
