

Some Recent
Protestant
Theology.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
SIX LECTURES.
Delivered in the Australian Church, Melbourne,
BY
CHARLES STRONG, D.D.
1 8 9 6.




SOME RECENT
PROTESTANT THEOLOGY
Being Six Lectures on the Drift of Modern I bought, as
illustrated by Representative Books of to-day,
BY
CHAS. STRONG, D.D. (Glasg.)
Minister of The Australian Church, Melbourne.
Dedicated
to
My Congregation.
May, 1896.


AUTHOR’S PREFATORY NOTE.
The following Lectures, delivered at the regular Sunday
Morning Services in the Australian Church, were meant to
popularise some of the methods and results of recent theological
science ; to bring under the notice of the general reader some of
the best modern books on theology; and to help the members of
mg congregation to understand better their own position, as a
fiee Christian Church, unfettered by, while not ignoring, the
forms of thought and faith of past ages.
The publication of these Lectures, it is hoped, may still
further help to fulfil these aims.
Melbourne, May, 1896.


Some Recent Protestant
Theology.
I.
“COMMUNION WITH GOD.”
In the Theological Translation Library., which is intended
to keep English readers in touch with the best modern
theological works of Germany and Holland, there has
recently appeared a translation of a work by Dr.
Herrmann, Professor of Theology in the University of
Marburg. The title of this work is, The Communion of the
Christian with God: A Discussion in agreement with the View
of Luther.
The Theological Translation Library is edited by Professor
Cheyne of Oxford University, and Professor Bruce of
Glasgow Free Church (Presbyterian) College. Both
are well-known men, and both are representative men
—the one, a distinguished Professor in the Anglican
Communion, the other, a leading Presbyterian.
Such a book, therefore, as that of Professor Herrmann,,
would not likely have been translated unless these
teachers—Drs. Cheyne and Bruce —had deemed it a
typical book, and felt it to be a work with which they
had sympathy, and which they thought worthy of being
introduced to the English-speaking public. In the
Preface, moreover, the translator tells us that Dr.
Herrmann is one of the greatest living theologians in
Germany.
In introducing to you this work, therefore, on The
Communion of the Christian with God , 1 feel that I am
introducing to you a work noteworthy in itself, and
noteworthy also as marking the direction at least, in
which some Protestant Theology in England and


Scotland, as well as in Germany, is travelling. It is
further a work which has a distinct bearing on & our own
non-dogmatic position as a Church, and our contention
that Religion is not a matter either of dogma or of ritual,
nor a System of Theology woven out of texts drawn
from an infallible Book, but a New and Living Spirit
of trust, hope, and love, a continual new birth of the
human heart and conscience out of the natural into the
spiritual, out of the animal into the Man.
\\ hat Dr. Herrmann professes to do is to re-inter beet
the theology of Luther. r
lhe keynote of that Theology, as we all ought to
know, was ‘ Faith, not Works. ’
But Luther never got quite clear of the old Roman
Catholic idea of what faith is. He continued to identify
it with certain beliefs —the acceptance of certain dogmas
In other words he still regarded a human work as
necessary to “salvation’ —the work, namely,of accepting
dogmas as to the Trinity, the Deity of Christ, &c. The
man must do something before God would receive him.
so and so about God, believe so and so
about Christ, and then you will be admitted to God’s
presence.
This, Dr. Herrmann contends, is just the old Roman
Catholic doctrine of “ works,” under another name.
Believe in a particular way, make up your mind to accept
certain dogmas of the Church proved from Scripture
and then the “ merits ” of Christ will be yours.
Christ is thus also kept outside of man. He is but a
means to an end. He does something outside of us, and
we reach out a hand to lay hold of what he has done.
Then God is satisfied, and we are allowed to hold
“ communion with God.”
This we can all recognise as “ the gospel ” which is
often preached, and as what is often called “evan-
gelical,” even in Protestant Churches.
But Dr. Herrmann maintains that this is not evan-
gelical teaching, and that so far as Luther taught in this
way he was really standing on the old church-teaching,
from which he had not completely emancipated himself,
bor what was the old church-teaching but, “Do


certain things—believe the Church, the Priest, the
Pope, the Dogmas—and then God will accept you for
Christ's sake, and allow you to climb up to God and
bliss ? ”
Luther only changed this into, “ Believe as I say the
Scriptures teach about Christ and about God, and you
shall be saved.”
This, the author contends, is a mechanical way of
regarding Christ’s work, and a mechanical way of
regarding Religion.
F'or what is Religion ? It is “ communion with God ”
—the sense of a Divine Presence in our hearts, perfect
trust in the Most High as wise and good, which cleanses
and uplifts the soul, and fills it with the strength and
impulse to live the life of love. It is not a mystic
ecstacy enjoyed in favoured moments, or induced by
fasting and penance and ascetic practices, but a sober
constant trust in the Supreme as a loving and recon-
ciling Power—a hidden music of the inner being to be
borne with one “ through dusky lane and busy
mart,” and with which courageously and serenely to
meet the sorrows, sufferings, and bufferings of life.
Religion is not accepting a dogma, or performing an
act of ritual. One is not religious when he repeats the
creed of Nicaea, or says, “ The Scriptures are infallible,”
or does what the Church commands him to do, or takes
the sacred bread into his mouth. Nor is he religious
when, by mystic contemplation, he realises the mystery,
the inscrutability, the omnipresence, of the Supreme,
and all his little life seems lost in the Eternal All, as
motes are lost in the sun ; nor yet when he, in ecstatic
mood, uses erotic language towards God and Christ,
and is swept away on a swelling wave of sentimental
emotion. This is not Christian Religion, whatever else
it may be. It is mysticism, ecstacy, transport.
Religion is not this contemplation of God, but is rather
God making Himself felt in the very soul of a man as
the Strength of his heart, his Friend, his Life, his
Redeemer from slavery to sense, and self, and corrup-
tion.
This, as I take it, is what Dr. Herrmann means by


Religion—the inner eye opening to see God, and filled
with the light and beauty of God. It is not the stretch-
ing forth of a hand to appropriate a “ merit,” or believe a
“ scheme of salvation,” but the trustful yielding of a
spirit on whom God presses, the thawing of the frozen
heart on which has fallen the sunshine of divine truth.
This is what I have often tried to teach you—that
our ways of regarding religion are far too mechanical—
as if it were a great supernatural ‘ lift ’ by which men are
raised out of hell to the very top story of heaven ! Such
representations of Religion are popular, and they
even commend themselves to those who are not really
religious. But they belong to the sphere of mechanics
all the same—not to Religion.
It seems to me that Dr. Herrmann is right in his
contention that the Protestant and Catholic are both
alike in error, when they thus reduce Religion to a
branch of mechanics. And so far as Luther did this,
he was not “ evangelical.”
But there was, the Professor believes, a deeper and
truer side to Luther’s teaching. Luther was a spiritual
man, and his religion was far more than mechanics :
it was the deep, calm, sense of God as a healing, recon-
ciling, uplifting Power in his conscience, heart, and life.
It is this spiritual Luther that the Protestant must
cleave to, the Luther after the spirit, not after “ the
flesh ” of the old dogmatism, and ritualism, and “ dead ”
church-works. Dogmas, ritual, and church-discipline
are but worldly, mechanical things, if they are not
the expressions of soul-life, expressions of what is
greater than they—the Communion of spirit with
Spirit—the communion of the human soul with the
God who has taken possession of it as its light and life.
Here is a thought for us to take to ourselves. We
profess to be Protestants. But being Protestants does
not mean being less religious than others. The develop-
ment of Protestantism must mean warmer, more loving,
more spiritual Religion—the realisation of Religion as
the possession of the soul by God.
I fear that, as an “ advanced ” Protestant Church,
we do not sufficiently feel this. People complain,


perhaps, that they do not grasp the meaning of our
Church. May not that be their fault ? They are still
on the old ground, and are seeking only a variety of the
■old thing, not seeing that it is the whole idea of Religion
which has been changed, and that it is the spiritual,
not the mechanical, Luther who is the father of “ the
Reformation.” People perhaps come to us discontented
with the old dogmas, and they go away discontented
because we don’t give them new dogrtTas in place of the
old. They do not see that it is the. dogmatic conception of
Religion which has to be got rid of, and that what we
are seeking is not a new dogma, but fellowship of the
human spirit with the Divine.
Protestantism put away the priest from between the
soul and God. Must it not put away dogma and ritual
also? The old theology fixed its thoughts largely on a
judicial means of salvation from a material hell. The
reformed Religion fixes its thought on God, and regards
“ salvation ” as redemption from fear, sense, self, and the
hell of godlessness and lovelessness, and as translation
into the heaven of trust, hope, love.
Our author, I have said, contends that the old view
of Religion is too mechanical. He contends also that
both Roman Catholic and Protestant regard Christ’s
work in too mechanical a way. “ Think thus and thus
about Christ, and then you may enter into communion
with God. Accept the dogma of Christ’s Deity, and
then it will be possible for God to come near to you.
Until then you are in outer darkness, and the wrath of
God lies upon you. You must make up your mind to
believe such and such things, miracles, resurrections,
birth stories, &c., and then God can forgive you, and
then you will have a chance of getting to heaven.” This
is how faith in Christ is often represented.
Now Luther was not free of this way of thinking and
speaking. But so far as he did thus think and speak,
he was not really protestant: he was Luther the monk,
Luther the priest, Luther the believer in works —not
Luther after the Spirit, the man of faith. Christ is thus
made a mere means to an end. “ Salvation ”is made
dependent on the work of making up one's mind to believe


suc h or such a dogma—and “salvation” is not com-
munion with God, but a hoisting process effected
by mechanical means. You are asked first to accept a
certain belief about God, before you are admitted to
fellowship with God, and therefore before you know
God. The soul seeking God is met by the priest who
says, “ First repeat this creed, and make up your mind
to accept it : —‘ I believe that Jesus was God,’ and then
you will be introduced to God, and God will make
Himself known to you. But if you don't know God, how
can you say Jesus was God ? This is like putting the
cart before the horse.
In Luther and the Protestant Movement, Herrmann
believes there w r as a deeper and nobler view than this
of the work of Christ. Luther did not first accept the
dogma, Jesus is God, and then go on to seek communion
with God. He first felt God laying hold of him, “ appre-
hending ” heart and conscience, in the life and love of
Jesus. So that Luther’s faith in the Deity of Jesus w T as
not first belief in a dogma. Ihe Deity of Jesus was
simply a fact of his own inner experience. God shone into
his very soul, and he knew God : as when the sun shines
into a dark room, and you know ihe light.
Christian Religion is thus not belief in a dogma, or
belief in miracles, or belief in history—it is the seeing
eye that sees God, the heart that feels Him as a
reconciling, loving Power pressing in upon humanitv in
the person of Jesus.
It is not by your work of belief as to this or that, that
you are made a Christian, but by God’s “ free spirit ,r
by God Himself in his truth, love, and beauty capti-
vating you, and lifting you up, a willing captive, into
the calm, the trust, the strength, the courage, and the
love of “ the God-man.”
Jesus is God. This is the very kernel of Christianity.
But. it is. not a dogma ; and you will never come at
Christianity so long as you regard it as a dogma, to be
received on authority of Book or Church. The only
true knowledge of God is knowledge of Him as Pie is
actually seen with the inner eye, manifested in the inner life,
m the soul of Jesus and in souls “apprehended” by Jesus!.


And to see that inner life of Jesus, to realise the full
significance of that life, the full meaning of that unique
fact in history , science cannot help you, historical
criticism cannot help you, dogma cannot help you.
The meaning of that life must lay hold of you as the
meaning of a song, a poem, a picture, must lay hold of
you, and bear you up with it —up, up, above your fears,
your sin, your sorrows, }Our low mean selves, into the
very heart of the great God Himself.
To be a Christian is not to repeat the Creeds, to say
‘Jesus is God,’ or, ‘He is the second Person in the
Trinity,’ or, ‘ He wrought miracles,’ or, to believe the
story of the nativity, or of the resurrection ; it is to feel
God —to catch sight of God as the eye catches sight of
the sun, as spirit catches sight of kindred spirit, and
steadily, constantly, hopefully to press on and on,
“ if that we may apprehend,” to use Paul’s words,
“ that for which also we are apprehended by Christ
Jesus.” Christian Religion is the life trustful, sober,
brave, and loving, that flows like a stream of crystal
water out of this real union of God and man in Jesus.
No ecstacy, but a calm, practical everyday thing—
part of ourselves.
This is as clear as I can make to you the thought of
Herrmann, as to what the work of Christ really is, and
as to the real, inner meaning of the Protestant Move-
ment.
I cannot quite endorse all that Herrmann says, for
I think he makes Christianity too much a relation to
Christ depending on a historical imagination of the Jesus
of the first century, which is impossible for all, but the
general drift of his teaching as to the work of Christ,
and the meaning of Christian Religion, is very much
what we have been long trying to make plain in this
Church. It helps us, to know that leading theologians
are with us, and that a book which presents to us this
intensely “ spiritual ” view of Religion and Christianity,
as distinguished from the commercial, mechanical, and
materialistic conceptions so often put forth as “ the
gospel ,” “evangelical ,” and “orthodox," is deemed worthy
of being introduced to English readers by such


representative churchmen as Professors Cheyne and
Bruce, however inconsistent it may be with the official
creed of the Anglican and Presbyterian Churches, or
with the unwritten creed of popular theology.
We want a fresh presentation of Religion and
Christianity. It is becoming less and less possible for
many to-day to accept the traditional dogmas—dogma,
(or a statement of alleged truth to be accepted on the
authority of a miraculous Book, or Church), being so alien
from the whole spirit of the modern world— and historical
criticism of the Bible has inevitably modified the old
beliefs, or made it necessary for us in many cases, as
honest men and women, to suspend our judgment on
points once thought incontrovertible. It is not we, it is
the Time-Spirit, in other words, “ Providence ,” that thus
drives us on to new standpoints. And what we in this
Church are seeking after is not the denial merely of an
old dogma, or the substitution of a new dogma about
Christ, and God, and Christianity, but rather the fresh
apprehension of the very heart and soul of Christian
Religion, and the presentation of it once more as a
living power, which, as of old, can bring strength, and
courage, and "redeeming” hope and love, into the
hearts and lives of men and women to-day.
It is by the approach we make to this goal, that you
must measure your Church’s success. Some of you
perhaps think that our work is to smash up old dogmas,
rail at creeds, and make sport of old beliefs. Such has
never been our aim, and never will be. Our ambition
is to follow on the line of Protestant development —of the
spiritual Luther— and to show Christianity to be not less
real, but more real, than our fathers thought it—a
Religion which has its own witnesses, not in a few
obscure facts of ancient history merely, but in the facts
of human evolution—in the rational, and moral, and
-spiritual nature of man himself. This is the goal— the
putting to one side of old dogma and traditional views
of the Bible and history, is only a means to an end.
Life, not death, is our aim.
W e must learn fully and freely, I think, to recognise
that the true Christian “ redemption ” and “ salvation,”


are not dependent on belief in dogmas, or on certain
views as 10 the record of historical events of eighteen
hundred years ago. But we must not stop here. We
must go cn to grasp that “redemption” and “sal-
vation ” —to realise the power of the spirit of Christ, as
a living force, which takes possession of the soul, and
raises man both individually and socially up to God.
The work of the Church is by its ministry, and
atmosphere, and life, to keep before men the living
picture of the Christ of history —not to teach a
dogma or a story merely, but so to bring near to men
God as seen in Jesus and the gospel story, that they may
feel Him as a living and loving Power in history, and
in their own lives, drawing Humanity into Divinity, and
making manhood and womanhood Divine.
There is one other thought in Herrmann’s book
which is worthy of note—the emphasis which he lays
on the Christian Fellowship.
This is an idea also which I have tried to work into
your thoughts—Christianity means a Fellowship, a
Society.
Ministers do not exist to defend dogmas, or to preach
an unchanging creed, and Christians do not come to
church to have their ears tickled, to be taught dogmas,
or to listen to lectures —they come together to look
together at the Christ-Picture. And the end of sermons
and hymns and prayers is to keep that picture living, to
make real and fresh to each age that Christ-Ideal, so
that it may sink into, and captivate the mind and the
heart.
“Advanced” Protestantism cannot, except at its own
grievous loss, ignore the idea of “the Church,” which
is an integral part of Christianity. It must not content
itself with railing at the Church as it is, or in breaking
up the Spiritual Family of Man, the Household of
God, “the Holy Catholic Church throughout all the
world,” into an anarchic rabble of “free-thinking,”
individualistic units. Christianity is impossible apart
from fello vship ; and faith waxes low, partly because
the present Church Fellowship is such a poor, cold,
formal affair—a mechanical structure, or a business


speculation— not a Fellowship of spirits that are in
communion with the God seen in Jesus, or that seek to
be . lifted above sense and self into the better life of
rational and spiritual manhood and womanhood.
I hope that this imperfect account of Dr. Herrmann’s
work has not only given you a clear idea of the teaching
of some recent theology, but that it has served also to
bring.before you. with some freshness the meaning of
Religion, Christianity, and the Church, as we are
seeking to realise them in our own Church-life.


Some Recent Protestant
Theology.
II.
THE BOOK OF DEUTERONOMY.
I wish to bring under your notice to-day, a book
emanating from a Presbyterian scholar in Melbourne,
Mr. Andrew Harper, 8.D., Professor of Hebrew and Old
Testament Exegisis in Ormond Theological College—
my object being again, as last Sunday, to make clear to
you the drift of recent theology, even in what are
recognised as “ orthodox ” and “ evangelical ” works.
Mr. Harper’s volume, forming one of 7 he Expositor's
Bible Series , is entitled, “ The Book of Deuteronomy," . It
may be taken, I think, as a typical book, representing
the views of many scholars even within “ orthodox
circles.
In the first place, let me say something as. to the
Book of Deuteronomy, and the reason for the import-
ance attached to it in modern Critical Science.
The word Deuteronomy is Greek, and was meant to
indicate, although this is hardly a correct description of
the book, a recapitulation of the Mosaic Law, whose
original is to be found in the Book of Exodus.
Deuteronomy purports to be a rehearsal, by the
veteran Moses, of the dealings of Jahveh with the
children of Israel, in their journeying from Horeb
towards the Promised Land, which they were now on the
eve of entering —“ in the fortieth year, in the eleventh
month, on the first day of the month ” —and a solemn
reiteration of the commandments of Jahveh, with
blessings upon the obedient, and awful curses upon the
disobedient. The laws promulgated in this book, as


comin- direct from Jahveh through Moses, in the form
of discourses, are religious, political, and social, ex-
tending to every detail of life and conduct, from the
worship of Jahveh in one sacred place alone , to the gleaning
of cornfields, or the harrying of a bird’s nest. A dis-
tinguishing mark of these laws is the spirit of kindness
and humanity which breathes in many of the regulations
as to the treatment of men and animals, though, it must
ie admitted, there are not lacking fierce denunciations
of. idolatry and witchcraft, terrible maledictions, and a
spirit of utter disregard to the feeling of the peoples
into whose land the Hebrews were about to carry havoc
and slaughter.
-Let me recommend you to take down your Bibles
when you go home to-day, and read through carefully
this, in many respects, remarkable “ Book of the
Covenant ” comparing it with the Law of Moses as
given in Exodus, chapters xx. to xxiii.
Now, the old view of this book, called Deuteronomy
was that it, together with the other books of the Penta-
teuch—Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers—was
the work of Moses, somewhere in the 14th century b.c.
and contained the direct instructions of the Divine
Being, spoken into the ear of Moses, and written down
by the great Hebrew leader, if not by God’s own finger.
When Bible students, however, came to look more
closely into this Book of Deuteronomy, they began to
doubt whether Moses could have written it—the only
evidence for his having done so being a tradition.
One thing seemed certain—Moses could not have
written the story of his own death, in the last chapter
ot the book. Another notable thing was that special
emphasis is laid throughout Deuteronomy on the
worship of Jahveh in one place only. This hardly accords
with Exodus, and seems to indicate legislation which
would naturally fall at a later date when the people
were settled in Palestine, and cheTemple was established
in Jerusalem.
If the same author who wrote the Book of Exodus
wrote Deuteronomy also, how, it was asked, comes it
that the latter differs so much in detail and in style from


the former ? Is it conceivable that the same writer
should have given two versions of a direct divine word
communicated to him ? Compare, for instance, the
fourth commandment as given in Exodus, and the same
as given in Deuteronomy. If the first version was, as
given in Exodus, written by the finger of Jahveh, why
should Moses forty years later have so much altered the
divine word, and omitted all reference to the creation of
the world in six days ?
Mr. Harper in his work sets forth with clearness
some of these difficulties in the way of accepting the
commonly accepted tradition that Moses wrote Deu-
teronomy. “ When we consider, he writes, that his
(the Deuteronomist’s) authorities may have been in part
not much earlier than his own time, that the critical
sifting of history was then unknown, and finally, and
most of all, that the Deuteronomist has
hortatory much more than purely historical aims, we
cannot evade the question whether a good deal that is
here set down to Moses may not turn out to be addi-
tions to, and deductions from, the original Mosaic
germs of law, made by inspired law-givers and prophets
who took up, and carried on Moses’ wojk.”—(P. 13.)
On careful and minute examination, two things
seemed to become more or less clear to students first,
that the law of Israel had grown from an original germ,
and that these books were not to be regarded as one
volume , by one author, but as monuments marking stages
in the gradual growth of Israel’s Religion and Law—
and second, that the individual books themselves were
not the work of one hand , but that in the same book
different hands might be traced, a hand, for instance,
which they called the J-hand, because it always uses
the word Jahveh as the name for God ; a hand which
they called the E-hand, because it always uses the more
general word Elohim as the name of God, and a hand
which they called the P-hand, because it seemed to be
that of a Priest. Such hands they believed they could
trace throughout the Pentateuch, even though they are
sometimes combined by an editor.
What was the conclusion ? That these books had


been compiled or edited, and had only gradually assumed
tns form m which we now have them.
The Religion of Israel grew—developed—was evolved,
nd it grew through a great and long sustained struggle
carried on by the higher spirits of the nation, with the
lower nature-religions surviving from an earlier age in
Israel, and in the kindred Semitic tribes by which
Israel was surrounded. y
p JL hl f th^ or y seemed to throw a great light on the
ntateuch. If these books were a compilation of
aditions, legends, historical documents, extending over
centuries, and if Israel’s Religion did not just drop out
of heaven, but grew, then it was not to be wondered at
that there should be two versions of the same stories
such as the stories of the Flood, Creation, the Tower
ot Babe! the _ Giving of the Law, the miracle of the
y uails, the bringing of water from the Rock, &c. That
e prophetic hand also should be somewhat different
trom the priestly, was only natural.
Moreover, if Israel’s Religion and Law grew from a°-e
to age, it was only to be expected that thev would as-
f^ m m V t ned [° rn ] S fr T a « e to a S e > and th at new features
would be introduced in accordance with the times and
circumstances.
Well this development theory, of which I have given
you on 3 a rough, general sketch or outline, was applied
to Deuteronomy.. Here was a second version of the Law
ot Moses, differing in many respects from the Law
of Moses to be found in Exodus, and including long
speeches, poems, and an account of Moses’ own
unal, said to have been given by Moses on the
plains of Moab before he ascended Mount Nebo to die
Why not, it was asked, regard Deuteronomy in the
same light as that in which the second version of the
stories of the Creation of man, the Flood, or the Tower
of Babel, are regarded? Might not Deuteronomy be
the work of a later hand writing in the ancient Mosaic spirit ,
but adapting the Mosaic Law to the requirements and
circumstances of a later time, and a more settled condi-
tlon , the n atlon ? True, speeches are put into the
mouth of Moses. But was it not the custom of ancient


writers to assume the names of great authors ? Hebrew
Proverbs are collected under the name of ‘ Solomon,’
and Hebrew Poetry under the name of ‘ David.’ Plato
puts speeches into the mouth of Socrates. John puts
speeches into the mouth of Jesus. So, in like manner,
we have in India the laws of Mann, and the teachings
of Buddha. This may not be our custom, but it was the
custom of the ancients, and was recognised by them as
quite legitimate.
Thus Deuteronomy came to be regarded not as a
literal and verbatim account of the last words of Moses,
but as a book written by more than one man probably,
and in its principal part —the recapitulation of theLaw —
by an earnest Mosaic reformer, writing in what he be-
lieved to be the spirit of Moses, long after the age of Moses.
Now came the further question, To what age shall
this book be assigned ?
From passages in the book itself, critics have come
to the conclusion that it must have been written
somewhere in the kingly period of Jewish history. It
will not fit into the age of Moses, or of the Judges.
But how late in the kingly period was it composed ?
Mr. Harper writes:— “ The book must have been
written before the 18th year of Josiah, 621 b.c., for the
Book of the Law which was then found in the Temple
was undoubtedly not the whole Pentateuch, but ap-
proximately Deut. 1.-xxxvi. But it can hardly have
been produced in Josiah’s reign, because it would never
have been permitted to drop out of sight had it been
known to the young king, and the reforming high
priest, Hilkiah. On the other hand, it can hardly
have been written, or known, before Hezekiah’s reforms,
for otherwise it would have been made the basis of
them, as it was made the basis of Josiah’s. Probably,
therefore, we may date it between Hezekiah and Josiah.
Indeed, we may with great likelihood affirm, as Robert-
son Smith suggests, that it was the need of guidance
caused by Hezekiah’s reforms, which suggested, and
called out this book.” —(P. 29.)
You have only to go back some fifteen years, and
read what Professor Robertson Smith wrote in the


Encyclopaedia Britannica on Deuteronomy, and note the
reception which such views then met with, to see
how far Presbyterian Theology has since travelled.
Robertson Smith, who is regarded as one of the fore-
most authorities on Semitic Religions, one of the fore-
most Hebrew scholars of our day, was Professor in the
Free Church Divinity Hall in Aberdeen. For saying
what Professor Harper now says as a commonplace
which can hardly be disputed, Professor Robertson
Smith was tried before the Courts of his Church, and
declared to be no longer a safe guide for the students.
He had to resign his professorship, and go forth with
the brand of heresy on his name.
True, you may say, but since Robertson Smith’s time
it has been discovered that this view of Deuteronomy
is quite consistent with the Westminster Confession of
Faith, and that indeed it leaves us theologically just
where we were. “After all,” says Mr. Harper, “ this
view does not move men away from the central
truth of inspiration, even as it was conceived by
the last generation ... It was always God that
was held to be revealed, and this the advocates
of the newer view insist upon most strenuously
... If those who hold by the Mosaic authorship of
Deuteronomy will tolerate the opposite view, they will
find that in dealing with the Scriptures as a revelation
of God, and as an infallible guide in all that concerns
religious and moral truth, there is no difference.” (pp. 35,
36.) Mr. Harper is not by any means alone in this view.
Dr. Driver, Professor of Hebrew, and Canon of Christ
Church, Oxford, with whose critical conclusions Mr.
Harper is in general agreement, thus writes in his
Introduction to the Literature of the Old Testament: —“ It is
not the case that critical conclusions, such as those
expressed in the present volume, are in conflict either
with the Christian creeds, or with the articles of the
Christian faith. The conclusions affect not the fact of
revelation, but only its form. They help to determine
the stages through which it passed, the different phases
which it assumed, and the process by which the record
of it was built up. They do not touch either the


authority or the inspiration of the Scriptures of the
Old Testament.” —(Preface, p. xviii.) .
All the same, my friends, I think it must admitted
that the acceptance of the new view as to the Book of
Deuteronomy indicates an enormous change in theology,
and that, although men like Robertson Smith may quite
sincerely believe that their new critical views do not
alter their old theological beliefs, these new critical
views must sooner or later modify, and even shift the
very basis of the old theology, bor just think what
such critical conclusions imply.
First there is implied what Robertson Smith, I think
called 11 inspired personation ” —in other words, inspired
fiction.
The old view was that Moses was directly and
miraculously inspired by God, and that the words
which he was said to have spoken to Israel were really
God’s words, which dare not be taken from or added
to. The new view is that a Reformer of Israel’s
Religion, several hundreds of years after Moses,
believing that he was really carrying out the ideas and
spirit of Moses, put speeches and laws into the mouth
of Moses—speeches and laws, based on some probably
genuine words of Moses to be found in the older books.
This work was somehow laid away in the Temple, and
was said to have been discovered there, while repairs
in the Temple were being executed. It was brought
to King Josiah who received it as an Old Copy of the
Divine Law, caused it to be read aloud to the people,
on the strength of it initiated a sweeping reform of
all religious rites and customs in Jerusalem and else-
where, and with a high hand set himself to extirpate
idolatry and witchcraft.
But this personation of Moses by a pious reformer
believing himself to be in thorough harmony with
Moses, which was'in accordance with the literary
customs of the times, does not, it is contended, interfere
with “ Inspiration.” And neither it does, if we take anew
and wider view of “ Inspiration ” —if we take a new and
view of “ Revelation" —if we regard all truth as “ inspired,
and as a “ revelation ” of God’s Spirit in man.


But from the old and “ orthodox ” point of view,
this can hardly be granted. Is not the foundation of
the old view, that Bible truth has been communicated
in an altogether unique and miraculous manner, and is
really sui generis ? And further, if this principle can be
applied to one Book of the Bible, why not to others ?
Can we wonder, therefore, that “ orthodox ” people,
to whom the idea of “ inspired personation ” was a now
thing, should have acted as they did towards Robertson
Smith ? And if the idea of “ inspired personation ” is
now accepted as a truism, must not a great change,
amounting to a revolution, have come over the “ ortho-
dox” Church’s conception of Inspiration and Reve-
lation ?
Now is not this what, during all these years, we as a
Church, have been contending for, and to the best of
our power witnessing for ? We have been maintaining
that our religious faith, our faith in an inspiring Spirit, in a
self-revealing God, does not rest on this view or that
view of the Bible—that while the Bible is a guide and
a light to us, it is not the final, or only light, and that
Inspiration and Revelation must have a larger and deeper
meaning than the old theology has been wont to assign
to them. We have not been seeking to deny Inspiration
or Revelation, but rather to reach a loftier and more
rational conception of God as the inspiring Source of
“ a]i . good thoughts,” and as for ever revealing Him-
self in human history.
It should be some comfort to us, therefore, to know
that leading men in the “ orthodox ” churches are now
setting their seal upon “the New Theology,” and
accepting it as incontrovertible.
This new teaching involves not merely the admission
of inspired personation, or literary fiction, into the Bible
as a channel of divine truth, but it admits also the con-
ception of a growth, of development' in the Bible.
The Religion of Israel did not fall full-blown out of
heaven : it grew from a little nucleus, a germ, and was
nursed by long years of conflict with the lower forms of
Religion—a conflict of which the Bible is the record.
The Old Testament becomes thus tlierecord of the unveil-


ing in human history of the true God , and its writers are not
“inspired” in the sense of being God’s “infallible”
mouthpieces, but rather in the sense of being on the
right lines in the search for God —the leaders of a great
religious upward movement that culminated at length in
“the Christ,” and his full, sweet, vision of “the
Father,” —the Religion of Humanity.
All this may seem to you self-evident, but it was not
the view of our forefathers. This unveiling of the Im-
manent Spirit working in and through all, and using
even human childishness, error, and limitation, _as
channels along which to touch and elevate the spirit
of man, would not have seemed to them to be “ Inspira-
tion ” or “ Revelation ” at all. To think that Moses
could have made a mistake, or that every word of the
Scriptures was not infallibly correct, and that inspiration
did not take men out of their times, or raise them com-
pletely above the intellectual and moral limitations of
their age and country, would have seemed blasphemy.
The idea of growth also, or development, belongs
peculiarly to our age, and is really a new, or re-newed
conception, begotten of the special studies of to-day in
all departments. To try and reconcile it, therefore,
with 17th century theology, or middle-age theology —to
put the new wine into old wineskins —seems to us a
vain and foolish effort.
Lastly, this new teaching involves not only the ideas
of “ inspired personation,” and of development or
growth in “inspired” literature and “ revelation,” it
involves also the conception of “ Inspiration ” and
“ Revelation,” as belonging essentially to the moral and
spiritual sphere.
“ Deuteronomy,” writes Mr. Harper, “ has been the
key of the position, the centre of the conflict in the
battle which has been waged so hotly as to the growth
of religion in Israel The difference is probably
never absolutely fundamental. On either supposition,
as we have said, the spiritual and moral teaching
remains the same.” —(p. 2.)
I do not wish to convey to you the impression that the
writer rejects what he calls the “ supernatural in the


Old Testament. In his Preface he tells us that he does
not do so, though he defers discussion on this point, as
not falling within the scope of his book. But it seems to
me that the whole tendency of the new view of the Bible
set forth in this work, and in the writings of the late
Professor Robertson Smith, Canon Driver, Professor
Cheyne, and others, inevitably tends to throw the “ su-
pernatural ” in the old sense of the word into the background,
and to lead us to regard the Religion of Israel, not as a
miracle, or a belief in miracles, but as a clearer and
clearer growing faith in the Supreme Force, as the
Spirit of Righteousness, Justice, and Love, the Moral
Root and Inspiration of the Universe.
The teaching of this new school as to the way in
which ancient history was written, makes us place less
weight upon details. If there has been “ inspired
personation,’ why not inspired legends and myths ? If
“ Revelation ’ and “ Inspiration ” did not necessarily
render men independent of their age, why, in an age,
which naturally expressed itself in miraculous stories,
and threw its ideas into the form of myths, should not
even “ inspired” men have chosen this natural form for
expressing divine truth ? To put speeches into the
mouth of Moses was perfectly in accord with the literary
custom of the age, it is said : why not to put a speech
into the mouth of Balaam’s ass, or to make a serpent
hold a conversation with Eve in the garden of Eden ?
If, as Mr. Harper seems to imply, the moral and the
spiritual is the essential—if the true Inspiration is the
Inspiration such as dwelt in the heart and conscience
of Jesus—if the true unveiling or revelation of God is
the discovery in the human Spirit of God as Spirit,
Light, and Love, the unveiling of the Divine Nature in
the soul of man - then miracles, or legends of the
miraculous—whether in the Old Testament or in
the New—must at least assume a secondary place.
Religious “ Faith ” can no longer be regarded as resting
upon these. The true “ supernatural ” must be found
in man himself, who, in his widening, deepening
thought, in his widening, deepening sense of right and
wrong, in his growing ideals of self-sacrifice, duty, and


love, rises higher and higher in the scale of Being—above
the beast , above the thing , above, in short, nature, and
natural history—knowing himself to be in nature,
but yet greater than nature. It becomes then, com-
paratively, a matter of indifference whether we believe
in what 'is generally called “ miracle,” or not —man
himself being the perennial miracle. And, further, the
true bond between religious men ceases to be belief that
this or that unaccountable phenomenon was witnessed
several thousand years ago, and is felt to be a present
•“ Inspiration ” —love of righteousness, the endeavor
after the life of charity, the desire to bless, trust in the
God unveiled through Jesus and through all Christ-
like souls, the “ fellowship,” in short, of a “ Holy Spirit ”
in man.
This work of Professor Harper is a type of many
modern writings within the recognised lines of ortho-
doxy, such as those of Driver and Cheyne, which seem,
as I have already said, to indicate a vast change in
Protestant Theology. No one who has been seized of
the critical and historical method can look again at
theological questions with the eyes of his fathers before
that method was born, We may go on using the
language of an earlier age, and repeating the old
phrases, but the new spirit must ultimately prevail,
bursting the old shells, and weaving for itself a new
theological form. Sooner or later this Biblical Criticism
must tell on the theology of all the Protestant Churches,
and lead, let us hope, to a larger, deeper, and more
spiritual conception of Revelation, and of Inspiration,
and therefore to a wider charity, and to a more Christian
and Catholic Church than the world has yet seen.
And this enlargement, and spiritualisation of Religion
is what you and I, as a Church, are supposed to
be striving after. For what do the dissolution of
dogma, or the change of view as to the Bible, matter
to us, if they are not preparing the way for a nobler
religious spirit, for a wider bpiritual Brotherhood, for
the Church of the Future ?
Slowly, slowly, the world moves, but yet it moves,
and silently a change is creeping like the morning, over


the thoughts of men. Let us seek to be faithful,.,
persevering, charitable, and, if it may be, to be “ fellow-
helpers” to that Truth which is larger than all our
Creeds, and wider than all our Churches.


Some Recent Protestant
Theology.
III.
THE EVOLUTION OF RELIGION.
In two previous addresses I sought to illustrate the
trend of Recent Protestant Theology, by reference to
two lately published volumes, one being a theological
discussion on Luther’s teaching, the other a critical
work on a great modern Biblical question—the author-
ship and date of Deuteronomy. Both these books, I
pointed out, seem to indicate clearly a decided change
in Protestant doctrine, from the letter to the spirit, from
ancient dogma towards a larger and deeper conception
of Religion.
To-day let me bring before you a work written from
a more distinctively philosophical standpoint : it is en-
titled, “The Evolution of Religion,” and is by Professor
Edward Caird, sometime Professor of Philosophy in the
University of Glasgow, and now Master of Balliol
‘College, Oxford.
To those who are really interested in theology I can
heartily recommend this book, though I must warn
them that they cannot read it just as a pastime. It
must be read and re-read.
Professor Caird writes from what is generally known
as a “ Hegelian” point of view. He, together with the
late Professor T. H. Green, of Oxford, has exercised
much influence on British thought, and has much to do
with the revival of a spiritual philosophy in the Scottish
and English Universities, as distinguished from
utilitarian and materialistic teaching on the one
hand, and agnosticism on the other. Although not a


clergyman, he is deeply interested in the religious
problem, and all his writings have a bearing on
theology. He is a member of the Church of Scot-
land, and was originally destined for the ministry,
like his distinguished brother, Dr. John Caird,
Principal of Glasgow University, author of a work
written from the same Hegelian standpoint as “ The
Evolution of Religion,” entitled “ An Introduction to
the Philosophy of Religion ” —which will well repay
your thoughtful perusal.
Although neither “ orthodox ” nor “ evangelical,” in
the conventional sense, Professor Caird’s writings are
typical of thought within the circle even of the “ ortho-
dox ” churches, and he may be said to speak out of the
heart of the Scottish Kirk. His philosophy was for
many years taught to the students of divinity in Glas-
gow University, and is still taught there by his suc-
cessor, Professor Jones, as well as by other students
elsewhere, who have now in their turn become teachers
of philosophy.
“ Evolution ” is the principle which modern thought
has called in to solve its problems, and satisfy that
desire for order and unity which seems natural to the
human mind.
As to what is to be understood by “ evolution,” how-
ever, it must be confessed, there is much haziness of
conception, and much loose thinking. Evolution be-
comes a word to conjure with.
(a) First, then, let me state, as plainly as I can, what
might be called the mechanical view of evolution. It
is something like this :—Given matter and force, and
infinite time, out of these there will gradually be evolved
more and more complex structures—sun, star, vege-
table, animal, man. These are all alike forms which
the given matter and force assume. Even thought,
conscience, religious aspirations, are but forms of the
same. The soul of all things is ultimately the action
and interaction of atoms, of invisible, intangible points,
as it were, beyond which analysis cannot go. So that
logically, a Socrates, a Plato, a Buddha, a Lord
Christ, the highest inventive genius, the greatest philo-


sophic thinkers, the marvellous inductions of science,
the poets, painters, musicians, sculptors, of all ages,
are really but more or less complex combinations of atoms , and
are really, if we may so speak, the children of these
atoms. Atoms they are, and unto atoms shall they re-
turn. Mechanical products they are, and back to the
simplest forms both soul and body must return. All
the marvellous history of life is but meaningless, pur-
poseless display of fireworks on th'e great ocean of
matter and force, imagined by a still more marvellous
firework, the mind of man.
Blind force and matter between them produce _ the
world, and most wonderful of all, produce the minds
that think force and matter—produce the minds that
can do what force and matter themselves, it is generally
thought, cannot do—namely, think.
From this point of view, the meaning of evolution
is, if not profound, yet clear. It means advance from
the simplest to the most complex forms. The mind of
man is really not essentially different from the star-dust
of the universe, but is the result merely of that more
highly complex action and interaction of atoms which
we call the brain. _ in
When I take a hammer and strike a flint, sparks fly
out, powder is ignited, and an explosion takes place.
When atoms are arranged in a particular way thought
spurts out of them, great scientists, philosophers, artists,
mathematicians, religious teachers are generated like
gases, and an explosion takes place in the shape of
language. When you meditate, and are engaged in
deep thought, it is the same thing, under another form,
as when you are digesting your dinner. Both processes
are ultimately resolvable into a dance of atoms. You
may say the mind of the thinker is higher than the
stomach of the eater, but what you really mean is that
the one is more complex than the other. Atoms in
motion are the father and the mother of both, and
the stream cannot rise higher than its source.
This is what I mean by the mechanical theory of
Evolution —a theory which, as you can readily see,
ignores the thinking being, who thinks force, thinks


matter, thinks the action and interaction of forces,
thinks simple and complex, thinks brain and nerves
and their relations to each other, and gives us the ideas
of “ cause and effect,” “ time and space,” “ higher and
lower,” “progress and evolution.” Man is thus like all
the rest of the universe a piece of mechanism, and
nothing.more. The living human being who thinks the
mechanism, who uses the mechanism, and controls it,
and expresses himself through it, is a mere accident,
difficult perhaps to explain, but no doubt quite ex-
plainable on purely mechanical principles, and composed
probably of very, very fine atoms.
From this mechanical point of view we should rather
speak of “revolution,” as of a wheel, than of “ evolu-
tion,” or out-rolling.
Logic and feeling alike seem to cry out against this
view of Evolution. And those who accept it seem, by
some strange sleight of hand, to slip into their argu-
ment more than is given in the premisses, winding up
with fine, high-sounding words about the progress of
man, the coming man, and the “ beatific union,” to
quote Professor Haeckel’s words, of “ the True, the
Beautiful, and the Good,” and with the Benediction,
“ May God, the Spirit of the Good, the Beautiful, and
the True, be with us.”—(“ Monism,” p. 89)
This theory may be at first sight attractive, especially
when, as Professor Haeckel does, we cover it over with
flowers of language and ideas of “ the True, the Beauti-
ful and the Good,” which do not belong to it. But we
must.not.be caught by fine-sounding phrases, or blinded
by scientific rhapsodies to the real significance of such
materialistic views. The flowers with which we cover
them having no root must soon wither, and discover to
us the worms of corruption, pessimism, indifference, and
deification of sense, crawling over the corpse.
(b) Now Professor Caird’s view of Evolution is as far
apart from the mechanical and materialistic view as
heaven is from hell. To him chemical and mechanical
processes are facts, but not the only facts. He main-
tains that you cannot explain life from one of its elements,
and that the fact of my body being a mechanism, and


that I cannot lift my arm without summoning mechanical
forces on the field, does not explain me, who lift my
arm and direct these forces, and apart from whose
organism there would not be a human arm at all.
Man includes the chemical, mechanical, animal, but he
cannot be explained by any or all of these. By no
possibility can you get out of mechanics anything but
mechanics. Refine your atoms to the vanishing
point, they are atoms still. To understand the parts,
according to him, you must look at the whole —to
rightly interpret the Beginning you must consider the
End. “ When indeed,” he says, “we turn back from
the developed organism to the embryo, from the
man to the child, we find that a study of the
process of genesis casts no little light upon the
nature of the being which is its result. The man
becomes in a higher sense intelligible, when we
trace him back to the child. But, primarily, and in the
first instance, it is the developed organism that explains
the germ from which it grew, and, without having seen
the former, we could have made nothing of the latter.
No examination of the child would enable us to pro-
phesy the man, if we had not previously had some
experience of mature manhood ; still less would an ex-
amination of the seed or the embryo reveal to us the
distinct lineaments of the developed plant, or animal,
or man.”—(Yol. 1., p. 44.) And again, he writes, “To
say that there is a universal reign of law, and that
nothing happens without a cause, is by no means to say
that there is one kind of law and one kind of cause for
everything. The world is not a congeries of things all
on the same level. It is more fitly described as a hier-
archy, in which the lower orders of being are both
presupposed and explained by the higher.” —(Vol. 1.,
p. 6.)
The evolution of the universe cannot, according
to this view, be explained by going back to the laws
of star dust ; for higher laws come into play as
you advance from the inorganic to the organic, from
the unconscious to the conscious, from the vegetable
to the animal, from the animal to the man, from


the animal man in a low and sensuous stage of
development, to man clearly self-conscious, and re-
cognising himself as a rational and a moral being.
You must interpret the beginning from the end, not the
end from the beginning. The key to the riddle of the
universe is not to be found in the first stage, but in the
last. It is the last act that interprets the whole play.
Now, the last act in the play of the universe is Man,
the self-conscious, thinking, moral, aspiring being.
It is in Man, therefore, not in mere mechanism,
chemistry, biology, atomic combinations, that we must
seek- for the rational interpretation of all the stages of
history which culminate in the developed human being
who, indeed, gathers up in himself all the stages that
went before, but is more than they, more than the sum of
them —as a song is more than all the notes, as the com-
pleted work of the Artist gathering up line, colour,
chemicals, and all the imperfect stages of the picture,
is more than these, and reflects a meaning upon these,
invisible from the lower stages. And, just as it would be
absurd to interpret the picture from the imperfect daub,
so it would be absurd to interpret Man from embryonic
life, from the sense-life of the beast or child, from the
mechanical forces that are presupposed in Man, and
have formed steps in his history.
The meaning of human life, then, cannot be found by
studying mechanics, or chemistry, or the anatomy of
the animal body. It can be found only in the human
being, in that which is distinctive of Man. And that
which is distinctive of Man is self-consciousness,
thought, ideals of beauty, truth, and goodness, and
power to struggle consciously up to these. It is in this
spiritual region you must look for the Man, and also
for the God, and the revelation of the Divine.
Here, you see, is a radically different view of Evolution
from that which mechanical monism presents. The latter
tries to explain the last stage from the first. Indeed it
has no stages ; for through all, and in all, is one mono-
tonous display of meaningless force, assuming, indeed,
more or less complex forms, but ever fundamentally the
same, and ever returning to the formless. The former


explains the first stage from the last, and sees in Evolu-
tion a chain of stages rising one above another, the pre-
ceding being always the preparation only for the succeed-
ing, and the succeeding being always something more
than a repetition in more complex form, of the preceding.
There is thus real progress, real upward movement,,
until at length, like sunrise breaking over the hill-top,,
the meaning of all that has gone before flashes in upon.
Man, and he knows, he sees that his destiny is to be a
Man, not a beast, and not a machine.
And thus waking to full consciousness of himself,.
Man is necessarily conscious of the Power “ not
himself”—in all, through all, and above all—in whom,
through whom he is all that he is, and whose light it is
that shines into him, and lies in golden shafts along the
uplands which lure him still further onward and upward.
The consciousness of God is not a conclusion arrived
at merely by formal logic—it is there in our own self-
consciousness, clearly visible if we will only turn within
and look for it. God is not an object among other
objects ; He is the presupposition of, and implied in,,
all our thought, as our own self is presupposed and
implied. “To sum up the whole matter in one word,”'
says our author, “ every rational being, as such, is a
religious being.”—(Vo[. I, p. 68.)
(< c) What then, is, from this point of view, “the Evolu-
tion of Religion ?” Is it, as according to superficial
observers it is, a more or less complex form of imagina-
tion and dream, assumed by the action and interaction
of atoms —the more or less complex forms of blind
force and matter ? No : it is the slow, steady, awakening
of the distinctively human consciousness—the eye&
opening wider and wider to the light—the twilight, the
dawn, the morning, merging into full day; the Man
coming not only to himself, but to the clearer and
clearer recognition of the God who is mirrored in him-
self, and is the unity and reality of all—at once the
Spiritual Force that works within, breaking out
windows through the walls of mere sense, and the Sun-
shine that breaks in glory through these windows and
draws us to itself as to our home.


In the earliest stages of human being Man is barely
•conscious of God. He is as yet too immersed in the
sense-life to reflect, to turn inwards. He cannot be
said to be clearly conscious of his own self. He is
taken up with outer objects, and all the strange marvel
■of the world around him. His Religion, therefore, is
childish, for he really is a child. He is a fetish wor-
shipper, or a polyhteist—sun, moon, and stars, and all
the mavellous forces of Nature monopolising his wonder,
fear, admiration, and awe.
Thought gradually comes into his eyes, however, as
into the eyes of a child, and he knows that he is a self.
This subjective, reflective stage is represented in the
teaching, for instance, of Socrates, or in the Religion of
the Buddha, where the idea of the gods is lost in the all-
absorbing idea of the Man—in the wonder, the mystery
of the strange inner world of the Ego, before which
•external nature fades away as an illusion and a dream,
a prison in which the Self is confined.
Then comes a still higher form of thought in which
Man is conscious not only of objects, and of a self, but of
the One in whom object and self are united. Con-
sciousness of the external universe, and consciousness
of the inner self, develope into the consciousness of the
.all-informing, and all-encompassing Spirit or Self, now felt
to be presupposed or implied in all human thought.
Henceforth “ we know God as God, as the Being who
is at once the Source, the Sustaining Power, and the
End of our spiritual lives.” —(Vol. 1., p. 195).
These stages may still be noted in Religion. There
are those who still think of God after the manner
of savages and children, as an object among other
objects. There are those who, like the Buddha, recoil-
ing from this view, think that they can do without
God, or that there is no God, so intently is their eye
fixed on the subjective. And there are those who have
risen beyond these stages in “ the Evolution of Re-
ligion,” and who recognise that neither in object by
itself, nor in subject by itself, is God to be found, but
in that living Presence which is not ourselves and yet
is ourselves, beyond our highest knowledge, yet not


“Unknowable”—a God “beyond knowledge; not,,
however, because too vague and general for definite
thought, but for the opposite reason, that He is inex-
haustible. He hides himself if at all, not in darkness,,
but in light. He is the ground on which we stand, the
atmosphere which surrounds us, the light by which we
see, and the heaven that shuts us in. ... Everything
we know is a contribution to the knowledge of Him,,
and nothing can be really known apart from Him.—
(Vol. 1., p. 153).
Time will not allow me to show you how Professor
Caird works out this idea cf Evolution in relation to the
Religions of the World, but I hope I have said enough to
enable you to grasp his Idea of Religious Development,
as the gradual coming of Man to God—that God whose
witness is always in man, and whom men cannot escape
from even when they call themselves atheists—that
God of whom Augustine speaks when he prays, “ Thou
hast made us for Thyself, and our souls are ever restless
till they rest in Thee.”
If you have followed me thus far, you can now under-
stand how Professor Caird regards Christianity.
True Religion is the highest stage of human develop-
ment—the recognition of God as Source, Middle, and
End of all. Christ raised man to this stage. For his
religion, given, it is true, at first in germ , was essentially
the union of the divine and human, God in Man, Man
in God. Jesus brought to birth in religious form, and em-
bodied both in his life and teaching, the idea of the
essential oneness (not identity) of the human and
the divir.e. “By him, as by no other individual
before, the pure idea of a divine humanity was
apprehended and made into the great principle of life.”
(Vol. 11, p. 230.)
Speaking of the thelogy of the Gospel of John,Dr. Caird
says :—“Christ is thus proclaimed to be the unique reve-
lation of God,but only as the first-born of many brethren,
the greatest of all the servants of humanity, the most per-
fect organ of that divine life for which man was made, in
as much as he was made in the image of God. In fact,
it was through Jesus Christ that that capacity of men


to become sons of God, which was in humanity from
the first, was actualised or clearly revealed; and that,
not merely in some casual voice of exalted religious
feeling, or in the abstract conceptions of philosophy,
but as the ruling principle of a life lived under ordinary
human conditions, and above ail, in the death which
was its culmination, the death of the cross to which
Jesus was lifted up that he might draw all men to him.
For the cross, combining as it did the loftiest and the
lowest things of human existence, the deepest outward
shame and the manifestation of the highest energy of
spiritual life to which the soul of man can rise, was the
appropriate, and we might even say, the necessary
symbol of a religion which, in breaking down all the
walls of division between man and man, class and class,
nation and nation, at the same time awoke man, in all the
weakness of his finitude, to a consciousness of unity with
God.” He further says that if we read “ all the books of
Christian devotion, from the earliest to the latest, we
shall find that what they dwell upon, when they are not
merely repeating the words of the creeds, but speaking
in the language of religious experience, is that Christ is
divine just because he is the most human of men, the
man in whom the universal spirit of humanity has found
its fullest expression ; and that, on the other hand, he
is the ideal or typical man, the Son of Man who reveals
what is in humanity, just because he is the purest revela-
tion of God in man,” and “ the first to break through
the Jewish division between the divine and the human.
(Vol. 11, p. 233 and 234.) ,
But this Religion taught by and embodied in the
person of Jesus, has had to grow. It was dropped by
him as a seed into the soul, and it has had many stages
of development, in some of which its beauty and truth
have been obscured. It was only a germ thrown into
an alien world, which it had to conquer and transform.
It is the absolute and the universal Religion because in it
lies hid the seed of Divine Humanity. But it can be
recognised as such, only when it comes to full self-con-
sciousness, full consciousness of its own meaning, when
all the limited and limiting forms of expression which


it has assumed are dropt, and it is recognised in its true
relation to the whole life of Man.
This, the true Christianity, needs riot to be bolstered
up with proofs and arguments. It is its own witness
in the heart of man, for in it alone does man reach true
unity and peace, and find the satisfaction alike of his
reason and his heart. We know that what Christ gave
was “ Bread of Life,” not by any appeal to miracle or
dogma, but by eating it, and knowing that “ in him was
life.”
To develop this life, to realise all that is wrapt up in
it, and all that it means for us as rational, social, and
religious beings, and to give to it new and fitting
forms of expression in co-operation and communion
with each other, must be the earnest effort of religious
men and women to-day. Our work is here and now,
to bring down the Ideal which floats above us into the
life on earth.
And as for that which lies beyond, “ the religious man
believes in a future life for himself and mankind, because
he believes in God ; he does not believe in God
because he believes in a future life or another world.
The only religious proof of a future life is, in short, that
God is not the God of the dead but of the living.”
(Vol. 11, p. 243.) Faith in the future springs out of
faith in God, that “ unbelief in death which seems
to be the necessary characteristic or concomitant
of true spiritual life.” Faith in the future is thus
felt to rest on something far higher, deeper and more
spiritual than any miracle or scientifically ascertained
fact.
It is along these lines that much Protestant thought
is to-day moving. The great idea of Evolution has
been applied to Religious History generally, and to
Christianity in particular. The crowning stage of the
world-history is Man ; the crowning stage of manhood
is Religion ; the crowning stage of religion is Christi-
anity ; the crowning stage of Christianity is a faith as
of “ a little child,” which is its own evidence , and which
through hopeful, loving trust, not in dogma or in book,
but in a living God, weaves for itself new garments of


beauty, and advances steadily and courageously towards
heights which do not yet appear.
The tendency of recent Protestant Theology is thus
not merely negative ; it is decidedly positive. Religion is
recognised in its simplicity, as of a little child, and }et
also in its profundity as having its roots in the very
consciousness of man, as the deepest and noblest
principle of the distinctively human life, and in its
practical nature as one with the moral life, as the bond
of human union, and the spring of all our highest
endeavour. ...
This is ihe view of Religion which is net, we hope,
undermining the old faith, but rather supplanting the
lower by the higher, and leading us, not to the rejection
of Christianity, but to a larger, truer, more spiritual
and more practical interpretation of Religion and of
“Christ.”
I need hardly say that it is along these lines we
have been trying to build up our Church. If any one asks
you, “ What is your Basis?” you cannot, perhaps,
answer better than by saying, “ The Evolution of
Religion.” It is this principle which sets us free from
and which vet links us to the past, which leads us to lay
aside old creeds, and yet makes us seek to bear with
us into the present and future the truth of which these
creeds are the imperfect and temporary expression.
Your Church does not mean a new dogma, or a denial
of old dogmas, but the recognition of the fact that all
things grow, and that the lower form can only be
retained by allowing it to develope into a higher.
“ This long, unhasting, unresting process of the
evolution of religion,” says the Professor, ‘ is itself the
best evidence we can have that there is a divine mean-
ing in the world, and that mankind have not laid the
sacrifice of their efforts and their thoughts, their prayers
and their tears, upon the altar of an unknown and
unknowable God.” (Vol. 11, p. 3 2 5-)


Some Recent Protestant
Tbeology.
IV.
THE INFLUENCE OF
GREEK IDEAS AND USAGES
UPON THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.
I propose, in this lecture, to present to you in outline
the substance of the late Dr. Hatch’s valuable Hibbevt
Lectures on the Influence of Greek Ideas and Usages
upon the Christian Church, to which I have on other
occasions also called your attention.
This course of Hibbert Lectures is not quite new—
it was published in 1890—but to the majority of people
its teaching is still fresh, and will be found to open up a
new world of religious thought. For its ideas are yet
far from being assimilated by the average Christian
intelligence, though familiar enough to theological
students ,
It is significant that this course of lectures should have
been delivered by a distinguished Anglican, “ Reader in
Ecclesiastical History in the University of Oxford, and
edited by the Principal of the Congregational College,
Oxford, Dr. A. M. Fairbairn. It does not follow that
Principal Fairbairn endorses all the conclusions of Dr.
Hatch, but his editing of this volume shows sympathy
at least with Dr. Hatch in his method and results—
method and results which are far-reaching, and which
cannot fail, if accepted, to modify greatly the theology,
not only of the Anglican Church, but of all the Churches.


That it should have been possible for an Anglican
clergyman to write such a book,and for a Congregational
clergyman at the head of a theological college to edit it,
without calling forth remonstrance or hostile comment,
seems to show that such modification is already indeed an
accepted fact, and that neither Articles nor Prayer Book,
nor the old unwritten creed of Congregational Churches,
can be any longer regarded as the standard of theology
even within the “ orthodox ” pale.
The Problem which Dr. Hatch sets himself to solve
is this: —How comes it that “in the forefront of the
teaching of Jesus Christ ” there stands “an ethical
sermon,” and “ in the forefront of the Christianity of the
fourth century ” “ a metaphysical creed,” the Nicene
Creed, whose metaphysico would probably have been
unintelligible to the first disciples ? Here is apparently
a marvellous change, which is not the substitution mere-
ly of one creed for another, but a radical change, the
substitution, namely, of a metaphysical for an ethical basis
of Religion and Society. How did this come about, and
how did the Christian Societies “come to the frame of
mind which attached importance to either the one or
the other, and made the assent to the one rather than
the other a condition of membership ?”
In the first century we seem to be in a world of
“ Syrian peasants in the fourth century we find our-
selves breathing the atmosphere of metaphysical
philosophy. To what cause shall we attribute this
revolution ?
Dr. Hatch answers, “ To the influence of Greece.”
This entire change of attitude was due to the fact
that the Religion of Jesus passed from Jewish to Greek
soil, and became embodied in Greek life. The roots of
“ the Gospel ” are to be sought for undoubtedly in
Judaism, and can be understood only when we under-
stand the ancient Prophets, as well as the Judaism of the
time in which the Christian Movement sprang up.
Thoroughly to comprehend “the Gospel” you must
become a Jew of the first century, breathe the air, so to
speak, of Palestine, enter into the mental and spiritual
attitude of men and women in that country, and in


that age, and have insight into the whole history and
spirit of that ancient Religion which Jesus came “ not
to destroy, but to fulfil.” But thoroughly to compre-
hend Christianity in its later developments, you must be-
come a Greek also of the second, third, and fourth cen-
turies: and not only so, you must further enter into the
thought, culture, literature, morality, religion, of Greece
even in pre-Christian times. “ Th£ truth which Aris-
totle enunciated, that all intellectual teaching is based
upon what is previously known to the person taught, is
applicable to a race as well as to an individual, and to
beliefs even more than to knowledge. A religious
change is, like a physiological change, of the nature of
assimilation by, and absorption into, existing ele-
ments.” (p. 4.)
Well, Dr. Hatch proceeds to throw himself back into
Greek life and thought. The Greek mind into which
the seed of Christianity, sown by Jesus, fell, was not
like a sheet of white paper. It was essentially an
educated mind. And so he says “ When Christianity
came into contact with the Society in which that habit
of mind existed, it modified, it reformed, it elevated, the
idea which it contained, and the motives which stimu-
lated it to action ; but in its turn it was itself profoundly
modified by the habit of mind of those who accepted
it.” (p. 49.)
The simple Religion of Galilee, with its colouring
drawn from the imagination and history of a Semitic
Race and an Eastern country, is transferred into a
vessel coloured with the habits, customs, education,
traditions, of an Aryan Race. It is looked at no longer
through the eyes of Hebrews with their “ Law and
Prophets,” but through the eyes of Greeks, with their
Homer, their Plato and Aristotle, their schools, and
lecture halls, their professors of literature, rhetoric,
and metaphysics. The Christian Movement burst like
a rushing torrent out of the heart of Hebrew seers, out
of the Soul of Jesus. When the torrent left Hebrew
soil it ceased to be a torrent, and became a broader,
but calmer stream, flowing through the woods, and
vales, and cities of Greece.


(a) Dr. Hatch, in the first place, finds the influence of
Greece in the application to Scripture of allegorical
methods of interpreting the Hebrew and the Christian,
Scriptures which, down to the present day, have ex-
ercised such an influence on Christian Theology.
We are all familiar with the way in which the plain
words of our Scripture have been often twisted and
turned. Instead of going back to the times and the
circumstances in which certain words were spoken, we
know how frequently commentators have tried to find
soQie secret, hidden, mystical reference, perhaps to al-
together different times and circumstances than those in
which the words were originally spoken or written. For
instance, in commenting on the red thread, which the
woman who had protected the Hebrew spies, was to
bind in her window, according to Hebrew story, so that
when the Hebrews were slaughtering her people, she
and her family might be left unmolested, an ancient
Father, sees in the scarlet thread the blood of Christ.
“ When Christ said “ The foxes have holes, but the
Son of Man hath not where to lay his head,” he meant,
writes Dr. Hatch, quoting Clement of Alexandria, “that
on the believer alone,who is separated from the rest,that
is from the wild beasts of the world, rests the Head of
the Universe, the kind and gentle Word. When he is
said to have fed the multitude on barley loaves and two
fishes, it is meant that he gave mankind the preparatory
training of the Law, for barley, like the Law, ripens
sooner than wheat, and of philosophy, which had
grown, like fishes, in the waves of the Gentile World.”
(p. 76.)
Many of you, probably, are old enough to remember
when such allegorical and symbolical interpretations
were still common, and all through the old Testament,
in passages written hundreds of years b.c., hidden
allusions were supposed to be found to the birth of
Christ, the Crucifixion, and the system of theology pre-
valent in the 17th century a.d.
Now, Dr. Hatch points out that this method of in-
terpretation, which has played such an important role
in Christian times from the earliest age, was exactly


the method employed by the Greeks in their interpreta-
tion of Homer, and the stories of Homeric mythology.
When the Greeks received the Christian Scriptures,
they treated them as they had treated their own Homer,
and as the Jewish-Greek writer, Philo, had treated the
Hebrew Scriptures.
The writings of Philo abound in this method of in-
terpretation. He sought to read Greek philosophy into
his own Sacred Books, and thus to win the Greeks to
Judaism. Through him, in large measure, probably,
this method passed into Christian circles. Philo
Greecised Judaism, and Hebraised Hellenism, and
the Greek Christians followed him.
It is only to-day, in the light of historical criticism , and
of the faith that God has not given us an ancient book
merely as our guide, full of riddles to be solved, but is
still speaking now in the men and language of to-day,
that this wide spread but mistaken and misleading
•conception of the Scriptures is passing away.
( b ) Dr. Hatch further finds the influence of Greece
in the place which Greek Rhetoric came to occupy in
the Christian Church.
Where do the homily and the sermon come from ?
Not from Galilee. Christianity did not come as a
homily or sermon delivered in set phrases. It came as
a “ rushing mighty wind,” an inspiration, firing the
hearts and elevating the life. How is it then, that the
fire seems to die down, and for the burning words of the
Prophet of love and righteousness and trust, is sub-
stituted the literary production, the formal discourse, the
rhetorical harangue ? Because the teachers of Christi-
anity were no longer Hebrew Prophets bursting with a
divine message, but Greek sophists and rhetoricians.
“ Christianity,” writes our author, “ came into the
•educated world in the simple dress of a Prophet of
Righteousness. It won that world by the stern reality of
its life, by the subtle bonds of its brotherhood, by its
divine message of consolation and of hope. Around it
thronged the race of eloquent talkers, who persuaded
it to change its dress and to assimilate its language
to their own. It seemed thereby to win a speedier


and completer victory. But it purchased progress-
at the price of reality. Its progress is arrested
now, because many of its preachers live in an
unreal world. The truths they set forth are truths-
of utterance, rather than truths of their lives. .. .
A class of rhetorical chemists would be thought of only
to be ridiculed ; a class of rhetorical religionists is only
less anomalous, because we are accustomed to it.”'
(p. 114.)
(c) Again, in the second, third and fourth centuries
we find the simple religion of trust and love, and the
enthusiasm of the prophets of the Kingdom of God,
transformed into the acceptance of certain definitions of
God and His relation to man. Whence this marvellous
change ? Once more Dr. Hatch answers, ‘ Greek
Influence.’ The Greek was given to define, to argue,
to press from premises to logical conclusions, and
insisted upon the acceptance of these conclusions and
definitions as “ at first co-ordinate with, and at last
superior to, trust in God and the effort to live a holy
life.” (p. 137.) Theology, rn the modern acceptation of
the word, was thus based on the Greek habit of mind.
From the Greeks, therefore, not from the Hebrews,
Christians learned to dogmatise, and to elevate the
dogma, and belief in it, into the place of Religion—into
the place of sonship and brotherhood in God, as pro-
claimed by Jesus. The Hebrew does not define, does
not throw his thoughts about divine things into the form
of dogmas. He is intuitive, practical, prophetic, a speaker
of proverbs—a Seer, rather than a logician.
The logic and definition of the Greek had undoubtedly,
and have still, their uses, but this confusion of Religion
with dogma, this identification of creed with life, this
substitution of an intellectual belief for a moral trust,
for the love, the spiritual earnestness of the Religion of
Jesus, is what Dr. Hatch calls a damnosa henditas from
Greece, and that part of Christianity which is “ doomed
to perish.”
(d) As regards Ethics, we know how simple are the
Ethics of Jesus. They can be summed up in the word
“ love ” —filial love of God, brotherly love of man, love


of “ the Kingdom,” leading to self-sacrifice for the good
cause in hope of the coming glory. How comes it that
for this simple basis is substituted something very
different ? “ Instead of the conceptions of righteous-
ness and holiness, there was the old conception of
virtue ; instead of the code of morals which was briefly
comprehended in this saying, namely, ‘ Thou shalt love
thy neighbour as thyself,’there was the old enumeration
of duties.” (p. 168.) The reason is, according to Dr.
Hatch, that Greek Ethics, like Greek Rhetoric and
Philosophy, had invaded and taken possession of the
Christian Church. “ Wisdom, for example, is. Greek
wisdom, with the addition that no man can.be wise who
is ignorant of God ; justice is Greek justice, with the
addition that its subsidiary form of beneficence is helped
by the Christian Society. The victory of Greek ethics
was complete. While Christianity was being trans-
formed into a system of doctrines, the Stoical jurists at
the imperial court were slowly elaborating a system
of personal rights. The ethics of the Sermon on
the Mount, which the earliest Christian communities
endeavoured to carry into practice, have been trans-
muted by the slow alchemy of history into the ethics of
Roman law.” (p. 169.) The whole basis of. Christian
Society is thus, Dr. Hatch declares, not Christian, but
“ Roman and Stoical,” and “the conversion,” he says,
“ of the Church to Christian theory must precede the
conversion of the world to Christian practice, for even
the Church repudiates the ethics of Jesus as applied
to every day life. . .
(A When we leave the age of Christ and the Apostles
we find ourselves no longer in the sphere of simple
Hebrew belief in one God, Creator of heaven and earth,
as pictured in the opening chapter of the Hebrew
Scriptures, but beset by questions and speculations as
to how God can create, how out of the invisible God
comes the sensible world, how imperfection, sin, and
failure are to be accounted for, if one God is the Author
of all. The simpler Jewish faith in the Oneness of God
which won for it acceptance among educated. Gentiles,
now 7 assumes a metaphysical and philosophical form.


How is this ? Still the answer must be, “ Greek
influence.” Plato and the Stoics rise again and the
New Faith is forced to speak their language, and clothe
itself in their philosophical garments. The Greek mind
must ask and answer questions about the Divine Nature,
which the Hebrew mind never troubled itself about.
‘Mind and matter,’ ‘being,’ ‘substance,’ ‘person,’ round
these terms Greek speculation hovered. Metaphysical
speculation was identified with Christian Faith by the
now predominant Greek bishops and presbyters, and
the resolutions of the majority upon such themes in
the great Councils, were elevated to the rank of clearly
revealed facts which must be accepted “ on pain of
forfeiture, banishment or death,” sanctioned by the Roman
State, whose interference with the Church has been at
the root of how much perversion and abuse !
The outcome of Greek speculation was the Creed of
Nicaea, whose adoption was carried, not unanimously,
but by a majority only, of that first great Church
Council, a.d. 325.
The Greek, undoubtedly, did good service to
Christianity in thus establishing a philosophic basis for
monotheism, and in elevating the idea of the Divine
Being ; but he, at the same time, helped to destroy the
simplicity of the faith, to raise to the position of
essential, what really is an accident, and to introduce me-
taphysical assumption as final resting places, which, at
best, were only stepping stones of thought, Plato, the
Stoics, Philo, are traceable henceforth in Christian
Creeds, which cannot be understood apart from Greek
speculation as to the Absolute, the Demiurge or
Creator, the Divine Essence or Substance, Creation,
the Word or Logos, ideai and logoi. When in the
Nicene Creed we say, “the only begotten Son of God,
Begotten of the Father before all worlds, God from
God, Light from Light, Very God from very God, Be-
gotten, not made, Being of one substance with the
Father—by whom all things were made,” we seem to
walk over the ashes of ancient Greek philosophy, and
each clause recalls to us the great Arian of
the 4th century. Each clause can be understood only


in the light of that great metaphysical controversy as
of the “ substance” of the Divine Being. The Religion
-of Jesus, by itself, could never have evolved such a
Creed, or have invented such metaphysical phrases.
(/) The same influence which Dr. Hatch thus traces
in Christian Theology he finds in Christian Ritual
and Ethics also.
“During the earliest centuries of'Christianity,” he
writes, “the Mysteries, and the religious societies which
were akin to the Mysteries, existed on an enormous
scale throughout the eastern part of the Empire. There
were elements in some of them from which Christianity
recoiled and against which the Christian Apologists use
the language of strong invective. But, on the other
hand, the majority of them had the same aims as
Christianity itself, —the aim of living a pure life, and
the aim of cultivating the spirit of brotherhood. They
were part of a great religious revival which dis-
tinguished the age. ’ (p. 291.) After a time we find
the simple rites and public teaching of primitive
Christianity exchanged for something mysterious, some-
thing which the public are excluded from, and
which the ‘initiated’ alone may take part in. Baptism,
at first so simple and open, is called by names
borrowed from the Greek Mysteries, such as ‘ enlighten-
ment,’ ‘ the seal,’ ‘ mystery,’ and other technical
words borrowed from the same source, are employed in
connection with it. Instead of being administered
immediately on conversion, a long period of prepara-
tion comes to be deemed necessary, and Christians are
separated into two classes, the baptised and the unbap-
tised, and are distinguished from each other by the same
words as are used of the initiated and uninitiated into the
Greek Mysteries. In several other respects baptism,
with its blaze of lights, its white-robed bands, its pass-
word, its crown of garland, came to resemble initiation
into the Greek Mysteries, and ancient secret religious
societies. “The primitive, “See here is water, what doth
hinder me to be baptised?” passed into a Ritual which
at every turn recalls the ritual of the Mysteries.” (p. 299.)
The same holds true of the Lord’s Supper. “ The


Eucharistic sacrifice came in the East to be celebrated
behind closed doors : the breaking of bread from house
to house was changed into so awful a mystery that none
butthe hierophant himself might see it.”(p. 305). “ Thu&
the whole conception of the Christian worship was
changed. But it was changed by the influence upon
Christian worship of the contemporary worship of the
Mysteries and the concurrent cults.” —(p. 309.)
Christianity in this way assimilated and absorbed
pre-Christian rites, and sought to adapt them to itself.
But in doing so it was only to be expected that the old
rites would react upon Christianity, and obscure its
simplicity and spirituality.
The work of to-day, therefore, is not to destroy
Christian Rites, and Symbols, or to abolish the forms
in which Christians clothed their thoughts and aspira-
tions, but rather to purify these forms, and to infuse
into them more and more the distinctively Christian
spirit of freedom, trust, and love.
Dr. Hatch thus sums up :
“ I venture to claim to have shown that a large part
of what are sometimes called Christian doctrines, and
many usages which have prevailed and continue to
prevail in the Christian Church, are in reality Greek
theories and Greek usages changed in form and colour
by the influence of primitive Christianity, but in their
essence Greek still. Greece lives ; not only its dying
life in the lecture-rooms of Universities, but also with a
more vigorous growth in the Christian Churches. It
lives there, not by virtue of the survival within them of
this or that fragment of ancient teaching, and this or
that fragment of an ancient usage, but by the continuance
in them of great modes and phases of thought, of great
drifts and tendencies, of large assumptions. Its ethics
of right and duty, rather than of love and self-sacrifice ;
its theology, whose God is more metaphysical than
spiritual—whose essence it is important to define ; its
creation of a class of men whose main duty in life is
that of moral exhortation, and whose utterances are not
the spontaneous outflow of a prophet’s soul, but the
artistic periods of a rhetorician; its religious cere-


monial, with the darkness and the light, the initiation
and the solemn enactment of a symbolic drama ; its
conception of intellectual assent, rather than of moral
earnestness as the basis of religious society—in all these,,
and the ideas that underlie them, Greece lives.”
(p. 350-)
Now, what is the result of these investigations upon,
our conceptions of Christianity? It'is not to make
us repudiate all speculation, all metaphysics, all theol-
ogy, all rites and ceremonies, all philosophy. We can-
not do without these, and it is just possible that with-
out these our Religion would not have lived, or at least
could not have become a world-wide Religion. It had
to be clothed in thoughts, words, and symbols, which
were the current coin of the civilised world of the
second, third, and fourth centuries. It would be
very narrow and foolish to reject all these forms-
as nonsense, and revile them as rubbish. Belief
in Evolution should teach us a better lesson than this.
But the result of these investigations is, I think, to
make us give these theologies, creeds, speculations,
symbols and cermonies, a secondary place, as not being of
the very essence of the Christian Religion, which is not
so much a logical and reasoned-out philosophy, as an
inspired life. The result of these investigations is not
to make us despise philosophy or ritual, but to lead us-
to regard no form of philosophy or ritual as absolutely
final. If the Greeks of the early centuries framed a
philosophy,we may do so too. If they adapted symbols-
and rites, we are at liberty to do so too.
And, finally, these investigations seem to teach us
that the cvedal basis of union on which the majority of
Christians rely, belongs not to Jesus, but to times and
circumstances very different from those of Jesus. He
never gave us the Nicene Creed, or the Athanasian
Creed, or the Confession of Faith. These were growths
on other soils. And why should we not outgrow them ?
Brotherhood in Christ as the revelation of God, does not
rest on the common acceptance of intellectual proposi-
tions and theological formulae. Indeed these have now
become a hindrance to real brotherhood, which lies in-


the acceptance of the Christ-ideal into our hearts,
and the common effort to give shape and form to it, not
only in philosophical and theological expression, and in
ritual, but also in art, and in practical life both in-
dividual and social.
The result of these investigations is not to destroy
Christianity, but to let us see it more clearly as it was
and is—a great spiritual and moral Movement ; and to give
us a vision of “ the Church ” as, not a little sectarian
clique merely, held together by antiquated science and
effete philosophy, and tyrannical priestcraft, but as
the noblest, widest, most human Society which we can
picture to ourselves —the Crown of the world s Social
Evolution and Highest Thought, during long ages. If,
moreover, the Church has grown, then the Church can
.grow. We are not called, therefore, to cast it aside as
an outworn garment, but rather to aid in giving new
and nobler expression to the splendid Ideal which the
Church, and the Church alone, stands for.
I would once more direct your attention to the bearing
which such a work as this by Dr. Hatch has upon our
own Church. Do not the results reached by such a
scholar strengthen us in the belief that we are on the
right lines, and that sooner or later all the Churches
will have to take up a similar position, and seek to
realise Dr. Hatch’s dream of “a Christianity which is
not new but old, which is not old but new; a Christianity
in which the moral and spiritual elements will again
hold their place, in which men will be bound together
by the bond of mutual service, which is the bond of
the sons of God; a Christianity which will actually
realise the brotherhood of man, the ideal of its first
communities?” (p. 353-) You are following no mere
divisive courses,” but the sober Ideal of Religion, and
the Church, which, out of the patient study of history
and reverent criticism of the past, is slowly emerging,
like a star of promise, over the cloudy horizon of
to-day.


Some Recent Protestant
V.
CHURCH ORGANISATION.
In previous Addresses on Recent Protestant Theology,.
I pointed out to you how the theory of Evolution had
been applied to Religion, to Christian Doctrine and
Dogma, and to the Biblical Books. Religion comes,
now to be regarded as a principle which has grown
with man’s growth. Christian Doctrine and Dogma
are looked upon also as growths, the results, on the
one hand, of an in-forming Spirit, an inner secret
force, or spiritual tendency, such as dwells in a seed
or germ, and of environment on the other—environment
intellectual, linguistic, moral. Christian Doctrine
and Dogma are studied historically, the different stages
in their growth are distinguished, and the different
elements—Greek, Hebrew, Eastern, Western —which
have gone to form them, to constitute the soil out of
which they sprung, have been scientifically analysed.
In the same way the Books of the Bible have been
historically studied, in relation to the different periods
in which they were written, and a development in their
teaching has been brought to light, making them no
longer an infallible text-book, but a record rather of
the human search for God, and of the steps by which
God’s Spirit in man has been leading the human mind
and heart upwards into a divine-human life of trust,
hope, and love
The same principles of Evolution and Development,


which we have seen applied to Religion generally, to
Dogma and Doctrine, and to the interpretation of the
Bible, have been applied to the Organisation of Christian
Society known as “ The Church,” creating, in this, as
in other departments, a revolution of ideas.
The belief of a large number of those who “ profess
and call themselves Christians,” is, that “The Church,”
as now constituted, is an institution directly and mi-
raculously founded by Heaven. This is the belief of
our Roman Catholic brethren, of many in the Anglican
Church, and also of Presbyterians, whose conception
of the Church will be found in the Westminster Con-
fession of Faith. These Churches all claim to be in
line with the Church of the first age, and to have the
divine sanction of Christ or his Apostles for their
particular forms of organisation, and for their distinctive
forms of government, whether by bishops, priests, and
deacons, or by kirk-sessions, presbyteries, synods, and
assemblies. They alike claim to be in possession of
“ The Keys,” and to be the genuine representatives of
Divine Society founded by Jesus and his Apostles.
A great change, however, is coming over Protestant
conceptions of “the Church.’ This is due to the patient
researches of this century into the history of the
Church, the study of ancient church-literature, and the
discovery of such treatises as “dhe Teaching of the
Twelve,” which have helped to throw still further light
on early Christian Society. Careful study of church-
history from the first century to the present, seems to
show that, like all other institutions, the Church has
g rown —that its rites and ceremonies, its officers and
form of government have been evolved under the influence
of circumstances, time, and place, and that there is no
final form of church-organisation, any more than there
is a final form of doctrine, or of practice.
We saw in last lecture, how “ the good seed of the
word ” dropped into the world by Jesus —the new con-
ception of God and Man which, through life and
and teaching, Jesus instilled into the world’s mind and
heart —was borne into Greece, and how on Greek soil it
sprang up in Greek form,clothing itself in the language,


■speculations, customs of Greece. This, we learned,
was the explanation of the marvellous change of at-
mosphere which we experience in passing from the
Sermon on the Mount, the parables, and short ethical
sayings of Jesus, to the Creed of Nicaea. We experience
a like marvellous change when we pass from Jesus and
the original company of disciples on the hillsides, or by
the lake of Galilee, or in the “ upper chamber ” at
Jerusalem, to the churches at a later date, with their
bishops, priests, and deacons, their imposing cere-
monies, their monarchical form of government. What
is the explanation ? Change of circumstances, change
of soil, influence of a different social, political, intel-
lectual, religious and moral atmosphere.
Jesus sowed the seed of a New Society : he preached
a Rejormed Society, under the title of “ The Kingdom of
God:” he told men to seek first “ The Kingdom,” and
to pray first for the coming of “ The Kingdom.” And so,
from the very beginning, his Gospel was the Gospel of
a Reformed Society, reformed not from without, but
from within. The conception of a Spiritual Society,
founded not on self-interest or force, like the kingdoms
of this world, but on the Religion of moral trust, and
brotherhood in God as “ Our Father,” was carried to
Greece and Rome. Christian communities sprang up
everywhere in the then civilised world. What more nat-
ural than that they should reflect the political forms, the
club-forms, the religious forms of the world ! What
more likely than that, as the numbers of Christians in-
creased, as danger threatened from without, as new
circumstances arose, as individual communities fede-
rated, the organisation of these churches should become
more complex, and that the original simplicity and
absence of form should at length be lost sight of! The
simple leaven of Jesus, the Galilean gospel of love and
humanity and child-like trust towards God, and of a
Kingdom founded on self-sacrifice and mutual service,
as of brothers and sisters, still wrought in the disciples’
heart. But round it there gradually gathered a crust
of organisation, which, while perhaps it was necessary
as a shell to protect the hidden life, at the same time


obscured the beautiful spiritual conception of distinctively
Christian Society, and rendered the Christian Kingdom
scarcely distinguishable from the Kingdoms of the
WO rld. “ My Kingdom,” John makes Jesus say, “is
not of this world ” —not founded on selfishness, violence,
survival of the strongest, but on the worship of truth,
and the following of the King of truth : “ everyone that
is of the truth heareth my voice.” But the forms of the
old world, borrowed from the Empire, the Temples, the
Mysteries, the Synagogues, the Clubs, took possession
of the new Kingdom, and thus the simplicity of the
first Christian communities was eventually lost in
the complexity of organisation.
How this took place, how gradually from the demo-
cratic constitution of Jesus’ original Society, we pass
to the elaborate monarchical form of church govern-
ment, culminating in the Papal throne of the Bishop of
Rome, it has been the work of distinguished Protestant
scholars and students of church history to show.
From three books I will draw in endeavouring to put
before you the modern Protestant view of the origin and growth
of Christian Church Organisation. The first book is Dr.
Harnack’s lately translated work on “ The Sources of
the Apostolic Canons, and the Origin of the Readership,,
and Other Lower Orders,” with “An Introductory Es-
say on the Organisation of the Earl) 7 Church, and the
Evolution of the Reader,” prefixed by the Rev. John
Owen. The second book is the late Bishop Lightioot s
Commentary on the Epistle to the Philippjans, with his
well-known chapter on “ The Christian Ministry. The
third book is Dr. Hatch’s Bampton Lectures on “ The
Organisation of Early Christian Churches, a boo
which I beg heartily to recommend to the general reader.
The works of Dr. Lightfoot and Dr. Hatch are not
quite recent, but they may be regarded as still pretty
well up to date, and to many, doubtless, they must be
perfectly new. , ,
“ The ecclesiastical and traditional theory of a three-
fold order in the Christian ministry,” writes Mr. Owen
“the assumption that such an order was of Divine
institution, that k obtained among, and was recognised


by all Christian Churches alike from the very dawn of
•Christianity, have now been long rejected by all in-
genuous scholars.” (Preface, p. xvi.)
This, however, does not alter the fact that a threefold
order is found at an early period. It is the part of
the historian, therefore, to trace the origin of such an
order.
(a) The first disciples were a democratic little society
formed around Jesus, at first within the bounds of
Judaism. They were a band of brothers held together,
not by any formal organisation, but by a devotion to
J esus as the Hebrew Messiah , and by devotion to the great
spiritual and social reform proclaimed by Jesus. Their
work was the same as that of Jesus, preaching the good
tidings of a Reformed Kingdom, a Kingdom of God on
earth, a Kingdom founded on purity of heart, on a
righteousness exceeding even that of the old law, on un-
selfishness and kindness even to the unthankful and the
evil, on respect even for the publican and sinner, and care
for the poor and suffering. The first church was thus, as
I have said, a really democratic little society within the
bosom of Judaism. All were brothers in a noble cause,
the regeneration of Israel. All were sons and daughters
of one Father, and the greatest was he who was servant
of all. “ Whosoever shall do the will of my Father,
the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.” The
Church of Jesus, if we may speak of the first band as
■“ a Church,” was a Society of brethren who went about
doing good to men’s bodies, exercising healing powers,
preaching good tidings of a new and better day, and
urging men to open their hearts and as little children
receive the message of divine love.
How utterly different all this from the Church of the
fourth century, or of the middle ages ! How far
removed from sacerdotalism and ecclesiasticism ! There
is nothing of the priest or ecclesiastic about Jesus.
He gives no instructions about rites and ceremonies, or
formal worship. He bids men rather keep their hearts
pure, and when they pray enter into their “ inner
•chamber,” and pray to the “Father who seeth in secret.”
Never does he say anything about founding an Ecclesi-


astical Order, and surely his silence is incomprehensible
if he had really meant to create a hierarchy, or a Church
in the sense of later times. .
(b) After Christ’s departure we read of the Christians
“breaking bread from house to house,” and the Apostles
office is not that of priests or ecclesiastics, but of
preachers —preachers of Jesus as the true Messiah ,
preachers of a returning Messiah.
Besides the Apostles, who made use, doubtless, when
they could, of the synagogue, we hear of some being set
apart to attend to philanthropic work, which formed
such a prominent feature in the Christian community.
In Paul’s epistles we find reference to different orders
in the Christian Society. There were apostles or
missionaries, prophets, teachers, workers of miracles,
persons possessed of healing powers, “ helps, govern-
ments, divers kinds of tongues.” W here, in this enume-
ration of church-offices, is there any mention of bishops,
priests, deacons as the divine order ? The true priest-
hood was that of all Christians — “ Thou hast made us
kings and priests of God ” ; “ye are a royal generation, a
chosen people.” The only high priest was Jesus, the
shepherd and bishop of souls.” “As late as the year 70,
says BishopLightfoot,“no distinct signs of episcopal gov-
ernment have hitherto appeared in Gentile Christen-
dom.” (p. 201.) Jesus did not profess to be a priest or a
bishop ; nor did Paul; nor, so far as we know, did John.
James, the brother of Jesus, seems to have been a
leader of the Church in Jerusalem, but hardly a bishop
or a priest in the modern sense of the word. “ ’iet,
continues Bishop Lightfoot, “ unless we have recourse
to a sweeping condemnation of received documents, it
seems vain to deny that early in the second centuiy
the episcopal office was firmly and widely established.
. (c) How are we to explain this change ? In this way
As Christianity spread and the number of disciples
increased, it was necessary to have some corresponding
organisation. The primitive freedom from organisation
could not be maintained. Discipline had to be observed,,
the poor had to be supported, and the sick or in prison
visited, the meetings of the Christians had to be regu-


lated, and the Church had to present an unbroken front
to the world , and to the dangers which threatened its
members from hostile forces. Whence could it borrow
its forms of organisation ? Whence, but from the
Society around it ? There was the Jewish Syna-
gogue, to be found not in Palestine only but in
every town of the then civilised world. There were
the Religious Associations also of the pagan world.
“ The most important among ” (private organisa-
tions of the Empire), writes Dr. Hatch, “ were
the religious associations. Almost all associations
seem to have had a religious element; they were
under the protection of a tutelary divinity, in the same
way as at the present day similar associations on the
continent of Europe invoke the name of a patron saint " r
and their meetings were sometimes called by a name
which was afterwards consecrated to Christian uses —
that of a ‘ sacred synod.’ But in a considerable number
of them Religion was, beyond this, the basis and bond
of union. Inside the religion of the State, and tolerated
by it, were many forms of religion and many modes of
worship.” (p. 27 and 28.)
Well, from the Jewish Synagogue it was only natural
that the Christians should borrow somewhat of their
forms. The Jewish Church was governed by a Council
of presbuteroi, or elders, and many of the first Christians
were Jews and made use at first of the Synagogue and
its forms. And it was also natural that those who
passed into the Christian from paganism should
bring with them something from the form of pagan
religious association. “The Christian communities,”
says Dr. Hatch, “ multiplied, and persecution forged for
them a stronger bond of unity. But to the eye of the
outside observer they were in the same category as the
associations which already existed. They had the
same names for their meetings, and the same names for
their officers. The basis of association, in the one case
as in the other, was the profession of a common Religion.
The members, in the one case as in the other, con-
tributed to or received from a common fund, and in
many cases, if not universally, shared in a common


meal. Admission was open in the one case as in the
other, not only to free-born citizens, but to women and
strangers, to freedmen and slaves. Consequently, when
the Roman governor found the Christian communities
existing in his province, he brought them under the
general law which was applicable to such associations,
(p. 30 and 31.) The Church might thus be said to have
been “ debtor both to the Jew and to the Greek ” for its
organisation. Such titles as episcopoi, bishops or overseers,
and presbuteroi or elders were borrowed from Gentile
Associations or from Jewish Synagogue.
In the second century, and end of the first, the
Church is governed by Episcopoi or Bishops who are
also named Presbuteroi or Elders. Presbyters and
bishops were respectively the Council, or Presidents of
the Society, who had to look after the discipline of the
Society, and the funds for distribution among the poor.
As time went on the President of the Council of a
church became more influential, and by-and-bye we
find, instead of several episcopoi, one officer, to whom
the name of Episcopos, or Overseer, is specially given.
Gradually the office of Episcopos became more and
more important. He was regarded as represent-
ing an original Apostle, and was invested with
greater authority, and more exclusive powers. “A
completely organised congregation at the end of the
apostolic age possessed (says Professor Harnack) .
x. Prophets and teachers, who were awakened by the
spirit, and announced the word of God ; 2. a circle of
elders who in all emergencies which affected the con-
gregation could come forth to guide them, and who had
to watch over especially the life and the evangelical
character of the congregation, and hence admonished,
punished, and comforted ; 3. the administrative officials
bishops and deacons —who possessed the charisma 01
government and of public service, and who had to
act especially in divine service and in the care
of the poor; the bishops were also members ol
the presbytery.” (p. 79-) “ In the course , of
second century,” continues Professor Harnack, “ the
organisation of congregations was thoroughly altered :


the foundations of the government of the Catholic
Church were formed. The alterations are shown
principally by three developments, ist. —The prophets
and teachers died out more and more, or were deprived
of their original significance. 2nd.—The worship and
other relations made it necessary to place one. man at
the head of the administration of the congregation —the
episcopoi were fused into the bishop. 3rd. The
directing college of elders was more and more
degraded to the position of an advising college for the
support of the bishop. Thus was the ruling order
developed in the congregation—bishops, presbyters,
deacons ; and these officials formed a special body of
consecrated persons above the laity.” (p. 81.)
(d) As Christianity passed into the Greek world its bas-
is of union also became changed. Originally it was an
ethical and religions basis. “In the earliest period,”
writes Dr. Hatch,“the basis of Christian fellowship was a
changed life—repentance towards God and faith.toward
our Lord Jesus Christ.” “In the second period the
idea of definite belief as a basis of union dominated
over that of a holy life.” (p. 187 and 188.) The Greeks,
as we saw in last lecture, introduced metaphysical
speculation into the primitive Christian trust and hope
and love, and they exalted such speculation into a first
place. The great question came to be, not,“ Are you a
brother or sister of the Christ, seeking first the Kingdom
of God and His righteousness m the spirit of the
Sermon on the Mount but, “Do you believe thus or
thus as to the constitution of the Godhead ?” The
moral and spiritual gave way before the intellectual, the
speculative, the theological.
(e) Then followed a third period. “Insistence on Cath-
olic faith has led to the insistence on Catholic order —
for without order dogma had no guarantee of perman-
ence. Consequently the idea of unity of organisation
was superimposed upon that of unity of belief.” (Hatch,
p. 188.) The idea of imperialism took possession, of
the Churches. Originally they were free communities
each presided over by its own episcopoi and presbuteroi.
By the fourth century they are regarded as one big Society


bound together by one creed, one system of dogma, and one
form of government. To doubt the creed, or to refuse
allegiance to the government of bishops, priests and
deacons, is now to put oneself outside the pale.
(/) Then further, these rulers of the Church ceased to
be what they were originally—officers of a Society ; they
became priests in the old heathen sense of the word,
holding “ the Keys of the Kingdom,” initiating into, or
excluding from the sacred mysteries ; and the idea pre-
vailed that the “New Ecclesia Dei, whose limits were
the world, was the exact counterpart, though only on a
larger scale, of the old Ecclesia Dei, whose limits had
been Palestine.” (Hatch, p. 141.)
The clergy, moreover, became a separate class recog-
nised by the State, and with a distinct civil status,
involving immunity from taxes, and from the jurisdiction
of ordinary civil courts; they received endowments of
money and lands; while Monasticism still further
separated clergy from laity, creating one standard of
morals for the monk or cleric, and another for the
ordinary Christian.
Thus, step by step, Christians departed from “ the
simplicity that is toward Christ,” and from the freedom
of the early Christian Communities, and became an Em-
pire, after the model of the old Roman Empire, and a
Priestly organisation or hierarchy, after the model of the
Hebrew Theocracy, or the Pagan Temples and Mysteries.
That they should so depart was inevitable. It was
impossible that a universal religion should be confined
within the narrow limits of its first little communities,
and the Reformed Kingdom of God had to pay the
penalty of mingling with the world and becoming a
world-moulding force. The pure gold often became
dim, and the beautiful Ideal of Jesus was often lost
sight of, like a white-winged ship among the great
billows. How could it have been otherwise ? The
seed had to be buried if it was not to “ abide alone,”
and the tender bud had to be preserved by the hard,
material husk. But through all the ages that divine
light has shone, and “the still small voice” has been
heard across the strife and tumult of men.


I conclude this sketch of the development of Church
•Organisation with two reflections.
(1) Church Organisation has been evolved; jt has
not been the result of a direct miraculous institution by
Heaven. This seems clear.
Then, does it not follow that our controversies and
contentions as to the true “ revealed” Organisation, by
which men have been so long divided, have become
altogether out of date ? Once we fully realise that “ the
Church ” is a growth, and that it has passed through
different stages; once we clearly discern the sources of
Church Organisation, we cease to fight for this Church
or for that, as the alone true and primitive. We learn
then to look beneath the surface for the true basis and
bond of Christian Union. “ For,” writes Dr. Hatch,
“the true communion of Christian men —the ‘ com-
munion of saints,’ upon which all Churches are built
is not the common performance of external acts, but a
communion of soul with soul, and of the soul with
Christ. It is a consequence of the nature which God
has given us that an external organisation should help
our communion with one another ; it is a consequence
both of our twofold nature, and of Christ’s appointment
that external acts should help our communion with
Him. But subtler, deeper, diviner, than anything of
which external things can be either the symbol or the
bond is that inner reality and essence of union—that
interpenetrating community of thought and character,
which St. Paul speaks of as “ the unity of the Spirit,”
and which in the sublimest of sublime books, in the
most sacred of sacred words, is likened to the oneness
of the Son with the Father and of the Father with the
Son.” (p. 192 and 193.)
(2) A second reflection is, that as the Church has
grown, it may continue to grow.
The Church has taken varied forms according to the
conceptions and necessities of different ages, and has,
from time to time, adapted its organisation. Must it
not continue to adapt itself? The new wine of Jesus
must continually be poured into new wine-skins. Not
by cleaving superstitiously, or lazily, to the past, but


by adapting the forms and methods of the Church to
our altered times and circumstances, can we best, pre-
serve the Church. Much in our ecclesiastical life is
hopelessly out of touch with present-day requirements,
and belongs to an age for ever past. The Church must
not stand aloof, but throw itself into the great demo-
cratic movement of to-day. It must be the Church
not of a class, or of a priesthood, but of Man, and. take
up into itself the life of to-day. “ Its unaccomplished
mission,” says Dr, Hatch, “ is to re-construct Society
on the basis of brotherhood. What it has to do it does,
and will do, in and through organisation,’.' and “ all
organisations, whether ecclesiastical or civil, must be,
as the early Churches were, more or less democratical. ’
(p. 221 and 222.)
In the Church of the Future, as it seems to us. at
least, the sacerdotal, the dogmatic, the monarchical
must disappear. Worship will be simple, and the
office of most importance will be that of the pro-
phet and teacher, the interpreters, the spiritual guides
pointing out new paths of development for the re-
ligion of the sons and daughters of God. And, as
in primitive times, the true Bishop will be not only
the overseer of souls, but the episcopos, the over-
seer of the poor and needy ; and the Church, as in the
ancient days, will be a humanitarian Society, knit to-
gether not by worship only, but by world-wide sympathies
and living interest in all that affects the interest and
progress of Man. “A communion,” to use Dr. Hatch s
words, “ wide as human life, and deep as human need
a Church which shall outshine even the golden glory
of its dawn by the splendour of its eternal noon. ’ (p.
222.)
It should be some encouragement to you of this
Church to knowthat,inbasing your Church-Communion,
not on a priesthood, or a dogma, or a traditional form
of government, but on community of aim and spirit, on a
common trust, a common hope, a common love, a com-
mon effort to spiritualise life, to bless and help mankind,
you are not departing from the faith, and from “ the
truth as it is in Jesus,” but that you are justified of


some of the foremost scholars and thinkers of the
modern Church, and are, while adapting yourselves, to
the circumstances and requirements of to-day, drawing
nearer to the original Ideal of “the Church” and of Jesus
“ Kingdom of God.”
It must seem to some as if you were the enemies of
the Church. But this is only because you subordinate
organisation to life, regarding that form of organisation
alone as “ divine ” which is best fitted in these new
times and circumstances, to promote the divine ends of
Jesus. There is no nobler Institution than “ the
Church,” and no greater calamity could befal the
world than the loss of this great spiritual Brotherhood.
It is because we dread such a calamity, because we de-
sire to see this Divine Society enlarged and. streng-
thened, that we live outside of the old organisations..
If there is one thing for which we long, it is the regen-
eration of the Church on those broad, spiritual lines on
which alone it can hope to become the Home and
Refuge of Mankind.
And the history of the past should make us hopeful of
the future. A religion which has survived such changes
may reasonably be expected to survive the greater
change demanded to-day ; and, if the law of Evolution
holds for churches as for other institutions, we need not
altogether despair, even amid the darkness and dead-
ness of the churches of to-day. Voices are on the air,.
“ The night is far spent and the day is at hand. ’ Let
us trim our lamps and go forth to meet the bridegroom
—“ the Christ that is to be.”
What form the Church of the future will assume, who-
can predict ? We can no more fully anticipate this than
we can anticipate the State of the Future. We can
only reach to-morrow through to-day, by following the
guiding star of principles, and pressing on in faith.
The Church of the Future will of itself emerge ■“ the
earth bringeth forth fruit of itself” —if we are. faithful
to the principles of free spiritual and social Religion on
which “the Kingdom ” was originally based, and boldly
carry them out, unfettered by conventional ideas of the-
Church, or by traditions, whether borrowed from Jewish


or from Pagan sources. The law of the Spirit of life
must, in Religion as in Politics, be our guide. It Cod
so clothe the grass of the field shall He not much more
clothe you”—clothe His Church with new and beautitul
form —“ Oye of little faith ! ”


Some Recent Protestant
Theology
VI.
PHILOSOPHY OF THEISM.
I wish to draw your attention to-day to a recent
work by Dr. Campbell Fraser, Emeritus Professor of
Logic and Metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh,
which is entitled “ Philosophy of Theism.”
This is the first of a series of lectures delivered before
the University of Edinburgh on the invitation of the
patrons of the Gifford Trust.
The Gifford Trust, as you may know, is a sum of
money bequeathed by the late Lord Gifford to endow
lectureships in the Scottish Universities. The following
extract from the Deed of Foundation explains the
object of the Trust :
“ I having been for many years deeply and firmly
convinced that the true knowledge of God that is, of
the Being, Nature and Attributes of the Infinite, of the
All, of the First and only Cause, the one only Substance
and Being—and the true and felt knowledge, (not merely
nominal knowledge), of the relations of Man and of the
Universe to Him. Being, I say, convinced that this
knowledge, when felt and acted on, is the means of
man’s highest well-being, and the security of his upward
progress, I have therefore resolved to institute and
found in connection, if possible, w;th the Scottish
Universities, lectureships for the promotion of the study
of the said subjects, and for the teaching and diffusion


of sound views regarding them, among the whole
population of Scotland.”
Religion Lord Gifford held to be the supreme ques-
tion of human life, the supreme reality, and he founded
this lectureship open alike to laymen and to clergymen
possessing the necessary knowledge and ability, for the
elucidation of this great primal factor in human hie,
free from sectarian bias or denominational limits.
"What he sought to secure was the best thought of the
most competent men on this all-important Problem ot
God, and man’s relation to the Ultimate Reality of all
life and being. , _ w
Professor Caird’s lectures on the Evolution ot
Religion, to which, some time ago, I called your atten-
tion, were delivered under this same Trust.
These lectureships are among the happiest omens ot
religious life in Scotland, and cannot fail to exercise a
tremendous influence on British theology. VV ith them
Scottish Religion maybe said to enter on a new era,. in-
asmuch as the principle is thereby formally recognised
that the study of Theology should.be like the study ot all
other sciences, absolutely free. It is true that in some ot
the Theological Halls of Scotland great liberty has been
taken by individual professors, who have also encour-
aged their students to study Theology as a science ;
but strictly speaking, every theological. Professor, is
bound by the law of the Church, and by his “ ordination
vows,” to make his teaching square with the West-
minster Confession of Faith drawn up m the 17th
century, and every student is obliged before entering
the ministry to sign this volume of obsolete theology,
and to swear allegiance to it for ever.
It is to be hoped that this absurd and immoral law
will be repealed, and that all lectureships, at least in
the Divinity Halls of the Scottish Universities, will soon
be placed on the same free and rational basis as the
Gifford Trust. ~ T
Let me endeavour to give you as perfect an idea as
can in the short limits of a sermon, of the general drift
of Professor Campbell Fraser’s lectures on the
Philosophy of Theism. The questions of which he


treats are questions over which many to-day are natur-
ally puzzling and disquieting themselves. It may help
such to know that they are not alone in their question-
ings, and how earnest and learned men are seeking to
solve the problem of problems.
(i) As rational beings we cannot help thinking and
asking the meaning of things. But we cannot stop
short at the meaning of this or that little fact of
experience. Indeed no fact can be explained just by
itself. A flower involves the earth out of whose bosom
it springs : a leaf involves a branch, and a branch
involves a tree. Nor can the human mind rest satisfied
with one class of facts, such as facts as to life (biology),
facts as to the earth’s strata (geology), facts as to the
functions of living bodies (physiology), facts as to the
stars (astronomy). When we have studied all these
classes of facts, the so-called sciences, individually,
separately, there remains the final problem of the
meaning of the whole , and of man's place in the
whole. Is the whole ultimately an irrational illusion
—the baseless fabric of a dream —or, as Professor
Fraser puts it, “Is religion, or the idea, of absolute
dependence on, and moral responsibility to, the
Supreme Power, of which the changing universe is a
revelation, an intellectually legitimate state of mind,
the expression of man’s deepest relation to the realities
of existence ? Is the faith, hope and love which it
involves, in its progressive development, the practical
solution for man of his final problem ?” (p. 38.)
Here is a problem, you can at once see, which lies
beyond any one of the sciences. For they deal exclu-
sively with the relations of certain definite facts of
experience to one another, but do not concern them-
selves with anything beyond. 1 hey are not, for
instance, concerned with the question how there come to
be facts at all; what a fact is in itself ; what the relation
of your mind to facts implies ; what the ultimate character
of the force is which is revealed in these facts; what
the rational meaning of the universe is, including the
human mind and heart and conscience, as a whole.
The sciences as sciences do not touch this final prob-


lem, and have no plumbline with which to sound its
de ßut S ’it is this final problem that really most deeply
concerns man, who cannot rest content to. be a mere
recorder of the antecedence and succession ot phe-
nomena, but insists on knowing what it all means, and
what he himself, the intellectual, moral, self-con-
scious and self-determining being is. Man thus
becomes not merely a scientific observer and classifier,
but a philosophical and religious thinker. His own
nature drives him beyond the narrow limits of 1 pure
SCU {2) Human consciousness involves three things—con-
sciousness of an outward world, an individual ego, and
“ God, the Infinite Being, the harmony of the whole.
k Anterior to,” says our author, “ and independent ot
philosophy, a spontaneous faith in self, in external
nature, and in God, seems to prevade human ex-
perience: mixing, often unconsciously, with the lives
of all • never perfectly defined, but in its fundamental
ideas always and necessarily incomplete; latent often
intellectually, yet never without a three-fold influence
in human life.” (p. 43-) , . ,
In other words, when we begin to analyse the human
mind we find in our very life, as rational beings, a con-
sciousness of self, a consciousness of not-self, and a
consciousness of something on which self and not-sell
alike depend, in which all things live and move and
have their being. .
“ A true philosophy of life consists in preserving the
proper balance between these three factors or elements
in a distinctively human nature. While no one of the
three can be wholly explained away, consistently with
sane human life, any one of them may be so exagge-
rated as to paralyse the moral influence ot the others,
and to distort the true conception of human life.” (p.
65 When you suppress the consciousness of a self, and
God there is left only “the outward and material
world,” which physical science reduces ultimately to
“ a universe of molecules in motion.” “ This is Fan-


materialism, which pretends to find in matter what
common consciousness refers to the ego and to God.”'
(p. 70.)
Or again, suppress the consciousness of God and the
outward world—what is left ? Simply the ego or self.
All things then live and move and have their being in
the individual ego, and outside of the ego "there is no-
thing. This is Panegoism, such as at one time the
German Philosopher Fichte professed. Should we in
the overwhelming sense of God, of the Infinite Ocean
of Being enveloping all, lose sight altogether of the
ego or individual self, and come to regard it as but an
illusion, we sink into a Pantheism or rather Acosmism
(no-worldism). Everything then is God, and there is no
world at all.
Materialism, Panegoism, Pantheism, thus spring out
of the place which we assign or refuse to these three
factors or elements of human consciousness—the out-
j ward world, the ego, and God.
j Professor Fraser proceeds to discuss these different
solutions of the world-problem, and to weigh them care-
fully in the balances. That problem is in few words,
j What is the ultimate reality beneath the show of things, and
i what is our relation to it ?
(3) (a) First comes the answer of “ Universal
Materialism.”
I have endeavoured, on a previous occasion, to put
before you the real meaning of Materialism, but I
‘would again just remind you of what it logically leads
to. Logically; for few people are logical materialists:
| they slip in ideas inconsistent with materialism, or they
endow what they call ‘matter’ with reason and self-
consciousness which, properly speaking, do not belong
to matter at all. And then, as Professor Fraser points
out (p. 101), it becomes only “a question of names —as
between the omnipotent and omniscient Matter on the
one hand, and the God of Pantheism, or even Theism,
on the other.”
The hypothesis of Materialism is simply this, that
the rational and self-conscious life is a mere accident,
that has no basis in the ultimate reality. It is an illu-


sion, how arising we don't know ; but of this we may be
sure it must ultimately dissolve into vortices of fire-
mist, or the chaos of atoms, out of which it originally
iS ßutif this be so, then is not the idea of matter a
product of the rational and self-conscious being .
Ltables and brutes do not think or talk of matter. And
fs not materialism a philosophic explanation of the wor d
given by a rational and self-conscious being? The
rational self-conscious being however, is only an illu-
sion, a meaningless accident of molecular force. 1
fore the idea of Matter, and the hypothesis of material-
ism are accidents of an accident, illusions of an illusion.
The materialistic philosopher and the idealistic philo-
sopher are really mere forms of universal illusion, and
the only reality is a succession of mindless, soulless,
meaningless sensations pleasurable or painful.
Thus the light goes out, and we are left standing in
utter darkness ; and the best thing we can do is to sup-
press and stamp out the rational self-conscious lite ot
man to treat it as we treat physical disease, and resign
ourselves to our sensations. To think is folly, to reason
is folly; or if as pure materialists we may not speak ot
f o py—for that would imply its opposite, wisdom—then
it is not “pleasant."
Hateful is the dark-blue sky,
Vaulted o’er the dark-blue sea.
Death is the end of life ; ah, why
Should life all labour be ?
Let us alone. Time driveth onward fast,
And in a little while our lips are dumb.
Let us alone. What is it that will last ?
All things are taken from us, and become
Portions and parcels of the dreadful Past.
Let us alone. What pleasure can we have
To war with evil ? Is there any peace
In ever climbing up the climbing wave !
All things have rest, and ripen toward the grave
In silence; ripen, fall and cease :
Give us long rest or death, dark death, or dreamful ease
—( Lotus-Eaters .)
Materialism, when perfectly logical and thorough
thus reduces all intellectual, and moral, and rehgiou


life to an absurdity, and even the physical science on
which the materialist builds, being an outcome of
mind, is a meaningless dream. The brutes are then
higher than man, for they are apparently free from
illusion , and are steeped in healthy sensation.
(b) So men turn from materialism, and, as in the age
•of Socrates, they begin to look within. They cannot
find the solution of the problem in the outward world
except by ignoring other facts. They see that what they
call the outer world, matter, molecules, atoms, are ideas
of the mind, that an external world means something
only to a perceiving, thinking, reasoning, internal mind,
that the conception of power or force necessarily resides
; only in a being possessed of mind, of mind- and will-
force.
The tables are thus turned, and instead of saying,
The outward world of molecules and atoms is every-
thing, we say, There is nothing real outside of the ego,
the I, the self. It is not the I, the thinking ego, that is
the illusion and accident ; it is rather the outward world
that is an illusion and an accident. /do not revolve
round the world, the world revolves round me. “ In-
stead of an eternal flux of molecules,” writes Professor
Fraser, “in imagined orderly motion in space, the
universe is now seen to be an eternal flux of orderly
perceptions or ideas in the history of the self-conscious
€go.” (p. 126.)
This is Panegoism : and it has as much to say for
itself as Panmaterialism. But further thought inevit-
ably shows that it is no final and satisfactory solution,
and that it ignores, as materialism does, some of the
facts of experience. The Materialist declares that the
Solution of the World-problem is to be found in Matter,
but when I ask what matter is, he can only answer, An
illusion of the illusion Mind. The Panegoist declares
that the Solution of the World-problem is the Personal
Self which thinks and wills, and out of which the idea
of matter has to be evolved. But when I ask, What a
personal self is, and how it comes to weave such a web,
how it gets outside its own circle so as to conceive of
other persons, and how it gets outside of itself so as to


conceive of an external world on which it acts, I find my-
self again running up against a stone-wall, and my
philosophical hypothesis is again smashed like a ship
on a reef. There is no God, no matter—only Me with
a big M, hanging, like Mahomet’s coffin, in mid air, cut
off from all other being—springing out of nothing-
related to nothing—ending in nothing. Panegoism,
like Panmaterialism, thus ends in absurdity.
We have asked the outward world, or matter, for a
solution ; we have asked the second element of ex-
perience, the ego or self, and both have answered, It
is not in me.”
(c) It remains now that we turn for an answer to tne
third element of experience—the element which we call
‘God’ the Power “not ourselves,’’ which embraces
and underlies the world of Egos and of material objects.
What if the outward world of matter, and the inward
world of self, be but waves in the Infinite Being,
“ perishable or illusory modes of God ?” This is the
solution offered by Pantheism. The world and man
are “ necessitated modifications of the One Infinite
Reality, called God, in which the universe is con-
substantiattd.” . 1£ ,
To the thorough-going Pantheist there is no self and
no world —there is only God, the Infinite Ocean of
Being, on whose bosom we rise and fall like the billows-
of a sea. From God we come, and into God all things
return, as the rain drops come from the ocean, and
return to the ocean. But if consciousness, thought,
will, are engulfed, what remains? In what are they
engulfed ? We do not know. The Mighty All in
which they sink is not conscious, nor is it thought, nor
is it will; it is as Mr. Herbert Spencer says, the “ Un-
known and Unknmvable." What is the ultimate reality
underlying the world and self? We can only answer,
the Unknown and Unknowable the night in which
He fr el said all cows are black the Unthinkable into
which we can rise if at all, only, as according to-
the Neoplatonists, by religious ecstacy, by a faculty
beyond reason and thought—the Nirvana of the Budd-
hist which is reached by stripping ourselves ot the


illusion of the outward world, and the illusion of our
is rest, but it seems to be the rest of death.
Here is unity, but it is more properly speaking the mono
tonv of the glassy ocean. If all things and all selves
modifications or modes of the One indefinite
Bern 0- then where does the experience of personality,
will individual thought, moral distinction come m .
These things have no reality. They are all illusion ,
Sh 4)°E S ach S rf these of Panmaterialism,
thit of Panegoism, and that of Pantheism-has some
truth in it, but none of them can be accepted as a fu
and final solution. They all three alike seem to end in
universal Nescience, in absurdity. , t . t icism ’
In this conclusion, what is now called Agnosticism
acauiesces. The highest wisdom, it says, is expressed
In three words I don't know. Is there any foundation
for anything—any real basis for Science, Philosophy,
Religion, Morality, Human Experience? I cion t know,
and what is more, I can't know. _ ,
But the rational mind and conscience canno a -P
this answer as final, without sinking into pessimism and
despair. Such agnosticism, or dm't-k»omsm, loosen
the loints and stops the heart, undermines all energy,
and breaks the spring of progress. No healthy, joyous,
enthusiastic life is possible when the foundation of h .
physical, intellectual, moral and religious, is thought
as a point of interrogation lying outside of all lmow
ICl 'fhe conclusion then at which Professor Fraser
arrives is that the solution of the world-problem cannot
be found by suppressing or tgnonng either of the th
factors or elements in experience, the outward wc>r ,
the ego, or the Infinite. We are not mere play of atom
ard molecules. We are not mere egoa shut m with
the prison walls of our little personalities. We are n
tyiptg waves on a fathomless ocean. # . r j •
(5) What then are we? The answer ts to be found w
man himself. He is the true supernatural, as Carlyl
puts it—man, the 'self-conscious, rational, moral bei g


who must, by a necessity of his own rational and
moral nature, cast anchor in supreme Reason and
supreme Goodness as the source and foundation
of all. “ The universe ” must be “ finally interpreted
in and through what is found in man man at his
highest or best man with his ineradicable con-
viction of moral responsibility, and his religious con-
sciousness that even the natural universe must be a
manifestation of what he has to think of as the perfect
reason of the ideal personality, (p. 2/9.)
We can find the meaning of. the world only in our-
selves : we can find the meaning of ourselves only in
the infinite God. We understand the world because
the world is full of reason : we reach forth to God
because God’s reason is in us. We are the mediator
between God on the one hand, and the world on the
(6) But we cannot perfectly grasp the ultimate reality.
Our guide must, therefore, be faith.
We walk by faith that reason is in all and through
all nature —by what Professor braser calls “cosmic
faith,” or the assurance that the material world will not
in the end put to intellectual confusion those who rely on
the universalit)' of its natural order. “ This blended
moral and religious faith not only guarantees the
physical faith itself, but is the absolute assurance that
the Supreme Power will not put to permanent moral
confusion those who strive permanently to realise the
ideals of truth and beauty and goodness ; or who trust
absolutely in infinite love, in and through which all
things somehow work together for good to those who
thus live.” (p. 275.) , , ,
Man placed midway between the outward world and
the Infinite, thus of necessity walks by faith—faith,
when he turns towards the world, in a physical order
which he is daily seeking to read more perfectly, and in
which he believes although he cannot prove ; faith in a
moral order, when he turns towards the Infinite, a
moral order which the good man is daily seeking to
read more perfectly, and in which he implicitly ti usts
although he cannot prove. Everywhere around us and


in us and beyond us is felt to be God—the presupposition
of all our experience, as evident to us as any human
being whom we recognise by the signs of kindred thought
and feeling. And yet the outward world is not ignored,
and our inner self is not ignored. ~ f .
But we know God only in part, and our very life is
to advance in knowledge of Him. We are person-
alities, and God is Personality. The difference
between us and Him is. as a German philosopher
(Lotze) has put it, that God is the only perfect Personality
and we are but imperfect personalities— growing person-
alities. Some modern thought, you know, regards
Personality as a mere accident. But the truest
philosophy, according to Professor Fraser, looks upon
perfect Personality as the goal of Evolution. “Evolu-
tion ’’ is only one half of the truth : “ Involution is the
other half. We are evolving out of the indefinite, the
impersonal, into the personal. Every step of the great
cosmic process is towards the self-conscious ana
personal, which, so far from being a mere limitation, is
the condition of the fullest and most perfect life. The
highest we know is a great personality a personality
that does not merge more and more into the unconscious,
but one that takes up into itself more and more the whole
universe, consciously identifying with itself, and assimi-
lating everything through thought and sympathy. Our
destiny as rational and moral beings is to become not
less but more personal—deeper, fuller, nobler person-
alities —in other words, to evolve out of things, or mere
animals, and Evolve into the free God-life of perfect
This solution of the Problem of the ego, the not-self,
and God, is Theism —the only solution of the Universe,
wherein man can ultimately find rest, strength, spiritual
health and joy.
Hence in a season of calm weather,
Though inland far we be,
Our souls have sight of that immortal sea
Which brought us hither ;
Can in a moment travel thither
And see the children sport upon the shore,
And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.


/ 7 \ I have given you in a few words what seems to me
to be the gist of this first series of Professor Fraser’s
Lectures They are typical of some of the most earnest
thought of this age, and of the direction in which
theology is travelling. The old questions over which
our forefathers squabbled are being dropped, and Re-
ligion as an ultimate fact , independent ot dogmatic
assumptions and miraculous revelation, begins to be re-
cognised. Professor Fraser simply seeks to draw back
the veil and show us in ourselves the continual revelation
of a living God, whom, indeed, as some one has ex-
pressed it, we can apprehend , although we cannot utterly
comprehend, else were we ourselves God.
Men’s minds are perplexed and confused just now,
and we need such lectures to clarify thought, and to
show us clearly whither the paths down which we turn
in our mental wanderings must logically lead. Happy
shall we be it from our often weary and unsatisfied
wanderings we come back at length not to out-worn
creeds but to the trust of our childhood developed into
a strong, full, reasonable faith, worthy of our manhood
and womanhood. Happy shall we be if, throng 1
perplexities, doubts, and questionings, we are shaken
out of our narrowness, our prejudice, our petty theo-
logies, our intolerant dogmatism, and learn how
profound, and yet how simple, is true Religion the
repose of the soul in God, the only substance, , the
ground of all reality, the immanent force of all pro-
gress, and the light of all our seeing-the unsearchable
yet inspiring, ever present Source of all Knowledge, a
morality, all wisdom, and all noble love—the macro-
cosm, as Professor Fraser expresses it, of which the
human being is the microcosm.
It is the faithful endeavour thus to see God—the ra-
tional and moral faith in such a self-revealing God, as
the Strength of Man’s heart, the Root of human pro-
gress, and the Basis of human brotherhood—which
alone unites us as a Church, and is the deepest bond of
human fellowship. “ Shew us the Father, and it sul-
ficeth us.”


appendices.
Appendix to Lecture 1.-The following short quotations from
Herrmann may help still further to elucidate Ins position—to our
thinking notan altogether satisfactory one frotn a philosophical 01
tninKing . ° Th proo f 0 f the historical reality of Jesus
always on" the significance which the story of
Tesus has gained for his life. It is only when the Christian has
taken this story to heart as an unquestionable fact m his own life
that*all that testifies to the historical
before him and is clearly and easily grasped. Thus the assensus
to what is historically reported, so far as , B^ oi "ff of
nlace in faith at all, does not precede the hducia as a worK or
human effort, but is bound up with it as a result broujht about by
the fact on which faith is based. (p. 177). In otliei words, we
read the story of Jesus, and it so lays hold on our heart and
conscience, that we are convinced of its reality. A divine person-
alitv takes hold of us and enters into our spiritual life, and we feel
£2 we are not dealing with an ideal merely but with a profound
personality in whom God has come near to us. i aith thus ceases-
toTe mere historical belief-it is a distinct spiritual faculty,
awakened under the influence of Christian fellowship through
Xch we discern a unique historical personality and feel him touch-
inn us. —“ Christian faith is nothing else than trust in peisons and
n the powers of personal life” (p. 178). ‘The proof of the
historical reality of Jesus for a believer rests always on the signifi-
cance which the story of Jesus has gamed for his life (p. ho)-
Details in the life of Jesus become thus of quite secondary impo-
tence “He who has found Jesus Himself to be the ground of his
salvation has no need of those miracles. It is well-known that
and for their sakes that are yet to be attracted but as for us wffo
know alreadv all we do know, what do we want with them IP- )•
“Indeed it is possible to think of a man. getting a most vmd
impression of Jesus’ power, just when lie thinks he sees that h s
historical appearance has been swathed m a thick mist o lege ,
h ,r S e ” Fo.'lhe viy risen that «'* “
Christ in the fullest sense of the term, we must reject the dogma
of Wmseli, must
Jesus, and when this act of God revealing Himself, namely Jesus,


fto°d‘ h by 'rs* r* Is Ull a“mSom%S^‘.uohM
Does it even vouch for an absolutely unique revelation of God ? 0.
™Z%:'n?A‘X'&"£'SrcioTing be ga.hered
Fs awakened by which we may see God in Christ, and the germ o
understanding is nourished ’ (p. 147).
x _tt r rv»o rrpnpvfll reader who has not time or
Which the difficulties in the
omy are very clearly stated popular exposition of the whole
r s&sr
For an account ot tne £,ic . i , u TCinrr<; xxii and
worship under Josiah, the reader is referred to 11. Kings, xxn. ana
him from publishing it. ascendrf the throne.
hi RvS“oM "" 42) is meant miraculoM, formal apart from
SW question Islliscusseil, but not
very satisfactorily.


Appendix to Lecture 111. —Those who take an interest in philoso-
phy will find much light on the great questions of to-day in the late
T. H. Green’s works. His view of Religion in relation to Evolution
and Criticism is summed up in a Lay Sermon in Yol. 111, which is
published also separately—“ Faith.” An excellent resume and ex-
position of Green’s philosophy has been published by W. H.
Fairbrother, M.A., Oxford.
For a general idea of Hegelian philosophy the reader is referred to
Caird’s Hegel—a little volume of Blackioood’s Philosophical Classics,
to Professor Jones’ Criticism of Lotze, and to Dr. Sterrett’s very
readable “ Studies in Hegel's Philosophy of Religion."
Appendix to Lecture IV.—A popular representation of the Early
Church’s beliefs will be found in Stanley’s Christian Institutions,
For a picturesque and dramatic description of early Councils see the
same volume, and Stanley’s Eastern Church, specially Lecture IV. on
the Nicene Council.
“ The Christian Platonists of Alexandria," by Charles Bigg, D.D.,
will also be a help.
Appendix to Lecture V.—For a further discussion of the origin
and development of the orders of the early Christian Ministry, the
student is referred to “ The Apostolic Age,” by Weizsiicker, trans-
lated in the Theological Translation Library, Vol. 11, Bk. V.,
Chapter 11.
“ We conclude, therefore, that there existed in the Church, in the
post-apostolic age, a representative body of presbyters, the title borne
by the leading members being honorary, but that the leading office
was vested in the overseers, the bishops of the Church,—and that as
a collective body ; and that, finally, both grades were connected,
since the bishops were chosen from the presbyters.” In Stanley’s
Christian Institutions, Chapter X. “ The Clergy,” the general
reader will find a popular exposition of the same subject. The com-
paratively lately discovered “ Teaching of the Twelve Apostles ”
alluded to in this Lecture, supposed by some to belong to the end of
the first century, has been translated into English by Canon Spence
(James Nisbet & Co.)
Appendix to Lecture VI. —Outlines of Hermann Lotze’s Philoso-
phy of Religion have been published by George T. Ladd, of Yale
University. The general notion is that personality means simply
limitation. God being infinite, it is argued, cannot, therefore, be
personal. But is this not a confusion of material or mathematical
conceptions with spiritual. A tree is more defined than a stone, and
yet we regard it as higher in the scale of being. Hence Lotze says,
“We conclude with the assertion which is exactly the opposite of the
customary one : Perfect personality is reconcilable only with the
conception of an Infinite Being ; for finite beings only an approxi-
mation to this is obtainable” (p. 69.) We would refer the general
reader also to Mr. Fiske’s little treatise, “ The Idea of God."


by the same author.
Christianity Re-interpreted,
and Other Sermons
Price 3s. 6d.
V mUC^;: o «:able,. perhaps best describes these thought-
W Coining Day.
Church Worship.
A book of Psalms, Hymns, and Services
Price 2/6 and 3/6.
A Book of Religion for Families
and Schools.
Price 6d.
The Australian Herald.
A Monthly Religious-Social Magazine. Edited by
Dr. Strong. Price 30.
Annual Subscription, 3/-, including postage.
May le fro, * IZZ
\Zary, Ur AurtmUnv
Church, Flinders Street.




