

The Story
of
A Great
Australian Industry
AUSTRALIAN
GENERAL ELECTRIC
limits*


AUSTRALIAN
GENERAL j|||) ELECTRIC
LIMITED


THROUGH A GREAT
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY


To commence
The ascendancy of the electrical industry in Australia, as elsewhere in the world, is
due to its universal service in every stratum of the social system. It has effected and
enhanced the ease, enjoyment and economy of everyday life, and in a large measure,
destroyed isolation. It has improved health, added dignity to labour, and assisted in
an emancipation which is appropriate to an enlightened age. In industry, it has
effected savings and expedited output to such an extent that it is now impossible to
picture an industrial era from which electricity is absent.
From the electric incandescent lamp to the marvels of X-Ray—from the telephone to short-wave
radio transmission—from industrial heating to domestic refrigeration ... there is no escape from the
inevitable transition to an electrical age. In an epoch, when the poorest man may enjoy the miracles
unearthed by Marconi, when the humblest home can scorn all but electric light, when democracy
cooks by wire and washes clothes at the touch of a switch, the electrical industry comes into its
rightful perspective as a public utility rather than as a purely commercial unit.
Australian General Electric Ltd. is sincere in its appreciation of a grave responsibility. Having estab-
lished itself as the focal point of electrical activity in Australia; having identified itself as the principal
component of the electrical industry in this country, its duty to the public becomes doubly exacting.
Quite apart from the millions of people engaged in industries reliant on electric energy, the genera-
tion and distribution of electricity, and the manufacture of equipment to make both possible, there is
a responsibility to the nation as a whole. A.G.E. realises that the electrical manufacturing industry
provides a triple service. It provides, firstly, a great deal of direct employment; secondly, it assists,
in revolutionising comfort, entertainment, health and efficiency; and thirdly, it uses many products
of other industries and indirectly assists further avenues of employment.
The operations of this Company have become so interwoven in the fabric of national life that some
record and reminder of their character is not only justified but desirable. It is for this purpose that
the following pages have been prepared.
ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF A.G.E.
In Australia, prior to 1930, were certain electrical manufacturing interests, limited in scope, but
steadily developing along particularly sound lines. These interests shared one aspiration and one
determination—the hope and conviction that electrical work of almost any magnitude could be
carried out in Australia by Australians. The realisation of this ideal depended upon concerted
action, and in 1930 these various organisations merged with their one dominating purpose in view.
Works had been established in Melbourne and Sydney by Metropolitan Vickers Electrical Company
Ltd., by Ferguson Pailin Ltd. and by Australian General Electric Company Ltd. Their activities
rapidly extended and gradually it became apparent to engineers who had been sceptical of Aus-
tralia's ability to produce major electrical products that surprising progress was being made. Steam
turbines, metal-clad switch-gear, railway traction motors, tramway motors, sub-station equipment of
the highest standard and efficiency appeared on the Australian scene—produced by Australians...
IN AUSTRALIA! By drawing upon the vast experience, engineering resources and research
facilities of an unassailable group of overseas principals, the Australian factories were able to dupli-
cate plants and products hitherto regarded as the exclusive province of the importer. Design and
manufacturing technique were kept in perfect tune with developments in other countries. Aus-
tralia took her place among the electrical plant producers of the world —transformed by A.G.E. from
a mere market to a source of supply.
In December, 1930, the merged companies completed their united front by the purchase of Wey-
mouth Ltd. This action added the production of power transformers to the group's commercial range
and so enabled a COMPLETE supply of electrical requirements. From 1930 to 1932 the work of con-
solidation proceeded and the separate activities were ultimately concentrated into the works at
Auburn, N.S.W., and those at Richmond, Victoria.


AFFILIATIONS
The overseas technical resources of Australian General Electric Ltd. are most effectively summarised
by six names, each as well known to engineers the world over as the initials A.G.E. in Australia:
Associated Electrical Industries Ltd. - - - England
The British Thomson-Houston Co. Ltd.- - England
The Edison Swan Electric Co. Ltd. England
Ferguson, Pailin Ltd. England
General Electric Co., Inc. ------- U.S.A.
Metropolitan Vickers Electrical Co. Ltd. - England
The appearance of these names on products large or small, from giant turbines developing 200,000
horsepower to the smallest magneto in a motor car, or from the vast propelling machinery of great
ocean liners to the most ordinary of wall switches is an immediate link to the initiated mind with the
world's largest and most elaborately fitted engineering laboratories.
To the Australian they have a still more vital significance because they signify the unique fund of
knowledge on which Australian General Electric Ltd. can draw for data, co-operation and new
electrical and engineering discoveries.
Behind these names stand famous physicists and engineers—Edison, Steinmetz, Swan, Coolidge and
Langmuir—experts whose reputations have won universal respect—men who have dedicated their
lives to the solution of engineering problems and the advancement of electrical science. Con.
elusions, discoveries and important information are interchanged, compared and faultlessly applied
through the medium of vast engineering and manufacturing organisations. It can be said, therefore,
that these six names represent the mobilisation of unrivalled knowledge, experience and resources
—and that their power and unique value are focussed into Australian light by Australian General
Electric Ltd.
THE AUBURN AND RICHMOND FACTORIES
The factories, of which there are two. of Australian General Electric Ltd., cover many acres of floor
space. Well-lighted, efficiently ventilated workshops, designed to give the fullest scope to human
knowledge and skill, are so planned as to foster that enthusiasm which comes only from the comfort
and content of workers. The variety of ways in which this factor has been dealt with needs no full
description in these pages—the consistent and marked loyalty of the A.G.E. personnel is sufficient
proof of their reality.
The works at Auburn. N.S.W., first opened in 1925, are the more recently established. This factory
occupies very large floor space, operates hundreds of the latest types of machines, employs large
numbers of men and women, and produces almost everything electrical.
The second factory at Richmond, Victoria, also gives employment to a large number of Australians.
Particular interest attaches to the Richmond works, inasmuch as they occupy the site of the first
electric power station ever erected in Melbourne.
From Auburn come the HOTPOINT Electric Irons, Jugs. Toasters, etc., which are known to practically
every woman and home in Australia. From these it is a far cry to headlight equipment for railway
engines—and yet they proceed from the same plant as do wiring devices and plastic mouldings,
metalclad switch-gear, control switchboards and contactors. Move a few yards further in this extra-
ordinary building and we see electric motors for tramways, railways and lifts coming into being.
Elsewhere, rotary converters ... further still, electric ovens for pastrycooks and bakers .. . and from
these to equipment for heating oil or water or melting metal.
From the Richmond works come the power transformers which play a part in every major power
installation in every part of Australia. Here, too, are current and potential transformers,
electric welding sets, oil circuit breakers and air-break switches, switchboards and a variety of pro-
ducts ranging from varnished paper insulating tubing to electric lifts! The trained staff of technicians
and workmen, and the availability of the very latest research information ensure products conform-
ing to the world's highest standards.


TWO SPECIALISED
RICHMOND, VIC.


AUBURN, N.S.W.


Hundreds of tons of costings are machined yearly in
\
Mis? Heavy Machine Aisle. A ib-ton overhead travel-
I 1
crone transports giant castings with simple ease.


MANUFACTURING
AND TESTING
IN AUSTRALIA’S LARGEST ELECTRICAL PLANTS
jAll equipment must be rigor-
ously tested! This glimpse of an
interesting section of a Testing
Area is similar to many to be
seen at the Auburn and Rich-
mond works.
EXTREME RIGHT.
Accurate to less than I,oooth
of an inch! The tools and
gauges made in this Tool Room
possible the split-hair
accuracy of A.G.E. workman-
ship.
LET us take a look into the Heavy
Machine Bay at Auburn. Here we find
huge machines quietly turning big steel
castings and forgings; machining them to
dimensions which are accurate to within the
tiniest fraction of an inch. Nearby are giant
drilling machines working to the same
accuracy and fitted with radial arms so per-
fectly balanced that the drills can be swung
into position by the lightest pressure of
the hand. And then we see the grinding
machine which ensures flawless accuracy
for the shafts on which rotating machinery
depends. This machine finishes off the
ground portion of the shaft with a glass-like
surface, accurate to within one-thousandth
of an inch! And here is a machine which
employs diamonds as a cutting medium.
This machine is used for finishing off the
surface of commutators for traction motors.
These Heavy Machine Shops are compara-
tively quiet... but, step over to the Punch
Press Department and hear the dull thuds of
the big Punches and the machine-gun rattle
of the Notching Punches. It is here that all
the varied pressings for motors, electric
irons and toasters are made. Some idea of
the capacity of this portion of the plant can
be gauged from the fact that, collectively,
the Presses are capable of nearly 1,000,000
strokes per shift. They convert nearly
750,000-lb. of steel per year into punchings
and pressings of innumerable shapes, vary-
ing in weight from .00031-lb. to over 5-lb.
We move along to the Motor Department
and glimpse the production of motors rang-
ing from i horse-power to 150 horse-power.
The precision of all the machines is truly
amazing, and it is indeed fascinating to
watch the progress of particular parts and
components.
At Richmond Works the same interesting
and important activities are proceeding.
Huge presses convert steel sheets into
punchings which, later, are assembled into
transformers weighing anything up to 40
tons! In the Coil Winding Department you
will see a special Insulating machine into
which bare copper conductors are fed. The
machine proceeds, with meticulous care, to
place layer on layer of cotton over the cop-
per. The copper is then wound on Formers
into big coils that are impregnated with var-
nish to make them moisture-proof.
Another process of particular interest is the
one of making varnished paper tubes. A
machine with specially heated rolls wraps
layer on layer of paper (treated with a
special varnish) into tubes of all shapes.
These tubes are used lor insulating the roda
and shafts that carry live metal.
And so, from this strange blending of noise
and quiet, apparent confusion and obvious
orderliness, large machines and small,
emerges the major portion of the electrical
requirements of a progressive nation
marshalled by a growing army of Aus-
tralians controlling modern machinery
which daily converts many thousands of
pounds worth of Australian raw material.


FROM DOMESTIC TOASTER TO
Copper stands commercially supreme as a
conductor of electricity: but insulation is as
important as copper itself. These special
machines apply an insulating covering of
cotton before the copper is wound into
coils tor use in the large transformers illus-
trated elsewhere.
Winding coils for small instrument trans-
formers is a particularly interesting process.
Photographed here are some typical workers
in this section — healthy, happy Australians
with dexterous fingers working under ideal
conditions in a great Australian industry.
It is fascinating to watch these modern
electrically driven machines in action.
They are used for drilling the castings of
Traction and Industrial Motors of 100 horse-
power and over.
The assembly and testing of electric motors
takes place only after many processes have
been passed through. Thousands of motors
are manufactured each year, yet each one
is subjected to the most exacting tests
before receiving its "0.K." label.
Relieving the breakfast time rush! The
Hotpoint Electric Toaster is a familiar and
friendly servant in thousands of Australian
homes. Hundreds of these Hotpoint
Toasters are assembled every week and
represent one of A.G.E.'s many contribu-
tions to domestic freedom.
This peep behind the scenes at Richmond
shows the assembling of power transformers.
These transformers quietly and efficiently
take their place in the sub-stations which
supply our domestic electricity, playing a
vital part in enabling the modern man and
woman to live electrically.


FORTY TON TRANSFORMER
The greatest care is required in the manu-
facture of Varnished Paper Bushings, which
play a major role in most electrical equip-
ment. A special quality of paper is em-
ployed and the operations entailed are sub-
jected to the closest supervision.
Thousands of individual items are used in
the production of A.G.E. electrical equip-
ment. The housing of these articles necessi-
tates an intricate and highly efficient store
system. Our photograph shows only a
portion of this department.
A I 5-ton Plano Miller capable of machining
castings weighing several tons each.
The photograph shows a portion of the
castings which will ultimately be used in
switchgear tor a power-station operated by
one of Australia's largest industrial under-
takings.
This glimpse of the main Transformer As-
sembly Aisle at Richmond works shows, in
the foreground, a number of large trans-
formers ready for those exacting tests which
ensure A.G.E. accuracy and efficiency.
An important link between A.G.E. and the
industries of Australia. The completed
products of this great organisation are
shipped and railed to every corner of the
Commonwealth. Certain A.G.E. products
are also sold in New Zealand.
Coils for electric motors are wound in
special formers on coil-winding machines. In
this picture we see these coils being wound
into the insulated slots of the stationary
portion of electric motors.


TURNING
THE WHEELS OF AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY
.1 s i’ ■ ■ v*!i>>--is jt irldlist* V ’f‘ (J V;-- y - l-irsO! :i;nS‘
fhi-v Tuiif.'*. L‘-i picpoio costmai r : '-- mot, :s whic
■'ii'V:- ..trams in oydncy MHboumo unJ Brisbane


This Notching Press punches steel blanks for
electric motors. This is one of the several opera-
tions necessary in converting electrical sheet
stool into laminations.
This type of Vertical Boring Mill plays a consid-
erable part in the preparation of castings for
industrial motors.
Winding a Tramway motor armature
is a job requiring skill and patience
and quite a bit of experience.
During recent years great changes have taken place in the design of electric motors. A.G.E. has
been able to improve greatly the reliability and efficiency of all types whilst considerably reducing
the weight per horse-power. This achievement has resulted in a still greater demand for motors for
an increasing number of purposes. The wheels of Australian industry now depend so definitely
on these motors for their motive power that the work of A.G.E. in this connection may be iustly
regarded as one of national necessity. Practically every type and size of electric motor is produced,
from the | horse-power type to the 3 Hon giants that keep the Sydney suburban trains on schedule.


WHERE MOTORS GROW
FOR A THOUSAND PLANTS
The Electric Cranes lift Motors from the Assembly Bench preparatory
to despatch to the testing area,
OVERPRINT.
When the coils are wound into a tramway motor armature they
receive a temporary binding of steel wire. After dipping into varnish
the motor is baked in an electric oven to make impervious to moisture. '


Taping the end leads of the windings of a
large industrial motor is no task for a man
lacking skill and patience.
A.G.E. is the creator and "godfather" of thousands of electric motors
which daily convert millions of horsepower of energy into mechanical
power. The modem electric motor, as produced at these works, is the
concentration of world-wide research of the highest order. It can be built
into almost any type of machinery to provide direct drive; it can be
erected at any angle from horizontal to the vertical; it can. by special
treatment of the insulation, be operated in gas-laden atmospheres and
even under water! The application of electric motors to industry has
resulted in savings of thousands of pounds sterling by every large
industrial undertaking.
On this page are illustrated a few of the many different types of electric
motors, from tram motors to elevator motors, manufactured by A.G.E. at
their Auburn factory.
Here a steel casting, produced by an
Australian foundry, is being machined
in a Horizontal Boring Mill.
In making the rotating portion of a Squirrel Cage
Motor, molten aluminium is poured into dies in a
special rotary casting machine.
Busily and dexterously insulating coils an
important process in the manufacture of every
electric motor.


CONTROLLING
THE WHEELS OF AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY
Easy accessibility to all working parts is essential to simple
installation and maintenance of electrical starting equipment.
This rear view of an automatic starter shows you how careful
layout mokes this possible.
Automatic starting is essential to many applications of the
electrical motor. This group of starters, for use with motors
or a latmrj at ?00 ho>S‘’ po»n- w.ll b ■ u-.'d ,n the
Aust-onon gold m.-rna mdud’y
- .'in .•t-i.iiiiif/iy smo! This skopt -'ot vc
-■ - i fiyttinq the final touchr--. to gas pio-of
; iic switchr-s specially cievt: iopesi tor
mimnq service.
An automatic starter manufactured to order for use with a
•v.i-- Hiawina machine. The equipment h sp'Cionv iriterinH".-'
with the motor it controls to automatically stop the machine
in nt amgmafirw


Here is one of the machines capable of winding coi
demanding wire smaller than I 100 of an inch i
diameter. Thousands of such coils arc made annuall
at the Auburn factory.
Positive and instantaneous control, vital to mechanised industry, reaches its highest point of
efficiency in the automatic and non-automatic control equipment evolved by A.G.E. engineers.
Through the correct use of automatic equipment many manufacturing processes can now be per-
formed with robot-like accuracy. Close attention to simplification of design has permitted the pro-
duction of equipment capable of handling the load of very big motors, yet, of itself, occupying a
surprising minimum of space. The great increase in the number of
types of electric motors has brought about a wide extension in the
range of A.G.E. control equipment, some of which is entirely new in
conception, other units being adaptations of standard designs and
il '>'■ 1 . t," .n-" 1 1; If.
This gas-proof
magnetic switch
protects the elec-
trical motor driven
hoist in a Victorian
Gold mine.
* mmm
Highly specialised work. Here starters are
being assembled for use in large Australian
industrial undertakings.


This electric bread baking oven is nearing completion
at A.G.E.'s Auburn factory. This glimpse gives an
"inside" story of this important equipment.
One end of the all electric kitchen recently installed by David Jones
Ltd., Large Sydney Department store, for their new restaurant.
These A.G.E. electric bake ovens supply all the bread
rolls, etc., for both David Jones' restaurants.
B.T.U.'S......
ELECTRICALLY
Fish and Chips Electncally!
An A.G.E. Fish Fryer.
An Electrical Griller for the
up-to-date cafe and hotel.
The restaurant manager and chef of to-day has learned that roasting
meats by electricity is simpler, more economical and efficient than
any other method. Above is a typical A.G.E. roasting oven.


Industry now recognises that Electric Heat is as essential as electric light and power. In the home
also —particularly in connection with hot water systems—progress in the development of electric
heating is unmistakably marked. In Air Conditioning installations, where electric heat is now used
almost exclusively for the maintenance of constant temperatures, such progress has been of par-
ticular value. In its industrial applications, electric heating has many dominant advantages. For
instance, it can actually be immersed in any fluid or metal that is to be heated, thus eliminating heat
transfer losses. For operation in drying processes under almost every condition the Electric Heating
unit can be installed in the actual Drying Chamber, so utilizing the full amount of heat generated.
In this field as well as those of electric baking and cooking—A.G.E. has been particularly active.
! Electricity is becoming essential to the baking industry. These are three bread
1 baking ovens in various stages of manufacture. Each oven is capable ol
baking 130 2-lb. loaves each loading.
This group of automatically controlled A.G.E. urns supply tea and coffee
for one of Sydney's latest restaurants. '
This electric metal melting plant has been used by the Sydney
Morning Herald for over seven years. Below is a close-up of
n the machine.
! Twins! A.G.E. Electric Steam
Generators at the Ball Factory
of Messrs. Slazengers (Aus-
tralia) Ltd.
Assembling electric immer-
sion units for water heating.


Building one of the most familiar of modern Hotpoint electric
servants—Hotpoint Irons being assembled for shipment to every
corner of the Commonwealth and New Zealand.
Plating machine at the Auburn factory. Out of this electrolytic bath
comes the protective sheen tor Hotpoint products.
NEW SERVANTS
FOR A NEW AGE
In serried ranks these Hotpoint Jugs are being assembled at the
Auburn plant. The popularity of this particular appliance is growing
at a remarkable rate.
Presses in the background produce the moulded parts for A.G.E.
products. Girls in the foreground trim and clean them.


i Brawn still finds a place in industry. This special
f !
j grinding machine produces the perfectly flat
i surface of Hotpoint irons.
The demand for electrical housekeeping facilities was never greater in Australia than it is to-day.
The electric iron has become a commonplace; electric jugs, grillers, toasters, etc., are no longer
regarded as luxuries but as necessities to the well-ordered home. The electric washing machine,
the electric range and similar equipment will soon be as universally used as the electric iron. Hot-
point appliances—the new servants for the new age—are designed to the ideal of simplicity, relia-
bility and complete safety. Most important of all, and quite apart from progressive improvements
in the products themselves, is the never-ceasing adoption of manufacturing operations which tend
to lower prices and so expedite the day when electric domestic apparatus will be used by every
home in Australia.
Travelling at a speed of thousands of feet
per minute, buffing machines put that final
sheen on Hotpoint parts after they have
been polished.
Special hoods to draw all dust from buff- i
ing and grinding machines into an exhaust--'
ing system. This keeps the surrounding
atmosphere perfectly clean. i
One of the operators winding ele-
ments for domestic appliances
work demanding very close attention.


Metal clad switchgear for use in West Australia. All live metal is enclosed and
oil circuit breakers are arranged for both electric and manual operation.
A switchboard which will control the
power of a large iron and steel mill. This
one is tor the Broken Hill Proprietary.
A typical A.G.E. circuit breaker. The
contact making surfaces are immersed
•«
The design and installation of ele- I
voted transformer sub-stations tor |
breaking down voltage are important
rvnrfc A A P IV/jIIDC
ELECTRICITY.....
LEASHED
The switchgear is mounted on a truck so that it can
be easily withdrawn for regular maintenance. All live
. parts are enclosed.
A distribution switchboard built to control the supply to a large building
in the Melbourne metropolitan area.
A metalclad switchboard under con-
struction. Note how the metal shutters
fall down over the live conductors
when the oil circuit breakers are with-
drawn for inspection.


Up till a few years ago the switchboard for controlling the switchgear in large power stations
occupied a comparatively large space. To overcome this the miniature type of control board
illustrated above has been developed.
Portion of a truck type switchboard. The oil circuit
breaker automatically recloses should a fault
develop.
The most advanced designs ol switch-gear are constructed by A.G.E. in such a way that it is almost
impossible for any operator to come in contact with live metal. Furthermore, almost incredible
quantities of electric power can now be handled with comparative ease in a space which would
have been considered impossible and totally inadequate only a few years ago.
A.G.E. has developed a new range of equipment, much smaller than anything that has been
attempted commercially before, with the result that the switch-gear for a large power station can
to-day be operated from a space no larger than an average-size office. A vast and progressive
improvement in all types of switch-gear is apparent, special attention having been paid to the posi-
tive action of circuit breakers, metering, etc.
There has also been a steady development in the design of outdoor Pole type sub-station switch-
gear. especially in connection with its application to rural electrification.
An intimate view of the back of a
miniature type control switchboard.
The outdoor isolating switch is an important
piece of apparatus in any electrical distribution
system. It must endure all weather conditions.
An interesting distribution switchboard. This
is located in an important suburban area of
Melbourne.
. Instruments that make a continuous record of
the current passing through them and auto-
fmatically control the voltage on the genera-
j tors are mounted on this switchboard.


TRANSFORMERS....
TRANSFORMERS....
TRANSFORMERS....
throat co!-v is r, xn:ciM-cl m u\< ;
1,1 9 varnished paper bushings
ensure that the brushed aifici-:
checks up to the r >oci dimen-
sions required.
The core of a transformer with a ;
■'np-.i. :*/ ■'( h.Oiifi KVA built to: an
important electricity undertaking in j
On-, ■, n-.lond.
‘he tanks of a large power lic.i; .fonm-i.
A transformer tank is filled with oil which flows
:■ ■ -fl Med ; oeling tubes
A group of icnge A.G.fc. power trans-
formers installed in an electricity sub-
station in Victoria.
This 10,000 KVA transformer
weighs 20-tons. Compare the con
struction of the tubes with those
on the transformers on the left.


, ifiis giant fu-ci - - fjK.'-i ib at
* A <c?,tßii.'HT-oncl works m *hr rr-onu-
Macturc ot *oi tinnsfairr:i-:
cores.
The Increasing practice, on the part of some organisations, of purchasing power in bulk at a voltage
much higher than that at which It can be used, has created a demand for transformers to step down
that voltage.
Some of the small Transformers manufactured by A.G.E. are supplied to industrial establishments
and others to supply authorities. The larger types of transformers are used mainly in the genera-
li°n and distribution of large amounts of power. One of the principal recent advances in Trans-
former design has been the development and application by A.G.E. of equipment which automatic-
ally corrects decreases or increases in line voltage. This equipment, known as the On-Load Tap
Changer maintains an almost constant pressure during periods of fluctuating load, and is proving
of the utmost value to Electric Supply engineers.
Wyhjing Ino ton-. ■■ on trans-
farmor at h r - :■■ ; ! vet Or y
Winding the coils for a large transformer. It is cus-
tomary to wind these coils with a large number'
of comparatively small conductors in parallel.
Impregnated. A gsoup of tronstoimcr coils about
to disappear into the tank vvhere they ore treated
undos vacuum.
i • tiili-'-flilil'l-- (!!■
... built
or lam,notion*
Assembling small power transformers show-
ing how the leads from the coils are brought
up for attaching to the bushings fitted into
the top of the transformer tank.


' u’- 1 ;,.-,.: largest city draws its Sight and power from these gigant:-:
M trepcirfan- Vickers turbo (iltemotors installed at Bunnerong. Sydney
'he *? f: men in the background give size to the illustration.
Victona's famous power station, VaiNum, which supplies proctically the
whoii.- of the stat>- with ! t-'- ■ -ctncity. :s also >. quipped with Metropolitan-
v Turbo alternators.
v tii-■ f-fir-■’> pc-w l'! si-it oiv Now Fotti The turbo-alternators
h* i loiotoii-.i h'y Iho Bi'tish ! homso-"- \ Ic-ustt-n Company Ltd.
"BIG FELLOWS"
#n these two pages are Illustrated some Interesting
engineering "jobs” manufactured both by A.G.E.
overseas associates and A.Ii.K. Australian factories.
Like an illustration tor an H. G. Walls' novo! . , . Gonero :
Electric (U.S.A.) outdoor switchgear o' V, -t_ Victoria
'.'''■-err, hoc-, boon •cplac- ,-j by a Dk'v ■.: .! . • r--\ •■■■_■
N.-j’iv Ton,,. "fJo'Si.bi kt‘ rh;s shot in, - ■ : -Tu ■, : ! qnu s
Srot h'.i-,- mo do • h;; c co-.oiNr-, h-'i ■■, I. 0.-o into posi
iiOo. A - BT.H, contiol'ori-'.-unonf sysroi" ■■ , rh--- most-'i to
.r.Anfrrt S 4*. I* A QnrtlMAl!* ■?!■««« kif< Ufi/ira/t


/actors for thes€> new Sydney trams are a product of the Auburn
factory of Australian General Electric Limited,
now a fomiliar sight on Melbourne s lines these new trams are
powered by A.G.E. motors.
■ ■ v-A-dchgear installed ot a sub-
= Light on-J Powci Ccpora-
>■ Ash tie id idvdney).
’■ ■W t-oUf; bs,'Sf?S
rapidly becoming so popular with Australian
, -rji. c.'-:d I;-.-. I oothoritir-s pi'ke.
The. Mercury Vapour rectificm .'s Brisbane City-
Council's sub-station ore Q product of the British
i homson-Houstcn Co Ltd... of Lngland.
Fhi S B.T.H. rncToi-clod switrha.’oi cortioit tho out-
put of thi- N-. v/ form ■■■ Stii::.:-: 1 , ti- ?:b a
Sydneys fleet electric trains are fitted with Metropolitan- VicK,:* equipment
largely manufactured n this country.
T■•k=4,tnc tram* of Victoria are driven and contiollcd bv Or-r-oi - ■■■;--
(U.S.A.) equipment.
On all previous pages the wholly Australian productions of A.G.E. have, because they constitute
practically the whole of the Company's business, been featured. A.G.E. contribution to Australian
industry, engineering and daily life does not cease, however, at the point where the present limit
of Australian manufacturing resources Is reached. Through its associate organisations overseas
A.G.E. has made possible the mammoth installations which provide the light and power lor entire
Australian cities; through their engineering organisation, giant switch-gear and generators are
placed In the service of the nation. A.G.E. is as much at home with the "Big Fellows" as with those
of less imposing size. The day may not be far hence when (as is the case with the motors propelling
so many of our electric trams, trains and trolley 'buses) the production will be entirely Australian.
Towards that Ideal this Company is working, fulfilling, meanwhile, an Important function In the
efficient installation of those huge equipments momentarily beyond Australia's scope.


BRINGING A
NEW FREEDOM
TO OUR WOMENFOLK
The true worth of any industry should be gauged by the extent of its service to humanity. There
is no other criterion. No record of the electrical industry would be complete without reference to
the emancipation it is effecting in the lives of women. The wives and mothers of former days were
automatons ... human machines performing menial and tiring tasks in cheerless monotony. Yester-
day. the kitchen clock tolled away a woman's life. Toil-worn hands, scarred by labour, monotonously
dipped into a greasy dish-pan. A roaring fire, kept burning to heat the water and cook the next meal,
smothered the room under a blanket of hot. motionless air. Dim, fitful light shadowed and multiplied
the laboured motions of a drooping figure. Each day but a repetition of the day before ... a mono-
tonous routine commanding woman's time, demanding her presence and shutting out all but a brief
hour or two she could call her own. There was little need of a clock in this old-fashioned kitchen,
for time was not measured there by minutes or hours, but by drab days . . . days that left the in-
escapable marks of kitchen toil. To-day, a youthful hand that defies the years, touches a switch and
a brilliant room is flooded with light. Clean, beautiful, efficient . . . every inch of this kitchen is
arranged to save woman's steps. Magic servants work for her . . . SHE directs and they DO. Her
days are her own ... her hours are free! World progress is marked and measured by man's success
in lifting the burdens of daily life from his family, and there has been no greater achievement than
that vanquishing the hours of household drudgery. Truly freedom has come to our womenfolk.
IN THE ELECTRIC KITCHEN
An electric range does the cooking, quickly, perfectly and economically—the lights are correctly placed for perfect visibility. No gloomy comers, no
without supervision. Mixing, toasting, grilling: the boiling of water orshadows, no glare!
eggs; the percolating of coffee ... all are done by electricity. Electricity Expensive? No. A kitchen, designed by A.G.E., equipped with A.G.E.
washes the dishes, ventilates the room, preserves the food at a correctand Hotpoint electrical appliances, is surprisingly moderate in cost, and,
temperature. Neatly concealed is a radio to please the musical mood. Allwhat is more, quickly pays for itself through the economies it creates.


A dream kitchen come true! A kitchen in which
practically every task is done in swift silence at
the touch of a switch! A cool, airy kitchen free
from smoke, fumes and dust . . . desiyned and
equipped by A.G.E. for the modern woman who
realises that drudyery is not economy. Biote the
logical arrangement of each “centre of opera-
tion,” the all-electric equipment, the pleasing
conservation of space. The planning and fitting
of all-electric kitchens is an important section
of A.G.E. activities.
Speed, remarkable economy and a
cool kitchen come with electric cook-
ery. Illustrated is one of the new
A.G.E. Hi-Speed Ranges.
The characteristic Monitor Top of the
General Electric Refrigerator is re-
garded throughout the world as the
signpost to perfect refrigeration.
The dreary and thankless task of
"washing up" is now banished by elec-
tricity. The General Electric Dish-
washer does the work perfectly.
Wash-day slavery is abolished by the
General Electric Washing Machine
which launders everything without hu-
man aid—from blankets to silks.
Cool, clean air in the modern kitchen!
Fumes and food odours vanish at the
bidding of your General Electric Ex-
haust Fan.
Saving milady's arms, hands and time!
This ingenious and graceful Hotpoint
portable mixer whips, beats, mixes and
extracts juice.
This General Electric Ironer can Iron the
most frilly garment whilst madame sits
comfortably operating the simple and
convenient controls.
Even hot water is now supplied by
electricity. \ This A.G.E. Hot Water
System provides instant hot water all
through thfehouse, day and night.
"Getting the deep-down dirt" from
carpets, rugs, upholstery, etc., is the
perfectly-performed function of the 1
General Electric Vacuum Cleaner. I


YOUR REQUIREMENTS....
.... OUR PRODUCTS
POWER GENERATION: Steam Turbines and Condensers for land and marine service. Turbo
Alternators, D.C. Generators and all capacities of Generating Sets.
TRANSFORMERS AND CONVERTERS: All types of Transformers, Rotary Converters, Motor
Generators, Mercury Rectifiers.
DISTRIBUTION: Oil and Air Break Switchgear of all types and for all services.
MEASUREMENT AND PROTECTION: Meters, Instruments, Relays, Lightning Arresters.
POWER UTILISATION: Large Motors for Rolling Mills, Winders, etc. Large and small Industrial
Motors, A.C. and D.C.
CONTROL: Starters, Controllers, Contactor Starters, etc.
TRACTION: Complete Electrical Equipment for Railways, Tramways and Trolley Buses.
INDUSTRIAL HEATING AND COOKING: Metal Melting Pots, Steam Generators, Industrial Heat-
ing units. Pastry and Bakers' Ovens, Restaurant, Hotel and Hospital equipment.
ILLUMINATION: All types of "Mazda" Gasfilled and Vacuum Lamps for General Lighting, Auto-
mobile Service, "Mercra" Electric Discharge Lamps, etc.. Floodlights, Fittings, Glassware, etc.
DOMESTIC USE: Ranges, Refrigerators, Dishwashers, Washing Machines, Vacuum Cleaners,
Floor Polishers, Bandmaster Radio, Radiators, Fans, Irons, Toasters, Jugs, Kettles, Clocks, etc.
GENERAL USE: Wiring Devices, Insulated Wires and Cables, Bare Copper and Aluminium Wire,
Steel Cored Aluminium Wire, Hi-test Insulating Materials, Varnishes and Tapes, Porcelain
Insulators, etc.
SALES OFFICES
OF AUSTRALIAN GENERAL ELECTRIC LTD.
SYDNEY 93-95 Clarence Street . 'Phone: BW 2261 (9 lines)
NEWCASTLE 9-11 Darby Street. 'Phone: 1310
LISMORE Mazda House, Keen Street . 'Phone; 260
MELBOURNE Queen & Little Collins Sts. 'Phone: Central 7900 (8 lines)
BRISBANE . Kelvin House, 252 Adelaide St. 'Phone: B 2151 (4 lines)
ROCKHAMPTON 158 East Street 'Phone: 1571
TOWNSVILLE Flinders Street East 'Phone: 1407
ADELAIDE ... 73 Pirie Street 'Phone: Central 8210 (3 lines)
HOBART ... 33 Elizabeth Street 'Phone: 3036, 3037
LAUNCESTON 15 The Quadrant . 'Phone: 504
Telegraphic Address for all Offices "INGENETRIC"
AGENTS
PERTH; Atkins (W.A.) Ltd., 894 Hay Street, 'Phone: B 3151 (4 lines) B 1901 (3 lines).
Telegraphic: "CACOLIM''


who:.*.? '.■■r a;;u r-jiiTEP -o n't uhpsa’. n'fHenbSUj-.tt. cou>wt HUNfa;a
