

SCIENCE AND RELIGION
[?]1885
Judge Higinbotham’s admirable Lecture
Defended.
A REPLY
TO THE
Rev. A. W. CRESSWELL, M.A.
(Of St. John’s Church, Camberwell.)
BY
H. A. DUGDALE.
PRICE THREEPENCE.


SCIENCE & RELIGION.
“ A Review of Mr. Justice Higinbotham’s Lecture by Rev.
A. W. Oresswell M.A.,” has been sent to me by the writer. As
Mr Oresswell knows from previous discussions that my ideas of
religion are very much in accordance with those of Judge
Higinbotham, I cannot but consider the sending his Review to me
as a challenge. I accept it in all courtesy, and with great
satisfaction; because only by the conflict of minds can truth be
evolved and become a general peace-maker.
In the Rev. gentleman’s first paragraph, he writes: “We
think it to be our duty to point out, as God shall help us, the
fallacies in his reasoning.”
I presume “we ” is the editorial of “ I ” —but, whoever it
was meant for, was not accorded divine “ help ” to point out
fallacies where they do not exist. So, Judge Higinbotham’s
lecture—one of the most truthful emanations from one of the
noblest minds our world has produced—still remains an undimmed
beacon for the mass of moral cowards who think with the learned
lecturer, but who have not the nobility to act their thoughts. In
defence of the clergy so dispassionately reproved, Mr. Oresswell
names a few of them who have distinguished themselves as
geologists. There is a saying: “ one swallow does not make a
summer.” I supplement it with : a few large-minded clergymen
do not make all the clergy large-minded. Bishop Colenso’s
honesty was no guarantee for the honesty of other bishops. One
benevolent and reverent Charles Strong is no proof of general
benevolence and reverence in a Presbytery. And further, if the
few geologic clergymen named by Mr. Oresswell have no greater
memory for their studies than that gentleman appears to have,
their congregations are not likely to have gained more information
on the antiquity of humankind than has been accorded to the
Camberwell congregation in the “ Review ” under consideration ;
which, on this very important question, must have misled all those
who have not yet commenced the study of geology.


In his forgetfulness Mr. Cresswell says : “ There is however
one statement of the Lecturer, (Judge Higinbotham) in connection,
with geological science, to which we utterly demur, and that is the
statement about the antiquity of man, viz: ‘ that the evidence
yeilded by the earth’s strata points with reasonable certainty to
the conclusion that man has existed on the earth during a period
anterior to history of about 200,000 years.’ Now here it is to be
much regretted that the lecturer has left the ground of fair
induction, and stated as a fact that which in the opinion of a large
number of geologists of high standing is regarded not only as not
proven but as a very improbable theory.”
Then he describes the Engis as “ the oldest human skull yet
discovered ” —clearly forgetting the Calaveras skull, found in
pliocene deposit, on Bald Mountain, near Angels, in Calaveras
County, one hundred and thirty feet from the surface, under four
beds of lava. Geologists know that the pliocene deposits speak
of occurrences at least 200,000 years old. In them have been
found human remains and many relics of human art which, more
than “fair induction” only, exist as positive proofs of humankind’s
immense antiquity. In a lecture given by Professor S. D. Whitney
in Cambridge, Mass., he thus refers to them : “ During the pliocene,
California and Oregon became the theatre of the most tremendous
volcanic activity that has devastated the surface of the globe.
The valleys of the rivers in the Sierra were filled, and much of the
country, particularly the North of California, was entirely buried
in lava and ashes. Since then the rivers, seeking new channels,
have made for themselves deep cafions, leaving their old beds deeply
buried under the lava. These old buried river-gravels are very
rich in gold, and extensive tunnelling into the sides of the
mountains and under the old lavas has been done. In one of
these old river bottoms, under the solid basalt of Table Mountain,
many relics of human art have been obtained. The age of these
deposits under the lavas is known to be pliocene, on account of the
remains of the contemporaneously buried flora and fauna, which
were almost totally unlike the flora and fauna of California at the
present time. That the skull was found in these old cemented
gravels, has been abundantly proved by evidence that cannot be
gainsaid. At the time it came into the speaker’s hands the skull
was still embedded in a great measure in its originally gravelly
matrix. In and about the skull were found other bones, including


some that must have belonged to an infant.” I have a drawing
of the Calaveras skull: it has a brutal appearance—very different
from the ideal first humans Mr. Oresswell’s forgetfulness places on
the earth only 6,000 years ago ! I say forgetfulness, because
having had a slight acquaintance with the Rev. Reviewer, from
what I then learned of him I cannot believe him guilty of purposely
with-holding so strong a proof of our much greater antiquity, as that
given by the Calaveras skull Naturalists agree that the N
skeleton is brute-like. Professor Huxley said it was the “ most ape-
like” he had ever seen, Lyell says its outline “more nearly resembles
that of a chimpanzee.” Abbe Frere, Canon of the Cathedral of
Paris, has made a collection of ancient skulls, and shows that the
older they are the more the frontal, or human region is flattened,
and the occipital or brute region is developed. So that, as
Professor Denton says: “ The older the skulls the more brutal
were the men who carried them.” The Engis skull—supposed to
be as ancient as the Neanderthal—which Mr. Cresswell told his
congregation is “ the oldest yet discovered ” and “ belonged to a
being of high order of moral and intellectual development,” is
described by Huxley as a “fair average skull.” Professor
Schaffhausen says : “We may regard it as beyond doubt that a
skull that does not bear signs of a low organisation cannot be
considered as derived from primeval man, even though it may have
have been found amongst the bones of extinct animals.” Therefore,
as this Engis skull is the only decent one, and the many others
are all of low type, it is only sound reasoning to'conclude that it
must have been a comparatively modern head, got into the cave
by some accident—or else, that it had belonged to an advanced
woman of those ancient times, who was ancestress of Judge
Higinbotham !
In face of all the numerous evidences of humankind’s advance,
ment from a low form, Mr. Cresswell said: “ But, again, when
life had made its appearance, has the order of it, however intro-
duced, been of progressive development? We distinctly and
unhesitatingly answer No.” And he proceeds to give his
reasons in that first beings of all species were large ; and in further
proof refers to the “ Scripture statement that, in the times before
the flood, ‘there were giants in the earth in those days.’”
The quotation is from Genesis and continues: “ And also after
that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men &c.”


■which information must strike a philosophic mind very forcibly,
when taken in conjunction with the dogma that God had only one
Son. It appears to have struck the Rev. Reviewer rather
curiously, for he follows the extract with : “So much, then, for the
theory of evolution or progressive development in general.” It has
awakened some strangely speculative thought in my own mind.
Row, as to the size of species. Rone of us know how small were
the first of those Dinotheriums, Megatheriums, Plesiosauri, &c.,
because it is most likely that the strongest ate their weaker
relatives, and continued doing so, growing bigger each age.
Therefore that the first of those who developed human characteris-
tics were large is most reasonable. I have long thought the first of
human kind must have been enormous brutes. The Reanderthal
skeleton proves how large primeval humans were. But size is no
proof of superiority. The largest skeletons discovered are
described as having an approximation in the structure of the bones
to the type of apes, and with “prognathous jaws.” I believe there
will be found relics of a much greater creature than the
Reanderthal, which might be called human. Traces of that use-
less size are to be seen very often now—and thoughtful minds can
trace many more evidences than this one, of the great and
wondrous truth —evolution. But as Mr. Cresswell has gone to
the bible for proof against it—which is only confirmation to the
.thoughtful —I will also give a little from the same book. When
the cousins of apes were growing more human they must still have
been very hairy, for ages. Strong evidence of that exists at the
present time ; some people having great thickness of hair on chest
and legs. Esau was evidently a “reversion; ”* for his father was
unable to discern the difference between his skin and that of a
beast. Then, in Leviticus, where leprosy is discussed, frequent
mention is made of the “hair.” Evidently, on the body ; for after
28 verses of direction during which “hair” is mentioned seven
times, the 29th verse says ; “If a man or woman have a plague f
upon the head or beard ” &0,, and instructions follow.
Darwin says, at some remote time men suckled their children.
That is confirmed in Job where he says ; “ One dieth in his full
strength, being wholly at ease and quiet. His breasts are full of
milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow.”
* See Darwin’s “ Origin of Species ”
t 1 ; itlical term for leprosy.
6


In Judges there is great mention of men who “ lapped water ”
“as a dog lappeth.” So, looking at these, the most ancient of
written proofs—and the skulls, the most ancient of tangible
proofs, we see a far sounder basis for the beautiful and grandly
hopeful theory of evolution, than for the wretchedly illogical,
irreverent, and most degrading doctrine of the “ fall ”of
humankind; which is invariably supported by its adherents with
the sort of argument logicians call “ begging the question.*
Mr. Oresswell disposes of the biblical astronomy in the follow-
ing extraordinary passage : “ The old Testament certainly speaks
of sunrise and sunset, but to infer that the Scripture teaches the
immobility of the earth because it speaks of sunrise and sunset, or
because Joshua said, ' Sun stand thou still ’ is just as fair as to
attribute the same error to compilers of nautical almanacs and
astronomical tables.”
This is a very good sample of the crude teachings I received
from clericals in my young years—and which nearly deprived me
of understanding the marvellous truth to be drawn from those old
writings—whenever I remarked on any verse or passage they told me,
with much didactic solemnity, that it meant quite something else.
Now, let us see what says, the bible about the sun episode : :
“ And he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still
upon Gibeon ; and thou Moon, in the valley of Ajalon. And the
sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people had
avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the
book of Jasher 1 So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and
hastened not to go down about a whole day. And there was no
day before it or after it, that the Lord harkened unto the voice of
a man; for the Lord fought for Israel.”
There are the exact words, and no twisting can alter them.
Yet, viewed by the light of common sense, the bible is a most
fascinating instructor; but the young cannot so consider it when
they are told that most things in it mean qnite the opposite to the
words before their eyes. Let any one watch throngs of humankind;
observe the sad effectof untruthful teachings. Atleast three fourths
of those faces, which ought to be a pleasure to look upon, express
dissimulation, and oh, so piteously! the indelible lines of hypocrisy.
The greater number of those spoilt faces result from ignorant
expoundings, by wholly incompetent teachers, of one of the most
valuable books in the world’s library—the bible ! But it is not a
7


study for young minds. To understand its true value requires the
light of matured thought ; which shows it to be, at the same time>
the most appalling, the most interesting, and the most conclusive
proof of evolution that has ever been written—unconsciously given,
it is true, but a proof that will appear stronger and stronger with
every succeeding age; until dissension will have quite ceased, and
humankind will have learned to love the great truth they now only
love to Cavil over.
Mr Oresswell deduces from Judge Higinbotham’s lecture that
he wishes us to “ become Deists.” Better—far better—had the
majority of humans been always Deists : their history would not
then have been stained with the dreadful records of thousands
burnt at the stake, or tortured to death by other fiendish means—
“ for the love of Christ.” When we think of the unhappiness of
millions from that myth, the cruel doctrine of the atonement
becomes more and more repugnant to the veneration and
reverence born of a more evolved understanding. To such
minds the idea is so clearly a remnant of ancient mythological
worship, with its plurality of gods, that it points as plainly to the
origin of creeds, as our snarling muscles, rudimentary tails, and the
low forms discernible in human embryos point to our brutal origin.
All honor to Judge Higinbotham for his courageous honesty •
That we have an administrator of justice so conscientious, so
sound in judgment, so pure in thought—and brave enough to act
his thoughts, must give a feeling of security to all thinking
persons !
H. A. DUGDALE.
September IJfth, 1883.
Stephens, Printer, 106 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.
8
