

MASON, FIRTH AND 00., PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.


WILL THE COMING MAN DEINK WINE?
The teetotallers confess their failure. After forty-five years of zealous and well-
meant effort in the “ cause,” they agree that people are drinking more than ever.
Dr. R. T. Trail, of New York, the most thoroughgoing teetotaller extant, exclaims :
“ Where are we to-day 1 Defeated on all sides. The enemy victorious and rampant
everywhere. More intoxicating liquors manufactured and drunk than ever before.
Why is this ? Why, indeed! When the teetotallers can answer that question
correctly, they will be in a fair way to gain upon the “enemy” that is now
so “ rampant.” They are not the first people who have mistaken a symptom of
disease for the disease itself, and striven to cure a cancer by applying salve and
plaster and cooling washes to the sore. They are not the first travellers through
this wilderness who have tried to extinguish a smouldering fire, and discovered, at
last, that they had been pouring water into the crater of a volcano.
Dr. Trail thinks we should all become teetotallers very soon if only the doctors
would stop prescribing wine, beer, and whiskey to their patients. But the doctors
will not. They like a glass of wine themselves. Dr, Trail tells us that during the
Medical Convention held at St. Louis a few years ago the doctors dined together,
and upon the table were “ forty kinds of alcoholic liquors.” The most enormous
feed ever accomplished under a roof in America, I suppose, was the great dinner of
the doctors, given in New York fifteen years ago, at the Metropolitan Hall. I had
the pleasure, on that occasion, of seeing half-an-acre of doctors all eating and
drinking at once, and I can testify that very few of them —indeed, none that I could
discover —neglected the bottle. It was an occasion which united all the established
barbarisms and atrocities of a public dinner—absence of ladies, indigestible food
in most indigestible quantities, profuse and miscellaneous drinking, clouds of
smoke, late sitting, ahd wild speaking. Why not ? Do not these men live and thrive
upon such practices ? Why should they not set an example of the follies which
enrich them ? It is only heroes who offend, deny, and rebuke the people upon whose
favour their fortune depends ; and there are never many heroes in the world at one
time. No, no, Dr. Trail! the doctors are good fellows ; but their affair is to cure
disease, not to preserve health.
One man, it seems, and only one, has had much success in dissuading people from
drinking, and that was Father Mathew. A considerable proportion of his converts
in Ireland, it is said, remain faithful to their pledge ; and most of the Catholic-
parishes in the United States have a Father Mathew Society connected with them,
which is both a teetotal and a mutual benefit organisation. In New York and ad-
jacent cities the number of persons belonging to such societies is about twenty-seven
thousand. On the anniversary of Father Mathew’s birth they walk in procession,
wearing aprons, carrying large banners (when the wind permits), and heaping up
gaily-dressed children into pyramids and mountains drawn by six and eight horses.
At their weekly or monthly meetings they sing songs, recite poetry, perform plays
and farces, enact comic characters, and, in other innocent ways, endeavour to
convince on-lookers that people can be happy and merry, uproariously merry, with-
out putting a headache between their teeth. These societies seem to be a great and
unmingled good. They do actually help poor men to withstand their only Ameri-
can enemy. They have also the approval of the most inveterate drinkers, both
Catholic and Protestant. Jones complacently remarks, as he gracefully sips his
claret (six dollars per dozen), that this total abstinence, you know, is an excellent
thing for emigrants ; to which Brown and Robinson invariably assent.
Father Mathew used to adminjster his pledge to people who knelt before him,
and when they had taken it he made over them the sign of the cross. He did


not usually deliver addresses ; lie did not relate amusing anecdotes ; he did not
argue the matter; he merely pronounced the pledge, and gave to it the sanction
of religion, and something of the solemnity of a sacrament. The present Father
Mathew Societies are also closely connected with the church, and the pledge is
regarded by the members as of religious obligation. Hence, these societies are
successful, in a respectable degree; and we may look, with the utmost confidence,
to see them extend and flourish until a great multitude of Catholics are teetotallers.
Catholic priests, I am informed, generally drink wine, and very many of them
smoke; but they are able to induce men to take the pledge without setting them
an example of abstinence, just as parents sometimes deny their children pernicious
viands of which they freely partake themselves.
But me cannot proceed in that way. Our religion has not power to control a
physical craving by its mere fiat, nor do we all yet perceive what a deadly and
shameful sin it is to vitiate our own bodies. The Catholic Church is antiquity.
The Catholic Church is childhood. We are living in modern times; me have grown
a little past childhood; and when we are asked to relinquish a pleasure, we demand
to be convinced that it is best we should. By-and-by we shall all comprehend that
when a person means to reform his life, the very first thing for him to do —the
thing preliminary and most indispensable—will be to cease violating physical laws.
The time, I hope, is at hand, when an audience in a theatre, who catch a manager
cheating them out of their fair allowance of fresh air, will not sit and gasp, and
inhale destruction till eleven p.m., and then rush wildly to the street for relief.
They will stop the play; they will tear up the benches, if necessary; they will
throw things on the stage ; they will knock a hole in the wall; they will have the
means of breathing, or perish in the struggle. But at present people do not know
what they are doing when they inhale poison. They do not know that more than
one-half of all the diseases that plague us most —scarlet fever, small-pox, measles,
and all the worst fevers —come of breathing bad air. Not a child last winter would
have had the scarlet fever if all the children in the world had slept with a window
open, and had had pure air to breathe all day. This is Miss Nightingale’s opinion,
and there is no better authority. People are ignorant of these things, and they are
therefore indifferent to them. They will remain indifferent until they are enlightened.
Our teetotal friends have not neglected the scientific questions involved in their
subject, nor have they settled them. Instead of insulting the public intelligence
by asserting that the wines mentioned in the Bible were some kind of unintoxicating
slop, and exasperating the public temper by premature prohibitory laws, they had
better expend their strength upon the science of the matter, and prove to mankind,
if they can, that these agreeable drinks which they denounce are really hurtful.
We all know that excess is hurtful. We also know that adulterated liquors may be.
But is the thing in itself pernicious?—pure wine taken in moderation? good beer?
genuine old Bourbon ?
For one, I wish it could be demonstrated that these things are hurtful. Sweeping
universal truths axe as convenient as they are rare. The evils resulting from
excessive drinking are so enormous and so terrible, that it would be a relief to know
that alcoholic liquors are in themselves evil, and to be always avoided. What are
the romantic woes of a Desdemona, or the brief picturesque sorrows of a Lear,
compared with the thirty years’ horror and desolation caused by a drunken parent ?
We laugh when we read Lamb’s funny description of his waking up in the morning,
and learning in what condition he had come home the night before by seeing ail
his clothes carefully folded. But his sister Mary did not laugh at it. He was all
she had; it was tragedy to her—this self-destruction of her sole stay and consolation.
Goethe did not find it a laughing matter to have a drunken wife in his house for
fifteen years, nor a jest to have his son brought in drunk from the tavern, and to
see him dead in his coffin, the early victim of champagne. Who would not like to
have a clear conviction that what we have to do with regard to all such fluids is to
let them alone ? lam sure I should. It is a great advantage to have your enemy
in plain sight, and to be sure that he is an enemy.
What is wine? Chemists tell us they do not know. Three-fifths of a glass of
wine is water. One-fifth is alcohol. Of the remaining fifth about one-half is
sugar. One-tenth of the whole quantity remains to be accounted for. A small
part of that tenth is the acid which makes vinegar sour. Water, alcohol, sugar,
acid —these make very nearly the whole body of the wine; but if we mix these
things in the proportions in which they are found in Madeira, the liquid is a
disgusting mess, nothing like Madeira. The great chemists confess they do not


know what that last, last small fraction of the glass of wine is, upon which its
flavour, its odour, its value, its fascination, depend. They do not know what it is
that makes the difference between port and sherry, but are obliged to content
themselves with giving it a hard name.
Similar things are admitted concerning the various kinds of spirituous and malt
liquors. Chemistry seems to agree with the temperance society, that wine, beer,
brandy, whiskey, and rum, are alcohol and water, mixed in different proportions,
and with some slight differences of flavouring and colouring matter. In all these
drinks, teetotallers maintain alcohol is forcer, the other ingredients being mere
dilution and flavouring. Wine, they assure us, is alcohol and water flavoured with
grapes; beer is alcohol and water flavoured with malt and hops; Bourbon whisky is
alcohol and water flavoured with corn. These things they assert, and the great chemists
do not enable us drinkers of those seductive liquors to deny it. On the contrary,
chemical analysis, so far as it has gone, supports the teetotal view of the matter.
What does a glass of wine do to us when we have swallowed it ?
We should naturally look to physicians for an answer to such a question; but the
great lights of the profession—men of the rank of Astley Cooper, Brodie, Abernethy,
Holmes —all assure the public that no man of them knows, and no man has ever
known, how medicinal substances work in the system, and why they produce the
effects they do. Even of a substance so common as Peruvian bark, no one knows
why and how it acts as a tonic; nor is there any certainty of its being a benefit to
mankind. There is no science of medicine. The “red lane” of the children leads
to a region which is still mysterious and unknown; for when the eye can explore
its recesses, a change has occurred in it, which is also mysterious and unknown: it
is dead. Quacks tell us, in every newspaper, that they can cure or prevent disease
by pouring or dropping something down our throats, and we have heard this so
often that when a man is sick the first thing that occurs to him is to “take physic.”
But physicians who are honest, intelligent, and in an independent position, appear
to be coming over to the opinion that this is generally a delusion. We see eminent
physicians prescribing for the most malignant fevers little but open windows, plenty of
blankets, Nightingale nursing, and beef tea. Many young physicians, too, have gladly
availed themselves of the ingenuity of Hahnemann, and s atisfy at once their consciences
and their patients by prescribing doses of medicine that are next to no medicine at
all. The higher we go among the doctors, the more sweeping and emphatic is
the assurance we receive that the profession does not understand the operation of
medicines in the living body, and does not really approve their employment.
If something more is known of the operation of alcohol than of any other chemical
fluid—if there is any approach to certainty respecting it—we owe it chiefly to the
teetotallers, because it is they who have provoked contradiction, excited inquiry, and
suggested experiment. They have not done much themselves in the way of
investigation, but they started the topic, and have kept it alive. They have also
published a few pages which throw light upon the points in dispute. After going
over the ground pretty thoroughly, I can tell the reader in a few words the substance
of what has been ascertained, and plausibly inferred, concerning the effects of wine,
beer, and spirits upon the human constitution.
They cannot be nourishment, in the ordinary acceptation of that word, because
the quantity of nutritive matter in them is so small. Liebig, no enemy of beer,
says this: “We can prove, with mathematical certainty, that as much flour or
meal as can lie on the point of a table-knife is more nutritious than nine quarts
of the best Bavarian beer; that a man who is able daily to consume that amount
of beer obtains from it, in a whole year, in the most favourable case, exactly the
amount of nutritive constituents which is contained in a five-pound loaf of
bread, or in three pounds of flesh.” So of wine; when we have taken from a
glass of wine the ingredients known to be innutritious, there is scarcely any-
thing left but a grain or two of sugar. Pure alcohol, though a product of
highly-nutritive substances, is a mere poison—an absolute poison—the mortal
foe of life in every one of its forms, animal and vegetable. If, therefore, these
beverages do us good, it is not by supplying the body with nourishment.
Nor can they aid digestion by assisting to decompose food. When we have taken
too much shad for breakfast, we find that a wineglass of whisky instantly mitigates
the horrors of indigestion, and enables us again to contemplate the future without
dismay. But if we catch a curious fish or reptile, and want to keep him from decom-
posing, and bring him home as a contribution to the museum of Professor Agassiz,
we put him in a bottle of whiskey. Several experiments have been made with


view to ascertain whether mixing alcohol with the gastric juice increases or
lessens its power to decompose food, and the results of all of them point to the
conclusion that the alcohol retards the process of decomposition. A little dlcohol
retards it a little, and much alcohol retards it much. It has been proved by repeated
experiment that any portion of alcohol, however small, diminishes the power of
the gastric juice to decompose. The digestive fluid has been mixed with wine, beer,
whiskey, brandy, and alcohol diluted with water, and kept at the temperature of
the living body, and the motions of the body imitated during the experiment ; but
in every instance, the pure gastric juice was found to be the true and sole digester,
and the alcohol a retarder of digestion. This fact, however, required little proof.
We are all familiar with alcohol as a preserver, and scarcely need to be reminded
that, if alcohol assists digestion at all, it cannot be by assisting decomposition.
Nor is it a heat-producing fluid. On the contrary it appears, in all cases, to
diminish the efficiency of the heat-producing process. Most of us, who live here in
the North, and who are occasionally subjected to extreme cold for hours at a time,
know this by personal experience ; and all the Arctic voyagers attest it. Brandy
is destruction when men have to face a temperature of sixty below zero ; they want
lamp-oil then, and the rich blubber of the whale and walrus. Dr. Eae, who made
two or three pedestrian tours of the polar regions, and whose powers of endurance
were put to as severe a test as man’s ever were, is clear and emphatic upon this
point. Brandy, he says, stimulates but for a few minutes, and greatly lessens a man’s
power to endure cold and fatigue. Occasionally we have in New York a cool breeze
from the north, which reduces the temperature below zero—to the sore dis-
comfort of omnibus-drivers and car-drivers who have to face it on their way up
town. On a certain Monday night, two or three winters ago, twenty-three
drivers on one line were disabled by the cold, many of whom had to be lifted
from the cars, and carried in. It is a fact familiar to persons in this business that
men who drink freely are more likely to be benumbed and overcome by the cold than
those who abstain. It seems strange to us, when we first hear it, that a meagre
teetotaller should be safer on such a night than a bluff, red-faced imbiber of beer and
whiskey, who takes something at each end of the line to keep himself warm. It
nevertheless appears to be true. A traveller relates that, when Russian troops are
about to start upon a march in a very cold region, no grog is allowed to be served to
them ; and when the men are drawn up, ready to move, the corporals smell the breath
of every man, and send back to quarters all who have been drinking. The reason is,
that men who start under the influence of liquor are the first to succumb to the cold,
and are the likeliest to be frost-bitten. It is the uniform experience of the hunters
and trappers in the northern provinces of North America, and of the Rocky Moun-
tains, that alcohol diminishes their power to resist cold. This whole magazine could
be filled with testimony on this point.
Still less is alcohol a strength-giver. Every man that ever trained for a supreme
exertion of strength knows that Tom Sayers spoke the truth when he said : “ I’m no
teetotaller: but when I’ve any business to do, there’s nothing like water and the
dumb bells.” Richard Cobden, whose powers were subjected to a far superior
trial than a pugilist ever dreamed of, whose labours by night and day during the
corn-law struggle were excessive and continuous beyond those of any other mem-
ber of the House of Commons,bears similar testimony: “The more work I have had
to do, the more I have resorted to the pump and the teapot.” On this branch of
the subject all the testimony is against alcoholic drinks. Whenever the point
has been tested—and it has often been tested-—the truth has been confirmed,
that he who would do his very best and most, whether in rowing, lifting, run-
ning, wqtching, mowing, climbing, fighting, speaking, or writing, must not admit
into his system one drop of alcohol. Trainers used to allow their men a pint
of beer per day, and severe trainers half-a-pint; but now the knowing ones
have cut off even that moderate allowance, and brought their men down to cold
water, and not too much of that, the soundest digesters requiring little liquid of
any kind. Mr. Bigelow, by his happy publication lately of the correct version of
Franklin’s Autobiography, has called to mind the famous beer passage in that im-
mortal work : “ I drank only water ; the other workmen, near fifty in number,
were great guzzlers* of beer. On one occasion I carried up and down stairs a
large form of types in each hand, when others carried but one in both hands.” I
* We owe to Mr. Bigelow the restoration of this strong Franklinian word. The common editions
have it “ drinkers.”


have a long list of references on this point ; but in these cricketing, boat-racing,
prize-fighting days, the fact has become too familiar to require proof. The other
morning Horace Greeley, teetotaller, came to his office after an absence of several
days, and found letters and arrears of work that would have been appalling to any
man but him. He shut himself in at ten a.m., and wrote steadily, without leav-
ing his room, till eleven p.m.—thirteen hours. When he had finished he had some
little difficulty in getting down stairs, owing to the stiffness of his joints, caused
by the long inaction ; but he was as fresh and smiling the next morning as though
he had done nothing extraordinary. Are any of us drinkers of beer and wine
capable of such a feat ? Then, during the war, when he was writing his history, he
performed every day, for two years, two days’ work—one from nine to four, on his
book ; the other from seven to eleven, upon the Tribune ; and, in addition, he did
more than would tire an ordinary man in the way of correspondence and public
speaking. I may also remind the reader that the clergyman who, of all others in
the United States, expends most vitality, both with tongue and pen, and who does
his work Avith least fatigue and most gaiety of heart, is another of Franklin’s
“ water Americans.”
If, then, wine does not nourish us, does not assist the decomposition of food, does
not warm, does not strengthen, what does it do ?
We all know that, when we drink alcoholic liquor, it affects the brain immediately.
Most of us are aware, too, that it affects the brain injuriously, lessening at once its
power to discern and discriminate. If I, at this ten a.m., full of interest in this
subject, and eager to get my view of it upon paper, were to drink a glass of the best
port, Madeira, or sherry, or even a glass of lager-beer, I should lose the power to
continue in three minutes ; or, if I persisted in going on, I should be pretty sure to
utter paradox and spurts of extravagance, which would not bear the cold review of
to-morrow morning. Any one can try this experiment. Take two glasses of wine,
and then immediately apply yourself to the hardest task your mind ever has to
perform, and you will find you cannot do it. Let any student, just before he sits
down to his mathematics, drink a pint of the purest beer, and he will be painfully
conscious of loss of power. Or, let any salesman, before beginning with a difficult
but important customer, perform the idiotic action of “ taking a drink,” and he will
soon discover that his ascendancy over his customer is impaired. In some way this
alcohol, of which we are so fond, gets to the brain and injures it. We are conscious
of this, and we can observe it. It is among the wine-drinking classes of our fellow-
beings that absurd, incomplete, and reactionary ideas prevail. The receptive, the
curious, the candid, the trustworthy brains —those that do not take things for
granted, and yet are ever open to conviction —such heads are to be found on the
shoulders of men who drink little or none of these seductive fluids.
The few experiments which have been made with a view to trace the course of
alcohol in the living system, all confirm what all drinkers feel, that it is to the brain
alcohol hurries when it has passed the lips. Some innocent dogs have suffered and
died in this investigation. Dr. Percy, a British physician, records that he injected
two ounces and a half of alcohol into the stomach of a dog, which caused its almost
instant death. The dog dropped very much as he would if he had been struck upon
the head with a club. The experimenter, without a moment’s unnecessary delay,
removed the animal’s brain, subjected it to distillation, and extracted from it a
surprising quantity of alcohol, a larger proportion than he could distil from the
blood or liver. The alcohol seemed to have rushed to the brain; it was a blow upon
the head which killed the dog. Dr. Percy introduced into the stomachs of other
dogs smaller quantities of alcohol, not sufficient to cause death; but upon killing
the dogs, and subjecting the brain, the blood, the bile, the liver, and other portions
of the body, to distillation, he invariably found more alcohol in the brain than in
the same weight of other organs. He injected alcohol into the blood of dogs, which
caused death; but the deadly effect was produced, not upon the substance of the
blood, but upon the brain. His experiments go far toward explaining why the
drinking of alcoholic liquors does not sensibly retard digestion. It seems that, when
we take wine at dinner, the alcohol does not remain in the stomach, but is imme-
diately absorbed into the blood, and swiftly conveyed to the brain and other organs.
If one of those “ four-bottle men ” of the last generation had fallen down dead, after
boozing till past midnight, and he had been treated as Dr. Percy treated the dogs,
his brain, his liver, and all the other centres of power, would have yielded alcohol
in abundance; his blood would have smelt of it; his flesh would have contained it;
but there would have been very little in the stomach. Those men were able to drink


four, six, and seven bottles of wine at a sitting, because the sitting lasted four, six
and seven hours, wbicb gave time for tbe alcohol to be distributed over the system.
But instances have occurred of labouring men who have kept themselves steadily
drunk for forty-eight hours, and then died. The bodies of two such were dissected
some years ago in England, and the food which they had eaten at the beginning of
the debauch was undigested. It had been preserved in alcohol as we preserve
snakes.
Once, and only once, in the lifetime of man, an intelligent human eye has been
able to look into the living stomach, and watch the process of digestion. In
1822, at the United States military post of Michilimackinac, Alexis St. Martin, a
Canadian of French extraction, received accidentally a heavy charge of duck-shot in
his side, while he was standing one yard from the muzzle of the gun. The wound was
frightful. One of the lungs protruded, and from an enormous aperture in the stomach
the food recently eaten was oozing. Dr. William Beaumont, U.S.A., the surgeon of the
post, was notified, and dressed the w'ound. In exactly one year from that day the
young man was well enough to get out of doors, and walk about the fort; and he
continued to improve in health and strength, until he was as strong and hardy as most
of his race. He married, became the father of a large family, and performed for many
years the laborious duties appertaining to an officer’s servant at a frontier post. But
the aperture into the stomach never closed, and the patient would not submit to the
painful operation by which such wounds are sometimes closed artificially. He wore a
compress arranged by the doctor, without which his dinner was not safe after he had
eaten it.
By a most blessed chance it happened that this Dr. William Beaumont, stationed
there on the outskirts of creation, was an intelligent, inquisitive human being, who
perceived all the value of the opportunity afforded him by this unique event. He set
about improving that opportunity. He took the young man into his service, and at
intervals, for eight years, he experimented upon him. He alone among the sons of
men has seen liquid flowing into the stomach of a living person while yet the vessel
was at the drinker’s lips. Through the aperture (which remained two and a-half
inches in circumference) he could watch the entire operation of digestion, and he did
so hundreds of times. If the man’s stomach ached, he could look into it and see
what was the matter ; and, having found out, he would drop a rectifying pill into
the aperture. He ascertained the time it takes to digest each of the articles of food
commonly eaten, and the effects of all the usual errors in eating and drinking. In
1833, he published a thin volume, at Plattsburg on Lake Champlain, in which the
results of thousands of experiments and observations were only too briefly stated.
He appears not to have heard of teetotalism, and hence all that he says upon the
effects of alcoholic liquors is free from the suspicion which the arrogance and
extravagance of some teetotallers have thrown over much that has been published on
this subject. With a mind unbiassed, Dr. Beaumont, peering into the stomach of this
stout Canadian, notices that a glass of brandy causes the coats of that organ to assume
the same inflamed appearance as when he had been very angry, or much frightened,
or had over-eaten, or had had the flow of perspiration suddenly checked. In other
words, brandy played the part of a foe in his system, not that of a friend; it pro-
duced effects which were morbid, not healthy. Nor did it make any material
difference whether St. Martin drank brandy, whiskey, wine, cider, or beer, except
so far as one was stronger than the other.
“ Simple water,” says Dr. Beaumont, “ is perhaps the only fluid that is called for
by the wants of the economy. The artificial drinks are probable all more or less
injurious; some more so than others, but none can claim exemption from the
general charge. Even tea and coffee, the common beverages of all classes of people,
have a tendency to debilitate the digestive organs. The whole class of alcoholic
liquors may be considered as narcotics, producing very little difference in their
ultimate effects upon the system.”
He ascertained too (not guessed, or inferred, but ascertained , watch in hand)
that such things as mustard, horse-radish, and pepper, retard digestion. At the
close of his invaluable work Dr. Beaumont appends a long list of “ Inferences,”
among which are the following:—“ That solid food of a certain texture is easier of
digestion 'than fluid; that stimulating condiments are injurious to the healthy
system; that the use of ardent spirits always produces disease of the stomach if
persisted in; that water, ardent spirits, and most other fluids, are not affected by
the gastric juice, but pass from the stomach soon after they have been received.”
One thing appears to have much surprised Dr. Beaumont, and that was, the degree


to which St, Martin’s system could be disordered without his being much incon-
venienced by it. After drinking hard every day for eight or ten days, the stomach
would show alarming appearances of disease; and yet the man would only feel a
slight headache, and a general dulness and languor.
If there is no comfort for drinkers in Dr. Beaumont’s precious little volume, it
must be also confessed that neither the dissecting-knife nor the microscope afford
us the least countenance. All that has yet been ascertained of the effects of alcohol
by the dissection of the body favours the extreme position of the extreme teetotallers.
A brain alcoholised, the microscope proves to be a brain diseased. Blood which has
absorbed alcohol is unhealthy blood —the microscope shows it. The liver, the heart,
and other organs, which have been accustomed to absorb alcohol, all give testimony
under the microscope which produces discomfort in the mind of one who likes a
glass of wine, and hopes to be able to continue the enjoyment of it. The dissecting-
knife and the microscope so far have nothing to say for us—nothing at all: they
are dead against us.
Of all the experiments which have yet been undertaken with a view to trace the
course of alcohol through the human system, the most important were those made
in Paris a few years ago by Professors Lallemand, Perrin, and Duroy, distinguished
physicians and chemists. Frenchmen have a way of co-operating with one another,
both in the investigation of scientific questions and in the production of literature,
which is creditable to their civilisation and beneficial to the world. The experiments
conducted by these gentlemen produced the remarkable effect of causing the edito
of a leading periodical to confess to the public that he was not infallible. In 1855,
the Westminster Review contained an article by Mr. Lewes, in which the teetotal
side of these questions were effectively ridiculed : but, in 1861, the same periodical
reviewed the work of the French professors just named, and honoured itself by
appending a note in which it said : “ Since the date of our former article, scientific
research has brought to light important facts which necessarily modify the opinions
we then expressed concerning the role of alcohol in the animal body.” Those facts
were revealed or indicated in the experiments of Messrs. Lallemand, Perrin, and Duroy,
Ether and chloroform —their mode of operation : why and how they render
the living body insensible to pain under the surgeon’s knife; what becomes of
them after they have performed that office—these were the points which
engaged their attention, and in the investigation of which they spent several
years. They were rewarded, at length, with the success due to patience and inge-
nuity. By the aid of ingenious apparatus, after experiments almost numberless,
they felt themselves in a position to demonstrate that, when ether is inhaled, it is
immediately absorbed by the blood, and by the blood is conveyed to the brain. If
a surgeon were to commit such a breach of professional etiquette as to cut off a
patient’s head at the moment of complete insensibility, he would be able to distil
from the brain a great quantity of ether. But it is not usual to take that liberty
except with dogs. The inhalation, therefore, proceeds until the surgical operation
is finished, when the handkerchief is withdrawn from the patient’s face, and he is
left to regain his senses. What happens then ? What becomes of the ether ? These
learned Frenchmen discovered that most of it goes out of the body by the road it
came in at—the lungs. It is breathed in; it is breathed out. The rest escapes by
other channels of egress; it all escapes, and it escapes unchanged! That is the
point; it escapes without having left anything in the system. All that can be said
of it is that it entered the body, created morbid conditions in the body, and then
left the body. It cost these patient men years to arrive at this result; but any one
who has ever had charge of a patient that has been rendered insensible by ether
will find little difficulty in believing it.
Having reached this demonstration, the experimenters naturally thought of
applying the same method and similar apparatus to the investigation of the
effects of alcohol, which is the fluid nearest resembling ether and chloroform.
Dogs and men suffered in the cause. In the moisture exhaled from the pores
of a drunken dog’s skin, these cunning Frenchmen detected the alcohol which
had made him drunk. They proved it to exist in the breath of a man, at six
o’clock in the evening, who had drunk a bottle of claret for breakfast at half-
past ten in the morning. They also proved that, at midnight, the alcohol of
that bottle of wine was still availing itself of other avenues of escape. They
proved that when alcohol is taken into the system in any of its dilutions —wine,
cider, spirits, or beer—the whole animal economy speedily busies itself with
its expulsion, and continues to do so until it has expelled it. The lungs exhale it;


the pores of the skin let out a little of it ; the kidneys do their part; and by what-
ever other road an enemy can escape, it seeks the outer air. Like ether, alcohol enters
the body, makes a disturbance there, and goes out of the body, leaving it no richer
than it found it. It is a guest that departs, after giving a great deal of trouble,
without paying his bill or “ remembering” the servants. Now, to make the demon-
stration complete, it would be necessary to take some unfortunate man or dog,
give him a certain quantity of alcohol —say one ounce—and afterwards distil from
his breath, perspiration, &c., the whole quantity that he had swallowed. This has
not been done ;it never will be done ;it is obviously impossible. Enough has been
done to justify these conscientious and indefatigable inquirers in announcing, as a
thing susceptible of all but demonstration, that alcohol contributes to the human
system nothing whatever, but leaves it undigested and wholly unchanged. They
are fully persuaded (and so will you be, reader, if you read their book) that, if you
take into your system an ounce of alcohol, the whole ounce leaves the system within
forty-eight hours, just as good alcohol as it went in.
There is a boy in Pickwick who swallowed a farthing. “ Out with it,” said
the father ; and it is to be presumed —though Mr. Weller does not mention the fact
—that the boy complied with a request so reasonable. Just as much nutrition as
that small copper coin left in the system of that boy, plus a small lump of sugar,
did the claret which we drank yesterday deposit in ours; so, at least, we must
infer from the experiments of Messrs. Lallemand, Perrin, and Duroy.
To evidence of this purely scientific nature might be added, if space could be
afforded, a long list of persons who, having indulged in wine for many years,
have found benefit from discontinuing the use of it. Most of us have known
such instances. I have known several, and I can most truly say that I have
never known an individual in tolerable health who discontinued the use of any
stimulant whatever without benefit. We all remember Sydney Smith’s strong
sentences on this point, scattered through the volume which contains the cor-
respondence of that delicious humorist and wit: —“ I like London better than
ever I liked it before,” he writes in the prime of his prime (forty-three years
old) to Lady Holland, “ and simply, I believe, from water-drinking. Without
this, London is stupefaction and inflammation.” So has New York become. Again,
in 1828, when he was fifty-seven, to the same lady : “ I not only was never better,
but never half so well; indeed, I find I have been very ill all my life without know-
ing it. Let me state some of the goods arising from abstaining from all fermented
liquors. First, sweet sleep; having never known what sweet sleep was, I sleep like a
baby or a plough-boy. If I wake, no needless terrors, no black visions of life, but
pleasing hopes and pleasing recollections : Holland House, past and to come. If I
dream, it is not of lions and tigers, but of Easter dues and tithes. Secondly, I can
take longer walks, and make greater exertions without fatigue. My understanding
is improved, and I comprehend political economy. I see better without wine
and spectacles than when I used both. Only one evil ensues from it; I am in
such extravagant spirits that I must lose blood, or look out for some one who will
bore or depress me. Pray leave off wine : the stomach is quite at rest; no heart-
burn, no pain, no distention.”
I have also a short catalogue of persons who, having long lived innocent of these
agreeable drinks, began at length to use them. Dr. Franklin’s case is striking.
That “ water American,” as he was styled by the London printers, whose ceaseless
guzzling of beer he ridiculed in his twentieth year, drank wine in his sixtieth with
the freedom usual at that period among persons of good estate. “At parting,” he
writes in 1768, when he was sixty-two, “ after we had drank a bottle and a half of
claret each, Lord Clare hugged and kissed me, protesting he never in his life met
with a man he was so much in love with.” The consequence of this departure from
the customs of his earlier life was ten years of occasional acute torture from the
stone and gravel. Perhaps, if Franklin had remained a “ water American,” he
would have annexed Canada to the United States at the peace of 1782. An agonising
attack of stone laid him on his back for three months, just as the negotiation was
becoming interesting; and by the time he was well again the threads were gone out of
his hands into those of the worst diplomatists that ever threw a golden chance away.
What are we to conclude from all this? Are we to knock the heads out of all
our wine-casks, join the temperance society, and denounce all men who do not
follow our example ? Taking together all that science and observation teach and
indicate, we have one certainty : That, to a person in good health and of good life,
alcoholic liquors are not necessary, but are always in some degree hurtful. This truth


becomes so clear, after a few weeks’ investigation, that I advised every person who
means to keep on drinking such liquors not to look into the facts ; for if he does he
will never again be able to lift a glass of wine to his lips, nor contemplate a foaming
tankard, nor mix his evening toddy, nor hear the pop and melodious gurgle of
champagne, with that fine complacency which irradiates his countenance now, and
renders it so pleasing a study to those who sit on the other side of the table. No ;
never again ! Even the flavour of those fluids will lose something of their charm.
The conviction will intrude itself upon his mind, at most inopportune moments, that
this drinking of wine, beer, and whiskey, to which we are so much addicted, is an
enormous delusion. If the teetotallers would induce some rational being—say that
public benefactor, Dr. Willard Parker, of New York—to collect into one small
volume the substance of all the investigations alluded to in this article—the substance
of Dr. Beaumont’s precious little book, the substance of the French professors’ work
and the other—adding no comment except such as might be necessary to elucidate
the investigators’ meaning, it could not but carry conviction to every candid and
intelligent reader, that spirituous drinks are to the healthy system an injury neces-
sarily and in all cases.*
The Coming Man, then, so long as he enjoys good health —which he usually
will from infancy to hoary age, will not drink wine, nor, of course, any of the
coarser alcoholic dilutions. To that unclouded and fearless intelligence, science
will be the supreme law; it will be to him more than the Koran is to a Mohammedan.
Science, or, in other words, the law of God as revealed in nature, life, and history,
and as ascertained by experiment, observation, and thought—this will be the
teacher and guide of the Coming Man.
A single certainty in a matter of so much importance is not to be despised. I
can now say to young fellows who order a bottle of wine, and flatter themselves
that in so doing they approve themselves “jolly dogs No, my lads, it is because
you are dull dogs that you want the wine. You are forced to borrow excitement
because you have squandered your natural gaiety. The ordering of the wine is a
confession of insolvency. When we feel it necessary to “ take something” at certain
times during the day, we are in a condition similar to that of a merchant who every
day, about the anxious hour of half-past two, has to run around among his neigh-
bours borrowing credit. It is something disgraceful or suspicious. Nature does
not supply enough of inward force. We are in arrears. Our condition is absurd,
and, if we ought not to be alarmed, we ought at least to be ashamed. Nor does the
borrowed credit increase our store; it leaves nothing behind to enrich us, but takes
something from our already insufficient stock; and the more pressing our need the
more it costs us to borrow.
But the Coming Man, blooming, robust, alert, and light-hearted as he will be,
may not be always well. If, as he springs up a mountain-side, his foot slips, the law
of gravitation will not respect nature’s darling too much to keep him from tumbling
down the precipice; and, as he wanders in strange regions, an unperceived malaria
may poison his pure and vivid blood. Some generous errors, too, he may commit
(although it is not probable), and expend a portion of his own life in warding off
evil from the lives of others. Fever may blaze even in his clear eyes; poison may
rack his magnificent frame, and a long convalescence may severely try his admir-
able patience. Will the Coming Man drink wine when he is sick? Here the testi-
mony becomes contradictory. The question is not easily answered.
One valuable witness on this branch of the inquiry is the late Theodore Parker.
A year or two before his lamented death, when he was already struggling with the
disease that terminated his existence, he wrote for his friend, Dr. Bowditch, “ the
consumptive history ” of his family from 1634, when his stalwart English ancestor
settled in New England. The son. of that ancestor built a house, in 1664, upon the
slope of a hill which terminated in “ a great fresh meadow of spongy peat,” which
* The teetotal tracts and books abound in exaggeration. In a treatise which professes to be
scientific I read such explosions as the following:—“ Wilkes Booth, the cowardly murderer of the
late President of the United States, when he saw his helpless victim in the box at the theatre,
had not the cruelty to strike the blow; his better feelings overcame him, and, trembling with
suppressed agony at the thought of becoming an assassin, he rushed into the nearest restaurant,
crying out —‘Brandy! Brandy! Brandy!’ Then, gulping down the hellish draught, it instantly
poisoned his blood, fired up his brain, transformed his whole nature into that of a raging fiend;
and in this remorseless condition he shot down that noble-hearted President —the nation’s great
hope—the people’s best friend. Then, what killed the President of the United States ? I answer,
4 Brandy! Brandy! Brandy ! ” Such falsehoods may provoke laughter, but cannot create con-
viction.


was “always wet all the year through,” and from which “fogs could he seen gather-
ing towards night of a clear day.”* In the third generation of the occupants of this
house consumption was developed, and carried off eight children out of eleven, all
between the ages of sixteen and nineteen. From that time consumption was the
bane of the race, and spared not the offspring of parents who had removed from the
family seat into localities free from malaria. One of the daughters of the house,
who married a man of giant stature and great strength, became the mother of four
sons. Three of these sons, though settled in a healthy place and in an innoxious
business, died of consumption between twenty and twenty-five. But the fourth son
became intemperate—drank great quantities of New England rum. He did not die
of the disease, but was fifty-five years of age when the account was written, and
then exhibited no consumptive tendency ! To this fact Mr. Parker added others; —•
“1. I know a consumptive family living in a situation like that I have men-
tioned, for perhaps the same length of time, who had four sons. Two of them
were often drunk, and always intemperate—one of them as long as I can remem-
ber; both consumptive in early life, but now both hearty men from sixty to
seventy. The two others were temperate, one drinking moderately, the other but
occasionally. They both died of consumption, the eldest not over forty-five.
“2. Another consumptive family in such a situation as has been already
described, had many sons and several daughters. The daughters were all tem-
perate, married, settled elsewhere, had children, died of consumption, bequeathing
it also to their posterity. But five of the sons, whom I knew, were drunkards—-
some of the extremest description; they all had the consumptive build, and in
early life showed signs of the disease, but none of them died of it; some of them
are still burning in rum. There was one brother temperate, a farmer living in the
healthiest situation. But I was told he died some years ago of consumption.”
To these facts must be added one more woeful than a thousand such, that Theo-
dore Parker himself, one of the most valuable lives upon the Western Continent,
died of consumption in his fiftieth year. The inference which Mr. Parker drew
from the family histories given was the following:—“lntemperate habits (where
the man drinks a pure, though coarse and fiery liquor, like New England rum) tend
to check the consumptive tendency, though the drunkard, who himself escapes the
consequences, may transmit the fatal seed to his children.”
There is not much comfort in this for topers; but the facts are interesting, and
have their value. A similar instance is related by Mr. Charles Knight; although in
this case the poisoned air was more deadly, and more swift to destroy. Mr. Knight
speaks, in his Popular History of England, of the “careless and avaricious em-
ployers” of London, among whom, he says, the master-tailors were the most
notorious. Some of them would “ huddle sixty or eighty workmen close together,
nearly knee to knee, in a room fifty feet long by twenty feet broad, lighted from
above, where the temperature in summer was thirty degrees higher than the tem-
perature outside. Young men from the country fainted when they were first con-
fined in such a life-destroying prison; the maturer ones sustained themselves by gin,
till they perished of consumption, or typhus, or delirium tremens.” f
To a long list of such facts as these could be added instances in which the
deadly agent was other than poisoned air—excessive exertion, very bad food,
gluttony, deprivation. During the war I knew of a party of cavalry who, for
three days and three nights, were not out of the saddle fifteen minutes at a time.
The men consumed two quarts of whiskey each, and all of them came in alive.
It is a custom in England to extract the last possible five miles from a tired
horse, when those miles must be had from him, by forcing down his most un-
willing throat a quart of beer. It is known, too, that life can be sustained for
many years in considerable vigour upon a remarkably short allowance of food, pro-
vided the victim keeps his system well saturated with alcohol. Travellers across the
plains to California tell us that, soon after getting past St. Louis, they strike a
region where the principal articles of diet are saleratus and grease, to which a little
flour and pork are added : upon which, they say, human life cannot be sustained
unless the natural waste of the system is retarded by “preserving” the tissues in
whiskey. Mr. Greeley, however, got through alive without resorting to this expe-
dient, but he confesses in one of his letters that he suffered pangs and horrors of
indigestion.
* Life and Correspondence of Theodore ParTcer. By John Weiss. Yol. 11., p. 513.
t Quoted by Governor Andrew, in his Argument from Knight, Yol. VIII., p. 392.


All such, facts as these—and they could be collected in great numbers—indicate
the real office of alcohol in our modern life : It enables us to violate the lams of
nature without immediate suffering and speedy destruction. This appears to be its
chief office, in conjunction with its ally, tobacco. Those tailors would have soon
died or escaped but for the gin; and those horsemen would have given up and
perished but for the whiskey. Nature commanded those soldiers to rest, but they
were enabled, for the moment, to disobey her. Doubtless, nature was even with
them afterwards; but, for the time, they could defy their mother great and wise.
Alcohol supported them in doing wrong. Alcohol and tobacco support half the
modern world in doing wrong. That is their part—their role , as the French
investigators term it —in the present life of the human race.
Dr. Great Practice would naturally go to bed at ten o’clock, when he comes in
from his evening visits. It is his cigar that keeps him up till half-past twelve,
writing those treatises which make him famous, and shorten his life. Lawyer
Heavy Fee takes home his papers, pores over them till past one, and then
depends upon whiskey to quiet his brain and put him to sleep. Young Bohe-
mian gets away from the office of the morning paper which enjoys the benefit
of his fine talents at three o’clock. It is two mugs of lager beer which enable
him to endure the immediate consequences of eating a supper before going home.
This is mad work, my masters; it is respectable suicide, nothing better.
There is a paragraph now making the grand tour of the newspapers, which
informs the public that there was a dinner given the other evening in New York
consisting of twelve courses, and kept the guests five hours at the table. For five
hours, men and women sat consuming food, occupying half-an-hour at each viand.
What could sustain human nature in such an amazing effort I What could enable
them to look into one another’s faces without blushing scarlet at the infamy of such
a waste of time, food, and digestive force ? What concealed from them the iniquity
and deep vulgarity of what they were doing ? The explanation of this mystery is
given in the paragraph that records the crime: “ There was a different kind of
wine for each course.”
Even an ordinary dinner-party—what mortal could eat it through, or sit it out,,
without a constant sipping of wine to keep his brain muddled, and lash his stomach
to unnatural exertion. The joke of it is that we all know, and confess to one
another, how absurd such banquets are, and yet few have the courage and humanity
to feed their friends in a way which they can enjoy, and feel the better for the
next morning.
When I saw Mr. Dickens eating and drinking his way through the elegantly
bound book which Mr. Delmonico substituted for the usual bill of fare at the dinner
given by the Press last April to the great artist —a task of three hours’ duration —
when, I say, I saw Mr. Dickens thus engaged, I wondered which banquet was the
furthest from being the right thing—the one to which he was then vainly trying to
do justice, or the one of which Martin Chuzzlewit partook, on the day he landed in
New York, at Mrs. Pawkin’s boarding-house. The poultry, on the latter occasion,.
“ disappeared as if every bird had had the use of its wings, and had flown in
desperation down a human throat. The oysters, stewed and pickled, leaped from
their capacious reservoirs, and slid by scores into the mouths of the assembly. The
sharpest pickles vanished, whole cucumbers at once, like sugar-plums, and no man
winked his eye. Great heaps of indigestible matter melted away as ice before the
sun. It was a solemn and an awful thing to see.” Of course, the company
adjourned from the dining-room to “the bar-room in the next block,” where they
imbibed strong drink enough to keep their dinner from prostrating them.
The Delmonico banquet was a very different affair. Our public dinners are all
arranged on the English system; for we have not yet taken up with the fine,
sweeping principle, that whatever is right for England is wrong for America.
Hence, not a lady was present! Within a day’s journey of New York there are
about thirty ladies who write regularly for the periodical press, besides as many
more, perhaps, who contribute to it occasionally. Many editors, too, derive constant
and important assistance in the exercise of their profession from their wives and
daughters, who read books for them, suggest topics, correct errors, and keep busy
editors in mind of the great truth, that more than one-half the human race is
female. Mrs. Kemble, who had a treble claim to a seat at that table, was not many
miles distant. Why were none of these gifted ladies present to grace and enliven
the scene ? The true answer is: Wine and smoke! Not our wine and smoke, but
those of our British ancestors who invented public dinners. The hospitable young


gentleman who had the affair in charge would have been delighted, no doubt, to
depart from the established system, but hardly liked to risk so tremendous an
innovation on an occasion of so much interest. If it had been put to the vote (by
ballot) when the company had assembled, Shall we have ladies or not? all the
hard drinkers, all the old smokers, would have furtively written “not” upon their
ballots. Those who drink little wine, and do not depend upon that little—those
who do not smoke, or can easily dispense with smoke —would have voted for the
ladies; and the ladies would have carried the day by the majority which is so hard
to get—two-thirds.
It was a wise man who discovered that a small quantity of excellent soup is a
good thing to begin a dinner with. He deserves well of his species. 'The soup allays
the hungry savage within us, and restores us to civilisation and to one another.
Nor is he to be reckoned a traitor to his kind who first proclaimed that a little very
nice and dainty fish, hot and crisp from the fire, is a pleasing introduction to more
substantial viands. Six oysters upon their native shell, fresh from their ocean home,
and freshly opened, small in size, intense in flavour, cool but not too cold, radiating
from a central quarter of a lemon—this, too, was a fine conception, worthy of the
age in which we live. But in what language can we characterise aright the
abandoned man who first presumed to tempt Christians to begin a repast by
partaking of all three of these—oysters, soup, and fish. The object is defeated.
The true purpose of these introductory trifles is to appease the appetite in a slight
degree, so as to enable us to take sustenance with composure and dignity, and
dispose the company to conversation. When a properly-constituted person has
eaten six oysters, a plate of soup, and the usual portion of fish, with the proper
quantity of potatoes and bread, he has taken as much sustenance as nature requires.
All the rest of the banquet is excess; and being excess, it is also mistake ; it is a
diminution of the sum-total of pleasure which the repast was capable of aifording.
But when Mr. Delmonico has brought us successfully so far on our way through his
book —when we had consumed our oysters, our cream of asparagus in the Dumas
style, our kettle-drums in the manner of Charles Dickens, and our trout cooked so
as to do honour to Queen Victoria—we had only picked up a few pebbles on the
shore of the banquet, while the great ocean of food still stretched out before us
illimitable. The fillet of beef after the manner of Lucullus, the stuffed lamb in the
style of Sir Walter Scott, the cutlets d la Fenimore Cooper, the historic pates, the
sighs of Mantalini, and a dozen other efforts of Mr. Delmonico’s genius, remain to
be attempted.
No man would willingly eat or sit through such a dinner without plenty of wine,
which here plays its natural part—supporting us in doing wrong. It is the wine
which enables people to keep on eating for three hours, and to cram themselves
with highly-concentrated food, without rolling on the floor in agony. It is the
wine which puts it within our power to consume, in digesting one dinner, the force
that would suffice for the digestion of three.
On that occasion Mr. Dickens was invited to visit us every twenty-five years “for
the rest of his life,” to see how we are getting on. The Coming Man may be a
guest at the farewell banquet which the Press will give to the venerable author in
1893. That banquet will consist of three courses; and instead of seven kinds of
wines, and various brands of cigars, there will be at every table its due proportion
of ladies, the ornaments of their own sex, the instructors of ours, the boast and
glory of the future press of America.
Wine, ale, and liquors, administered strictly as medicine—what of them?
Doctors differ on the subject, and known facts point to different conclusions.
Distinguished physicians in England are of the opinion that Prince Albert would
be alive at this moment if no wine had been given him during his last sickness;
but there were formerly those who thought that the Princess Charlotte would have
been saved if, at the crisis of her malady, she could have had the glass of port wine
which she craved and asked for. The biographers of William Pitt—Lord Macaulay
among them—tell us that, at fourteen, that precocious youth was tormented by
inherited gout, and that the doctors prescribed a hair of the same dog which had
bitten his ancestor from whom the gout was derived. The boy, we are told, used
to consume two bottles of port a day; and after keeping up this regimen for several
months, he recovered his health, and retained it until, at the age of forty-seven, the
news of Ulm and Austerlitz struck him a mortal blow. Professor James Miller, of
the University of Edinburgh, a decided teetotaller, declares for wine in bad cases of
fever; but Dr. E. T. Trail, another teetotaller, says that during the last twenty years


he has treated hundreds of cases of fevers on the cold-water system, and “ not yet
lost the first one; ” although, during the first ten years of his practice, when he
gave wine and other stimulants, he lost “about the usual proportion of cases.”
The truth appears to be that, in a few instances of intermittent disease, a small
quantity of wine may sometimes enable a patient who is at the low tide of vitality
to anticipate the turn of the tide, and borrow at four o’clock enough of five
o’clock’s strength to enable him to reach five o’clock, With regard to this daily
drinking of wine and whiskey, by ladies and others, for mere debility—it is a
delusion. In such cases wine is, in the most literal sense of the word, a mocker.
It seems to nourish, but does not; it seems to warm, but does not; it seems to
strengthen, but does not. It is an arrant cheat, and perpetuates the evils it is
supposed to alleviate.
The Coming Man, as before remarked, will not drink wine when he is well. It
will be also an article of his religion not to commit any of those sins against his
body the consequences of which can be postponed by drinking wine. He will hold
his body in veneration. He will feel all the turpitude and shame of violating
it. He will not acquire the greatest intellectual good by the smallest bodily loss.
He will know that mental acquisitions gained at the expense of physical power
or prowess are not culture, but effeminacy. He will honour a rosy and stalwart
ignoramus, who is also an honest man, faithfully standing at his post; but he will
start back with affright and indignation at the spectacle of a pallid philosopher.
The Coming Man, I am firmly persuaded, will not drink wine nor any other stimu-
lating fluid. If by chance he should be sick, he will place himself in the hands of
the Coming Doctor, and take whatever is prescribed. The impression is strong
upon my mind, after reading almost all there is in print on the subject, and con-
versing with many physicians, that the Coming Doctor will give his patients
alcoholic mixtures about as often as he will give them laudanum, and in doses about
the same magnitude, reckoned by drops.
We drinkers have been in the habit, for many years, of playing off the wine
countries against the teetotallers ; but even this argument fails us when we question
the men who really know the wine countries. Alcohol appears to be as pernicious
to man in Italy, France, and Southern Germany, where little is taken except in the
form of wine, as it is in Sweden, Scotland, Russia, England, and the United States,
where more fiery and powerful dilutions are usual. Fenimore Cooper wrote : “ I
came to Europe under the impression that there was more drunkenness among us
than in any other country—England, perhaps, excepted. A residence of six
months in Paris changed my views entirely; I have taken unbelievers with me into
the streets, and have never failed to convince them of their mistake in the course of
an hour On one occasion a party of four went out with this object; we passed
thirteen drunken men within a walk of an hour ; many of them were so far gone
as to be totally unable to walk In passing between Paris and London I have
been more struck by drunkenness in the streets of the former than in those of the
latter.” Horatio Greenough gives similar testimony respecting Italy : “ Many of
the more thinking and prudent Italians abstain from the use of wine ; several of
the most eminent of the medical men are notoriously opposed to its use, and declare
itja poison. One-fifth, and sometimes one-fourth, of the earnings of the labourers
are expended in wine.”
I have been surprised at the quantity, the emphasis, and the uniformity of the
testimony on this point. Close observers of the famous beer countries, such as Saxony
and Bavaria, where the beer is pure and excellent, speak of this delicious liquid
as the chief enemy of the nobler faculties and tastes of human nature. The surplus
wealth, the surplus time, the surplus force, of those nations are chiefly expended
in fuddling the brain with beer. Now, no intelligent reader needs to be informed
that the progress of man, of nations, and of men depends upon the use they
make of their little surplus. It is not a small matter, but a great and weighty
consideration —the cost of these drinks in mere money. We drinkers must
make out a very clear case in order to justify such a country as France
in producing a Million and a half of dollars' worth of wine and brandy per
annum.
The teetotallers, then, are right in their leading positions, and yet they stand
aghast, wondering at their failure to convince mankind. Mr. E. G. Delavan writes
from Paris within these few weeks : “ When I was here thirty years since, Louis
Philippe told me that wine was the curse of France ; that he wished every grape-
vine was destroyed, except for production of food ; that total abstinence was the


only true temperance ; but be did not believe there were fifteen persons in
Paris who understood it as it was understood by his family and myself ; but he
hoped from the labours in America, in time, an influence would flow back upon
Prance that would be beneficial. lam here again after the lapse of so many years,
and, in place of witnessing any abatement of the evil, I think it is on the increase,
especially in the use of distilled spirits.”
The teetotallers have always underrated the difficulty of the task they have un-
dertaken, and misconceived its nature. It is not the great toe that most requires
treatment when a man has got the gout, although it is the great toe that makes
him roar. When we look about us and consider the present physical life of
man, we are obliged to conclude that the whole head is sick and the whole heart is
faint. Drinking is but a symptom which reveals the malady. Perhaps, if we were
all to stop our guzzling suddenly, without discontinuing our other bad habits, we
should rather lose by it than gain. Alcohol supports us in doing wrong ! It pre-
vents our immediate destruction. The thing for us to do is, to strike at the causes of
drinking, to cease the bad breathing, the bad eating, the bad reading, the bad feel-
ing, and bad thinking, which, in a sense, necessitate bad drinking. For some of
the teetotal organisations might be substituted Physical Welfare Societies.
The Human Race is now on trial for its life ! One hundred and three years ago
last April, James Watt, a poor Scotch mechanic, while taking his walk on Sunday
afternoon on Glasgow Green, conceived the idea which has made steam man’s sub-
missive and untiring slave. Steam enables the fifteen millions of adults in Great
Britain and Ireland to produce more commodities than the whole population of the
earth could produce without its assistance. Steam, plus the virgin soil of two new
continents, has placed the means of self-destruction within the reach of hundreds
of millions of human beings whose ancestors were almost as safe in their ignorance
and poverty as the beasts they attended. At the same time, the steam-engine is an
infuriate propagator ; and myriad creatures of its producing—creatures of eager
desires, thin brains, excessive vanity, and small self-control —seem formed to bend
the neck to the destructive tyranny of fashion, and yield helplessly to the more
destructive tyranny of habit. The steam-engine gives them a great variety of the
means of self-extirpation—air-tight houses, labour-saving machines, luxurious food,
stimulating drinks, highly-wrought novels, and many others. Let all women for
the next century but wear such restraining clothes as are now usual, and it is
doubtful if the race could ever recover from the effects; it is doubtful if there could
ever again be a full-orbed, bouncing baby. Wherever we look we see the human
race dwindling. The English aristocracy used to be thought an exception, but Miss
Nightingale says not. She tells us that the great houses of England, like the small
houses of America, contain greatgrandmothers possessing constitutions without a
flaw, grandmothers but slightly impaired, mothers who are often ailing and never
strong, daughters who are miserable and hopeless invalids. And the steam-engine
has placed efficient means of self-destruction within reach of the kitchen, the stable,
the farm, and the shop ; and those means of self-destruction are all but universally
used.
Perhaps man has nearly run his course in this world, and is about to disappear,
like the mammoth, and give place to some nobler kind of creature who will manage
the estate better than the present occupant. Certainly, we cannot boast of having
done very well with it, nor could we complain if we should receive notice to leave.
Perhaps James Watt came into the world to extinguish his species. If so, it is
well. Let us go on, eating, drinking, smoking, over-working, idling, men killing
themselves to buy clothes for their wives, wives killing themselves by wearing them,
children petted and candied into imbecility and diphtheria. In that case, of
course, there will be no Coming Man, and we need not take the trouble to inquire
what he will do.
But probably the instinct of self-preservation will assert itself in time, and an
antidote to the steam-engine will be found before it has impaired the whole race
beyond recovery. To have discovered the truth with regard to the effects of alcohol
upon the system was of itself no slight triumph of the self-preserving principle.
It is probable that the truly helpful men of the next hundred years will occupy
themselves very much with the physical welfare of the race, without which no other
welfare is possible.


TO TOT.A.T, -A-BST^IHSrEIRS
Wxdam gistrid Jfnfoepnbmt of
TEMPERANCE BENEFIT SOCIETY.
( Registered under the Friendly Societies Statute.)
The Victoria District Independent Order of Reciiabites Tem-
perance Benefit Society was established in January, 1861, for the purpose
of securing for its members the economical benefits which are the direct result
of the practice of Total Abstinence principles. In its constitution and working
details the Independent Order of Rechabites Friendly Society is similar to the
orders of Oddfellows and Foresters, affording all the advantages connected with
these and similar societies, while it is free from their many blemishes and defects. '
The Independent Order of Rechabites do not afford encouragement to the
traffic in intoxicating drinks, as their Tents are not permitted to meet in
.public houses, nor are the members involved in any expense in addition to the
contributions provided for in the General Laws.
As a Benefit Society, the Independent Order of Rechabites offer to their .
members the following advantages:— l. The security of large accumulated
Sick and Funeral Funds. 2. As Low Entrance Fees and Quarterly Con-
tributions as are compatible with the safety arid solvency of the Society.
3. Being the ONLY Benefit Society in Victoria which allows during sickness
Twenty Shillings per week for Twelve Months. 4. The sick and death
rate being far BELOW the average of any other Benefit Society, as a conse-
quence of the members being all Total Abstainers. 5- Having a Tent
Assurance Fund, by which Tents are sustained in the event of any
extraordinary demand upon their Funds.
Any Total Abstainer of good moral character, and between 15 and 50 years
of age, ftiuy become a member of the Independent Order of Rechabites, and thus
secure relief during sickness, payment of a sum at death, and
medical attendance and medicines for self, wife, and family. The
entrance fee between 15 and 20 years of age is 125.; between 20 and 25, 135.;
between 25 and 30, 195.; between 30 and 35, 255.; increasing, according to
scale, up to 50 years of age. A quarterly payment of 9s. entitles members to
20s. per week when sick, and a funeral allowance of £2O; and an additional
fee entitles to medical attendance and medicines. Members may insure
their wives in the Funeral Fund at a quarterly payment of is., which will
entitle a member to on the death of his wife. To induce youths, appren-
tices, and others in receipt of small incomes, to become members, a system of
half benefits and payments has been established.
A Life Assurance Branch has just been established in connection with the
Order, to give members the opportunity of obtaining the advantages justly due
to the life of a Temperance man as compared with the general public. No
Assurance Society in the colony has yet established a Temperance section.
Colonial societies have hitherto limited the minimum amount of policy to
£lOO. A member joining this order may assure for £2O, or for any multiple of
£2O up to ,£lBO. The tables have been carefully prepared upon the basis of
the United Kingdom Temperance and General Provident Institution in London
—the most successful Insurance Society in the world. Any full, half-benefit,
or honorary member may become an Assurance member.
The Progress of the Independent Order of Rechabites is in itself a
remarkable testimony to the merits of the Society. In 1861 there were 2 tents
and 66 members. At 25th December of last year there were 81 Tents,
numbering about 3500 Members ; the Funeral Fund at same date was about
the Sick Funds about ,£9000; other funds about £600; while the
Juvenile Members numbered about 1000, with £l6O to their credit. It is
earnestly desired that the year 1869 may be remarkable for the progress of the
Order in numerical and social importance. Ministers of Religion, Teachers of
Day and Sabbath Schools, Members of Temperance Societies and Bands of
Hope, Total Abstainers, and all who desire to promote the best interests of
society, and foster a spirit of independence and self-reliance, are cordially
invited to unite themselves with this institution. February , 1869.
