

Free Church Morality!
Jn ihrce of its i^lopt^nts
IN NEW SOUTH WALES:
A OF THE OF jSj.
Fm>zj
n J^ollege,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG, A.M., D.D.;
SENIOR MINISTER OF THE SCOTS CHURCH, SYDNEY,
AND FOR MANY YEARS ONE OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CITY OF
SYDNEY IN THE PARLIAMENT OF N. S. WALES ;
HONORARY MEMBER OF THE AFRICAN INSTITUTE OF FRANCE,
OF THE AMERICAN ORIENTAL SOCIETY,
AND OF THE LITERARY INSTITUTE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OLINDA
IN THE BRAZILS.
Price In.
All Booksellers.
SYUDnsriEi'sr :
GIBBS, SHALLARD, AND CO., GENERAL PRINTERS, 108 PITT STREET.
MDCCCLXXVI.




CONTENTS.
Xj
PART I. —The Bathurst Case .. .. .. .. .. 5
PART II. —The St. Andrew’s, or Presbyterian College Case —
Embodying a History of the Founding of
St. Andrew’s College .. .. .. .. 10
PART lll.—The Phillip Street Church Case.. .. .. 35


ADVERTISEMENT,
(Addressed particularly to the Minhten of the Preebyterian Church in the
Australian Colonies and Neic Zealand.)
Having been a member of the Parliament of New South Wales for
twenty-tive years of my past life, I uniformly and earnestly
endeavoured, on every proper occasion, during that long period, to
uphold and maintain the system of popular election as one ol the
safeguards of public liberty, both in Church and State; and
especially to ensure its freedom and its purity. It may easily be
conceived, therefore, how mortified and vexed I must have been, not
to speak of emotions of a higher and more sacred character, to find
that in our Presbyterian Church, of which the principle of popular
election has at all times been the characteristic and the life, that
important principle has in certain influential quarters, and under the
colour of extreme sanctimoniousness and a sacred regard for equity
and justice, been outraged in the most unwarrantable manner in this
Colony, while acts have been done in the alleged cause of religion that
are worthy only of professed jockeys and gamblers. The three fol ow-
inc cases, which have all occurred since the union of the Presbyterian
Church in New South Wales in the yqar 1865, will illustrate my
meaning, and prove the- truth of my assertions.
It may be alleged that in writing the following pages I must
have been actuated merely by a spirit of hostility towards the .Free
Church. So far from this being the case, my congregation was, at
my instance, the first, although the remotest at the time, beyond seas,
to express its cordial sympathy with the Free Church immediately
after the disruption in 1843, and its admiration of the noble sacn ce
it had made in the cause of religions liberty; and I retain precisely the
same feelings and the same opinion still. But lam quite sure there
are none who will denounce the unworthy proceedings I have narrated
in this pamphlet,of certain Free Churchmen in this Colony, more indig-
nantly, as being a public discredit to their cause, than all right-minded
Free Churchmen both at home and abroad.
As to whether it is right and proper to publish such proceedings
to the world, I have no misgivings on the subject myself; and I am
quite indifferent as to what may be said on the matter in certain
quaiters. It is surely just and right that the members of our com-
munion in this and the neighbouring colonies should know how such an
Institution asSt. Andrew’s College,the common property of our Church,
has originated on the one hand, as well as how it has been debased
on the other through the acts and deeds of certain Free Churchmen.
Besides, there is a large amount of Church funds —not less than
£4OO0 —available for the supply of religious ordinances among the
humbler members of our communion in this city and neighbourhood,
which has been unrighteously appropriated by certain grasping I fee
Churchmen ; and of which I publish these pages to demand the
restitution in the name of justice and the rights of the poor.


FREE CHURCH MORALITY
I.—THE BATHURST CASE.
In the years 1865 and 1866, there happened to be a vacancy in the
Presbyterian Church at Bathurst,—the Metropolitan Church of the
Presbyterian communion in the Western District of Hew South
Wales. It is the only Church of that communion in the Colony of
which the minister has a glebe—forty acres of valuable ground, through
which the railway to the westward now passes, in the immediate
vicinity of the town of Bathurst, It was granted to the church at
my request by his Excellency Sir Richard Bourke, some time about
the year 1835. On my applying for a similar grant, about the same
time, for the church at Maitland, where the Crown land was much
more limited, and considered much more valuable, Sir Richard .gave
only five acres, as a paddock for the minister’s horse; but that
ground being since built over, as part of the town of West Maitland,
now produces an increasing revenue for the church of £3OO a year,
which is equally divided, by Act of Parliament, between the ministers
of East and West Maitland.
The church at Bathurst had been but indifferently served during
most of the thirty years of its existence, previous to the vacancy I
have mentioned; and it greatly needed a* revival of some kind at the
period in question, as there was much deadness, as there is
unfortunately still, in the congregation.
There were four candidates for the vacant charge at Bathurst —
either virtual or declared. The first of these was the Rev A. C.
(now Dr.) Geikie,* of Bowenfels, a township on the way up from
Sydney, and in the Presbytery of Bathurst.
The second was the Rev. Alexander McEwen, now of Mudgee,
an inland town to the north-westward of Bathuist, and also in the
Bathurst Presbytery. The third of the candidates was the Rev.
James Love, of Brisbane, Queensland, a minister originally of the
Irish Presbyterian Church, who was then greatly desirous of a
settlement either in New South Wales or in Victoria; but having
been unsuccessful in both cases he has since gone over .to the Church
* Note Dr. Geikie has since got the degree of D.D. from an American College.


of England. The fourth of the candidates was the Rev. John
Cameron, who had then but very recently arrived in the Colony as
the first of ten ministers for whose passage out from the mother
country £lOOO had been raised in the Colony, at the Union of 1865. t
When the third and fourth of the candidates had each officiated for
a month at Bathurst, the other two being previously well known in
the district, the election of a minister for the vacant charge was
resolved on by all parties concerned, and Dr. Geikie, who I presume
had been appointed Moderator of the Kirk Session during the
vacancy, gave the elders and management instructions how to proceed
in the case, but told them in doing so that there was no necessity for
his own presence on the occasion ; and he accordingly remained at
Bowenfels, and took no part in the election which ensued. _ The
result of that election, which was communicated to Dr. Geikie by
Mr. Cameron himself, on his return to Sydney, was, that 32 votes-
were tendered for Mr. Cameron, 10 for Mr. Love, 8 for Dr. Geikie,
and 6 for Mr. McEwen. A call, in the usual form, was then
presented to Mr. Cameron, most if not all of the minority signing it,
and thereby ratifying and confirming the decision of the large
majority. _ _ , ~
Doubtless this result of the election at Bathurst was dis-
appointing enough to Dr. Geikie, who could not possibly conceive
how any of the other three candidates could have been preferred to
himself; and who therefore, by some species of legerdemain or sleight
of hand, which I cannot pretend to describe, declared the election
informal; and in the absence of Mr. Love, who had returned to
Brisbane, and of Mr. Cameron to Sydney, got himself declared and
appointed the duly elected minister of Bathurst. In talking over the
subject on the floor of the Assembly, in the year 1866, the Rev. Dr.
Steel declared to me, that “if the Bathurst case had been brought
before the Assembly”—as fit certainly ought to have been —“Mr.
Cameron would have been declared the minister of Bathurst, and Dr.
Geikie thrown out.” This was precisely my own opinion also. But
Mr. Cameron was a young man at the time, and inexperienced in the
forms and practices of Colonial Church Courts; and he had probably
nobody to counsel him at Bathurst. It is worthy of remark, however,
that the very same thing that then occurred at Bathurst, in Dr.
Geikie’s having been defeated at an election by a young man then
recently from home, has since occurred again during the past year at
South Yarra, one of the suburbs of Melbourne, where Dr. Geikie
was a well known and strongly supported candidate, but was defeated
by a young man recently arrived from the mother country. History
repeats itself rather awkwardly at times.
t Mr Cameron was a licentiate of the Church of Scotland, hut had been sent out by the
Free Church before the Thousand Pound Fund had been heard of at home. *'-om that tuna,
however, the Free Church Committee were repaid the hundred pounds they had expended
his passage out.


Mr. Cameron, however, was not disposed to submit in silence to
such manifest injustice. He accordingly published a letter in the
Bathurst paper of the day expressive of his indignation at the wrong
he had sustained at the hands of Dr. Geikie. I have never seen a
copy of that letter myself; but I can easily conceive that it was
pretty strong, and, of course, highly distasteful to Dr. Geikie.
The next preaching station to which Mr. Cameron was sent by
the Church Extension Committee of our General Assembly was that
of Young and Grenfell, two goldfields in the south-western interior.
Mi\ Cameron’s duty in that station —for I officiated for him one
Sabbath myself—was to preach at Young in the morning, and, imme-
diately thereafter, to ride or drive to Grenfe 1 !, 35 miles distant, and
preach there in the evening ; remaining at Grenfell during the week,
preaching there in the morning of the following Sabbath, and riding
or driving thereafter to preach at Young in the evening. In this
station I am happy to testify that Mr. Cameron was highly esteemed
as a minister of the Gospel—in proof of which his people, besides
paying him his stipulated salary, had presented him, before I visited
the district, with a horse and buggy, to render’his travelling between
his two stations more agreeable.
Young and Grenfell, which are now two distinct charges, are in
the Presbytery of Goulburn ; but after Mr. Cameron had been there
about three years a vacancy occurred at Orange, a more eligible charge
in the Presbytery of Bathurst; and as I happened to be on the spot
at the time I ascertained to my own satisfaction that if Mr. Cameron
had presented himself as a candidate for that charge, which he would
most willingly have accepted, he would have been elected as the minister
without fail. But Dr. Geikie was the Moderator of the Presbytery
of Bathurst, and he gave it to be understood that unless Mr.
Cameron would first withdraw and apologise for the indignant letter
he had published on the election for Bathurst about three years
before, he would not allow him to officiate within the bounds of that
Presbytery. Mr. Cameron had clearly been the injured party on
that occasion, and Dr, Geikie the party who had inflicted the injury ;
but as the poet Dryden says—
Forgiveness to the injured doth belong ;
But they ne’er pardon who have done the wrong.
Mr. Cameron, however, was a man of spirit, and refused point-blank
either to withdraw or to apologise for his letter. Thoroughly dis-
gTisted, however, at the unworthy treatment he had thus experienced
on two notable occasions in New South Wales, he determined to
leave the Colony altogether; and he at once resigned his charge at
Young and Grenfell, and passed over the Murray as a mere probationer
into Victoria. I did not appro/e of Mr. Cameron’s leaving the
colony at the time. It was directly contrary to my advice and
entreaty; but I was not surprised at his doing so, considering the


unworthy treatment he had twice received in it. As soon as it was
known at Bathurst that Mr. Cameron had gone over as a probationer
into Victoria, a strong effort was made from thence in an influential
quarter in Victoria to damage his character, and to prevent his
settlement in that colony; but the report of a valedictory service,
with which he had been honoured at Young, and to which I shall
refer presently, completely neutralised that very discreditable effort,
and ensured Mr. Cameron a cordial reception in Victoria. The first
place Mr. Cameron was sent to as a probationer, by the Church
Extension Committee of that Colony, was Seymour, a rising town,
about 60 miles from Melbourne, on the Sydney road, where he was
at once called and settled, and where he has remained till within the
last few weeks a highly esteemed and respected minister.
Dr. Geikie has since been publishing one or two rather able
papers (I believe, for I have not read them) on Scotchmen, of the
higher classes particularly, leaving their mother-church in the colonies,
and passing over to the Church of England. Did it never occur to
him that his own procedure in the case of the Bathurst election of
1866 sufficiently explains such a process, as far as the Western Dis-
trict is concerned 1 At all events, a particular friend of his own has
told me very recently that under Dr. Geikie’s ministry Presbyte-
rianism has been dying out in the Bathurst district for years past.
Singularly enough, however, the Bathurst case has come up again;
or rather the evil influence it originated has very recently been
exerted successfully in a distant part of the colony. There was a
vacancy lately in the Presbyterian Church at Goulburn—the metro-
politan church of our communion for the southern portion of the
colony, as that of Bathurst is for the western. Being requested by
the clerk of the Goulburn Presbytery to supply the vacancy there for
one Sabbath in January last, I did so on two occasions; for although
the distance is 134 miles by the railway from Sydney, I can travel
more economically than other ministers, having a free pass from
Government for life for all the railways of the colony.
During my short stay at Goulburn, I learned that our people
there were proposing to send home for a minister from Scotland.
Knowing, however, that Mr. Cameron was about to leave his charge
in Victoria, in consequence of a large exodus of the agricultural
portion of his congregation being about to take place to a much more
favourable tract of country, previously unknown, a long way down
the Goulburn River, and supposing that the Bathurst affair would
by that time be forgotten, I recommended the Goulburn people,
before sending for a minister from Scotland, to invite Mr. Cameron
to preach for them on tiial for two Sabbaths. I did so—lst, because
Mr. Cameron was a tried man, and had been highly successful in the
two charges he had held for ten years previous, both in New South
Wales and in Victoria; 2dly, because he had been deeply wronged in


having been virtually expelled from this colony, to which I naturally
wished that he should have an opportunity of returning; 3dly,
because I knew he was a much superior preacher to most of those
we were likely to get from Scotland; and 4thly, because he was com-
paratively at hand, and might, if accepted, be settled in a few weeks,
whereas, if the congregation sent for a minister from Scotland, they
would have to wait for at least a twelvemonth, and be obliged at last to
take whatever minister, however unsuitable, might be sent them. Mr
Cameron was accordingly invited to Goulburn, and preached two*
Sabbaths there with much acceptance to the congregation generally.
But as soon as there was the slightest prospect of his settle-
ment at Goulburn, the adverse Bathurst influence of 1869, originating
in Mr. Cameron’s refusal to withdraw his own letter on the Bathurst
election of 1866—that influence, transmitted as it was, through a fit and
proper channel to Goulburn, and backed up with a letter from one
of the ministers of Sydney, who had been inoculated with the
Bathurst virus, was brought to bear against Mr. Cameron, with all
manner of unfounded and injurious statements; and the result was
that he did not receive a call, or, in other words, was excluded from
a position for which he was eminently fitted, both from talents and
services, and virtually thrown out of this Colony for the second time.
There is something superlatively wicked, in my estimation, in thus
ruining the character and blasting the prospects of an unoffending
and deserving minister, whether it be done from Bathurst or from
Sydney, or from both together.
But they ne’er pardon who have done the wrong!
In these circumstances, Mr. Donald Manson, a highly respectable
storekeeper at Hill End, and a thorough Presbyterian, who had been
an attached member of Mr. Cameron’s congregation when he was at
Young and Grenfell, indignant at the unworthy manner in which he
had been spoken of and treated by certain people at Goulburn,
addressed a letter on the subject to the Australian Witness* of date
Hill End, 9th Feb., 1876, of which the following is an extract: —
Allow me, for the information of your Presbyterian readers in this and the
other Colonies, to say that prior to his (Mr. Cameron’s) leaving the congregation
over which he presided (at Young) they, although financially a poor one, as
expressing their respect and esteem for him, and regret at his leaving, invited
him to a special tea meeting, at which he was presented with a highly com-
plimentary address and a purse of forty-four sovereigns, and, as a further token
of respect, on the following afternoon he was accompanied out of town eight
miles by a large portion of his flock, in buggies and on horseback, all thinking
at the time that they were obeying in regard to him an apostolic injunction, Let
the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour, especially they who
labour in the icord and doctrine.
*As Mr. Manson’s letter was not inserted in that paper, it was published in another hearing
a similar name, from which I obtained the extract.


I may add that on resigning his charge at Seymour, Mr.
Cameron was appointed hy the Victorian Church Extension Com-
mittee to preach in a vacancy in Belfast, a town of 2500 inhabitants
in Victoria, where he was so highly esteemed as a preacher that he
received a unanimous call at once, before he had completed his appointed
term of service. I believe he will accept that call and remain in
Victoria.
The Goulburn people, I may add, subsequently called the Rev,
A. M. Tail, late of Newtown, Sydney, who has since been settled
with much acceptance in that very important charge. Mr. Tait is
one of three ministers whom I was instrumental in bringing up to
New South Wales from New Zealand, during a visit I happened to
pay to that interesting colony in the year 1873.
I had crossed over on that visit by steam from Melbourne to
Dunedin, the chief city of New Zealand in the south \ passing from
thence to Wellington, the capital of the colony, and then to Auckland
towards the northern extremity of the land—preaching repeatedly
and lecturing in all the three cities. And as my colonial history and
standing were well known in New Zealand, while families and indi-
viduals, previously of my own congregation in Sydney, were settled in
all these cities, my tour in the Island somewhat like a series of
ovations; and on my return to Sydney not fewer than three of the
Presbyterian ministers of New Zealand, feeling unsettled in the
charges they then held in that colon j, were induced to follow me to
New South Wales, where they were all settled in important charges
almost immediately. One of these three ministers was the Rev. A-
M. Tait, who, after a remarkably successful ministry of two years in
Newtown, is now settled in Goulburn. During my stay in Welling-
ton, the capital of New Zealand, 1 had the honour of enjoying the
hospitality of the Hon. Sir Donald McLean, one of the Ministers of
the Crown.
lI. —THE ST. ANDREW’S, OR PRESBYTERIAN COLLEGE
CASE.
A University having been established in Sydney, in the year 1850,
on the secular and non-sectarian principle of the University of London,
it was deemed expedient and desirable, in order to conciliate the
opponents of the measure, that affiliated colleges of a denominational
character should also be established for the leading churches
of the colony, to afford tutorial assistance and religious training for
their students respectively. The Bill for the establishment of these
Colleges had been introduced into the Legislature, and read a first
time, early in the year 1854, shortly before I had been re-elected a
member of the Colonial Parliament, on my return to the Colony
rom one of my voyages to England. The nature and character of


the measure was, that any church or society should be entitled to
found a College inside the University, and to receive from ten to
fifteen acres of ground for the purpose within the University
Reserve, provided it should raise for the erection of the College
buildings not less than Ten Thousand Pounds, and that an amount
equal to the sum total of the subscriptions for such College respec-
tively, up to Twenty Thousand Pounds, should be contributed from
the Public Treasury, together with a salary of £SOO a year from
the State for the Rector, Warden, or Principal.
I confess I did not approve of the measure personally, believing
that as the University was open equally for all, it would have been
much better for each religious denomination to be left to make all such
arrangements for itself from its own resources, without the assistance
or intervention of the State. But, as I -saw from the first that a
Presbyterian College on such a basis might be made very serviceable
for the training of candidates for the ministry in various branches
of clerical education not included in the University curriculum, I
gave my assent to the measure with not a little misgiving and
hesitation.
At a social meeting, however, which was held at the Honourable
the Speaker’s (Sir Charles Nicholson’s), immediately after my re-election
to Parliament, (chiefly I believe to ascertain my opinions on the
subject), there was one point in the original draft of the Bill
to which I promised unhesitating opposition. It was there provided
that the benefits of the proposed Institution should be limited to
members of the Church of Scotland. But the Presbyterian Church
of the Colony being at that time unhappily divided into three or
four sections, which have since been reunited, I insisted on the
withdrawal of that limitation from the Bill, so as to ensure the
benefits of the 1 nstitution equally to all Presbyterians; and this
amendment having been submitted to the Select Committee on the
Bill, the proposed limitation was withdrawn accordingly.
It was not, however, till the Parliamentary session of 1862, shortly
after my return to the colony from another voyage to England, that
I submitted to the Legislative Assembly of the period the draft of a
Bill for the establishment of a Presbyterian College in connection with
the University of Sydney—paying into the Treasury beforehand, agree-
ably to one of the rules of Parliament for all private Bills, the sum
of £25, being the first instalment of a subscription of £IOO which
my late brother, Mr. Andrew Lang, of Dunmore, Hunter’s River,
for several years a member of the Legislative Council of the period,
had authorized me to subscribe for the College on his behalf. A
Select Committee, of which I was chairman, was accordingly
appointed to take the Bill into consideration, and to report to the
Assembly. The Committee held a whole series of meetings, and
examined a number of highly competent witnesses on the subject


among others, the late Rev. Dr. Woolley, then Principal of the
University of Sydney, whose evidence satisfied the Committee on
a point which was deemed at the time of great importance, viz., that
it would not be practicable, under'the constitution of the University,
to combine with the future College a preparatory School or
Academy for the training up of pupils or students for the College.
Por, as it was well known at the time, just as it is still, that there
were no young men of the requisite previous training in the Colony
ready to enter a Presbyterian College if it were actually in existence,
the erection of such a School or Academy was an object of as much
importance and of as urgent necessity as the College itself.
On another point of importance, the Committee were satisfied
from the evidence of two highly competent witnesses—Professor
Smith, of the University, and the late IST. D. Stenhouse, Esq., M.A.,
and J.P., one of the Senators of the University—that any reputable
Scotsman or Presbyterian who might be both able and willing to
contribute <£l towards the College, but could not afford a larger
amount, would be just as likely to give an intelligent and con-
scientious vote for the election of the office-bearers of the Institution
as his more fortunate fellow-countryman who could subscribe £IOO.
So much time, however, had been occupied in the proceedings
of the Select Committee, that the Bill had only passed the second
reading when the session of 1862 came to a close. And during a
subsequent session, that of 1863-4, when the late Mr. D. C. Dalgleish
was chairman of the Select Committee on the Bill, it had been read
a second time, and had passed the Committee of the whole House,
when the Ministry of the day was thrown out, and the Parliament
suddenly dissolved.
At the general election of January, 1865, I stated at the hustings
to my constituents of Sydney West that that would be the last
time that I should ever ask their suffrages as a candidate for the
representation of the city; for as I then believed that the College
Bill would shortly be passed into law, and that I should be entrusted
with the carrying out of the measure as Principal of the College, I
had fully determined—and this was my principal reason for doing so
—that the Parliament then about to come into existence should be
the last in which I should sit.
In consequence of the union of the Presbyterian Church, which
took place in the year 1865, no further proceedings were taken in
the matter of the Presbyterian College Bill till the session of 1866,
when it passed the Legislative Assembly, and was forwarded to the
Legislative Council, or Upper House of the Colonial Parliament.
But not having been passed in that House when the session closed,
it was taken up again in the session of 1867; and after much
debating on certain amendments of the Legislative Council, and the
very unusual proceeding of a conference of both Houses on these


amendments,* in the discussion of which the Bill was all but lost, it
was finally passed, and received the Royal assent through his late
Excellency, Sir John Young (now Lord Lisgar) on the 12th
December, 1867.
I had thus had an incredible amount of labour and annoyance in
carrying the measure through both Houses of Parliament to its final
close. And as it is usual in such cases that the person who succeeds
in getting any important measure passed through Parliament should
be entrusted with the carrying of it out, as in the case of the late
Mr. Alexander Dick, who carried the Lands’ Titles Act through Par-
liament, and was appointed one of the commissioners for carrying it
out, I expected, for this as well as for other reasons to which I shall
advert in the sequel, that my claim to the office of Principal of the
College would not be disputed by any of my brethren.
From this peiiod, however, there was developed, in the matter
of the Presbyterian College, a regular conspiracy against the rights
and interests of the Presbyterians of the colony, and particularly
against myself, while an amount of undue influence was exercised
to vitiate and control the forthcoming election, to which I can find
no other parallel in recent times than that of the famous Galway
election of 1871, when the patriotic Judge Keogh denounced and
condemned the Romish bishops and priests of his own communion
for proceedings not one whit more iniquitous than those that were
openly and unblushingly enacted in this Colony in the case I refer
to. And I have no hesitation in denouncing as the principal con-
spirator in that case the Rev. Dr. Steel, of Sydney, with his worthy
coadjutor, the Rev. James Cameron, A.M., of Richmond, now
Moderator of our General Assembly.
The Rev. Dr. Steel arrived in the Colony to occupy a Free
Church vacancy in Sydney in or about the year 1862, having been
selected for the purpose by Professor Smith, of the University of
Sydney. He had previously been the minister of a Free Church—
in the English town of Cheltenham, if lam not mistaken. Now,
as it is of some importance for a Scotch minister in an English town
to obtain the degree of Doctor either of Laws or Divinity, which,
however, is not always procurable from a Scotch University, there
is an ingenious process available for obtaining the desired object in
another way. There is an office in London to which, if the alumnus
of a Scotch University transmits his college tickets, or his certificate
* This I believe is the only instance in the history of the Colony, in which a con-
ference of the two houses of Parliament has been held. There were two questions to be settled
at the conference—the one as to whether the minimum subscription to entitle a subscriber to a
vote for the College Council should be one pound or five pounds ; the liberal members having
threatened, if the higher minimum were fixed, to throw out the Bill. The other question wan
whether the Institution should be designated St. Andrews, or simply the Presbyterian College.
I had advocated the latter designation, by way of distinction, as there were already an Episco-
palian and a Roman Catholic College on the University Reserve, called respectively St. Paul's
and St. John’s.


of Bachelor or Master of Arts, he can be admitted ad eundem, as it is
termed—that is, to the same position in some German University
that trades in degrees, for the small charge, I am told, of thirty
shillings. But the Germans call a Master or Bachelor of Arts a
Doctor of Philosophy, or Ph.D., and the possessor of this German
title forthwith assumes that of Doctor in England ; the good people
there not knowing either what it means, or how it has been obtained.
It is virtually an assumption of academical degrees on false pretences,
and no alumnus of a Scotch University, who has any respect either
for himself or his Alma Mater, would condescend to anything of the
kind. It is rather strange, indeed, that Doctor Smith should have
selected for a ministerial charge in this colony any person with so
questionable a title. It shows at all events, what the sequel has
abundantly confirmed—that Dr. Steel was a person of easy virtue,
exceedingly desirous of office or distinction in society, and rather
unscrupulous about the means of obtaining it.f
Dr. Steel exhibited from the first his fixed determination to
obtain such a monopoly of the votes of the subscribers to the College
as would enable him, through indifference in some quarters, and oppo-
sition to the whole measure in others, to control the election. There
was a Provisional Committee appointed by the General Assembly of
1867, to agitate throughout the Colony for subscriptions for the
College; the election of the College Council (which was to consist of
four ministers and eight Presbyterian laymen) being entirely in the
hands of the subscribers. But that Committee, speedily lapsed into
a mere Free Church clique, and was used for Free Church purposes
almost exclusively.
There was no division of the territory made by the Provisional
Committee, so as to assign to each of the parties concerned in the way
of agitating for subscriptions for the College a reasonable and equit-
able portion of the field available for the purpose—each being
supposed to be guided in the selection of his proper portion by the
Christian principle of doing to others as he would that others should
do to him. At one of the earlier meetings of the Provisional Com-
mittee, it was stated that there was a large number of Scotchmen and
Presbyterians who were deriving large incomes from their squatting
stations on the Murray and Murrumbidgee rivers, while residing in
or near Melbourne, and were therefore bound to contribute towards
the College as much as residents in New South Wales. I proposed,
therefore, with a view to ascertain whether these gentlemen would
assist us or not, to go to Melbourne myself by the steamboat, and
return overland through Eiverina. But as the success of such a
mission was rather problematical, I stated that I should do what I
could in agitating for the College at Yass and Goulburn, where the
f Dr. Steel has since got the degree of D D. from an American College.


field was much more promising, on my return. Dr. Steel, however,
informed the Committee that he had engaged to visit these two locali-
ties himself—adding,.however, in a sort ot patronizing style, that he
would be glad if I could meet him by the way, and we should visit
Yass and Goulburn together. I felt excessively mortified at this
information, and immediately discovered that we had not got into the
hands of thoroughly honest men, and that in agitating over so large a
portion of the best parts of our available field—the whole Southern
portion of the territory—Dr. S. was not agitating so much for the
College as blowing the trumpet for himself; inducing the members of
our communion in the extensive portion of the territory he had thus
appropriated to suppose that he was the only member of our corps
who took any interest in our College, and the only person deserving
anything at the hands of its supporters and friends. But as it did not
accord with my ideas of self-respect to be merely playing second fiddle
to Dr. Steel, I declined the offer to meet him at Yass and Goulburn,
and therefore left him to gather in the harvest there for himself. In
short, Dr. Steel conducted his extensive agitation of the Southern
portion of the Colony with an utter disregard to the rights and
interests and feelings of others. For, before commencing his agitation
for the College at Yass and Goulburn, he had been holding meetings
on the subject, and collecting subscriptions and votes at Wollongong,
Kiama, and Shoalhaven, besides other places on the coast, and at
Araluen, Braidwood, Gundaroo, and Queanbeyan, in the interior—
thereby creating a perfect monopoly of the whole Southern territory
for himself, and ensuring much personal influence and many votes
for the coming election.
There was a still more flagrant case, however, of the same kind,
some time thereafter.
At the meeting of the General Assembly in 1868, the Bev.
Thomas Johnston, of Armidale—an able, zealous, and successful
minister of our Church—gave me a strong invitation to New England,
which I told him I should be happy to accept, in the hope of doing
something considerable for our College in that region, as it was apart
of the territory I had never visited. But the General Assembly was
scarcely over when it was announced that Dr. Steel was going forth-
with to New England, as he did accordingly. There was no appoint-
ment for the purpose by the Provisional Committee, as W. Neill, Esq.,
manager of the City Bank, who was present at the meeting (which I
was not), has assured me. Dr. Steel merely told the Committee that
he had made his arrangements for going to New England, and went
forthwith. I felt on this occasion as I had done in the case of Yass
and Goulburn; as New England was one of the most extensive and
best fields in the Colony for agitation on behalf of our institution; but
I made no complaint on the subject. I was not singular, however, in
the idea I had formed of the monopolizing spirit and the gross
injustice of Dr. Steel’s procedure in the matter; for two other


brethren, who were agitating for the College elsewhere (but whose
names I decline mentioning, as they are both since dead), spoke most
indignantly of Dr. Steel’s procedure in monopolizing New England in
the way he had done. It was simply supplanting his brethren by
artifice and trickery of the grossest kind, and thereby openly violating
the grand rule of our common Christianity, which commands us to do
to others as we should wish them to do to us.
I had occasion to call on Dr. Steel on some business connected
with the New Hebrides Mission, in the month of September, 1869,
when he expressed himself extremely anxious that the College should
be commenced forthwith and without any further delay; and as we
were then about a thousand pounds short of the amount required to
be subscribed for the inauguration of the College, he asked me if I
thought some of our moneyed men might not be induced to guarantee
the payment of the remaining amount of the subscription to the
Government, so as to enable us to get on with the College at once.
I expressed myself equally desirous with Dr. Steel on the occasion,
that the College should be speedily inaugurated, but told him at the
same time that the proposal he had suggested was simply contrary to
law, as the Government required the actual subscription, or rather
payment, and not a mere guarantee from any quarter that it should
be contributed or paid at some future time, I confess I was astonished
at the proposal ; but hearing immediately thereafter, through the
late Rev. Mr. Dougall, when about to leave Sydney for Maitland,
that Dr. Steel was to proceed to England shortly thereafter, I was at
once let into the whole secret. In short, Dr. Steel was to get a few
of our moneyed men to guarantee the subscription of the remaining
thousand pounds then still deficient ; he was then to get himself
elected Principal, as he had no doubt he would be with the votes and
influence he had obtained over so large a portion of the territory as
he had then appropriated and traversed; and he was next to go home to
England, to parade himself before the General Assembly of the Free
Church in Edinburgh, in May, 1870, as the man whom all Australia
delighted to honour. But as this project failed, and as it was inti-
mated to Dr. Steel in 1870, through myself, that his physical defect
of excessive and increasing deafness would entirely unfit him for the
office of Principal of the College, the chief duty of which would be
holding conversational lectures with the students, he announced him-
self no longer a candidate, and bent every effort thereafter to throw
me out and to get another Free Churchman, either from home or from
the Colony elected in his stead.
Of the selfish and monopolizing spirit, I have indicated, so utterly
regardless of the rights and claims of others, and so utterly unworthy
of Christian ministers, the following will doubtless serve as additional
illustrations ;
In the year 1869 I happened to have some clerical correspon-
dence with the Rev. Mr. Laing, of the Manning River, in the course


of which I stated that I intended to visit that district shortly myself,
in the hope of doing something for the College; for as it was in con-
sequence of certain letters of mine in the daily press, illustrative of the
great capabilities of the Manning River for the settlement of an agricul-
tural population, which had been written aftera visit 1 had paid to that
district more than twenty years before, that a large exodus of Scotch
and other Presbyterian families took place from the Hunter to the
Manning, it was natux'al that I should wish to visit the district again.
Mr. Laing, in reply to my letter, expressed a wish that I should post-
pone my visit for some time, as I did accordingly; conceiving that
the district might not he in circumstances to render such a visit desirable
atthetime. Yeryshortly thereafter, however, (Mr. Laing having in the
meantime reported my intended visit at head-quarters) itwas forthwith
announced that the Rev. James Cameron, A.M., of Richmond, was
going to the Manning, the Hastings, and the Macleay River, to
agitate for the College. In short Mr. Cameron, being a Free Church-
man and a right-hand man of Dr. Steel’s, was a safe man for any
mission in which the supposed interests of the party were concerned;
and Mr. Laing, being a Free Churchman also, licensed and ordained
by that section of our Church shortly before the union, the trio was
complete.
The Rev. John Kinross, of Kiama, a Free Churchman also, and
therefore a safe man for the interests involved, was appointed to
agitate in the elevated region of the south-east; and as there then
remained only a small portion of the coast to the southward, in the
Eden and Bega districts, unvisited, Dr. Steel went thither to agitate
himself. In the meantime, the wealthy and populous district of
Bathurst had been reserved for the Rev. Mr. (now Dr.) Geikie, and
the late Rev. W. Purves ; the valley of the Hunter was assigned to
Mr. Thomson, and the late Mr. Purves was appointed to visit the
Clarence and the Richmond Rivers. Nay, a visit to Gundagai and
Wagga Wagga having been planned in 1869, the duty of agitating
in that district was assigned to Mr. Purves and Mr. Thomson ; and
when it was deemed expedient to pay a second visit to Bathurst, Mr.
Thomson was again selected for the purpose, although an accident
he met with by the way prevented him from carrying out the object
of his mission. In short, by a species of “ artful dodging,” -which, I
believe would have been reprobated and denounced even at Tattersall’s
by the gentlemen of the Turf, and was utterly unworthy of a body of
Christian men associated for the accomplishment of a common object,
every populous place beyond Sydney along the whole line of coast from
Cape Howe to Point Danger, was closed against me, and every populous
and promising place in the interior was handed over to others. So
that I had only to take up with the more distant and thinly settled
portions of the territory, where the prospect of any adequate return
from a system of agitation for any object was exceedingly problema-
tical.


The success of these artful proceedings was doubtless facilitated
not a little through a serious and long protracted illness with which I
was visited while they were in progress, and from which I was.
only recovering slowly at the election of the College Council
in November, 1870 ; foi; the field was thus left comparatively open
at a very critical period for the conspirators.
The monopolizing and iniquitous procedure I have detailed had
in the meantime become so notorious, and was ceitain to prove, as it
actually did, so utterly damaging to the institution, that I addressed a
letter through the press to the subscribers to the College, on the eleventh
of October, 1870, informing them of the fact, and recommending all
who had any confidence in me to forward to me their proxies for the
forthcoming election; as in that event I pledged myself, in conjunc-
tion with certain University-bred men, both clerical and laic, in
whom the public of our communion had entire confidence, to nomi-
nate the right men for the College Council. And so successful was
this appeal, that notwithstanding the shortness of the period that was
then to elapse before the election of the members of Council, on the
7th November following, upwards of three hundred and twenty
proxies were sent to me from all parts of the territory.
At a secret conclave of Free Churcji plotters, held immediately
before the election of November, 1870, a printed card was exhibited,
from which, of course, my name was cai’efully excluded. And so
zealous were the parties in the case that parcels of the card were
forwarded on the Sabbath morning previous to the election to the
office-bearers of churches of our communion known to be presided
over by safe men, for distribution among subscribers to the College.
Whether any of these functionaries received and distributed these
cards or not, lam not aware; bxit some of them at all events were
equally indignant at the fact and the profanation. It appeared,
however, that notwithstanding their zealous efforts, these parties
could not succeed in excluding me as one of the four clerical members
from the College Council.
In the meantime an incident occurred of an unusual character,
but in perfect accordance with the preceding details, as well as of
evident bearing on the then forthcoming election of the College
Council. The Free Church congregation of Dr. Steel and the United
Presbyterian congregation of the Rev. Adam Thomson celebrated
the Eucharist together under the same roof. It was alleged,
indeed, that the arrangement had been made purely in consequence of
the indisposition of one of the ministers ; but allowing that it had,
this could not affect its bearing on the forthcoming election ; and
there was much indignation very justly excited in certain qxiarters at the
idea of such an ordinance being used to serve such a purpose. At all
events the incorporating union which had thus taken place between
the two congregations served to enhance the Free Church vote on
the one hand, and to place Mr. Thomson in a position which he would


Eev. Dr. Steel
.. 645
Rev. Adam Thomson
.. 621
Rev. Dr. Lang
.. 455
Rev. James Cameron
.. 417
never otherwise have reached on the other; for, to use the language
of the Turf, Mr. Thomson, with the aid of the Free Church vote,
came in at the election only half a length behind Dr. Steel.
The following was the result of the election of November, 1870.
It tells its own tale, and
with mingled astonishmei
was received, both in town and country,
t and indignation ;
astonishment
Four Clerical Members
' Honorable John Richardson .. .. 658
Andrew Brown, Esq. .. .. .. 634
John Frazer, Esq... .. .. • • 600
, T , D. L. Waugh, Esq. 551
Eight Lay Members 4 Honorable s. D. Gordon 519
J. H. Goodlet, Esq. - .. .. .. 515
John Campbell, Esq., Commercial Wharf 613
Charles Smith, Esq. .. •• •• 476
The position of Dr. Steel and his coadjutors on this list would
doubtless have been honorable to these gentlemen, had it been
in any respect the result of fair and honest means. It would he an
insult, however, to the common sense of the subscribers —even of
those * who were the most friendly to Dr. Steel—to say that the
election of 1870 was either a fair or an honest election. In the
estimation of one of the most competent of their number to give an opinion
on the subject, I mean the late Nicol Drysdale Esq.,
whom I shall have occasion to mention more particularly in the
sequel, “It was a regular swindle on the part of Dr. Steel, Mr.
Cameron,” and a third person I shall not name.* In short, by his
artful but unwarrantable and unjust appropriation of the whole of
the southern portion of the territory—extending from Wollongong
and Kiama on the coast to Yass and Goulburn in the interior, —as a
field of exclusive agitation for himself, as well as by his subsequent
appropriation of the whole territory of New England, a country as
large as all Scotland, for the same purpose, backed up as he was by
his humble coadjutor, Mr. Cameron, who had followed his example in
a similar appropriation of territory along the coast to the northward,
and strengthened by the incorpoi’ating union with Mr. Thomson, Dr.
Steel had acquired as complete a command of the ballot-box at the
election of the College Council as the late Emperor Louis Napoleon
had ever done over those of France; the rights and interests of his
brethren being simply ignored and their provinces iniquitously in-
vaded.
I shall perhaps be told that Dr. Steel was not aware of the
egregious wrong he was doing to others, —his equals, his brethien, in
♦ Note. -These were Mr. Steuhonse’s own words to myself in November, 1870, immediately
after the election.


thus appropriating for himself so vastly disproportionate an extent of
the whole field for agitation. I cannot accept this excuse. Dr.
Steel is no fool. He was perfectly aware of what he was doing all
the while. He knew perfectly that he was openly violating the
grand golden rule of Christianity established by the Saviour himself,
—To do to others as we should wish them to do to us. He knew per-
fectly that he was over-reaching and circumventing his own brethren,
whose rights and interests he was bound to respect.
The persons who had thus usurped the command of the ballot-
box had evidently no desire that the College Council should occupy a
high character and standing as the heads of an academical institution.
Shortly after the result of the election was announced in Sydney, a
gentleman of the highest professional standing in the colony, and one
well acquainted with the antecedents of'the Presbyterian Church,
although neither a Scotsman nor a Presbyterian himself, expressed to
me his unfeigned surprise at the very inferior intellectual
character of the Council, so utterly unworthy of the high character
and history of that Church. Mr. Gordon, Mr. Richardson, and Mr.
Frazer were, undoubtedly worthy of the places they occupy in
that body, from their position in society, as members of the Legisla-
tive Council or Upper House of our Colonial Parliament, their
superior intelligence, and their donations to the institution ; and Mr.
Waugh was also a fit and proper person, from his superior education.
But Mr. Goodlet, the timber merchant, Mr. John Campbell, the
produce or potato merchant, Mr. Andrew Brown, the farmer and
stock holder, and Mr. C. Smith, the South Sea Islands skipper, were
all merely dead weight, smuggled as it were into the hold of the craft
to sink her sufficiently in the water to enable her Free Church pilot,
Dr. Steel, to steer her at his pleasure. Of the character and standing
of these gentlemen as members of society, I can only speak, as
I desire to do, with respect; but it was an outrage upon the common
sense of the Presbyterian community to place them in their present
position as the directors of an academical institution.
When the union of the different sections of the Presbyterian
Church was ratified by Act of Parliament in 1865, the four different
ecclesiastical bodies that formed the Union were in point of numbers
as follows :—lst. The Synod of Australia, representing the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland, much the largest of the four. 2nd. The
Free Church, under the leadership of the Rev. Dr. Steel. 3rd. The
Synod of Hew South Wales, to which I belonged, and which had had
■eight ministers for a series of years before the union, and brought
into the united body a large amount of valuable ecclesiastical pro-
perty. 4th. The United Presbyterians, consisting of a single congre-
gation—and that by no means a large one—under the late Rev. Adam
Thomson.
Now, it wasuniversally understood before the election of 1870, that
as there were to be four clerical members of the College Council, there


should be one to represent each of the four sections of the Church.
In accordance with this idea it was my earnest desire and endeavour
that the Rev. Colin McCulloch, then of Balmain, Sydney, now of
Queensland, should represent the Established Church of Scotland
section in the College Council. Mr. McCulloch had successively been
minister at home, of Denny, of Montrose, and of the East Church of
Aberdeen, and was one of the most popular ministers in the Church
of Scotland. But hiS wife having been attacked with a pulmonary
affection had been constrained by the faculty to flee for her life to the
more genial climate of Queensland ; and about twelve months there-
after Mr. M'Culloch had obtained leave of absence for twelve months
to visit his family in that remote colony. Finding Mrs. McCulloch
restored to perfect health through the change of climate, he resigned
his charge in Aberdeen, and devoted himself on the invitation of the
Presbyterian colonists, to the interests and advancement of the infant
Church in that portion of Australia. Having afterwards, however,
had a call to a wider sphere in Sydney, he was open for election to the
College Council as representing the largest or Church of Scotland sec ■
tion of our Church. The 320 proxies I had obtained immediately
before the election, each of which enabled me to vote for four clerical
and eight lay members, I gave to Mr. McCulloch, which raised the
number of his votes to 345. But what could any number of votes
avail that gentleman in the face of the virtual conspiracy of the Free
Church clique under Dr. Steel to swamp the election! Mr.
McCulloch was therefore thrown out to make room for the Rev.
James Cameron, A.M., of Richmond, a zealous but merely third
rate Free Churchman. Mr. McCulloch’s loss to the College was an
irreparable one. Besides being a superior preacher to any Free
Churchman then in the colony, he was a zealous and successful
minister, a University-bred man of high standing, and a gentle-
man who would have been an honour to our institution, and a
“ guide, philosopher, and friend,” to the College Council. Knowing
the amount of support I had obtained in his favour, he had looked
forward to his election with the greatest interest: he was naturally
therefore extremely mortified at his defeat, in the peculiar circum-
stances in which it was brought about, and he felt his exclusion
from the Council so gross an insult to himself, but especially to that
portion of the church he particularlyrepresented, that he embracedthe
first eligible opportunity to leave the colony in disgust, and to return to
Queensland. His own words before leaving, in regard to the election
of the College Council, were mild enough, but exactly to the point:
<£ It was the ugliest piece of party-jobbing I have ever known.
In regard to the lay members for that body, I shall only mention
one of the laymen for whom I voted, and to whom I gave all my
proxy votes, viz., N". D. Stenhouse, Esq., J.P., since deceased. Mr.
Stenhouse was a lawyer of the highest standing in Sydney, and
a thorough Presbyterian, a member of trie Senate of the University,


and regarded by all who knew him as one of the first scholars in the
Southern Hemisphere. He had also set his heart on being elected one
of the College; Council, and as a layman he would unquestionably have
given a high character and standing to that body, just as Mr.
M‘Culloch would have done as a minister; but through the artifice
and trickery of the Free Church clique who managed the election,
this distinguished scholar was thrown out by Mr. John Campbell, the
potatoe* merchant! In short, the Honorable John Frazer was the only
layman of the Council who was not a Free Churchman, and I was the
only minister ! Four of the members of the College Council belong-
ing to Dr. Steel’s congregation, and three to Mr'. Thomson’s, there
was only a minority of five remaining for the other sixty congrega-
tions of the Presbyterian Church of the colony ! But this is Free
Church Morality according to the Amended Code of Dr. Steel.
The proceedings of the College Council during the first two
years of its existence exhibit a mere record of dreary inanity and
helpless incapacity. Early in the year 1871 Mr. Andrew Brown,
taking it for granted that a Principal for the College was to be
brought out from the mother country, gave notice of a motion, at the
instance of Mr. Cameron, that immediate steps should be taken for
the erection of the requisite buildings for his accommodation, as well
as for that of the students who were to rally around him on his arrival.
But neither Mr. Brown nor his prompter was aware that the Council
had no power under the Act of Parliament to erect any buildings till
the appointment of a Principal, that it had no authority to send for a
Principal from home, and that there were no students in readiness
for that functionary when he came. In short, this work of indis-
pensable necessity in the case, the raising up of a body of students
for the College, never gave the Council one moment’s concern
during the first two years of its existence.
In the course of the subsequent proceedings Dr. Steel moved
that a Dr. Smith—a Free Churchman, of course —should be sent for
from home for the office of Principal; but nobody knew anything of
Dr. Smith but himself. It had been ascertained,indeed, thathehad been
unsuccessful as a candidate for some office of the kind in the mother
■country, and that he belonged to a small but rabid section of his
own body, who were strongly opposed to the measures then in pro-
gress for union at home between the Free and the United Presby-
terian Churches,
It was next moved by Mr. Thomson, and warmly adopted by the
clique, that certain ministers in Edinburgh should be delegated to
select and send out a Principal; but although Mr. Gordon and
myself insisted that there was no power of delegation in the Act, it
was not believed by the seven wise men of Gotham, and a deputation
was, therefore, appointed to wait upon counsel learned in the law,
through a solicitor in town, to decide this previous question. It was
decided accordingly in accordance with Mr. Gordon’s opinion and
mine.


Mr. Goodlet, the timber merchant, then, finding that we were
confined to the Australian Colonies for our man, gave notice of a
motion to advertise,, in all the colonial papers, for tenders fora
Principal for St. Andrew’s College; without specifying, however, as
lie surely ought to have done, according to custom, whether the
lowest tender" would be accepted or not. The worthy Councillor
seemed to be thinking at the time of a tender for battens and tree-
nails or California planks.
Mr. Cameron, in the spirit of petty intrigue and want of
straightforwardness for which he is distinguished, moved that the
four clerical members should all, like the Long Parliament, pass a
self-denying ordinance, renouncing all claim to the office of Principal
for themselves. As Mr. Cameron had not even the shadow of a
claim for the office himself, and had, therefore, nothing to renounce,
I merely observed on the occasion that his motion simply meant
that nothing should be done till they got Jonah thrown overboard—
meaning myself.
Mr. John Richardson was somewhat more generously disposed; for
he actually moved that, as I was rather an oldish man, I should be
appointed Principal of the College for eighteen months—doubtless that
I might serve as a warming-pan for some other and better man. I
could only regard such a motion, however, as a personal insult, although
I believe it was not so intended, and could only admire the entire
want of delicacy of feeling as well as of common sense which the
motion implied.
When this dreary exhibition of inanity, imbecility, and bad-
feel in » was in progress towards its consummation, the Rev. A. jST.
Mackray, of Ashfield, now of Torquay, in England, submitted a
motion to the Presbytery of Sydney to the effect, “ that the Presbytery
should give certain specific advice to the College Council in regard to
the choice of a Principal.” On that motion, however, the following
deliverance was adopted by the Presbytery, by way of amendment,
after much previous debate, on the motion of the Rev. Colin
McCulloch, then of Balmain, Sydney.
“ That, whilst the Presbytery greatly regrets that the Council of
St. Andrew’s College does not fairly represent the various sections of
the Church, and, still more, that the proceedings at the election of the
members were in some respects calculated to encourage the suspicion
that this state of things was the result of design, it judges it inex-
pedient to take any action in the matter, inasmuch as it possesses no
jurisdiction, either for the reparation of past mistakes or for the
direction of the Council in any procedure which the said Council
may in future choose to adopt , and for similar reasons, the Presby-
tery further deems it inexpedient to interfere by petition or otherwise
with the Council of St. Andrew’s College, as to the method which
that body may choose to adopt in fulfilment of them statutory duty
of electing a Principal.”


This deliverance sufficiently indicates, on the part of the Presby-
tery, its strong feeling of dissatisfaction and indignation both at the
manner in which the College Council had been constituted and at a
ltS Mr. Thomson moved, and thepotion
was carried, “ That the Rev. A. N. Mackray, A.M., of Ashfield, be
the Principal of the College.” Mr. Mackray, however, being m bad
health and 1 under engagement to proceed to England, declined the
annointment. I could only regard the proceeding as a public, deli-
berate, and studied insult to myself. But even if Mr Mackray had
accepted the office, he could not have been permitted to hold lt ’ ’J° r 0n
a further reference to counsel learned in the law, it was found that
the College Council could not go beyond its own body in the choice
° f a S these circumstances I deemed it expedient to apply to the
Government, requesting that, before any steps should be taken for
the incorporation of St. Andrew’s College, a Commission should be
appointed to ascertain how the Act of Parliament for the establish-
ment of the College had been carried out. This would surely have
been the proper course to have adopted on the occasion, as it would
have removed the case entirely out of the region of sectarian prejudice
and placed the whole question, which was one simply of feet, m
the hands of competent, disinterested, and honourable men. But bir
James Martin’s Government deemed it inadvisable to enter upon sue i
an investigation—very unfortunately, I conceive, for the interests o
justice, as well as for those of the whole Presbyterian community
°f th ° n c °k° n^ ar 1g72 j had the p onor to be chosen Moderator of the
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales ;
and in the course of my opening address I brought the subject of St.
Andrew’s or the Presbyterian College before the Assembly as
follows :
So early in the history of this colony as the year 1802, that is seventy
years ago, there was a small settlement of Presbyterians from the Scottish
border who had previously been resident for a time in the City of London,,
formed under the patronage of the Government of the day, at Portland Head,
on the ’Hawkesbury River. One of their number, Mr. James Mem, a humble
but intelligent mechanic, who had previously been a member of the Presby-
terian Church in Crown Court, London, of which the Rev. Dr. Gumming
in recent times been so long the pastor-this humble mdmduM, whose name
deserves to be held in everlasting remembrance, having officiated as the
voluntary catechist of the little society on their passage out, continued to do so
on thei/ settlement in the colony,—assembling them for Divine service in a
central locality in their district every Sabbath, and there engaging n the
hmh nraises of God ; reading the Scriptures, with a sermon from some Puritan
divine and lifting up their hands and their hearts to God m prayer and suppli-
cation’ Continuing" this worthy practice they were enabled, so early as the
year 1809, to erect a Presbyterian church, a commodious stone building,
which cost them £4OO, being the first place of worship of any communion that
erected tn this vast continental island by the voluntary efforts of the


people. Persevering in this exemplary practice till the year 1824, shortly after
my own arrival in the colony, I dispensed to them in that year the ordinance
of the Lord’s Supper, (which they had in the meantime declined receiving from,
other communions), agreeably to the hallowed customs of their fatherland. In
the year 1826 I brought them out a pastor from Home, when the venerable
catechist at length ceased from his labours, which he had dis ° liar ? ed ,f®
zealously for the long period of twenty-four years. I may add that, m the
year 1812, the late Admiral Bligh declared, before a High Commission Court m
London, that, in the year 1807, when he was Governor of the Colony, Mr.
Mein’s was the only assemblage of the people for divine service, Resides thnse
that were held by the Government (episcopal) chaplains, in New South Wales.
Now, surely the race of Scots Worthies, which was thus so nobly commenced in
this colony with that humble individual, has not become extinct in Mr James
Mein ? But who is there at present following the noble example which he
bequeathed to our union in this vast territory ? For my own part I know not
In such circumstances, it is surely the interest and the duty of this
Assembly to ascertain how and why it has been that the noble institution of
the future, to which the hopes of all right-hearted men of our communion were
directed with such intense interest five years ago, when the agitation commenced tor
the establishment of a college for the training up of a native ministry for our
Presbyterian communion—l say it is alike the interest and the duty ot tins
Assembly to ascertain how and why it is that that noble institution, on which
such hopes and expectations were concentrated a few years since, has hitherto
proved an utter failure—occasioning surprise, disappointment, and indignation
in many quarters, and proving a laughing-stock and an object of contempt m
numerous others. This, I maintain, without fear of contradiction, is the
question of questions for this Assembly during its present sessions.
I shall probably be told, indeed, that this General Assembly can have
nothing to do with St. Andrew’s College—an institution to be incorporated
under an Act of Parliament, with an independent jurisdiction. But the tact is
it is not so incorporated yet; and, until it is, it is, to all intents and purposes,
the mere creature of the General Assembly. The General Assembly of 1867
appointed a provisional committee to carry out the Act of Parliament of that
year for the establishment of the College; and, three years thereafter, when
the amount required for that purpose had been raised, the General Assembly
of 1870, taking it for granted, without inquiry, that the duty assigned to that
committee had been fairly and honestly discharged, and that the result would
be a fair and honest representation of the subscribers to the College and the
Presbyterians of the colony, directed an election of a council for the govern-
ment and management of the College to take place according y. u e
result of that election has proved, beyond all doubt that tke Assembly of
1870 had been grossly deceived in the matter, and that the College Council
resulting from that election is not a fair and honest representation of the i resby-
terians of the colony, but the representation of a mere section of'their
body, effected and brought about in wilful violation of the law of Christ
the Great Legislator of the Universe, and in defiance of those rules and
principles that regulate the procedure of all Christian and honourable men.
In one word, ever since the agitation for the establishment of St. Andrew
College commenced, early in the year 1868-instead of acting agreeably to the
divine rule, “ Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so
to them ’’—undue influence to an to an unprecedented extent,
was systematically and successfully used to vitiate the election o '
disfranchise a large portion of the subscribers to the College ; to carry the
election over their heads, in favour of a particular section of our Umtett
Church, and to establish a virtual dictatorship in that Church through St.
Andrew’s College. Of all this the proof is easy, direct, and unmistakable ,
and, I repeat it, it will be the bounden duty of this Assembly to ascertain the


important fact during its present sessions. The question is not one of law—
with such questions we can have nothing to do in this Assembly it is simply a
question of morals, a question of fact, as to whether an ordinance of a former
Assembly of this Church has been fairly and honestly carried out. If such an
inquiry as the case demands is granted by this Assembly, the truth in the
matters at issue will very soon be ascertained, and our future course will thence-
forth be plain and obvious; but if it should not be granted under the same
undue influence to which I have already adverted, we may at once write upon
our future College gate, “ Ichabod ! the glory is departed—for the Ark of God
is taken !” At all events the institution in the welfare of which we are all so
deeply interested will then have been based upon iniquity, and cannot be
expected to prosper.
The composition of the College Council which resulted from the election
of 1870, sufficiently attests the fact that such undue influence as I have adverted
to has been employed to a remarkable extent in the case in question. Of the
four sections of the Presbyterian Church that concurred in the Union of 1865,
much the largest of the four was the Synod of Australia, representing the
Church of Scotland; but while that large section of the united Church had no
clerical representative assigned it, among the four in the College Council, the
Free Church section had two. Nay, while the Free Church congregation, under
the Eev. Dr. Steel—and the United Presbyterian, under the Eev. Adam
Thomson, comprise seven, or a clear majority of the College Council, there are
only five such members for the fifty or sixty other congregations of the Church.
Such flagrant injustice, the evident result of undue influence and downright
packing, it would be difficult to parallel in the history of iniquitous elections
—either in Church or State—either at home or abroad.
There are three remarkable circumstances, all conducing at present to
strengthen the demand for inquiry in this matter by the present Assembly.
The College Council, resulting from the election of 1870, has now been two full
years in existence, without having taken one single step in advance in the
interests of the Church; while every step it has actually taken in any direction,
and every act and deed it has done, have been pronounced by authority null
and void, as being contrary to law. Surely, then, it is high time to inquire, in
such circumstances, whether the ordinance of the General Assembly of 1867,
forming a Provisional Committee for the establishment of St. Andrew’s
College, has been fairly and honestly carried out; and whether that rope of
sand which it has called into existence, but which, as yet, has no Parliamentary
character and no corporate rights, should not cease to subsist.
Again, the whole British Empire has been ringing, or rather boiling with
indignation for months past at a case of undue influence at the election of a
member of Parliament for the County of Galway in Ireland. In that case, a
Eoman Catholic Judge, a true patriot, a devoted lover of justice, and a right
honourable and fearless man, did not hesitate to denounce to the British
Parliament three Eomish bishops and a large number of priests for having
used such influence at that election. And is the use of undue influence at
elections confined to Eomish priests and bishops ? I wish it were, for we
should then have never heard of the mystery of iniquity which has been
developed in the history of St. Andrew’s College. For I have no hesitation in
expressing my belief and conviction that undue influence has been used by
Presbyterians in the case of that college of a character equally opposed to
British law and eternal justice with that of the Eomish priests and bishops at
the famous election for Galway., And as we have no Judge Keogh in our
communion to denounce iniquity of this particular kind on the part of men of
the same religious denomination with himself, it would seem that in the good
providence of God, the necessary but painful task has devolved upon myself.
For the third of the three remarkable circumstances to which I have
adverted, is that I should be occupying the chair on the present occasion,
now that the case of St. Andrew’s_College has come before the General Assembly


of the Church in a legitimate way for the first time since the General Assembly
of 1867, when a provisional committee was appointed to carry out the Act of
Parliament then recently passed. For surely it is the first and highest duty of
this Assembly to ascertain whether the important service then assigned to that
committee was discharged in a fair and honest and legitimate way, to the glory
of God and the welfare and advancement of the best interests of His Church.
The honourable and highly responsible position I now occupy as the Moderator
of this Assembly was, as I have stated in the outset of this address, neither
wished for nor sought for in any way by me. But as I have been, during the
whole of my public life in this colony, a zealous advocate of popular election,
and especially of its freedom and its purity, both in Church and State, it
seems that in the good providence of God the important duty of vindicating
the character of popular election in this Church has been cast upon me. And,
as I have already stated, in so far as I am personally concerned, I am prepared
to discharge that duty without fear and without favour.
I ask, then (as a measure involving the highest interest, and the bounden
duty of this Assembly), for the appointmeut of a committee to ascertain whether
the Provisional Committee of the Assembly of 1867, for the establishment of
St. Andrew’s College, under the Act of Parliament then recently passed, was
fairly and honestly carried out, and whether undue influence, to a remarkable,
to an unprecedented extent, was not systematically used to vitiate the election
of 1870, to disfranchise a large portion of the subscribers to the College, to
carry the election over their heads in favour of a particular section of our
united body, and to establish a virtual dictatorship in this Church through
St. Andrew’s College. If this Committee is granted, an equitable settlement of
the important questions at issue may be speedily effected; but if it should be
refused, an appeal to the Law Courts of the colony (which would be highly
discreditable to this Assembly) may be the necessary result.
Paralysed as our Church has thus been in all its members, through what I
cannot help designating the original sin of the formation of our College
Council nothing whatever has been done for years past in supplying the two
great desiderata of the Church—l mean the training up of a native ministry,
and the employment of suitable persons as catechists for those localities
throughout the territory for which the ordinances of religion cannot be supplied
for the present in a more legitimate and effectual way.
I trust then, fathers and brethren, that the needful measures ot reform
will at length be taken by this Assembly to remove that great blot from our
beloved Church, that “ the offering of Judah and Jerusalem may yet again be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years.”
1 have no reason to feel ashamed of my Address to the General
Assembly of 1872, of. which I have thus given the concluding
portion. “ The charges it preferred against the parties who had
usurped the management anil control of B>t. Andrew s College were
specific enough, and might have been easily refuted, if they had
either been untrue or unfounded. And it was surely the interest, as
well as the dutv, of the Assembly to have instituted a searching
inquiry into the case, before allowing an Institution of so much
importance to the Church, and which it had itself been instrumental
in originating, to pass entirely out of its hands, as it certainly would
through the incorporation of the College Council, without ascertain-
ing whether its own instructions for the establishment of that
Institution had been fairly and honestly carried out , in such case I
should either have been fully justified on the one hand or confuted
on the other. But there was no intention, in certain influential


quarters, to permit any inquiry in the case on the part of the
Assembly ; and, therefore, just as in that of the Presbytery of
Sydney, on the motion of the Rev. Colin McCulloch, although for
a somewhat different reason, no action was taken in the matter by
that venerable Court.
it bad been the general opinion of the public towards the close
of the year 1872 that if the solemn farce of the proceedings of the
College Council, which I have narrated in the preceding pages, and
which had then been going on for nearly two years, had been con-
tinued, they would have ended at last in an appeal to the Courts of
Law. I merely alluded to this circumstance at the close of my
Address; but to allege, as was done on the occasion, that I had
myself threatened the Assembly with law proceedings, was utterly
unfounded.
It had now been ascertained that the College Council could not
go beyond its own body in the choice of a Principal; and an election
accordingly took place on the 24th September, 1872. On that
occasion the Honorable S. D. Gordon, the oldest and ablest of the
lay members of the Council, a Free Churchman also, and a member
of Dr. Steel’s congregation—after a long and able speech, in which he
described my career in the colony for the previous half-century, and
pointed out the services I had rendered during that long period both
to Church and State—moved thal I should be Principal of St. Andrew’s
College. This motion was seconded, also in a long and able speech,
by the Honorable John Frazer,* the next oldest member of the
Council, and was then supported by the Honorable John Richardson
and Mr. David Waugh. An amendment on this motion, however,
was moved by Mr. C. Smith, the South Sea skipper, at the instance
of Dr. Steel (who wisely keeps behind backs on such occasions), to the
effect that the Rev, Adam Thomson should be the Principal of the
College; and that amendment, having been seconded by the Rev.
Dr. Steel, and supported by the Rev. Janies Cameron, A.M., —who,
as a second Free Church clerical member, had no right to be there at
all, to the exclusion of a member for the Church of Scotland, or
largest section of the Church,—all the rest of the dead weight—Mr.
Goodlet, Mr. Campbell, and Mr. Brown—followed as a matter of
course.
The vote of the Council, therefore, proclaiming as it did the
iniquitous amount of undue influence exerted on the occasion was as
follows :
For Dr. Lang: The Hon. S. D. Gordon, The Hon. John Frazer, the Hon.
John Richardson, and Mr. D. Waugh.
For Rev. Adam Thomson: Dr. Steel, Mr. Cameron, A.M., Mr. C. Smith,
Mr. Goodlet, Mr. Andrew Brown, and Mr. John Campbell.
The Rev. Adam Thomson was therefore declared Principal ot
the College.
* Mr. Frazer was not then au Ai.JUO., or member of our Legislative Couuuii, but lie was
so afterwards.


Sir James Martin, the present Chief Justice, who was then a
barrister in private practice, had shortly before declared to the Rev.
Dr. M‘Gibbon, who had consulted him on the subject, that an
election by the College Council would not stand unless it were
unanimous. But for this opinion of Sir James Martin, in which I
was led to believe the Attorney General, Mr. Butler, concurred, there
would have been no election at the time, until either an amendment
of the Act of Parliament in the case, or due inquiry into the ante-
cedents of the election, had taken place ; for, knowing well what
would happen, I should otherwise have absented myself on the
occasion. But as doctors disagree occasionally, so also do lawyers; for
Mi\ Butler, who was then Attorney General, pronounced the election
good, and it stood accordingly.
Mr. Thomson at the time was Merely the second-rate minister
of a United Presbyterian congregation in Sydney, which he had
gradually reduced from a comparatively flourishing condition to the
merest fragment; and neither in standing nor in scholarship was
he a fit and proper person for the office to which he was elected.
But envy is one of the strongest passions in the clerical mind. I
was a member of the Colonial Parliament, and had been so for many
years—whether for good or for evil it is not for me to state—when
the Union of the Presbyterian Church was formed in the Colony, and
the first General Assembly held. As I was the oldest minister of
our communion, and had been instrumental in bringing out and
settling not a few of the others, while most of them were then but
of yesterday, it would doubtless have been a matter of common
decency, as well as of propriety, to have elected me Moderator of
the first General Assembly—the only occasion on which I ever
cared for or wished for the office. But that unworthy feeling was too
strong in the breasts of the brethren to permit of anything of the
kind, and Mr. Adam Thomson was therefore chosen on that occasion,
us well as in the one in question, as a stop-gap to exclude me. Dr.
Steel and the Rev. James Cameron who, as a second Free Church
clerical member of the College Council, had no right whatever to
the position he occupied, and who had usurped the proper place of the
Rev. Colin McCulloch, a much abler and better man, both voted
for Mr. Thomson, and the dead weight, which was of no intellectual
value whatever, enabled them to carry the election.
It will doubtless be supposed, and perhaps taken for granted,
that there must either have been something grievously wrong in my
personal antecedents, or that the Presbyterian system of Church
government must be a very bad one, to give occasion for such trans-
actions as these. But it will be evident from a remarkably parallel
case, even in the Apostolic age, that neither of these inferences is at
all wari’antable. For, incredible as it may seem, it is nevertheless
the fact, that the great Apostle of the Gentiles, the Apostle Paul,


was actually treated by Jus brethren, the very ministers lie had him-
self settled over the infant Churches in Asia Minor, in precisely the
same manner as I was by mine. The Apostle had planted far more
Churches and settled far more ministers in Asia Minor than I have
done in Australasia, —although I have done something considerable
in that way also. But listen to his own confession on the subject.
“ This tJiou knowest .” he tells his son Timothy, “ that all they
which are in Asia he turned away from me ; of whom are Phygellus
and Hermogenes .”—2 Tim. i. 15. What particular wrong they had
inflicted on the Apostle—whether they had excluded him from the
Moderatorship of their First General Assembly, or from the office
of Principal of their Divinity College—we cannot tell; but the fact
that they had done him some grievous wrong is unquestionable.
Now had Paul been a lord-bishop, whether Anglican or Romish, as
many suppose he must have been, nothing of this kind could possibly
have happened; but he was merely a Presbyterian minister like
myself, and the brethren simply voted him out, as they did me. It
will not be supposed, of course, that there could have been anything
wrong in the antecedents of the Apostle ; and as for the government
of the Apostolic or Presbyterian Church, it was evidently pretty
much the same in the case in question—the treatment of its more
prominent men—as it is now. The celebrated Madame de Stael
gives us the rationale of all such cases in a much more satisfactory
manner when she tells us that “ The strongest antipathy in nature
is that of infei’ior men towards those who are in any way superior
to themselves,” whether in point of talent, of services, or of sacrifices
for the cause with which they are identified.
I should be sorry, however, to have it supposed that I consider
Dr. Steel and Mr. Cameron the Phygellus and Hermogenes of our
Presbyterian Church, although I confess there is a strong family
resemblance.
Neither Dr. Steel, nor Mr. Cameron, nor Mr. Thomson had
ever rendered the slightest service or made the slightest sacrifices
for the cause of superior education in the Colony. For my own
part, I had made two voyages to England in that cause, and had
brought out for educational purposes, and in a great measure at my
own expense, three-college bred men, all Masters of Arts in three
different Scotch Universities, through whom I succeeded in establishing
an educational institution in Sydney, which maintained a high charac-
ter, agreeably to the testimony of his Honor Sir William Burton, in
his book on the Colony, during the ten years of its vigorous
existence, and gave a superior education for the time to upwards of
five hundred of our Colonial youth. Then as to pecuniary subscrip-
tions for the college, while Dr. Steel, Mr. Cameron, and Mr. Thomson
contributed only a hundred pounds altogether, my family, including
a legacy of ten thousand pounds subject to the life rent of the donor’s


widow, had contributed not less than £11,140, that is more than
all the other subscribers put together.*
It was no wonder, therefore, that I should have set my heart,
as I had certainly done in resigning my seat in Parliament from fat-
other than pecuniary motives, on the prospect of being chosen Prin-
cipal of St. Andrew’s College.
All that now remained for the complete establishment of the
College was the incorporation of the College Council, which his
Excellency the Governor was authorized by Act of Parliament to
effect, when satisfied that a Principal and Twelve Councillors had
been appointed, and the other conditions of the Act fulfilled. But
as there were only eleven Councillors, besides the Principal, it was
evident that his Excellency could do nothing of the kind without
an amendment of the College Act, unless he chose to ignore the
fact and override the law. This difficulty therefore remained, and
it was confidently expected that an amended Act would have to be
obtained; which would in all likelihood have implied various other
desirable changes, besides the one in question, and led perhaps to a
Parliamentary inquiry into the whole case, before the incorporation
of the College Council could be legally effected.
In these circumstances, great efforts were made to get the
incorporation of the College Council effected, notwithstanding the
legal difficulty in the case; and Mr. C. Smith, one of the dead-weight
Councillors, who had some Parliamentary influence to bring to bear
on the case, kept badgering Mr. Parkes, who was then Premier, on
the subject day after day. At the same time, Mr. Neill, Manager
of the City Bank, who had first observed and called attention to the
legal point of difficulty—that of there being only eleven Councillors
instead of twelve, with the Principal—brought it under the notice of
the Premier in an earnest application to stay proceedings, at least till
the point should be decided by the Supreme Court of the Colony. Mr.
Parkes, however, declined acceding to this very reasonable proposal,
and like another Alexander, cut the Gordian knot by deciding, in
the face of the law, with a majority of the Cabinet (for there was a
division in the case) that the Governor should be advised to proclaim
the incorporation of the College in the Government Gazette.
Before the incorporation was gazetted, however, a strong opinion
was given by Sir James Martin and Mr. Darley, two of the ablest
barristers in the Colony, at the instance of Mr. William Barker, of
Hunter-street, that the incorporation of the College Council, in the
absence of a twelfth Councillor, would be invalid, as being contrary
*My late brother-in-law, John Hunter Baillie, Esq., Secretary to the Bank of New South
Wales, who had resided for years under my roof, bequeathed to a Presbyterian College in
Sydney, in the year 1854, at least ten thousand pounds, subject to the life rent of his widow,
for the maintenance of two professorships—one for the English Language and Literature, and
the other for the Oriental and Polynesian Languages. His widow, Mrs. Baillie, contributed
a thousand pounds additional from her own resources; my late brother contributed one hun-
dred, and the rest of my family forty pounds, making in all £11,140.


to law. I waited upon the Governor myself, with this opinion, when
His Excellency told me that he had not then heard of the case in
any way : “ But, you know,” he added, “ whole files of papers are
sent me, daily, by my Ministry, which I must sign, as a matter of
course.” “ Whether right or wrong, your Excellency!” I replied.
“ Whether right or wrong,” said His Excellency, repeating my
words, and laughing as he did so. St. Andrew’s College there-
fore was, at length, incorporated, and the Supreme Court, when
appealed to on the subject, decided that the procedure of the
Government in the matter was right. Whether it would have done
so, before any action had been taken by the Government, and the
question had been presented to it befoi’ehand as a mere point of law,
is a very different question ; and so fully persuaded of the contrary
was Sir James Martin, now Chief Justice, that he strongly advised
me to appeal to the Privy Council on the subject, which I did
accordingly. I had occasion to visit England on another matter, in
the year 1874. As the case could not be brought on before I left
London, on my return to the colony, towards the close of that year, I
placed in the hands of the solicitor who had been engaged to conduct
it a hundred pounds, which he thought would be sufficient for the
purpose, as the case was very simple, and would, in all likelihood, be
a very short one; but the solicitor, having heard of the decease of
the late Rev. Adam Thomson, Principal of the College, shortly after
I had left England, and supposing that that event might, in some
way, affect or influence our proceedings, left the case in abeyance,
and wrote out for further instructions. I was much disappointed at
this delay, especially as my own available funds were locked up to
meet the result of the Appeal; so I gave the requisite directions,
perhaps too hastily, to withdraw the appeal, and to let the matter rest.
The Rev. Adam Thomson, having been long in bad health, died
on the Bth November, 1874 ; and, on the 20th April, 1875, the Rev.
John Kinross, of Kiama, a country minister, who had never been
heard of before beyond his own district, was elected his successor.
Of course he was a Free Churchman, and a friend and supporter of Hr.
Steel’s. To his credit it may be mentioned that, having no
Academical title when he arrived in the colony, he had qualified
himself for that of Bachelor of Arts at the University of Sydney ;
but so little was he known at that University that, when his appoint-
ment to his present office became known, one of the Professors of
the University asked one of our Ministers, a superior scholar,
“ Who is this you are sending up to us for St. Andrew’s College—
somebody we have never heard of before 1” Even as a preacher,
Mr. Kinross’s standing was a comparatively humble one ; for, on a
vacancy occurring at Newtown, one of the suburbs of Sydney, in
1874, although Dr. Steel’s friends did all they could to ensure his
settlement in that vacancy, he was thrown out by one of the three
ministers whom I had been instrumental in bringing up from New


Zealand—the Bev. A. M. Tait, who had then just arrived in
colony.
My chief object in desiring the office of Principal of St. Andrew’s
College was that, in addition to the discharge of the proper duties of
that office, I might be enabled to found an institution outside the
University for the training up of candidates for the ministry in the
Presbyterian Church on a principle which I had seen in remarkably
successful operation in America in the year 1840. Early in the pre-
sent century the Presbyterian Churches in America found themselves
in precisely the same circumstances as we are actually experiencing
at this moment in this colony- -the supply of ministers from the old
country had entirely ceased; the number of students whose parents
could support them as candidates for the ministry at College was
yearly diminishing in proportion as the field of action was becoming
more extensive, while the difficulty of supplying the ordinances of
religion to the rising settlements all over the country was increasing
everyday. In these circumstances it occurred to some master-mind
to form what has been designated “ The General Education Society”
of America; the object of which was to select youths of piety and
promise from the humbler classes of society in all parts of the country,
and to raise the requisite funds for their support, while pursuing their
studies for the ministry in the schools and colleges of the country.
The idea took remarkably well with the American Churches ; nume-
rous youths of piety and promise were selected from all parts of the
country, and funds were raised for their support, both in the prepara-
tory schools or academies, and in the Colleges and Universities. Nay,
so popular and successful had the scheme proved that, at the period of
my visit to the United States, in the year 1840, the General Educa-
tion Society had actually trained up and sent forth into the great
field of the world not fewer than fourteen hundred ministers !
The principle of the Society was not to give the sums they
advanced for their beneficiaries as a charitable donation, but simply as
a loan, to be repaid by the beneficiary as soon as practicable after his
settlement in the ministry; for which purpose he had to give his
promissory note to the Society to enable it to continue the process
without pressing unreasonably on the churches. But in the event of
the beneficiary being sent to any missionary field, either within the
States or beyond seas, where repayment by the beneficiary was
not to be expected, his note of hand was forthwith cancelled, and his
debt to the Society deemed to be discharged.
Although the Americans were the first to apply this principle
systematically and extensively, the practice has not been altogether
tinknown in the mother country. In the Quarterly Review for
October, 1870, it is stated that Lord Chancellor Plunkett, who was
born in 1764, and was one of the ablest and best men that Ireland has
ever produced, was the youngest son of a Presbyterian minister in
Dublin, who died young and left his family in a state of dependence.


Finding, however, that their deceased pastor’s youngest son, Thomas
Cunningham Plunkett, was a lad of promise, his father’s congregation
very handsomely advanced the funds necessary for his residence and
'education in Trinity College, Dublin, the whole of which he repaid
with interest when he became a barrister.
It was accordingly my declared intention, on retiring from the
active duties of the pastorate, on the completion of the 50th year of
my ministry, in 1873, to devote the remainder of my days, if God
should spare me in life and health, to this noble object; for I trust
that I shall not be wearied in well-doing, notwithstanding the scurvy
treatment I have experienced from the present office-bearers of St.
Andrew’s College. I am happy to state that in carrying out this
intention, which I have hitherto been prevented from doing, I have
received much encouragement from distant localities in the colony,
which I propose to visit for the purpose, if God will.
That lads of piety and promise are to be found in sufficient
numbers throughout the colony, to be boarded and educated as candi-
dates for the ministry on the American principle I have indicated
above, I have no doubt whatever. The following is an extract of a
letter on the subject from a respectable schoolmaster on one of our
Northern rivers, of date Nov. sth, 1874) “ I have not fewer than
nine fine healthy sons of (I hope) piety and promise —the eldest under
twenty-one. It was he who wrote you concerning the Rev. Mr.
Thom’s death at the Richmond River. I would wish, if I were able,
to give every one of them a college education. But what can Ido ?
my means are so limited, and my duties as a teacher so heavy and
laborious.”
Now, what has either the late or the present Principal of St.
Andrew’s College ever done, or even attempted doing, either in this
way or in any other, for ensuring a future supply of ministers of the
Gospel for this vast Australian portion of the great field of the world?
Why, absolutely nothing. In the spirit of helplessness and incapa-
city, they have merely been sitting, like the patients of old, at the
pool of Bethesda, waiting till some Presbyterian angel come down
and trouble the waters, by providing another bursary or scholarship
for St. Andrew’s College. Even the Tutorial Institute, from which we
were led to expect so much in this way, and for which one of our
still State-paid ministers was permitted to retain his salary of <£lso
u year, after resigning his proper charge, has turned out a regular
sham. For, although the Rev. J. B. Laughton’s mere boarding-
house for grammar school boys numbers nineteen boarders, it is a
matter of question whether any one of them will ever come forward
for the ministry in the Presbyterian Church.
For some time after the union of the Presbyterian Church, in
1865, the different sections of which it had previously been composed
were gradually amalgamating, and thereby realizing the beautiful
idea of the Psalmist—


Behold how good a thing it is.
And how becoming well.
Together such as brethren are,
In unity to dwell.
But Dr. Steel, by his thoroughly selfish, unbrotherly, and anii-
christian, though successful efforts to vitiate and assume the control
of the election of St. Andrew’s College, and to get his Free Church
lean cattle driven into the educational preserve, has not only damaged
and degraded what might otherwise have been one of the noblest
Institutions of the Southern hemisphere, but has thrown an apple of
discord into our camp, and raised a spirit of antagonism and division
amongst us which he will never be able to allay.
The buildings of St. Andrew’s College are now completed, and
the institution is to be opened on the 18th proximo. I have had the
honour on the occasion to receive the following invitation, to which I
have hitherto, for reasons which it is unnecessary to state, declined
replying till now :
St. Andrew’s College,
Sydney, 19th April, 1876.
Eev. and Dear Sir, —At the meeting of the Council, held yesterday, it was
resolved (after you had left) that the opening of St. Andrew’s College should take
place on Saturday, the 18th of June next, at 2.30 p.m., and that you should be
requested to take part in the proceedings by offering up the first prayer.
Will you have the kindness to inform me, at your earliest convenience,
whether you will comply with the request of the Council ?
I am, Eev. and Dear Sir,
Yours truly,
John Kineoss.
Eev. Dr. Lang.
[Eeply.]
Sydney, May 31st, 1876.
Eev. and Dear Sir, —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 19th ultimo, inviting me, on the part of the College Council,
to take part in the proceedings at the opening of St. Andrew’s College on the
18th of June next, by offering up the first prayer.
I have hitherto deferred replying to this letter, not from discourtesy, but
for reasons which it is unnecessary for me to state. I now do so by saying that
I cannot take any part in the proceedings at the opening of St. Andrew’s College,
and that in particular I cannot ask the Divine blessing on an institution which,
under its present management, has, in the strong but appropriate language of
one of our own brethren, been “ conceived in sin and brought forth in iniquity.”
I am, Eev. and Dear Sir,
Yours very sincerely,
John Dunmoee Lang, D.D.
Eev. Principal Kinross, Ac., Ac.
111. THE PHILLIP STREET CHURCH CASE.
The third of the three cases to which I alluded in the outset, as
illustrative of the very questionable moral principles and practice of
the leaders of the Free Church party in this colony, is that of the
transference or sale of the valuable property of the Phillip-street


Church, Sydney, to the Rev. Dr. Steel and his congregation at a
notorious undervalue, to the great injury and loss of the Presbyterian
community generally in Sydney.
The Presbyterian Church, Phillip-street, Sydney, was erected at
the instance, and in great measure through the personal efforts, of
the Rev. Hugh Darling, who arrived in the colony from Scotland as
a minister of the United Presbyterian Church, in the year 1855, and
who continued for upwards of two years thereafter to officiate in that
capacity in the Court House, King-street, (the use of which had been
granted him for the purpose,) where he collected a pretty large and
highly respectable congregation. Of that congregation Mrs. Mary
Roberts, a wealthy lady, of Scottish parentage and a native of the
colony, was a member; and when it had become sufficiently organized
and consolidated to take steps for the erection of a place of worship,
that lady very generously sold the office-bearers the allotment on
which the church stands on peculiarly favourable terms ; for whereas
the allotment immediately adjoining had been sold at £lBOO, she
charged them only £6OO, on the ground of its being intended for the
erection of a place of worship for the United Presbyterians, and when
that amount was actually paid her, she presented them with a cheque
for £lOO towards the building.
The church, including the amount paid for the ground, cost
about £5OOO, the greater part of which was contributed by the public
through the personal exertions of Mr. Darling, who, although a
popular and esteemed preacher, resigned his charge for reasons which
it is unnecessary to state, and left the colony for England towards
the close of the year 1859, having occupied the new building some-
what less than two years. Mr. Darling afterwards returned to
Australia, but not to New South Wales, and became the pastor of
a Presbyterian Church at Emerald Hill, one of the suburbs of Mel-
bourne, in the colony of Victoria.
The Rev. Adam Thomson, who succeeded Mr. Darling, arrived
in the colony in 1861, and for several years thereafter his congregation
continued to maintain its former numbers and efficiency; afterwards,
however, it lost ground, and it gradually dwindled down to a mere
fragment. Mr. Thomson having in the meantime obtained another
office, with an adequate salary, the idea had actually been entertained
of disposing of the church altogether; and in prospect of this occurring,
Mr. Moses Moss, a wealthy Jew in Sydney, made a liberal offer for
it, with a view of having it converted into a synagogue, which,
however, was declined. During Mr. Thomson’s ministry it had been
deemed expedient and necessary to add a new frontispiece to the
church, the erection of which involved the congregation in a debt of
about £2000; but Mrs. Roberts having again come generously
forward with a further donation of £BSO, the debt on the church was


reduced to £1250. The building, which was one of stone and of
creditable appearance, had then cost, as I happened to learn from the
Treasurer in the year 1873, £7OOO.
The other office to which Mr. Thomson had been appointed so
opportunely, in the way I have stated above, on the 24th September,
1872, was that of Principal of St. Andrew’s College; but, as the College
was not incorporated till about six months thereafter, or, on the 21st
of March, 1873, Mr. Thomson continued to officiate in his church,
and did not finally resign his pastoral charge till the 22nd August of
that year. The negotiations that were in progress in the meantime,
on the part of those concerned, were quite unknown to the public,
and especially to the Presbyterians of Sydney, till they were startled
one morning beyond measure with the astounding information that
Mr. Thomson and his friends had virtually"sold their church, which
they were about to leave, to Dr. Steel and his congregation, for the
mere payment of the debt on the building, or for the notorious under-
value of £1250 ! It was alleged at the time, whether true or not is
of no consequence, that the arrangement for the sale was virtually
made on the sth of May, 1873, when Dr. Steel and Mr. Thomson
occupied the same carriage at the public funeral of the late Mr.
Wentworth,
Dr. Steel’s church was one of those comfortless and costly iron
buildings that were got up to order at Home, for the goldfields of
Australia, during the prevalence of the gold mania, when mechanical
labour for the erection of buildings of any kind was scarcely
procurable in the colonies. It adjoined the Parliamentary buildings
of the colony, and it was understood that when the new Parlia-
ment House, of which the plan had actually been adopted,
should be erected, the ground it stood on would be resumed by the
Government. In these circumstances the arrangement carried out
by those concerned in the purchase of the Phillip-street Church is
related, with great plausibility, in the following paragraph of the
“ Financial Report of the Deacons’ Court of the Congregation of
St. Stephen’s (Dr. Steel’s) Church, Macquarie-street, Sydney, for the
year 1873 —“ln endeavouring to carry out the resolution of this
congregation to erect a new church, the Deacons’ Court thought
proper to communicate with the Colonial Secretary, and to inquire
whether the Government had any intention of resuming the site on
which the church stands for public purposes, as rumours of this had
existed for years. The Colonial Secretary immediately replied that
it was likely the land would be required, and that he would write
fully on the subject a few weeks after. While waiting for further
communication from the Government, an overture was made by the
congregation in Phillip-street to unite with them on the retirement
of the Rev. Adam Thomson, and to use their church for public
worship. After various meetings an arrangement was amicably made,
to be submitted to the congregations respectively. It consisted of


the following propositions : That, on the retirement of Mr.
Thomson, the congregation should meet in St. Stephen’s Church, and
worship there; that the sessions should be united ; that, as the
committee of management in Phillip-street was not an ordained
body, the Deacons’ Court of St. Stephen’s Church should assume
the management of all the property; that the debt of £1250 on
the church in Phillip-street should be taken, and the said church,
after the necessary alterations and improvements for the accommo-
dation of the congregation, should be used for regular worship. The
Deacons’ Court resolved to recommend, also, that the Church in
Macquarie-street should be retained for the purpose, and used for the
Sabbath-school, pending negotiations for its sale to the best
advantage.”
Dr. Steel’s congregation had, it seems, been talking for some
time previous of getting a new church, and this bright idea of how
that desirable object could be best accomplished happily occurred to
the parties most deeply interested in the very nick of time. It is
passing strange, however, that these worthy ministers, who usually
got credit for being well informed, should have both been entirely
unacquainted with the fact that the arrangement they were contem-
plating was entirely beyond their power to effect, as being directly
contrary to the laws of their own Church ; for, in chapter eighth of
the Code of Rules of the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales,
clause 91, it is declared that, “ the General Assembly alone has the power
to erect new presbyteries, or to alter the constituent charges of those
already existing .” Now, here was not only the alteration of an exist-
ing charge by the parties concerned, but the actual annihilation of
that particular charge through its absorption into another. And the
other Scots worthies of the Presbytery of Sydney, who, when the above
arrangement was submitted to them for their sanction and approval,
sanctioned and approved of it by a large majority, were evidently
equally and grossly ignorant of their own law. There was, indeed, a
small minority on the occasion, headed by the Rev. Dr. McGibbon,
who, in a series of resolutions, pxotested against the decision of the
majority, but without effect. That decision, however, was unques-
tionably null and void, as it was contrary to the fundamental laws of
the Church; the General Assembly, which alone had power to
decide in the case, never having been consulted in the matter.
Let us now look at the whole case on its merits, independently
of the law, which I have just stated.
The question, therefore, as to whether the Phillip-street church
should be virtually handed over to Dr. Steel and his congregation,
on being referred to his own congregation by Mr. Thomsen, was
decided in the affirmative by a majority of fifteen to seven. What
right, I ask, then had Mr. Thomson, the retiring pastor, to take the
part he thus acted in the case—that is, virtually to dispose of the
property of the Church which he had done so little to create, and to


hand over the mere fragment of the congregation which his prede-
cessor, Mr. Darling, had collected and formed, but which he had
virtually annihilated, to another congregation which had no claim
whatever in the case ? And what right had the fifteen, including
not fewer than three members of Mr. Thomson’s own family, but
scarcely any of the original members and subscribers for the erection
of the church, to vote away the property, at Mr. Thomson’s instance,
in the face of the seven who remonsti’ated and protested against the
proceeding? I believe both Mr. John Goodlet and Mr. John Rich-
ardson voted in the majority of fifteen for the virtual sale of the
church to Dr. Steel and his congregation, although neither of them
had any intention to attach himself to that congregation; the one
having moved to Ashfield and joined the church there, and the other
having removed his family and establishment to Armidale, in New
England. Besides, Mr. W. King, who headed the minority of seven,
had been Treasurer of the Church in Phillip-street from its commence-
ment, and, next to Mrs. Roberts, was one of the largest contributors,
both personally and influentially, towards its erection. ,
Again, what right in equity and justice could either Dr. Steel
or his office-bearers at his instance, have to pui’chase, at so notorious
an undervalue as £1250, a property which, independently of
the original and virtual gift of the allotment by Mrs. Roberts, had
cost nearly £7OOO, and which belonged toothers? And was the
Macquarie-street congregation, which glories in being the wealthiest
of the Presbyterian communion in Sydney, so poor as to require such
an act of palpable injustice to be committed on its behalf? Had it not
a valuable property of its own, since disposed of for £4OOO, to enable
it to erect a new church for itself in some other suitable place ? Why,
the case of the Macquarie-street congregation taking over the Phillip-
street church property at the notorious undervalue of £1250 reminds
one of the rich man who, to entertain a passing traveller, spared his
own flocks and took the poor man’s ewe lamb ; for there is clamant
poverty and much spiritual destitution concerned in the case, as I
shall shew presently. At all events, the whole transaction detailed
in the paragraph I have quoted from their financial report was dis-
creditable in the highest degree to the Macquarie-street congregation,
and, through them, to the whole Presbyterian community of our city.
But there is another party who has a deep interest in the case, but
whose rights in the matter were rather strangely ignored. I mean Mrs.
Mary Roberts. In addition to the virtual gift of £I2OO to the
Phillip-street Church, in selling its office-bearers the ground it stands
on for £6OO, when it was really worth £IBOO, that very generous lady
gave £IOO towards the building, and afterwards contributed £BSO
towards the liquidation of its debt of £2OOO. But Mrs. Roberts, whom
I happened to see on another matter shortly after the transference or
sale of the church had taken place, told me that she had never been
consulted about the transference of the Phillip-street Church property


to the Macquarie-street congregation, and added most indignantly, when
I asked her whether she approved of it, that she certainly did not,
but quite the contrary: as she never supposed, when contributing to-
wards the Phillip-street Church, that she was doing so for a church for
Dr. Steel, Now, in all questions of ecclesiastical property, when
appealed to courts of law, these courts uniformly lay the utmost stress
upon the question as to what were the views and objects of the per-
sons concerned in creating the particular ecclesiastical property; and
it was, therefore, a piece of the grossest impropriety on the part of
the persons concerned in this case never to consult Mrs. Roberts on
the subject. Nay, I met at Young, when on a clerical visit to that
part of the country in the year, 1873, Mr. David Duncan, a re-
spectable tradesman in the place, since deceased, who told me that he
was one of the parties concerned in the founding of the Phillip-street
Church, and that his name was inscribed on the roll deposited in
the foundation-stone • adding that he considered the alleged trans-
ference of the property a gross invasion of the rights of those con-
cerned.
I recollect reading in the Times, when in London, in the year
1834, the report of the speech of the Vice-Chancellor of England in the
famous case of the Lady Hewley’s charity,—in which Unitarians had
seized and appropriated the valuable property which that bene-
volent lady, who was herself a Presbyterian of the reign of Queen Anne,
had bequeathed for the training up and support of a godly ministry
in the North of England ; and I was particularly interested on the
occasion in observing the anxiety which the learned Vice-Chancellor
showed to ascertain the views of Lady Hewley herself and the
doctrines she desired to propagate through her noble bequest. But
in their anxiety to complete their work the parties concerned, both in
the sale and in the purchase of the Phillip-street Church, entirely
ignored the views and the contributions of Mrs. Mary Roberts.
There can be no doubt also that if Mr. King, “ who had been
Treasurer of the Phillip-street Church from its commencement,” with
his minority of seven, who protested and voted against the sale of
their Church, had instituted an action in the Supreme Court against
the high-handed procedure of the majority, they would have gained
the action with costs.* But Mr. King is a man of peace, and declined
* Some time before my visit to America in the year 1840, there had been an incorporating
union effected by a large majority of both Churches, between the “ Presbyterian Church of the
United States,” and the “Associate Synod of America.” The result of this union was to dis-
continue the Divinity College of the Associate Synod at Newark, in New Jersey, and to transfer
the valuable library belonging to that College to the famous Presbyterian College of Princeton
in the same State. But three of the ministers of the old Synod, having dissented from the
Union, brought an action in the Supreme Court of the United States, for the recovery of the
property of the Synod, and gained it. On visiting the Divinity College at Princeton, along
with my friend, the late Eev. Dr. Samuel Miller, Professor of Church History at Princeton, I
happened to observe a large number of empty shelves in the College library, and asked Dr.
Miller why they were so, when he told me that these were the shelves from which the library
of the old Divinity College of the Associate Synod had just been removed and carried back to
Newark, in consequence of the decision of the Supreme Court of the United States.


caiTying the question into a court of law. But neither he nor
M rs. Roberts has ever joined Dr. Steel’s Church. —Mrs. Roberts having
attached herself to the ministry of Chalmer’s Church, under the
Rev. Dr. Wazir Beg, and Mr. King to that of St. Andrew’s Church,
under that of the Rev, Dr. White, T.C.D.
It is edifying to observe the self-complacency which the managing
committees of the two congregations exhibited in reporting to the
Presbytery of Sydney the steps they had taken respectively in effect-
ing the happy consummation which they were pleased to call their
amalgamation or union, without deeming it necessary to say a single
syllable as to the downright iniquity that characterised the whole
transaction. The Presbytery, which had in the meantime become
thoroughly Free Ghurchified for the occasion, ratified and confiimed
the unfon on the 9th September, 1873 ; merely expressing the modest
hope that the united congregation would, in future, exhibit increased
liberality for the extension of the Church.
From this deliverance of the Presbytery, the Rev. Dr.
Me Gibbon dissented, for reasons afterwards to be given in. These
reasons were accordingly submitted to the Presbytery at its next
ordinary meeting, on the 7th October following, when the Rev. Dr,
Gilchrist moved, and Dr. McGibbon seconded,—That they should
be entered on the minutes of the Presbytery; but Mr. McMaster,
one of Dr. Steel’s people, moved, by way of amendment, and Mr.
Walker seconded, —That they be not inserted in the minutes; and,
the roll being called, the amendment was carried. Whether the
majority had begun to be ashamed of the transaction, and desired
that no ecclesiastical record of it should remain, does not appear;
but Dr. McGibbon, being determined that his resolutions should be
known to the public, had them inserted as follows, by way of adver-
tisement, in the Sydney Morning Herald of October Bth, 18/3. I
may add, in passing, that I was myself absent in New Zealand
during these transactions.
It is somewhat remarkable that that library ol the old Associate Synod of America should
have been associated with one of my own earliest recollections In the year 1804 or 1805 I
heimr taken in her hand by my mother, when a very little boy, to hear the Rev. Dr.
Mason an eminent mLister from America, preaching in the Middle Parish Chuich of Greenock,
for a Divinity College in that country. I recollect perfectly seeing the old white-haired minister
in the pulpit and bad probably put my penny in the plate on the occasion. It was interesting
to recur to this recollection when looking at the empty shelves in 1 rmceton College, from which
the library that Dr. Mason had thus been instrumental in forming had just been removed to
its original place in Newark.
T nreached during my visit to America, on that occasion, in a large Presbyterian Church
of hundred Communicants, in Philadelphia, which had been erected for the
Xssoclate Synod by a Mrs. Duncan, of that city. That Church had also to follow the fate of
Dr Masoids library; for although the whole congregation had joined the Union, the Church
had to pass over to the small minority in Newark. The Americans, however, were just the men
fo. such an emergency • for the office-bearers got their lawyers to submit certain motions
merely to gainTimf ufl they could erect a much finer Chuich for the congregation, now the
Church in Philadelphia There can be no doubt, therefore, as to the
result of an action in the case of the Phillip-street Church even yet.


Copy of Reasons of Dissent of the Rev. Dr. M'Gibbon, from the finding of the
Presbytery of Sydney, September 9th, 1873, in re the Amalgamation of
the Phillip-street Church with the Church in Macquarie-street.
I*—l dissent because the resolution of the Presbytery is vague and
general, and might, as far as the hope expressed in it is concerned, be found
anent the liberality of all the churches.
. I dissent because it was the duty of the Presbytery, on such an occasion,
to instruct the Churches concerned, in what it conceived to be their duty in the
matter in hand.
3.—1 dissent, because the Presbytery ought not to have allowed a Church
which had existed so long, and had struggled so nobly in the creation of valuable
property, to become extinct on such unequal terms, and to die ingloriously.
4- I dissent, because some of the Phillip-street people were unwilling, by
a resolution of the majority, to pass into oblivion, on such unequal terms—'the
Presbytery ought to have refused its consent, and to have insisted that the
remembrance of the Church should live in the direct result of its efforts and
liberality in some other quarter.
3.—1 dissent because it was a righteous thing that the Macquarie-street
Church, in literally “absorbing” the people of Phillip-street Church, should
purchase the Church building at something like its fair value—the money to be
expended by a vote of the Phillip-street Church, in such church buildings in
other places as might be most required. The property was worth £4OOO, and
only a debt of £l2OO remained upon it. Had the building been sold for £4OOO
a balance of nearly £3OOO would have remained, after the discharge of the debt!
It ought to have been the privilege of the Phillip-street people to have given
this money, as their own liberality, to two 'or three destitute districts around
Sydney, for the purpose of commencing new churches ; and such noble
generosity would have perpetuated the name of the Phillip-street Church
through many generations.
6- Instead of this, however, the Presbytery consented to a most unfair
arrangement, by which this valuable property became the property of the
Macquarie-street Church for £l2OO, that is, for the mere payment of the debt.
Of course it will be said that some money will be expended on the repair
and renewal of the building; but this cannot affect the arrangements, for the
building, without any repairs, was fully worth £4OOO. It will be said, too,
that because the Phillip-street people join the Macquarie-street people, the
church is still as much the property of the Phillip-street people as it is of the
Macquarie-street people ; but this is distinctly not the case. The Phillip-street
people are truly and absolutely absorbed in the Macquarie-street Church ; for
notone vestige of the Phillip-street Church remains in the Ecclesiastical Act
called an “ Amalgamation.” Forinstanoe, the Phillip-street Committee of Manage!
ment is “ abolished ;” the hymn book is excluded ; the posture of worship is
EEVERSBD ; the harmonium is removed ; so that, in the most perfect manner
the Phillip-street Church has gone out of existence, and the Macquarie-street
Church still remains, with its property, in Macquarie-street, and with the
Phillip-street property, at a cost of £l2OO ! The arrangement has reduced the
number of the churches of the body in Sydney to the aggrandisement of one ;
but no occurrence could have been so favourable to the strengthening of the
body by the addition of at least three churches, in most important localities.
7. I dissent and complain because, when I pointed out all these facts and
reasons, and appealed to the Presbytery, that at least £5OO should be paid by the
Macquarie-street Church towards church extension at Woollahra, as an acknow-
ledgment of the advantage of the amalgamation, and a memorial of the union,
and engaged, if this were done, to raise other £5OO for the same object, the
Presbytery contented itself with the vain expression of a hope that the Mac-
quarie-street Church would be more liberal in future than it had been in the
past.
John McGibbon, LL.D,


Dr. McGibbon was uninformed, when he tabled these reasons of
dissent, both as to the cost of the Phillip-street Church, and its value
at the time as an article of property. The information I have given
above on these points I obtained from Mr. King three years since ;
and it is the great importance of the question involved in the case,
to the welfare and advancement of our church in this city, that has
induced me to enter into these details on the subject.
Dr. Steel’s iron church in Macquarie-street, and that of Phillip-
street, are situated quite close to each other, in two parallel streets in
Sydney, like the Post Office and the Town Hall in Melbourne ; and
as the Phillip-street Church congregation had been reduced to a mere
fragment in 1873, when Mr. Thomson was about to resign his charge,
there was no need for a second Presbyterian Church in that
locality. If, therefore, the Phillip-street Clrurch had been sold at its
real value when vacated by Mr. Thomson, and the proceeds, after-
paying off the debt, been expended under the superintendence of
the Presbytery of Sydney in the erection of other Presbyterian
churches in those populous suburbs of Sydney, in which they have
long been urgently required, and in which, from the want of such
churches, the scattered members of our communion are passing over
into other religious bodies, there would have been no complaint made
in any quarter had Dr. Steel’s congregation been the purchasers in a
fair and honest way, while a benefit and blessing of incalculable
amount and value would have been conferred upon our colonial
church in this great metropolis.
1 concur entirely with Dr, McGibbon in thinking that the trans-
action 1 have been reviewing was in no respect a union or amalga-
mation of two different congregations on equal terms. It was the
mere absoi-ption of the remains of the Phillip-street congregation by
that of Dr. Steel; everything characteristic of the former of these con-
gregations having disappeared and been extingushed in the process. In
short, the Phillip street congregation simply passed out of existence,
while that of Macquarie-street remained with all its characteristics
fully preserved.
It is well known that, although Dr. Steel does not appear in the
transaction —keeping, as it were, behind backs, and telling us, while
he wipes his mouth, that he has done no wrong—he was nevertheless
the soul of the movement from the first, both in his own congregation
and, through his influence with Mr. Thomson and his fifteen, as the
virtual patron of St. Andrew’s College, in that of the Phillip-street
Church also. In fact, with all the sanctimoniousness of an old Phari-
see—making his long prayer for a pretence at the corners of the streets,
and devouring widows' houses all the while —Dr. Steel artfully seizes
and appropriates for his own purposes —for his own honour and glory
—the valuable property which might otherwise have gladdened the
inmates of many widows’ houses in this city, and stands before us an
innocent man! For my own part, lam quite sure no intelligent,


disinterested, and candid person can possibly regard this whole trans-
action in any other light than in that of a nefarious job ; and it only
aggravates the iniquity of the case that it has been all done in the
alleged interests of justice and in the cause of religion.
When the Phillip-street Church passed into the hands
of the office-beai’ers of Dr. Steel’s congi’egation on the terras
I have mentioned, they erected a handsome spire in front and a
gallery within ; but the architect employed in the work, having made
the pillars that support the gallery at least eighteen inches too high,
and the floor of the gallery horizontal and without a bevel or incline
to the front, the pulpit had to be raised so unusually high, that the
people in the gallery might see as well as hear the preacher, that he
cannot but remind an inhabitant of Sydney, where such sights are
frequent, of a cockatoo on a lofty perch.
The cost of the Phillip-street church, I have stated on the autho-
rity of Mr. King, the treasurer, had been £7OOO up to the period of the
sale ; and, as the building was then in good condition, and city pro-
perty had not fallen in value in the meantime, it should have brought,
after paying the debt of £1250, the sum of £5750. Now, allowing
£l l sO towards the additions on behalf of such of the members of the
Phillip-street church as might identify-themselves with Dr. Steel’s con-
gregation, there should have been £4OOO available from the sale forthe
purposes of church extension in the humbler portions of the city and
suburbs. In that event, Mrs. Roberts would have had it in her power,
as she ought certainly to have had, to express her approval of the
manner in which the large portion of that amount which she had
herself contributed, should be appropriated when diverted from its
original destination.
What a benefit and blessing the expenditure of that £4OOO
would have proved to members of ouf communion, and especially
those of the humbler classes, in the different suburbs of the city;
allowing at the rate of £IOOO for each additional church in such
locality ! There is a church of this kind urgently required at present
in the suburb of Waterloo, containing a population of 8000 souls,
including a number of Presbyterian families and individuals of the
humbler classes, among whom the Rev. J. T. Curtis, a recent licentiate
of our Church, is now gathering around him a very hopeful con-
gregation. I have officiated there twice myself during the last twelve-
months, and was gratified in the extreme on the second occasion at
the remarkable already made under the zealous labours of
Mr. Curtis. The office-bearers of the congregation, which is now
regularly organised, are actually looking out for a suitable allotment to
purchase for a church, and have collected a considerable amount for its
erection. Now what a God-send would not a thousand pounds be to
that congregation at this present moment 1 And there could easily be
found other three localities in precisely similar circumstances in and
around the city.


But is the £4OOO (which Dr. Steel and his office-bearers have so
unjustly and unwarrantably seized and appropriated for their own con-
gregational purposes) irrecoverably lost to our Presbyterian community 1 ?
I think not. When the silversmiths of the city of Ephesus were
exciting a tumult in their theatre against the Apostle Paul and his
companions, as preachers of the Gospel, and thereby damaging their
trade as shrine-makers for the goddess Diana, the town clerk, a very
reasonable man, told them, on behalf of Paul and his companions,
that they were not “ robbers of Churches.” Could he have said as
much of Dr. Steel and his office-bearers, if he had known beforehand
that they had seized and appropriated, for the ornamentation of their
own Church, which they were well able to have effected from their own
resourses, available property which might-otherwise have served to
erect four Churches in the destitute localities of this city ? I think
not. I rather think he would have considered “ robbers of Churches”
their proper designation. Surely then the office-bearers and members of
Dr. Steel’s congregation, who give themselves the credit of being the
wealthiest Presbyterian congregation in Sydney, will consider the
£4OOO a debt of honour on their church, which they are bound to
pay off, as they are well able to do, forthwith. For my own part I
should be delighted to see the first of the four thousand pounds, to be
recovered in whatever way from the sale of the Phillip-street Church,
paid over to the office-bearers of Mr. Curtis’s congregation at
Waterloo; for I confess that the hope of realising so gratifying a
consummation helped materially to induce me to publish this pamphlet.
But if Dr. Steel’s office-bearers and congregation should decline to
take the timely hint I have thus given them, what shall I say "to
them before bidding them farewell for the present? Why, all 1 can
say is, that property of any kind unjustly and iniquitously acquired
is, in plain English, stolen property ; and this will unquestionably be
the character of the Phillip-street Church property so long as they
hold it on the present terms.
**sr


7Af f
B<6UO
Fl/Zd' 7
M cof^j
By the same Author.
PRICE, ONE GUINEA,
NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
In two volumes, octavo, London, 1875, and lor sale at
W. Maddock’s, Bookseller, 383 George-street,
An Historical and Statistical Account
of New South Wales, from the
Founding of the Colony in 1788
the present day.
