

AN
Authentic Record
OF THE
Reports, Proceeding and Editorial Articles,
IN CONNEXION WITH
THE ARRIVAL OF
The Right Reverend
Josiah Brown Pearson, D.D., II.D.,
Lord Bishop of Newcastle
IN MELBOURNE; HIS RECEPTION IN SYDNEY; THE RECEPTION, IN-
STALLATION, AND PUBLIC MEETING IN NEWCASTLE; THE ARRIVAL
AND RECEPTION AT MORPETH; AND THE LAYING OF THE COR-
NER STONE OF ST. MARY'S PARSONAGE, WEST MAITLAND.
COLLECTED AND REVISED, WITH AN INTRODUCTION,
BY THE
REV. S. SIMM.
West Maitland:
T. DIMMOCK, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, HIGH-STREET.
1880.




AN Authentic Record
OF THE
Reports, Proceeding And Editorial Articles,
“ WHEN THE EMOTION COMES, LET HIM HASTEN TO FIX IT IN ACT, AND
NOT ALLOW IT TO EVAPORATE IN MERE SENTIMENTAL MUSING.”
Extract from Sermon by the Eev. Joseph B. Mayor, M.A., at the Consecration of
the Bight Reverend the Bishop of Newcastle, May ls£, 1880.
IN CONNEXION WITH
THE ARRIVAL OF
Cjtt s3Ufrmnfr
ijiwwt
§hjjop 0f ftefoxastfo,
IN MELBOURNE ; HIS RECEPTION IN SYDNEY J THE RECEPTION, IN-
STALLATION, AND PUBLIC MEETING IN NEWCASTLE ; THE ARRIVAL
AND RECEPTION AT MORPETH ; AND THE LAYING OF THE COR-
NER STONE OF ST. MARY’S PARSONAGE, WEST MAITLAND.
COLLECTED AND REVISED, WITH AN INTRODUCTION,
BY THE
REV. S. SIMM.
West JRaxfkttb:
T. DIMMOCK, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, HIGH-STREET.
1880.




To
The Clergy And Laity
Of the Church of England
in the
Diocese of Newcastle;
and especially
Commttfke;
and the
gltmfccrs of % piocfsun gourntl:
The Right Reverend the President,
gnrton JJmsotr, ff.p.,
iisjrop of Iphmtstfe,
Rev. Canon Selwyn,
Rev. J. Shaw,
Rev. F. D. Bode,
Rev. J, Dixon, Secretary,
Rev. S. Simm,
Rev. Canon White,
Major Bolton,
J. Lee, Esq., Treasurer,
T. Hungerford, Esq,
J. N. Brooks, Esq.,
W. R. Logan, Esq,
A. J. Gould, Esq.,
Httmorisls of f(«
l-mbal of tip £«oiti> gisljou of getorastle
are respectfully dedicated
§i| % €Vxtor.


Preface.
It was thought that the members of the Church would be pleased to
have an authentic record of all the circumstances connected with the
most memorable event that has hitherto occurred in the history of the
Diocese —the Arrival, Reception, and Installation of its becond
Bishop.
The history of the proceedings relating to the Election of the
Bishop, is contained in the Report of Synod. In the following pages,
a record of our Bishop’s Arrival, Reception, and Installation, is pre-
served.
The Diocesan Council decided upon the form which the proceed-
ings should take (subject to the approval of the Bishop), viz.: lhafc
there should be a Thanksgiving Service on the first day; and that the
Installation Service, Luncheon, and Public Meeting, for the presen-
tation of addresses to the Bishop, should occupy the second day.
Through the skilful management and unwearied zeal of the
Reception Committee, and its indefatigable Secretaries, the Rev. John
Dixon, and H. D. Portus, Esq, the whole of the arrangements were
successfully carried out.
But we are very sensible that the introduction of a Bishop to his
Diocese is the prelude to action—to the promotion of every good work.
It is, therefore, our desire, in collecting and editing the various articles
contained in this publication, and in placing them in their present form
in the hands of the members of the Church, that the great work of the
Church may be promoted; and especially that that most importan
work, the Building of a Cathedral may, at least, be advanced one step.
The quotation placed on the first page explains the intention of
this humble effort. Our desire is to gather up the many happy utter-
ances, concerning the Diocese of Newcastle, which this memorable
event has called forth; and, especially, to direct attention to whatever
has been said respecting our greatest work —a Cathedral. Yy e ave,
therefore, ventured to set forth a scheme for raising a hund tor this
object. It is the result of much thought and conversation on the subject,
and particularly with an influential layman of the Diocese of bydney.
It is offered solely with a desire to lead others to action; and with the
hope that, by our joint efforts, a scheme may be developed, in which
the whole Diocese may unite, with the same zeal and enthusiasm in
raising a Fund for the erection of a Cathedral, as were manifested in
the Reception of the Bishop.
May the Great Head of the Church direct all our consultations
and efforts to the promotion of His Glory, by the extension of the
Redeemer’s Kingdom in this land.
S. S.


Introduction.
The arrival of the Second Bishop of Newcastle has been made the
occasion of so much enthusiasm and good feeling, on the part of the
members of the Church of England, —which, as far as possible, they
have embodied in several Addresses, which were presented to the
Bishop, and which called forth replies which are so fresh, hopeful,
and cheering to children, and Sunday School Teachers; —to parents, on
home influence; —on religious instruction; —to wives, on making
happy homes; —on the erection of a Cathedral and Church Work
generally, —that we have been induced to preserve, in a somewhat
more permanent form, these spontaneous addresses, which will be
all the more valuable to us, because they are the first, warm, out-
spoken lessons of him whom we are proud to call our Bishop.
Delivered in the midst of much excitement and emotion, they, never-
theless, contain sober truths and useful lessons, such as we may all
think over at our leisure. Not many are able to deliver addresses
with the ease with which the Bishop spoke, on so many and trying
occasions; and still fewer could do so, without wishing much had not
been said. In this instance, a judiciousness accompanied the Bishop’s
remarks, so that there is no occasion to desire the omission of so
much as a word. As replies to the several addresses, they are both
appropriate and profitable. May the same good spirit direct and
accompany our Bishop through all his labours and ministrations.
But this event has called forth several able articles, chiefly from the
editors of the Church of England papers, of this and the adjoining
colony of Victoria. While we avail ourselves of this opportunity of
thanking the writers of these valuable articles, we also beg to assure
them that it is with no small degree of pleasure, that we find our-
selves enabled, in the accompanying pages, to give their labours in
this instance, if not a more enduring form, at least a more extensive
circulation, among the members of the Church of England, in the
Diocese of Newcastle. But we may add that it will he an additional
pleasure to learn that, as one of the results of this effort, a goodly
number of our members become subscribers to these papers, which
are so worthy of their support; and although we have no desire,
through this medium, to press our preference for one paper more than
another upon the members of the Church, yet we think it is but fair
to the Australian Churchman to say, in its behalf, that while it has
ever been found faithful to the principles of the Church of England,
it has, daring the many years of its existence, freely opened its
columns for the discussion of subjects of great moment to the
interests of this Diocese. And, as the following pages shew, the


Australian Churchman has bestowed both space and ability in en-
deavoring to interest and instruct its readers on the subject of the
appointment and arrival of the Second Bishop of Newcastle. It has
been with no little pride that the members of the Church, in the
Diocese of Newcastle, have noticed the enthusiastic attentions which
were shown to their Bishop both in Melbourne and Sydney; and
while, we have no doubt, many of our members in the more distant
portions of the Diocese will read of the kindness of the members of
our Church, in other places, towards their Bishop with feelings of
gratitude and pleasure, let us hope that this warm recognition of
brotherly regard towards our Bishop may have, in the future, a more
general application among both the Clergy and Laity of our own and
the neighbouring Dioceses; for, hitherto, there has been a lamentable
disregard of the Apostle’s teaching, that “ We are members one of
another.” And this coldness, or this want of a more friendly recog-
nition, has tended to create misunderstandings on many important
ecclesiastical subjects; when, perhaps, cordiality in conversation, and
brotherly intercourse, would have tended to soften, if not to remove,
many of those vexed questions which, in our Synods and correspon-
dence, have not always, during their discussion, called forth the most
amiable qualities of some of our valuable guides.
Coming to the general question of the Bishop’s reception, and
the causes of the enthusiasm displayed by all classes of Churchmen,
and even by many members of other communions, the grounds
assigned in the article of the Australian Churchman are among the
main reasons for the general outburst of loyalty, which has been the
subject of both admiration and somewhat of surprise. It is un-
doubtedly true, that Dr. Pearson is the chosen Bishop of the
Church of the Diocese of Newcastle, in Synod assembled. He was
invited to come, and preside as Bishop, over the Church of this
Diocese; and, in the most becoming manner, he accepted our invita-
tion ; so that the manifestation which took place on his arrival was
only a natural result of the order of our proceedings. The members
of the Church could not have done less than accord, to the Bishop of
their choice, a hearty welcome. It amounted to a magnificent
reception; and it is to be hoped that, generally speaking, it was not
a mere display of feeling, but the result of good, sound Church
principles, in which the Clergy have had much to do in training the
Laity—those principles which, for some years, have led the Laity
to do their duty, as Representatives in Synod, as Churchwardens, as
members of the Parochial Councils, as steady contributors to the
Church’s Funds; and which principles, we believe, will not be found
wanting, in supporting the Bishop in the great works he has come
amongst us to accomplish. The Bishop may proceed to the perfor-
mance of his high and responsible duties, with confidence that he will
be supported by right loyal Churchmen, in carrying out whatsoever
he can shew is for the good of the Church, and the well-being of his


Diocese. And we venture to say that the Bishop (who is wisely
judicious and cautious), may proceed to move with freedom amongst
bis people, for they are most favourably impressed. He has won their
hearts already by the manner in which he has spoken, for example,—
to Sunday School Teachers and the children, on the occasion of the
presentation of the Address in the Cathedral Close, after the beautiful,
hearty Thanksgivui 8 service; as also, for the manner in which, at
Morpeth, he spoke of the home influence of parents, in forming the
minds and habits of their children. Nothing can surpass the force of
these words as addressed to parents-" When you remember how
short the time is which the child spends in Day-school or in Sunday-
„ schoo] ’ when , y? u remember how potent is the influence of example
you must admit the immense power homes have upon those who
„ are Arming habits for their future lives. I trust, then, that what-
ever the future of education may be, so far as schools are concerned.
„ the training of the homes in this Parish will be healthy and wise
and that more and more importance will be attached to it, as it
justly deserves.” More to the same purpose will be found in that
very happy address, delivered after the reception of the addresses
presented by the members of the Church and the Mayor at Morpeth
Ihe addresses at the Luncheon, and at the Public Meeting, while
they won all hearts, especially made the Bishop and Clergy one
both m heart and action. It will be remembered how cordially these
words were received: after speaking so kindly of his reception, he
proceeds to say with manly humility,—“ But'as time goes on, I will
„ tr y f rom those who are ready to guide and teach me with
regard to my new duties, and the new surroundings of my life. In
a S 1 ® meantim e, I shall ask for the forbearance and patience of the
Clergy and the Laity, being what we used to call at Cambridge, a
freshman. I must ask for your candour; I know quite well that
„ in c f ry. in g on the concerns of a great institution, such as this, there
must arise occasional misunderstandings. There must be incidents
„ irom time to time, which tend a little bit to throw a cloud over the
„ . suns mne of the pleasant relations that should exist between us ; this
, f 18 to be expected in the ordinary course of human things. When
„ such occasions arise, be plain, and honest, and straightforward with
me. Ho not let the thing hang back, and disturb our relations
„ week t 0 week > and y ear t 0 year. Let us have it out. One
thing more, I want your patience and your candour, and from both
Clergy and Laity, for they combine to form one Church.
“I als L ° want your kind co-operation; your co-operation, not only with
« 17 6 ' but with each other. I feel that one of the peculiarities of the
hte ot the Clergy m this country, is, that they are likely to suffer
from a sense of isolation. In that case, it is more and more the
duty of the Laity to co -operate with their Clergy.”
At the Meeting which was held in the evening, at which ad-
dresses were presented from the Diocese and the three City


Parishes of Newcastle, it is not to be wondered at that the
want of a Cathedral occupied not only a place in the united
Parishes* address, but that the Bishop, in his reply, with con-
siderable effect, directed attention to the subject of the erection of
a Cathedral, as also to the objects, constitution, and practical life-
work of a Cathedral. Among many excellent remarks, which may be
found in these addresses, thanks to Mr. Eipper, the able reporter of
the Maitland Mercury , the Bishop said—“ I look upon a Cathedral
“ as something more than a handsome Church, where the services are
“of an ornate character. I think that it should be the centre of
“ warmth and life to the whole Diocese.** After much more to the
same purpose, he said—“ You must look forward to having the
“ Cathedral free and open to all comersj you must pay the price ol
« a little discomfort for having the Cathedral; you must be content
“ to give up some slight local privilege for the honour and pleasure of
« having such a building as we hope to see in your midst.** And
then the Bishop added a few words which must make him, as long as
he lives, the sailor’s friend. t( It would (he said) De a grand thing
"if you should help some sailor to think of home and home mflu-
« ence, by being made to feel welcome in your Church.** The Bishop
has gone straight to the hearts of all classes, and he has aroused such
an interest in the Church, that it requires very little foresight to
predict, that if the building of the Cathedral be set about without
further delay, the Bishop has done much already towards open-
ing the purses and pockets of all classes, from the sailor and labourers
of the port and city of Newcastle, to the wealthy throughout the land.
11 1 think in this way (said the Bishop) as a centre of teaching,, as
t( setting an example of worship in the Diocese, as a spot round which
«our Diocesan associations can gather, you would find, throughout
«the Diocese, great blessings following from the contemplated
“building and its adjuncts.** And we venture to add that the
Diocese may “ rise and build ,** and it will be found that a response
will be made by the members of the Church in the most practical
shape, after the manner of the Jews to the appeal of Nehemiah—
“ Let us rise and build.** .
The whole of the proceedings of the Reception, Installation
Service, and Public Meeting, were greatly enhanced in interest and
strengthened by the presence of the Venerable (and as his recep-
tion amongst us proved) the venerated Metropolitan. A quarter
of a century of Episcopal labour has brought the good Bishop,
in years, to the borders of Winter. But we were all pleased
to see how hale, erect, and able he still is in the performance of his
duties. The sermon which he delivered, and which we still hope to
see printed in full,—of which some short account will be found in
these pages —was most admirably adapted to the occasion. The
preacher not only, in friendly and affectionate words, reminded us of
what we had lost in our late devoted Bishop, but what we had received


in our new Bishop. It was impossible for any right-minded person
not to determine, as far as he might be able in the terms of the text,
to “ encourage and strengthen,” by every means in his power, our new
Bishop in the performance of those high and responsible duties which
he was that day entering upon. The sermon was very effective; and
coming, as it did, with the weight of experience, wisdom, and piety of
the Metropolitan, and followed by the administration of the Holy
Communion to between two and three hundred recipients, we may
calculate that the truths delivered will bring forth fruit abundantly to
the glory of God. At the Luncheon and the Evening Meeting, we
found that not only was the venerable Bishop hale, erect, and able for
his work, but that the vein of pleasautry, for which he has always been
distinguished, is not only not worked out, but that it turned out, on
these suitable occasions, some precious grains of genuine good
humour. It is not saying too much that, for the occasion, the Metro-
politan’s addresses were all that could possibly be desired. It is
possible that there was one present who did not cordially agree with all
the Metropolitan said. The Incumbent of the Cathedraf Church did
not, we may imagine, see the logical connection of the good Bishop’s
injunction to “rise and build,” and his humorous sayings about
the coal mine. “ Forget everything about the coal mine, and ‘arise
“ ‘ and build? or as was said hundreds of years ago, ‘Do it.’ He
“ hoped they would act while the feeling was warm within their hearts.
“The thing might be done if they were in earnest. As for the coal
“ mine, he was in some doubt whether, if he were referred to as Metro-
politan, he could say they were right in using up what was capital for
“building purposes; he might say that all they were right in using
“up was the interest. But of one thing he was certain—that while
“ they depended upon the coal mine, the Cathedral would never be
“ built.”
This is the most pressing undertaking in connection with the
Diocese of Newcastle. So much has been said about the present
edifice that it is needless to dwell upon this subject. It has been
spoken of as a disgrace and a reproach. The Bishop’s first sight of
his Cathedral was a matter of dread. Some thought he might faint,
or that even worse consequences might follow. Fortunately, the
Bishop has survived all the toils aud wearinesses of his memorable
reception, and even the sight of his Cathedral. And now we can
imagine with what thankfulness, he will hail any suggestions, which
may lead to the securing the necessary funds, to justify him in be-
ginning to build a Cathedral—in a Parish, it must be remembered,
where a Church is an absolute necessity, and on a spot unequalled in
the world. The building of a Cathedral is a tremendous undertaking.
In our case, we shall require not only the coal mine, but the most
generous liberality of every member of the Church in the Colony;
and if thus supported, we believe the Bishop of Newcastle will, in a
few years, see a noble Cathedral standing where now stands our shame
B


and reproach. But it must not be forgotten that, hitherto, the
difficulties have been such that no one in the position of the Incum-
bent of Christ Church could think of facing them, without the
co-operation of his Bishop. This the late Bishop did not feel he
could give, and the present position of affairs is the result. With the
co-operation of the Bishop, what can we not expect to accomplish.
A great and hopeful field of operations lies before us. The building
of a Cathedral, it must be borne in mind, differs from that of a
Parish Church, insomuch that contributions may be reasonably
solicited from the whole Diocese; and in the case of building a
Cathedral in this Diocese, contributions to be solicited, need not be
confined to the Diocese of Newcastle; for when the Cathedral in
Sydney was in course of erection, contributions from this Diocese
were solicited and liberally responded to. With this fact in remem-
brance, and the warm support of the Metropolitan, the Diocese of
Sydney will render us, we may reasonably hope, considerable aid in this
great work.
The magnitude of the work, and the large sum of money required,
when so many local requirements are in abeyance for the want of funds,
would deter many persons from entertaining a thought on the subject
of building a Cathedral-; not because they are unwilling to contribute
to such an object, but because of the improbability of the sum required
being raised, or of the Cathedral being completed in his or her lifetime.
And such a conclusion is nor, under all the circumstances, an unreason-
able one, especially when we consider how long a time Cathedrals in the
past, in various parts of the world, have taken to erect, and notably,
in Sydney, the foundation of which was laid about fifty years ago, and
was only completed within the last ten years. Now, if it can be shewn
in our case that the whole amount required could be realized within,
say, two years, and the Cathedral finished, or such portion as may be
decided upon, in five years, many thousands, not only in this Diocese,
but throughout New South Wales, will be found willing to contribute
to the object.
In venturing-to place before the Diocese the following scheme, we
do so with considerable diffidenee, but under a deep sense of feeling at
this time, that it is the bounden duty of every one to exert himself to
the uttermost, to prevent “ the emotions which have been excited to
evaporate in mere sentimental musing.” I will hasten, to the utmost of
my ability, to fix the emotions in such a manner, that every member of
the Church of England may have a practical opportunity of assisting in
the erection of our Cathedral, and of removing our reproach. The
erection of a Cathedral is a Diocesan movement. The Incumbent of
Christ Church must not imagine that he is not held in the highest
esteem, if in this scheme the Bishop is chosen, on principle, to be the
centre of action.
First, then, we propose that the Bishop be requested to issue a Pastoral
or Circular letter, setting forth the objects of building a
Cathedra], and the plan proposed to raise the funds, which
letter should be circulated not only in this Diocese, but through-
out New South Wales, and the neighbouring Colonies.


2. —That in this Appeal no immediate contributions should be solicited,
but a written promise, that upon the receipt of a list of promised
subscriptions, with the names and addresses of the contributors
so promising, which, in the aggregate, will amount to £30,000 or
more, as the great work may require, the subscribers will then
forward to the Treasurer of the Fund the amount that they set
opposite to their names.
3. —That it be a stipulation that no part of this sum shall be spent, not
even the foundation stone of the building laid, until the whole
sum of £30,000 or more, as the case may require, be paid in.
4. —That an arrangement be made with some newspaper proprietor to
publish (on a separate sheet if he think proper, as the same
type, when once set up, will do for the whole time to be agreed
upon, with the monthly additions) the names and residences,
together with the promised amounts of subscriptions, once a
month. And these to be sent throughout the Diocese, addressed
to such members of the Church of England as the Secretary
may be advised, but especially to the promising contributors,
that they may see how the work is progressing.
5. —That a paid Secretary be appointed, whose duty it shall be to visit
every Parish in the Diocese, and in conjunction with the Clergy-
man, Churchwardens, Members of the • Parochial Council, or
other influential residents, make a personal canvass of the
Parish ; and, where advisable, to call Public Meetings, and to
do such other things, in connection with raising the Cathedral
Building Fund, as the Bishop may advise
G.—That as soon as the sum of, say, £35,000 has been promised (making
allowance for defaulting promising contributors to the extent of
say, £5000) the Secretary shall make out a list of the promised
subscriptions, with the names, residences, and the various
amounts promised, and shall send a copy to every subscriber;
and shall then take such steps to collect the promised sub-
scriptions as the Bishop and Secretary may deem best.
7. —The appointment of Treasurer to be made by the Bishop.
This is a plain, workable, common sense scheme It runs upon the
lines which the members of the Church have laid down. We have
elected our Bishop ; he has come amongst us ; we are more than satis-
fied with our choice. We thank Gcd for sending us, in all respects, so
good, able, and judicious a man to preside over this Diocese. But
there is no Cathedral, no Episcopal Seat. This is the want which we
are bound to supply, and we are convinced that every Clergyman, as
w r ell as every member of the Church in the Diocese, and throughout
the Colonies, will help us in accomplishing what is so much needed.
The Bishop is placed in his proper position in the movement, which
we venture to believe he will consent to occupy. He will find that the
whole Church will support him in this great work; and although it
may be discovered, as we proceed, that as in all great works, so in this,
many unexpected difficulties will crop up, yet it is quite certain the
Church has never been so aroused, on this or any other subject, as it
has been at this time, on the all-important subject of building a
Cathedral. Never have there been such gatherings of the members of


the Church. Neter such addresses on the subject. Never has the
whole Diocese been so thoroughly awakened ; and, I venture to say,
such gatherings and such addresses will never be seen and heard
again on the subject. Our course is to follow up the warm and loyal
emotions which have been created. It is a matter of raising money for
a noble purpose. We must, every one of us, determine to do our best ;
in fact, we must, for the time being, become a Diocese of contributors
and collectors, in behalf of the Cathedral Building Bund. We have
now a large field for carrying on our operations. A remark which fell
from one of the speakers, at the banquet at St. Paul’s College, Sydney,
given in honour of the arrival of our Bishop, led a gentleman to
examine the comparative numerical strength of Roman Catholics and
the Church of England in these Colonies, which is stated to be con-
siderably on our side. The numbers given for the strength of the
Church of England, presided over by twelve Bishops, are as follows :
New South Wales 191 C1ergymen...286,553 people
Yictoria 144 „ ...322,293 „
South Australia 42 „ ... 63,061 „
Queensland 39 „ ... 77,500 ~
Western Australia 20 ~ ... 18,273 ~
Tasmania 60 „ ... 66,808 ~
Grand Totals 499 834,588
Erom such numbers, is it too much to expect that £35,000, or
even £50,000, can be raised if required P We think it a reasonable
expectation. In the meantime, we submit these considerations, with
the accompanying editorial notices, addresses of the Metropolitan, and
the Bishop of Newcastle, together with other interesting articles, ail
bearing upon the arrival of our Bishop; and with the hope and prayer
that, while the collection of papers thus presented may form a memorial
of this greatest of Diocesan events —the Arrival and Installation of the
Second Bishop of Newcastle —the perusal by many who were present,
and by many more whose circumstances prevented them from being
present, may keep alive in the former, and kindle in the minds of the
latter, a spirit of loving anxiety to join heartily in assisting their Bishop
to erect a suitable Cathedral for the Diocese of Newcastle.


Articles
ON THE
ARRIVAL OF THE SECOND BISHOP OF NEWCASTLE.
In the “ Australian Churchman ” of July 2§th, the following notice appeared: —
gioccsc 0! fgUllrjorcm.
ARRIVAL OF THE BISHOP OF NEWCASTLE.
The Right Rev J. B. Pearson, D.D., has safely arrived in Melbourne,
where he is at present a guest of his old friend, Bishop Moorhouse.
On Monday he was welcomed by a choral thanksgiving service at All
Saints’, St Kilda. The Bishops of Melbourne and Ballaarat, the Dean
of Melbourne and about forty of the clergy took part. The Bishop of
Newcastle preached, referring in his sermon to the heartiness of his re-
ception and touching upon the progress of church work in the colonies-
From same Taper , August 19 th.
We are glad to be able to record that the Right Rev. Dr. Pearson has
had a special welcome in a form which must have been as acceptable to
his lordship as it is noteworthy in the history of the Diocese of Mel-
bourne. The Church of All Saints’, East St Kilda, was placed at the
disposal of the diocese for the occasion by those in charge of the parish,
and the success which attended the arrangements abundantly justified
in the choice made of this particular Church. We suppose that there
is no Church in the diocese which, in the extent of the accommodation
afforded to the congregation, the stately dimensions of the chancel, and
on account of the excellence of the choir, is so well suited for special
services of a diocesan character. Till the new Cathedral is opened for
public worship, we trust that the example set on the 26th inst. will be
followed as often as occasion may require. The “welcome” took the
form of full choral evensong. Invitations had been sent in the name of
the Bishop of Melbourne to the clergy of the diocese, and were well
responded to. Some forty of their number, headed by the Very Rev.
the Dean and the Yen, the Archdeacons Crawford and Stretch, were
present on the occasion, and occupied the seats reserved for them in
the chancel behind and beyond the choir. At half-past seven p.m. a
procession of clergy was formed at the parsonage, which was joined in
the Church grounds by the choir, and entered the Church at the west
door in the following order : —Cross Bearer, Choir Boys, Lay Clerks,
Clergy of the diocese (according to date of ordination—Juniors first),
Canons of the Cathedral, Archdeacons, Dean, Bishop of Newcastle and
Chaplain, Bishop of Ballaarat and Chaplain, Bishop of the Diocese and
Chaplain.
The processional hymn, in which the congregation heartily joined, was
No. 391, A. and M. (revised edition) to Sullivan’s tune in Church Hymns.
c


When the Bishops had reached their appointed places in the Sanctuary,
the service was begun by the Rev. E. C. Spicer. The Confession was
said according to the use of Ely, and the rest of the service was taken
to Tallis. The Psalms (68, 133, 134), the Magnificat, and Nunc
Dimittis were sung to plain chants j and the anthem consisted of the
soprano recitative, the duet—“ Now we are ambassadors”—and the
chorus—''How lovely are the messengers”—from Mendelssohn’s St. Paul.
Special lessons had also been appointed. The first lesson was Joshua
i. I—lo, and was read by the Bishop of Ballaarat; the second lesson
was John xxi. 15—23, and was read by the Bishop of Melbourne.
After the Collect for the day, the following special Collects were said
by the Bishop of Melbourne“ Almighty God, who by Thy Son Jesus
Christ didst give to Thy holy apostles may excellent gifts, and didst
charge them to feed Thy flock; give grace, we beseech Thee, to all
Bishops, the pastors of Thy Church, that they may diligently preach
Thy Word, and duly administer the godly discipline thereof ; and grant
to the people, that they may obediently follow the same; that all may
receive the crown of everlasting glory ; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen”
“Almighty God, our Heavenly Father, we give Thee humble and
hearty thanks for that Thou hast called Thy servant to be a Bishop in
Thy Church, and hast brought him so far in safety on his journey to the
place in which he is appointed to serve. Continue, O Lord, the care of
Thy good providence toward him, and grant that he may come among
the people committed to his care in the fulness of the blessing of the
Gospel of Christ. Let Thy grace so work in him that he may be
faithful in the possession and courageous in the administration of his
high office ; that he may be watchful in ruling those over whom he is
placed ; earnest in correcting them, fervent in loving them, patient in
bearing with them, and diligent in praying for them. Hold up his hands,
wo beseech Thee, by the prayers and earnest labour of his clergy and
people, that he and they may build up the Church in all holy, truthful,
and righteous living and labour, that the fathers to the children may
make known Thy truth, that Thy name may be hallowed, Thy goodwill
be done in the land, and the kingdom of Thy dear Son enlarged and
strengthened, so that Thy people may give Thee thanks for ever, and
show forth Thy praise from generation to generation ; and this we beg,
for Jesus Christ’s sake, to whom, with Thee and the Holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.”
The concluding prayers were said by the Rev. J. F. Stretch. During
the singing of Hymn 269, the Bishop of Newcastle proceeded to the
pulpit, and preached a remarkably clear and thoughtful sermon from
Rom. xii. 5, which he prefaced with a few words expressive of his high
appreciation of the reception accorded to him by the clergy and laity
of Melbourne. We were glad to learn that his lordship is favourably
impressed with the apparent energy of colonial life, and sincerely trust
that he may be able to guide its forces in the direction of faithful and
enduring Christian work. If one may judge from the utterances of a
single sermon, we think that the Diocese of Newcastle may be con-
gratulated on the choice of a chief pastor, who seems as manly and
outspoken as he is earnest and scholarly. During the offertory, Hymn


304 was sung by the choir with great taste and expression ; indeed, the
reverence and precision with which the whole service was rendered by
both clergy and choir, cannot be spoken of too highly. We should
think that all present must have been deeply thankful that a service of
so devotional and elevating a character is possible amongst us. After the
presentation of the alms, a solemn Te Deum was sung, the whole choir
and most of the clergy facing eastward ; and then came the Bishop s
Benediction. The recessional hymn was No. 274 —“Through the night
of doubt and sorrow.”
It is almost needless to add that the Church was crowded. The
Offertory, which exceeded £2O, will be given to the diocese of Newcastle.
st. Paul’s, geelong.
The foundation-stone of a new Sunday school in connection with St*
Paul’s Church, Geelong, was laid on Tuesday afternoon, by the Bishop
of Newcastle, in the compulsory absence of the Bishop of Melbourne.
The buildings are to cost about £IOOO, and will be very complete and
handsome. Bishop Pearson gave a very interesting address,. for a report
of which we are indebted to the Argus. After apologising for the
absence of Bishop Moorhouse, he proceeded to ask what he, a stranger
amongst them, could say F One was necessarily asked on arriving in a
new country what he thought about the country. He would answer
the question. He was pleased with the aspect of the country, with its
rich gifts, and with the welcome he had received. He admired the
energy evinced in years gone by in the various towns of the colony.
Fields had become townships, and waste lands fields. In an apparent
wilderness there were now smiling homes. On the question of education,
he thought the colony had not improved upon the old country. The
system was devoid of reference to the Creator. That went against his
judgment. In England there was an extensive and elastic system, and
there was a great deal of enthusiasm in giving religious instruction.
There was a spirit of rivalry which appeared to have been lost in the
colony. The elements of Christian instruction were given in these
schools. That element had been lost in the State-schools, but he hoped
they would have it back again in some form or other, and he thought
the Geelong people, by the effort now being made, intended to do
something with respect to Christian education. The Bishop then pro-
ceeded to say that the School was for the express purpose of providing
means for religious instruction, and was dedicated to One whom they
desired to see their children grow up and revere. In this school the
Church of England catechism would be taught and the Bible. He
urged upon them to value the Bible—the book of human conduct, and
the Christian means of gaining instruction. He hoped they would
have a group of rooms built, which would prove a blessing. He then
referred to the utility of school buildings such as they were about
erecting, and believed that they would be the means of forwarding the
interests of the young people, and prove valuable to the Parish. He
pointed out to Sunday-school teachers that if they wanted to achieve
success in their labours, they would have to be regular in their attend-
ance at the school, and to bring carefully-prepared lessons for their
pupils, even at the risk of making some great personal sacrifice.


From the “ Town and Country Journal
BY LAICUS.
The Bishop of Newcastle (Dr. Pearson) has been enticed by our
Melbourne friends to give them a little visit, before coming on to his
new diocese. Perhaps it is well for him to familiarise himself with
Australian affairs and Australian thought, before plunging into the
absorbing work of a diocese which has been for some time without a
Bishop. He has been very warmly welcomed in Melbourne, the
particulars of his reception having been given in a previous number of
the Journal. Chancing to be in Melbourne last week, it occurred to
me that the readers of the Journal might be glad to have a short
description of the good Bishop’s first Sunday Service.
On Sunday last, the new Bishop was advertised to preach in the
morning at Malvern, and in the evening at East Melbourne. Malvern,
I may mention for those not familiar with the topography of Mel-
bourne, is a pretty suburb equally distant from Toorak and Hawthorne,
on the south side of the City of Melbourne. As the locality wa3
pleasant, a long suburban walk and a Bishop at the end of it did not
seem an unpleasant programme for a Sunday morning. So at 10
o’clock I started from my temporary home, and trudged along, passing
innumerable pretty cottages and pleasant villas. The suburbs of
Melbourne, though unblessed with the natural beauties which Nature
has scattered so bounteously in the neighbourhood of Sydney, are
pretty by reason of the grassy slopes and the abundance of luxuriant
gardens. The ugly rows, which are so common in the older portions of
Melbourne and Sydnej, seem almost unknown in the newer suburbs of
the vast capital of Victoria. Hawthorne is a comparatively large
place, with a respectable population, consisting of many social grades.
Toorak, on the other hand, is mainly filled with the residences of “ the
upper crust,” and although the Governor no longer honours Toorak
with his presence, the wealth and fashion of Melbourne is still centred
there. Malvern has not yet acquired a reputation for fashion, but it
contains some very nice residences, and doubtless its vacant spaces will
soon be filled up with well-kept gardens. The little Gothic Church on
the Glenferry road is prettily surrounded by trees, probably supplied
from the Government Botanical Gardens, for it was the practice of the
curator, even in the days when Baron Von Mueller was somewhat
neglectful of esthetic effects in the Gardens, to give young plants for
the plots of ground round churches and schools. Thus there are scores
of Churches in Victoria prettily embowered in foliage. Everything
betokened the care bestowed upon Malvern Church and its surround-
ings, and when once inside the building it was evident to me that it was
a very comfortable little church. At one end it had its organ, with
the choir seated in front. At the other was a chancel with an effective
tesselated floor, and within the altar rails was his Lordship the Bishop
of Newcastle, ready for the service to commence. He has acquired
the art which is most necessary for a Bishop, of sitting still in a
dignified manner, and, as in his new robes he occupied the chair which
for the occasion did duty as a bishop’s throne, he appeared as though
his new rank was no embarrassment to him. But Hr. Pearson is in


no sense an ecclesiastical-looking personage. Strip him of his cassock,
his robes, and his lawn sleeves, and clothe him in an ordinary frock
coat, and one would say that he was not even a professional man. He
would pass anywhere for an intelligent, well-educated merchant. His
thick but well-trimmed beard and his heavy moustache are appendages
not usually associated with an episcopal countenance. His ■whole
appearance is suggestive of strength and the power of work. As he
stood up he appeared above the ordinary height, and I should think he
is not far from six feet in height, and broad in proportion, with hands
that look as though they could grasp the crozier with a pretty firm grip.
His expression is full of intelligence, but it does not suggest very keen
intellectual power. There is an openness and candour about his
countenance which will go far to win the confidence of his new flock,
and there is a manliness in his appearance which will inspire instant
respect.
The morning prayers were read by the Incumbent, a young clergy-
man who bears an excellent reputation as a parish minister. Like the
majority, I believe, of the Melbourne clergy, he wore a cassock under-
neath his surplice. His only failing was that, unlike the Bishop, he
could neither sit nor stand still five seconds together. The choir were
evidently attempting great things in honour of the Bishop’s visit, and
their Te Deum was elaborate, including solo parts which were almost
beyond the strength of the performers. The Bishop read the Com-
munion Service, and he evidently knows his Ten Commandments
well, for he repeated them with scarcely a glance at his prayer-book.
Immediately before the sermon, a hymn very generally used in Non-
conformist places of worship at the celebration of the Lord’s Supper
was sung, and his Lordship advanced to the oak desk. It was well
that he did not try to sit down, for the seats provided at the two desks
were of such a meagre character that not even a curate could maintain
his equilibrium with any degree of comfort. Without any collect or
prayer the Bishop commenced his sermon, giving out his text from the
book of Nehemiah, “ The joy of the Lord is your strength.” Dr.
Pearson has not a particularly good voice, it is not clear and mellow,
but he manages it remarkably well, and when he had made a fair start
with his sermon, he showed that he could use it with much power and
effectiveness. He was evidently accustomed to preach to large
audiences, and the oratorical element in his composition was checked by
the comparatively small size of his congregation. But the church was
crowded, and his audience was sufficiently large and attentive to draw
out some of his really fine powers as a preacher. His subject was
simple; it was, as he expressed it, “ the sacred duty of being happy,”
and it afforded a very good opportunity of judging of the tone and
spirit in which he commences his new duties in the Newcastle Diocese.
He believes that no work is likely to be successful which is not under-
taken “ in good spirits,” and he is evidently calmly confident that he
will have the wisdom and strength granted to him sufficient for his
needs. Very beautifully he alluded to Nehemiah, who in the court of
the Assyrian monarch was filled with a noble discontent—“ for there is
such a thing,” he said, “as noble discontent”—and longed for the re-
establishment of Jerusalem. He referred briefly to the steps taken,


and the difficulties which arose, leading to the disheartenment of many,
and calling forth Nehemiah’s inspiriting assertion, “ The joy of the
Lord is your strength.” If this sermon was a fair specimen of Dr.
Pearson’s utterances, we may expect that his influence will be of a
manly, practical character, and that he will not take his place among
the “ unco guid,” who think a long face a sign of piety. Indeed, the
laity of the Diocese may congratulate themselves that the choice of the
Synod fell upon one apparently so well adapted to rule over a division
of the Anglican church in a young and unsettled country.
Dr. Pearson, the newly-consecrated Bishop of Newcastle, N.S. W.,
preached at Trinity Church, Bast Melbourne, last night, to a crowded
congregation. His text was taken from the fifteenth verse of St. Paul’s
epistle to Philemon : —“ Bor, perhaps, dear brother, he departed for a
season, that thou shouldst receive him for ever” —referring to the
absconding and subsequent conversion of Onesimus, one of Philemon's
slaves. The preacher, in his remarks, drew a strong picture of the
tender Christian character of St. Paul, as exhibited in his pleading with
the master for the slave, and pointed to the latter’s conversion, and
subsequent reconciliation with Philemon on equal social terms, as an
instance of the power and influence of the Gospel.
From the “ Church of England Messenger.”
We congratulate the Church of England in Australia, and the
Diocese of Newcastle in particular, on the arrival in our midst of the
Right Reverend Dr. Pearson. The bright and hearty service at All
Saints’, St. Kilda, cheering as it was to the hearts of all true Church-
men by its exhibition of brotherly unity, and its notes of jubilant
thanksgiving, was after all but a feeble expression of the sense which
some of us entertain of the great blessing which, with God’s help, the
new Episcopate may prove to the Church of Christ in this land. The
ministry of Dr. Pearson at home was already distinguished for its wide
usefulness, and its large and high promise. Equally as a college lec-
turer, as a parish priest, and as a University preacher, he was recognised
by many as a true teacher, and as a bold and wise leader. Abreast of
all the culture of the age, the intimate friend of some of the most
eminent and trusted of the leaders of its thought, a devout believer in
the Catholic faith, who has proved his power to commend that faith to
the mind and heart of this eager, struggling wonderful century, he is
just the man to form a rallying-pomt for that numerous class of thought-
ful doubters in Australia who would fain become believers if they could.
A man with a vocation—one who has won his way to a definite aim and
mission through those very struggles and difficulties which form the
special trial of our time —he will be able to comfort and instruct not
less by the mistakes which he avoids than by truths which he teaches.
In the little volume of sermons, entitled Disciples in Doubt , which
came into our bands just before his arrival, we have a significant inti-
mation at once of the method and theological position of the newly


consecrated prelate. Firm as a rock on the cardinal points of our
common Christianity, Dr. Pearson yet shows himself in these sermons
to be as delicately sensitive to the deepest needs as he is largely tolerant
of the inevitable misgivings of thoughtful minds. For those misgivings
he has philosophical alleviations, and for those wants he has a message
so clearly perceived and so closely applied that it will be hard for any
to resist the conviction that it is, indeed, a message from God. And
if, from the message, we may venture to turn for a moment to the manner
and tone of the messenger, it will, we think, be generally felt that in
the quiet and reverent and yet withal the earnest and powerful style of
Dr. Pearson's address, the truths which he declares lose nothing from the
manner of their utterance. If in what we have said our words may
seem to some to savour too decidedly of panegyric, our excuse must be
that we have striven to state the truth as simply as we were able. No
doubt Dr. Pearson has defects like the rest of us ; and it is certain that
the work which awaits him will tax all his energy as a pastor and all
his skill as an administrator.
It is not, however, upon such subjects that one wishes to dwell at a
time like this. We would rather remind ourselves how fruitful must
be that spiritual life of our mother Church which can spare labourers
like Dr. Pearson for the needs of these distant colonies, and how base-
less must be those alarms which, among the manifold difficulties of
modern life and thought, can fear under such circumstances for the ark
of God. With the Divine Word for our guide, and with such chief
pastors as Dr. Pearson to open out to us its treasures of wisdom and
comfort, we may well thank God and take courage. The clouds which
threaten our future may be dark, but the light of God’s promise shines
brightly behind them.


Diocese of Sydney
The Right Rev. the Bishop of Newcastle is expected to arrive in
Sydney by the s.s. Chimborazo at the end of the week. An address
of welcome from the Bishop and Clergy will be presented to him on
his arrival, and steps are being taken to entertain him at a dinner at
St. Paul's College on an early day next week. JDr. Pearson will pro-
bably preach at the Cathedral at the service of welcome held in his
honor.
ARRIVAL or THE BISHOP OF NEWCASTLE.
(From the “Australian Churchman ,” August 19^.
The Diocese of Newcastle, having been the first to be separated
from the old Diocese of Australia, anything connected with that See
must have a special interest to Australian Churchmen. Our beloved
Bishop Broughton was an old fashioned High Churchman ; the first
Bishop of Newcastle too, the revered Dr. Tyrrell, “ the only Bishop
who never left his diocese,” with his high aims for, and anxious thought
of it, was a High Churchman; and we, who have since the days of our
first Bishop, always turned our eyes towards the Diocese of Newcastle,
can remember the indomitable zeal and energy of Bishop Tyrrell. We
could tell of many a horse that the good Bishop knocked up, and we
have heard of many a cleric who could not keep up with him. Any-
thing therefore of such special interest as the arrival of a Bishop to
succeed him must be of absorbing interest to our readers.
On Sunday the 15th August, at one o’clock exactly, the Chimborazo ,
with Bishop Pearson on board, dropped anchor in Neutral Bay, and
really a more beautiful day could not have been for his arrival in the
waters of Port Jackson—a cloudless sky, a warm sunny air tempered
by a gentle breeze —all we trust happy omens to his Lordship.
The thoughtful arrangements of the Bishop of Sydney and the Yen.
Archdeacon Child (Vicar-General of the Diocese of Newcastle) were
upset by an alteration in the time of arrival, and being Sunday the
Morning Service detained the clergy, and no doubt many of the Laity,
who otherwise would have had the privilege of greeting the new Bishop
and Mrs. Pearson. It had been intended to meet Dr. Pearson at the
Circular Quay, adjourn to the Church Society’s House, and then to
attend Morning Prayer at the Cathedral; this however could not be
done. Archdeacon Child remained in readiness for the signalling of
the steamer, and at 12 o'clock a messenger kindly sent from the Flag-
staff 1 announced the vessel in sight. A note was immediately sent to
the Bishop at the Cathedral, and also to the Bishop of Goulburn, who
had come up to greet his brother Bishop. Shortly after, the dropping
of the ball at the yard arm gave the signal that the Chimborazo had
entered the heads, when the Yen. Archdeacon Child, accompanied by
Mr. J. Horbury Hunt, for years professionally connected with the
Diocese of Newcastle, and Mr. Clarendon Stuart, a Member of the


Sydney Diocesan Synod, steamed off down the harbour to meet the
vessel in the steam yacht Nixie, especially chartered for the occasion.
Fort Denison was rounded, and just after the huge Orient liner dropped
her anchor in Neutral Bay, the little yacht was laid alongside, and a
hearty welcome given to the Bishop and Mrs. Pearson. No time was
lost in transferring from the big to the little steamer, and the Nixie's
head was laid for the Prince’s stairs, Circular Quay; but on the way,
the Bishop of Sydney and Mrs. Barker, the Bishop of Goulburn and
Mrs. Thomas, were met in a waterman’s boat. A speedy transhipment
was effected to the Nixie, and under pleasing congratulations and
“ hand-fastings,” the Quay was reached, and a perfectly quiet and
private landing effected, before it was generally known that the Chim-
borazo was in. Two of the Bishop of Sydney’s carriages were waiting
to convey the Episcopal party to Bishopscourt, the beautifully situated
residence of our Bishop. As the Chimborazo steamed off the coast, she
could be distinctly seen from Bishopscourt, and the first salute the
Bishop of Newcastle had was the hoisting and dipping of an ensign
from this charming spot. We change the sky but not our feelings,
and we can well understand that that first greeting to Australian shores
filled the new Bishop’s heart; for though he was now at the Antipodes,
the same kindly English feelings and sympathies awaited him and his.
May God bless his work in his new sphere of labour in the Lord’s
vineyard. High hopes are entertained of him as the friend of Bishop
Moorhouse, and the eyes of all who love the Church of England, and
her well-defined, distinctive Doctrines, will be turned towards him.
The address of the Bishop and clergy to the Bishop of Newcastle
was presented on Monday afternoon, in the presence of a goodly
number of ladies^and gentlemen, at the Church Society’s house, Phillip-
street.
The Bishop of Sydney, in presenting the address, gave a hearty
welcome to the Bishop of Newcastle, in the name of the clergy and
laity of the Diocese of Sydney, and the Bishops and Dioceses of Goul-
burn and Bathurst. The new Bishop of Newcastle had already been
received and welcomed by the Bishop and clergy of Melbourne, and
the clergy of this colony had every reason to be thankful that the
brotherhood of the Australian Episcopate would be strengthened by the
accession of one who numbered among his friends the able and admirable
Bishop of Melbourne. The gifts among the clergy of the Church
were various ; but the spirit which animated the Church had been—and
he trusted would be—the same. They were actuated by the same
motives, doing the same good work from the beginning to the present
time. In the providence of God, Dr. Pearson had been called upon to
succeed one whom for a quarter of a century he had regarded as one of
his most valued and able friends in the episcopate,—one whose untiring
energy and industry in his devotion to his work, and great liberality
towards the future interests of his Diocese, were now matters of history,
and whose private and affectionate friendship he had greatly valued.
The late Bishop of Newcastle belonged to the same illustrious institu-
tion from which the new Bishop had come, namely St. John’s, Cam-
bridge, and he frankly believed that the same spirit which animated the
late Bishop would animate the present one. He remembered an
E


observation being made to him many years ago by one who had witnessed
the consecration of four clergymen for the colonial episcopate, that the
colonial Church would never again receive such an acquisition as when
it received Bishop Short, Bishop Perry, Bishop Tyrrell, and Bishop
Grey. Bishop Short we retained in Australia ; the presence of Bishop
Perry we had lost, although the influence of his interest in the Church
was still felt: and by death we had lost Bishop Tyrrell. It was a
matter for congratulation that the Church at home was so rich as to
be able to spare for the colonial Church men of undoubted ability and
learning, such as the gentleman we were now welcoming among us.
He desired also to extend to Mrs. Pearson a hearty welcome, as to one
who would be the partner of the life and labours of Dr. Pearson, and
a helper in the great work in which he was about to engage. The
Bishop concluded by reading the address, which bore the signatures of
nearlv all the clergy of the Diocese, and was as follows : —“ We, the
undersigned, Bishop and Clergy of the Diocese of Sydney, are glad to
avail ourselves of this opportunity of offering you our hearty welcome
and congratulations upon your safe arrival amongst us on your way to
your Diocese. We are very thankful in believing that it has pleased
the great Head of the Church to call one to succeed the first Bishop of
Newcastle (whose zealous and indefatigable labours for the advance-
ment of his Diocese will long live in the remembrance of the Church in
this colony), who will bring to the discharge of the duties of his high
office abilities of no mean order, and a single eye to the glory of God
in the extension of His Kingdom in this land. We pray that the best
gifts of the Holy Spirit may be abundantly poured forth upon you, and
the flock committed to your charge, to enable you to feed the Church
over which He has made you Overseer. We remain, your faithful
servants in Christ.”
The Bishop of Newcastle, in reply, sincerely thanked the Right Rev.
chairman, and those gentlemen who had signed the address, for their
kindly words of welcome. If anything could make a stranger in a
strange land quickly feel at home, it was the expression of such good-
will and sympathy as was contained in his lordship’s words and in the
written address. The Clergy of Victoria had already given him a warm
welcome, and had risen high above all local prejudices, and stretched
out the right hand of Christian fellowship, as they felt that we all
recognized the same great principles upon which was founded the
Church of Christ, and particularly that portion of the Church the
forms of which we had brought with us from our native land. Anything
that lifted us out of our narrow prejudices was to be welcomed. Speak-
ing only as an outsider, and not as one who had any personal acquaint-
ance with colonial church matters, it seemed to him that many of the
defects that might fairly be expected in the colonial church system were
due to the fact that such long distances separated the head of one
Diocese from the head of another Diocese, and the head of one Parish
from the bead of another Parish ; and it was just possible, under those
circumstances, that there would be a tendency to localism, and to work
in narrow grooves. An occasion like the present brought the clergy
closer together, and served to assist in widening their views, and they
learned to respect and help each other—not as high churchmen, or as


low churchmen, or as broad churchmen, but as the expounders of the
Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, which had been committed to their
keeping. He again thanked the Bishop and Clergy for the address of
welcome with which they had presented him, and also for the welcome
extended to Mrs Pearson. He believed that he had brought with him
one who would be very helpful to him in his future work. Very soon
they would be proceeding to their future home, where they would carry
with them pleasant recollections of that occasion; and he would ask
them to continue their prayers that God’s blessing would rest upon the
good work in which he was about to engage.
The Bishop of Goulburn heartily concurred with all that had been
said by the Metropolitan, and joined in the hope that the Bishop of
Newcastle would be successful in the work of his Diocese. He was
always glad to hear of prosperity in another Diocese, and had always
felt that each Diocese derived benefit from the progress and prosperity
of the neighbouring Dioceses. The Bishop of Newcastle had arrived
at a very opportune time, and he trusted that the laity would cordially
support their new Bishop, by their prayers as well as by their contri-
butions, to enable him to enter upon his work with facility and prompt-
ness. He hoped that he would have the pleasure of welcoming l)r.
Pearson on a visit to Goulburn.
The Hon. Charles Campbell, M.L.C., on behalf of the Bishop and
Diocese of Grafton and Armidale, cordially welcomed Dr. Pearson ;
and Mr. Alexander Gordon also welcomed him, on behalf of the laity
of the Diocese of Sydney.
The proceedings then terminated.
(From “/S'. M. Herald,” August 19. )
At St. Andrew’s Cathedral, last evening, a thanksgiving and welcome
service was held, on the occasion of the arrival of the Bight Beverend
Dr. Pearson, Bishop of Newcastle. Long before the service commenced
the spacious edifice was filled in every part, and numbers had to be con-
tent with merely standing-room. Full choral service was performed,
the anthem being “ I was glad.” The Dean of Sydney read the proper
lessons for the Evening Service; and amongst those present were the
Venerable Archdeacon Child, of the Diocese of Newcastle ; and Canons
Hulton King, Stephen, Allwood, Moreton, and Gunther. Dr. Pearson
selected his text from Mark iii. 14-15 —the ordination of the twelve
apostles ; and in an eloquent and impressive discourse he showed how
Christ’s apostles banded themselves together to spread the message of
salvation over the whole w r orld ; and reminded his hearers that, in the
proper sense of the word, every Christian was called upon to do his
share in the great work. In referring more particularly to the pre-
sent occasion, the Bishop assured his hearers that since his arrival on
Australian shores nothing but expressions of goodwill and sympathy
had been poured in upon him and his companion in travel. The
Church in these Colonies had shown them that those who came here as
the rhinisters of Christ found a ready welcome in Christian hearts, and
he asked them in their prayers to speed in every possible way the guests
who would soon be leaving them, and commend them to the care of their


heavenly Father Anew and affectionate relationship had been estab-
lished between the Metropolitan Diocese and the daughter Diocese of
Newcastle, and he fervently trusted that they might be enabled to help
each other in the work of the Master, and press onward towards the
height of their calling. The Bishop of Sydney, before pronouncing the
Benediction, offered up special prayers on behalf of the Bishop ot
Newcastle.
COMPLIMENTARY BANQUET TO THE BISHOP OF
NEWCASTLE.
(From the “S. M. Herald” August 20.)
About three hundred gentlemen assembled in the large hall of St,
Paul's College, last evening, on the occasion of a complimentary
dinner given to the Bishops and Clergy by the lay members of the
Church of England, on the occasion of the arrival of the Bishop of
Newcastle (Dr. Pearson). The company included a large number of
the most prominent public citizens, and the whole arrangements were
under the direction of the Hon. Charles Campbell, M.L.C., and Mr.
M. Metcalfe. The banquet was served up in first-class style by the
Compagnoni Catering Company, under the direction of the manager,
Mr. Packham. . . .. A
Sir Alfred Stephen, K.C.M.G., occupied the chair, and on his right
were —The Bishop of Sydney (Dr Barker), the Colonial Secretary (Sir
Henry Parbes), the Bishop of Goulburn (Dr. Thomas), the Minister
of Justice (Sir G. L. Innes), the Colonial Treasurer (the Hon. James
Watson), and Archdeacon Child ; and on the left were the Bishop of
Newcastle, Mr. Justice Hargrave, the Bishop of Bathurst (Dr. Mars-
den), the Hon. J. Campbell, M.L.0.; Archdeacon Pownall, Archdeacon
Puddicombe, and Mr. Alexander Stuart, M.L.A. Among the company
were the Hon. Charles Campbell, M.L.C. ; the Hon. W. J. Foster,
M.L.C.; Mr. E. B. Smith, M.L.A.; Mr. Alexander Gordon, and many
leading private citizens. Letters of apology were read from Sir James
Macarthur and Sir James Martin, both of whom intimated that their
absence was solely due to ill-health. _
The usual loyal toasts of “ The Queen,” “The Prince of Wales and
Royal Family,” and “ His Excellency the Governor,” having been pro-
posed by the chairman and duly honoured,
Mr. Justice Hargrave proposed “ The Parliament of New South
AVales.”
The Hon. J. Campbell returned thanks on behalf of the Legislative
Council, and said that, although he was a member of that body, he was
bound to admit that he was not quite satisfied with all its proceedings.
(Hear, hear; and laughter.)
The Hon. J. Watson returned thanks on behalf of the Legislative
\ssemblv. He claimed that the present Parliament had performed a
great deal of valuable work, and he hoped that the new Parliament
would be equally as productive of prompt and useful legislation.
Sir Henry Parkes said that he had been desired to propose for the
acceptance of the company the toast of “ The Bishops and Clergy of


the Church of England in New South Wales.” (Applause.) This
country was abundantly endowed with the sources of natural wealth,
with a population composed of the very best elements that could enter
into the formation of a nation. Such a country offered great scope
for the efforts of Christian workers, for the efforts of enlightened
teachers of the Gospel, which, both in its immediate soul-satisfying
character and in the moral grandeur of its far-reaching results, could
never be excelled. (Applause.) He apprehended that the work of the
Christian pastor, broadly, roughly, resolved itself into two distinct
classes of results, the result in the condition of individual souls, and
the result in the growth and character of a nation. (Hear, hear.) In
a land like this, untrammelled with any of the old traditions, but having
coming to us every year units from the most enlightened nations of the
earth; with a people forming a nation which, as sure as the sun would
rise, would rank among the future nations in the achievements of science
and culture—in a country like this, it was for the Christian minister to
surmount the social structure with the incomparable glory of the
Christian faith. (Hear, hear.) Whether or not the bishops and
clergy of the Church ot England were equal to the grand work which
was before them, it was not for him, at that moment, to say; and
certainly, standing there in the presence of so many distinguished 5 men
of that Church, he was in fear of indulging in flattery. But this he
did know—that the members of the Church of England were nearly
one-half of the population of this land. This he did know—that the
clergy of the Church of England were in numbers the greatest body of
teachers in this land—(hear, hear)—and if they did not stamp the
character of their pure broad religion upon the character of this
country, the default would lie at the door of the clergy. (Applause.)
The people were here,—the highest elements of Christian civilization
were here, and both were open to the exertions of the clergy. There
could be no grander character than that of the man who was attached
to the pure doctrines of his Holy Master; who did his utmost to soften
and pardon the guilty, to soften the blow to the afflicted, to heal, as far
as they might be healed, the wounds of the suffering, and who at last
stood in the presence of his Maker, after toiling on the hard path of
duty, with the words of Christian benediction on the lips of the world,
from which he had been called to his rest. (Applause.) The Church
of England, through its clergy, should endeavour to realize the position
they occupied in this country. They should endeavour to see that their
work lay not in the Church alone, but in the Sunday-school, in the homes
of their parishioners, in the wild bush, and in the back lanes of our
city, where the worst and lowest grades of civilization were to be found.
(Applause.) They should let no other class of clergymen outstrip
them in their zeal. It was to him somewhat discouraging that the
Church which ranked next in point of numbers in this colony had ex-
tended its influence in certain directions beyond the Church of England.
The Church of England comprised nearly half the population, and
should have a much larger number of Christian pastors than they had
in comparison to the Church of Some. To be enabled to cure any
defect they should first see what the defect was, and it certainly was a
defect in the organization of the work of the Church of England that
F


it was'outstripped by another Church in the number of its means for
accomplishing its ends. (Hear, hear,) By the very principles of their
Church politic they should encourage freedom, they should encourage
diversity of opinion, and they should encourage discussion; but there
might be a Church policy which tended to encourage extinction of
intellect and the consolidation of all into one level obedience of priestly
power. (Applause.) It was for the Church of England to repel any
such ecclesiastical policy as that by zeal, and perseverance, and success.
(Cheers.) The Government to which he belonged, and the Parliament
of which he was a member, had done something to withdraw certain
support from the Church of England as well as from other Churches.
That ought to be a signal for redoubled efforts to give individual support
to the Church. (Hear, hear.) It ought to be a signal for prompt
action and zeal where no zeal had hitherto manifested itself; and he
felt convinced that if the latent energies of the people of the Church
of England were evoked, they would respond in a thorough and heart-
felt manner. (Hear, hear ) He believed that amongst the 230 clergy-
men of the Church of England—he thought that was the number in this
colony—there were many men who were —in point of zeal, in earnest-
ness and effort to serve their Master and ameliorate the condition of
their fellow-creatures —equal to any pastors that ever existed in reality
or in fiction; and as he thoroughly believed that example moved
example, their labours, if persevered in, would speedily multiply cases
of that kind, and he had no fear of what the consequences would be;
for the trammels having been removed from the Church of England, it
would serve to infuse vigour into the members, from one end of the
Church to the other, —from the poorest man up to the highest ecclesi-
astic, and the prosperity of the Church would be all the greater.
(Cheers.)
The Bishop of Sydney was directed, on the part of the bishops and
the clergy who were present, to return their very sincere thanks for
the honour they had done him and them on this occasion, by the
manner in which they had drunk this toast, and for the great gratifica-
tion afforded them in thus enabling them to meet on the occasion of a
welcome to their right rev. brother. The occasion of his arrival was a
very important one, and was fraught with consequences of great
moment; not only momentous for the Diocese, but for the Church as a
whole, because they required from time to time to be raised out of the
groove in which they were running. Eor the accessions they had
received from the mother country they were very much indebted. The
interest which the laity had taken in their history was fraught with the
most important consequences. There were several right rev. brethren
who were there that evening who would not have been there if it had
not been for the exertions of the laity. The Dioceses of Goulburn and
Bathurst owed their existence to the laity. The late Robert Campbell
—(applause)—first moved in the formation of the Diocese of Goul-
burn ; and it was owing to the liberality of members of the same family
that that work was undertaken ; and it was by the exertions of a layman
who was not present —(Mr. Rossi) —that that work was carried on.
But the same might be said of Bathurst, and also of Grafton and
Armidale, in connection with which the name of Mr. Clarke Irving was


associated. He was extremely glad of the opportunity that was thus
afforded to them of publicly expressing the gratification they felt in
being able to unite socially in this pleasant manner. He looked upon
this as one of the means by which the cordial union which was a
necessity in this Diocese, and in the adjoining Diocese, would be pro-
moted. What they should have done, had it not been for the laity, he
could not tell; for although the Parliament of New South Wales had
assisted, for instance, in the erection of the hall in which they were now
gathered, they had only actually contributed the half of its cost, and
the rest had been obtained by the exertions of the illustrious layman
who presided on this occasion—Sir Alfred Stephen (Loud applause.)
Look, for example, at the school for the daughters of the clergy, which
was entirely built and endowed by the laity. And it was particularly
laid down by the lady who was the founder of that institution that no
clergyman should be requested to contribute to it. The association for
the relief of superannuated clergymen would be eventually one of the
greatest blessings in existence in the Diocese; for what could give
greater pain to the laity than that when a clergyman was past his work
he should be in danger of want, instead of having an institution like
this, in which he could receive the sympathy and support of the flock
in connection with which he had striven to discharge his duties in the
days ot his health and strength. He hoped the time would come when
clergymen would be enabled to retire upon annuities of £IOO or £l5O,
when they had passed beyond heavy labour. The labours of the clergy
had been described by the Premier, with one important omission. The
labours of the clergy must extend beyond the Sunday school to the day
school. (Loud applause.) He would not enter into the discussion of
a question upon which no doubt there would be great differences of
opinion ; but he still adhered to what he had publicly stated and re-
stated—that it was both their privilege and their duty to discharge the
functions of clergymen, as teachers of the young in the daily as well as
in the Sunday Schools. (Applause.)
Sir Alfred Stephen now came to what might fairly be termed the
toast of the evening. His experience of long speeches was that they
were not well received or appreciated; and that particularly applied at
such a late period of the evening as that. He should, therefore, con-
tent himself with asking them to drink to the health, success, and
happiness of the newly-arrived Bishop of Newcastle. (Loud applause.)
In the first place, they tendered to him their most cordial welcome to
the colony. They rejoiced in being able to recognize in him a gentle-
man who was a distinguished scholar, not merely as a classic, but as a
theologian ; and they had every reason for believing that he would do
honour to the colony, and give satisfaction to those over whom he would
preside. It was pleasant to remember that he was there not by the
nomination of any one person. No one could possibly love and respect
more than the speaker did the Bishop who had spoken and the other
Bishops. He believed that they were all good men, and that better
could not have been selected. It was, nevertheless, gratifying to know
that the gentleman whom they had met to honour was there, not by
nomination, but as one who had been elected and invited by those over
whom he was to preside. He trusted that he would find his residence


in the Diocese of Newcastle as pleasant to himself as he was quite sure
it would be beneficial to the inhabitants of the Newcastle district; and
that he would be as much pleased with them as he was quite sure they
would be with him. He trusted that their guest would be of infinite
service in the Diocese. From what he had heard of him, and judging
from the sentiments he had already uttered since he had been there, he
\yould be peculiarly acceptable to all classes of that community over
which he would have to preside, and whose spiritual interests would be
placed in his charge. (Applause.)
The toast having been enthusiastically honoured,
The Bishop of Newcastle, who was received with enthusiastic ap-
plause, said he would ill requite the chairman for his kind words,
and the laymen of Sydney for their kind hospitality, if he attempted a
long speech at that late hour. He should, therefore, content himself
with very few words of thanks for the manner in which they had drunk
the toast which had just been proposed. He came to this colony with
a sense of great responsibility. He looked back on the career of that
distinguished man whom he was called upon to succeed, and who was
noted for his honest devotion to the great work in which he was en-
gaged. (Applause.) It was always a serious responsibility to succeed
a devoted man: and when he considered also that he was, as the chair-
man had just mentioned, the elected of the Diocese, he felt that that
added to his responsibility, because he was afraid that when they came
to receive him, they would be disappointed with the one whom they
had elected. However, he would try as much as any man could do,
to contribute to the peace of that Diocese, to its welfare, and to the pros-
pects of the Church. It was not for him at that early period of his
episcopacy to say much of what he was going to do, but would content
himself with a simple promise that he would endeavour to do his
duty. He had been glad to hear from the lips of so illustrious a lay-
man as Sir Henry Parkes the definition of the duties of the Clergy.
He had put before them a very high standard which it was hoped the
Clergy would attain. However, he was glad to find that night that he
had something else to talk about besides himself. The gentlemen
there that evening had given him a toast to propose. It was “ The
University of Sydney—its Prosperity and Success.’' He did not know
why he was chosen, because he should have thought that of all the
gentlemen present, he knew least about the University of Sydney.
That might be, in some respects, an advantage. (Laughter.) “The
University,” to his mind, always meant the University of Cambridge,
and when he talked of the University of Sydney, he just tried to bring
before his mind what he might fairly attribute to the influence of the
University of Cambridge on himself. He tried to look back to the
pleasant, and he hoped, not useless years, somewhere about thirteen,
which he spent in active connection with St. John’s College, Cam-
bridge. Now, the first thing that presented itself to him prominently
Was the associations of the place. Those who remembered, as he did,
their ancient courts and old cloisters, the pleasant gardens and that
library so full of ancient learning, would know what he meant when
he spoke of the associations of the place. The Premier had just con-
gratulated them upon living in a country which was not trammelled


by traditions. He (Dr. Pearson) was proud to say that he lived in a
University which was abundantly trammelled by traditions, which was
associated with the names of some of the best and most learned and
public-spirited men England ever possessed. Of course it was not
the fault of the University of Sydney that it did not possess those
associations, but he hoped that in due time it would be trammelled with
many such honourable associations. Then again, in their University
they had the association of persons; they had pleasant recollections of
tutors and “coaches;” but above all he thought of the college life in
the University of Cambridge, and could not help thinking that, if the
University of Sydney was to become a great social power in New South
Wales, it would be by the strength of its college life. (Cheers.) What
was a University without colleges—without some corporate life of this
kind? What was a University when it resolved itself into some huge
examining, some huge degree-conferring machine ? Could they imagine
any pleasant or lovable associations of an institution of that character,
of such a huge board of examiners ; therefore, he hoped that whatever
the future of the Sydney University might be, it would be strengthened
by college life. Then there were the pleasant associations of those
whom they had met and worked with there. He had not spoken of
the association of books; but, apart from that, he could only express
his strong hope that the grand associations of the Universities of the
old country would gradually grow up round the Universities of the
new, and that the Sydney University would be a power of sweetness
and light in this colony of New South Wales, and in due time they
would have round them such associations as would make it a pleasure
and honour to young men to become under-graduates. He hoped the
wealthy men of this colony would, as in England, devote some portion
of their wealth to the extension of sound learning among them. Sir
Henry Parkes rather threw it at the clergy that they had not so many
clergymen as their neighbouring denomination. [Dr. Thomas: We
have wives.] (Laughter.) There was one way out of that difficulty,
and that was to make some good scholarships for the liberal sciences,
to which some of them might afterwards devote themselves. Let them
have no distinctions between liberal culture and clerical work, and he
hoped that one result of their meeting that night would be that they
had brought the clergy and laity more closely together, and he hoped
that in future years there would grow up a great feeling of unity among
them. And now he had to ask them to honour the toast which he had
to propose, and he had also the pleasure of calling upon one who was
well qualified to respond to it. If they wanted good mathematicians,
where would they go to get them ? Why, to St. John’s College, Cam-
bridge. He had, therefore, much pleasure in calling upon one who
had been intimately associated with that college to respond on behalf of
the Sydney University.
The toast having been duly honoured,
Professor Gurney said that it was a peculiarly pleasant duty to him
to have to acknowledge such a toast, and particularly when it was pro-
posed by such a gentleman as the present Bishop of Newcastle. About
ten years ago, in the fair city of Cambridge, in the College of St, John
the Evangelist, he (Professor Gurney) was a humble under-graduate,
G


and among the dons there, far above him, was Mr. Pearson. He was a
college don and lecturer in modern science, a subject of which he (Pro-
fessor Gurney) knew nothing whatever. He need scarcely say that he
could not claim any intimacy whatever, but he knew Dr. Pearson and
respected him, and he felt special pleasure in having, on behalf of the
Sydney University, to welcome him as a man endowed with gifts, and a
learned man in a branch —that of moral science—which he believed had
been treated in this colony with undeserved neglect. He would now
take the opportunity of making a short statement of the position of the
University, and the work carried on in that institution in kind, in
quality, and in quantity. In the matter of quantity, the number of
students during the past three years had been increasing year by year.
He had been lecturing during the past term to forty-four freshmen. In
the matter of quality, he could hardly speak with propriety, but he
would say that everything they did was done most publicly. They
published their examination papers, and published their work. At the
same time he thought there was room for improvement. The present
system of teaching classics, mathematics, and natural science was not
complete. They were blamed by some because they did not teach some
of the more useful sciences, such as the subject of engineering, and by
others they were blamed because they did not teach such subjects as
moral science. They would not be content with the present state of
affairs, and would not be satisfied until they taught more of both the
practical and the more theoretical sciences, so that they should have
men learned in subjects such as that of which Dr. Pearson was a master,
and they would not have to import medical men from across the border.
(Applause.) They would do their best with their present means; but
they would never rest until they emulated the usefulness of the great
English Universities, and until the affiliated colleges, and St. Paul’s in
particular, flourished in the manner the Cambridge College of St. John
the Evangelist, of which he had such pleasant recollections, did.
(Applause.)
The proceedings terminated with the toast of “ The Chairman,” pro-
posed by the Bishop of Sydney, and acknowledged by Sir Alfred
Stephen.
(From the “Australian Churchman ,” August 26).
We take the opportunity as a Church paper, upholding, without fear
or favour, the doctrines of the Catholic Church, to offer our hearty word
of welcome to Bishop Pearson. We congratulate the Diocese of New-
castle in having secured the services of a Father in God, whose fame
has long preceded him, as a scholar and theologian of no mean order;
as a man of unblemished piety, and as a sound liberal-minded Church-
man.
We thank God that out of her wealth of great names, the Mother-
land can still spare men of this calibre to preside over the Church in
Australia.
We greatly need them to help in the widening of our views on
matters ecclesiastical; to lift us out of the narrow grooves into which


we so easily fall, and to enlarge our sympathies touching Church life
and work in this and other Dioceses. The advent of such a Chief
Pastor in this portion of the fold of Christ gives a fresh impetus to
Christian thought and effort ; quickens anew the sense of responsibility ;
awakens fresh interest and co-operation in all that makes for the edify-
ing of the Body of Christ.
We are thankful to recognise in Bishop Pearson one who will ever
seek to uphold the claims of the Church of England as a living Branch
of the Church Catholic. While maintaining her Scriptural and Apos-
tolic character and Constitution, we are persuaded his Lordship will
ever enforce her distinctive and truly Evangelical teaching.
Judging from his few public utterances and actions, we feel sure that
he will have scant sympathy with that negative, indefinite Protestant,
ism so popular, and yet so culpable ; inasmuch as it betrays an utter
indifference to those points of distinction which necessarily exist between
Church Doctrine and Dissent.
We bid Bishop Pearson God-speed on the new and most important
work in which he is about to enter, Presiding over a Diocese so long
and ably ruled by the late Bishop Tyrrell, and through his industry and
self-denial so splendidly endowed, he will have many advantages and
means of extensive usefulness at his command.
But he will also have trials and difficulties to meet and overcome.
We pray that “ he may go among the people committed to him in the
fulness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ.”
And we repeat the loving words of good Bishop Moorhouse offered
for his brother at the noble service of welcome, who thus prays to God
on his behalf:
“ Let Thy grace so work in him that he may be faithful in the
possession and courageous in the administration of his high office ;
that he may be watchful in ruling those over whom he is placed ;
earnest in correcting them, fervent in loving them, patient in bearing
with them, and diligent in praying for them. Hold up his hands, we
beseech Thee, by the prayers and earnest labour of his clergy and
people, that he and they may build up the Church in all holy, truthful,
and righteous living and labour, that the fathers to the children may
make known Thy truth, that Thy name may be hallowed, Thy good-
will be done in the land, and the kingdom of Thy dear Son enlarged
and strengthened, so that Thy people may give Thee thanks for ever,
and show forth Thy praise from generation to generation ; and this we
beg, for Jesus Christ’s sake, to whom, with Thee and the Holy Ghost,
be all honor and glory for ever and ever.” Amen.
THE BISHOP OF NEWCASTLE.
(To the Editor, of the Herald and Advocate.)
Sir, — The brief but important notices with which you have favoured
your readers of the arrival and reception of the Bishop of Newcastle


in Melbourne, have been read, I have no doubt, with the greatest
interest in all parts of the Diocese of Newcastle.
Although it is only what might be expected, yet it is gladdening to
read that the Bishop has been received in the most cordial manner by
the Bishops of Melbourne and Ballarat —by the venerable Dean of
Melbourne, by about fifty of the clergy, and crowds of the laity, who
assembled with one heart and voice to return thanks with the Bishop
for his safe arrival, so far, on his way to his Diocese.
There are numbers besides the members of his own church who
will look on with intense interest and pleasure at the receptions
which the Bishop may receive on his way to his Diocese. Every time
your telegraphic notices, which have reference to the Bishop’s move-
ments, will be welcomed with avidity.
It is becoming known that a movement is on foot to give the Bishop
of Newcastle a fitting reception on his arrival in your city. I feel quite
certain that all ranks and classes of your community will unite in
wishing success to the movement, for doubtless every right-minded
citizen will hail the arrival of one who, while he is a distinguished
visitor, has chiefly been chosen to his present position, we believe,
because of his large-minded views and devotion in doing good. Surely
the addition of such a man is an advantage to any community !
While, then, the members of the church to which the Bishop belongs
are preparing to give him such a reception as ought to be accorded to
one who has left all behind to cast in his lot with us, and has come
14,000 miles to join in every philanthropic work, let the sympathy of
the whole community be shown in the welcome demonstration on the
day when he sets foot on the wharf of your city, and may the members
of the Church of England, from the highest to the lowest in the
Diocese of Newcastle, realise in some measure the benefits of which
they are the recipients by such a man devoting his life to their service,
and may they arouse themselves to do in a worthy manner their duty
on this memorable occasion. I am,
Welcome Stbangee.


Diocese of Newcastle
REPORTS OF THE PROCEEDINGS
IN CONNECTION WITH THE
Arribal & Installation of the Second Bishop of Newcastle,
AUGUST 25TH AND 26TH, 1880.
(From the “Maitland Mercury” August 26. )
Yesterday afternoon, the Lord Bishop of Newcastle, Dr. J. B.
Pearson, who was elected by the Synod of the Diocese last year in suc-
cession to the late Right Rev. William Tyrrell, D.D., arrived by steamer
Morpeth in Newcastle Harbour, and was welcomed on the wharf by a
large number of the clergymen and laity of the Diocese. The follow-
ing clergymen were present: —The Venerable Archdeacon Child,
Vicar-General; Canons Selwyn, White, and Tyrrell, Revs. F. W.
Addams, W. H. H. Yarrington, S. Simm, W. S. Wilson, G. H.
Johnstone, John Shaw, F. D. Bode, Jno. Dixon, J. J. Nash, W.
Marshall, W. Lund, W. Tollis, A. C. Thomas, C. Walsh, C. M. Mills,
E. Huband-Smith, and H. S. Millard. Among the laity were a large
number of representative churchmen and members of Synod. The
public generally also gathered in force, and the crowd included many
ladies and children. The wharf presented a very pretty appearance as
the steamer came alongside. Both the houses in the city and the
shipping in the harbour were pranked with flags, and while the
weather was calm, cool, and full of sunshine, the sea was exceedingly
gentle. The gathering must have convinced the Bishop that the
people among whom he has come to labour were determined to extend
to him and his lady a hearty welcome. Many of the visitors had
come great distances in order to be present, and all quarters of the
Diocese were represented by both clergy and laity.
The Morpeth was signalled at about half-past two, and at a quarter
past three precisely she drew alongside the wharf. The Bishop and
Mrs. Pearson stood together on the bridge of the vessel, and were
greeted with hearty cheers from clerical and lay throats, which his
Lordship acknowledged by lifting his hat. The Mayor of Newcastle,
Mr. Chapman, had already sent from Sydney by telegram an expression
of regret at his enforced absence, and just now another came to Mr.
Buchanan, the Police Magistrate. As soon as possible the Venerable
Archdeacon Child accompanied Mr. Buchanan on board, and the Police
Magistrate having been introduced to the Bishop, told his lordship
that Mr. Chapman desired him to present to himself and Mrs. Pear-
son the hearty congratulations of the citizens of Newcastle upon their
H


safe arrival amongst them. The Bishop said a few appropriate words
in response.
The Bishop’s party consisted of himself and Mrs. Pearson ; the
Bishop of Sydney and Mrs. Barker; and Canon Stephen and Mrs.
Arundel Barker. All immediately landed and were conducted to
carriages in waiting. The clergy and parochial officers present walked,
and a procession was formed which started towards the Cathedral Church
(Christ Church) on the hill which commands so striking a view of the
town, the ships, and the sea. Large crowds were gathered about the
church, and over the gate to the churchyard was an archway bearing
on a scroll the words, “ Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the
Lord.” Green boughs and flowers had been effectively used in orna-
menting the ground, and conspicuous among the decorations was a
banner with the word “ Welcome” broadly emblazoned on it.
As soon as the procession reached the church, the door was opened,
and every seat was quickly filled. A short service of thanksgiving was
proceeded with without delay. After the opening voluntary, the choir
sang the Church’s hymn of praise Te Deum. Then followed the
Lord’s Prayer. Afterwards were chanted Ps. cxi., Confitebor tibi, and
P. cxiii., Laudate , pueri. The proper lesson was Matthew x. 37.
Then came the Cantate Domine, and after the Apostles’ Creed had
been said, the following prayers were offered:
“ Most merciful Lather, we give Thee humble and hearty thanks that
Thou has brought Thy servant the Bishop of this Diocese to the end of
his journey in peace and safety. Continue, O Lord, Thy goodness to-
wards him, and grant that he may live among the people committed to
his care in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ. So endue
him with Thy Holy Spirit that he, preaching Thy Word, may not only
be earnest to reprove, beseech, and rebuke, with all patience and doctrine,
but also may be to such as believe a wholesome example in word, in
conversation, in love, in faith, in chastity, and in purity; that faithfully
fulfilling his course, at the latter day he may receive the crown of
righteousness laid up by the Lord the righteous Judge, Who liveth and
reigneth with the Lather and the Holy Ghost world without end.
Amen.
“ O Almighty God, Who by Thy Son Jesus Christ didst give to Thy
Apostle Saint Peter many excellent gifts, and commandedst him
earnestly to feed Thy flock; Make, we beseech Thee, all Bishops and
Pastors diligently to preach Thy holy Word, and the people obediently
to follow the same, that they may receive the crown of everlasting
glory; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen''
The Choir sang the hymn beginning “ The Church’s one foundation,”
and the service was closed with the Episcopal Benediction, pronounced
by the Bishop of Newcastle. The officiating clergymen were Canon
Selwvn, the Rev. F. D. Bode, and the Rev. John Dixon.
Outside the church the children of the three parishes of Newcastle,
Christ Church, St. John’s, and Wickham, had been assembled, in
number about twelve hundred, and when the episcopal party came
from the church, the children sang a welcome, as follows :


In this bright land of Sunshine,
From Britain far away,
We raise united voices
In welcome’s loudest lay.
Borne safely o’er the billows,
Through many a danger pass’d,
Our Bishop stands amongst us,
In his distant home at last.
Chorus —Then join all Christian people
With heartiest voice sincere,
To give him warmest welcome,
To our Southern land so dear.
Glad herald of the Gospel!
To strengthen all that’s right,
He comes with message holy,
To labour in our sight,
And we with willing welcome,
Firm by his side will stand.
To make a Christian Britain
In this happy Southern Land.
And in each smiling village
May church spires point on high,
To the Shepherd Good above us
And Our Home beyond the sky,
Where, when each care is over,
And earth’s last billow pass’d,
May Bishop, Priest, and people,
A glad welcome hear at last.
The words and music were composed by Mr. Hunt, the choir master,
and were sung with great spirit.
Canon Selwyn then came forward, and presented, in the name of
Mrs. Selwyn, on behalf of the teachers and children of the Sunday
schools of the three parishes, the following address to Mrs. Pearson :
“We, teachers and children of the church of the three parishes in
Newcastle, offer you our hearty welcome and good wishes on your
arrival here.
“ Our fathers of' the church at large will welcome our bishop, but we
specially welcome you-
“As teachers we have heard with pleasure that you have been a Sunday
school teacher in our far distant fatherland; that there you loved to
care for the children of the church ; and we are glad to think that in
your new country you will not forget your former work.
“As children we want to tell you how glad we are to see you; that
already we love you because you have come out from your own home
to live with us here. We want to learn from you whatever of good
you will teach us or help others to teach us ; and we hope to show you
that in Australia, as well as in England, children of the church are
growing up eager to learn all that will make them happy and wise.
“ Both as teachers and children we pray that Almighty God may bless
you and give you long life and happiness ; and that you may be able to
bear your full share in lightening the labours of our Bishop and
Father in the Lord; and we shall always look to you as one who will
naturally love us and our work, for Christ’s sake, and for our Bishop’s
sake, and we hope also for our own sake. We are, dear lady, for our-
selves and the children of the church in Newcastle.”
[Here followed the signatures.]


The Right Rev., the Bishop, in replying for Mrs. Pearson, said r—-
My dear teachers and children of the parishes of Newcastle, I must
ask you to allow me to say a few words on behalf of my wife this
afternoon. She thanks you most heartily for coming to give us this*
kind welcome to our new home and work. Before we were married we
had made up our minds to come out to you. For many weeks were
talking about the long voyage, and making preparations for it, and now
at length we have reached the city of Newcastle, it is very pleasing to
tiud that you seem so glad to see us, and to hear such hearty expressions
of goodwill for our future. My wife greets all Sunday school teachers
here as old friends and fellow labourers. Though separated by thou-
sands of miles, you have been engaged in one work, and have had the
same purposes, the same hopes, and no doubt many of the same
difficulties; therefore she feels towards you as a friend and fellow
labourer, and as time goes on I hope she may see her way towards
helping the cause of God in some way or another. For the children
of Newcastle we shall always have feelings of gratitude and love for
their coming together to-day with their pretty faces and cheerful voices
to make us welcome here. We are glad indeed to think that you may
learn holy lessons such as may make you better day by day, so as to
make you more and more like Him who is childhood’s pattern as well
as manhood’s, and the becoming like whom is the way to be what the
God who made us meant us to be. Teachers of children, we thank
you most heartily for this kind welcome. May God bless and keep
you in the right way for His dear Son’s sake. Amen.
The united assemblage, numbering upwards of 2000 persons, then
joined in singing the hymm “Go forward, Christian Soldiers,” and
three lusty cheers were given for his Lordship the newly-arrived Bishop.
The children were then regaled with an unlimited supply of refresh-
ments, to which ample justice was done, and the company dispersed
later on.
Stfinut
TO EIS LORE SEIF TEE BISEOP OF NEWCASTLE ON TEE OCCASION
OF EIS ARRIVAL.
Oh! thou who comest to our southern land,
Leaving thy former home and kindred dear
With boldness, and dost undertake to steer
Our Church, and add thy squadron to the band
Of chosen saints, —thy Master’s great command
Thou hast obeyed, and shook off idle fear.
Oh may thine hand be firm, though dangers rear
Their threatening heads, and may’st thou be a brand
To stir our flagging Church to efforts new.
Help me to guide my feet, and make me bold
To win my place among the chosen few,
And steer my feet unto the glorious goal,—
That when my race is run I may behold
The Bishop and the Shepherd of my soul. —G.M.


Instillation.
(from the “Maitland Mercury ,” August 28 .)
We have already described the proceedings observed on the occasion
of the arrival of the Right Rev. Dr. Pearson, Bishop of Newcastle in
succession to the late Right Rev. Dr. Tyrrell. The Bishop and Mrs.
Pearson arrived in the Diocese on Wednesday afternoon, by the steamer
Morpeih from Sydney, where for a few days they had been the guests
of the Metropolitan, who with Mrs. Barker accompanied Dr. Pearson
and his lady to Newcastle.
On Thursday forenoon, shortly before ten o'clock, the clergy of the
Diocese, who were present in large number, assembled at Christ
Church parsonage, and having robed, proceeded in order to Christ
Church Cathedra], which was filled by a large congregation. A great
many of the laity of the Diocese, from different and distant parts,
were included in the assembly.
Morning prayer was then said by the Rev. Canon Selwyn. The
proper Psalms were Ps. lxxv, Confitebimur tibi , Ps. cxxi, Levavi oculos,
and Ps. cxxii., Lcetatus sum. The Rev. Canon White read the first
lesson, Isaiah vi, I—B, and the Rev. Canon Tyrrell the second lesson
John xv, I—ll. After the third collect, the choir sang “ O Guardian
of the Church Divine." Upon the conclusion of the Hymn, the
Metropolitan directed the Deputy-Registrar of the Diocese, Mr. R.
W. Thompson, to read the notarial Act of the consecration of the
Bishop of Newcastle > and Mr. Thompson having obeyed, the Metro-
politan delivered his mandate for the installation of the Bishop to
Archdeacon Child, Vicar-General, who read the mandate, while the
clergy and congregation remained standing.
The Archdeacon proceeded to induct the Bishop in the following
words: —
“In the name of God. Amen.—By virtue of a Mandate under the
hand and seal of the Right Reverend Father in God, Frederic by Divine
permission, Bishop of Sydney and Metropolitan, and in conformity
with the approved usage of the Church of England, I, Coles Child,
Bachelor of Arts, Archdeacon of Newcastle, do hereby induct thee,
Josiah Brown Pearson, Doctor of Divinity, into the occupation of the
See and Diocese of Newcastle, and do instal thee in corporal, lawful,
and canonical possession of the same by the style and title of Bishop of
Newcastle, this twenty-sixth day of August, 1880.”
The Archdeacon then said—
“ O Lord, save Thy servant the Bishop of this Diocese.”
The people answered —
“ And send him help from Thy holy place.”
Then the Archdeacon offered the following prayer —
“ Almighty God, Giver of all good things, Who by Thy Holy Spirit
hast appointed divers Orders of Ministers in Thy Church ; Mercifully
behold this Thy Servant now called to the Work and Ministry of a


Bishop ; and replenish him so with the truth of Thy doctrine, and adorn
him with innocency of life, that both by word and deed, he may faith-
fully serve Thee in this office, to the glory of Thy name, and the edifying
and well-governing of Thy Church; through the merits of Our Saviour
Jesus Christ Who liveth and reigneth with Thee and the Holy G-host,
world without end. Amen.”
Addressing the Bishop, the Archdeacon said—
“ The Lord bless thee and keep thee The Lord make His face to
shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee. The Lord lift up the light
of His countenance upon thee and give thee peace both now and ever-
more. Amen''
The choir sang “ Come, Holy Ghost, Creator 00016,” and the
Metropolitan proceeded with the Communion Service. The collect
was the special collect for the consecration of Bishops, as follows:
“Almighty God, Who by Thy Son Jesus Christ didst give to Thy
Apostles many excellent gifts, and didst charge them to feed Thy flock;
give grace, we beseech Thee, to all Bishops and pastors of Thy Church,
that they may diligently preach Thy Word and duly administer the
godly discipline thereof; and grant to Thy people that they may dili-
gently follow the same; that all may receive the crown of everlasting
glory ; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.”
The hymn before sermon was " My God and is Thy Table spread.”
The Metropolitan preached the sermon. He took his text from
Deuteronomy lii, 18. “ Charge Joshua, and encourage him, and
strengthen him.” The words of Moses to Joshua were those of a dying
man, who might not enter the Promised Land. The workman may die,
but the work proceeds. Though the commander may not enter the
land of promise the people must. Another leader must therefore be
appointed. There was some similarity between this closing scene in
the life of Moses and the present occasion. One who for upwards of
a quarter of a century had laboured in the Diocese had gone from
amongst men. The loss to those for whom he had worked was to him
great gain. For the Lord removed him when full of years and honors ;
the time had come when their late Bishop felt that to depart and be
with Christ was far better. The loss to the church was the loss of
help, of experience, of the deepest interest in the work he had under-
taken, and the very conspicuous and self-denying liberality to the
Diocese he was now to leave. Yet the work goes on and another
leader must be appointed. The rule of the church must be maintained
according to its ancient order. And as the principles of all right
government are ever the same, because they are in subjection to the
eternal law of God, so also the promises made to the rulers of the
people and of the church are still the same. What was required of
Moses was required of Joshua as his successor ; what was promised to
Moses Joshua could claim —" I will never leave thee nor forsake thee ;
I will never fail thee.” The promise given to Joshua was in fact re-
peated from age to age in the church. Therefore the church now can
boldly take the promise as addressed to itself—" The Lord is my helper ;


1 shall not want; he will never leave me nor forsake me.” Paul, when
he gave the charge to Timothy, repeated the promise, while at the same
time he reminded him of his great responsibilities as a bishop, of the
duties which flowed from the office, and who it was who had committed
the care of the church to him. Two things specially were enjoined by
Paul on Timothy. He was to preach the Word ; to use one of the great
means by which the church does her exalted work. The pulpit still retains
its power: right words, wise words, words in season, are still as goads
stirring men up to godliness. Timothy was also to lay hands suddenly
on no man. He was carefully to discriminate in the selection of men
for the priestly office. Bishops of modern days were required to be as
careful as Timothy in the choice of instruments for God's work. Fitly
chosen instruments indeed display the power and knowledge of God,
and become a valuable means of disseminating truth and righteousness
in the world. Joshua was not only to be charged, he was also to be
encouraged. And what was the encouragement ? Promises were
made to him upon which he could rely; an engagement was entered
into which was certain to be fulfilled. That was truly encouragement
to undertake the task set him. He had the assurance of God’s constant
presence and support. Christ had given similar encouragement to his
disciples individually and to the church collectively. And every one
who was conscious that he was doing the will of God and performing
His work, might apply the gracious promise to himself. Joshua was
also to be strengthened. How ? In the command to do the work of
the Lord was contained the strength to obey. “ God’s commandings
are God’s enablings,” an old writer has said. When God gives the
command he gives the strength. Christ’s servants can do all things
when He strengthens them. Dr. Barker proceeded as follows : To us,
to you who represent this Diocese of Newcastle, to him who has this
day been set before you manifestly in the face of the people and before
the Lord as bishop—it is a cause of large thankfulness to feel that
although our wants and weaknesses are the same as theirs of old time
and that we are the same as Moses, hesitating, weary, under the load
of all the people, yet the power and presence of J ehovah is more fully
manifest to us than it was to Joshua. For we have Jesus for our guide
who is the true Joshua, the captain of our salvation: He it is who
assigns our lot in life, He fixes the bounds of our inheritance, He gives
us the promised security of peace, He leaves nothing undone for his
chosen, until he brings them to the rest and the inheritance of His
heavenly kingdom. To Him, therefore, we may confidently direct our
thoughts and our prayers when we think, as we must naturally do, of
the responsibilities of the Episcopal office, and of the need of wisdom
and strength to discharge its manifold great and solemn duties. It is
a comfort to us, and a help to us, to believe that he who comes to you
to-day as your chief pastor has, in the providence of God, been
clearly called to this office and ministry ; that after much prayer and
earnest deliberation on your parts, the hearts of men were guided by


the hand of the Lord, towards one eminently calculated for the
position by sound learning and fitted by ministerial experience to
undertake the office into which he has this day been installed. The
apostle gives two directions in Hebrews xiii.; he bids us to look at
the pastors who have passed away, and to those who bear rule over us.
He bids us obey those who at present fill the office. We are grateful
to remember the past; we look hopefully to the future. Deep interest
is felt, much prayer has been offered, and the anticipations of many
are that large and lasting benefits to the Church of Christ and the
people in his charge will follow from the appointment of this second
Bishop of Newcastle, My brethren of the clergy and laity, strengthen
your chief pastor and encourage him. Strengthen him by that in-
terest in his work which takes the form of sympathy and support, —
support by personal and pecuniary efforts, after the self-denying
example of him who once bore rule over you. Encourage him by
work, by your manifest interest in the work in which he is engaged;
encourage him by your sympathy in discouragements and difficulties,
by your confident belief that God will be present with him in his pur-
poses and labours; encourage him by your petitions to the Throne of
Grace that he may especially be one of those wise teachers who turn
men to righteousness and shine in the brightness of the firmament as
stars for ever and ever.
The offertory was taken, to be devoted to the general fund of the
Diocese, and the service, which included the administration of Holy
Communion, was proceeded with to its conclusion.
In the afternoon the Bishop was entertained at a luncheon, in the
Citv Hall, at which between one hundred and eighty and two hundred
persons were present. A large number of ladies was included. The
hall was handsomely decorated with wreaths, flowers, and boughs, in
some cases arranged about the word “Welcome;” and the tables
were adorned as well as the poverty of gardens, consequent upon the
long dry weather, would permit. Above the row of seats set for the
principal guests, was a scroll bearing the words “ The Lord make His
face to shine upon thee/’ Mr. Lashmore, of Newcastle, was the
caterer, and performed the function excellently. The Archdeacon of
Newcastle (Archdeacon Child), presided, and on his righth and were
Mrs. Pearson, the Bishop of Sydney, Mrs. Child, Canon Stephen,
Mrs. Selwyn, and Major Bolton. On his left sat Mrs. Barker, the
Bishop of Newcastle, Mrs. Arundel Barker, Canon Selwyn, Mrs. John
Lee, Canon White, and Mr. Thomas Hungerford.
After dinner, the Chairman expressed his pleasure at seeing so many
churchmen present at that entertainment so handsomely provided to
welcome the Bishop. He then proposed the toast of “ The Queen” —
(cheers) —who on one side of her beautiful character cherished a most
Christian sympathy with her people. The toast was most warmly
received.


Canon Selwyn said he had been chosen to propose the next toast,
not specially because he was able to speak, but because his superiors
thought it was his duty to undertake the task. (Hear, hear.) Of
course when they heard what the toast was, they would feel at once
that he could not but be glad and ‘proud to propose it. He wished at
the same time it had fallen into hands more able to do it justice. The
toast he was about to propose was as dear to members of the Church as
the previous toast was to all Englishmen. It was health and long-life
to the most venerable and respected Metropolitan. (Long continued
applause.) He was glad to note that they received, as he was sure
they would receive, the toast with acclamation. (Renewed applause.)
To most of them perhaps the Bishop of Sydney was not personally known,
it was true, but he had long been known by his character by those who
do not belong to his diocese, but who have learned to respect and love
him—(hear, hear) —as a most able leader of the Church. And it had
been most peculiarly gratifying to himself and all there, and to the
clergy especially as well as to the laity, that they had the great privilege
of the Bishop’s presence among them that day. (Applause.) That was
no common day. (Hear, hear.) That day they welcomed their dearly-
loved Bishop—beloved in anticipation, and to be more dearly loved when
they came to know him. (Hear, hear.) But the presence of their own
Bishop amongst them would not have been so pleasant as it was, if it
had not been accompanied by the presence of the Metropolitan. (Hear,
hear.) And he thought that all then present, and who were also present
at the Cathedral Church in the forenoon, must have felt how solemn was
the service, beautifully it was adorned by the most eloquent and
touching and graceful and appropriate address of their beloved Metro-
politan. (Applause.) No one could have listened to those truths with-
out feeling himself elevated and instructed, He believed that discourse
would bear fruits. He hoped they would second him in the request he
was about to make to the Bishop of Sydney, that he would allow his
sermon of that day to appear as it ought to appear, in a manner in which
it could be read and studied. He knew it was delivered without notes,
but he hoped there were some present able to take notes of it, and that
the Metropolitan would be induced to let it appear in a shape worthy
to appear before them. They, the clergy, had learned to value and to
follow the kind advice, and to highly esteem the fatherly counsel of him
who was over them in the Lord—the Metropolitan of this and the other
dioceses of the province. He confessed that he hoped to draw out from
the Bishop of Sydney another address. They were celebrating the great
event of the arrival of their Bishop in a variety of ways. Yesterday
they began with the acclamations of the little children. Then their
fathers and mothers in the ways of the Lord met in the Cathedral
Church, and took part in a solemn service there. At that particular
time they were celebrating the event as men and women, and especially
as Englishmen and women, in its social aspect. By and by they would
celebrate it by a public meeting. He should be glad if the Bishop of
Sydney would give them a few words on the social side of the event.
He hoped that Dr. Barker would enjoy long life and find reason to
come again amongst them, when they would receive him loyally.
(Applause.)
I


The toast having been enthusiastically honored,
The Bishop of Sydney said that when many years ago he was ap-
pointed Bishop of Sydney, and there was appended to his appointment
a description of his office as Metropolitan of Australia, he sought
counsel from the Lord Bishop of London, as one likely to know what
the duties of a Metropolitan were. The Bishop was greatly perplexed
at the question, but looking up to him in a very significant way, he
said—“ Well, I cannot exactly say what the duties are, but I am quite
sure that when you get to Australia, your suffragans will all look up to
you.”—(Laughter and applause, which as the joke hung fire with some,
were renewed after a brief lull. Dr. Barker is taller than the ordinary
sons of men.)—He was happy to feel that on the present occasion the
rule had not met with any exception . (Laughter. Dr. Pearson is of
middle height.) He regarded it as one of the privileges of his position
that he was permitted to be there that day, and that he had been at the
request of the clergy and apparently with the full concurrence of the laity,
asked to take part in the very important and most deeply interesting
proceedings of the time. He felt that there was not much more than
an imaginary bond between the dioceses and the Metropolitan’s office—
(hear, hear,) —and that they might all be more closely united by the fact
that while the Bishops ruled them, the Metropolitan, though he did not
rule, had some ideal and to some persons imaginary, but on this occasion
very real duty to perform. He had to assist in the installation of a
bishop, and he was thankful to think that on this occasion his duties had
been so agreeably diversified. He was certainly a little alarmed at the
prospect the Vicar-General opened up in the programme sketched to
him, and found that yesterday and to-day and throughout the whole
day there was something expected from the Bishop of Newcastle and
the Metropolitan, and he began to apprehend that he should sink under
the tasks laid upon him. He was glad to say, however, that that well
appointed meal and that pleasant company had quite restored him, and
he felt perfectly competent to return thanks for the manner in which
Canon Selwyn had proposed and they had received the toast of his
health. His relations with the late Bishop of Newcastle were of a very
affectionate and tender character. Under that cold exterior there lay a
deeply affectionate nature. (Applause.) Very few, probably, appre-
hended the depth of that affection. (Hear, hear.) On several occasions
he was permitted to fathom to some extent the late bishop’s nature, and
to know that there thrilled therein as tender and loving a heart as ever
sent forth its expressions of condolence with a friend in affliction.
(Hear, hear.) Although perhaps these observations respecting the late
Bishop were not immediately connected with the business of the day,
the mind naturally rested upon one who was wholly devoted to the
work of the Diocese, who denied himself solely for the purpose of
benefiting the Diocese in the manner he deemed best. (Applause.)
He also took a warm and fervent interest in the organisation of the
Synods of the Church, and though others may not always have con-
curred in his views of church government, yet on the whole, the church
in Australia was deeply indebted to the wisdom and forethought of the
late Bishop of Newcastle, and for the manner in which he had wrought
out the subject of synodical action. (Applause.) He had ever regarded


him (the Bishop of Sydney) very loyally as his Metropolitan—as
Metropolitan not so much created by the Crown, for the democratic
tendencies of this country had to some extent affected him, but as
Metropolitan by consent of the Bishops and clergy, whatever that
might mean. Perhaps the General Synod might some day throw a
little light on the subject. At present the Metropolitan was allowed to
assist in the installation of a Bishop, and to partake of the hospitalities
of the laity. For all those, and for the kind manner in which they had
received the toast, he returned them his most cordial thanks.
Major Bolton had been so highly honored as to have the toast of the
afternoon entrusted to him. He traced back the history of the past to
the occasion, when for the first time in Australia a Synod of the Church
of England met in that very room. For the first time, the laity of the
church were admitted to a share in the management of its temporalities,
and it was made clear that the laity were the church. The election of
the present Bishop was one result of the synodical action for which
they were indebted to the late lamented Bishop. The new Bishop had
no ordinary duty to fulfil; he succeeded to one who was an example to
all men However, the new Bishop knew that the work before him was
one of difficulty, and to enable him to carry it out he had chosen an
assistant from among the ladies of England. (Applause.) He had
brought one of the ladies of England with him as his wife (applause)
to assist him. If he had not done so he (Major Bolton) would have had
some misgivings as to the future career of the Bishop. He was sure
Mrs. Pearson would be a valuable aid to church work in the diocese.
He proposed “ the Bight Rev. Hr. Pearson, Lord Bishop of Newcastle
(applause), and Mrs. Pearson.” (Long continued applause, and three
ringing cheers for the Bishop and one cheer more for his lady.)
The Bishop of Newcastle, who was cheered again on rising, said—Mr.
Archdeacon, my Lord Bishop of Sydney, and ladies and gentlemen, I
can assure you that since I landed upon Australian shores, my faculty
of gratitude has been exercised from day to day most vigorously.
(Hear, hear.) When our steamer came to Melbourne, I bad the grip*
of an old friend’s hand in the person of the Bishop of Melbourne
(applause)—one whom lam glad to think the people in the home of
his adoption are learning to honour and love. (Applause.) And when
in the course of our journey we came on to Sydney, I felt very soon that
if I had not met an old friend yet that I had formed a new friendship
—if I may be allowed to say so —with the Metropolitan of this pro-
vince. (Applause.) I cannot tell you how fully we appreciate the
kindness of the Bishop and Mrs. Barker to us in their home, or the
hospitality which met us from the churchmen of Sydney. Applause.)
But I assure you we have a great deal of gratitude and power of thank-
fulness left for the diocese of Newcastle. (Applause.) My wife and
I could not fail to be pleased when we came to this harbour and saw it
so gaily decked, or when we came to the cathedral church (so to call it)
—(laughter)—and saw the large gathering which was to welcome us
with children’s voices. (Applause.) Now perhaps you may all
remember the old adage about gratitude being a sense of favours to
come. Now that at last I have got among Newcastle people, my
gratitude partakes greatly of that character. I cannot help looking


forward to the future and thinking of what we must expect each from
the other. (Hear, hear.) 1 assure you I.feel most deeply the sense of
responsibility in succeeding one who has been spoken of, and honestly
spoken of, in such terms as you have heard (applause)—as one who
was devoted to his work, and who proved it by his constant residence
and constant labours in your behalf. I do feel the responsibility of
succeeding him. (Hear, hear.) Well, if we are to see life and
progress and energy in this Diocese, what shall I have to ask of
you, in that sense of favours from you to come. It has struck
me that one thing I shall have to ask of you is forbearance. I
shall have to ask for your patience as being a new comer.
(Hear, hear.) We are not old colonists yet ; we have only been
five weeks in Australia. That is my misfortune, many will think.
But as time goes on I will try to learn from those who are ready to
guide and teach me with regard to my new duties and the new sur-
roundings of my life. In the meantime, I shall ask for the forbearance
and patience of the clergy and the laity, being what we used to call at
Cambridge a freshman. I must also ask for your candour. I know quite
well that in carrying on the concerns of a great institution such as this
there must arise occasional misunderstandings. There must be incidents
from time to time which tend a little bit to throw a cloud over the sun-
shine of the pleasant relations that should exist between us. This is to
be expected in the ordinary course of human things. When such
occasions arise, be plain, and honest, and straightforward with me.
(Applause.) Do not let the thing hang back and disturb our relations
from week to week and from year to year. Let us have it out.
(Applause.) One thing more. I want your patience and your candour,
and from both clergy and laity—for they combine to form the Church,
I must tell Major Bolton—(a laugh) —I also want your kind co-operation
—your co-operation not only with me but with each other, I feel that
one of the peculiarities of the life of the clergy in this country is that
they are likely to suffer from a sense of isolation. In that case, it is
more and more the duty of the laity to co-operate with their clergy.
(Hear, hear.) You know that at home—no, this is home now —I mean
in England— (a laugh)—when things go a little wrong with a clergy-
man, he is only a few yards from his next door clerical neighbour, and
can go in and talk the thing over. He can say, “ how awkward Mr.
Smith is turning, there have only been some slight changes made, and
he is quite in a huff about them.” (Laughter.) But here the clergy-
man has not always such an opportunity. He has no outlet for com-
plaints when his nearest clerical brother lives sixty or seventy miles
away. It is therefore more incumbent upon the laity here to co-operate
intelligently and heartily with the clergyman of their parishes. I
venture to say this —that if the laity recognize their position
as members of the Church, and their duty to be fellow-workers with
the clergy, the success of the Church is assured. I thank Major
Bolton and you for the hearty good will you have manifested to us;
I thank you for the kind way in which you have received my dear wife.
(Applause ) Major Bolton has spoken of what she is sure to be to the
diocese. I can speak much more confidently of what she is to me. I
knew her before I married her as a good daughter, a good sister, and a


good neighbour, and I knew she would make a good wife. I will tell
you one little remark she made after that service yesterday afternoon,
in which we were both glad to join. She said, “ Oh, my dear, the
cathedral! ” (Laughter and applause.) I do not think I can do
better than leave you that remark of my wife’s as a subject for your
meditation—(renewed laughter.) I thank you heartily on behalf of
my wife and myself.
Mr. Trenchard proposed “ The Visitors,” and expressed a hope that
some of them would before long be invited to the ceremony of laying
the foundation stone of the new Cathedral.
Canon Stephen responded. After acknowledging the hospitality of
the people of the Diocese, he expressed his pleasure at being present at
the installation of the second Bishop of Newcastle. Some 33 years
ago he had been present at the consecration of the first Bishop. He
could assure the new Bishop that the sympathy of the clergy of the
diocese of Sydney was his.
Mr. B. W. Thompson proposed “ The Ladies,” and especially Mrs.
Selwyn, the lady who had taken a chief share in the reception proceedings.
Mr. H. J. Bolding responded.
This concluded the proceedings of the luncheon.
A public meeting in connexion with the arrival of the Bishop was held
in the evening in the City Hall. There was a large attendance of both
sexes, and, as before, the diocese was very generally represented by
gentlemen who had come specially to attend. The Venerable Archdeacon
Child presided.
The Chairman said it was nearly twelve months—twelve months next
week —since the Synod of the diocese met in that hall to put in force
the ordinance for the election of a Bishop. They had now before them
the Bishop who had been sent to them by the Divine blessing, to the
choice of whom they were guided by the Divine hand. Of course the
progress of civilization, the rapidity of communication now enjoyed
between one country and another, had enabled their newly-elected
Bishop to reach his Diocese within a year of his election. But all this
progress in the arts and sciences brought upon clergymen further
duties, responsibilities and anxieties. They were met to continue the
welcome to the Bishop, already expressed in other forms. (Hear, hear.)
They purposed to put their welcome in the form of an address, signed
by members of Synod on behalf of the Diocese, and to hand this to the
Bishop as a lasting memorial of the cordiality with which he was
welcomed among them. Before calling on the gentlemen who were to
present the addresses, he would say one or two more words. When their
late Bishop, who died almost seventeen months ago, came to the
Diocese, a different order of things from the present prevailed. He
really laid the basis of the church. There was now no parish in which
there was no church ;in some there were several. In his own parish
of St. James’, for instance, there were four substantial churches. The
great desire of the late Bishop, to provide for every resident clergyman
a parsonage, was also accomplished. (Hear, hear.) He used to say,
get the clergyman fixed in the parish, and then everything will follow—
church, school, church organisation, all that is necessary to carry on
J


church work. When the late Bishop came, the Diocese extended from
Newcastle to Wide Bay. First, it had been lessened by the cutting off
the Brisbane Diocese, then a new Diocese of Grafton and Armidale
further diminished it, and a little was afterwards taken off to add to the
Diocese of Bathurst. The late Bishop had to travel many and many a
weary mile over the large original Diocese. And the arrangements to
decrease it required anxious and peculiar care. What was the result,
however P The Diocese was now compact; the Bishop would find it
comparatively easy to go over. He did not mean to say that the
management and oversight of the Diocese would be easy (hear, hear) ;
it would involve great responsibilities and anxieties and duties (hear,
hear) j and they all felt most glad and thankful that their new Bishop
had brought one with him who would assist him to support the anxieties
and responsibilities of his office (applause). Some had gone rather far
in thinking that Mrs. Pearson would be a sort of assistant-bishop (a
laugh); the way she would really and best assist the Bishop was by her
wifely sympathy, her encouragement when he came to his home wearied
with the many anxieties and perplexiti s he would have to encounter,
surrounding the episcopal office. He could assure the Bishop on behalf
of the clergy and laity that they would give him the most hearty and
cordial support, as they offered him a hearty and cordial welcome. On
behalf of the clergy and laity he said to Dr. Pearson and Mrs. Pear-
son, —God bless you; we thank you for coming out from your own land
to help us ; and we are sure that with God’s blessing, an opening for
great usefulness is before the church in this Diocese under your
guidance. He called upon Mr. Thomas Hungerford to read the
address.
Mr. Hungerford read the following address—
“To the Bight Eeverend Josiah Brown Pearson, Doctor of Divinity,
by Divine permission Lord Bishop of Newcastle.
“ Bight Eeverend Father in God, — We, the clergy and laity of the
Diocese of Newcastle, desire in all duty and loyalty to bid you a hearty
welcome to your Diocese.
“We rejoice in receiving you and Mrs. Pearson amongst us, and we
recognise the gracious ordering of the will of God, which in answer to
our prayers has sent you to be our chief ruler.
“We thank the goodness of the Almighty, which has preserved you
on your voyage, and guided you in safety to this country; and we pray
that the same over-ruling Power may still be with you in your care of
those over whom the Holy Ghost has made you overseer.
“We do not wish to conceal from ourselves the anxieties and labours
everywhere incident to a Bishop’s office, and not least in such a Diocese
as this, comparatively small though it be among colonial Dioceses;
but we believe that they will be lightened to you by the cheerful and
zealous co-operation of all members of our church throughout the
Diocese, and it is our hearty desire and purpose to do all that in us
lies, under your guidance and oversight, to promote the glory of God,
the good of souls, and the extension of Christ’s kingdom.
“We know how great and important a work it is which the Church
is called to do within our borders. This work our late revered and
well loved Bishop began; to it he devoted all his life and means, and


we trust you may be spared for many years to carry that same work
forward, directed by the Divine wisdom, shielded by the Divine pro-
tection, and cheered and sustained by the Divine love.
“ With this expression of our duty and affection to yourself, and
with the belief that your cares and labours in God’s service will be
lightened by her who has come to share those cares and labours with
you, and with the assurance that our prayers on your behalf shall be
constantly offered to Our Father in Heaven,
“ We remain, your Lordship’s faithful servants in Christ Jesus Our
Lord,”
[Signed by the members of the Synod, Clerical and Lay.]
Mr. Hungerford said he was only speaking as the mouthpiece of the
laity of the Diocese —(hear, hear) —in wishing the Bishop long life and
ability to do as much work as the late Bishop had done. (Hear, hear.)
The late Bishop wrought against difficulties that seemed insurmount-
able, and he had made the Diocese of Newcastle an example to all the
Australian Dioceses. He had given a noble instance of self denial and
self devotion, and he (Mr. Hungerford) believed the present Bishop
wmuld follow the example. He believed with every confidence that the
new Bishop would be able to guide the church well. To the late Bishop
they owed synodical action, and thus the laity had been enabled to
take their proper place in church work. Synodical action strengthened
the church by thus uniting the laity with the clergy, and it was a step
in the right direction, for it tended to cement all the elements of the
church in a strong whole. He had been delighted with the sermon of
the Metropolitan, and he was sure clergymen and laymen were all
pleased with their new Bishop.
Mr. Hungerford then handed the address to his Lordship.
Canon Selwyn explained that though the welcome given to the Bishop
was a diocesan matter, yet, as no doubt all the parishes would as they
had opportunity, welcome the Bishop specially, the three parishes of
Newcastle had determined to take that opportunity, and with no thought
of intruding, purposed to present an address to the Bishop. He read the
following address :
“ To the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Newcastle :
“ Right Reverend Father in God—We, the Incumbents and Parish-
ioners of the three parishes of Newcastle— Christ Church, St. John’s,
and St. James’—desire to take this opportunity of expressing to you
our cordial welcome to this the cathedral city of your diocese, in ad-
dition to the general welcome from the diocese just now given to you.
“ We feel sure that you must have made many sacrifices in responding
to the call addressed to you, to come over and help us; and we venture
to hope that our heartfelt expressions of affectionate welcome on your
first landing in our city, and the assurance that we shall at all times be
prepared to second your efforts to the best of our ability, may have
some compensating value.
“ We are looking to you to help us to wipe away the reproach, which
no doubt you will have already felt lies heavily on us, as regards the
church in which you have this day been installed.
“ Our late Diocesan devoted his attention to other objects, which he
considered to be of primary importance, and left to his successor this
great work


“ Your Lordship’s advent, we firmly believe, will impart a strong
impetus to this, and every other good work ; and we confidently antici-
pate that at no distant period you and we shall have the happiness of
beholding a noble cathedral, crowning one of the finest sites in the
world, in°which Bishop, clergy, and laity may unite to worship God in
the beauty of holiness.
« We can assure you that churchmen here are waiting to be led by
you, in every work of faith and labour of love, and there is nothing
which they more desire than to have your Lordship frequently coming
amongst them to tell them what they ought to do. At all times we
shall make it our earnest endeavour to obey with a glad mind and will
your godly admonitions, for we know that such obedience is not only
honorable and due to you, but due also to ourselves and to God.
“ Assuring you that it will be our constant prayer that, in the exer-
cise of your office as our Bishop, you may be endued with power from
on high to feed the Church of God, over which the Holy Ghost hath
made you overseer, we subscribe ourselves your faithful servants and
brethren in Christ Jesus.”
[Signed by the incumbents and office-bearers.]
He would venture to add a few words. The proceedings of the two
days were not merely formal, and of course they would bear fruit. The
fruit he hoped they would bear was the erection of a cathedral, respect-
ing which they might have Mrs. Pearson saying, “My dear, what a
noble building.” That was the fruit he wanted to see. He hoped the
building of the cathedral would be the Bishop’s first work—the erection
of a noble, a commodious building, to which the Bishop will be glad to
see the people come. A fine Cathedral might be made a real bond of
brotherhood He felt that that meeting had inaugurated a new state
of things. The late Bishop took up other work—the building of the
cathedral was not his work. That he left to his successor. But he
thought it safe to say that the present Bishop will first of all be active
in building up the material fabric of the church, as well as in the
building up of the spiritual temple of the Lord. The address contained
the hopes and aspirations of the three parishes of Newcastle, and he
hoped the Bishop would receive them as expressing the kindliest feelings
towards him, and their desire to be led by him. (Applause.)
The Bishop of Newcastle said,—Mr. Archdeacon, my Lord Bishop of
Sydney, my brethren of the clergy and laity, I remember that a friend
of mine came to England from a visit to Canada. His report was that
he found the people there more English than the people of England —
they were so hearty, so hospitable, so kind in every way to a stranger.
I think he would have been able to bring back an equally satisfactory
report if his steps had been turned towards Australia instead of Canada.
(Cheers.) I speak no words of course, but words I feel from the very
bottom of my heart, when I say I thank you for the kind welcome you
have given us to-day and yesterday. We came among you as strangers ;
already we feel that we are strangers no longer (applause.) If we look
back upon the history of the Church in Australia—l am not going to
give you a lecture on that subject; you know more about it than I do —
I will just remind you of a few facts from the consideration of which
you may take courage for the future. It was in 1829 I think when the


first archdeacon was appointed in Australia. At that time the territory
contained only 60,000 people, scattered over this island continent, and
barely a dozen clergy. One archdeacon and about a dozen clergy. It
was seven years after that that the predecessor of our revered Metro-
politan was raised from the rank of archdeacon to the order of a bishop
and the description which he gives of the state of the country during
his visitations, as to what state he found the church, will form a striking
contrast to what we may see and read of to-day. Whole counties were
without a church and without a clergyman—in some there was a clergy,
man but no church, in others one clergyman and one church. There
was no adequate provision for the spiritual needs of the population,
which was even then increasing fast. Now, through the good guidance'
and blessing of God upon the efforts of the clergy and the laity, you
have in a manner transplanted the English Church to these Southern
Shores. (Hear, hear.) This Diocese was for a long time about five
times the size of Great Britain. I assure you, that looking back at
the life of my predecessor, I feel almost appalled at the work which he
must have gone through, and at the self-denying labours to which he
devoted himself from year to year. (Applause.) Some reference has
been made to the kind of provision to the Diocese which he made, and
that which he did not make. I have been very much struck with the
provision and its character. He seems to me to have shown a most
laudable preference of the substantial to the showy. There is no fine
cathedra], but there is no small settlement without its little village
church (hear, hear) —so that the inhabitants of remote districts are
not cut off from means of grace. In his looking forward to the future
he was most anxious to provide permanently for the support of pastors
and teachers in the various districts. Running through all his work
there was a thought of permanence, of substantial good, which we
cannot too much admire. And in thinking of what has been done,
and what not, I think we must give each his word of admiration
to him who looked at the real needs of the people and not at what
would merely make a pretty picture (applause.) At the same time I
quite agree with Canon Selwyn that the time has come for building a
cathedral. (Hear, hear.) For one reason I should almost regret this
building, for I think this diocese is unique in the possession of such a
structure (laughter and applause.) I have seen many churches and none
to equal that (renewed laughter.) Ido not think that when speaking
of building a cathedral, I should look merely to see a building which
would ornament the town, and in which what we may call the elegant
part of church life would be carried on. I look upon a cathedral as
something more than a handsome church, where the services are of an
ornate character ; I think that it should be the centre of warmth and
of life to the whole diocese. (Applause.) If I thought that in ad-
vocating this building in your city I was injuring any bush parish in
a remote part of the diocese, on drawing off attention from that practical
and substantial work to which my predecessor devoted his time and
energy and wealth; if I thought I was asking people to think of the
material structure when they should be building up the living temples
of the Lord in the Sunday-school and in the day school, or in any other
kind of Christian effort, I would have nothing more to do with it. But
K


1 think that a cathedral with its staff—so far as one can carry out the
idea of a cathedral in the circumstances of a new country, should prove
a great benefit, not only to Newcastle but to every parish in the diocese.
First of all, it is most important that the bishop, and especially _ one
coming from another land, and a stranger to the necessities of his position
should have around him faithful counsellors. These are known as the
chapter. Of course we are accustomed to speak of the dean and chapter.
But I believe we should be more true to the original intention of the
church if we spoke of the Bishop and chapter. The chapter should be
counsellors of the Bishop when he is puzzled, as no doubt he often will
be puzzled. Then the cathedral should set the type of worship to the
churches of the diocese. No doubt it is difficult to secure uniformity
of ritual in a diocese where some of the districts are so remote. Yet in
such points as singing hear) the cathedral might set an example.
Then from the cathedral you might get help by making it a centre of
life to that large class to whose labours we are so much indebted —the
lay-readers. If they were brought up to the cathedral, attended service
there, received some instruction from the elder clergy, and had ad-
dresses delivered to them in the cathedral, they would go back to
their parishes with freshened life and energies. One point I. should
like to lay a little stress upon. You must look forward to having the
cathedral free and open to all comers. (Hear, hear) You must
pay the price of a little discomfort for having the cathedral; you
must be content to give up some slight local privilege for the honor
and pleasure of having such a building as we hope to see in your midst.
It would be a grand thing if you should help some sailor to think of
home and home influences, by being made to feel welcome in your
church. (Hear, hear.) I think in this way, as a centre of teaching,
as setting an example of worship to the Diocese, as a spot round which
our diocesan associations can gather, you would find throughout the
Diocese great blessings flowing from this contemplated building and its
adjuncts. Canon Selwyn spoke as if I were to build the cathedral.
But it will be a great deal better for us to do it. It must be done in
fact in that way, if at all. Do not forget these little hints—l speak more
especially to our wealthy brethren: act upon them while they are
tolerably warm and fresh. (Laughter and applause.) I do thank you
most heartily for your welcome to Newcastle. I trust that by God’s
blessing, you will not regret this day’s proceedings. (Hear, hear.) I
will try as much as lies in me, to follow in the steps of him who worked
so hard for you. Of course I do not pretend that I shall do exactly
as he did—all men do not see things in the same light. (Hear, hear.)
I have much to learn. I have heard about that wonderful synodical
action and consensual compacts and other things, which sounded to me
as words in a foreign tongue. I have no doubt I shall get into it in
time. Especially I have to thank the elder clergy, those with whom I
have already been brought in special contact, for their kindness. I
have felt from the time I came here that they have received me warmly,
and I believe I can depend upon their hearty co-operation in time to
come (hear, hear), And now I should like to say how much I sympa-
thise with what is going to be done next. I have had much communi-
cation with Archdeacon Child. I should like before this large assembly


to thank him for his personal kindness and for the trouble he has been
at in giving me instructions and advice, and in bringing me safely to
Newcastle. (Hear, hear.) He has counted no trouble too great in
the way of correspondence, and I cannot tell you in detail how kind
and helpful he has been to me. So that I sympathise most heartily
with the address that I believe is to be presented to him. And, as the
Archdeacon’s modesty will not permit him to call upon any gentleman
to read the address to him, I will do so. I ask Canon Selwyn to read
the address.
Canon Selwyn said he gladly, as one of the elder clergymen, under-
took the duty of reading the address to the Archdeacon. He knew
that it expressed the sentiments of every clergyman in the diocese who
had been for the past twelve months or so under the guidance of the
Archdeacon. It was a simple duty they owed to him and to themselves,
to state publicly the feeling they entertained towards one who had
worked with unwearying assiduity in carrying out not only the ordinary
work of the diocese but in preparing the way for the arrival of the
Bishop. The labour had been immense, and it had been performed in
a most admirable manner. He would now read the address —
“ To the Venerable Coles Child, 8.A., Archdeacon of Newcastle, Vicar-
General and Administrator of the Diocese, during the first vac-
ancy of the See.
“ While we have been engaged in offering our welcome and con-
gratulations to the Bishop of Newcastle on his arrival in the Diocese,
we are not unmindful of the anxious duties which have incessantly
occupied your attention during the vacancy of the See.
“We desire to assure you that we recognise with brotherly regard
and appreciation the patience, zeal, and untiring assiduity with which
you have discharged the onerous duties pertaining to your office of Vicar-
General and Administrator of the Diocese, and we feel that in their
performance you have been actuated by a conscientious desire to advance
the glory of God, and the welfare of our beloved Church.
“In the exercise of your functions as Archdeacon we trust that you
will be guided by the Divine wisdom and love, and that all your efforts
will tend to our still further edification ; and praying that you may be
long spared to continue your useful labours among us, we subscribe
ourselves your faithful brethren in Christ.”
[Signed by the Clergy and Laity.]
Mr. R. W. Thompson also bore testimony to the unwearied assiduity
with which the Archdeacon had performed the duty cast upon him
during the vacancy of the See. He had great pleasure, on behalf of the
laity, in supporting the address.
The Archdeacon thought his services had been too highly rated. He
could not, however, have performed them at all if it had not been for
the help of the Metropolitan and the co-operation of the clergy. He
thanked them for their kind address, and could only say he was sensible
of many imperfections. He had endeavoured to do his duty, and he
had many difficulties to encounter. Among other labours, he had been
obliged to fill six cures during the time he administered the affairs of
the Diocese. It had never fallen to the lot of the late Bishop to do so
in the same space of time. Allusion was made m the address to his


future duties as archdeacon. All he could say was that he was at the
disposal of the Bishop. With respect to the Cathedral they must join
with united purpose and earnest action, must surrender all hope of aid
from the coal mine, and must put their hands in their pockets if they
wanted to see the cathedral built. Another point was that in some way
or other provision must be made for the further subdivision of parishes,
and the supply of additional clergymen. Out of the twenty-nine
clergymen of the Diocese, twenty-five were present that day. But
twenty-nine were not sufficient for the work that was large and grow-
ing, and the laity must provide the means for providing additional
clergymen. There were other matters he might touch upon, such as
the training of clergymen, religious instruction in Public Schools, but
he would refrain. He thanked them for the address.
Canon White, as one of the bush clergymen, had to thank the Bishop
of Sydney for the interest he had taken in the proceedings of those two
days. The service of the installation was one of the most impressive
and interesting that he (Canon White) was ever present at. He be-
lieved that service would do incalculable good. For the share in it
which the Bishop of Sydney had taken, he deserved their best thanks.
He could not help seeing in the notarial act of consecration, in the
mandate of the Metropolitan, and in the installation of the Bishop in
the Cathedral Church of the Diocese, the links which bound the Church
in the colonies with the Church in England. The Bishop of Newcastle
was consecrated according to the mandate of the Queen, the head of
the Church in England, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Primage
of the Church; and then, in compliance with the mandate of the
Metropolitan, in which the Metropolitan defined his position in the
Church in the colonies, was installed and formally inducted into posses-
sion of his See. That was one function of the Metropolitan which the
Bishop of Sydney might claim —to act as a connecting link between the
Church in England and the Church in the colonies, and also as a con-
necting link between the different Dioceses in the province, and thus to
manifest the oneness of the Church. That was a most important
function. The Bishop of Sydney deserved their warmest thanks for
the loving words he had spoken of their late Bishop. The way in
which Dr. Barker had described the character of their late Bishop was
most touching. He had truly read that character. Under a cold
exterior there had beat a warm and affectionate heart. His kindness to
little children was very marked, and children were always attracted
to him. He thanked the Bishop for the trouble he had taken,
and also thanked Mrs. Barker for having accompanied her husband.
(Applause.)
The Bishop of Sydney augured from the fact that bishop, clergy and
people all talked, as Englishmen usually do, of duty, that the work of
the diocese would prosper. Their great want was a cathedral. Might
he remind them of the proverb —“ If you want anything done, do it
yourself.” (Laughter.) He did not think the coal mine would build
the cathedral. Rather was it a great hindrance to its having been built.
If fifteen years ago, they had never had the smallest prospect of return
from that coal mine, it would have been better for the chances of the
cathedral. If it had been deluged with water, or set on fire, or had


never existed, the cathedral might have been in existence at this day
(laughter). He did not quarrel with endowments : they were very
good things. But where there was a belief that an inexhaustible fund
existed that would one day build the cathedral, people buttoned up
their pockets, and said “Go to the coalmine ” (Laughter.) They had
been kind to him, so he would presume and take a liberty with them.
He would say “ Forget everything about the coalmine, and arise and
build, or as was said hundreds of years ago, ‘Do.’” He hoped they
would act while the feeling was warm within their breasts which what
had been said had kindled. Would any gentleman give £SOO ? Would
any lady—men were so mean: they always fell back on the ladies-
engage to collect £ LOO ? The thing might be done if they were in
earnest. As for the coalmine, he was in some doubt whether, if he
was referred to as Metropolitan, he could say they were right in using
up what was capital for building purposes: he might say that all they
ought to spend was the interest. But of one thing he was certain, that
while they depended on the coalmine the cathedral would never be
built. The services he had rendered had been overrated. He had
merely done his duty. He was greatly interested in that occasion.
He looked forward to much benefit from the residence of the Bishop in
the Diocese. The Bishop would find the value of his wife as a helper
and comforter. And they should remember their Bishop in their
prayers. They should bear him up in their hearts and bring him often
up to God, with his hopes, and joys, and troubles. Then great bless-
ings would follow from his residence. He believed that by their
Bishop the Church of England would be fully maintained. He meant
the Protestant reformed Church of England. (Continued applause.)
Their late Bishop was the ideal of a class of clergymen existing in
England in his time, and many still remain there. He was a sound
Protestant —(hear, hear) —a warm lover of the Church of England,
with no sympathy with advanced ritual. He hoped the clergy would
second the efforts of the present Bishop to maintain that just propor-
tion, that medial course which the Church of England has ever held
between the Church of Rome on the one hand and nonconformity with
the Church of England on the other. (Applause.) They had his best
wishes, and he returned them his best thanks.
The Rev. W. S. Wilson proposed that the thanks of the meeting
should be given to the laity for their exertions, not only in those re-
ception proceedings but also in the general work of the diocese. The
proceedings which had marked the reception of the bishop were suc-
cessful because the laity had been enthusiastic. It had been said the
bishop had been brought to the diocese by the act of the laity. That was
scarcely the case. It so happened that two gentlemen were before the
Synod, but when it was manifest in which direction the hand of God
pointed the whole Synod tried to follow it. The bishop was the bishop
neither of the clergy or the laity, but the bishop of the whole diocese,
chosen by the Synod of the diocese, and the diocese would co-operate
with him in his work. The speaker, who concluded that the large
number of elections to Synod showed great increase of zeal among the
lay members of the Church, proceeded to point out how the general
work of the laity in the diocese might be systematised. The Church
L


might look to the laity for greater help in the support of the clergy,
especially seeing that by the forethought of the late bishop much of
the burdens pressing in other dioceses had here been lightened ; lay
members of the church might also take a portion of the evangelical
work off the shoulders of the clergy; women’s work in the church
could be reduced to a more rigid system ; and godly mothers might
by devoting one of their children from the cradle to the service of Gfod
make provision for the future supply of clergymen for the Church.
The Rev. John Shaw supported the proposition.
Mr. H. B. Cotton responded and promised £lO5 to the Cathedral
fund.
The Rev W. H. H. Yarrington proposed a vote of thanks to the re-
ception committee.
The Rev. John Dixon and Mr. H. D. Portus responded.
The proceedings closed with the singing of the evening hymn and
the episcopal benediction.
Welcoming the Bishop of Newcastle at Morpeth.
(From the “Maitland Mercury Sept. 4 .)
On Thursday evening a large meeting of the parishioners of Mor-
peth, Hinton, and Woodville, was held in the Church school room,
High-street, Morpeth, to witness the presentation to the Bishop of
Newcastle, Dr. Pearson, of addresses of welcome to the town. The
room presented a very pretty appearance, with its decorations of flags,
wreaths, ferns, and flowers. It was lighted up with Chinese lanterns,
and while on the wall opposite the entrance door the words “ May
health and happiness attend you” met the eye, over the row of seats
set for the Bishop and clerical visitors might be read “ A loving wel-
come to Morpeth.” Every part of the district which is under the
pastoral charge of the Venerable Archdeacon Child and the Rev. W.
Lund was represented, and some of the gentlemen had come many
miles in the dark along bush roads. The meeting included a great
many ladies.
The chair was taken by the Archdeacon, who said the object of the
meeting was to address a hearty and cordial welcome to the Bishop
and Mrs. Pearson, who had just arrived in Morpeth. The meeting
addressed the Bishop as residents of Morpeth and as Churchmen.
Assembled in that room, he saw a large body of Churchmen, not only
from the town of Morpeth, but from Hinton, Woodville, and other
more distant parts of the parish. It was very gratifying indeed to
him that his parishioners had come to welcome their Bishop among
them. It showed good feeling towards him, when they came long
distances to welcome him on a dark night such as that. As Church-
men and residents of the parish they purposed to present an address of
cordial and hearty welcome to their Bishop and Mrs. Pearson on their
coming to reside among them. After the address from the members


of the Church was presented, the Municipal Council of Morpeth,
through their Mayor, were anxious to take the opportunity of address-
ing the Bishop in words of welcome also. He would now ask Mr.
E. C. Close kindly to read the parishioners' address and to say a few
words.
Mr. Close then read the address as follows :
“ The Bight Reverend Josiah Brown Pearson, Doctor of Divinity, by
Divine Permission Lord Bishop of Newcastle.
“ Right Reverend Father in God, —On behalf of the members of the
Church of England resident in the parish of Morpeth we bid you and
Mrs. Pearson a very hearty welcome on your coming to reside amongst
us.
“ For the last thirty-two years the town of Morpeth has been the
centre of the operations of the Church of England in this diocese and
has benefitted by the residence of its first bishop. We trust that during
your episcopate still greater benefits will spring from your residence here
as well as from the kind and loving interest which Mrs. Pearson will take
in all matters connected with our church in this town.
“ It is a source of much satisfaction to know that you have been
accompanied to this country by one who will help you to bear the bur-
dens of your high and holy office, and will sympathise with you in all
the anxieties which necessarily belong to that office.
“We pray that the blessing of Almighty God may rest upon your
labours in His service, and that His Holy Spirit may graciously vouch-
safe that support and encouragement which are needed by all who are
engaged in the work of extending the kingdom of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ.
“We remain, your Lordship’s faithful servants in Christ Jesus our
Lord,
E. C Close,
“ Representative of the Parish of Morpeth in the sixth
Synod of the Diocese of Newcastle.
G. Blundell,
Geo H. Stephens,
D J. Campbell,
“ Wardens of St. James’s Parish Morpeth.”
Mr. Close proceeded to say, having presented the address to the
Bishop, that it was not easy to add anything further to the appropriate
words he had just read. The Bishop would see that the people of
Morpeth desired to give him a hearty welcome ; the address had been
prepared as a token of the kindliness of feeling which exists in the
hearts of the people for their Bishop. (Hear, hear.) For many
years, for more than thirty years, the parish of Morpeth had been the
seat of the head of the Government of the Church of England in the
Diocese; and it was no wonder, therefore, that, one Bishop having
passed away, the people of Morpeth should stand forward to welcome
his successor and his lady. (Applause.) He hoped that the numerous
occasions upon which his Lordship had been lately called upon to
receive addresses of welcome would not make them appear monotonous.


He feared it might be so. He did not know that he could add to
what was so well said in the address. He regretted that the Bishop
should have come at a time when the country was afflicted with drought,
and when he can scarcely derive particularly favorable impressions of
the fertility of our soil or the beauty of our landscapes. His impres-
sions of the country and the climate would not be agreeable. The
parishioners of Morpeth offered to his Lordship and Mrs. Pearson a
most hearty welcome, and wished them many days of happiness and
comfort and success in their work. (Applause.)
The Yen. Archdeacon desired to say a few words. The address read
by Mr. Close was not the outcome of form or ceremony; it was a
cordial and hearty welcome to the bishop. The people of Morpeth
would think themselves neglectful of duty if they did not give the
bishop some sign of their feelings towards him, if they did not put the
expression of those feelings into writing. He spoke, of course, in no
unkindness to the late bishop. But when they reflected that now they
had a bishop’s lady among them as well as a bishop, they would ac-
knowledge her presence to be a great boon to the parish and the church.
(Applause.) They looked forward to receive help in a variety of ways
from a lady who had had so much experience in church work. Another
thing he desired to bring before them. Their bishop had come from
the town of Newark in England, a considerable town. Their church
was a little church. They had spent a great deal of money upon it,
and he hoped they had the value of the outlay. It had been twice
built, built once and pulled down, and the foundation stone had been
laid twice by the gentleman who read the address, Mr. Close. But
they must know that the Bishop had left a good church behind him.
The Newark church was larger than St. Andrew’s Cathedral in Sydney,
of which they thought so much. Newark church, of which the bishop
had kindly shown him photographs, was an old English church, a fine
old English church, one of the many that England possesses. Never-
theless Morpeth might be proud of her little church, and the people
should do what they could to beautify not only that but the other three
churches in the district of Morpeth. He wished to assure his Lord-
ship that the words addressed to him were not words of form, but a
sign and token of the feelings of the people of Morpeth. They wished
his Lordship and Mrs. Pearson many years of Health and happiness
amongst them, and they bade him and Mrs. Pearson a most hearty
welcome. (Applause).
Mr. Thomas Jones, Mayor of Morpeth, read the following address:
“ To the Eight Reverend Josiah Brown Pearson, Doctor of Divinity, by
Divine permission Lord Bishop of the diocese of Newcastle, New
South Wales.
“ May it please your Lordship,—
“ We, the Municipal Council of the Borough of Morpeth, desire to
congratulate yourself and your good lady upon your safe arrival on the
scene of your future labours here, and to give you in a representative
capacity on behalf of ourselves and the townspeople, a most hearty
welcome.


“ We feel it a great privilege that your residence is fixed in our midst,
and we may therefore, without presumption, indulge in the vanity of
looking upon you as a fellow-townsman.
“ The reputation of your great learning and highly-accomplished
manners has preceded you; and we cannot but consider ourselves favoured
by having you amongst us —as the example of so distinguished a prelate
cannot fail to have a beneficial influence upon those with whom he may
come in contract.
u The preceding address, on behalf of the church, so fully expresses
all that we would wish to say, that we need merely add in conclusion
our hope that the Great Disposer of all may long spare you and your
amiable lady to be with us.
“We remain your Lordship’s faithful servants,
Thos. Jones, Mayor,”
[Signed also by each of the Aldermen.]
Mr. Jones went on to observe that all he could say was embodied in
the address. That expressed the feelings the inhabitants of Morpeth
had towards the Bishop. The few words uttered by his Lordship on
the platform, on the occasion of his arrival, were so telling, that the
people formed the most lively hopes of the benefit his residence among
them would be. The words his Lordship used were so appropriate
and so nice—that he hoped the longer they knew each other the better
they would like each other—that the people were prepared on their
side to cherish a liking for his Lordship. He begged his Lordship's
acceptance of the address.
The Bishop of Newcastle, whose rising was the occasion for applause,
said—Mr. Archdeacon, Mr. Close, Mr. Mayor, if I had been told on
the second of September, 1879, that within the space of twelvemonths
I should be addressing a goodly company of the inhabitants of a
parish and borough a little to the north of Sydney on the river
Hunter, I should have received that statement with something of sur-
prise, and perhaps a little doubt. But life is full of changes and
chances. 1 can tell you that when this particular change was first
presented to me, it disturbed me not a little. It is not a very
easy thing to transplant one’s-self from one side of the earth
to the other. There are so many old associations to be broken
up, so many favorite places and so many old friends to be left,
that it is not a step to be taken without very serious hesi-
tation and questioning. When the change involved, as this
particular one did, accession to an office of high dignity and respon-
sibility, that doubt and hesitation were very much increased. I can
assure you it was a very difficult thing to say either yes or no to
the invitation sent to me through the Archdeacon from the Synod of
this diocese. Ido trust that I did right in saying “Yes.” (Applause.)
I thank you all for the many good wishes that have been expressed,
and I pray that my residence among you, and my efforts in your
behalf, may be blessed to your good; and that the longer we are
together the more we may do for each other’s good. The Archdeacon.
M


has been alluding to this assembly of the Church people of Morpeth.
1 can assure you that I feel a little disposed in some respects to envy
him in it. For I feel that the work of a bishop rather cuts him off
from that personal and close friendly relation which may exist between
a parish clergyman and his parishioners. But I rejoice to think that
from the words of warm welcome addressed to me to-night if I do not
find some friends close at hand, it will at all events be my fault and not
theirs. (Applause,) It cannot but be pleasing to my wife to find that
she is so heartily welcomed by you. Though lam the second bishop
she is the first bishop’s wife to come among you ; and I think, so far
as my experience of her goes, that you will not regret that I brought
her with me. (Applause.) In looking forward to the future—as far
as we dare look forward to the future—there are several things that
press upon one’s mind. Especially the question of the education of
the young people growing up around us. I am not going to enter
upon any controversy just now, but no doubt there are many fathers
and mothers present. I would like to remind them of one very im-
portant point. That is, that whether the special formularies of any de-
nomination are taught in the day schools or not, and whether the child-
ren are taught in Sunday-schools or not, the great formative influence
of their lives will be at home. (Hear, hear.) The Sunday school no
doubt is a most useful institution. I have reason to believe you will
hear some advice upon that particular subject presently. But I should
like to lay stress upon home influence for one moment. When you
remember how short the time is which the child spends in day-school
or in Sunday-school,—when you remember how potent is the influence
of example, you must admit the immense power homes have upon those
who are forming habits for their future lives. 1 trust then, that
whatever the future of education may be so far as schools are
concerned, the training of the homes in this parish will be healthy
and wise, and that more and more importance will be attached
to it, as it justly deserves. I should like to say a few words upon
one point, on the importance of our all working together for the
good cause we all have at heart. I believe that very often the best
clergyman in a parish is the one who sets his people to work best.
I should be very sorry if it were supposed that the clergyman is
merely the official person set up to carry out the Sunday services.
Remember that he should be, and I believe in many cases is, the con-
trolling and inspiring cause of all kinds of good work around him. I
can speak with great thankfulness of the co-operation I have received
from lay members of my church in Sunday School, in Youths’ Clubs,
in various parochial institutions, district visiting and so forth. I can
assure you of one thing,—the more each of you finds to put his or
her hand to in the way of church work, and the more earnestly and
zealously you do that work, the happier you will be, the happier the
parish will be, the happier the community will be. (Applause.)
Morpeth, 1 assure you, has my sincere good wishes. The Archdeacon


aas referred to the church at Newark. It is a glorious old church.
Since I came here I have felt inclined to wish that I could have
brought it with me in my portmanteau, and could stick it up at New-
castle as a cathedral straight away. (Laughter and applause.) That
course would save much trouble and anxiety. I am not quite sure,
however, that if it were otherwise possible, the people of Newark
would have allowed the proceeding. (A laugh.) So we must do the
best we can. If the diocese will exert itself as much as the people of
Morpeth have exerted themselves, so that success has crowned the
efforts of the Archdeacon and Mr. Close, —if the diocese is as ener-
getic in its proportion as the efforts you have made were in yours, we
shall very soon have a beautiful cathedral. lam not speaking words
of flattery when I say that Morpeth possesses a very excellent type of
a good English country church. No one need be ashamed of it, if it
could be transplanted to England instead of the Newark church being
brought here. I must say a few words of special thanks to the Mayor
and Municipality. It is very pleasing to me to find myself recognised
as a fellow-townsman. I feel that I am the more completely recog-
nised by the fact that 1 have brought with me a fellow-townswoman.
I hope that we shall become knit in various social ways with the
neighbourhood in which we live. When I look back to my life at
Newark, I call to mind that I was very closely associated with the
Mayor and corporation in various ways, impossible in a country like
this, where Church and State are not in close union as in England.
As vicar, I was almost like an alderman, for I was knit to the cor-
poration in various trusts and endowments and other matters. We
accept the new condition of things here, and hope to make the best of
it. It is a very great help to me, in beginning this new life, to hear
from the lips of the Mayor such very kind words of welcome, and the
hearty expression of such good wishes. (Applause.) I thank him
and all the inhabitants of Morpeth, whether they be church people or
members of other denominations, for these most hearty evidences of
welcome, and hope that we shall each find the other very good neigh-
bours. (Applause.)
The Rev. Canon Tyrrell said the Archdeacon had asked him to say
a few words that night. He congratulated them, he rejoiced with
them that the residence of the bishop was among them (hear, hear.)
It was a privilege. He wished them to look upon it as a privilege.
Might he presume to commend the bishop to their reverent care.
He said reverent, because in these democratic times, and in this demo-
cratic country, it often occurred to him that authority was sometimes
kicked at. Aye, divinely-appointed authority was sometimes kicked
against. That the bishop was divinely-appointed who could doubt ?
They could all remember that for some months after the death of the
late bishop, up to the time of the election of Dr. Pearson by the
Synod, prayers were offered up in every church in the diocese that the
Synod.might be guided by the Almighty in its choice. Who could


say that He who heareth and answereth prayer was not present in the
Synod, and guided its members to the choice made ? The bishop was
in that way a divinely-appointed authority. Who sent him ? He
was sent by the successors of the apostles. In these ways he was
divinely-appointed. He would then say —Reverence the bishop for
his office. There was too much looking to the man. Let the office
be reverenced. “ Obey him that hath the rule over you, and submit
yourselves, for he watcheth as one that must give an account, that he
may do it with joy and not with grief.” How could they give the
bishop joy and how make his work easier for him ? He would say —
Let this district and every district in the diocese do its work properly.
Let each individual do his church work properly. Let each care for
the spiritual good of his neighbour, and then the temporal good of
the church would follow. The temporalities would always follow upon
the spiritualities. Let all do their work in their several districts
earnestly, thoroughly, and heartily. So would they lighten the
labours of the bishop; so would they further the influence of the
church for good; so would they advauce Christianity among them.
(Applause.)
The Rev. John Shaw thought the visitors could all join with Canon
Tyrrell in adding their congratulations to those self-congratulations
which the parish of Morpeth must feel on the present occasion. He
also felt that it was a very kind and encouraging thing for the Mayor
and Council of the borough to come forward as they had come forward.
No doubt to win golden opinions from all sorts of people and to have
expressions of encouragement greatly strengthen the heart of any one
placed in a high and responsible position. There was no doubt that
the bishop was the keystone of the arch of that system which they
looked upon as highly calculated to advance the best interests of every
portion of the population amongst which it works. There was one re-
mark which fell from the Rev. Canon Tyrrell worthy of note. It was
that we must look to the office of the bishop. The office of a bishop
was one which diffuses strength throughout the whole system over which
he presides. No doubt that, admirably as the diocese had been ruled
and its affairs administered during the recent vacancy of the see, they
had in many respects been longing for the advent of their natural head.
He was quite sure that the excellent Archdeacon had himself felt—
though the external administration of the diocese had been most wonder-
fully well conducted —that the advent of the bishop would greatly
strengthen that spiritual care which they felt had to a certain extent
been in abeyance. [The Archdeacon : Hear, hear.] It was for a
reinfusion of vitality throughout the whole diocese in respect of that
spiritual work that they greatly longed and prayerfully trusted.
The Archdeacon had been kind enough to ask him to say a few words
about Sunday schools and about the young. They all knew that the
happiness of future homes depends upon the young. They make or
mar the happiness of parents. Therefore a great branch of the English
family depends for its progress upon the formative influences set to


work in the case of the young. When the bishop came to know more
of the diocese he would find that this matter had not been lost sight of.
There was a numerous body of Sunday-scholars in the diocese. But
the bishop was the keystone of the arch of the whole church system.
And he thought the bishop would find that the whole Sunday-school
work wants systematising. Some action was taken in that direction in
Synod three years ago. Suggestions were made tending to secure
uniformity of Sunday-school instruction throughout the diocese, and for
other improvements calculated to be highly beneficial. This was one
of the matters that they hoped the bishop would endeavour to bring
into systematic operation. He hoped that he would not be frightened
at the wonderful array of work they were preparing for him. He
would find people willing to carry out his suggestions—(applause) —
they did not expect him to do the work; they just wanted to be told to
do something. The centurion in the Gospel was a man having authority,
and he said to one “ Go,” and he went; to another “ Come,” and he
came; to a third u Do this,” and he did it. That was just the relation
of the bishop to the clergy and laity of the diocese: they wanted to be
told to go and to do, and were, he trusted, ready to go and to do.
The remarks of the bishop on home influence must have commended
themselves to everyone there. [The speaker interposed an apt anecdote,
the point of which was that a little fish, having tried to teach a young crab
to walk straight, acknowledged the hopelessness of the task when he found
that at home the student was surrounded by companions who walked crab-
wise.] If a child was desired to walk the right path, that right path must
be trod at home, or else the day-school or the Sunday-school teaching
would be of little service. Their kind and good bishop had said he
would not enter into the education question. He knew no word would
be said by him upon it till that word was well weighed. He for his part
was not indisposed to proclaim now, as he had proclaimed before, his
own opinion that vast opportunities for good are presented in the pre-
sent educational system of New South Wales. These opportunities the
clergy are largely using. He believed that if these opportunities were
fully taken advantage of, if a thoroughly systematised religious education
were given on the Lord’s Day, and if good home influences were oper-
ative, the young people of the colony would grow up to be a blessing
to their parents. (Applause.)
The Bishop of Newcastle proposed a vote of thanks to Archdeacon
Child, to whom he was indebted for much kindness both while he was in
England and since he had come to Australia. They no doubt knew and
valued the Archdeacon. He knew also how to value him, and felt he
was expressing the sentiments of all there when he thanked the Arch-
deacon. And he thanked him specially for calling that meeting, in order
to make those who were neighbours to himself and Mrs- Pearson friends
as well as neighbours. (Applause.)
The Archdeacon said he had merely performed a duty to Dr. Pearson
which he could not have neglected. He felt it was a great privilege to
have Dr. and Mrs Pearson near him, and residing in Morpeth.
The proceedings of a very pleasant meeting closed with the singing
of a portion of the evening hymn, and the episcopal benediction.
N


The Corner Stone of St. Mary's Parsonage.
WELCOMING THE BISHOP.
(From the “Maitland Mercury ,” September 7, 1880.^
On Saturday afternoon the corner stone of the building now in pro-
gress in St. Mary’s parish, West Maitland, as a residence for the
clergyman, was laid by Mrs. Pearson, wife of the newly-arrived Bishop
of the diocese. And as this was the first occasion on which the Bishop
and Mrs. Pearson had visited St. Mary’s parish since their arrival in the
colony, opportunity was taken to give them formally a cordial and glad
welcome. A bright sky and a refreshing breeze made the afternoon
pleasant and cheerful, and the proceedings were very successful from
beginning to end.
The scene of the ceremony, close to St. Mary’s Church, was made
gay with flags, and part of the building materials on the ground were
put to temporary use in the erection of a platform for the visitors and
of another larger one to accommodate the children of the parish, who
were to sing several hymns. One advantage of thus using up the,
building material was that the ground was a little clearer than other-
wise it would have been. Some two or three hundred people are
computed to have been present, exclusive of the children.
At three o’clock the Bishop and Mrs. Pearson, accompanied by Arch-
deacon Child, arrived, and were conducted to the platform by Messrs.
Prentice and Rourke, two of the churchwardens. Proceedings were
then opened by the incumbent of the parish, the Rev. W. H. H.
Tarrington, who offered prayer, and read 1 Corinthians iii, I—l 4.
The children then, under the conductorship of Mr. Thomas Dimmock,
sang “ Who are these like stars appearing.”
Mr. Tarrington addressed the assemblage. They had met that after-
noon for a twofold purpose. In the first place, they desired on that,
the occasion of his lordship’s first visit to the parish of St. Mary’s, to
offer a most cordial welcome both to him and his estimable lady
(applause). He was sure it was a great pleasure to all of them there
to see his Lordship and Mrs. Pearson in their midst. (Hear, hear.)
They had long and anxiously waited for their arrival, and it was a
matter for great thankfulness that in the kindness and providence of
God, they had been permitted to reach their destination, and that they
should welcome them there that day. (Applause.) He did not intend
to detain them with any lengthened remarks, as he was suffering from
a severe cold, and it was impossible for him to do justice to the subject
which he had in his heart. He would do his best. He would say that
sincerely and from his heart he welcomed on behalf of the parish his
Lordship and Mrs. Pearson. (Hear, hear.) The coming of such a
distinguished scholar as his Lordship to Australia was an event of no
ordinary importance. (Hear, hear.) Not only was his advent fraught
with consequences of the greatest moment to the history of the Church
of England, but that a man of such standing should come to the colony
w r as a matter of importance to the community at large. Especially so
in these days of indifferentism to say the very least of it, in these days


of hurry when men’s minds are so much taken up with the affairs of
the world and so little attention is given to those subjects which are of
the highest possible significance. It was then a matter for congratula-
tion that they should have such a man as his Lordship to come out and
join the ranks of the church, and to assist those who labour to publish
the unsearchable riches which are in Christ Jesus. The only way in
which a community can be raised and exalted is by righteousness, by
that righteousness which comes from faith in Christ Jesus. No one
who had studied the work of the Church of England in these colonies
would deny that she is dear to the hearts of Protestants, that wherever
the doctrines, the simple doctrines of faith in Jesus Christ, are taught
by the Protestant reformed Church of England, in sincerity and in
truth, the hearts of all Australians are warm to that church, and the
hands of all Australians are ready to assist her. (Hear, hear.) And
there was no Protestant Church so dear to the hearts of English people
as the Church of England. They were assembled—and he was glad to
see so many of different communions—to express their congratulations
that they should have in the church such a man as Dr. Pearson. Other
communions had done much, but no church had done more than the
Church of England in spreading truth. The bishops and doctors and
divines of that church had written books in defence of the Christian
faith beyond comparison better than even those excellent ones written
by the clergymen and learned men of other communions. That was
his opinion, and because he believed it to be well founded, he welcomed
Bishop Pearson, and the community might welcome him, because he
was distinguished for learning, and his presence in their midst would
strengthen the cause of their common Christianity. Undoubtedly in
coming to Australia from the old country, Dr. Pearson must have broken
many sacred associations, and must have experienced a severe trial in
leaving England. His Lordship the Bishop of Newcastle was not the
first bishop under whom he (Mr. Tarrington) had laboured. His dear
friend, the Bishop of Goulburn, a revered servant of God, and who had
done wonders in the way of work for the Church, had told him of the
pain he experienced when leaving dear friends in old England, and in
severing the associations which had grown up, to come out to this far
distant land. He had no doubt similar feelings had been experienced
by the Bishop and Mrs. Pearson. They had given up a great deal to
come to Australia. The people of the diocese of Newcastle thanked
them. The people of St. Mary’s gave them a cordial welcome. They
might perhaps feel that this giving of addresses was somewhat monoto-
nous—as he saw had already been said elsewhere—but he hoped the
Bishop and Mrs. Pearson would take all that was said as coming from
the heart. That was what was meant. (Applause.) Not long ago he
had to acknowledge the receipt of a most cordial welcome from that
parish of St. Mary’s (Applause.) That welcome he should never
Forget as long as he lived. He had felt some misgivings before he came,
but he was so warmly and cordially received that he felt quite at home.
He wanted the Bishop and Mrs. Pearson to feel, in like manner, that
the people in this sunny land of Australia felt their hearts warm to
them. (Applause.) He would not detain them longer, but would read
the short address from himself and the churchwardens which had been
prepared.


The address was as follows:
“ To the Right Reverend Rather in God, Dr. Pearson, Lord Bishop of
Newcastle,
“Right Reverend Father in God —
“We, the incumbent and parishioners of St. Mary’s parish, West
Maitland, desire on this, the occasion of your Lordship's first visit to
our parish, to offer to you and your esteemed lady a most hearty wel-
come.
“It gives us unfeigned pleasure to see you in our midst, and we greet
you with affectionate cordiality and earnestly pray that your coming to
us may prove to be in the fulness of the blessing of the Gospel of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
“ Your arrival has long been looked forward to with emotions of the
deepest interest; and, now that you have come to us, we would express
our thankfulness to Almighty God that He has in His good providence
brought you safely on your way.
“ We pray that yourself and Mrs. Pearson may long be spared, and
that every temporal and spiritual blessing may ever attend you —that
health, happiness, and peace may be your earthly lot, and Heaven your
crowning joy. Signed on behalf of the parishioners,
W. H. H. Yarrington, Incumbent.
John Lee, 1
John Rofrke, > Churchwardens.”
J D. Prentice, )
After reading it, Mr. Yarrington said: I have much pleasure, my Lord,
in presenting you with this address. (Cheers )
The Mayor of West Maitland and Mrs. Fullford having been pre-
sented to Dr. and Mrs. Pearson, Mr. Fullford, in response to a request
to add a few words, said he heartily welcomed his Lordship and Mrs.
Pearson to Maitland. Although he had not been specially commissioned
as Mayor to do this, he had not the slightest doubt that anything he
said would be heartily endorsed by the people of West Maitland.
(Hear, hear.) He had much pleasure then in assuring his Lordship
and Mrs. Pearson that they were heartily welcome, he hoped their
efforts in the diocese would be crowned with success, that they would
never have occasion to regret having come to Australia, and that they
would enjoy long life and all earthly happiness. (Applause.)
The children sang “ Whither, pilgrims, are you going ?”
Mr. Yarrington then explained that the second part of the proceed-
ings would be the laying of the corner stone of the new parsonage.
He narrated the circumstances which led to the pulling down of the
old building, and dwelt on the need for providing good houses for
clergymen if they were expected to do their work properly. The new
parsonage would be one of the best in the diocese; it would be built on
the newest and most admirable principles, with all modern improve-
ments as respected ventilation, ana so on. He would now request Mrs.
Pearson to lay the stone, and would first present her with a silver
trowel. (Applause) Before the ceremony was proceeded with, how-
ever, he would say that in accordance with a venerable custom, a bottle
would be placed beneath the stone. The bottle contained a copy of
the Maitland Mercury, the Sydney Morning Herald , and the Evening


News, some coins of the realm, and a parchment bearing the following
inscription: —
“ This corner-stone of St Mary’s Parsonage was laid by Mrs. Pear-
son, wife of the Right Rev. Dr. Pearson, Lord Bishop of Newcastle, on
the 4th day of September, ad. 1880, in the 44th year of the reign of
her Majesty Queen Yictoria, his Excellency Lord Augustus Loftus
being Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of New South
Wales and its dependencies. Building Committee:—Rev. W. H. H.
Yarrington, Chairman ; Messrs. J. Lee, Jacob Gorrick, James Fullford,
H. J. Adams, J. Sawyer, Dr. R. J. Pierce, J. B Vans, S. A. Fullford,
G. A. Smyth, Dr. R. G. Alcorn, John Rourke, and Jas. D. Prentice.”
He had been reminded that that day, the 4th September, twelve
months ago, the Right Rev. Dr. Pearson had been elected by the Synod
Bishop of Newcastle. (Applause) It was then an auspicious day
upon which to perform the ceremony which they were assembled to
witness.
Mrs. Pearson was then escorted to the stone, which, under the
direction of Mr. Browne, the architect for the building, she laid in the
customary manner. Giving the stone the usual three mystic taps with
the mallet, she said—l hereby declare this stone to be well and truly
laid. (Cheers.)
A collection was made for the building fund, while the children sang
“ There is a better world, they say.”
The Bishop of Newcastle said—Mr. Yarrington, my friends (ap-
plause)—Mr. Yarrington said that he was afraid I should find it
somewhat monotonous to receive so many addresses of kind and hearty
welcome. My fear is that these repeated thanksgivings from me to the
people of Newcastle, West Maitland, and other townships in this diocese,
may become somewhat monotonous. (“ No, no.”) For it is rather a
hard strain upon one to make so many speeches on the same subject
within the space of a few days. However, I hope you will take the
will for the deed. I assure you that there is within my heart a very
grateful feeling to you for the kind welcome you have given my wife
and myself (app*lause). We are very glad to associate with our visit to
West Maitland that important ceremony in which my wife has just taken
a principal part. I believe that it is on the whole the wish of the laity
of the Church of England that they should have a married clergy (hear,
hear). For my own part, I think that is a very wise wish (hear, hear).
I think it associates the laity with the clergy in many of the interests of
life from which they would otherwise be shut out; it helps to keep up a
social and sympathetic feeling between them which otherwise could not
exist. [ Mr. R. W. Thompson : Hear, hear.] However, there is one
strong argument for clerical celibacy that commends itself to my mind.
It is that an unmarried clergyman must take up much less room than a
married clergyman. (Laughter and applause.) Some of the laity said
“ Hear, hear,” when I spoke of the advantages of a married clergy.
They must take the responsibility if they get their wish: they must
build the married clergy houses- (Hear, hear.) Now you are met to-
gether here this afternoon to show your interest in a proceeding of that
kind. I teel that the influence of a happy home upon a clergyman


must be no less beneficial on his mind than on his work. When I have
been thinking of home and its associations there often occurs to my
mind that epitaph which a man put upon the grave of a wife with whom
he had lived sixty years, “She made home happy.” I commend this to
the ladies present as one of the highest aims they can have in this life,
to. make their homes happy. I can assure you I only express the good
will and true desire of my heart when I say that I trust Mr. Yarring-
ton will find the new parsonage when it is erected, both a healthy and
a happy home. (Applause.) Mr. Yarrington reminded you, and very
wisely I thought, that the clergyman requires a home for study, for
preparation of his work. Now, do you know I think that sometimes
people are unreasonable to their clergyman in this particular matter.
They expect from him very hard work to a great extent, perhaps to a
disproportionate extent, outside of the home. No one can go on talk-
ing long, and talking sense, without thinking a good deal and reading a
good deal. You should remember that you are giving your clergyman
a place where he can read and think. An American author has said
“thoughts rule the world.” However that may be, this I will say, that
a clergyman’s thoughts ought to have a very high influence upon the
parish. And that his thoughts may be worthy to influence it, the
parish .must give him time to think and to prepare himself. It was
well said by an old writer that a man is hard at work no less when he
whets the scythe as when the swathes of grass are falling beneath the
scythe. You must give your clergyman time to whet his scythe, if you
expect the swathes of grass to fall beneath it. This occasion then is
important as inaugurating a new studying place as well as a place of
repose and domestic comfort for the clergyman of this large and im-
portant parish. We are very glad to have taken part in it. We were
talking of wives just now—we never know what they can do till they
try : I had not the least conception what a good stonemason and brick-
layer my wife was. (Laughter.) I am pleased to tell you how glad
we are to meet you on this happy occasion, and to see so many children
gathered together as members of the Sunday-school Year after year
the work of the Sunday school is growing in importance; but always
remember this, that the teaching of the Sunday school can never stand
in lieu of parents’ example. (Hear, hear.) Send your children to
Sunday-school; send them punctually and regularly, for punctuality
and regularity are essential to the good working of any school; but
follow up the teachings they receive there with the good example and
the bright influences of a Christian home. (Hear, hear.) Well,
Churchmen of West Maitland, I wish you success in all the wholesome
undertakings that there are around you. You have here a church that
compares very favorably with other churches in the colony. You have
a clergyman who labors hard at his work. You have a Sunday school
in good order, as I can see from this platform ; and I have heard that
they have been well trained in the sweet exercise of singing God’s
praise.. May God bless you in all your works begun, continued, and
ended in Him. (Applause.)
The children sang “ God Save the Queen,” and Mr. Yarrington
having thanked the Archdeacon, the Rev. John Shaw, and other visiters
for their presence, the Bishop pronounced the benediction.


The trowel, which was of silver with an ivory handle, bore the fol-
lowing inscription:
“ Presented to Mrs. Pearson, wife of the Right Rev. J. B. Pearson,
D.D., Lord Bishop of Newcastle, by the building committee, on the
occasion of her laying the corner stone of St, Mary’s parsonage, West
Maitland, September 4th, a.d. 1880.”
Mr. J. Hart, watchmaker and jeweller, of West Maitland, provided
the trowel.
During the afternoon Miss Turner presented Mrs. Pearson with a
bouquet, from Mr. Cliffe Parnell’s garden.
We have already described the plan of the parsonage, which will do
credit to Mr. Browne, the architect. The contractor, Mr. J. Wright,
is making good progress with the work. It may be mentioned that the
corner stone bears an inscription in gold, indicating by whom and when
it was laid.
The following article appeared in the “Newcastle Despatch,'' Aug. 28, from the pen of
the valuable Secretary of the Diocesan Council , the Dev. J. Dixon :—
THE BISHOP'S ARRIVAL.
One of the most striking things about the Church of England is
its capacity for renewing its youth. It often seems to be getting old,
and to have lost its old spirit and power; but these are the very times
when a new manifestation of life and vigor bursts out from some un-
expected quarters. Nothing seemed older than the Church before the
Reformation; nothing younger than the Church of Luther and his
friends. Nothing could have been stiffer than the English Church of the
eighteenth century, nothing more full of life than the movement of the
nineteenth. Somewhat similar features have marked its history in the
Colonies, and the advent of the second Bishop of Newcastle may be
regarded as one of those memorable periods when the Church renews
her youth. Unless we are very much mistaken in our estimation of the
new Bishop's ability, he possesses the power of presenting old facts in
fresh form—bringing them out with all the life and force of present-
day realities. He evidently believes that these facts are not simply to
be brought out, but also to be applied, so that the Church may be as
a fruit tree, bearing its seed in itself; and that the very times it looks
old and decrepit are the very times when the young seed is about
to burst into new life. The hearty reception and cheerful services, the
warm greeting and cordial feeling which marked the proceedings of
Wednesday and Thursday last, furnish an exemplification of what was
looked upon as almost impossible—that members of the Church in
Newcastle are capable of being moved. This arises from a feeling
which Churchmen and citizens alike have —that under the Bishop of
Newcastle's administration, fresh air and daylight will be let in, and
that a sense of reality will be the result. That he possesses calmness
and wisdom, that he has the power of gaining the confidence of all
classes of the community, is evident from the matter and manner of
his addresses. He speaks with frankness, he asks for candour ;he is
wise enough to be fair to each, and to be friendly with all. From a gen-


tleman of such profound scholarship, possessing such broad sympathies
and quick discernment, whose associates have been some of England’s
most gifted sons, the residents within the Diocese, and colonists gener-
ally, hope to receive a quickening impulse, and obtain extended views.
Through his instrumentality we hope the Church will take a new lease
of power, and that a permanent elevation of the community may result.
It is to be hoped that the Bishop, having severed many ties of affection
when, in obedience to the call of duty, he left England’s shores, may
find that new and endearing relations may be formed here. We hope
on our part that the bonds of such relationship may every year of his
episcopate become more firmly established, and that the condition of
the whole people may advance in a satisfactory way. There are social
problems which, in the course of a few years, must be solved. Earnest,
thoughtful men, look into the future with grave and anxious fears.
Adventurous leaders and bold talkers have prepared and carried
schemes which involve us with perplexity, and will involve our children
in misty doubt and unbelief. These restless spirits, with mischiev-
ous activity, have sought to remove every obstacle which seemed to
interpose between them and their object. In the midst of it—we are
ashamed to pen it, but truth demands its utterance—many Christians
have failed to do what is true. The Bishop of Newcastle, as a wise
leader, will remind us, we hope, that the colony, like an individual,
must ever cherish the courage to do what is just and right. If wrong
steps have been taken, we must not be afraid to retrace and start anew.
We could not allow the opportunity to pass away, without specially
directing the attention of our readers to the character and position of
the Bishop of this important city and district, and to express the hopes
his residence amongst us has created. The events of the past few
days are interesting and affecting, affording an opportunity for allusions
to the changes which have taken place of a significant kind. But as
one man dies another fills his place. It has been the blessing of
England that from time to time in her history, when emergencies have
arisen, noble leaders have been raised up, so we believe that the Bishop
of Newcastle has been sent amongst us, as one who will see his way
amid conflicting counsels to do what is right, and go on, simply saying
“ Be just, be true, and fear not.”
THE BISHOPRIC OF NEWCASTLE.
(From the "Australian Churchman Sept. 9 .)
The account that appeared in our columns last week, of the Recep-
tion and Installation of Dr. Pearson, will, we think, be read with
interest by Churchmen. We can personally vouch for it, that it in
no way exaggerates, but rather understates, the depth and heartiness
of the feeling displayed. The manifestation of that feeling is its own
guarantee as to its sincerity. It speaks for itself, and no one ac-
quainted with it can forego the conclusion that in the Diocese of
Newcastle there is at least a strong affection for the Church of Eng-
land, and for its Catholic form of government and administration.


We doubt not the same feelings prevail largely in other dioceses, but
we are not saying too much, when we affirm that on the late occasion
of the arrival of Bishop Pearson, there was a greater combination of
all classes of society to give expression to those feelings than has been
noticed elsewhere. We intend to examine somewhat closely into the
causes of this manifestation, which we think will bring before our
readers some sound valuable principles likely to be of service on other
occasions of a similar kind, and in other matters of Church government.
In the first place, the election of the Bishop of Newcastle has been
made by the broadest and fullest adhesion to Church principles possible.
He is not a Bishop of the Clergy, nor of the Laity, as apart one from
the other. Neither is he the selection of an individual, or even of a
coterie of individuals; but he is the choice of the Church, expressed
in its own lawful assembly—the Synod of the Diocese. No doubt
many of our readers are aware of the circumstances attending that
election. The names of two clergymen as qualified for the post, viz.,
the Rev. Dr. Hodgson and the Rev. Dr. Pearson, came before the
Synod. The former had the prestige of the recommendation of the
late Bishop of Lichfield, the revered Selwyn, the old friend of Bishop
Tyrrell; the latter, the no less equal prestige, and as it turned out,
the more powerful approval of the present Bishop of Melbourne, Dr.
Moorhouse. As in all such assemblies there was a division of parties,
and strong efforts were made to secure a victory for their respective
candidate. This is but the healthy action of the body corporate.
Debate ensues, pros and cons are fairly considered, and in due time
the result is taken. A majority decided in favour of Dr. Pearson.
We venture to say that in such cases, except with an individual who
can only see in the line with his own nose, whose bridge is as narrow
as his mind, all parties are united again as soon as the decision is
made. There is no feeling of favour or affection, or anything under-
hand in the process, and the minority fall in with the verdict, and
harmony and order regain their sway in the assembly. That it has
done so in Newcastle, the account of the proceedings we have referred
to amply testify. The whole body of the clergy and a large concourse
of the laity assembled to greet and welcome their future Father in
God. And this is the rule in all such cases and not the exception.
Whatever proceedings are constitutionally carried out, such proceed-
ings are harmonious and satisfactory in their result. Men are only
dissatisfied when a victory is gained by management and diplomacy,
which works on crooked lines, and stoops to schemes and bye-ends to
gain its point. In saying this, however, we do not mean for a moment
to ignore the fact that the previous reputation of Bishop Pearson, his
actual presence and the wisdom and weight of his words in his public
utterances had their due effect on his people, and helped to elicit the
fervour of his reception.
The main ingredient however, was the mode of election, which
would have gone far to counterbalance a less favourable impression
than the Bishop has made. At this point then, we carry our thoughts


a This happy termination of the appointment of a
successor to the See of Newcastle, is largely owing to the Catholic views
and earnest work of the first occupant of that See. A fellow-worker
with the late Bishop of New Zealand, he shared with that prelate in
his efforts to build up our Church in these colonies, on the old lines of
Primitive Christianity. Ist, By the establishment of a Diocesan Synod
in which the laity should have a voice by their representatives. 2nd,
As Dioceses increased, by the formation of Provincial Synods with
their Bishops under a Metropolitan, and 3rdly, as provinces increased,
by a General Synod with one Metropolitan to be chosen as Primate.
In accordance with this view, as soon as dioceses were formed out of
the Metropolitan See of Sydney, Dr. Tyrrell endeavoured to secure a
Provincial Synod having its due authority over the Diocesan Synods.
Unfortunately, his efforts in that direction did not meet with a full
measure of success. The Provincial Synod has been established; but
it is shorn of all legislative power. It has been purposely “ crippled”
in its birth. A General Synod, too, was called into existence, the
Metropolitan of Sydney has been duly elected Primate, and messages
of congratulation passed on the occasion between the colony and the
Archbishop of Canterbury as Primate of All England. As the Pro-
vincial Synod, however, has no power beyond the power of speech,
what is left for the higher body, the General Synod ? Only the anomaly
that it constitutes a still higher Court with no power to enforce its
decisions. The Diocese of Sydney by the action of the authorities
has decided that no rule or ordinance shall have effect unless passed by
a majority of that Synod. The lower body controls the two higher.
One member of the body corporate is greater than all the other mem-
bers. This successful phase of democracy has not been brought about
by democrats themselves ; but it is owing to the efforts of a Conser-
vatism that strives to see a validity in Letters Patent when their validity
is gone ; that insists on an oath of obedience to the Archbishop of
Canterbury by a Bishop of a colonial Diocese, when the real oath to his
Metropolitan has to be taken afterwards, that ignores the principles of
the Catholic Church on the question of government, and holds instead
to the illusion of an imaginary identity with the Establishment at home.
Such a state of things cannot work satisfactorily ; and one question
is already looming in the near distance which will bring the whole
matter into discussion. We allude to the continuance of the See of
Sydney as the Metropolitan See. It has every claim to this position,
but if it maintains it, the Diocesan Synod of Sydney must be pre-
pared to forego some of its rights in connection with the appointment
of a successor to our present Bishop. The Bishops of the Province
must at least have a voice in the election of their Metropolitan. We
look forward with confidence to the time when the wise proposals of
Bishop Tyrrell will be adopted, and this portion of the Holy Catholic
Apostolic Church be free to work on the ancient models.
T. Dimmock, Printer, High-street, West Maitland.




