

OSCAR WILDE
TWICE DEFENDED
from
ANDRÉ GIDE’S WICKED LIES
and
FRANK HARRIS’S CRUEL LIBELS
by ROBERT HARBOROUGH SHERARD




Stephen Mr. Kenna


OSCAR WILDE
TWICE DEFENDED
from
ANDRÉ GIDE’S WICKED LIES
and
FRANK HARRIS’S CRUEL LIBELS
to which is added
A Reply to George Bernard Skaw
A Refutation of Hr. G. J. Renier’s Statements
A Letter to tke Autkor from Lord Alfred Douglas
an Interview witk Bernard Skaw ky Hugk Kingsmill
by
ROBERT HARBOROUGH SHERARD
Chevalier de la Legion d’Honneur
-sNLIST
3/6
CHICAGO
THE ARGUS BOOK SHOP, INC.
19 3 4


f-
Copyright 1934, by The Argus Book Shop, Inc.
Printed in the U.S.A.


PART I
ANDRE GIDE’S WICKED LIES
about the late Mr. OSCAR WILDE in Algiers in
January, 1895, as Translated from the French and
Broadcast by Dr. G. J. Renier, minutely examined
and commented upon.
To which is added a letter from
Lord Alfred Douglas.


Dr. G. J. Renier, having in his compilation on
my late friend, Oscar Wilde, helped himself rather
too freely to passages in my books, The Life of Oscar
Wilde, and The Story of an Unhappy Friendship,
to the extent of rendering himself and his publishers,
Peter Davies, Ltd., liable to an action for infringe-
ment of copyright, I was able to take advantage of
this laches on his part to oblige him and his pub-
lishers, through The Society of Authors, and as an
alternative to such legal proceedings, to publish in
connection with a passage on pages 106, 107, 108,
which he had taken from Andre Gide’s autobi-
ography: Si le Grain Ne Meurt, a statement from
me, Wilde’s original biographer and oldest friend,
that there is in the scandalous story about Wilde’s
conduct in Africa in January, 1895, not one single
word of truth.
Gide’s fabrication, in brief, is to the effect that
Wilde, believing him to be innocent in the matter
of unnatural vice, inveigled him into a haunt of
debauchery, a low cafe in Algiers, procured him a
young and beautiful Arab boy as a confederate,


primed himself and Gide with liquor and aphrodisiacs
for the night’s orgasm, and, exulting with satanic
laughter at Gide’s approaching downfall, conducted
them to the rooms which he is alleged to have rented
in Algiers for the very purpose of sodomitical en-
counters, spending the night in an adjoining room
with a boy accomplice of his own.
As to this story, I consider it advisable to quote
right here and now what Reginald Turner wrote me
on the subject on October 18th of last year, when he
had read a copy of the original edition, published in
Corsica, of the pamphlet in which I exposed its utter
falsity and malice. Reginald Turner, need it be
recalled, was Wilde’s old friend, who nursed him
with such devotion during his last illness in Paris.
He wrote:
“ I heartily agree with all that has reference
to Gide’s absurd account of what happened in
Algiers. When I read those pages in Si le Grain
Ne Meurt, I was amazed. Anything more impos-
sibly like Oscar was never written. The whole was
nauseatingly unlike but especially the part you
put your accusing finger on, describing Oscar as
procuring Gide a boy and exulting with satanic
laughter, etc. —anything so preposterously untrue
has never been written The whole thing is
fantastic. So also is the monstrous and revolting
alleged conversation with Bosie Douglas which is
quite incredible, from what one knows both of


Bosie and Oscar. I don’t know what made Gide
put it in, certainly not to make money; he has, as
yon doubtless know, always been a wealthy man
and though notoriously careful of his money, never
in want of it, nor has he ever been in any of the
usual senses, a Bohemian. It must have been the
result of some resentful aberration.”
To return to Renier, besides publishing the
disclaimer of my part, he also promised through
the Society of Authors that should I be able in this
pamphlet to prove that Gide’s narrative is a lying
and malicious fabrication, he will in future editions
of his biography of Oscar Wilde suppress the filthy
story altogether.
In the meantime, I presume, he will be content
to continue to stultify himself by branding Oscar
Wilde as a Sodomite on pages 106, 107, 108 of his
biography, while proclaiming which is indeed a
fact—on page 161 of the guinea edition of the same
book that “Sodomy itself was, however, at no time
alleged against the prisoner.”
No man has been more cruelly slandered than
Oscar Wilde by the men and women of the country
which his genius so signally adorned. Nor is it
unknown scribblers alone who have assailed his
memory. Even writers, by talent or high social
standing, of influence and importance, have not
blushed to make his name the butt of their envenomed
shafts. This denigration has been in steady progress


ever since his death, thirty-four years ago, and today
is still busily ensued. Within the last year Wilde’s
friends and admirers the world over have had to
shrug or to wince at the weird fabrications of a
Gertrude Atherton, the puritanical moralizings of
a Sir William Rothenstein, who here missed a fine
opportunity of holding his tongue, the irresponsible
absurdities of an Edward Marjoribanks (with the
approval of Lord Carson’s silence) and the feline
disparagements of a Countess of Oxford and
Asquith; while, only a few months ago, we have had
from a certain Earl of Birkenhead, in a biography
in which he put the memory of his father in the cold
storage of a bookselling frost, an entirely fictitious
story of how once at Oxford the Pigmy Smith
publicly snubbed the Titan Wilde.
Various motives of which assuredly not one was
worthy and proceeded mainly from the base envy of
overwhelming superiority, must have prompted these
decorative dawpluckers. Dawpluckers? Is that the
right designation to use for these lampoonists ? When
one remembers how some of them have not recoiled
from the impious and sacrilegious act of assailing
the dead man through the revered memory of
Speranza, Lady Francesca Elgee, the mother of
all mothers, mater dolorosa, the mother of whom
Wilde wrote: “No one knew how deeply I loved and
honoured her,” does it not seem that “carrion crows”
would be the apter appellation for such uncleanly
fowl ?


Never before, however, even by his most
malicious slanderers, had Oscar Wilde been branded
as guilty of the crimen tantum horribile non inter
Christianas nominandum till the Dutch Doctor
Renier sailed into English waters with a mudsquirt
dangling from his mast-head, and a tub of French
sewage conveniently placed for the befoulment of a
broken marble column that only calls for tears.
As an expounder of sexual psychopathy, Dr.
Renier fails. I have in this connection an admirable
opinion on his book by an expert who finds it inter-
esting and lively but points out that Renier is clearly
not very careful as to his authorities, and adds that
any story is good enough for him as long as it is
amusing and in accordance with his parti p-ris.
He adds:
“In spite of what he says about the ‘practice ’
(a mistake in English, I suppose), he knows very
little about homosexuality. As for his psychology,
he has, I should say, read an obsolete elementary
textbook and forgotten half he has read. The truth
is that in his small-statish jealousy and hatred of
England, he is anxious not to exonerate O. W.
or to apologise for him, but to represent English
society as a mass of Sadistic Philistines. He seems
never to have heard of the Euston case and the
alarm which it caused.
“Had he read his Krafft-Ebing or even his
Pepys intelligently he would have known that


persons like Gide during their practices always
indulge in phantasies imagine, that is, that
they are effectively making love to queens, society
beauties, film stars and the like. The odds, there-
fore, are heavy that Gide’s story was a phantasy
of that kind.”
Apart from this Renier deliberately disregards
the fact that the unfortunate Wilde was doubly the
victim of syphilis, that he undoubtedly had inherited
the diathesis from his libertine father, as evidenced
by the premature deaths both of his sister Isola and
of his brother Willy, pejorated in his case by the fact
that when a lad at Oxford, at the age of twenty, he
contracted, thanks to the idiotic system which arises
from British hypocrisy, a fresh infection which
broke out in virulent form in 1886, chased him from
his marriage-bed and was undoubtedly the teterrima
causa of all his subsequent mental, moral and physi-
cal aberrations. What is particularly hideous in
Renier’s use of the foul story he has lifted from
Gide is that it would have us believe that the kindly,
humane, fatherly Oscar Wilde did deliberately,
knowing himself to be the potential conveyor of this
loathsome contagion, sexually debauch a child thirty
years younger than himself.
An eminent critic has suggested to me that no
proper biography of Wilde can be written without
the collaboration of an expert syphilologue.
Renier equally disregards the fact that when


by the hideous alchemy of psychopathia sexualis the
benign Jekyll in Wilde was transmuted into the
depraved Mrs. Hyde, his acts were manifestly
Masochist and feminine and in no wise the virile
and Sadist performance of a Sodomite.
In this matter Renier has no excuse. The squalid
details of Wilde’s offences are available to all and
the perusal of them establishes as clear a case of
feminine masochism as is anywhere recorded. Well
might the late Mr. Justice Charles describe them as
“unspeakably, unthinkably filthy”. So they would
appear to a gentleman of normal composition who
had led a clean life, and whose studies had not en-
lightened him on the horrible alchemy referred to.
For all the caresses that Wilde bestowed on his
wretched partners were precisely those which are
lavished on their lovers by depraved women, usually
those of social position and outward respectability.
And as Renier ought to know, no offences other than
these were charged or proven against Mrs. Wilde-
Hyde. Wilde was homosexual and irresponsible.
Gide and Renier wish to send him down to posterity
as a sodomite and a criminal.
In the 5/- edition of his compilation Renier,
by quoting Gide’s fabrication about the incident in
Algiers (the locus of which, by the way, this slovenly
biographer places in Blidah), definitely brands
Wilde as a sodomite; for not content with repro-
ducing Gide’s story, he adds: “Oscar Wilde returned
to England to face the Marquis of Queensberry and


to swear that his accusations were baseless.”
Oscar Wilde did nothing of the sort. If after
his enjoyable holiday with Bosie he returned to
England, Home, and George Alexander, it was to
superintend the rehearsals of The Importance of
Being Earnest which was produced at the St. James’s
Theatre on February 14th. During their stay in
Africa in 1895 neither Oscar nor Lord Alfred had
any reason to feel anxiety about Lord Queensberry.
Since the middle of July of the previous year, Lord
Queensberry had left them alone.
Renier, however, for the deliberate purposes
of heightening his climax, backing Gide up in his
falsehoods about Wilde and giving a semblance of
veracity to Gide’s faked interviews with the latter,
manipulates the sequence of events, ignores the eight-
months’ truce between Wilde and Queensberry and
attributes the marquess’s visit to the Albemarle Club
to his indignation at receiving a postcard from his
son threatening him with a prosecution for libel.
Renier knows perfectly well that this wretched card
had been written and received by Queensberry nine
months before the latter visited Oscar’s club and left
his own illiterate and insulting card which precipi-
tated the scandal. The fact is, of course, that what
stirred Queensberry’s gall and prompted him to
fresh malevolence against Wilde was the latter’s
overwhelming triumphs at the Haymarket and St.
James’s Theatres, and his mortification at the failure
of his attempt to insult Wilde at the premiere of


The Importance of Being Earnest by hurling a
phallic bouquet at him over the footlights.
Wilde’s triumph at the St. James’s took place
on February 14th. Lord Queensberry left the insult-
ing card at the Albemarle Club on February 18th
at 4:30 p.m., and it was not till March 7th or Bth
that this was handed to Oscar on his return from a
round of country house visits, and not, as Renier
suggests, “on his return” from the foul orgy in
Algiers (or Blidah, an choix ).
I would love to be able to think of Renier as the
mere victim of the malicious Gide; but, alas, I cannot
shut my eyes to the fact that like Gide and indeed
like almost everyone who since his death has written
about Wilde, the latter’s overwhelming intellectual
superiority arouses envy in his heart and prompts
him to traducement. Before we reach the infamous
libel on pages 106, 107, 108, Renier has depicted
Wilde for us as dirty, as a snob, as a debauchee and
a drunkard; and after we have been shown him as a
Sadist, a sodomite, and a criminal, we are introduced
to him as a wilful perjurer, a liar, hypocrite and
swindler.*
* And this is the "brilliant piece of biography" which Compton
Mackenzie in The Daily Mail for March 23rd described as “pre-
eminently sane, just and charitable”! I wonder what Mr. Mackenzie’s
many friends in Italy will think of his commendation when on page 94
they come to the passage in which this "man of good taste, who is
also a man of the world" accuses Italian married women of the whole-
sale practice of Lesbianism. A "scandal", as it was termed in a letter
to me from the editor of the Corriere della Sera, to which I at once
drew the attention first of Sir John Simon, as I was anxious to spare
the British Foreign Office an unpleasant "diplomatic incident" and
then, as my letters to the Foreign Secretary were contemptuously


And surely not the most gullible of Griswolds
could after reading Gide’s various writings about
Wilde come to any other conclusion about Andre
Gide than that he is an abominable liar, and a clumsy
one at that, who has hoisted himself into European
notoriety by defaming the great men with whom he
has come into contact and who are dead. Where
he has attacked a living man of distinction and the
latter publicly tells him he is a liar—as Lord Alfred
Douglas has done in print more times than once —
well, for silence Brer Rabbit isn’t in it with Andre
Gide.
It will be interesting to see if he will observe
the same silence and discretion towards me when I
right here and now affirm that nearly everything he
has zmhtten about Oscar Wilde is pure fake; that he
never visited Wilde at Berneval at all, that Wilde
never solicited alms off him at the Cafe Napolitain
nor wrote him the begging letter which he prints in
In Memoriam (but which he has prudently sup-
disregarded, of Signor Mussolini himself. Some little time later I
begged a lady friend of mine who lives in the West of England also
to draw the Duce’s attention to this abominable libel on Italian woman-
hood, which she promptly did. The result was then immediate and all-
effective. Through the Italian Consul at Bastia I received from the
Ministerio della Stampa in Rome the thanks of the Italian capo del
governo for my cortese segnalazione and the promise that it would
be acted upon, while the same day my collaboratrix in England
received from Signor Dino Grandi the warm thanks of Signor Musso-
lini for her interference on behalf of the slandered women of Italy.
It may be noted as symptomatic that not one of the numerous critics
who reviewed Renier's book even commented upon this scandalous
passage, so delighted had they been by the recrucifixion of Wilde,
nor when the “diplomatic incident” of Signor Grandi’s intervention
and remonstrance occurred was the slightest allusion made to it in
the British press.


pressed in his rechauflfee of his Wilde fakes in the
recently published Pretextes, 1926); and that, as
Lord Alfred Douglas tells him in the French version
of his Autobiography, he only saw Wilde once, which
was on the occasion of the public dinner given to
Wilde by Edouard Ducote after his release from
prison, Gide also lies by relating that this dinner was
given at his expense and that here in public he threw
his arms round Wilde and embraced him. As long as
his fabrications about Wilde were devoid of malice I
let them pass. But now that he finds profit and fame
in vilely traducing my friend, I cry: “Halte-la!” *
In the original edition of this pamphlet I did
not give any proof of the above sweeping assertions
of Gide’s mendacity and the consequence was that
Reginald Turner in the letter from which I have al-
ready quoted questioned my accuracy on the subject.
Having fully endorsed my strictures on Gide’s
Algiers fabrication he adds:
“But, although I do not know or remember for a
fact, I feel certain that Gide saw Oscar several
times after he came out of prison and I am strongly
* Since the above challenge was made last year in the original
edition of this pamphlet I have received a postcard, posted in Paris
on November 28th. On one side was a view of Le Moulin Rouge.
On the front side was my address written: “Monsieur Sharrod,
homrae de lettres, Calvi, Corse” and to the left of this, in the space
reserved for correspondence, was scribbled obliquely and in 3 lines the
message: "Amical —souvenir —Andre Gide.” I never met Gide in
my life, though when I imagined him the true friend of Wilde, I did
what 1 could to drag his name out of the twilight to which for thirty
years of his literary career it was consigned; until indeed the public or
rather a depraved section of the public, took a taste for pornography.


under the impression that he visited him at Ber-
neval. But, as I say, I don’t know it for a fact;
tho’ Oscar certainly knew Gide and talked of him
after he came out of prison
Reggie Turner is one of the most Christian of
men, all-forgiving, all-condoning, with a sweet child-
like faith in the goodness of men. He literally cannot
see malice or fraud or treachery in any living soul.
I always think of him as one of those little children
of whom is the kingdom of heaven. Though it pained
me to disillusion him further as to Andre Gide, I felt
it my duty at once to write to him and to give him
my detailed reasons for declaring that the story of
the visit to Berneval was a lie just like every other
one of Gide’s statements of his contacts with the
ruined, disgraced and hated Oscar Wilde after he
came out of prison. On October 29th he wrote me
in answer:
“Thank you so much for the pamphlet and most
interesting letter. You put the Berneval case most
dearly and I wish it had been elaborated in the
Wicked Lies.”
The reason it had not been so elaborated was
that I was forced for a variety of reasons to keep my
pamphlet, Andre Gide’s Wicked Lies rigidly within
certain limits. I am able now to rectify this omission
and to give seriatim the reasons why Andre Gide’s


writings about Wilde in his In Memoriam must be
considered a tissue of malicious falsehoods.
(1) Although Oscar was writing twice or thrice
weekly from Berneval to Bosie Douglas, he never
mentioned having received any visit from Gide. Nor
did he ever mention such a visit when he met Bosie
in Rouen or at any time afterwards when they were
living together in Naples or afterwards during their
many contacts in Paris. Bosie is quite confident Gide
never visited him at Berneval.
(2) So am I. I visited Oscar at Berneval towards
the beginning of July and never heard Gide’s name
mentioned as having “hastened to see his friend as
soon as he had heard of his whereabouts after his
release from prison.”
(3) Gide himself proves the lie by saying that it
was “still winter” when he arrived at Berneval, that
his visit took place directly after Wilde’s release and
that it was at the Hotel des Bains that he found
Wilde living and had the long conversation with him
which he reports. The guileless Renier enthusiasti-
cally quotes from this fake actually describing
Wilde’s rooms from Gide’s vision, but with his con-
genital contempt for chronological exactitude gives
himself and Gide over to confusion by stating—what
is the exact truth that Oscar left the Hotel des
Bains to go and reside at the neighboring Chalet


Bourgeat at the end of June. Now Gide’s visit to
Oscar, had it ever taken place, is chronologically
fixed from Oscar’s alleged words to him as well after
the end of June, when Oscar was no longer at the
Hotel des Bains. Gide tells us how Oscar told him
with glee of how he had given a “grand dinner” to
the Berneval children some time previously. Now
this “grand dinner”, which was really a tea with
cakes and strawberries and cream for the boys only,
and was followed several days later by a second
school-treat, took place on June 27th, 1897. As Gide
arrived in the “wintry” Berneval well after these
school-treats given by Oscar, it fixes (or would fix)
Gide’s visit there some time in the middle of July.
(4) Gide’s account of the Hotel des Bains and his
description of Wilde when he first saw him that
night are in themselves sufficient to show that his
story is a fabrication. He speaks of dining with
certain “vague persons,” guests, whom he considered
pitiful society for Melmoth. There were no guests
staying in the hotel before Oscar left it for the Chalet
Bourgeat. He says that one of the books lying on
Oscar’s table was a copy of his newly published
Nourritures Terrestres (the book, by the way, that
drove young Privaz to suicide). It would certainly
have been impossible for Oscar to have this book,
for it is on record that the first copy of this work
was not sold at the Mercure de France office till years
after 1897, and that Vallette narrowly missed an


apoplectic stroke when he heard that one of Gide’s
aviary of “nightingales” (rossignol is the French
trade term for unsaleable books) had actually been
asked for by a customer.
(5) In his description of Wilde’s personal appear-
ance, he says that his teeth were atrociously bad.
Wilde’s teeth at Berneval had been properly attended
to by a dentist and presented a normal aspect. He
adds that the hands were very red and coarse. I
suppose he imagined this would necessarily be so in
the case of a man who had recently come from pick-
ing 'oakum. Unfortunately for his veracity, Wilde
had not touched a strand of oakum for over eighteen
months and his hands were as beautiful, white and
well kept as they always were. He had not been
picking oakum, he had been writing the immortal
De Profundis.
(6) He says that he noticed Wilde was again
wearing the same rings he used to wear, and notably
the blue Egyptian scarab. This is another proof of
his lying. Oscar had no jewelry at all when he left
prison; it was all hocked by his brother Willy while
he was staying with his mother in Oakley Street
when out on bail and when there was often not a
penny in the house and the pawnshop had to be re-
sorted to. None of his jewelry, of course, was re-
deemed and most emphatically there was no scarab
ring on Oscar’s finger—as I ought to know better


than anybody. On the night before the fatal 25th of
May, Oscar, in anticipation of not returning home,
had asked his sister-in-law, Willy’s wife, to distribute
amongst his friends the little trinkets which he still
possessed as remembrances of him. In telling me
this, the poor woman handed me a small silk hand-
kerchief saying “Will you take this, Robert? Oscar
wanted you to have his scarab ring, as you were with
him in Paris when he wrote The Sphinx , but you
know what’s become of it. It had to go up the spout
like all the rest of his things.”
(7) What a clumsy faker Gide is, I think is shown
where, to give a little natural touch to his narrative,
he mentions that at a certain point in the conversation
Wilde lighted a cigarette. As if Wilde ever did
anything else!
(8) As to the alleged conversation which occurred
between Gide and Wilde, inasmuch as this interview
never took place, it was no doubt collected by Gide
at the Ducote dinner where he did speak of his prison
experiences. This he never did to any of his friends
in private conversation and Gide, whom he disliked,
was the very last man to whom he would have de-
picted himself in such a humiliating posture. The
particulars about Berneval, and so on, had no doubt
been told to Gide by some of the band of young
Parisian poets whom Oscar once entertained during
his stay at Berneval at the Cafe des Tribunaux.


(9) Where Gide does really give himself away,
though, is where he says that in taking leave of Oscar
next morning, after Oscar had accompanied him in
the carriage in which he alleges he drove back to
Dieppe, Oscar again praising his foetid N ourritures
Terrestres said to him: “Listen to me, dear” (as
though Oscar would call Gide ‘dear’) “I want you
to make me a promise. This Nourritures Terrestres
is a fine book, a very fine book —but, dear, promise
me now you will never again use the personal pro-
noun “I”. “And”, adds Gide, “as I didn’t quite seem
to understand him, he went on: —Tn Art, look you,
there is never the first person singular’.” Now if
anybody wants to be convinced that Gide is lying
where he puts these words into Oscar’s mouth at
Berneval in 1897, let him refer to page 82 of Leon
Pierre-Quint’s Life and Works of Andre Gide, of
which Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. have issued an English
translation. There he will see that Gide has stated
that it was Marcel Proust who had laid down this
artistic pronouncement for his instruction. “You can
say everything,” Proust told him, “but never say T.”
(10) Gide says that after leaving Oscar and re-
turning to Paris he went to see Bosie and told him
what Oscar had said. We happen to know now that
Bosie had never heard of any visit of Gide’s to Oscar.
(11) Gide continues his narrative by writing:
“Shortly afterwards Wilde came back to Paris”—


which shows that he knew so little of Wilde’s move-
ments that he was in ignorance of the fact that from
Berneval Wilde had gone to live with Bosie in Naples,
and did not come back to Paris till well on in the
following year, 1898. His story of being hailed on
the Boulevards by a dingy Wilde, who after standing
treat to him and his friend to two cocktails and
having insisted on paying for these drinks, drew
Gide aside and literally begged of him, is too child-
ishly absurd to need any further examination.“ Listen
to me”, Gide reports him as whispering, “you ought
to be told —I am absolutely penniless”. An absolutely
penniless man cannot be supposed to stand drinks at
a cafe, and especially “cocktails”, at the Gafe Napo-
litain on the Boulevards.
(12) A few pages further on he quotes a begging
letter from Oscar to himself which he says was
written shortly before Oscar’s journey to Napoule.
In brackets he gives the date of Oscar’s stay at
Napoule as “in the winter of 1897 to 1898”. Here
he gives himself away again as a liar, and the letter
so dated —if it exists —is a forgery. In the winter of
1897 to 1898 Oscar was in Naples and Paris. It was
only in December, 1898, that he went to Napoule and
afforded Frank Harris the occasion, in connection
with that journey, for the most monumental as well
as the most cruel and scandalous of the fabrications
which disgrace Frank Harris’s Life of Wilde.
Renier writes Wilde’s biography and so pre


sumably knows something about the man. How is it
then that he can produce Andre Gide as a credible
witness against Wilde? Does he believe Gide where
he relates:—
(a) That Wilde (who so hated scenes) used
“to parade the streets of Algiers surrounded by an
extraordinary crowd of marauders and beggars,
throwing largesse to them, contemplating them with
joy and chatting with one and all.”
This monstrous absurdity is repeated by Leon
Pierre-Quint on page 30 of his biography of Andre
Gide where he says: “In the course of his (Gide’s)
second visit to Algeria, having fallen in with Wilde
he was dragged by him into new debaucheries.
Febrile, strained, mad, surrounded by an extraordi-
nary gang of marauders, Wilde on the eve of his
lawsuit allowed himself to be hurried along by a sort
of fatality.” This is sheer poppycock. Leon Pierre-
Quint has been listening to some of Gide’s fairy tales.
When Gide forced himself upon Oscar Wilde and
Lord Alfred Douglas in Blidah and afterwards in
Algiers, there was no suggestion of any lawsuit on
the horizon. I have already explained that the
Marquess of Queensberry had entirely abandoned
his persecution of Wilde, which was only revived by
the jealousy which the tremendous success of his
two plays, produced so shortly one after the other,
provoked in his mind.


( b ) That Wilde on leaving his house in Tite
Street in January, 1895, for his trip to Algiers, com-
missioned a friend in London to collect all his mail
for him and having sorted this out to forward to
him in Africa only such letters as were of sodomitical
interest, which letters Wilde then carried to a bar in
Algiers where, while drinking a mort of sherry-
cobblers, he used one of the tables on which to spread
out this correspondence and loudly expatiated on its
contents.
(c) That Wilde connived at his ten-year-old
son, Cyril, the lad of whom he wrote with such
admiring affection in De Profundis and who was so
lovely a child, being reserved for the sodomitical
purposes of one of his friends and that this friend
confided the monstrous fact to Gide. (Is Renier
a father himself?)
Is not Renier aware that Wilde never carried
a watch, “never walked”, never called Gide “dear”,
that “cocktails” had gone out in 1894, and that to
show epicurean Oscar priming himself with such an
aphrodisiac as ginger tea is as monstrous as it is
absurd ?
Similar mendacity shouts from almost every line
of the rotten story which Renier has so cheerfully
reproduced, with no other purpose than to give a
sensational climax to his account of Wilde’s unhappy
perversion.
Renier has carefully edited the narrative, but


in his slovenly way has left in one or two details
which betray it as a malicious fabrication. He gives
Gide’s description of the “marvellous adolescent”
with the olive-coloured skin, the large dark eyes and
the “slender childish body”, but he carefully omits
Gide’s monstrous statement that this boy, whose
name was Mohammed, was especially reserved ac-
cording to Wilde, for the foul purposes of one of
Wilde’s intimate friends. He also echoes Gide’s spite-
ful slander about Oscar’s hand, which Gide describes
as “enormous”;* and worse, he copies Gide’s abso-
lutely fantastic description of Wilde’s “sonorous,
interminable, uncontrollable, insolent laugh”, the
laughter of a devil over the moral downfall of the
innocent, and with Gide explains that “the great
pleasure of the debauchee is to drag others into de-
bauchery”—whereas Wilde’s laugh, if joyous and
exhilarant, was never ill-mannered nor prolonged.
As to the infamous suggestion of his delight in cor-
rupting a youth fifteen years his junior, surely Renier
knows that never, even by his bitterest enemies, was
Wilde accused of such devilish work, until Gide
opened the cloaca of his fetid imagination.
* Whereas all Wilde’s friends most cordially agree with Henri
de Regnier, the French Academician’s description of Wilde’s hands
as "beautiful”. Gide, of course, borrowed this malevolent misrepre-
sentation of Wilde’s physique from Bernard Shaw's spiteful picture of
poor Lady Wilde which, as Shaw has sometimes been spoken of as an
Irish gentleman, is worth repeating here. ”1 never saw Lady Wilde's
feet: but her hands were enormous, and never went straight to their
aim when they grasped anything, but minced about feeling for it. And
the gigantic splaying of her palm was reproduced in her lumbar
region. ’ (Memories of Oscar Wilde contributed to Frank Harris’s
book by Shaw).


Here are some further reasons why G. J. Renier
ought to have recognized the utter falsity and mon-
strous absurdity of Gide’s narrative:—
1) Gide represents Wilde, who had come for a
short holiday with Bosie Douglas, as having sought
out and rented in a “very ugly quarter of the town”,
and as a kind of African Parc aux Cerfs, a tiny two-
roomed flat for his sodomitical adventures. Douglas
flatly denies the flat.
2) Did Renier pause for one second to consider
that according to Gide there was but one key to the
“tiny two-roomed flat”, that is to say, only one exit;
that when the guide brought Gide and Wilde the two
Arab children, Wilde made Gide go into the further
room, “la chambre du fond”, with the lovely adoles-
cent, Mohammed, while he (Wilde) locked himself
into the first room with the nondescript darboukah
player by turning the key of the door between the
two rooms ? Argal, as there was no other issue to the
back room and as Gide and Mohammed were locked
into that room, how did Mohammed get away after
the terrific debauch was over? What became of
Wilde and his companion ? When and by whom was
the communicating door unlocked? Had Wilde dis-
appeared, and if so how did the couple in the back
room release themselves? When an approver is
telling a story charging a man with a crime very
much worse than murder he cannot be allowed com


plete silence on such essential details, though this
silence may satisfy Mr. Renier. What sort of a
figure would Gide make as King’s evidence in the
Old Bailey?
3) Gide’s monstrous assertion that the lad
Mohammed, to whom Oscar had introduced him and
who was selected by him as Gide’s accomplice, was
the boy specially reserved for a cherished friend’s
purposes. Who is going to believe that Wilde would
encourage Mohammed to be unfaithful to his friend
and client in favour of a penurious, uncomely, Latin
Quarter scallywag?
4) The statement that Wilde coupled Gide
with this exquisite youth for the hideous purposes
described, while he, Wilde, contented himself for
that night with the little nondescript darboukah
player. (Here is altruism indeed!)
5) Wilde was always exceedingly discreet and
had almost the cunning of a maniac in concealing his
actions. It is a complete misrepresentation of
facts for Renier to describe him as “communicative
and ready to display his inner self”. From all people
who, he might have reason to suppose, could have
no sympathy with him in his homosexual moods, he
hid his madness. Take my own case and read what
Alfred Douglas wrote me on October 17th, 1929:
“You are not and never have been competent to write
about Oscar, because obviously you never knew what


his real life and character were. . . . Oscar knew you
well and at one time liked you very much, but he
carefully concealed from you the side of his life and
character which governed his conduct". And I had
been his intimate friend—though very rarely in his
company after his success for over twelve years
when his hidden mania was dragged into the light of
day. And this is the discreet and cautious madman
about whom Renier would have you believe that he
had made an immediate confidant of a seedy Bo-
hemian journalist, whom he had only met three or
four times in Paris, whom he disliked, and who had
posed to him as a severe moral censor whom the
merest suggestion of homosexual practices might
be supposed to disgust and horrify.
6) Wilde, who was no fool, would be aware
that from the moment of his arrival in Algiers with
Bosie, they two, being persons of cosmopolitan
repute and distinction, would be under the sharp if
discreet surveillance of the political police bureau
attached to the Governor’s office; that every action
of theirs would be duly reported.*
* This fact in itself disposes of the whole miserable story, for had
Wilde conducted himself as Gide describes, a full report of the
occurrence would have been handed in the same night to the high
police, either by the guide, whose license would convey the obligation
of furnishing such reports—all these guides acting as police indicateurs
—or by the two policemen who according to Gide had been bribed by
Oscar to protect their debauch. Their report would have been enquired
into and a draft of it would immediately have been forwarded to Paris
to the head police quarters and the British Embassy. From Paris it
would in due course have gone to London, to Scotland Yard, the
Home Office and the Foreign Office, and would inevitably, sooner or
later, have reached Lord Queensberry’s ears.


y) The F,rench colonial authorities in Africa
are particularly opposed to any such enterprises as
described above. In this particular case, a flagrant
breach of Article 334 of the Penal Code —the hiring
of an apartment for the purposes of habitual debauch,
supplying the gravamen exacted by the French
courts which insists on habitual debauch being es-
tablished —having been committed, the almost certain
result would have been that Wilde would have been
notified by the Governor —supposing that for various
reasons a prosecution had not been decided upon- —
that his presence on the territory of the Republic was
no longer desirable. In other words, he would have
been asked to leave Algeria in twenty-four hours,
and this would certainly have closed the door of
France to him for ever. Considering that he spent
the last few years of his life after leaving prison on
French territory, it is perfectly obvious that no such
conduct on his part took place.
8) Does Renier really believe that two Algerian
policemen would allow themselves to be bribed “with
a few cigarettes” to connive at the commission of
the crime punishable by Article 334 as above, and
thus render themselves liable to the grave penalties
edicted by the Penal Code, Article 177, against the
complicity of Government servants, involving the
same penalties as those inflicted on the criminal,
besides civil and military degradation? My friend,
Georges Claretie, I should here observe, pointed out


to me in connection with this paragraph that a great
many of the policemen in Algiers are natives, and
that Arab or negro agents might be less prudent and
scrupulous than white men. But “a few cigarettes”!
However, Gide disposes of this argument in favour
of any probability of this invention by using in the
text in his description of the incident the French
slang word “flics” for the policemen. The word “flic”
is the French slang equivalent of our English slang
word “split” and would never by any chance be used
by a French writer of Gide’s finicking preciosity to
describe a black policeman.
9) When evidence was being collected by
Queensberry against Wilde, proof would have been
afforded him of this occurrence in Algiers. Where
is there a trace of such procurable evidence ever
having been hinted at ? And who is going to believe
that Wilde, coming dripping and foul from the al-
leged debauch in Algiers and knowing the mass of
evidence he had left behind him and how easily such
evidence could be procured and brought against him
in Regina vs. Douglas, would have been such an
utter fool as to prosecute Queensberry?
10) Did it ever occur to Renier to ask himself,
if this story of Gide’s is true, why it was never
heard of up till 1925, when Oscar Wilde’s reputation
was so tremendous all over Europe and when poor
Pierre Louys was dead and could be insulted with
impunity. Would not Harris have leapt at this titbit


of slander for use in his “Confessions”, and to afford
a striking incident in the 7-reel film about Oscar
which he would have written in collaboration with
George Bernard Shaw if the latter had not found
£6OO too small a fee for such a questionable task,
and stood out for £10,000?
Further, why did Leon Lemonnier, really
Wilde’s best biographer up-to-date, make no mention
of this Algiers story, though Lemonnier is a very
sharp critic of Wilde’s failing and in one place says
that nobody can blame the judge for giving him two
years’ hard labour? Shall I tell Renier why Lemon-
nier did not publish it? He told me why. He said
“I prefer to leave the responsibility of it to Andre
Gide”.
No, no! Renier did not want to admit to himself
that his chief witness against Oscar Wilde was a
pitiful liar and braggart. Else how could this Dutch
Doctor attach the slightest importance to the fellow’s
statements after reading the passage which in Si le
Grain Ne Menrt follows on from the words “Wilde
made me” down to “the other musician?” In this
passage Gide describes how vastly superior are the
delights of Sodomy to those of Onanism and goes
on to describe his own virile performance on that
night of nights. The particular passage to which I
wish to call the doctor’s special attention is so filthy
that out of respect for Mrs. Boffin I have turned it
into Latin of sorts. Here it is:—


“Mohammedo abito, postea, ossa tremens gaudio,
din mansi. Et quanquam per ilium, summa volup-
tate jam quintum fructus eram, libidinosam de-
lectationem egomet renovavi saepenumero. Et ad
hospitium reditus usque ad matutinas horas ejus
repercussiones extendi
He concludes by relating how “at daybreak I rose
and ran, yes, really ran in my sandals far beyond
Mustapha, feeling from the night I had passed no
fatigue whatsoever, but on the contrary a sprightli-
ness, a kind of lightness of soul and body which did
not leave me the whole of that day.”
Can Renier honestly maintain that he believes
this story? If so, he runs contrary to the score of
eminent medical men whom I have consulted. And
not medical men alone. Here is what a retired Indian
judge who has had to investigate the sordid details
of hundreds of cases of unnatural offences wrote to
me, after I had submitted my Latin version to him,
ripest of scholars, with the question whether Petro-
nius would have passed it: “I admire your friend
Gide. He must be a strong built man, a Monsieur
Douze-Fois, as Casanova would say. I have the best
authority for saying that the inhabitants of the
cities of the plain are reduced to absolute inertia after
two visits to the Temple of Venus Praepostera.”
And when this man wrote this, he did not know
what Renier the expert knows, that Andre Gide, in
the very book from which Renier took the filthy lie


about Wilde, sets himself up as the imitator of and
apologist for the man of whom it is written in the
10th verse of the 36th chapter of Genesis: —
“And the thing which he did displeased the Lord;
wherefore He slew him also.”
On the very first page of Si le Grain Ne Meurt
Gide describes, as one of the earliest recollections of
his childhood, being seated under a big table in his
father’s dining-room at the age of five and practising
the vice alluded to. It is the leit-motiv throughout
the whole of his dull and dirty book. He describes
how, being detected in this practice in the class-room,
he was expelled from school; and in all his books,
printed at his own expense in Belgium because no
decent French printer would set them up, he main-
tains that masturbation is one of the legitimate
pleasures of life, strongly to be recommended to
youth as a relief from the monotony of home life
and to all as a consolation in times of affliction.
Does Renier know that Gide’s doctrines have
caused great havoc among boys and young men,
leading to at least one suicide, that of a young man
called Privaz, in 1929, about whom his father,
Etienne Privaz, has written a book entitled Un
Malfaiteur: Andre Gide, issued by Albert Messein,
of 19, Quai St. Michel, Paris? Having glutted him-
self on Gide’s Nourritures Terrestres, the lad could
not face a life full of such horrors, and rather than


succumb to the temptations filling his mind and
poisoning his thoughts he put an end to his existence.
Would Renier like to read the very pathetic letter I
had from the father, who is living in Geneva, quite
recently?
The merest village doctor could have told Renier
that this habit not only destroys all virility in a man
but entirely warps his morale, which is the virility
of the soul. Andre Gide exemplifies this proposition
in the most striking way. Not only does he admit in
Si le Grain Ne Meurt that he reached manhood a
total physical wreck*, twice rejected for military
service for incipient tuberculosis and twice rejected
in the lists of natural love for total impotency, but
by the malice, deceitfulness and megalomania with
which his writings are instinct he shows how his
vicious habit, practised as described on page 346,
“maniaqnement, jusqu’a I’epuisement, jusqu’a n’avoir
plus devant soi que Vimbecilite, que la folie”, had
destroyed within him every vestige of a moral sense.
The Lord has different ways of slaying.
Malice snarls from almost every page of his
filthy book. He compares Wilde to Krupp and
‘Philli.’** He cruelly slanders Pierre Louys, to whom
* Douglas tells us that when he first met Gide In Algiers, when Gide
was 25 years old, the latter looked like a badly preserved man of 40.
** Count Philipp zu Eulenburg, the unfortunate homosexualist,
who being prosecuted pro forma avoided all consequences by getting
his trial continually put off on the grounds of illness, thus taking an
aegrotat in the Infamy School. He survived twelve years in leisured
ease and died after the abdication of Emperor William.


he once wrote: “I have loved thee more than any
man except thy brother. Let us agree never in the
future” —they had quarreled definitely—“to speak
ill of one another”. This does not prevent Gide from
lying most atrociously about the great artist, whom
he says he had loved so dearly. Leaving aside the
contemptible spite which prompts him throughout his
Si le Grain Ne Meurt to spell his friend’s name, not
as Pierre Louys wished it to be spelled, L..0..u..y..5..
for the sake of giving a Gothic mediaeval look to his
patronymic, but in the modern accepted form Louis,
as his father and still more distinguished grand-
father, surgeon to Napoleon Bonaparte, had used
it, and the despicable jealousy which prompted him
never once in the course of his book where the refer-
ences to Pierre Louys are innumerable to refer to
the overwhelming worldwide triumph of the “marvel-
lous boy’s” first book, his splendid Aphrodite, the
whole of this autobiography, Si le Grain Ne Meurt,
is a continuous traducement, belittlement and deni-
gration of a splendid literary artist, the latchets of
whose shoes, he, Gide, was ever, and is still today
unworthy to fasten. And what might surprise me is
that Dr. Renier, who professes to know something
about medicine, did not realize after reading Gide’s
book which he used so perfidiously against Wilde,
and Gide’s story of an adventure he had with Pierre
Louys in Algiers, shortly after Wilde had returned
to London and notably certain remarks that Gide
had put into Louys’s mouth, did not at once realize


what a blundering liar this fellow, Gide, is, nor ask
himself if Gide could lie with such effrontery about
Louys why he should not be suspected of lying also
about Oscar Wilde and Lord Alfred Douglas.
In the passage referred to Gide relates how after
Douglas had left Biskra, Louys forced his company
upon him, accompanied him to Algiers and there
would “give him no peace till he had carried him
off to the brothel”. Here Gide selected “the least
hideous” of the prostitutes on hire and took her up
to bed, to be greeted on his return downstairs with
the titters of Pierre Louys and the other girls.
Louys then, according to Gide, told him that the girl
he had taken upstairs was suffering from syphilis
and that Gide would very soon have occasion to
recognize the truth of this statement, but that he
mustn’t worry about that as the pox was not half as
bad as it is made out to be but a tribute that all men
must pay to Pleasure and moreover —and here did
not Renier recognize Gide’s shameless faking?—
that it was universally recognized as being a great
stimulant of the brain and that three-fourths of
men of genius owed their literary triumphs to the
fact of having had syphilis.
A theory now discredited but to prove which
Maupassant and his Bottle de Suif and Oscar Wilde
and his The Importance of Being Earnest used to
be pointed to as evidence at the time when Gide was
writing his autobiography and devising how best to
blacken the character of the friend he had loved so


dearly. It was at that time considered an undoubted
fact, but placed by a lying reporter in the mouth of
Pierre Louys in 1895, is as adipose an anachronism
as one can well conceive. It would have been less
asinine, for instance, for Harris to have told us that
in planning his (imaginary) escape for Oscar Wilde
he had hesitated between the (non-existing) yacht
at Erith and a fast and powerful monoplane, a Moth,
for choice; or for the Right Honourable Winston
Churchill, when he was condensing Charlotte
Bronte’s famous novel, to have explained to us that
if the heroine heard Rochester’s wild “Jane, Jane,
Jane” that dished the parson’s goose and sent her
flying to the arms of her wailing demon lover, it
was obviously because she had a radio loudspeaker
on the fancy whatnot in her hall-bedroom.
In 1895 the bacillus of syphilis had not yet been
discovered and the foul disease was still la bouteille
d’encre —bottle of ink—to the doctors. Ehrlich’s
Eureka and Hata’s Hurrah (or possibly Banzai) did
not ring through the world’s most mournful lazar-
ettos till 10 years later, and it was still later that the
extraordinary theory that the effect of the pallid
spirochaet on the human brain as genius-producing
was tentatively launched, triumphed for a while and
has now faded away.
For Gide to put the enunciation of such a theory
into the mouth of his friend in 1895 is to prove him-
self a shameless faker. This does not much surprise
one in the author of Si le Grain Ne Meurt which


crawls with similar clumsy fabrications, but what
does astound is that it appears to have duped the
learned doctor of philosophy and self-constituted
authority on sexual matters, the Dutch G. J. Renier.
Gide, however, is merciless towards those who
have outstripped him in the field of letters. Like
Bernard Shaw towards Oscar Wilde and Sir Henry
Irving, his jealousy pursues his victims beyond the
grave. He allows his panegyrist, Leon Pierre-Quint,
to print the cruel falsehood that Pierre Louys, the
immortal author of Aphrodite, died in “misery and
debauch”; while on Pierre Loti, his master and Mar-
cel Proust, his guide, philosopher and friend, he
spews the venom of the statement that being both of
them homosexualists they were incapable of describ-
ing women and that accordingly all the female char-
acters in their books are simply travestied from boys
with whom they had been in love and whom they had
rigged up in female attire to figure as heroines in
their novels. And what can be said as to his mon-
strous inventions about Lord Alfred —who had al-
ways shown him kindness and condescension —on
whose neck he fell in 1903, proclaiming him his
dearest friend, and whom 22 years later he tries,
fortunately in vain, to pillory higher than Haman
was hanged?
Sheer brag: his vaunt of having distinguished
himself in the cities of the plain. He may have
assoilzie from any charge in respect of the crimen
tantum horribile. He was physically incapable of its


commission. When he announced: “I have practised
every kind of vice; at least I have encouraged them.
Family life, I hate you!” or declares that “when any
act gives pleasure to the performer, that is proof
that he was right in doing it” he is simply lying as
to his credo, he is trying to epater le bourgeois.
In a letter I received from Renier he directed
my attention to the enormous popularity of Gide’s
books on the Continent and especially in Germany,
as proof of their value and reliability. Certainly to
judge from the Bibliography which is appended to
Leon Pierre-Quint’s panegyric on Gide, the latter
may be supposed to have really delivered the goods
to the world. Ten closely printed pages are filled with
the list of the translations of his books which have
been issued in every European country, in the U.S.A.
and even in Japan. Curiously enough, Bulgaria of
all places has been the least eager for his literary
pabulum and so far has only swallowed two of his
books, of which one, by the way, bears the suggestive
title of La Porte Etroite. The reasons for this popu-
larity abroad which must be particularly gratifying
to Gide inasmuch as “that big ass Goethe” (cf.
Pierre-Quint page 73) has told us that “posterity
begins at the frontier” (letter to Gerard de Nerval
after receiving the latter’s translation of Faust ) are
two. The first is that the world looks to Paris for its
literary light and the mistaken idea abroad is that
Gide is admitted in Paris to be the Kingpin of
modern French literature. He is not, as could be


proved by scores of opinions of men and women,
interested in letters. He is the temporary beneficiary
of what the French call le snobisme, a word which
Larousse explains as denoting “factitious and foolish
admiration of all that has a temporary vogue.” The
explanation of this vogue is that malicious humanity
is always gratified to read disparagements of the
truly great and deservedly world-famous, but more
particularly and this gives the second reason of
Gide’s popularity because his books denouncing
the interference of the church and of religion—an
interference based entirely on sane physiological
reasons just like that of the Lenten fast, the insti-
tution of pilgrimages, the forbiddal of consanguine
marriages, etc. with deleterious and destructive
though pleasure-giving practices afford the votaries
of these practices a ready-made apology for their
conduct. What a relief to wretched Onanists and to
self-accusing Sodomites to be told that any habit
that gives pleasure is, for that very reason, shown
to be permissible and that family or clerical forbiddal
should be manfully defied. It has always seemed to
me a pity that some great Churchman does not make
it known to the dupes of teachings of this sort that
if the Church has always inveighed against these un-
natural pleasure-giving habits and frightens people
about them with the menace of God’s wrath, it is
because they are horribly mischievous from the point
of view of health, that they are inexorably punished
by never-forgiving Nature and that if the Church


has called them Sin it is because she has also taught—
what Nature clearly proves to be the bitter Truth in
this case —that the Wages of Sin is Death. He could
point out that when the fate of Onan was held up to
humanity as a terrifying example and the narrative
of the destruction of the cities of the plain was given
as a warning and a menace, there was no belief in a
future judgment nor in any after-life, nor in a
Heaven or a Hell. These ideas only arose in the
minds of the Jews about the year 150 B.C. when
their persecution by the Maccabeans was at its
fiercest. There was no question of these practices
being anything but physically destructive. It was
Nature and not Jehovah who was offended and who
punished for the offence. So Hide’s teachings don’t
inspire his readers and followers to a heroic revolt
against a tyrannical divinity represented on earth
by priest or parson, but simply run counter to the
edicts of an implacable Nature who does not wait
for any after-life to give the rebels what is coming
to them, but deals it out to them, hot and strong,
right here and now. This is what the cunning Gide
so carefully camouflages and that is the main
grievance that one has against him and his books.
But the excuse he tenders to his dupes to lay as
flattering unction to their antinomian souls, is so
heartily welcome to the poor fools who fancy they
have been imperilling their immortal souls instead
of their mortal bodies, that it fully explains this
vogue and the crowd of snobs (in the French sense


of the word) who hail Andre Gide as the Ace of
Antinomians.
There is, however, a special reason for such
popularity as Gide’s books enjoy in Germany,
although this is very much less than Renier would
have me believe. Since the original edition of this
pamphlet was published, I have received from
Germany many expostulations for writing of “the
enormous popularity of Gide’s books” in the Father-
land. I have before me one such expostulation which
comes from Frankfurt from a lady of high literary
attainment and great erudition. She writes: “I
confess that till now I never read anything that Gide
has written and whenever I heard his name mentioned
it was always in connection with a taint of perversity.
I also remember having read, one or two years ago,
a criticism in a journal of sexual science at my library
on a new play of his, from the Oedipus-Saga. An
Oberstudien-rat of my acquaintance who is very up
to date in all literary matters and who reviews books
for the leading periodicals told me a day or two ago
that one cannot speak with any justification at all
of “an enormous popularity of Gide’s books in
Germany” and that he is known here only to a limited
circle of “intellectuals”. Dr. Renier would do better
to be a little more cautious in making his statements
and should write books for a really scientific purpose
and not —as it seems to me —solely in the hope of
creating a mischievous sensation.”
There may be enthusiasm in Germany for Gide’s


books where they condone unnatural vice, but then
Germany has always kicked against Article 175 of
the Strafgesetsbuch and of late, owing to the expense
of rearing children, has lusted after sterile unions;
and if Gide as the defender of and apologist for the
practices which brought Shuah’s son to grief is so
loudly hailed as a prophet, it is because in the vast
agglomerations of Hitler’s concentration-camps
some substitute had to be found for what the afore-
said Article 175 of the German Penal Code reproves
and punishes. So much so that it has actually been
stated in Die Neue Weltbilhne, the anti - Hitlerian
weekly published in Prague (No. 32, August 10th,
1933) that the practice has been regularly organized
as a part of the program in these camps and is
carried out as a kind of drill under the command
of drill-sergeants by all the prisoners divided into
platoons periodically. As to this statement, the
Prager Sosial-Demokrat is quoted by the Weltbilhne
as having definitely proved it by the depositions of
various witnesses from the detention-camps. I must
add, however, that I have failed to ascertain from the
Weltbilhne, to which I used to subscribe, on what
date these proofs were furnished in the Sozial-
Demokrat.
However, enough ipecacuanha for today.
Now let Gide get his knock-out, and Renier
throw up the sponge: There was another witness of
all that Wilde did in Africa in 1895, namely, Alfred
Bruce Douglas, third son of the eighth Marquess of


Queensberry, whom Renier has very properly de-
scribed as an indispensable witness about Wilde and
of patent sincerity. Why did not Renier then, before
publishing Gide’s tale, consult this impeccable
witness? Douglas tells me he never had a word
from Renier. And as to Gide’s story of the night in
Algiers, or Blidah, or the Moon, Renier omits to tell
his readers that Gide states that the incident took
place during the absence of Douglas who, he alleges,
had gone to Blidah, for a purpose which we will not
describe here, and that he, Gide, was alone in
Algiers with Wilde when the beastly quartette was
performed.
And as to this statement, let me quote from a
letter which Lord Alfred Douglas wrote me on last
July 26th, 1933.
“I CERTAINLY WAS WITH OSCAR THE
WHOLE TIME WE WERE IN AFRICA.
IT IS A SHEER LIE TO SAY THAT I
WENT AWAY TO BLIDAH, LEAVING
OSCAR ALONE WITH GIDE.”
And as to Andre Gide in general and his wicked
lies in Si le Grain Ne Meurt about him, Bosie
Douglas, and Oscar Wilde, and why he, Douglas
did not at once prosecute Gide, this is what he wrote
me on May 25, 1933:
Dear Sherard —
Andre Gide’s story about Oscar and myself in
Si le Grain Ne Meurt is a mass of lies and misrepre~


sentations. When I first read the book (long after it
was written) 1 hesitated what action to take about it,
because I knew that a libel action in France would be
a farce. you know, there is nothing in France which
corresponds to our own laws of libel. In England, a
man who is libelled can get thousands of pounds in
damages, or he can get the libeller sent to prison. In
France, the libeller is condemned in the Police Correct-
ionnelle to some paltry fine, probably 200 francs! If
Gide had been an Englishman, I could have taken
criminal proceedings against him and he would certainly
have been sent to prison, probably for the maximum
two years.
As you say, if I had gone to Paris and blown his
brains out, no jury in the world (least of all a French
jury) would have convicted me. But being a Catholic,
it was not possible for me even to think of doing this.
So on the whole, after much consideration, I decided
to do nothing and to refrain from stirring up the mud
or advertising Gide’s filthy book.
I had several years of fighting against Ross, Harris
and others, involving frightful mental strain and a
ruinous expenditure, and I felt that I simply had neither
the means nor the energy to start a new campaign in a
foreign country. So I contended myself with writing
my Autobiography and leaving the literary world to
judge me by my own written words. Gide’s confessions
about his own disgusting conduct and the whole record
of this dull, fifth-rate writer (this "egoist without an
ego” as Oscar called him) whose success amongst
stupid and corrupt people depends entirely on his re-
volting pornography, are, 1 believe, quite sufficient to
discredit his contemptible lies about two poets.
Even if everything he said were true he would
stand convicted on his own evidence of being a despic-
able cad and a treacherous scoundrel who makes money
by abusing the confidence of friends who trusted him.


So on the whole , I prefer to leave him to the judgment
of decent people now and after my death.
Yours sincerely.
ALFRD DOUGLAS.
P. S.—l suggest that you print this letter in your book.
Which I have done.
It will be interesting to see if the perusal by Dr.
Renier of these definite statements as to Gide’s lying,
by the gentleman whose evidence in all that concerns
Oscar Wilde he very rightly accepts without reserv-
ation of any sort, will induce him to add —which till
now he has refused to do —Lord Alfred’s disclaimer
of the Algiers fabrication to the one that he is pub-
lishing on my behalf as a footnote to his own version
of it.
Of course, it is just possible that a perusal of
the foregoing pages may induce him to suppress the
disgraceful story altogether.
Et nunc erudimini.
ROBERT HARBOROUGH SHERARD.
Colvi, Corsica,
September lsth, 1933- (Revised June, 1934).


PART II
OSCAR WILDE “DRUNKARD AND SWINDLER”
A Reply To
George Bernard Shaw
Dr. G. J. Renter
Frank H ARRIS
and Others
Together with an interview with
GEORGE BERNARD SHAW by HUGH KINGSMILL.




On page 154 of Dr. G. J. Renier’s Oscar Wilde
published by Peter Davies, Ltd., occurs the following
slanderous statement:
“He wanted more and more money. . . He
even resorted to dishonesty in order to come by
money. He made the scenario for a play and sold
the exclusive rights to four or five people.”
The inventor of this cruel lie was Frank Harris,
but nobody would have attached any importance to
this further proof of his mendacity and malice had
not George Bernard Shaw substantiated it in the
letter which he wrote to Harris in praise of his in-
famous book and which Harris so skilfully used.
Shaw not only expressed full belief in Harris’s
accusation against Wilde but took the opportunity
of gratifying an old grudge against his brother
playwright by stating that this conduct on his part
established the fact that Wilde died “an unproductive
drunkard and swindler”.
That a man of George Bernard Shaw’s intel


ligence and reputation for generosity should be
capable of harbouring rancour against a fellow
townsman and brother artist who perished so miser-
ably as did Oscar Wilde would seem incredible even
to those who take the most pessimistic view of
human nature, of “the ridicule and tragedy of being
born a man”, did we not possess in Edward Gordon
Craig’s memoir of his mother, Ellen Terry, and
particularly in his annex to that book: A Plea for
George Bernard Shaw where he deals with the
publication of the correspondence between Shaw and
Ellen Terry and Shaw’s jealousy of and hatred for
Sir Henry Irving, the clearest demonstration of the
painful fact that this great man, Bernard Shaw, is
actually capable of uncharitable vindictiveness even
towards the dead. “Well”, writes Craig, summing
up his pronouncement on the matter, “jealousy is,
after all, a very human weakness and forgivable,
but it must not lose in stature, in quality petty
jealousy is very petty. Shaw’s jealousy does not
resemble the terrible passion of an Othello- —it is
dreadfully like the permanent and unpleasant habit
of I ago, ever kindling him to mischief. It flares (up
in) him always— he is jealous of writers who write
better This seems to be the explanation of his
cruel and pitiful description of Oscar Wilde on his
deathbed.
Of course, we must not forget that Ellen Terry
herself wrote to her son on the 13th, December, 1905,
apropos of these attacks on Henry Irving: “Do you


believe there was malice in what Shaw wrote of
Henry ? I don’t—but C is very sore with me
about it, when I merely say Shaw was a fool —always
was —on the subject —and pretended to be foolisher
than he really was, for he is a tremendous admirer
in truth.” So possibly in speaking of the dead Wilde
as “an unproductive drunkard and swindler” Shaw
may have been simply dissembling his love, but this
will not prevent us from asking why he kicked the
dead poet, not downstairs, but in his coffin.
With Wilde as “an unproductive drunkard” I
have nothing to do here. I have already disproved
this double slander elsewhere on the most probatory
evidence. When I come, as I propose to do, to publish
a minute analysis of Renier’s odious compilation and
to examine its sources, I shall be able once again to
confound him and his brother-libellers on this point
also. Today my business —God knows with what
repugnance is with Shaw and Harris on the
“swindler” charge.
George Bernard Shaw’s present attitude on
Harris’s vile book in general and on the specific
falsehood about his having been swindled by Wilde
over the scenario of Mr. and Mrs. Daventry in par-
ticular is shown in the interview with the author of
The Apple Cart from the able pen of Mr. Hugh
Kingsmill, which I append to this exposure of the
falsity of the wicked charge. When with gratitude
and enthusiasm, I accepted Kingsmill’s chivalrous
offer to see Shaw on the subject of his ill-advised


recommendation of Harris’s book, it was in the hope
that Shaw would be sufficiently convinced of the way
in which he had been bamboozled by Harris to with-
draw this particular charge of swindling against
Wilde. All the rest of his letter of recommendation
left me unconcerned. Harris’s lies disprove them-
selves.
Well then, in his book Harris states that as soon
as Mr. and Mrs. Daventry was announced as forth-
coming at the Royalty Theatre, “a crowd of people”
claimed prior rights in the scenario of this play.
This statement alone should have opened Bernard
Shaw’s eyes. No writer for the stage in England
has had more experience of stage-craft than he. Did
not accordingly the questions present themselves to
his mind: “Did Mrs. Campbell in announcing Mr.
and Mrs. Daventry give a resume of the plot of the
new play? And if she did not and the play was just
announced in the same fashion as every other forth-
coming play staged in London is advertised, how the
dickens could Harris’s ‘crowd of people’ know what
it was about and so decide that it was based on a
scenario which they had bought from Wilde and in
which they had ‘valuable rights’?”
Harris’s phantom crowd of defrauded play-
wrights next dwindles down to a selection of persons,
whose names are given and of whom not one was a
playwright or could have bought a scenario from
Wilde with any intention of using it for the writing
of a play.


The first person Harris names as having been
swindled is Mrs. Brown-Potter, who, Harris says,
declared that she had “bought a play from Oscar
some years before for £IOO ( !)” Can Shaw see the
Oscar of The Importance of Being Earnest selling
a play for that sum? A play, mind you.
I may add, as regards this lady, that some years
after Oscar’s death she and Murray Carson were
staying at Guilsborough Hall with Irene Osgood
(the then Mrs. Sherard) and myself and that though
poor Wilde’s tragic story and career as a playwright
were discussed frequently and at great length
between us, not at any moment was anything said
by Mrs. Brown-Potter to indicate that she had ever
had any reason to complain of Wilde’s treatment of
her. Bien au contraire.
The other names given by Harris as having
been defrauded by Oscar Wilde by buying the sce-
nario which Harris had paid £SO for are Horace
Sedger, Beerbohm Tree, George Alexander, Olga
Nethersole, Leonard Smithers and Ada Rehan,
I am not at present in a position to state what
were the facts about Oscar’s transactions, if any,
with Miss Nethersole or with Horace Sedger; but
as to Tree and Alexander, is not Harris’s falsehood
so transparent that it ought not to have deceived
anyone? Tree was a very kindhearted man and had,
as he told me at the supper he gave to Lord Edward
Cecil at the Garrick Club, a real affection and the
greatest admiration for Wilde and it is quite possible


he may have advanced £SO, not as the purchase-price
of a complete scenario —he was rather better in-
formed as to the monetary value of a scenario by the
author of A Woman of No Importance than either
Frank Harris or G. B. Shaw—but as hansel on some
possible if problematic future work by the disgruntled
playwright. He would fully realize the importance
of giving earnest-money in this case and his good
heart would do the rest. Harris might have added
to his list of persons so defrauded the names of Hare
and Wyndham because both these gentlemen gave
Wilde money as a small advance on work which some
day he might be able to do for them, Sir Charles
coming specially over to Berneval to visit Wilde and
comfort him. As to Alexander, who is going to
believe that after cutting Wilde in the cruel and
heartless way at Napoule which Wilde has described
in one of his letters to Robert Ross, he would have
approached him in the matter of a £SO scenario.
That Wilde would have approached George
Alexander, after having been publicly snubbed by
him, is a proposition that does not demand one
moment’s investigation.
We now come to Smithers, whose case according
to Harris was the worst and most heartless of Oscar’s
fraudulent manoeuvres. Harris tells us that while
Mr. and Mrs. Daventry was in rehearsal, Smithers
“himself in dire need” came to him with a pathetic
story how when Oscar was in “absolute need” in
Italy he, Smithers, had induced a man named Roberts


to advance him £IOO on a play to be written by Wilde.
During his stay in Italy in 1897 Wilde was not ‘‘at
that time in absolute need”. The rent of his villa had
been prepaid by Bosie who had also procured for
him the sum of £2OO from his mother, the Marchio-
ness of Queensberry. Nor was Smithers in 1897 or
at any time during the remainder of Wilde’s life in
any “dire need”. He was going over weekly to
Dieppe and taking £6O in gold with him to be spent
on the “mud-honey” for which his soul craved. I
happen to know; for it was during one of his swine-
fugues to France, that I rescued from starvation in
the streets his hack, Ernest Dowson, and heard all
about Smithers from him while the author of
“Cynara” was slowly dying in my cottage at
Cat ford.
We have in the form of two letters from Oscar
Wilde to Smithers the clearest proof that if indeed
an offer was made to the playwright at Smithers’s
prompting by Roberts it was not accepted by Wilde.
The first of these letters was written on May 30th,
1899, from the Grand Cafe in Paris. I am unable to
give it in the poet’s own words as I am quoting only
from a French translation of it which is given on
page 167 of Henry Davray’s Oscar Wilde La
Tragedie Finale, but this is the message rendered
back again into English:
“Yon will, I suppose, be here tomorrow evening.
I know all about your arrangement with Roberts


—fixed up between you to make me accept a
small sum instead of proper terms. ‘You become
more and more interesting hour by hour’ to
quote from The Importance of Being Earnest.
Naturally there will have to be a new agreement
on the subject seeing that you hid the real
circumstances from me. You were only ‘the man
of straw’ —a new part, I hope, for you to play.
It is not a very pretty role. . . .”
On June 6th, he refers again to the matter in a
most amusing letter to Smithers, a kind of burlesque
parody of the Affaire Dreyfus, which proves that
there was nothing at all in the Roberts-Smithers
claim. Here is what he writes (page 168 of Davray’s
book) in my English:
“ With regard to the tedious Roberts
absurdity the statements made were made quite
seriously. He told B.—for example : ‘I suppose
Wilde has no idea that it is I who have his new
play’. What was I to think? Naturally, I thought
that it was you who wrote the bordereau and
had sold it to Schwartz-Koppen-S. . . . Hence,
VAffaire Smithers. Now, of course, you have
been acquitted and it is thus proved that the real
traitor is W. Esterhazy, assisted by Du Paty-
Roberts.”
This letter alone disposes of the Roberts-
Smithers claim, for “turning to mirth all things on


earth” as only Oscar could, it certainly does not
suggest that Oscar admitted any liability for money
to Smithers, inasmuch as it goes on to say: “I am
expecting your cheque for £l2”. One doesn’t demand
£l2 from a man to whom one owes £IOO.
On page 514 of his abominable Oscar Wilde
and His Confessions, Frank Harris admits that
before he consented to give Oscar £SO for the sce-
nario of the play and for the first act, he was made
aware by Oscar that Smithers “had tried to buy a
play” from him and that Oscar denied having come
to any arrangement with him on the subject. Who
is going to believe that, knowing there had been some
discussion between Oscar and Smithers on the
subject, the cautious Harris would pay Wilde the
£SO without first or at any subsequent time during
the few months which elapsed between this tre-
mendous financial operation and the writing of the
manuscript of Mr. and Mrs. Daventry, making the
most casual inquiry from Smithers as to the exact
nature of any transaction concerning a scenario by
Oscar Wilde and what money, if any, had been paid
to Oscar.
It is foolish to suppose that so sharp a prac-
titioner as Frank Harris would have paid Oscar
£SO, to be followed, according to his story, by two
other payments of the same amount if there had been
any doubt in his umbrageous mind as to the solidity
of his speculation, and as to the particular pig that
he was purchasing in that particular poke.


In fairness, however, to his manes I ought to
state that since this pamphlet was originally published
by me in England, I have received a letter from Lord
Alfred Douglas, (September yth, 1933), stating
that being in the Cafe Royal in London after the
premiere of Mr. and Mrs. Daventry, in the company
of Frank Harris, they were approached by Roberts,
who was favourably known to Lord Alfred, and that
then and there he showed them by a manuscript which
he produced and submitted that Harris’s play was
only a travesty of a play which had been sold to him
by Wilde. This, however, is flatly contradicted by
Harris himself where he writes in his account of
how Wilde had swindled him that Smithers had no
claim at all on a pre-empted Mr. and Mrs. Daventry,
that “the characters sketched by Oscar for Smithers
and Roberts were altogether different from mine
and were not known to me when I wrote my story.”
Who, then, is going to believe Harris when he
states that “about the twentieth representation of
his play I paid Smithers?” Paid him what, and
what for?
I don’t, and for the very good reason that
meeting a draggled and limping Smithers down and
out in Fleet Street some years later I took him into
the bar at The Cock and made him drink his fill, and
that while doing so he entertained me with a very
different story as to the way he had been treated by
Frank Harris, whom he described as “a blackmailing
swindler”.


w e now come to the last of the people whom
Harris names as having been swindled by Wilde—
Miss Ada Rehan. I commend the following passage
to the very special attention of Mr. George Bernard
Shaw. To my thinking this one passage alone justifies
me in saying that at the bottom of Harris’s abomi-
nable lies about “his friend” Oscar Wilde spite, envy,
malice and all uncharitableness were the prompting
motives.
The profound baseness of Frank Harris in this
matter demonstrates itself by the fact that in order
to adduce Robert Ross’s testimony, he actually
interpolated a forged passage into Ross’s pathetic
Oscar's Last Days. In this forgery Ross is made
to repeat the names of all the persons whom Wilde
had “swindled” over the scenario. This list of names
includes also that of Ada Rehan, but gives Louis
Nethersole not Miss Nethersole as one of Oscar’s
victims.
When this forgery was committed, namely in
1918, Robert Ross was dead and could not protest.
Had he been living, I think that even Ross would
not have allowed this use to be made of his name;
this lying fabrication to pass unchallenged. No one
better than Ross knew what had been the dealings
between Oscar and Ada Rehan when by hazard they
met in Paris in 1899, how Oscar had behaved on that
occasion and with what sentiments towards the un-
happy man the “swindled” Ada Rehan had parted
from him for the last time.


Since writing the above and publishing it in the
original edition of this pamphlet, I have received
from Reginald Turner who was Wilde’s devoted
friend, a letter which again in justice to the manes
of Frank Harris, I feel called upon to quote here.
He writes from Florence, after having carefully
perused the Swindler pamphlet:
“. ... I cannot agree that Harris interpolated
that passage in Ross’s letter Oscar’s Last Days.
It was "written to More Adey and I saw the
letter. One didn’t think so much of its possible
importance at the time or that it would ever be
reproduced. In any case I know it represents
Ross’s view roughly. Though, of course, views
change with time and both are sincere at their
own time. Moreover the letter was published
elsewhere before Robbie Ross’s death.”
As to this statement of Reginald Turner’s,
knowing Reggie’s absolute good faith, I cannot but
think that he must be mistaken in saying that he
actually saw this letter with the incriminated passage
in it as written by Robert Ross to More Adey, before
it was despatched to More Adey. Or his memory
may have failed him. I would rather believe this,
knowing that Harris had no scruples about inserting
deliberate forgeries into his text about Oscar to
bolster up his malicious fabrications, than that Ross
deliberately wrote what he knew to be lies. That


when it suited his purpose Harris did not hesitate
to commit forgery is notably demonstrated in the
alleged letter from Oscar to him, Harris, which he
prints on page 583 (Appendix) of his biography of
Wilde. In this letter supposed to have been written
from the Sandwich Hotel in Dieppe, where Oscar
stayed for a few days directly after his release from
Reading Gaol, he is represented as thanking Harris
for his “great kindness” to him, “for the lovely
clothes and for the generous cheque.” Any one
inclined to doubt that this letter is a sheer forgery
is invited to compare it with a letter as to the authen-
ticity of which there is no possible doubt which was
written just at this time by Wilde to More Adey
and which is quoted in extenso in Hugh Kingsmill’s
Life of Frank Harris, on page 102, in which Wilde
tells More Adey how shortly before his release Harris
visiting him in Reading Gaol had told him that
having made over £20,000 in South Africa, he pro-
posed sending him a cheque for £SOO before his
release. “I was very deeply moved,” wrote Wilde, “at
his generous present and made no attempt to conceal
my feelings, which were indeed beyond my control”.
“A few days later, Wilde continues,” relates Kings-
mill, “Harris sent him a message expressing his
regret at being unable to give him the promised
cheque.” Wilde then goes on to express his views
on Harris and this action of his. He says he loathes
promise makers. ... “I have nothing but contempt
for them” and concludes as to the generous cheque


and its donor, “The Frank Harrises of life are a
dreadful type. I hope to see no more of them”. And
simultaneously with this letter, Harris would have
one believe Wilde wrote him the letter which Harris
prints on page 583.
So I would rather believe that the message in
Ross’s letter with all deference to dear Reggie
Turner—is an interpolated forgery by Harris, than
that Ross was base enough to write it knowing it to
be false. I will remark en passant that in a letter
describing so tragic an occurrence as the death of
poor Oscar to so devoted a friend as was More Adey
it seems incredible that the writer should, almost on
the first page of his letter, linger with details over
such a trivial matter as a squabble of the dead man
with an absent correspondent. It is not the kind of
thing that a man telling such a terrible story would
put almost at the beginning of his letter. Of course,
horresco referens, I know that Robert Ross was by
no means the self-sacrificing, loyal, devoted friend
to whom with such enthusiasm I dedicated my first
book on Oscar, The Story of an Unhappy Friendship;
and that when Oscar called him The Mirror of
Perfect Friendship he forgot that there are mirrors
which distort, ridicule and disfigure. I have been
most reluctantly driven at long last to the conclusion
that Lord Alfred Douglas was on the whole right
about this man and that truth was not in him. All of
which I may be forced one day to establish and prove.
It would mean a great humiliation to myself, for it


would show me up as a very simpleton. But I suppose
that that is the common experience of any man who
finds out that the gods of his faith are liars, and too
late clamours querulously: “Who is it that I can
trust?”
Anyhow, there can be no possible contestation
of the fact that Robert Ross was perfectly well aware
of what had been the nature of the dealings between
Ada Rehan and Oscar Wilde after their meeting by
purest chance at Durand’s restaurant. Therefore,
if he did indeed write the lying passage, it only means
this—that the moment the breath was out of Wilde’s
body and there was nothing more in largesse or
entertainment or future advantage to be hoped for
from his lifeless clay, the ever scheming, always
self-centred and ferocious egotist whose name was
Robert Baldwin Ross turned his coat, and his native
perfidy and shrewd sense of where his interests
would lie in the future prompted him to do what
would please, flatter and serve Frank Harris —
Frank Harris, the wealthy and influential. For be
it remembered that Robert Ross was at this time
penniless and that such a friend as Frank Harris
might be to him was well worth cultivating. When
one remembers that immediately after Wilde’s death
he rummaged Wilde’s papers and appropriated, for
possible sinister future use, papers which because
they had been dearly cherished by his dead friend
should have been sacrosanct to him, one would not
be going too far if one stigmatized as dishonest and


perfidious his account of the meeting between Ada
Rehan and Oscar Wilde.
I am so fortunate as to possess a probatory
document about this meeting. It is an extract from
a book of considerable interest entitled; Time Was,
published in 1932 by Messrs. Hamish Hamilton
Ltd., a book of memoirs written by Mr. W. Graham
Robertson, R.8.A., R. 0.1., the distinguished artist
and man of letters and to have permission both from
him and from Mr. James Hamilton, M.A., L.L.8.,
managing director of Hamish Hamilton Ltd., to
publish this extract. I commend it to the attention
of Mr. Bernard Shaw and ask him when he has
perused it, whether my publication of Mr. Graham
Robertson’s narrative can honestly be described (to
quote his words in a letter to Mr. Hugh Kingsmill)
as a mere attempt to “throw a handful of soot on
Frank Harris” or whether it is not fully justified by
my wish to defend the memory of my friend against
the charge of having swindled Ada Rehan. I am
writing these lines, by the way, just 50 years after
I first met Wilde in Paris (March 1883) and can
frankly say that not once in all those 50 years did I
ever detect him in an untruth or find him guilty of a
mean and unworthy action —never once.
And now let us hear what Mr. Graham Robert-
son and Miss Ada Rehan have to say about the
meeting with him in Paris. I quote from page 230
of Time Was :


... he (Augustin Daly) died quite suddenly
in Paris * where he was staying on a holiday
with Mrs. Daly and Miss Rehan.
It was a terrible experience for the nervous,
sensitive Ada Rehan, and when I next saw her
I remember her telling me how much she had
been helped and sustained by Oscar Wilde,
whom she and her party had come across acci-
dentally a few evenings before. She and the
Dalys had been dining at a restaurant and,
looking up, she had seen Oscar Wilde sitting
with some man at a neighbouring table and
looking at her tentatively. It was after the tragic
shipzvreck of his life; he was a wanderer and
an exile, unrecognised by nearly all his former
friends —and there he suddenly was, looking at
her kindly and earnestly.
7 didn't know zvhat to do,’ she told me. ‘Mr.
and Mrs. Daly were with me and I could not tell
how they woidd feel about it. You never do
know with men when they are going to feel very
proper and when they are not!’
I agreed that the male sense of propriety was
liable to fluctuations.
‘And was Mr Daly feeling proper?’ I enquired.
‘No,’ said poor Ada, ‘he wasn’t. It was such
a relief: if I could not have bowed I should have
cried. So Mr. Wilde came over and sat with us
• Augustin Daly died on June 7th 1899.


and talked so charmingly—it was just like old
times—we had a lovely evening. And then, only
a few days later, Mr. Daly died. Arrangements
had to be made and Mrs. Daly was not equal to
taking them in hand. I seemed to he all alone
and so confused and frightened. And then Oscar
Wilde came to me and was more good and help-
fid than I can tell you—just like a very kind
brother. I shall always think of him as he was
to me through those few dreadful days/
This was the last direct news of Oscar Wilde
that I ever received. . . . ”
According to Harris, Wilde, whom he met in
the summer of 1899, was living at the time of this
rencontre with Ada Rehan, in “the mean little hotel”
in the rue des Beaux-Arts, where though he had
“come out in great red blotches” all over his arms
and back, he was busy carrying on a filthy intrigue
with the successor to the young soldier about whom
he had “confessed” to Harris when Harris accompa-
nied him on the journey to Napoule, which never
took place. Wilde, as a matter of fact, at the time he
met Ada Rehan was living at the Hotel Marsollier.
It seems to me quite possible that “the other
man” with whom the Dalys and Miss Rehan saw
him dining at Durand’s was none other than Harris
and that the latter not being invited to join the party
at Daly’s table, conceived an augmentation of jealous
spite against his friend and revenged himself by


giving a perfectly false account of his meeting with
the American actress. In any case he knew of their
having met and thought that this fact would lend
some artistic verisimilitude to his story of what
passed between them.
Frankly, could one hope by throwing at him all
the soot in the world to blacken such a man?
Harris’s motive in accusing Wilde of dishonesty
in the matter of the scenario proceeds from the time-
honoured artifice of the pickpocket, who yells “Stop
Thief” and accuses the man he has robbed.
Harris basely defrauded Wilde over Mr. and
Mrs. Daventry. I commend to the special attention
of Dr. Renier the following extract from a letter
which Lord Alfred Douglas wrote me in March of
last year. Dr. Renier will of course not contest
Douglas’s evidence, for he has put it on record that
Douglas’s writings “concerning Oscar Wilde are
indispensable and patently sincere”.
“About Mr. and Mrs. Daventry”, he writes,
“I have always believed that Oscar’s rage and
indignation against Harris about this killed
him. Harris completely ruined the play and
never paid Oscar his share of the royalties.”
He then refers me to the story published in
The Bookman of New York (April-May, 1930) by
T. H. Bell, who was at one time secretary to Harris
and who exposed Harris’s conduct in extenso. Un


fortunately Bell’s story of the Harris-Wilde asso-
ciation over Mr. and Mrs. Daventry is completely
discredited by the fact that he adds to it an entirely
imaginary account of how Harris, hearing Wilde
was in extremis, sent him, Bell, over to Paris with a
large sum of money for Oscar’s relief, and of how
he arrived to find Oscar dead on his bed, with Sisters
of Mercy watching the corpse in a candle-lighted
room. Bell’s story is pure fake. Harris never sent
him to Paris; Harris gave him no money to take to
Oscar. Long before any train started for Paris on
December first, Harris knew that Oscar was dead
and beyond the need of charity. Bell not only never
went to the hotel d’Alsace but has no idea what the
house looked like. He speaks of entering the hotel
by its side-entrance and of stepping from the stair-
case directly into Oscar’s death chamber. The hotel
d’Alsace has no side-entrance. To get to the room
where in His Mercy God released my friend, one has
to pass through an ante-room. Two men were in
attendance in the house of death, Robert Ross and
Reginald Turner. Bell says he gave the money he
had brought over for Oscar to one of the two, which
he cannot remember. He certainly did not give it to
Ross, or the latter would have mentioned the fact in
his account of what happened at the hotel between
the death and the funeral. He says not a word of
any visit from Bell dona ferens. As to receiving any
money through him from Harris he is also silent.
That there was scarcity of cash is shown by the fact


that on the bill owing to Dupoirier by Oscar at the
hotel, which amounted to 2,268 francs, Ross was
only able to give the devoted landlord 200 francs on
account, leaving a debt of 2068 francs, which was
not settled till years later.
As to Reginald Turner, here is what he wrote
me from Florence on April 24th of this year:
“I hasten to answer your question. Though I
couldn’t swear in a Court of Law that Harris
didn’t send his secretary to the Hotel after
Oscar’s death, I could swear that he never got
there. I was there all that day and among the
various callers there was no one from Harris
and no money from anyone. Had any been
handed to Ross he would certainly have told me.”
I will add that I had it from my late friend
Louis Fabulet, that his friend and collaborator
Viscount Robert d’Humieres was convinced that
Harris’s treatment of the “swindler” Wilde over
Mr. and Mrs. Daventry so maddened the unhappy
playwright that he laid violent hands on himself and
that his death was suicide. I hardly agree. I know
Oscar’s view on suicide: “The greatest compliment
a man can pay to society.” Of course the means
were close to hand. His agony was so great from the
tumour in his ear that morphia injections were cons-
tantly being administered to numb the pain and the
bottle of the divine anaesthetic was within his reach.


The Pravaz syringe with which Dupoirier used to
administer up to 80 injections a day to Wilde, as
well as his gold mounted denture were on sale at the
hotel, two years after his death.
Altogether, was it nice of Bernard Shaw, on
the strength of Harris’s statement to write of Oscar
as dying a “swindler” and so to encourage Dr. Renier
to make about him the abominable assertion which
I have quoted from page 154 of his compilation?
It is true that Dr. Renier having on pages 106, 107
and 108 of the said compilation depicted Wilde on
the sole evidence of an approved liar, Andre Gide,
as a monster and a criminal of the vilest type may
well have considered it an anticlimax and venial
just to add a mild charge of dishonesty against the
dead man.
And now to listen to what George Bernard
Shaw’s present attitude is towards Harris’s book
which he so strongly recommended to the public and
from which Renier took the wicked lie I have exposed,
as recorded by Hugh Kingsmill who in this was
prompted alone by motives of piety and reverence:


AN INTERVIEW WITH
MR. GEORGE BERNARD SHAW
In the summer of this year (1932), Mr. Robert
Sherard wrote to me about my study of Frank
Harris, which had appeared in the spring. In the
course of this study, I had shown again and again,
while analysing Harris’s Autobiography, that he
was completely unable to discriminate between what
had happened and what he preferred to think had
happened, whether in his own life or the lives of
others. By the time I reached Harris’s biography
of Wilde, charity or exhaustion had weakened my
detective zeal, and, while taking the same general
view of Harris’s attitude to Wilde as Mr. Sherard
takes in the following pages, I accepted as true the
legend of the yacht at Frith and two or three other
important episodes of the book.
Mr. Sherard, in his letter, put me right on these
points, and, after some further correspondence, sent
me his destructive and absolutely convincing analysis
of Harris’s Wilde. I wrote to Mr. Sherard, who was
in Corsica, saying that Mr. Shaw ought to see this
analysis, which would convince him of his mistake
in endorsing Harris’s Wilde as the book by which
Wilde must stand or fall. Mr. Sherard consented
to my approaching Bernard Shaw on the matter.
I therefore wrote to Mr. Shaw, giving the most
important points in Mr. Sherard’s indictment of
Harris. Mr. Shaw replied that no doubt the famous


lugger (the yacht at Erith) existed only in Frank’s
imagination, but that he was certain it would have
materialised had Oscar consented. He went on to
say, in defence of Harris’s pictures of Wilde’s un-
restrained debauchery in his last years, that it was
clearly not plain living and high thinking which
prevented Wilde writing in Paris; and he ended by
suggesting that to convict Harris of a hundred lies
would not discredit his powers of portraiture, though
it might rake up all the mud into which Oscar finally
sank, and once more obscure and befoul his very
considerable literary achievements and the moment-
ary nobilities of which he was capable. “My verdict
on Frank’s Memoir,” he wrote, “stands until I read
a better one.”
A postcard accompanied this letter. Mr. Shaw
suggested on it that I should persuade Sherard to
let poor Oscar alone, and not take up his vaguely
remembered disgraces for the sake of throwing
another handful of soot at Harris, which wouldn’t
whitewash Oscar. The postcard concluded with an
invitation to come and talk the matter over.
On the Sunday before I called on Mr. Shaw,
London was placarded with “OSCAR WILDE’S
ARREST”; for the serialisation of Edward
Marjoribank’s Life of Lord Carson, in the Sunday
Express, had just reached that important moment
in Lord Carson’s career. When Mr. Shaw opened
our talk by expressing his regret that Wilde’s follies
could not be left in the oblivion which was fast


covering them, I asked him what he thought of the
placards announcing Oscar Wilde’s arrest which
were on view throughout London on the previous
Sunday. Mr. Shaw, who had spent the week-end
in the country, was taken aback. I pressed the point
as far as I could. It was indeed more than a point, it
was a complete and unassailable argument for saving
Wilde from liars and sensation-mongers. But in
the verbal prize-ring the effect of a knock-down blow
is entirely neutralised if its recipient chooses to
overlook the fact that it has been delivered. “You
know”, said Mr. Shaw, “Harris’s Wilde is far more
interesting than the real Wilde.”
“But, Mr. Shaw, the point isn’t whether Harris’s
Wilde is more interesting than Wilde was. The point
is whether his biography deserves to be endorsed by
you as the authoritative life by which Wilde must
stand or fall. You call Wilde, on the strength of
Harris’s picture of his last days, ‘an unproductive
drunkard and swindler’. If you would look through
Sherard’s manuscript, I am sure you would not send
down this phrase uncorrected to posterity.” I then
gave in outline the evidence which Mr. Sherard had
collected from Wilde’s landlord, and from Monsieur
Chiappe, Prefect of the Paris Police, evidence which
conclusively showed that Harris’s picture was a
malicious slander. Mr. Shaw looked thoughtful over
Monsieur Chiappe. I felt that I was getting him
into a corner, but a moment later he was back in the
middle of the ring, listening with courteous attention


to my attack on the disgusting and ridiculous scene
in which Harris saddles Wilde with his own dislike
of women during pregnancy.
‘‘Ah, yes, yes. Ah, to be sure. Yes, yes.”
No wonder, I thought, the Irish problem is
insoluble.
‘‘lt’s not a question of whitewashing Wilde,” I
persisted, “or even of taking Sherard’s view of him.
It’s simply a question of making it clear that no
confidence at all is to be placed in Harris’s Wilde,
which on the strength of your endorsement is every-
where accepted as the true account of Wilde.”
“Oscar could be really charming at times. . .. ”
At the end of an hour I gave it up. Mr. Shaw
escorted me out of his flat and along the passage to
the lift. I entered the lift, which contained three
women, and as it began to descend I saw Mr. Shaw
smiling benignly down on me. “Bernard Shaw!” the
three women gasped. It was an impressive moment,
but it would have been more impressive to me if Mr.
Shaw had consented to repair the damage which he
had done to the most brilliant wit and dramatist of
his generation.
Public men are naturally reluctant to impair
their prestige by withdrawing their pronouncements.
But in this instance Mr. Shaw had simply to remind
the world that since giving his endorsement of
Harris’s Wilde he had experienced in his own person
what it felt like to be the subject of a biography by
Frank Harris—an experience the rigours of which,


he has himself told us, he very wisely mitigated by
revising Harris’s Bernard Shaw before publication,
and in many places entirely rewriting it.
HUGH KINGSMILL
London, November 1932.
Note Mr. Kingsmill’s interview with Mr.
Shaw was originally intended to be used as a preface
to my as yet unpublished book: George, Frank and
Oscar described lower down in the interview. En-
thusiastically recommended by his reader, it was
accepted for publication by Mr. Werner Laurie, who
three weeks later changed his mind and withdrew
the inadequate offer he had made for it. It was then
sent in turn to John Lane, Gerald Duckworth and
Jonathan Cape of whom the two latter publishers at
least never even opened Curtis Brown’s parcel, for
when this eventually homed to Corsica it was found
to contain a note from the agent’s manager to some
member of Gerald Duckworth’s staff. In America
Horace Liveright and Brentano’s admired it greatly
but the slump was then at its blackest and Frank
Harris being entirely discredited in the U. S. A.
where poor Oscar no longer “cuts much ice” and
George Bernard Shaw of The Apple Cart and other
worse fiascos ranks as a hasbeen and a backnumber,
a book about these three gentlemen was not con-
sidered to have “great sales’ possibilities”. The same
reason for its rejection was given me only quite


recently by A. A. Knopf, Inc., who, though they
described it as “absorbing” reading, considered that
as both Wilde and Harris were dead and Harris’s
Life of Shaw had aroused no interest in the States,
a book mainly concerned with these three people was
not likely to be very profitable. The painful fact
seems to be as was impressed upon me by a cynical
London editor, who, however, utterly failed to con-
vince me, that the public is interested only in Wilde
as perverted, a criminal, and a monster and not in
the least in the Wilde Ada Rehan has pictured and
whom I have known, admired, and loved for over
fifty years.
On reading this interview, I couldn’t help feeling
that Shaw’s contemptuous refusal even to glance at
my proof of Harris’s falsehoods may have been
prompted by some rancour he harboured against my
humble self who thirty-six years ago with my little
book The White Slaves of England, accomplished
in ten weeks what Shaw and his cunctating brother-
Fabians had failed to do in ten years of soap-box-
orating: forced England to recognize the rights of
her very poor. As usual, it is mainly the wrong
people who have profited by the revolution I then
brought about but some lasting good was done. But
enough. My task today is a more arduous one.
Heavens! The task of shooing hyaenas away
from the graves of the illustrious dead! !
ROBERT HARBOROUGH SHERARD.
Calvi, Corsica,
July Z ist, 1933. {Revhed June> 19}4)


The Fortune Press, Inc., Chicago
Published by
THE ARGUS BOOK SHOP, Inc.
Chicago, 111.
