

AN ACT
No. 1, 1900.
To CREATE A New DIOOESE IN THE COLONY OF VICTORIA AND TO
PROVIDE FOE THE APPOINTMENT OF THE FIEST BISHOP THEREOF
AND THE MAINTENANCE OF THE See.
WHEREAS it is desirable that the Diocese of Melbourne shall Preamble
be subdivided and that so much of the said Diocese as is
described in the First Schedule hereto be severed therefrom and
constituted a Diocese to be called the Diocese of Sandhurst and
Beechworth Be it therefore enacted by the Bishop the Clergy
and the Laity of the Church of England within the Diocese of
Melbourne duly met in Assembly according to law as follows:—•
1. From and after the installation of a Bishop of Sandhurst Boundaries of
and Beechworth all that portion of the Colony of Victoria com- " e " '° ce>,e '
prised within the boundaries defined in the First Schedule hereto
shall be severed from the Diocese of Melbourne and shall become
and be a separate Diocese to be called the Diocese of Sandhurst
and Beechworth of which Bendigo shall be the See.
2. The dividing boundary line between the Diocese of Map of new
** Diocess.
Melbourne and the Diocese of Sandhurst and Beechworth as
described in the said Schedule shall be shown on a map or plan
which shall be drawn in duplicate and each plan purporting on
its face to be a duplicate shall when certified under the hand of
the Bishop of Melbourne and the Bishop of Sandhurst and
Beechworth be conclusive evidence of the dividing boundary line
between the two Dioceses.


Jurisdiction to 8. If at anyplace or places there be now or hereafter shall
neighbouring be at such place or places a Church or Churches in the
certain 6 eases. Diocese of Melbourne within one mile of the border of the
Diocese of Sandhurst and Beeohworth or vice versa while in the
adjoining Diocese of Melbourne or Sandhurst and Beeohworth
there is not at such place or places a Church within two miles of
the border the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Diocese within
which such Church or Churches are situate both parochial
and diocesan shall if the Bishops of Melbourne and Sandhurst
and Beeohworth consent extend into the adjoining Diocese for
such distance as shall be agreed upon in each case by such
Bishops but not exceeding two miles in depth from the
boundary and six miles in breadth along the boundary the line
defining such extra-territorial jurisdiction both as to depth
and breadth to be in each case agreed to by both the said
Bishops Provided that such jurisdiction shall not approach
nearer than one mile from any Church on the other side of the
border Provided also that if a Church be built on the other
side of the border within two miles of the boundary the said
extra-territorial jurisdiction shall cease and determine.
Bishop of 4. Until the installation of the first Bishop of Sandhurst
Melbourne to _ _ , ~ , . , „ _ r ~ in
exercise powers and Beechworth the Bishop of Melbourne shall exercise in
of 1 Bishop of ‘that portion of the Diocese of Melbourne described in the
leechworth nd First Schedule hereto all the powers and authorities hereby
vested in the Bishop of Sandhurst and Beechworth when
installed and if there shall be a vacancy in the See of Mel-
bourne before such installation the person administering the
affairs thereof shall during such vacancy perform all or any
of such duties as aforesaid and shall as soon as conveniently
may he after the arrival of such Bishop within the said Diocese
take order for his installation in some Church therein to be
selected by the Nominating Committee hereinafter provided.
Nomination of S. As soon as may be after the Council of the Diocese of
iandhurst P and Melbourne is of opinion that the financial arrangement
committee! 1 by contained in the Second Schedule hereto can be carried out
the Bishop of Melbourne shall convene a Committee as
hereinafter provided to nominate directly or by delegation


as such Committee shall determine a Bishop or Priest to
be the first Bishop of Sandhurst and Beechworth and as soon
as may be after such nomination the Bishop of Melbourne shall
take the necessary steps for giving effect thereto in accordance
with the rules for the confirmation and consecration
of Bishops and the election of Primates made by the
General Synod of the Dioceses of Australia and Tasmania on
the Ist day of October a.d. 1896 and adopted by this Assembly
on the 19th day of November a.d. 1896 or with such other rules
for the like purpose as may hereafter be made by any such
General Synod and be adopted by this Assembly.
6. The said Committee shall consist of the Bishop of Melbourne
and 18 Members namely 8 Clerical and 3 Lay Members to be
selected from among their own number by the Board of Electors
of the Diocese of Melbourne appointed under the provisions of
Act No. 4 1878 together with 3 Clerical and 8 Lay Members
to be selected by and from the Clerical and Lay Representatives
of the Archdeaconry of Beechworth and 8 Clerical and 8 Lay
Members to be selected by and from the Clerical and Lay
Representatives of the Archdeaconry of Sandhurst Such elec-
tions shall be certified to the Bishop of Melbourne in writing by
the Chairman of the Board of Electors and by the Acting-
Archdeacon of Beechworth and the Archdeacon of Sandhurst
respectively The members of the Committee shall have power to
decide as to all matters connected with the election of the Bishop
of Sandhurst and Beechworth but no election shall be valid unless
a majority of the Clerical and a majority of the Lay Members of
the Committee certify in writing to the Bishop of Melbourne
their assent thereto.
Constitution and
powers of
Nominating-
Committee.
7. In case of a vacancy occurring in the Committee the
remaining members of the Committee shall fill the same by
election of a Clerical or Lay Member of the Board of Electors
of the Diocese of Melbourne or of a Clerical or Lay Member of
the Church Assembly representing a parish or parochial district
in the Archdeaconry in respect of which the vacancy has occurred
as the case may be and the acts of the Committee whether it be
complete in number or otherwise shall be valid to all intents and
purposes whatsoever.
Vacancies on
Committee.


8. The maintenance of the See shall be secured in manner
specified in the Second Schedule hereto and the moneys payable
under Clauses 1 and 8 respectively of such Schedule shall be
treated as income unless the Church Assembly of the Diocese of
Sandhurst and Beeehworth shall otherwise determine.
9. In the event of the income of the Bishop of the Diocese of
Sandhurst and Beeehworth from, other endowments being less
than £BOO per annum such income shall be made up to that sum
from the amount received by the said Diocese under Clause 1 of
the Second Schedule hereto.
10. Subject to the proviso hereinafter contained the manage-
ment of the property referred to in Section 1 of the Second
Schedule hereto shall continue to be wholly controlled by the
Trustees of the property under the direction of the Bishop in
Council of the Diocese of Melbourne Provided always that no
sale mortgage or other security shall be given by the said
Trustees over the said property or any portion thereof without
the consent in writing of the Trusts Corporation of the Diocese
of Sandhurst and Beeehworth Annual statements of accounts
with reference to such management duly audited by the Auditors
of the said Diocese of Melbourne shall be furnished to the
Bishop of Sandhurst and Beeehworth and shall be conclusive
evidence as to the net rental of the said property available for
distribution between the Diocese of Melbourne and the Diocese
of Sandhurst and Beeehworth.
11. The property specified in Clause 2 of the Second Schedule
hereto and all other properties and all moneys situated or being
in that part of the Diocese of Melbourne which after the coming
into operation of this Act will be a part of the Diocese of
Sandhurst and Beeehworth and which are vested in the Church
of England Trusts Corporation for the Diocese of Melbourne or
other official trustees of the said Diocese shall remain vested in
the said Corporation or the said official trustees as the case may
be for the benefit of the Diocese of Sandhurst and Beeehworth
until a properly constituted Trusts Corporation be appointed for
such Diocese when all such properties or moneys and any


securities or investments representing the same respectively as
the case may be shall be duly vested in the last mentioned Cor-
poration subject to any liabilities existing in connection therewith.
12. When a Trusts Corporation for the Diocese of Sandhurst Trusts corpora-
L . tion or Bishop
and Beechworth shall have been duly appointed all moneys to of Sandhurst
. ... , and Beechworth
which the said Diocese may become entitled shall be paid to suon to receive
Trusts Corporation for the benefit of the said Diocese and until Diocese,
such Trusts Corporation shall be appointed the income derived
from all such moneys as aforesaid shall be paid to the Bishop of
Sandhurst and Beechworth upon trust for the benefit of the said
Diocese and his receipt shall be a sufficient discharge for the same.
13. When a Bishop of Sandhurst and Beechworth shall have Powers, &e., of
been installed he shall be a Bishop within the meaning of the Sandhurst and
First Section of Act 18 Victoria No. 45 and shall have
and may exercise within the limits of the Diocese of Sand-
hurst and Beechworth all the powers and authorities which a
Bishop of the Church of England in Victoria may lawfully
exercise and shall be for all purposes the successor of the Bishop
of Melbourne in such Diocese.
14. All Acts of the Church Assembly which shall be in
Acts of the
force in the Diocese of Melbourne at the time of the instal-
Assembly to be
lation of the first Bishop of Sandhurst and Beechworth aiTereTby"*' 1
shall be binding upon the Bishop Clergy and Laity in the
Diocese of Sandhurst and Beechworth so far as the same
may be applicable to or be capable of being carried out within
such Diocese until the same shall be revoked or altered by any
Assembly convened by the Bishop of the Diocese of Sandhurst
and Beechworth in accordance with the provisions of the
Act 18 Victoria No. 45 or of any Act passed under the
authority thereof Provided however that this Act shall not be
revoked or altered by the Church Assembly of either Diocese
without the consent of the other.
15. Any Clerk who holds or shall hold a ministerial charge in clergy passing
J _ to new Diocese
the Diocese of Sandhurst and Beechworth shall be eligible tor eligible for
appointment to any ministerial charge in the Diocese of Melbourne Diocese of
pari passu with Clerks holding licenses in that Diocese and any 1
such Clerk who is a subscriber to the Clergy Widow and


Orphans’ Fund of the Diocese of Melbourne or to the Super-
annuation Fund of the said Diocese formed under the provisions
of the Act of the Church Assembly No. 8 1882 and whose
Reservation of subscription or subscriptions shall then have been dulv paid mav
rights of Clergy .. , . • /i J
passing to new continue to be a subscriber to either or both of the said Funds
Clergy widow may participate in the benefits thereof although he be no
Fund, &c.
longer a resident in the Diocese of Melbourne Any Clerk who
holds or shall hold a ministerial charge in the Diocese of
Sandhurst and Beeohworth shall also be entitled to become a
member of any Provident Fund superseding the abovemen-
tioned Funds which may hereafter be established in the Diocese
of Melbourne on payment of schedule rates Nothing in this
Act shall affect the eligibility of theological students from
the Diocese of Sandhurst and Beeohworth to any theological
scholarship or studentship which up to the time of the passing
of this Act shall have been established at Trinity College for
the benefit of candidates for the ministry of the Church in the
Diocese of Melbourne.
Declaration
by Bishop.
16. On the installation of a Bishop of Sandhurst and
Beeohworth he shall make and subscribe a declaration in the
form set forth in the Third Schedule hereto.
Schedules to
Act.
17. All the Schedules hereto shall be read as and taken to be
and form a portion of this Act.
When Act to
come into
18. This Act shall come into operation so soon as the proposal
to form the Diocese of Sandhurst and Beeohworth shall have
been assented to by a majority of the Clerical and Lay
Representatives in this Assembly of the portion of the Diocese
of Melbourne intended to be formed into the said Diocese of
Sandhurst and Beechworth and the Primate shall be satisfied
that a sufficient endowment has been secured for the maintenance
of the See and the Council of the Diocese of Melbourne is of
opinion that the financial arrangement contained in the Second
Schedule hereto can be carried out.
operation.
Short title of
Act.
19. This Act may be cited as “The Sandhurst and Beechworth
Diocese Act 1900.”


FIRST SCHEDULE,
Description of Boundaries.
Commencing at the junction of the River Loddon with the
River Murray thence along the eastern boundary of the Diocese
of Ballarat to the Great Dividing Range thence along the
Great Dividing Range and along the north-eastern boundary of
the County of Evelyn to Mount Baw Baw thence in a straight
line north-easterly to Mount Useful on the Great Dividing Range
thence by the Great Dividing Range to the eastern boundary of
the Colony of Victoria at Forest Hill thence northerly and
westerly along the boundary line between the Colonies of New
South Wales and Victoria to the commencing point Provided
that the Parochial District of Omeo shall not be included in
the Diocese of Sandhurst and Beechworth but shall continue
to be a part of the Diocese of Melbourne.
SECOND SCHEDULE.
1. Twenty-five per cent, per annum of the net rental of
St. James’s property Melbourne after the payment of all interest
rates taxes assessments repairs cost of collection and all other
outgoings whatsoever in connection with the said property or the
ownership thereof Provided that if in any year 25 per cent, of
the said net rental be less than JO 1800 such deficiency shall be
made up to the Diocese of Sandhurst and Beechworth from the
Consolidated Fund of the Diocese of Melbourne.
2. Investments now constituting or representing the “ Hastie
Bequest.”
3. Twenty per cent, per annum during ten years of the
income of the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund derived from offer-
tories and contributions and after the tenth year the percentage
shall be sixteen per cent, twelve per cent, eight per cent, and
four per cent, in the next four following years respectively.


8 . X
4. Tke undermentioned debts due in respect of advances on
the security of promissory notes from Funds of the Diocese of
Melbourne in aid of the erection of church buildings in the
Archdeaconries of Beeohworth and Sandhurst, viz.:—Moyhu,
£47; Shepparton, £222; Dry Diggings, £6l; Nathalia, £117;
Heathcote, £3O; Numurkah, £B7; Wodonga, £2; Macorna,
£100; Emu Creek, £76; Yalca, £75; Narioka, £18; Eochester,
£ll2.
THIRD SCHEDULE.
1 A. B. do solemnly and sincerely declare my acceptance of
the Act 18 Victoria No. 45 and of the Act 86 Victoria No. 454
and that I will to the best of my ability give effect thereto and
to the Acts passed in pursuance thereof until the same or any
of them shall respectively be lawfully altered or varied.
[Passed and assented to sth October 1900.]
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, Printers, Melbourne.
