

CHRIST and CRITICISM:
AN EXAMINATION OF
MODERN NATURALISM IN RELIGION.
“ By not grasping too desperately at the view which more strikingly involves
the supernatural, we have received back with ‘full measure pressed down and
running over,’ the assurance that God was really speaking here.
“ If, in that first burst of joyous surprise, Messianic references of the most
definite kind were found where we now can see only faint hints and adum-
brations, we need not wonder.’" Professor Harper, on Deuteronomy.
MELBOURNE:
MELVILLE, MULLEN & SLADE, 262 & 264 Collins Street.
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS IN TOWN AND COUNTRY.
1896.




CHRIST and CRITICISM:
AN EXAMINATION OF
MODERN NATURALISM IN RELIGION.
BY THE
Rev. R. LEWERS TAYLOR,
PRESBYTERIAN MINISTER, FLEMINGTON.
“ By not grasping too desperately at the view which more strikingly involves
the supernatural, we have received back with ‘full measure pressed down and
running over,’ the assurance that God was really speaking here.” . . .
“ If, in that first burst of joyous surprise, Messianic references of the most
definite kind were found where we now can see only faint hints and adum-
brations, we need not wonder.” — Professor Harper, on Deuteronomy.




CHRIST AND CRITICISM.
“I am the owner of the Sphere,
Of the seven stars and the solar year,
Of Caesar’s hand and Plato’s brain,
Of Lord Christ’s heart and Shakespeare’s brain.”— Emerson.
I.
We live in an age when all religious faiths are made the
subject of historical investigation. The world’s re-
ligions are placed alongside of one another, and minutely
compared; their resemblances and their differences are
noted; the elements common to them all are grouped
together and unified. The process is first analytic and
then synthetic. It is the basis on which all modern
criticism of religion rests. It may be called the study
of comparative religion.
The method of study is simple. Each religion is
pushed back to its earliest beginnings; its natural
elements are examined; its natural growth is explained
along the line of its traditions—especially its written
traditions. The process of its historical development is
thus gradually unfolded by experts before our eyes,
and finally accounted for without the aid of any
miraculous element. There is no special and so-called


“supernatural revelation” in any of them. Ihe human
mind, conditioned by certain surroundings, naturally
evolves the various religions of the world. The
Israelitish and Christian religions are no exceptions, and
present no specific difference from any other forms of
religious development, there is no “chosen nation,
and no special revelation given to a “peculiar people.”
For if we think there is something special about our own
religion, other nations also think there is something
special about theirs.
In this spirit Max Muller recently gives us four
volumes on world-religions. They are entitled respect-
ively—Natural, Physical, Anthropological, and Psycho-
logical Religion. These titles are an index of naturalism
in religion. Each of them rounds off a great period in its
development. The religion of the Old and New Testa-
ments takes its place in the general treatment, and
merits highest praise. But the author is generous, and
the other religions of the world also come in for praise.
Heathen religion is vindicated from those aspersions
which are cast upon it by too eager Christian apologists,
who wish to uphold their own faith at the expense of all
others. There is a levelling-up of other religions, and a
little levelling-down of Old and New Testament religion,
and then the whole process of natural evolution is seen
at a glance. Now, of course, this historical examination
of the Christian faith is inevitable, because, like all
the other great religions of the world, it is on one side of it
natural, and it is also historical—set in human conditions
and expressed in the frailty of human language. This
is the half-truth on which Max Muller builds, and it


may be freely admitted that hitherto this natural side of
the Christian religion has been somewhat neglected by
theologians and apologists.
Indeed, most Christian people are of a very conserva-
tive turn of mind and are very nervous about this kind
of investigation. But it is simply hopeless to expect
that Christianity can escape such treatment. The
Scripture literature called the Bible gives a very toler-
able basis for Max Muller’s argument. The true position
to take up, then, is to admit all these facts on which
naturalism builds; to admit the natural and historical
development of Christianity so far; to admit that it may
and must be subjected to the most searching inquiry as
to its crude beginnings, its varied and unequal literature,
its false and tiue traditions; and to be quite willing,
when all the facts are weighed, that it should take its
chance with the rest. Then we must go on to show
that there is another side, overlooked often by the investi-
gators, and yet presenting phenomena which are entitled
to careful consideration, and which make good the claim
of the Christian religion to be not merely natural and
historical, but also, in the midst of this, supernatural and
divine m a sense that can be said of no other.
If this attitude be taken, the investigation will not
prove an unmixed evil. Indeed, there are apparent
everywhere in it very hopeful elements. There have
been many periods in the history of religious thought
when a similar spirit prevailed to that prevailing amongst
us now. Those periods issued, through intellectual
struggle, in great achievement. To the men who witnessed
them such movements often seemed to consist in mere


disintegration and destruction, but they afterwards issued
in revival and rejuvenescence. Many examples might
be given in illustration of this truth. In early, and
mediaeval, and modern religious thought the “time-spirit”
has given partial and often perverted interpretations of
Christianity, which, with philosophic plausibility or dog-
matic intensity, have obscured its most precious elements,
But in the end the Christian faith has been none the
worse for such impositions and perversions. On the
contrary, it has been helped rather than hindered by the
obstacles thrown in the path of its onward progress.
Perhaps the most convincing illustration of this is to be
found in the Renaissance. The Christianity of that
period was overlaid with formalism and superstition.
There came a widespread intellectual movement, whose
impact fell upon scholasticism, and sent it to its doom.
The cultured and critical spirit gained the ascendency,
treating the uncritical and unhistorical and narrow
scholastics with derision. The results were remark-
able. Many were driven into scepticism, and in some
respects the consequences of the Revival of Learning
were deplorable, proving that mere intellectuality was
quite insufficient for itself. But in other ways, and
in far more important issues, the results were simply
marvellous. It drove the earnest spirits into a deeper
search for the great essentials of religion. It instituted
a new series of studies in the field of Scripture, where the
student critic was able to compare his conclusions,
obtained at first hand, with the doctrines of the
established religion. The consequence was that the
established ecclesiasticism, both of thought and polity,


was broken into fragments, and out of the ruins arose
men like Erasmus and Reuchlin, and then Luther, &c.,
and then the final glory of the Reformation.
And so our own time of destructive criticism points to
a better and nobler future for the church. To some
sensitive souls it may seem a humiliation to Christianity
to proceed in this way to examine its credentials. But
Christianity has submitted to many such, and, indeed,
to worse humiliations, some of them lasting for centuries,
and has risen out of them like Christ Himself—more
glorious than ever. So, if it can, in the newer light,
make good its claim, it will pass through this present
movement only to issue in a higher revelation of itself to
the minds of men.
II.
Let us try and set clearly before our minds the task
which “ naturalism” has undertaken. Max Muller
leaves no doubt as to his principles, methods, and con-
clusions. Here is a sentence from his “ Natural
Religion” (page 237):—“1f we see with what natural
feelings and simple sentiments religion began, and
then follow its course till it reaches that perfect, or at
all events, that complete state in which we find it in
later times, we shall hardly think that we degrade
religion by accepting it as the most precious product of the
human mind (the italics are mine), nor shall we consider
man as robbed of his dignity, because on the day of his
birth the gods did not descend from heaven to present
him with a religion ready-made or reduced to settled
creeds and finished articles of faith, but left him to


grow and to learn to stand on his own legs, and to
fight his own battle in the struggle for truth.”
Now, that is naturalism . Again, here is his definition
of Christianity:—“What we call Christianity embraces
several fundamental doctrines, but the most important
of them all is the recognition of the divine in man, or,
as we call it, the belief in the divinity of the son.”—
Mark the small d and small s! He adds, . . . “the
discovery of the divine in man has been surrounded
with a legendary halo . . . has been changed into
mere mythology, so that its real meaning has often
been quite forgotten, and has to be discovered again
by honest and fearless seeking.”
Nothing could be plainer than that. It is thorough-
going naturalism. It explains the Israelitish and Chris-
tian religions of the Old and New Testaments as it would
explain the development of Buddhism or Mohammeda-
nism by a natural process, open and bare to the eye of
reason. The only supernatural in Christianity worthy
of credence is the supernatural which belongs to all
religions, and which is only more complete, but not
necessarily final, in Christianity. It may not be the
ultimate religion. It is merely the most complete we
know, and we may be in process of evolving a better one,
and Max Muller and the rest may be factors in the
process. Therefore Christ Himself may be merely
transitional and so anything like Deity must not be
ascribed to Him, except in the manner in which we are
all divine. The unique position of the prophets of the
Old Testament, and of the Christ of the New Testament,
and the supernatural specialty of the revelation conveyed


by them are swept away, and called with splendid
patronage “legendary halo.”
No one understood this naturalistic teaching better
than the late Professor Robertson Smith, and no one
more deeply deplored its spirit or exposed its shallow-
ness more mercilessly. With a scholarship second to
none, and with a spiritual insight and power not always
found with scholarship, his works are really the best
modern defence of an enlightened orthodoxy against the
naturalistic attack.
In his “Old Testament in the Jewish Church” (second
edition, p. 295), he gives a concise statement of naturalism.
He says :—“ On the naturalistic theory of religion, ethical
monotheism is the natural belief of mankind, not, indeed,
attained all at once in all races, but worked out for
themselves by the great thinkers of humanity, con-
tinually reflecting on the ordinary phenomena of life
and history. It is held that natural religion is the
only true religion, that the proof of its truth lay open
to all men in all countries, and that Christianity itself,
so far as it is true, is merely the historical development,
in one part of the world, of those ideas of ethical mono-
theism which other nations than Israel might have
worked out equally well on the basis of their own ex-
perience and reflection. From this point of view the
prophets are regarded as advanced thinkers who had
not yet thrown aside all superstition, who were ham-
pered by a belief in miracle and special revelation, but
whose teaching has abiding value only in proportion as
it reduced these elements to a subordinate place and
struck out new ideas essentially independent of them.


The prophets, we are told, believed themselves in-
spired. But their true inspiration was only profound
thinking. They were inspired as all great poetic and
religious minds are inspired, and when they say that
God has told them certain things as to His nature and
attributes this only means that they have reached a
profound conviction of spiritual truths concealed from
their less intelligent contemporaries. The permanent
truths of religion are those which spring up in the
breast without external revelation or traditional teach-
ing.”
That is a clear statement of the position, and he pro-
ceeds to refute it, and speaks of “spiritual prophecy” as
a “continual divine guidance addressed to those needs
which, in heathen nations, are met by divination, but
which, in Israel, are supplied by the personal word of
the revealing God, ministered through a succession of
prophets.” Elsewhere he says:—“ In truth, as Merx
concludes, Kuenen still owes us the proof of his state-
ment that other ancient nations share the prophetic
consciousness of inspiration. That consciousness is as
clearly separated from the inspiration of the heathen
fidvns as from the afflatus of the Indian or Greek bard.”
These statements fully anticipate Max Muller and all his
school, and suggest the character of the reply to the
whole of their argument. For the application of this
naturalistic principle is not confined to one section of
religious study. It is applied all round, even to human
nature itself and its redemption. No doubt Professor
Robertson Smith knew and felt all this, and hence his
emphatic assertion of the Supernatural. He would


know that, as a logical necessity, the principle must be
applied to the radical evil of human nature, and if the
question were asked, how is naturalism to meet the
problem called “ sin ? ” the answer would be ready : The
disciples of naturalism profess to believe in the radical
evil of human nature, and also in the necessity of a
radical restoration. But they say that since the radical
evil came along the lines of natural choice, involving free
will, so must the restoration come by the exercise of
choice ; it must come by a natural up-grade, and, in fact ?
it is here present in the slow “ evolution” of the human
race. Thereby are excluded miracles, Divinity, special
Revelation, and the rest of the “legendary halo.” We
may trust man’s natural divinity to find the way back.
Most of us would hardly dare to think that naturally
there lay within our several breasts a latent Jesus
Christ! Most of us have abandoned that notion with
more or less of heart-break. We cannot but admire the
courage of this new “ honest and fearless seeking” called
“ naturalism.”
Now we see the drift of all this thinking and teaching
of Max Muller and others. The historical method in
religious investigation has, in the hands of some, a
strong tendency to become a naturalising method, which
leaves the Christian Revelation almost bloodless and in
a state of extreme emaciation. The press teems with
books of this kind. They find their way into College and
University. The position has received the ablest philo-
sophic attention and presentment. It is now one ever-
present constituent of the atmosphere of the educated.
It has reached though it may be insensibly our


churches. The most thorough-going critics on the
Christian side dread and condemn it, for they see its
plausibility; that it has a certain air of consistency ;
and not only that it relieves the ordinary mind of many
difficulties, but also that it tends to carry conviction by
bringing religion into line with all the other departments
of scientific study where our life and knowledge are
stated in terms of natural evolution. It is therefore worth
serious and thoughtful discussion.
III.
We must proceed to meet the position on the recog-
nised lines of naturalism, and by the historic method.
Let us take an example of this vague kind of general-
isation from a recognised historian of the modern school.
Mr. Froude tells us (Hist. Eng., Vol. i., p. 70): “We
allow ourselves to think of Raphael or of Phidias as
having accomplished their work by the power of their
own individual genius, but greatness like theirs is
never more than the highest degree of an excellence
which prevails widely around it, and forms the envi-
ronment in which it grows. No single mind in single
contact with the facts of Nature could have created
out of itself a Pallas, a Madonna, or a Lear, and such
vast conceptions are the growth of ages, the creation
of a nation’s spirit, and artist and poet filled full
with the power of that spirit, have but given them
form, and nothing more than form. . . . Shaks-
pere’s plays were as much the offspring of the long
generations that pioneered his way for him as the dis-
coveries of Newton were the offspring of Copernicus.


No great general ever rose out of a nation of cowards;
no great statesman or philosopher out of a nation of
fools; no great artist out of a nation of materialists; no
great dramatist except when the drama was the
passion of the people.” This position has been hailed
with joy by Lotze in his “ Microcosmus” (Vol. i., p. 30,
Third Edit.). He says: “Following on weak attempts
to interpret the course of history, and all that is impor-
tant in its events, from the mere volition of individuals,
we are glad once more to find nowadays an inclina-
tion to derive human social conditions, religious aspira-
tions, and the variable tendencies of art, from the
unconsciously organic operation of a universal spirit.”
He seems to modify this by saying that “ the ideal
element in the world of reality may well have given
the first impulse.” But that is just the philosophical
position that the ideal is always at the beginning and not
at the end. The phrase, “unconsciously organic opera-
tion of a universal spirit,” puts the position clearly and
concisely; and Professor Flint in the first volume of his
recent work, “The Philosophy of History,” confirms the
matter by saying (p. 135): “ The reflections of philoso-
phers and others on liberty have been to a much greater
extent consequences than causes, presupposing and
corresponding to a general condition of experience and
attainment, desire and opinion.” I am not pledged to
any or all of these opinions, but merely state them to
show how, in every quarter, the general idea in them
prevails. It is the kind of reasoning by which naturalism
urges its claims. It will account for Isaiah and Jeremiah,
&c., on down to Jesus Christ Himself, by the age in


which they lived ; by the tendencies of the time ; making
the men the exponents of their environment. As
Shakspere sprang out of the Elizabethan period, so
Isaiah and Christ sprang out of the natural circumstances
of their age, and are accounted for by that age. That
may be true or untrue, or partly true. But the principle
is applied by men of every shade of opinion to the
ordinary movements of social and mental history, and
it is applied by the “naturalists ” to all religions, including
Christianity. A Christian writer applies it to phil-
osophy:—“No genuine philosophy is isolated; it can
only be understood in the light of necessary tendencies
and currents of the time: it is, so to speak, the very
breath and spirit of the age, seized in its passage, and
lit up into consciousness. . . . Philosophy gives
utterance to the ideal truth, of which the actual life or
age is but the imperfect expression.” (Stahlin, Kant,
Lotze, Ritschl, p. 75.) “ Kant, too, was of course not an
isolated figure. In his philosophy a general principle,
that was working itself out in the dominant tendencies
of the time, came to consciousness of itself.” In no
special sense was there anything miraculous in a Shaks-
pere or a Kant. And by parity of reasoning, there was
nothing miraculous in Jesus Christ. Christ in the sphere
of religion was perhaps a greater natural master than
other great natural masters. As an heroic and warlike
nation produces great generals, a wise and learned
nation like the Greeks produces great statesmen and
philosophers, a nation that has faith in the invisible
and spiritual produces great artists, a nation with a
literary spirit produces a Shakspere, so a religious nation


like the Jews produces a Christ. Christ is then the
“ natural flower of Judaism.” It was the “soil of
Jewish thought” that gave birth to Christ. So, practi-
cally, says Max Muller. That is the conclusion reached
by naturalism. That is not the Christ of St. Peter, nor
of St. Paul, nor of St. John, nor will the critical
investigation of the New Testament yield this result.
But no matter. Naturalism has got rid of the “ legendary
“ halo,” a result of “ honest or fearless seeking.”
IV.
Let us now examine this matter both in the Old and
the New Testaments. The prophets are related to the
Old Testament history as Christ is to the New. When
they are compared, the resemblance is at many points
so striking as to suggest the inner spiritual unity of the
Bible. Even hostile critics admit the truth of this.
Now, the question for investigation is—Does the
national life of Israel in its character and aims account
for the prophets ? Are the prophets the voice of the
people, as Shakespere is the voice of his age ? Then,
we shall ask further—ls Christ the voice of His own
time and nation ? If we can evolve either the prophets
or Christ from their respective conditions; if they are
the mere exponents of the general ideas and national
forces which prevailed widely around them, they must
simply take rank with the rest of the world’s teachers —
nothing less, but also nothing more.
Let us take first the prophets. Now, unfortunately
for this plausible theory of naturalism , the facts are dead
against it. The theory will not work at all. The


prophets cannot be shown to be the mere exponents
of their time —the voices of ideas which prevailed widely
around them. Not only do nearly all the Christian
scholars and critics pronounce against such an interpre-
tation of the phenomena presented by the prophets, but
the very scholars who ought to champion this naturalistic
theory, such as Wellhausen and Kuenen, are forced
to acknowledge a vast and perpetual cleavage between
the prophets and the national life of the people among
whom they lived and moved. Prophets and people are
at opposite poles of thought and character and states-
manship. Isaiah’s relation to his own age is given us in
a sentence of his own :—“ Hearing, hear ye, but under-
“ stand not; seeing, see ye, but know not.” And that
very same cry is taken up and quoted by Christ in the
New Testament as descriptive of His own people and
time. But of that more anon.
Professor George Adam Smith in his book on Isaiah
puts it thus:—“lsaiah stood on one side believing in
one Supreme God, Lord of Heaven and Earth, and his
generation stood on the other side believing that there
were many gods.” Again he says:—“The prophets
prevailed over the people’s materialism.” How does
the theory of natural evolution look there ? Let anyone
read the sublime message of Isaiah with an open mind,
and then judge of his surroundings, and tell us if the
nation which he accused of being steeped to the lips in
idolatry, materialism, and the consequent spiritual
stupidity could produce him as its natural flower! We
might say that he stood quite alone in his faith during
his whole lifetime, not only against his own nation, but


also against the surrounding world. He resisted the
external forces single-handed, and conquered the in-
ternal faithlessness when both were combined against
him, and in hours of extreme national peril he demanded
such a faith in Jehovah alone as would, we fear, be too
great a test for even the best of us now. Every com-
petent scholar and critic who has no theory to serve is
struck with awe by the spiritual greatness of this lonely
man. For instance, Professor Robertson Smith confesses
as he looks at this and kindred facts: “The prophets
transcended the common sphere of Semitic thought,”
and again, “ The prophetic idea that Jehovah will vindi-
cate the right even in the destruction of his own people
of Israel involves an ethical standard as foreign to
Semitic as to Aryan tradition,” and again, “The mass
of the Hebrew people before the exile received with
blank incredulity the prophetic teaching that Jehovah
was ready to enforce His law of righteousness even by
the destruction of the sinful commonwealth of Israel.”
Did this nation of moral cowards, who were ever hanging
on to Egypt or to Assyria for help instead of to God—
did it produce by some natural evolution a man like
Isaiah, whose character and purpose were continually
hostile to its own ? Did the beaten and hounded serfs,
who hungered back to the flesh-pots of Egypt, produce
the great prophetic liberator, Moses ? All through, it is
entirely different. From the first, and all along, the
people rebelled. against, or at best gave a reluctant
adhesion to the destiny to which they were called by
such men as Moses and Isaiah. The massa perdita, as
Delitzsch calls the people, never at any time realised


that destiny, and were broken and scattered and finally
rejected because of their utter incapability to rise to it.
In line with all this, Christ pronounced doom over them,
and St. Paul had eventually to break with them forever
and turn away to the Gentiles. This revelation, which
we prize as coming from the Jews, did not come from
the nation, nor was the nation ever the theatre in which
it was acted out. It was not a national, but an individual
experience, and the theatre of it was the consciousness
of the prophet. It was projected from that consciousness
upon the people, but as a nation it may be said they
never rose to the occasion. Ewald tells us with fine
penetration that “ the urgent pressure and impulse of
the truth” within the prophet’s heart is divinely
kindled, and that its urgency is all the greater from
the fact that “the masses of men as distinct from the
“prophet” are just at the opposite poles of life and
thought. So that the prophets “ did their work wholly
from an original and unborrowed power.”
Coming now to a critic like Schultz, who accepts most
of the critical positions of the destructive school, and who
in his constructive work certainly allows naturalism its
full measure of homage, we find him saying The
possibility of a historically intelligible transition from the
religion of the Semites to that of Israel is only one side
of the answer to the question as to how the Hebrew
religion arose. The other side of the answer must
always be given by faith. This people had prophets and
experienced a revelation of God to itself, of that God
who willed that this greatest gift to man, the religion of
redemption and reconciliation, should be revealed upon


this soil.” “ The power of religious instinct, the pro-
phetic susceptibility to impressions of the true life of God,
must have been awakened here in a way that can only be
explained . . . by the inscrutable omnipotence of
the living spirit of God at work in nature.” (Old Testa-
ment Theology, Vol. 1.,p. 109.) He adds—“ Certainly
this higher conception had not yet become a living power
in the masses of the people Moses had to deal with.”
And a little further on he says : —“Even those who stood
nearest to Moses behaved in a way utterly at variance
with the true religion.” And yet he pleads in the strongest
way for the mythical element in the Old Testament, and
for the arrangement of the Pentateuch on the critical lines
of natural development. But he is constrained to acknow-
ledge this “inscrutable” element in the Old Testament
prophet, which cannot find a parallel in the activity of
any heathen seer. And all this is confirmed by the
critics who are the most pronouncedly destructive—by
men like Kuenen and Wellhausen. Dr. Kuenen tells us
that Jeremiah’s idea of Jehovah “stood above” his
patriotism, and “when the difficult task of choosing be-
tween the two was imposed on him, he preferred to be
a bad citizen to his country rather than an unfaithful
servant to Jehovah.” Jeremiah, as the prophet of his
country’s doom, was hated, and at last murdered. All
the great prophets are lonely figures, like Christ him-
self. Jeremiah, like Christ, “ stood alone when religion \
and patriotism went hand-in-hand.” “ Jeremiah,” says
Wellhausen, “ alone did not suffer himself to be misled
by the general feeling.” (Proleg., p. 488.) “ The pro-
phets had been the spiritual destroyers of old Israel.


The prophets confronted the nation with an ideal to
which it did not correspond. . . . Their mistake
was in supposing that they could make their way of
thinking the basis of a national life.” (Proleg., p.‘4gi.)
Such statements as these we take to be in strange
conflict with the theory of a natural evolution of Old
Testament religion. In view of these facts alone,
naturalism has an exceedingly difficult task to make out
a good case. One feels that there is an unconsidered
element in the situation, which the conclusion of
naturalism is not big enough to hold, and that there must
be some other, and larger, and more worthy explanation
which will embrace all the facts. In other departments
of scientific study a similar situation presents itself. In
the realm of Darwinian evolution a similar problem
emerges. And here Professor Drummond puts the case
clearly:—“Because the spiritual to our vision emerges
from the natural, or to speak more accurately, is con-
voyed upwards by the natural for the first stretches of
its ascent, it is not necessarily contained in that natural,
nor is it to be defined in terms of it.” —Ascent of Man.
He is anxious to prove that the hints of altruism in
nature are, broadly speaking, usher to the Supreme
Altruism in Christ and Christianity. He does this
evidently to secure the unity of the natural and super-
natural in God. He may be prompted by a true instinct.
But he none the less asserts the Supernatural. On this
analogy it might well be true that the prophets of the
Old Testament and the Christ of the New Testament
are the most supreme religious message to man—the
supernatural element in it naturally environed. His-


torically, it is true that the revelation of this in the
Bible record is unique, and, compared with all other
literatures, the Bible is in that sense supernatural. It is
true that the supernatural is in the natural man, as it is
in everything, but also true that the highest message of
a saving redeeming altruism is seen in Christ, who is
supremely alone ; and this is confirmed by comparing
Him with all others, and by the impossibility of account-
ing for Him (or for the prophets), by the individual, social
or national development of His time. We may admit
that man is the crown of natural evolution, and yet
see that he stands apart from the highest animals by a
chasm. So Christ may well be the crown of the natural
religions, yet, by analogy, He stands apart from natural
development by an immeasurable chasm.
Therefore we come to this position: The natural
needs an infinite first cause, and the natural religions an
infinite religious first cause for their explanation; and an
infinite altruism, manifested in Christ, is at once natural
in environment (and necessarily so), and supernatural in
manifestation, as in cause ; and the Bible is the supreme
record of its historical manifestation; and the Christian
society the supreme ideal of all natural evolution in
religion, to which man’s efforts outside of Israel never
reached, and within Israel, only by the influence of “the
inscrutable omnipotence of the living spirit of God at
work in nature,” i.e., in the natures of special individual
souls in Israel. There are then two lines of development
running parallel in Old Testament history. There is a
natural development of religion and of the ritual-cultus
attached to it, which we can, in a broad sense, parallel


elsewhere in the religious world. There is also a super-
natural development from, say, Moses to Isaiah, which
we call the prophetic. The second and higher develop-
ment is environed by the lower and natural one, though
the clear distinction between them is not adequately, if at
all, recognised by those who lived under their influence.
These two interpenetrate, but the divine initiative is
always from the prophetic side, and the prophetic
development is, in the main, hostile to the natural and
national development along the whole line, just as Christ
“ came to His own and His own received Him not.”
The prophetic movement is divine and supernatural,
though it is environed, and, therefore, often limited by
the natural. “ Hence,” says Schultz, “we must picture
to ourselves a religion pretty closely resembling in its
manifestations the other old Semitic religions of the
kindred tribes, and in no way consciously recognised or
apprehended as in antagonism to these, but, never-
theless, in its deepest essence, and when looked at
in connection with the tendencies that conditioned
its development, and determined the history of this
people, very different from those simple nature religions.
Thus, we find in the Hebrew nation the soil in which
a creative act of God in history could lay a firm founda-
tion for a history of the true religion, the complete
form of which appeared in the divine life revealed to
man in Christ” (O.T. Theology, Vol. 1., 112.)
That we conceive to be near the true position. Some-
times the too-eager orthodox betray their blindness to
the natural; while the thorough-going naturalists in
religion ignore the remarkable spiritual phenomena of


the Scriptures, which strike every candid mind so
forcibly as to deserve by comparison with everything
else in the field of religious inquiry the term, “Super-
natural Revelation.”
V.
But this external evidence of the isolation and unique-
ness of the prophet in the field of history is not the sole,
or even the true ground, perhaps, on which this claim to
the supernatural rests. The prophets must be inter-
preted through their own special message. And here
we have no hesitation in saying that their message
stands alone in the whole world of religious history
and thought. Its peculiarity is this, that it emphasised
two great qualities in its character of God, as displayed
in His dealings with the people, viz., Love and Righteous-
ness. Witness the tragic passion of Jehovah delineated
by Hosea ! Righteousness punishes and seems cruel as
devouring fire, yet ever behind it, and through it all
beats everlasting love. Both go on together, and on the
lips of the prophets make a message of redeeming power
and purpose seen nowhere else in all the religious world.
These two attributes of the prophetic message go on
evenly balanced for, say, a thousand years before Christ.
Prophet after prophet takes them up and speaks them
into the present and projects them into the future against
all appearances and apparently against all reason. The
nation is driven hither and thither in strange vicissitudes
of fortune. The greatest part of them is lost beyond
recall. Those remaining in the Southern Kingdom are
driven into exile, and their land ruined behind them


and while the general mass of the people is little better
for the experience, the prophet gazes through the ruins
of Jerusalem to a glorious future, and lifts up his voice in
spiritual prophecy of its coming more boldly than ever.
All the old environments collapse. Religious ceremony
itself becomes impossible, and is indulged only as a
dream. Yet on this double message goes, over the event-
ful and suffering centuries, growing clearer and more
powerful in its utterance. Other religions have some-
what meagrely emphasised one or other of these qualities
of the prophetic message. But no other religious teachers
in the world have carried Love and Righteousness for-
ward in this even balance for a thousand years, and with
the mass of the people around them comparatively deaf,
and often stupidly hostile. The Love is a suffering love
because it is righteous and must have utter holiness in
the worshipper. The Righteousness is one that sorrows
because it must punish while it loves. Witness the
passionate suffering in Isaiah : —“ In all their affliction
He was afflicted.” Such is the sorrowing God of the
Prophets—with heart-faint, Gethsemane and Cross in
this Old Testament literature! This prophetic voice is
nothing less than the voice of God Himself crying in the
wilderness of religious history : —“ Prepare ye the way of
the Lord, and make His paths straight.”
And when the prophetic voice dies away, the Psalmists
take up the strain, and we hear this song of Love—
Righteousness, rising into the dome of the desolate sky
over Israel. Prophecy indeed has ceased, but only as
an external oracle. Its spiritual essence, for the devout,
is fragrant in the garden of Hebrew poetry. For what is


Prophecy but the spiritual oracle and historic forecast of
a moral law which appoints the destiny of man to good-
ness and God, and of a love which, at the cost of sacrifice,
redeems him from all iniquity. The Psalter was the
expression of the continued Spirit of Prophecy, and this
wondrous song was the consolation of the devout few in
Israel, during the darkness of that night which preceded
the dawn of Christmas Day.
Now the peculiarity of all this is that in other religions
we find something very similar to Israel’s natural
development, and yet something so entirely wanting in
them as to demand for its explanation a factor which
we may call the supernatural. Zoroaster, roughly speak-
ing, the contemporary of Moses, like him, uplifted the
worship of his time into a moral earnestness and religion.
Whether he taught a pure monotheism or not, he gave
an impulse to the Parsee religion which, as Dorner says,
reaches “the ethical opposition between good and bad.”
The Parsee religion also held other truths such as the
immortality of the soul, and probably some notion of the
resurrection of the dead. These latter truths of the
Persian religion profoundly affected Judaism, adding
nothing indeed to the Hebrew religion (as Dr. Kuenen
points out) but stimulating the same truths, latent in
Israel, into activity. But one looks in vain for the
prophetic, righteous, long-suffering God—the Love—
Justice Jehovah, with redeeming purpose coming near to
men. “On both sides, the ethical and the religious, it
is the Hebrew religion, which holds that which Parseeism
seeks or needs.” (Dorner.)
Or, again, take for example Mohammedanism. Moham-


med may be said to have seized upon that side of
Judaistic religion which might be described as righteous
power. He called himself a “ prophet,” but he was only
half a prophet. He carried Judaism with its notion of a
political Messiah to a logical conclusion in the religion
of the sword. But such a religion had no place for
women and children. The very fountain of Old Testa-
ment religion—God’s pitying love as a Father over His
children, was dried up. As a result Mohammedanism is
as spiritually barren as the deserts its fanatical devotees
roamed over.
And once more, and by way of contrast, look at Budd-
hism. Here we have a conception of religion the reverse
of Mohammedanism. The Buddha preached a charity,
which, apart from Christianity, is truly beautiful. The
sorrow of the world became the basis of a new religious
brotherhood, and renunciation its law of life. But
Buddhism blinked the true nature of sin as an offence
against eternal righteousness. It aimed at cessation of
desire, and so of pain. The result was an apathy that
blights Buddhistic lands to-day, as with the blight of
moral death. It was love without righteousness.
Carrying these facts with us, we come to a greater
matter still. The prophetic message of Love and Right-
eousness had at the end, say of a thousand years, one clear
and grand utterance in a great deed —the sacrifice of
Christ, who, in His sinless life, is in line with the Old
Testament Righteousness, and in His sacrifice, is in
line with its Love. That the balanced attributes of this
great historic message should issue in a commanding
and conquering Personalty is surely an arresting fact!


“Through Christ the original destination of these
prophecies becomes as Paul saw, their ultimate des-
tination as well.” And with these two facts of a sin-
less life as against a wisdom, and a perfect sacrifice as
against an earthly victory, the disciples go out into the
pagan world; and against all opposition, all precedent,
all custom, absolutely prevail over that world. In that
respect and in that alone, is there true fulfilment of
Prophecy.
It is simply impossible for natural evolution to account
for that. These people, as Christ said, slew the prophets,
and stoned them that were sent unto them ; and even-
tually, and for the same reasons, they slew Himself.
Now it is perfectly evident to any careful student that a
man like Max Muller knows neither the Old Testament
nor the New Testament in their true spiritual signifi-
cance. He talks at large about “ideas,” about “truth,”
in an abstract way. That kind of nonsense is in the
air; naturalism can easily account for that. But the
task set naturalism is to account, not for “ideas” and
the growth of them as apparent in language, but for a
Prophetic Life, which for a thousand years spoke one
unique and unmatched message, and then culminated
in the Christ, but only to begin anew, and after leaving
Jerusalem in ruins, stride forth into the pagan world,
and not only overcome its opposition, but command its
homage, and make every truly good element in Paganism
part and parcel of its own mission. That is an historical
miracle enacted before our very eyes, and no theory
of natural evolution will for one moment account for it.
At every point it is the complete reversal of the ordinary


development of religious history in other lands. And
every student of comparative religion, who is spiritually
competent, is convinced of this.
VI.
Now, let us turn to Christ Himself. “ What does
our religion owe to Jesus, and what to Judea and
the Jews? Is it the ripe fruit of His spirit or the fair
and final blossom of dying Judaism?” (Fairbairn). The
general answer to that question is that Christ came to
His own and His own received Him not.
Julius Wellhausen is supposed to belong to the camp
hostile to orthodoxy. Doubtless he has his own notion
of things, but our business is not with his philosophy or
its application to religion. He is, perhaps, the greatest
living Hebraist, and probably he is greater than he knows.
He has some words about Jesus, however, which are truer
to the spirit of the New Testament than he may himself
apprehend. Wellhausen’s defamers should study him.
At all events he has the true conception of Old and
New Testament connection. He says:—“The Gospel
develops hidden impulses of the Old Testament, but it »
is a protest against the ruling tendency of Judaism.”
Of Jesus, he says:—“He is most distinctly opposed to
Judaism in his view of the kingdom of heaven.”
Speaking of the repentance demanded by the Gospel, he
says :—“ Ihe will thereby breaks away from the chain
of its own acts, and makes an absolutely new begin-
ing not conditioned by the past.” Referring to Christ’s
calling God the “ Heavenly Father,” Wellhausen
says:—“ The expression is simple, but the thing


signified is new” (Proleg., p. 509, et seq.) Such expres-
sions are very significant. The “ newness” of Jesus and
of His mission evidently overpowers Wellhausen, arch-
critic though he is. That is just what we are contend-
ing for. Christ’s own generation—even the best of them
—even the Baptist and the disciples themselves, after
much training, very inadequately understood Him. It
took St. John fifty years after Christ’s death to
adequately reach the spiritual notion of His kingdom,
and then he wrote his priceless Gospel in order to
set forth what had come to him very slowly indeed.
(The Johannine authorship of the Fourth Gospel, though
not settled beyond debate, is receiving daily confirmation
from scholars.) St. Paul did not at first understand the
new Prophet Jesus, though deeply versed in all Jewish
literature. The preaching of St. Peter was a tremen-
dous recoil from the despair due to the crucifixion. The
resurrection set the new tide in the Palestinian ministry
of Jesus. Its waters are covering the barren sands now
everywhere. It is that fact of the resurrection which
explains the rest of the New Testament literature, and
especially the Pauline epistles. So great is the force of
this fact upon St. Paul, that it works a revolution in his
thinking, a revolution, in the opinion of Baur, of
Tiibingen, such as to be nothing short of miraculous, or,
at all events, quite inexplicable on ordinary lines of
development. St. Paul is thereby obliged to begin and
interpret the whole Jewish past in terms of Christ’s
great Personalty. He has to come to the standpoint of
Christ who “has the history, persons, institutions, terms
of the Old Testament ever before him, but only that


he may reverse the process of the Judaizers; read
Christ into the New Testament, instead of the Old
Testament into Christ.”
St. Paul was kindled into dialectic passion, not by a
gradual and reasoned development of ideas about the
Messianic office, but by the sudden and post-resurrection
touch of Christ’s Great Personalty. So that Christ
explains St. Paul’s epistles, rather than the epistles
explain Christ. Their teaching is even smaller and
narrower in range than Christ’s. Jesus Himself effected
the revolution in the idea of the Messiah; it became
charged with Divinity only after the resurrection, and
from that came the tremendous truth of the Incarnation.
St. Paul elaborated that, at first beginning with the
question of Sin, and then interpreting anew the universe
itself in terms of The Christ. But the very thought of
an incarnation of God was naturally impossible to a Jew.
He instinctively recoiled from such a thought. The
prophets of the Old Testament probably never conceived
such a thing, and certainly they never could have
uttered such a thing with any meaning to their hearers.
If not impossible, it was at least improbable. The
watchword against idolatry for centuries by every
prophet was, “ One God,” and any representation of God
in the form of an incarnation would have stultified the
prophet in the eyes of the people, and his message to his
hearers. By no logical or natural process can one
possibly develop an incarnation out of Hebraism or
Judaism, or out of the prophetic message. To us the
Old Testament may be incomplete without it. But in
our opinion neither the Immanuel (the Ideal King, born


into the'suffering and disaster of his people), of the first
Isaiah, nor the Suffering Servant of the second Isaiah,
really contained for prophet or hearer any clear thought
of an incarnation of God in Christ as we see and com-
prehend it. There is nothing to gain and everything to
lose by such an assertion in the interests of orthodoxy.
To us these “ premonitions” may, and do, point to an
incarnation. But we, like the Disciples, are simply wise
after the event.
A belief in incarnations may naturally arise on the
soil, say of India, to a Brahmin, but in Judea, and to a
Jew, never ! It was a revelation that turned St. Paul’s
world upside down—that Christ should fill the politico-
religious notion of the Messiah, with Divinity! And St.
Paul and the rest went out into the world to preach,
interpreting afresh the past in terms of such Divinity.
It was Christ who illuminated the disciples and St. Paul
and the whole of their past for them.
The New Testament, drawing from Old Testament
sources in the new light of Christ’s Divinity, says “ the
Word was made flesh!” That is very different to
Philo’s exposition of Logos, as Eternal Reason, which is
just the union of the teaching wisdom of the Jews with
Hellenistic philosophy and has no ethical or historical
content. Philo was the contemporary of Jesus, but “the
incarnation would be for him an absolute impossibility,”
though he and others laboured philosophically at the
problem eventually solved in the historical Christ. The
writer of the prologue of St. John’s Gospel probably never
even heard of Philo, nor when he wrote was he likely to
be stirred into mere dogmatic utterance or metaphysical


speculation by the antagonism of the Hellenic mind.
The result in St. John’s Gospel is not due mainly to any
such surrounding stimulus or opposition. It is positively
due to Christ Himself. The base of the pyramid of
New Testament literature is Christ. Any other explana-
tion stands it on its apex—the supremacy of unreason.
The Jew of Nazareth became the problem of His time,
and He has been the problem of the world’s thought
since, so that even che savant Renan, it is said, at last
invokes “ Christ by the name of God.” Christ is still
the supreme problem of criticism, and such critics as
Weizsacker, Weiss, and Beyschlag “regard Jesus as by
indefeasible right of inner being and character, belonging
to an order higher than the natural.”
In the whole drift of Judaism lies the confirmation of
this contention. As Dorner puts it (Person. Christ Div.
i., v. 1., p. 19): —“In place of an intensive progress, in
place of the Messianic idea becoming ever clearer and
richer, they sought progress in extension, in proselytiz-
ing, and hope for a political Messiah to succeed therein
to the utmost extent.” It is also confirmed by the
history of the New Testament religion immediately
subsequent to Christ. That the Jewish national spirit
“recoiled from the idea of the man becoming of God” is
evident by the various forms of Ebionism in the early
Christian Church. To these, Christ was simply a
prophet endowed with extraordinary powers at His
baptism.
It may be asked then: What part did Judaism play in
this great drama, for “ salvation is of the Jews?” Well,
while Jesus overcame the reigning tendencies, customs,


and modes of thought of the people and the time, in so
far as they perverted the service of the living God into a
sensuous worship, yet He found among them a com-
paratively fitting arena in which to act out His super-
natural part —giving His life for the world. For example,
the legalism which hoped for the divine favour by zealous
observances was simply an opportunity for Christ. It
was by itself an utter failure, and absolutely impotent to
produce Christianity. Yet it was a point of practical touch
with God, and not merely a mental abstraction like the
philosophical wisdom of Philo. It kept the way open for
some ideal victorious man , though it failed to produce him.
Into this divinely-prepared opportunity Christ stepped—
the answer to prophetic yearning—and solved the problem
once for all by His victorious life. Hence the ecstacy
with which, in Kingsley’s “ Hypatia,” Raphael, the Jew,
having learned about Christ, comes back to the last
brilliant and beautiful exponent of a dying philosophy, and
says to her: —“I have found a man !” So the religious
world found at last “a man.” —“The man, Christ Jesus.”
It will be seen then that the various elements of
Judaism presented to Christ simply conditions , and never
can be ranked as causes. He touched the water of
Judaism into the wine of Christianity. In that sense
“salvation is of the Jews.” But no kind of natural
transition, as of a plant into its latent flower, will explain
Christianity. Instead of even the prophets accounting
for Christ, it would be truer to say that Christ accounts
for the prophets. He is not merely the ideal at the end,
He is also the “ beginning,” as St. John at length in-
stinctively feels. For all ideals in morals, philosophy,


and religion are not at the end, but at the beginning.
Christ is then the divine voice of the Old Testament’s
prophetic inspiration, which becomes flesh and dwells
among us in the New Testament. “In the beginning
\vas the word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God.” There is a modern tendency to read
too little into these words. Christ accounts for all before
Him, and certainly for all after Him. He looks back-
ward, as well as forward. This truth was wrung from
men like Matthew Arnold, who called Christ the “ New
Absolute,” and like Renan, who spoke of Him as the
founder of “ the absolute religion.” The whole New
Testament history proclaims this, and the passage from
the national to the universal in the New Testament cannot
be called a process. It can only be called a cataclysm,
and it has no earthly analogy in any other religion of the
world.
Even Dr. Kuenen, the very apostle of naturalism, is
forced to confess (Hibbert Lectures, 1882): “The rise
of Christianity would be an insoluble riddle were I to
set aside Him who for eighteen centuries has taken rank
as its founder.” And we make bold here to say that
Kuenen’s attempt in that same lectureship to evolve
Christ from the conditions of His age by natural genesis,
is so conspicuously weak as to be properly described
only as an utter failure. If anyone wishes to be con-
vinced on historical lines of the Supernatural in Christ,
he cannot do better than read these “ Hibbert Lectures”
of 1882. The lecturer is a passed master in subtlety of
argument, and is unsurpassed in his artistic literary
power of presenting a cause; and yet one feels that the


attempt to whittle away the supernatural by naturalistic
reasoning is a very lame one, even in the hands of so
great a scholar as Dr. Kuenen. At the touch of “honest
and fearless seeking,” the argument breaks down all
along the line.
And so we are brought back to that primitive New
Testament fact—that faith gathers round Christ Him-
self, around His Personality, and not merely around
His words and ideas. And the task of the naturalistic
school is not merely to evolve His words from some
Talmudic level of homilies and morals, but to produce
the Personality, from which all these ideas and morals
get a strangely new and enduring vitality, greater far
than ethics, or metaphysical theology, because a Person-
ality in which both are kindled in a matchless religion,
and in which that religion to-day has its central efful-
gence. When that “ light ” shone on Israel, the tradi-
tional religion “loved the darkness rather than the light.”
It was “ an evil and adulterous generationa “ genera-
tion of vipers!” Did it produce Christ ? They yet mur-
dered their own production—most unnatural mother.,
Was He the natural flower of Judaism ? Then the
nation crushed its own beauty and trampled it in the
streets with public scorn.
Peter once made a notable confession:—“Thou art
the Christ, the Son of the living God.” Then comes
the answering benediction of Christ which makes
vivid the whole discussion“ Flesh and blood
hath not revealed it unto thee but My Father which is
in Heaven.” The longer and more minutely we
ponder the problem, the more is the supernatural forced


ttpon us. It may be summed up in the words which Dr.
Kuenen tries, but fails, to confute Christianity, the
person of Jesus Christ, is not the last shoot of Israelitish
nationality but the completion of the revelation of God
which underlies its history.” The origin of Christianity
is a supernatural origin ; and one of the best things that
can happen the Church is to be put upon her mettle by
the discussion of such a problem. I, for one, am
prepared to accept, if necessary, the critical data of W ell-
hausen and Kuenen and Robertson Smith, and the rest,
regarding the Old Testament, with all that such data
involve as to the history and reconstruction of the
Pentateuch, the question of Christ’s relation to the Old
Testament, and the vast and unsolved question of
Scriptural Inspiration ; and, indeed, the modification of
theological dogma at almost every point.
But however destructive the results may prove to our
traditions, there will remain one central and immovable
constructive in both Old and New Testament. We believe
that the overthrow of the traditional position regarding
the Old Testament is a foregone conclusion, but we are
equally certain that a true and enlightened orthodoxy
will adjust itself to the new position and come out of the
trial more triumphant than ever. We need not abuse
this modern spirit, and we need not be afraid of it. We
must patiently examine it, and the more thoroughly the
principle is pushed into the study of Old and New
Testaments by the modern mind the better for Christ’s
own influence in the world of thoughtful men.


VII.
The modern mind is continually haunted and per-
plexed by the claims of the natural and the super-
natural, and is exercised by a feverish desire to
reconcile their apparent antagonisms ; there is a yearn-
ing after some great unity, in which it is felt they must
stand. The human mind has ever been characterised by
a desire of this kind, and can rest only in some such
unity. It is a mistake, however, to attempt to reach it
by a short and royal road, as many modern thinkers,
such as Spencer, do. Perhaps, indeed, all our modern
reasoning about social and religious problems, is some-
what vitiated by a tendency to regard society as making
progress in the aggregate, and without due weight being
given to the incalculable element introduced into any
set of social or religious conditions by the sudden rise ot
some great genius. Eventually, we must come to see
that such men as Socrates, the Buddha, Mohammed,
Shakspere, Phidias, were not solely the expression of
their environment, but were in themselves creative
forces, without which the environment had come to
little. There is therefore an element of progress every-
where, which is not merely evolutionary in the slow and
ordinary sense, but creative and initiatory in a wonderful
and surprising way. Both these elements move together
towards the issue called “progress,” and are necessary
the one to the other. In the realm of literary excellence,
there seems to be a limit to human intellect. On
reflection, we conclude that it is simply impossible, say,
to begin where Shakspere left off. He is high-water
mark in dramatic literature.


And here a crowd of questions in the realm of religion
thrust themselves upon us, which a nervous religious
apologetic must not simply try to howl down, but fairly
and calmly answer. So far, at all events, it is conceded
that Christ is high-water mark in religion. And, be it
remembered, religion is not something like art, and
music, and dramatic literature—which are mere sub-
sections in the intellectual realm of educational life—
but something which covers the whole life of man, whose
progression in character is practically limitless. And
after all it is not the keenest intellect, but the highest
character which means the highest civilisation and the
purest society. But there are other masters in this
supreme realm of the soul and its highest life. What
about them, and how do they stand to Christ and His
claims? Is there anything creative, divine, and super-
natural about them and their work? Let who likes deny
it. We prefer to put it thus:—The other masters in
this supreme function of the soul's life, while perhaps
possessing and exercising a certain divine initiative upon
their environment, and not wholly explicable by that
environment, are nevertheless incomparably lesser than
The Christ. He is comprehensive of them all, and so
dwarfs them when they are brought into His presence,
and, indeed, so dwarfs “His own” environment, as to
make us realise that He is the religious “absolute”—
that is, so complete a Finality, as to command the
supremacy of that lesser reverence we give to other
teachers ; and so enduring and expansive in His teaching
as to be impossible of human improvement; and so
quickening (in His sacrificial function) of the highest life


in mankind, that universalism in religion is achieved in
Him—the complete fusion of the ideal and practical life.
So then, whatever of lesser supernatural we concede to
others, and their teaching and influence, the claim of The
Christ to the supernatural in religion is so high as to be
quite above all cavil. The step from this position to the
New Testament and orthodox one of His divinity, His
incarnation, His sacrificial death, and His resurrection
is quite easy for those whose spiritual experience qualifies
them to discern spiritual facts. Sometimes it happens
that a very high intellect is found nearly destitute of this
spiritual equipment. Such an intellect is unfitted to be
a judge in these matters. “ The fundamental Christian
experience from the beginning to the present day is
that this process of divine revelation, meant for the
whole human race, has really taken place within the
limits of Scripture, and reached for all time its highest
point in Jesus Christ, as well as that the New Testa-
ment writings which testify of Him are genuine docu-
ments of God’s completed revelation. Christendom
draws from the person of its founder by means of these
writings which testify of Him a supernatural world-
overcoming spiritual life, a satisfaction of the deepest
needs of the human heart, and of the human race, such
as can be got nowhere else, and by these Scriptures it
is led back from all the errors of its historical course to
its original and imperishable sources.” (Beyschlag.)
VIII.
In conclusion we have to point out that the history of
the Christian Church since the time of Christ cannot be


explained without His supernatural power. The Eastern
or Greek Church gave herself up to mere hair-splitting,
and so completely applied the terms of a reigning philo-
sophy to Christ and Christianity, that the essential
qualities of Christ’s Evangel were almost obliterated.
On the other hand, the Western or Roman Church inter-
preted Christianity through the medium of magistrates,
law, jurisprudence, and a great political hierachy, until
it was almost impossible to recognise Christ at all. At
last the supernatural power of the New Testament
Church flings off these “ distortions of its spirit” and
meaning, and reasserts her glory in all those simple yet
profound essentials, through and in which the Reforma-
tion gets its significance. As the Archbishop of Canter-
bury said recently in the Upper House of Convocation;—
“ The Reformation brings back the Church of God to
the primitive model; ” which means, that the Church
is brought back to Christ; which means that Christ
Himself is the perennial fountain of her power, amidst
the barren desert of the worst formalisms! And what is
it that sustains the Church amidst the mass of world-
liness and selfishness in which her lot is cast ? What is
it which makes her triumph over her own follies—weak-
ness, schisms, sin and shame—and over her hide-bound
creeds ? And to do this for two thousand years ? Does
the world, with its power, its knowledge, its genius, hold
her up ? Does the love of the brotherhood (sic) hold her
together naturally ? Do the moral codes of men prove
salt and light and leaven to her ? By no means. The
Church is not the product of the age, at least in those very
distinctive qualities which separate her from the wisdom


and power of the world, and often fix her in an attitude
of the most determined antagonism against it, in interest
and inspirit. No ! The formative power of the seeming
chaos of religious society, called the Christian Church, is
Jesus Christ; and if the Divinity of His great Personality
were removed to-morrow, the spiritual “unity of Christ-
endom,” now under one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
would be split into a million of unrecognisable and
practically incoherent and worthless fragments.








