

1 h \/\
AN ANSWER
TO CEUTAIN
CALUMNIES
IN’ THE LATE
GOVERNOR MACQUARIE’S PAMPHLET,
j\nd tut;
THIRD EDITION OF
MR. WENTWORTH’S
ACCOUNT OF AUSTRALASIA
THE REVEREND SAMUEL MARSDEN,
Principal Chaplain to the Colony of New South Chiles,
PUBLISHED BY J. I-IATCHARD AND SON,
PICCADILLY.
182 G.
Price Three Shillings.


LONDON :
PRINTED BY S. AND R. BENTLEY, DORSET STREET.


AN ANSWER,
The late Governor Macquarie, in the com -
mencement of his government of New South.
Wales, formed a resolution to unite the free and
the convict population in one body; and from
the influence of his own powerful example, and
the authority he possessed as governor, he seem-
ed confident that this object, upon which his
mind was fully bent, could be accomplished. This
injudicious resolution formed the basis of his
future policy, and led him to adopt such mea-
sures as he thought would tend to raise one
class of the community and to lower the other;
so as to bring bond and free more upon one
common level. The Governor was not sufficiently
aware, at this time, of the difficulties he would
have to encounter in his attempts to reduce to


practice his new theoretical system of policy.
Had the Governor duly weighed this subject, he
would have seen that, before he could accomplish
his favourite plan, he would not only have the
established laws, customs, and opinions of so-
ciety to alter; but to change the inherent prin-
ciples of mankind, which no power on earth
can possibly do.
I returned from England a few weeks after the
Governor’s arrival in the colony, when I learned
that he had appointed to the magisterial office
persons who had been under the sentence of the
law, and that he expected officers holding his
Majesty’s commission 'to associate with them.
Though I conceived that it was too much for
the Governor to require any officer to lower
his rank in society by such an association, and
that the measure would be attended with the
most serious evils, yet it was not my wish to
interfere with any system of policy the Governor
might think proper to adopt for the rule of his
government. He was answerable to none un-
der his authority for his public conduct. At the
same time, the wisdom of the above policy was
very much questioned by the reflecting part of
the community. It is well known in the colony,
and to many in England, that my differences
with Governor Macquarie originated in the fol-
lowing circumstance; which is closely con-
nected with the above statement.


I had not the most distant idea, that the
Governor, from my situation, would call upon
me to act with the newly-appointed magistrates,
until I saw a government and general order in
the Sydney Gazette, appointing me one of the
Commissioners of the Public Roads, along with
these new magistrates. I was much astonished
at this appointment, considering it a degradation
of my office as senior Chaplain of the colony.
I waited upon the Governor, and informed him,
that it was totally incompatible with my sacred
functions to accept of such an appointment; and
requested that he would allow me to decline
it. My objection gave the Governor much dis-
pleasure. He told me, that he considered my
refusal as an act of hostility to his government,
and of disrespect to his person ; and it created
instantly those indignant feelings, which such
an impression was calculated to produce in the
mind of a military man, possessed of sovereign
power, and accustomed to be implicitly obeyed.
The Governor would not admit of my verbal
objection, and required me to write to him on
the subject, which I immediately did. After my
letter was sent to the Governor, the order above
alluded to, appointing me Commissioner of the
Public Roads, was sent to me officially by the
Governor’s secretary. On the receipt of. the or-
der I waited upon the Governor a second time.
He asked me if I had reconsidered his order ;


I answered in the affirmative; and respectfully
told him, that I sincerely regretted that I could
not bring my mind to comply with his wishes;
but that upon this point my determination was
unalterably fixed, not to do that which appeared
to me so inconsistent with my sacred office and
functions, whatever the future consequences
might be to myself.
This determination did not tend to conciliate
the Governor’s mind; he became more indignant,
and gave me to understand, that it was well
for me, that I held a civil commission, or he
would have tried me for disobedience to his
order by a court-martial. From that day, I
dated all the future difficulties I experienced
under Governor Macquarie’s administration;
for this wound was never healed. It was not
my objection to obey the Governors order,
that gave him such infinite offence, but my not
approving of his system of policy, in making
persons magistrates who had been under the
sentence of the law; by objecting to be asso-
ciated with them in public business. The Go-
vernor considered it was my duty to do whatso-
ever he commanded; and I thought I was bound
to respect my sacred office; and on this point we
differed.
It was never my wish to lay before the public
any circumstance that occurred in this colony,
during the administration of the late General Mac-


quarie, had I not felt myself called upon to do
so in vindication of my own reputation, from the
gross calumnies which have appeared in a recent
publication. It is my intention to state such cir-
cumstances and facts as I may deem necessary for
my justification, and I shall leave the public to de-
termine how far I have merited the wanton attacks
that have been made upon my character by the
author of the publication to which I have alluded.
In making this appeal to the public, it may not
be improper to go back to the period when my
connexion vyith thi§ colony commenced, and to
state a few of the leading circumstances which
have taken place, from time to time, in this go-
vernment, in which I have been personally con-
cerned. I was appointed to officiate in this coun-
try as a clergyman, by his Majesty’s commission,
bearing date theTst of January, 1793, and arrived
in New South Wales in the beginning of 1794.
The settlement had then been established about
six years. At the time of my arrival the colony
was in great distress, for want of bread and ani-
mal food, there being but one cask of meat in the
King’s stores.
, The late Admiral Phillip had, at this time, re-
turned to Europe, and the administration of the
government had devolved upon the late General
Grose, who was lieutenant-governor and com-
manding officer of the regiment. During the ad-
ministration of. Governor Phillip, the civil and


military officers were allowed only two acres of
land each for cultivation, and that, being near
Sydney, was very rocky and barren. The civil
and military officers, as well as the soldiers and
prisoners, had suffered much from the want of
provisions. General Grose was alive to their
wants, and was convinced that, unless some vi-
gorous measures were adopted to'bring a certain
portion of land into cultivation, the colony could
not exist. This induced him to grant to every
officer, civil and military, one hundred acres of
land, and thirteen convicts as servants, victualled
and clothed from his Majesty’s stores, to assist
them to bring their lands into cultivation as soon
as they could. The officers, civil and military,
receiving such liberal assistance from the execu-
tive government, exerted all their abilities, and
applied all their means, to accomplish the de-
sirable object the Governor had in view. They
were sensible that not only their own existence,
but that also of the whole colony, depended upon
their united efforts in raising a sufficiency of grain
to supply the wants of the inhabitants. Expe-
rience had taught them, that supplies from Eng-
land were very uncertain, and could not be de-
pended upon,, the distance being so great, and
the communication so rare in the then infant state
of the colony. The Rev. R. Johnson, the chap-
lain of the regiment, and myself, thought it right
to accept of the Governor’s offer, and had each'


y<
a grant of one hundred acres in common with
the other officers, which we: immediately began
to clear and bring under cultivation.
I did not consider myself in the same situation,
in a temporal point of view, in this colony, as a
clergyman in England. My situation at that pe-
riod would bear no such comparison. A clergy-
man in England lives in the very bosom of his
friends; his comforts and his conveniencies are
all within his reach, and he has nothing to do but
to feed his flock. On the contrary, I entered a
country which was in a state of nature, and was
obliged to plant and sow, or starve. It was not
from inclination that ray colleague and I took the
axe, the spade, and the hoe ; we could not, from
our situation, help ourselves by any other means,
and we; thought it no disgrace to labour. St.
Paul’s own hands ministered to his wants in a cul-
tivated nation ; and our hands ministered to our
wants in an uncultivated one. If this is cast upon
me as a shame and a reproach, I cheerfully bear
it; for the remembrance of this never gives me
any cause of pain or remorse. It has ever been
the opinion of those who have had the best means
of information, that if General Grose had not
adopted this wise, humane, and effective mea-
sure, or if the officers had not seconded his liberal
views with their best exertions, the inhabitants
must have perished from want. The grant of one
hundred acres of land to the officers gave the first


stimulus to agriculture, by inducing them to de-
vote their spare time and pay to the cultivation
of their lands ; yet all their efforts could not pre-
vent occasional distress for want of bread—wheat
was, at times, from one to three pounds per
bushel, for more than twelve years from the
dates of the grants to the officers; from which
fact it may be inferred, in what a state of hunger
and distress the country would have been if the
officers had not turned their attention to agricul-
ture. There were for years no free settlers to cul-
tivate the land, and the support of the troops and
the convicts depended principally upon the exer-
tions of the officers. If it had not been the inten-
tion of the Colonial government, that the clergy
should cultivate the land given to them by the
crown, they would not have received any indul-
gence in land, or servants to aid them in its
cultivation. But the land was given with the ex-
press understanding, at the time it was appropri-
ated to them, that they were to proceed to the
immediate cultivation of it. In September 1795,
the late Admiral Hunter arrived as Governor.
When he had taken upon him the government, he
followed the system of his predecessor, General
Grose. He was soon convinced that there were
none in the colony possessed of capital and know-
ledge sufficient to attempt to bring under cultiva-
tion a country in a state of nature, and covered
with heavy timber, excepting the officers who
had salaries.


Admiral Hunter, acting under this conviction,
considerably extended the grants of land to those
who had already received one hundred acres,
including the clergy with the other officers;
and continued to hold out every encouragement
in his power to the officers whilst he remained in
the colony. In October 1800, Admiral Hunter re-
tired from the colony, and Captain Philip Gidley
King succeeded him in his government. He had
hot been long in his situation as Governor, before
he saw the wisdom and sound policy of holding
out encouragement to those 1 who cultivated grain,
as well as to those who turned their attention to
the breeding of sheep and cattle.
For this purpose he gave much larger grants of
land to those officers and others who he judged
would benefit the colony, than had been given by
former Governors. In 1807, Captain King retired
from, the government, and I accompanied him to
England. The late Admiral Bligh was next ap-
pointed Governor. Not being in the colony during
his administration, I am ignorant of what grants
he gave, or to whom. In 1810, on the Ist of
January, General Macquarie entered upon his
government. I returned to New South Wales a
few weeks afterwards. During Governor Macqua-
rie’s administration, he gave additional lands to
the clergy who were on the establishment of the
colony prior to his appointment, and I received
from him a grant of one thousand acres ; and to


the rest of the clergy, who had received no pre-
vious grant, he gave a greater quantity. Itishardly
to be credited, that all the Governors for more
than thirty-five years, would have given grants of
land to the clergy, if they had believed that this
indulgence would militate against religion and
morality, and the general interest of the colony.
All the Governors were satisfied that the salaries
allowed to the clergy were far too small to sup-
port them in the public situation they held in the
colony : the highest, up to 1800, did not exceed
ten shillings per day ; and from this humane con-
sideration, the land they obtained was given to
them, with a view that they should improve it
for the benefit of their families and the general
interest of the colony. From the above state-
ment relative to ray farming concerns, I shall
leave the public to judge how far I have acted
unbecoming the character of a clergyman, exiled
to afar distant country from my native land, into
a colony where the common necessaries of life
were often not to be purchased at any price; and
in a community so peculiarly constituted as that
of New South Wales, in which every person is
liable to be plundered of his property by day and
by night. Whatever farming concerns I may have
had, whether they have been great or small, no
Governor ever accused me of neglecting my cleri-
cal duties, with the exception of the observation
which General Macquarie Iras made in Ids pub-


lished letter to Viscount Sidmouth, under date
of 31st of January, 1820, after I had served ten
years under his government. Had I been guilty
of any neglect of duty, surely General Macquarie
ought to have noticed it in the preceding period
of ten years.
The very manner and language in which Ge-
neral Macquarie expresses his observations on
my conduct, clearly show the motives from which
they originate. Much has been said and insinu-
ated to vilify my character, both by the late Go-
vernor Macquarie, in his pamphlet addressed to
Viscount Sidmouth, as well as in a recent pub-
lication by Mr. W. C. Wentworth, upon which I
shall make a few remarks.
In 1807, when I returned to England, there
were upwards of 1400 women in the colony.
More than 1000 of these women were unmarried,
and nearly all convicts. Many of them were ex-
posed to the most dangerous temptations, pri-
vations, and sufferings; and no suitable asylum
at this period had been provided for the female
convicts since the establishment of the colony.
On my arrival in London, in 1808, I drew up two
memorials on their behalf, stating how much they
suffered from the want of a proper barrack or
building for their accommodation. One of these
memorials I presented to the Under Secretary
of State, Mr. Cooke, at the Colonial Office,
and the other to his Grace the Archbishop of


Canterbury. In my different interviews with
Mr. Cooke and the Archbishop, they both
expressed a readiness to promote this object,
which was viewed by them as one of the first
importance for the promotion of the reformation
of the female convicts. On ray leaving England,
in the year 1809, I was assured by his Majesty’s
Government that instructions had been given to
Governor Macquarie to erect a suitable building
for the women convicts, and I had no doubt at
that time but that these instructions had been
given. I arrived in the colony, as already men-
tioned, soon after Governor Macquarie had taken
the command, and found the women at Para-
matta in the same wretched destitute state as I
had left them three years before. After residing
in the colony some months, I stated what had
passed between me and those in authority at
home, respecting the condition of the female con-
victs. The Governor admitted that something
ought to be done to relieve their sufferings, by
providing some accommodation for them to reside
and lodge in. We had various consultations from
time to time upon this subject, as the moral evils
increased continually with the increasing num-
bers of female convicts transported from 'Europe ;
yet no measures were adopted to remedy these
evils by the local government. On the 10th of
July, 1816, I wrote an official letter to the Go-
vernor, in the hope of calling his attention to this


subject, and on the SOth received his answer, in
which he admits generally the correctness of my
statements, and laments the misery and crime
which the want of an asylum for the women
occasioned.
The following is a copy of the correspondence
above alluded to.
“ Paramatta, July 19 t/i, 1815.
“ May it please your Excellency,
“ I feel it my duty, as principal chaplain and
resident magistrate of this district, to submit to
your Excellency’s serious consideration the pre-
sent state of Paramatta and its neighbourhood,
as far as relates to its public morals and police.
During more than twenty years’ residence in this
town, I do not remember any former given period
When so many offences were committed against
the peace, as there have been for some time past;
housebreaking, highway robberies, and other
daring crimes, have increased to a very alarming
degree. Nearly the whole of my time, from morn-
ing to evening, has been occupied for some weeks
in examining the different complaints preferred
before me. I humbly conceive these very great
and serious evils to originate principally from the
following causes, which, with all due submission,
I beg to lay before your Excellency. The first
observation I shall make relates to the male
convicts, a number of whom are employed by


the Crown at Paramatta as mechanics, and in va-
rious other public situations. These men have no
barracks or huts provided for them by the Crown,
as formerly, where they can dress their provi-
sions and sleep at night, and be under the eye of
the police. On this account numbers of them
are scattered all over the town and neighbourhood,
and procure lodgings where and as they can,
amongst the lower order of free people, who live
upon their vices, and become their protectors
upon all occasions.
It generally happens that these free people,
when any theft is committed, will, either through
fear or interest, cautiously conceal every circum-
stance within their knowledge that would crimi-
nate the guilty, who lodge in their houses, and
by whose frauds, impositions, and thefts, they are
maintained. The convicts in the employment ol
the Crown being at full liberty in the night to
commit any depredations with impunity, in con-
sequence of having no settled residence, thereby
form such plans to prevent detection, either be-
fore or after they have committed any crime, as no
art or cunning of man can unravel. Hence the ma-
gistrate is daily compelled to discharge persons
accused before him of various offences, for want
of evidence, though the most satisfactory con-
viction arises in his mind of their guilt.
“ I would further observe, that it is not uncom-
mon for the convicts, when brought before a ma-


gistrate for theft, and their guilt is established, to
make very strong appeals to the feelings' of the
magistrate, by stating the extreme hardships they
labour under, in having no accommodation pro-
vided for them by the Crown, where they might
dress their provisions and lodge at night; and that,
to obtain the means of defraying their lodgings,
they had been compelled to commit this and the
other offence.
“ When the magistrate is aware that their
statement is correct (so far as relates to their want
of accommodation for sleeping), and there appears
a possibility that they would not have commit-
ted the crimes alleged against them under other
circumstances, his feelings become impercepti-
bly interested in the prisoner’s behalf, and his
mind is greatly perplexed how to act: he knows
the law admits of no plea for stealing, yet he
often cannot punish : hence the guilty seek relief
in that divine rule of Justice, “ Do unto others as
ye would they should do unto you.” Thus the
guilty pass with impunity, who, under other cir-
cumstances, would meet with that punishment
their crimes justly merit. lam fully convinced
that, unless the convicts in the service are lodged
in barracks or huts, provided for them, and placed
under the immediate eye of the police, there is no
vigilance it possesses that can prevent the com-
mission of crimes of the most serious nature ; and
it will be equally impossible for the magistrate.


when offences are committed, to bring the guilty
to punishment. The convicts at present, having-
no settled place of residence, are accustomed to
change their lodgings as occasion may require, so
that when a theft is committed, and any indivi-
dual convict suspected, he cannot be found; he has
changed his lodgings, and no one knows where
he has gone. This gives the criminal tithe either
to conceal his stolen property or to dispose of it,
which is all that he requires, and by these means
the ends of public justice are defeated. There
are seventy-five convicts employed at the public
works at Paramatta, under the superintendent,
Mr. House, very few of whom have any place
whatever to lodge in, and they that have not, be-
ing more than sixty in number, pay for their lodg-
ings and fire, which, at a moderate estimate, can-
not amount to less than from ten to fifteen pounds
per week. This sum they have little means to ob-
tain but by theft, as few persons at Paramatta have
any work for them to do, when they have perform-
ed the public work assigned them by Government.
“A. second cause of the moral and political state
of Paramatta and its neighbourhood, is the mise-
rable state of the female convicts in the service
of the Crown, and employed at the Government
factory. Numbers of these women are of the
most infamous and abandoned character, com-
posed of the very dregs of the whole Colony , be-


ing principally collected from the gaols at head-
quarters, and all the different districts throughout
the whole Settlement; many of them are a terror
to the better part of society.
“ I need not state to your Excellency that these
female convicts have no more accommodation
provided for them than the male convicts. During
the night these women spread themselves through
all the town and neighbourhood of Paramatta, and
some are glad to cohabit with any poor, wretched
man who can give them shelter for the night.
From the best information I can obtain, many of
these females pay four shillings a week for their
lodging and fire: few of them have any means,
excepting prostitution, to obtain this sum; and
hence the male convicts weekly rob and plunder
either Governmentor private individuals, to supply
the urgent wants of the females who are devoted
to their pleasures. If this were not the case, the
females would be left entirely destitute; for the
lower order of free people neither could nor would
supply them with lodgings and other conveniences
to dress their food, unless they could remunerate
them to their satisfaction. The extensive illicit'
commerce carried on under these circumstances,
between the male and female convicts, is destruc-
tive of all religion, morality, and good order, and
destroys at once the most distant hope of any
reformation being produced in either. Nothing


can be more distressing to the serious, reflecting
mind, than to see the vices and miseries of these
abandoned females.
"When I am called upon, in the hour of sickness
and of want, to visit them in the General Hospital,
or in the wretched hovels where they lodge, my
mind is often oppressed beyond measure at the
sight of their sufferings. Though their vices have
rendered them loathsome to the better part of so-
ciety, yet these females are objects of the greatest
commiseration, from the certain miseries that at-
tend them through a life of dissipation while here
on earth; and, if their dreary prospect beyond the
grave be viewed in a religious light, it far exceeds
in horror the utmost bounds of human imagina-
tion. As their minister 1 must answer, ere long, at
the bar of Divine Justice, for my duty to these, ob-
jects of vice and woe ! I see how they live and how
they die ; and often feel inexpressible anguish of
spirit in the moment of approaching dissolution, on
my own and their account, and follow them to
the grave with awful forebodings, lest I should
be found at last to have neglected any part of my
public duty, as their minister and their magistrate,
and by so doing contributed to their eternal ruin !
So powerful are these reflections at times, that I
envy the situation of the most menial servant, who
is free from this solemn and sacred responsibility,
namely;, the care of immortal souls. However, lam
fully persuaded that whatever anxiety of mind


I may suffer on account of this part of my charge,
and whatever privations and hardships of body
these females may also endure, no relief will ever
be found for either, so long as the male and
female convicts are necessitated to provide lodg-
ings for themselves, and at liberty to spend their
nights in scenes of prostitution, robbery, and
other vices, such as their corrupt inclinations or
necessities may suggest.
“ I beg further to remark, that these women,
having no settled place of residence provided for
them, have no proper means of taking care of
their weekly ration; and on this account their
provisions are often stolen from them, so that
many have nothing to eat for two or three days
towards the latter end of the week; therefore
they are urged by the calls of hunger to steal, or
to do things worse. When I was in England, in
the year 180 S, I represented to His Majesty’s
Government the profligate state of the female
convicts at the period I left the Colony; which
was owing at that time, in a great measure,, to
the want of a barrack for their reception, where
the good could be separated from the bad, and
opportunity afforded to all those who wished to
redeem their characters, and return to the paths
of virtue. I was assured by those in authority, at
that time, that that serious evil should be re-
medied by barracks being provided for them.
His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, and


other gentlemen in high official situations, with
whom I conversed on the subject, considered the
reformation of the female convicts of the first
importance to the present and future welfare of
the colony; and were convinced that, unless
proper accommodations were provided for them,
they never could be reclaimed from vice. Seven
years have now elapsed since that period, and
Your Excellency is well aware that no provision
has yet been made for the female convicts to this
day; and that they are still exposed to the same
ruinous temptations and hardships as formerly,
with this difference only, that the evils have
increased to the public, in proportion to the
increased number of females sent out from
Europe. What I here state is from my own
positive knowledge; there is no one in the Colony
so well acquainted with their vices and distresses
as myself, as no one is called upon to visit them
so much in the hour of their affliction.
“ There is no magistrate in the settlement be-
fore whom they are so frequently brought on va-
rious accounts; nor any to whom they so much
appeal in the day of trouble. lam of opinion, that
no clergyman was ever placed in so painful and
trying a situation, as far as relates to the moral
and religious state of the people committed to
his care. I see them devoted to vice, and infamy,
and extreme wretchedness, while living; and
when they come to die, suffering all the horror


of mind and anguish of spirit that guiit can
possibly inspire; without the means of applying
any remedy to relieve their sufferings in either
case. There is another "serious evil I wish to
state to your Excellency, in consequence of the
female convicts being, at large in the night to
indulge their vicious habits and passions; namely,
there is scarcely one female convict that will
quietly go into the service of the most respectable
family in the Colony.
“ It generally happens, that when the female
convicts are ordered into the service of private
individuals by the magistrate, they will, in the
most open and positive manner, refuse to obey
his orders ; and will sooner live upon bread and
water in a solitary cell than leave Paramatta,
the scene of their sensual gratifications, till they
weary out, by length of time, the patience of the
magistrate, and he knows not what measures to
adopt to support his judicial authority, and to
carry his necessary orders into execution. Hence,
instead of the Government Factory being a
house of correction for the abandoned females,
and a benefit to the colonists and other inha-
bitants, as a check upon public vices, it becomes
the grand source of all moral corruption, insub-
ordination, and disease, and spreads its pesti-
lential influence throughout the most remote
parts of the Colony. On this account, there is
not a bushel of wheat or maize in the farmer’s


barn, nor a sheep in his fold, nor a hog in his
stye—nor even a potatoe, turnip, or cabbage in
his garden—but what he is liable to be robbed of
every night he lies down in his bed, either by
his own or his neighbour’s servants, to supply
the wants of these abandoned women, to whom
the men can gain access at all times of the night;
and nothing can prevent them while the women
are at large. The number of the women em-
ployed at the factory, under Mr. Oakes the
superintendent, is one hundred and fifty; they
have seventy children; there is not any room in
the factory that can be called a bed-room for
these women and children. There are only two
rooms, and these are both occupied as work-
shops; they are over the gaol, and are about
eighty feet long and twenty wide. In these
rooms there are forty-six women daily employed ;
twenty spinning wool upon the common wheel,
and twenty-six carding; there are also in them
the warping machine, &c. belonging to the fac-
tory. These rooms are crowded all the day;
and at night such women sleep in them as are
confined for recent offences, amongst the wheels,
wool, and cards, and a few others, who have no
means whatever of procuring a better abode.
The average number of women who sleep in the
factory, is about thirty in the whole; many of
these women have little and some no bedding ;
they all sleep on the floor; there is not a candle


or bedstead belonging to the factory. I do not
deem it either safe or prudent, that even thirty
women should sleep in the factory which has
been crowded all day with working people could
this be avoided; as the air must be bad and con-
tagious. Were the magistrate to compel even
half the number of women, with their children, to
sleep in the factory, which belong to it, they
could hot exist. Not less than one hundred and
twenty women are at large in the night to sleep
where they can. Many of them pay four shil-
lings per week for their lodgings and fire; they
have no means but theft and prostitution to
obtain this sum ; and these vices are become so
common and habitual, that the women will tell
the magistrate that they have no other means to
supply their necessities.
“ I am of opinion, that the sum paid by the
male and female prisoners, at Paramatta, for their
lodgings and fire, must exceed 1000/. per annum.
There are one hundred and fifty women, and
thirty-three men employed at the factory, under
Mr. Oakes ; and seventy-five under Mr. Rouse,
at the Lumber-yard, as mechanics,- &c. I have
not included in this statement, the constables,
the convicts employed in His Majesty’s stores,
nor the men and women servants at the General
Hospital, who are equally unprovided for.
“ No men can be more anxious and attentive
for the good of the public service than Messrs.


Rouse and Oakes: and they do all they can ; and
often feel it their duty to bring the convicts
under their directions before the magistrate, for
not performing the task assigned them. Though
they prove to the satisfaction of the magistrate
that the convicts under their directions have not
executed the task of labour enjoined upon them,
yet the magistrate, in many cases, is greatly per-
plexed how to administer impartial justice, for
the reasons above stated. •He must either
compel the convicts to make bricks without
straw, or exert his utmost ingenuity to compro-
mise the difference between the superintendents
and the convicts, in such a way that the' former
may not lose all their authority, nor the latter be
encouraged in their idleness; which is a very
hard and difficult task.
“ I might farther notice, that many of the male
and female convicts are much addicted to ine-
briety; and that the great number of licensed
houses to sell spirituous liquors considerably, in-
creases the number of crimes. Thirteen houses
were licensed this year to sell spirits at Para-
matta ; I should consider five, at the utmost, to
be amply sufficient for the accommodation of the
public. It would then be the interest of the
publicans to keep regular houses, while at present
it is the reverse.
“ I have now stated what I deem to be the real
causes of so many public offences being com-


mitted in this district, and the extreme anx-
iety and fatigue brought upon the magistrate in
consequence of them.
“ I now appeal to your Excellency, whether,
under such circumstances, any man of common
feeling, possessed of the least spark of humanity
or religion, standing in the same official relation
that I do to these people, as their spiritual pastor
and magistrate, could enjoy one happy moment
from the beginning to the end of the week. I
humbly conceive it is incompatible with the
character and wish of the British nation, that her
own exiles should be exposed to such privations
and dangerous temptations, when she is daily
feeding the hungry, and clothing the naked, and
receiving into her friendly, and I may add, pious
bosom, the strangers, whether savage or civilized,
of every nation under heaven. There are, in the
whole, under the two principal superintendents,
Messrs. Rouse and Oakes, one hundred and
eight men, one hundred and fifty women, and
seventy children; and nearly the whole of them
have to find lodgings for themselves when they
have performed their government task.
“ I trust that your Excellency will be fully
persuaded that it is totally impossible for the
magistrate to support his necessary authority,
and to establish a regular police, under such a
weight of accumulated and accumulating evils.
“ 1 am as sensible, as any one can be, that the


difficulty of removing these evils will be very
great; at the same time their number and influ-
ence may be greatly lessened, if the abandoned
male and female convicts be lodged in barracks,
and placed under the eye of the police, and the
number of licensed houses be reduced. Till
something of this kind is done, all attempts of the
magistrate, and the public administration of reli-
gion, will be attended with little benefit to the
general good.
“ I have the honour to be. Sir,
“ Your Excellency’s most obedient,
“ humble servant,
“ Samuel Marsden.”
“Sydney, iiQth July, 1815,
“ SIR,
“ I have just now been favoured with your let-
ter of yesterday’s date, and return you many
thanks for the information and suggestions con-
tained therein, respecting the immorality and
profligate, abandoned conduct of the male and
female convicts, at present employed by Govern-
ment at Paramatta. It has not escaped my ob-
servation that, for the last three years, greater
crimes, and more serious offences, have been
committed at Paramatta' and its vicinity, than in
any other of equal extent in this Colony. Perhaps
these enormities may be deducible principally to
the causes pointed out in your letter; namely.


the want of proper quarters, or barracks, for
lodging the male and female convicts in. I agree
with you that such barracks are essentially ne-
cessary, and would, I have no doubt, prevent
many robberies, and other evils pointed out in
your letter. I have all along been fully impressed
with the necessity of having barracks for the
male convicts, both at Sydney and Paramatta,
and a new factory, on an enlarged scale, for the
female convicts, erected at the latter place ; and
I wrote home, three years ago, to his Majesty’s
ministers, soliciting their permission to have
buildings of this description erected immediately.
I have not yet, however, been honoured with an
answer from them on this important subject; and
though I am as sensible as you can possibly be of
the utility and necessity of such buildings, yet
I cannot take upon myself so serious a responsi-
bility as to have them erected, and thereby in-
cur so great an expense to the Crown, with-
out first obtaining the permission of his Majesty’s
ministers for so doing. In the mean time, 1 la-
ment equally with you the disorders and immo-
ralities consequent on the want of proper quarters
for the male and female convicts : but they are
evils, I fear, that cannot be materially remedied
at present, in any other way than by establish-
ing a more energetic and active system of police.
I therefore recommend that the number of town-
constables should be immediately increased, and


that regular and frequent patroles of constables
should be established in the town of Paramatta,
for the protection of the persons and property of
the inhabitants, and for presex'ving the tranquil-
lity of the town.
“ I have the honour to be, &c.
“ L. Macquarie
“To the Rev. Samuel Marsden, principal Chaplain
and Magistrate at Paramatta.’’
The Governor paid no further attention to
what I had pressed upon him, than merely an-
swering my letter. I was convinced, therefore,
it would be in vain for me to urge this matter
further upon him, as I could not say more, to
induce him to order a building to be provided for
the women, than I had already done. After wait-
ing eighteen months, without the most distant
prospect of obtaining relief for the female convicts
from the Colonial government, I sent a copy of my
letter, with the Governor’s answer, to England.
In 1819, when the state of the gaols came under
the consideration of Parliament, a select com-
mittee of the House of Commons was appointed
to examine into various subjects relative to the
gaols, and the transportation of convicts to New
South Wales, when my letter, with the Governor’s
answer, were both laid before this committee,
and afterwards printed in the Committee’s Re-
port, pages 79 —84. It appears that, after my
letter to Governor Macquarie, and some other


documents had arrived in London, the Ear!
Bathurst made a communication to the Governor,
under date of 24th of June, 1817, which was
answered by the Governor, in a despatch dated
the 4th of December, in the same year, and which
is printed in the Appendix to the Deport of the
Same Committee, page 507. In this despatch
Governor Macquarie alludes to my letter ad-
dressed to him, respecting the female convicts
at Paramatta, in the following paragraph : —“ It
is very true that there are no suitable buildings
for them” (viz. the women) “ to lodge and reside
in provided by Government, excepting the factory
at Paramatta, which is only sufficient to contain
about sixty women, whilst there are, sometimes,
not fewer than two hundred employed there ;
these are, therefore, in common with the male
convicts, obliged, to find lodgings for themselves ;
it, therefore, often happens that they are ex-
posed to form bad connexions, which lead to
vicious and profligate conduct.”-—On the 19th
July, 1815, the date of my letter to the Governor,
there were between two and three hundred male
and female convicts in the employ of Government
at Paramatta, who had no lodgings provided for
them by the Crown. It may easily be conjec-
tured what must have been the scenes of vice
and profligacy committed every night, by such
an abandoned class of men and women. This
state of things did not exist merely for a few


months, but for ten years, after Governor Mac-
quarie arrived in the colony. My readers will
judge how far I, as resident chaplain, and se-
nior magistrate, at Paramatta, have merited the
odium and scandal attempted to be thrown upon
my character, for laying before the supreme Ma-
gistrate and Governor of this Colony the public
crimes and immoralities of the people committed
to my charge, both as a magistrate and as a cler-
gyman, and for soliciting the aid of Government
to remedy their pernicious and ruinous effects.
When I made ray statement to the Governor,
which has given so much unmerited offence, it
was not a sudden act, done on the impulse of the
moment; I had counted the cost, and was fully
aware that to offend my superior would neither
be to my interest nor happiness, but, on the con-
trary, would injure me in every possible way;
whatever I may have suffered on that account, I
have never repented of that act. Had I been a
tenfold greater hypocrite than Governor Macqua-
rie has laboured to represent me in,his Letter to
Viscount Sidmouth, yet ray hypocrisy could not
alter the moral evils which existed in his govern-
ment, either in their number or. magnitude, and
these he neglected to remedy for years. The fact
of the existence of these evils could not be con-
troverted ; they were known to the whole Colony,
and were so destructive and ruinous in their na-
ture;, and so affected the best interests of society,


that they left no just room for the exhibition of
wanton ridicule, or undignified observation. Had
the Governor duly considered his exalted rank,
and awful responsibility, as supreme magistrate,
he would have hesitated before he attempted to
justify his own public measures, by casting' reflec-
tions upon me, through the medium of light and
trifling language, which could only tend to lower
his own dignity in the minds of those who read
his pamphlet, whatever impression it might make
besides. I am, to this day, satisfied that I did no
more than my public duty, in forwarding such
memorial to the executive authority, to make
some provision to counteract the overwhelming
influence of public crime.—Had the Governor
conceived, at the time I wrote my letter to him,
that I had been influenced by improper motives„ or
that I had made any erroneous statements, it was in
his power to have instituted an immediate inves-
tigation, public or private, and then, if he had
found, on the result of such enquiry, just and
sufficient ground, he might, with some truth and
justice on his side, have passed his censures upon
me. He had also a fair opportunity to do this
when the Commissioner of Enquiry, John Thomas
Bigge, Bsq., arrived in the Colony, legally com-
missioned by his sovereign, to examine into every
thing relative to the concerns of the Colony, and
sworn to do justice in, every case submitted
to. his investigation. It would have been easy


for him to have ascertained, before the Com-
missioner of Enquiry, the truth or falsehood of all
that he has stated in his letter to Viscount Sid-
mouth, before he sent it into the world, had he pos-
sessed the smallest wish to do so ; for it appears
from the date of the letter, that the Commissioner
was on the spot when it was written. I admit, and
I think it very evident, that the Governor may have
written some of his observations in the moment
of irritation; and this may in some degree ac-
count for the language he makes use of, and the
errors in his statements. He took for granted
many things that could not be proved, because
they never had any real existence.
" I am further accused of severity as a magis-
trate : I hope I shall be able to make it appear
that this accusation stands unsupported by fact.
Assertions without proof avail but little. This
charge was first made against me in- a despatch
from Governor Macquarie to Earl Bathurst, under
date of the 4th December, 1817, and originated
from the following circumstance. On the death
of Mr. Judge Advocate Bent, in November 1815,
Mr. Solicitor Garling was appointed acting Judge
Advocate until the following October, when Mr.
Judge Advocate Wylde arrived to fill that office.
During the period that Mr, Garling performed
the duty of criminal j udge, some very heavy sen-
tences were past upon four men who were tried
before him, viz. Michael Hoare, John Gilchrist,


Edward Doyle, and John White. These men
were sent up to Paramatta gaol to receive part of
their punishment by solitary confinement, and
afterwards they were to be sent to one of the
penal settlements. They had not been long con-
fined in their cells, before some of them became
so very ill that they were removed into the Ge-
neral Hospital. I mentioned their situations to
the Governor, and advised him to mitigate their
sentences, under the impression that it would be
impossible for these men, from the state they
were in, to survive the heavy punishment that
had been awarded against them. As the gaol
was under my inspection, as resident magistrate
of the district, I felt it my duty to report to the
Governor the state the above prisoners were in.
The Governor did not attend to my recom-
mendations, and I said no more upon the sub-
ject, but afterwards stated their case to Mr.
Judge Advocate Wylde upon his arrival: still
nothing was done for these men. One of the
prisoners, Edward Doyle, had been servant for-
merly to the late Nicholas Bayly, Esq. During
their confinement, Mr. Bayly went accidentally
into the gaol to select some labourers from a body
of newly arrived convicts, when he saw Doyle
and the other prisoners, and learned from them
what their sentences were, and what effect they
had already produced upon them, and which he
could not but notice from the emaciated state


they appeared to be in. The sentences of these
men, being uncommonly severe, and having been
noticed in the Sydney Gazette, had excited con-
siderable sensation in the public mind. Mr.
Bayly made some representation respecting them
to the Government at home, but what that was I
never knew, having never seen his statement. A
copy of his letter, without signature, was sent
back by Earl Bathurst to the Governor for him to
answer. When the Governor received it, he imme-
diately suspected that I was the author, and spoke
to me on the subject. The Governor founded his
suspicion upon what I had formerly stated to
him respecting these men, when I advised him to
mitigate their punishment, and asked me if I did
not recollect the conversation that had passed
between him and me at that time: I replied in
the affirmative, and repeated the substance of it
immediately. As I had never either seen this
letter or known its contents, I could only deny
the authorship. The Governor then handed over
the letter to Mr. Justice Field for his perusal, who
assured the Governor that I was not the author;
that the letter was neither written in my language,
nor did it contain my sentiments of his govern-
ment. But nothing that I or Mr. Justice Field
could say, could remove this impression from
his mind; and under the influence of this im-
pression, in his despatch to Earl Bathurst, of
the 4th December, 1817, in reply to Mr. Bayly’s


letter, in retaliation for the supposed injury I had
done him, the Governor inserted the following'
paragraph. “Some years ago, for the'express
purpose of preventing severe punishments from
being inflicted in the interior districts by the ma-
gistrates, I directed them to send me quarterly
returns of all persons confined, tried, and pun-
ished by their authority. These returns are now
regularly made, and on comparing one with the
other, in those received from the Rev. Mr. Mars-
den, as senior magistrate at Paramatta, I have
invariably found that the punishments inflicted
by his authority are much more severe than those
inflicted by any other magistrate in the Colony.”
When the Commissioner of Enquiry came out, he
brought Mr. Bayly’s original letter with him in his
own hand-writing, and signed with his signature,
which Mr. Bayly readily acknowledged to be his.
This circumstance proved beyond all doubt,
that I had not been guilty of writing this “ ano-
nymous” letter, as the Governor called it, (be-
cause the Secretary of State had suppressed the
name of its author) against his person and govern-
ment, to his Majesty’s Ministers; and that I had
thus suffered wrongfully under this imputation.
The circumstance of the Governor’s having re-
ceived the quarterly returns of all punishments
inflicted by me, and never having noticed, for
years, any severity of punishment, either to myself
or to any of his Majesty’s Ministers, must weaken


this charge against me in the opinion of every
impartial judge; and more especially when it is
considered what state the Governor’s mind was
in towards me at the period he made this charge.
The charge was evidently made under the most
unfriendly feelings, arising from a false and un-
conquerable suspicion which he had cherished
in his bosom respecting the above letter. From
what had occurred upon this subject, the Com-
missioner of Enquiry was induced to ask Mr.
Judge Advocate Wylde the following question;
“ Do you consider Mr. Marsden a severe magis-
trate?” Answer —“ I should not say he was a
severe magistrate; I should say he was a strict
magistrate.” I conceive there is a very material
difference between severity and strictness in a
magistrate. I ever considered that the certainty of
punishment operated more powerfully upon the
mind of the delinquent than the severity of pun-
ishment ; and upon this principle I acted. Long-
experience in this Colony has taught me that
this opinion is correct, and founded upon a
sound, wise, and, I may add, a humane policy.
■ A magistrate has a duty which he owes to the
public as well as to the delinquents, and he is
not justified in remitting punishments where the
safety and well-being of the community call
for their infliction, ft should not be overlooked
that Paramatta was the settlement to which all
the disorderly women were sent by every bench


of magistrates and court in the Colony, and that
these women drew to the town the male con-
victs from every district with whom they had
formed an illicit intercourse. No man of com-
mon reflection can suppose for a moment that a
magistrate could maintain his authority and en-
force any subordination, or protect the inhabitants
of a town in such a state of vice and profligacy,
without great strictness in the discharge of his
office. According to the Governor’s own state-
ment in his despatch to Earl Bathurst, of the
4th of December, 1817, already alluded to, there
were one hundred and forty women convicts (and
most of these were common prostitutes), and
about the same number of male convicts, at large
during the night in the town of Paramatta, at full
liberty to indulge in any vicious practices their
corrupt inclinations might dictate, except the
little restraint imposed by a limited police; for
not one of all these numbers had a place pro-
vided by the Crown for him or her to lodge in;
nor were there gaols to confine them for any
crimes they might commit. I shall also be able
to show, from two government and general orders
issued by General Macquarie, that it was not in
my power to inflict severe punishments. These
two orders were published in the Sydney Ga-
zette ; the first on the 10th, and the second on
the 20th of September, 1814: and were after-
wards printed in the appendix to the Letter ad-


dressed by Governor Macquarie to Viscount
Sidmouth, under date of the 31st of January,
1820, in answer to a Letter addressed to Earl
Bathurst on the condition of the Colonies, by the
Honourable Henry Grey Bennet, M. P, One of
these orders enjoined upon the magistrate at Pa-
ramatta, that the gaol-gang there should not con-
sist of more than ten men; and the other, that
not more than fifty lashes should be inflicted upon
delinquents. At the same time, it was out of the
power of the magistrate to punish crimes by soli-
tary confinement, for want of a suitable gaol. From
the general state of dissipation, and from the riots
and robberies nightly committed in the town of
Paramatta, originating in the unrestrained inter-
course of between two and three hundred male
and female convicts, it became the imperious
duty of the magistrate to exercise the little au-
thority and means he possessed with strictness,
for the protection of the lives and properties of
the peaceable inhabitants. Persons who are not
practically acquainted with the extent of crime
committed under the above circumstances, can-
not be competent judges of the duty of a magis-
trate so situated. It is evident, that from the
10th of September, 1814, to the 16th of March,
1818, the day I voluntarily resigned the magis-
terial office, I could not, during that period, sen-
tence any delinquent to receive more than fifty
lashes, without violating the government and


general orders; and as the Governor received a
return of all sentences inflicted by me, he could
not omit noticing the breach of his own orders,
had such a circumstance frequently occurred;
nor can it be easily credited, that I, knowing the
unfriendly terms I was then upon with the Go-
vernor, would have put myself in his power, by
violating his public orders in the discharge of
my magisterial duties. I will here notice one
instance out of many that came before me, to
show that the magistrates ought to possess some
discretionary power with respect to punishments
in this community, where there are hundreds, who
have committed, in England as well as here, and
are still capable of committing, capital offences
against the state. Shortly after H. M'Arthur, Esq.
was appointed a magistrate, and associated with
me in that office, six brickmakers belonging to
Government, were sent up from Sydney to make
bricks for the Crown at Paramatta, They were
all dangerous infamous characters. The overseer
brought them repeatedly before the bench for
idleness and other misconduct, when they were
admonished and discharged. Admonition had no
effect upon them; they continued their miscon-
duct, and, the overseer continued to bring them
from time to time before the bench, when the ma-
gistrates sentenced them to receive each fifty
lashes. One of them, named Hill, as he turned
from the bench with the greatest contempt,


making use at the same time of an horrid oath,
ridiculed the sentences passed upon him and his
companions, and wanted to know why the ma-
gistrates retailed punishments out in that way,
and proposed that one of them should receive
the whole punishments that had been awarded.
Hill, for his daring impiety and open contempt
of the bench, was placed before the magistrates
again, when one of the bench gave it as his
opinion, that as Hill had proposed that one of
them should receive the whole of the punish-
ment that had been awarded, he should re-
ceive it, and the other men be discharged; for
he was certain that Hill would be hanged unless
he was checked by some severe punishment, he
was such a wicked daring character. I informed
my brother-magistrate that this could not be
done, for the magistrates were not authorized
to award a greater punishment by the Colonial
orders than we had done, and that Hill could
not receive more than his share. Hill, after this,
became a bush-ranger and common robber. A
constable fell in with him, and in his attempt to
secure Hill, Hill stabbed the constable and got
off again into the woods. He afterwards com-
mitted other robberies, and was discovered in a
cave amongst the rocks, where the constables
surrounded him. He made a desperate resist-
ance, and was not secured until he was shot.
His wounds, though severe, were not mortal He


was afterwards tried and executed for stabbing
the constable. If I had felt myself safe in
awarding more than fifty lashes in, any case,
agreeably to the Government order, I should,
upon every principle of justice, expediency,
and humanity, have sentenced Hill to receive
more than that number at this time. Had he
received the punishment due to his offences,
many of his future crimes might have been pre-
vented, and his life prolonged. I mention this
case also to show that I was unwilling to
violate the public orders, though the safety of
the community loudly called for more exemplary
punishments upon such daring offenders. I might
state many more instances of a similar kind, that
have constantly occurred. In concluding my ob-
servations upon the above accusation, I am war-
ranted in saying that the Governor stated no
specific fact. He did not say to Earl Bathurst
that on such a day, or month, or year, I inflicted
severe punishment on any one individual or in-
dividuals. The charge, therefore, at most, is
merely general, and stands unsupported by any
evidence. There is one paragraph in the Go-
vernor’s despatch of the 4th of December, 1817,
which is worthy of notice, in which he says,
“ I frequently visit and inspect all the gaols in
the Colony personally, and I add, with much sa-
tisfaction, that I never once received a complaint
of bad or cruel treatment from any of the prise-


ners confined in them.” This testimony com-
ing from such high authority, and stated upon
personal knowledge, and afterwards being trans-
mitted in an official despatch to his Majesty’s
Government, merits some degree of credit, even
from my adversaries. If at any time the prison-
ers felt themselves aggrieved by any act of mine,
and had any complaint to make, they had an op-
portunity to do so in the Governor’s frequent
personal visits to the gaols ; and all who are ac-
quainted with the restless dispositions of men in
their situation, know that such characters are
never backward to make their complaints known
on every occasion. All the Colony knew that
differences existed between the Governor and
myself, and that any well-founded complaint
against me would not be unacceptable to the ru-
ling powers.
I may here notice the testimony of Richard
Jones, Esq., given before the Committee of the
House of Commons on the Ist of July, 1819, and
printed in the Report of the Committee, page
147 : “ Are you acquainted with Mr. Marsden ?
I am. What character does he hear in the Colo-
ny ? It is impossible for a man to bear a better;
both as a moral and good man in the country, in
every point of view, his character is unexception-
able. Is his removal from the magistracy of the
country considered as a public loss ? I think it is ;
he has been universally allowed to be the best
magistrate in New South Wales : there is not a


magistrate or person in New South Wales who
will not say that he was, during the period he was
in the magistracy, the best magistrate we had.”
I shall now leave the public to decide how far I
have merited the charge of acting with severity as
a magistrate.
Amongst the various accusations contained in
Governor Macquarie’s Letter to Viscount Sid-
mouth, there is one in which I stand charged with
trafficking in spirits.* Upon what just ground
this charge rests, I shall leave my readers to judge
from the following statement; but at the same
time the charge is so general and undefined, as
to the time and occasion the Governor alludes to,
that there might appear some difficulty in meeting
it. In the infancy of the Colony, previous to my
arrival, barter was established, as the means of
buying and selling amongst all classes, from the
Governor downwards, for the mutual accommo-
dation of the community. As there was no beef
nor milk, and often neither tea nor sugar to be pur-
* “ The Rev. Mr. Marsden (says Governor Macquarie) being
himself accustomed to traffic in spirits, must necessarily feel
displeased at having so many public-houses licensed in the
neighbourhood.” (p. 14.) The Edinburgh Review, in quoting
this passage, prints by mistake, “ says Mr, Bigge", instead of
“ says Governor Macquarie," which makes all the difference be-
tween the accusation of my adversary, and the opinion of my
judge. But thus do public critics mistake away people’s cha-
racters! For Mr. Bigge's opinion of this accusation, see the
Appendix.


chased at any price, wine and spirits became the
medium of exchange at that time, in common with
other commodities. As the Colony progressively-
advanced in agriculture, commerce, and wealth,
barter gradually decreased, and money-transac-
tions became more general, as the wants of indi-
viduals could be more readily supplied, either from
the produce of the land, or from the merchants
who from time to time established themselves in
the Colony. I can affirm that, for the last eighteen
years, I have not had in my possession as much
spirits as would allow my servants half a pint each
per week, and at no period of my residence in the
Colony, did I ever purchase spirits for sale. I
had been almost thirty years in the Colony, and
ten years under Governor Macquarie’s govern-
ment, before this charge was made against me ;
and he did it at a time when he knew that it would
suit his own purpose best; not before, nor at the
period when, the Commissioner of Enquiry was
in the Colony, but after he was gone. By this
means I was deprived of the opportunity of a fair
and impartial investigation into this charge. Had
the Commissioner been here, its truth or falsehood
could easily have been established, for the wit-
nesses were upon the spot. I could not have kept
a public-house for the sale of spirits, selling it in
any quantity from a pint to a puncheon, as the
advocate of Governor Macquarie asserts in his
subsequent publication, without the knowledge
of the community. After the Governor’s printed


letter reached this country, it was not in my
power to call upon him for an explanation, so long
as he continued to administer the Government;
but I wrote immediately to the Commissioner on
the subject; and a copy of this letter will be found
in the Appendix to these pages, in which I no-
ticed some other remarks of Governor Macquarie,
besides the charge in question. On Governor
Macquarie’s retiring from the Government, I ad-
dressed an official letter to him, a copy of which
is here submitted to the public :
“ Paramatta, December 4, 1821.
“ Sin,
“ Previous to your departure from the Colony,
I feel myself called upon to address a few lines to
you, in consequence of a letter which appears to
have been written by you to the Right Honoura-
ble Lord Sidmouth, under date of the 31st of Janu-
ary, 1820, and laid before the public in 1821. This
letter contains certain charges and allegations
against me, in which my character is seriously in-
volved, as a clergyman holding the first clerical
situation in these Settlements for the last twenty
years, and a father of a family, now advancing fast
down the vale of life. On this account lam anx-
ious to have them fully investigated while you are
upon the spot; in order that all doubt relative to
their truth or incorrectness may be removed from
the public mind.
“ I cannot but regret, that you did not make
these charges against me when the Honourable


Commissioner of Enquiry was here, when their
truth or falsehood could have been so easily esta-
blished, and, being included in his Report, would
have come before my superiors with more official
clearness and importance than can perhaps at
this period be obtained. Why you preferred to
allege your charges against me to the Right
Honourable Lord Sidmouth, rather than convey
them to his Majesty’s Government through the
Honourable Commissioner of Enquiry, the official
medium pointed out by the British Parliament,
and actually in the Colony at the period the let-
ter in question appears to have been written, it
is not for me to say. I can only repeat, I regret
you did not do this, as the way was so open, free
and easy, for you to have stated to the Commis-
sioner, all you have done to the Right Honour-
able Lord Sidmouth, relative to myself, and
equally open' for me to have replied to your ac-
cusations. As that opportunity is now gone by,
I am constrained, though most unwillingly, to
make this present application to you; in doing
which, I beg to assure you, I am not influenced
by any unchristian feeling or vindictive motives;
my only wish is to obtain a fair explanation, and
to know upon what just grounds these charges
rest; and with as little trouble and inconvenience
to myself, and you, as the nature of the case will
admit. I should have made this application im-
mediately on the arrival of your printed letter in


the Colony, had not you, upon former occasions,
expressed your sentiments to me with so much
warmth, on all political points in which our opi-
nions did not coincide. I, therefore, thought it
more prudent to wait till your mind was relieved
from all the cares of your government, when you
could with more convenience attend to my re-
quest. I have no doubt but you will allow, that
I have a right to demand an explanation, as an
act of common justice, and that no man ought
to be condemned unheard.
“At the same time, I wish to obtain this in
any way that may be deemed most agreeable
to you, consistent with my own reputation. I
have conceived it most respectful in me as a
clergyman, having served under your authority,
during the whole period of your administration,
and also more congenial to my own feelings, to
write to you, in the first instance, rather than to
call for a public investigation. Every man has
an undoubted right, when accused, to vindicate
his own conduct, and further than this I have no
wish to go; but so far lam compelled to make
the attempt at least, or bear the public reproaches
which lam conscious I never merited. Should
you be persuaded, that your statements to the
Right Honourable Lord Sidraouth, relative to my-
self, are correct, and that you have not been de-
ceived in the information you have grounded your
charges upon, and therefore willing and ready to


defend them, I trust I may then be at liberty,
without being charged with any unkind feeling
or unchristian conduct towards you, to adopt
such measures as may appear to me best calcu-
lated to set my character right in the opinion of
my superiors and an impartial public.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your most obedient, humble servant,
“ Samuel Marsden.’ 1
“ To Major General Macquarie,
&c. &c. &c.”
To this letter the Governor returned me no
answer. It may be presumed he would have
done so, if he could have made a replication
with truth, safety, and honour. As Governor
Macquarie took no notice of my letter, I wished
to bring the subject before the Supreme Court
by a civil action. Previous to making appli-
cation to Mr. Justice Field, I wrote a letter to
His Excellency Sir Thomas Brisbane, of which
the following is a copy; inclosing at the same
time a copy of my letter to Governor Mac-
quarie,
Paramatta,- January 21,*/, 1025.
" Sir,
“ I have taken the liberty to lay before your
Excellency the copy of a letter, which I ad-
dressed to General Macquarie on the 4th ultimo,


and which he has not condescended to notice up
to the present time. The publication to which my
letter alludes, (viz. General Macquarie’s Letter
to the Right Honourable Lord Sidraouth,) con-
tains some very pointed observations relative to
ray conduct, which are calculated and studiously
designed to wound my reputation in every part
of the world, in the opinion of any person into
whose hands that publication may chance to fall.
I have no hesitation in saying, that it contains
a false and scandalous libel upon my character.
The following reasons have induced me to call
upon General Macquarie for an explanation by
letter, rather than by an appeal to a court of
law.
“ Ist. I conceived, that it was impossible to
foresee what evils might not be created in the
Colony by a legal investigation, in the present
unsettled state of the public mind.
u 2dly. I conceived an action of law, against
General Macquarie here, would only tend to
weaken the arm of the executive authority, and
lessen the respect due to the supreme power.
“ 3dly. I also conceived, that as a minister of
the Gospel of peace, it was my duty, while I
suffered injury as a man, to bear it as a
Christian.
“ How far I have acted with sound judgment,
in yielding to the above considerations, I
cannot say. I trust, that after twenty-eight


years of public service in this Colony, and with
the approbation of every former Governor,
(General Macquarie excepted,) ray character
will not suffer in your Excellency’s opinion, nor
in that of his Majesty’s Government, and my
best friends in England, from any wanton and
unmerited attack which General Macquarie may
think himself warranted in making upon me
through the public press.
“ Could I persuade myself that his pamphlet
would produce this effect, I would instantly ap-
peal to a court of law, for the vindication of my re-
putation, and should feel myself justified in taking-
such a step. If General Macquarie’s assertions
were correct, my conduct would be a disgrace to
my profession, and I ought no longer to retain my
public situation. But I feel so fully conscious of
the correctness and integrity of my public and
private manner of life during the whole adminis-
tration of General Macquarie, that I am most
ready and willing to meet any and every charge
he may have to allege, or has alleged, against
me, of whatever nature it may be. I have
ever had an anxious wish, and at the same time
have felt it my duty, to support the honour and
safety of his Majesty’s Government; , and I do
maintain, that my conduct has corresponded
with the dignity of the public situations I have
had the honour to hold under this Government.


If General Macquarie will not meet me before his
departure from the Colony, upon fair, open and
honourable ground, to vindicate his conduct,
or to give me an opportunity to vindicate mine
upon the spot, the matters at issue between us
must rest, until he arrives in England; though
I feel that in exercising this forbearance, I am
not doing strict justice to my own character,
and may, perhaps, have to repent hereafter, the
not appealing to the laws of my country to
redress my wrongs, while the General is in the
Colony to answer my complaint.
“ I must now apologize to your Excellency for
addressing you upon this occasion. As lam to
serve under your authority, I felt myself called
upon to mention the subject. I have felt anxious
to convince your Excellency, that I am prepared
to vindicate myself against every accusation Ge-
neral Macquarie has brought against me in his
public letter to the Right Honourable Lord Sid-
mouth ; and I have stated above, my only reasons
for waiving a public prosecution in this Colony;
viz. my wish not to increase the unsettled state
of the public mind ; not to lessen the respect due
to the supreme power; and not to show any liti-
gious feeling towards General Macquarie. In
adopting this line of conduct, I can injure none
but myself; and I shall always have the satis-
faction to feel, that I have acted upon Christian


principles, should my reputation hereafter suffer
in the public opinion fot want of a legal justi-
ficatidh.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your Excellency’s most obedient
“ humble servant.
" Samuel Mausden.
“ To His Excellency, Governor
Sir Thomas Brisbane, &o. &c. &c."
Shortly afterwards, a verbal communication
took place between Sir Thomas Brisbane and
myself dn the subject. The result of this inter-
view went so fat, as to induce me to relinquish
my intention of commencing an action at law; in
the supreme court of civil jurisdiction in this
Colony, for the unfounded and libellous state-
ments contained in the printed letter to Viscount
Sidmonth. At that period, there were strong
reasons of a public nature existing in the Colony,
which induced me to forbear my intended,
prosecution of Governor Macquarie, contrary to
my own judgment; but I have ever since felt that
I did not do justice to ray own character, in
suffering Governor Macquarie to leave the Co-
lony, without compelling him to answer the
charges he had alleged against me before a
court of law'-.
In ofder to show that I was not afraid of
meeting this charge in open court, I wrote to my


friends in London, furnishing them with such
documents as I deemed necessary for my justifi-
cation ; and requested, that an action for the libel
might be instituted in the court of King’s Bench
against Governor Macquarie, on his arrival, should
they deem such a measure necessary. Here the
matter rested, and would have remained in ob-
livion, had not the advocate of Governor Mac-
quarie, Mr. Wentworth, renewed, by publishing
this false, scandalous, and malicious libel, former
attacks upon my character. I may here notice
a Government and general order, issued by Go-
vernor Macquarie on the 17th of August, 1816,
relative to the traffic of officers generally. This
order is printed in his own letter, addressed to
Viscount Sidmouth; and in it is the following
paragraph. “ His Excellency the Governor or-
ders and directs, that from and after the Ist
day of January next ensuing, no officer or per-
son holding any commission or appointment
under this Government, shall, directly or indi T
rectly, be concerned in any mercantile or trading
concerns whatever, on pain of, being dismissed
from his situation.” This order was issued more
than five years before the Governor resigned his
government. I presume, that it will hardly be
credited, that I should be so daring, at least for
these five years, to venture to do any act that
could by any forced construction be construed
into a breach of this order, which would subject


me to the loss of my commission, and to dismission
from His Majesty’s service. I was not upon such
friendly terms with Governor Macquarie, nor had
I been so for many years, as to warrant me to
expect the smallest favour or forbearance from
him, if I in any manner offended against his go-
vernment.
The circumstance that is stated in Mr, Went-
worth’s book to have occurred, relative to the
wind-mill being seen at work during church-time,
did not happen with my knowledge or sanction.
The mill was not in my possession at that time,
nor was lin New South Wales. I never heard
of the circumstance taking place but once, and
the Commissioner of Enquiry was the person who
told me of it, after my return from New Zealand,
in the presence of the head-constable of Para-
matta, who informed the commissioner that the
mill was not in my possession at that time, but
rented to a resident in Paramatta. I expressed
my regret to the commissioner, that any thing
should have taken place in my absence, which had
the appearance that I sanctioned the violation
of the Sabbath-day. As I was 1200 miles off at
the time, it was out of my power to prevent what
had happened ; but I assured him that it should
not occur again, for the mill should be taken
down ; which was done.
It is also alleged against me, in the same
publication, as an instance of my unfeeling in-


humanity, that I opposed the establishment of
the Benevolent Society for the relief of the aged
and indigent poor. This statement contains a
gross misrepresentation. On the occasion alluded
to, a meeting of the Benevolent Society of Syd-
ney had been called together by public adver-
tisement in the Sydney Gazette. I attended that
meeting. Governor Macquarie was in the chair.
It was proposed by one of the Sydney members,
that the Benevolent Societies of Paramatta and
Windsor should be incorporated with the Sydney
Society ; and that there should be one general
depository at Sydney, where all the necessary
stores should be kept, and from which all the
supplies should be drawn for Paramatta and
Windsor. This proposition was supported by
several of the Sydney members. I conceived
that the measure was very ill-judged, as it would
immediately destroy the funds of our Society at
Paramatta, and spoke to the following effect
That our Benevolent Society had now been es-
tablished for a considerable time, and was going-
on well, and that we were very willing to relieve
the wants of our own poor, but that the shop-
keepers, and others, who supported our society,
would not subscribe if their money was to be
sent to Sydney for the benefit of the merchants
and others there. In reply to my objections it
was still contended, that the whole would be be-
nefited by a general incorporation. The very


agitation of this proposition excited a suspicion
in the minds of the inhabitants of Paramatta, that
the only object which those had in view, who
pressed the union of the societies, was to have
the money, which was raised for the benefit of
the poor at Paramatta, expended at Sydney for
the benefit of the traders and merchants there.
In consequence of this persuasion, the subscri-
bers to our society immediately withdrew their
subscriptions, by which means it was annihilated
from that day to the present time. We wanted
no assistance from Sydney, we were willing to
relieve the wants of our own poor, and we only
wished that the society at Sydney would not in-
terfere with our society. In making my objec-
tion to the incorporation of the societies, I not
only expressed my own sentiments, but the opi-
nion of the body of our society. The subscribers,
when afterwards called upon for the amount of
their subscription, said, if any benefit was to be
derived from supplying the necessaries to the
poor, the subscribers were entitled to that bene-
fit, and not the merchants and shopkeepers of
Sydney, fifteen miles distant. It must be appa-
rent, from the above facts, that those members
of the Benevolent Society at Sydney, who pro-
posed and urged the union of the two societies,
did a most serious injury to the poor, by wishing
to force a measure which the public at Paramatta
would not sanction, because they conceived that


it militated not only against their inclinations, but
against their interest. I may here observe, that
my opposition to the Benevolent Society for the
relief of aged and indigent poor extended so far
and no farther. To show my good will to the
Sydney Benevolent Society, I have continued
my subscription of two guineas per annum to the
present time ; a circumstance not worth noticing,
if my adversary had not expressed himself with
such a spirit of bitterness, malevolence, and vi-
tuperation.
The following charge is also made against me in
Mr. Wentworth’s book, and contains another gross
misrepresentation, viz. That I, on one occasion,
actually went and intreated Lieutenant-colonel
O’Connell, of the 73d regiment, who was admi-
nistering the government during the absence of
Major-general Macquarie, while on a tour of in-
spection through the southern settlements, to ba-
nish from the Colony a missionary of the name of
Crook, because a small congregation of devout
individuals were in the habit of assembling occa-
sionally in his house, for the purpose of private
devotion. Mr, Crook was sent from England as
a missionary to the Society Islands, under the
patronage of the London Missionary Society.
On his arrival in the Colony, he withdrew himself
from the service of the Society for more than ten
years. For a considerable time he resided at
Paramatta, and officiated as parish-clerk at my


church until he removed to Sydney. During my
absence from the Colony, in 1808, after the late
Admiral Bligh was deprived of his government,
Mr. Crook was, by the then ruling powers,
though a layman, appointed chaplain to the
church where he had officiated as clerk ; and
this duty he performed, as well as the surplice
duties of burying the dead and christening the
children. Whether Mr. Crook was, from princi-
ple, a member of the established Church, or a
Dissenter, is not for me to say; his public con-
duct gave the community sufficient reason to
conclude that he was a member of the church.
He performed the duties of parish-clerk; he
received the holy sacrament regularly in the
church; and after the late Admiral Bligh’s arrest,
and the regular officiating clergyman was sus-
pended from his sacred functions, Mr. Crook
was appointed, as already mentioned, to perform
divine service in the church, and for this duty he
received a salary. On my return to the Colony,
in 1810, I found several missionaries in New
South Wales, who had lately arrived from the
Society Islands; and as I was agent for their so-
ciety, they applied to me for advice and support.
Mr. Crook being originally intended to form one
of the body, an intimacy was soon formed be-
tween the missionaries and him. In time, some
of them began to disapprove of Mr. Crook’s con-
duct, and particularly of his administering the holy


sacrament in a private house; and such as were
dissatisfied with him contended, that as he was
a layman, and had never been ordained by any
religious community as a minister of the Gospel,
he was not authorised to administer that holy
ordinance. They also conceived that Mr. Crook
degraded this sacred ordinance, by administer-
ing it in common vessels of daily use; and, as
none of them were deprived of the benefits of
this ordinance, since it was administered every
month in the established Church, it appeared to
them unnecessary for him to take upon himself
this sacred service. On this ground the mission-
aries applied to me, as agent of their society, to
speak to Mr. Crook on the subject. As Mr. Crook
had for years publicly attended the established
Church, when he was clerk, and afterwards when
he performed divine service in the church, and
received the sacrament, he could not, in this in-
stance, be supposed to act from purely consci-
entious motives. I therefore complied with the
request of the missionaries, whom he now con-
sidered as his brethren and colleagues, and in-
formed him what they had alleged against him,
and recommended him not to administer the sa-
crament in his house any more, as this gave them
so much offence. However, he was determined
to act in this respect as he thought proper, and
communicated to the missionaries the result of
what bad passed between us. A strong party-


spirit began now to manifest itself between Mr.
Crook and the missionaries who differed with
him, and it was thought advisable to mention the
circumstance to the Governor. The Governor
expressed his disapprobation of Mr. Crook’s con-
duct, and desired me to inform him, that if he
persevered in administering the sacrament in his
house, he would order him to leave the Colony,
as he considered it unbecoming the sacredness of
that ceremony. I replied, that I did not wish to
deliver that message to Mr. Crook: the Governor
then directed me to communicate it from him to
the Lieutenant-governor, Colonel O’Connell, who
would deliver it. I then sent for the Rev. Wil-
liam Cowper, assistant chaplain to the Colony, and
for Mr. Crook, to the Orphan-house, and in the
presence of Mr. Cowper, informed Mr. Crook what
message the Governor had directed to be deli-
vered to him, through the medium of the Lieu-
tenant-governor. 1 was in hopes that Mr. Crook
would have expressed a willingness to comply
with the Governor’s directions, without obliging
me to go to the Lieutenant-governor, wishing to
avoid that, if it could be done, as it would only
tend to increase the unfriendly feelings to-
wards each other, that already existed in the
minds of those who professed the Gospel. How-
ever, in this I was mistaken ; Mr. Crook was
still determined to administer the sacrament in
his own house ; he therefore accompanied Mr.


Cowper and me to Colonel O’ConneH’s bar-
racks, where I delivered the Governor’s mes-
sage, which was immediately communicated to
Mr. Crook by the Lieutenant-governor, and the
dispute was set at rest. My interference in this
matter, amongst the missionaries, created very
unfriendly feelings in Mr. Crook’s mind towards
me, and he did not fail to act upon them by re-
presenting me, both in India and in England, as
a persecutor of Dissenters; and I was informed
that his representations had produced their in-
tended effect upon the minds of some individuals
in the Christian world. If I was an enemy to the
missionaries, as my accuser wishes to make the
world believe, the Directors of the London Mis-
sionary Society cannot pass entirely free from
censure. They have placed the concerns of their
mission to the South Sea Islands in my hands for
the last twenty-five years, during which period
God, in his infinite goodness, has greatly blessed
the labours of the missionaries, to the glory of
his grace and mercy. Twenty-five years is time
more than sufficient, for the Directors to have
found out their error, and to have withdrawn
their confidence from me, if I had done any
thing to forfeit it. As the Rev. Daniel Tyerman
and George Bennet, Esq. a deputation from the
Missionary Society, happened to be in New
South Wales, on their way to India from the
South Sea Islands, after accomplishing their mis-


sion there, when the publication in question
arrived in the Colony, I addressed a letter to
them, of which the following is a copy, with their
answer.
“ Paramatta, Mai/ 6th, 18 25.
“ Gentlemen,
“ As you have been deputed by the Missionary
Society to examine into the concerns of the mis-
sion and the state of the missionaries in the South
Sea Islands, I am induced to address a few lines
to you in your official capacity as representatives
of that Society. You are aware that a publica-
tion has recently arrived in this Colony, which
contains a most scandalous and libellous attack
upon both my public and private character. It
is evident that the intention of the writer was to
give a most deadly blow to my reputation, in the
opinion of every person into whose hands it might
chance to fall. As I have been closely connected
with the Missionary Society and the mission-
aries in those islands, I wish to notice one charge
which is made against me in this work, in which
I am accused of persecuting a missionary, viz.
Mr. Crook, and of applying to the government
here to banish him out of the Colony. From
your long residence in the islands, and from your
personal knowlege of Mr. Crook, and my con-
duct towards the missionaries from the first es-
tablishment of that mission to the present time,
and from what you have heard, and seen, and


known in the islands and in New South Wales,
you will be able to form some correct judgment
how far the above charge is founded in truth. My
accuser states that this application was made by
me to Lieutenant-Colonel O’Connell, to banish
Mr. Crook from the Colony when Major-General
Macquarie was on a tour to the Southern Settle-
ments. This statement is incorrect, as General
Macquarie was at head-quarters at the time al-
luded to, and not absent at the Southern Settle-
ments. I have to request that you will do me
the favour to communicate to me your impartial
opinion how far I have in any way merited such
an accusation, either as it respects Mr. Crook or
any other missionary belonging to the Mission-
ary Society. In complying with my request,
you will much oblige,
“ Gentlemen,
“ Your most obedient
“ humble servant,
“ Samuel Marsden.”
“ To the ilev. Daniel Tyeiman,
and George Bonnet, Esq.”
“Sydney, May 1 Uh, 1825.
“ Reverend and dear Sir,
“ We have to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the sth instant, requesting our opinion,
as the representatives of the London Missionary
Society, on one of the malicious charges against


you, in the outrageous publication lately come to
the Colony. It is with the utmost satisfaction we
state, as our decided opinion, that the charge of
intolerance or persecution towards Mr. Crook or
any other missionary connected with the London
Missionary Society, or, indeed, connected with
any other Missionary Society, is utterly untrue.
We believe it to have originated in malice or cul-
pable ignorance, and to be a gross libel.
“ We rejoice, Sir, to take the opportunity to say
that the South Sea Mission, and all its mission-
aries, have been, and continue to be, exceedingly
indebted to your singular kindness and persever-
ing zeal in their behalf. No temporal reward, we
are persuaded, would have been equivalent to
the most valuable services, which you have so
long and so faithfully rendered to this mission
and its missionaries. After all your upright and
perfectly disinterested kindness towards the mis-
sionaries when they have been residing on the
Islands, —when they have been residing in the
Colony on their way from England to the Islands,
• —when they have voluntarily returned from the
Islands to the Colony, —and when, by dire neces-
sity and cruel persecution, compelled to flee from
the scenes of their missionary labours and take
up their residence here; that you have met with
so much calumny, and so few returns of grate-
ful acknowledgment for all you have done and
borne on their behalf, is to us a matter of sur-
prise and regret.


ce Allow us, dear Sir, to conclude, by expressing
our hope that the other envenomed shafts aimed
at you in this infamous publication, will prove as
impotent as that aimed at you through that so-
ciety, in whose name, and as whose representa-
tives, we beg to renew its cordial thanks and
unqualified acknowledgments. And desiring to
present our own thanks in the amplest and most
respectful manner,
“ We remain,
“ Reverend and dear Sir,
“ most faithfully.
“ Your obliged and obedient servants,
(Signed,) “ George Bennet,
“ Daniel Tverman.”
I am also charged with having “ thrown cold
water on the Institution for the education and
civilization of the Aboriginal Natives, and that I
never once visited it from the date of its esta~
blishment to the close of Governor Macquarie’s
administration, a period of six years.” Some
time in. the year 181.4, Governor Macquarie spoke
to me on the civilization of the Aborigines of
New South Wales, and asked ray opinion on the
subject. In reply, I informed the Governor what
attempts had been made to promote this object
by individuals, and the results of those attempts,
since I had been in the Colony, a period of twenty


years. I further observed, that hitherto, two diffi-
culties had opposed their civilization. The first
was, they had no wants, they lived free and inde-
pendent, and thought little more of to-morrow than
the fowls of the air or the beasts of the field, and
put no value upon the comforts of civil life. The
second was, it had been found hitherto impossible
to attach them, either to places or to individuals
in the Colony who wished to benefit them. At
the same time, I approved of some attempt being-
made, upon a regular plan, to civilize them, as
nothing of that kind had yet been done. The
Governor asked me what situation I thought
would be most eligible to form an establishment
for them. I replied, on or near the banks of
Paramatta River, opposite to the flats, as num-
bers of natives were wont to resort there at that
time, for the purpose of fishing. I also mention-
ed, that there was a farm, belonging to the late
Captain Kent, of the Royal Navy, conveniently
situated, with suitable buildings upon it, that
might be had for a small annual rent, if the Go-
vernor wished to make a trial of what could be
done to benefit the natives. The Governor made
no objection to my proposal; and I afterwards
made an agreement with Captain Kent’s agent,
to rent the farm, with the buildings, for thirty
pounds per annum, subject to the Governor’s ap-
proval, for the intended establishment of the Na-
tive Institution. The Governor said no more to


me on the subject. What passed between him and
me must have been communicated by the Go-
vernor himself to my accuser, as that conversation
took place in his Excellency’s private room, at Go-
vernment House ; and my accuser has perverted
the true meaning of the observations I made to
Governor Macquarie, relative to the civilization of
the Aborigines, and passed over, in total silence,
the readiness which I expressed to meet the
Governor’s wishes, and to forward his apparent
views, as far as I then understood his intentions.
When the Native Institution was formed,! was
not in the Colony, and from the time of my
a’eturn until Governor Macquarie retired from the
Government, a period of six years, he never once
mentioned this institution to me. It was matter
of surprise to the community, and generally con-
sidered as a marked disrespect to my public si-
tuation, as senior Chaplain of these Settlements,
when Governor Macquarie placed the Native
Institution close to my church, and appointed
two of the assistant Chaplains, one residing
twenty miles, and the other fifteen, from Para-
matta, members of the committee to superin-
tend the institution, and took no notice of me,
though Principal Chaplain, and residing upon the
spot.
The Governor's motive for doing this was ap-
parent to every person; all viewed this act as
designedly done to lower me, not only in the


opinion of the inhabitants of my own parish, but
in that also of the whole Colony.
It is alleged against me as a crime, that I
never visited this institution, though close to my
own door. Had I interfered with the institution,
under such circumstances, either by visiting it,
or by instructing the children, without invitation,
or permission, I must have been subjected to
some unpleasant observations from the ruling
powers, which I did not think prudent to hazard.
The writer of the paragraph in question knew
this well, when he made the above charge against
me. Had Governor Macquarie at any period
ever hinted a wish for my attendance, I should
most readily have met that wish. When he re-
signed the government, and before his departure
from the Colony, I was appointed by his Excel-
lency Sir Thomas Brisbane, a member of the
Native Institution, and continued to superintend
its interests, with the other members, until the
beginning of the last year, when the Governor
made some alteration in the original plan of this
establishment, and the Committee were dissolved.
Governor Macquarie did,not omit to make a
complaint against me to the Commissioner of En-
quiry, when he was in the Colony, for my neglect
of the Native Institution, and I gave the Com-
missioner the same reasons for my non-interfe-
rence, that Ido now. If there was any neglect,
that must not be charged to my account, but to


the account of the executive authority. The ob-
servations that have been made, charging' me with
indifference to the welfare of the Aborigines, were
designed to impress the public mind with an
opinion, that I possess no Christian feeling to-
wards these poor heathens, and through that
medium to reflect disgrace upon my character as
a minister of the Gospel.
It is further alleged against me, as an unchris-
tian act, that I refused to supply the Sunday
School at Paramatta with bibles. The very
reverse of this assertion is the truth, as will
appear from the proceedings of the Committee
of the Paramatta Bible Association, when
the subject was brought under the considera-
tion of that Committee. The Rev. Walter Lawry,
Wesleyan Minister, addressed a letter to Mr.
John Eyre, Secretary to the Paramatta Bible
Association, requesting a supply of bibles and
testaments for the Wesleyan Sunday School. I
was chairman of the committee, when Mr. Law-
ry’s letter was read, and! expressed ray wish that
the bibles and testaments should be supplied to
the school, and if they could not be granted as
a donation from the Auxiliary Bible Society at
Sydney, consistently with the established rules
of that society, that we should, by a private
subscription, purchase them for their benefit.
It is also alleged against me, that! opposed the
Sunday School Institution. 1 shall state the


grounds upon which this charge rests, and leave
my reader to judge how far criminality can
attach to me in this instance. In January 1817,
a Mr. William Smith, with a few other persons,
addressed a printed circular to the public, so-
liciting subscriptions to aid them in establishing
what they called a Sunday School Institution;
a copy of which was forwarded to me by Mr.
Smith as secretary. On reading their circular, I
saw their object was to censure the established
clergy, and to interfere with the schools that
were already formed under their patronage or in-
spection. On receiving the above circular, I im-
mediately addressed the following letter to their
secretary, Mr. Smith.
“ Paramatta, January 10th, 1817.
“ Sir,
“ On my return from Sydney this day, your
printed letter was put into my hands. I am
very much surprised at its contents, which, in my
view, are directly calculated to mislead the pub-
lic mind, and to reflect the highest disgrace upon
the established clergy in the Colony. It charges
them, if not in direct terms, yet in such as
cannot be mistaken by the public, with neg-
lecting the necessary instruction of the children
in these settlements on the Sabbath Day ; which
charge the majority of your committee well
know is groundless. I cannot but express my


astonishment, that Mr. John Eyre, public school-
master at Paramatta, under my immediate in-
structions; Mr. John Hoskings, who has the
charge of the female orphans under the com-
mittee of that institution; Mr. Bowden, public
schoolmaster at Sydney, under the direction of
my colleague, the Rev. Mr. Cowper; and Mr.
Oakes, head-constable at Paramatta, should sanc-
tion such a direct mistatement, as that contained
in your public letter.
“ Mr. Eyre has attended the public school for
years on the Sabbath Day, at Paramatta; Mr. Bow-
den has done the same at Sydney; Mr. Hoskings
has the care of the orphans; and Mr. Oakes has
seen the children, both at school and church, for
years, at Paramatta, before the New South Wales
Sunday School Institution was thought of. I feel
no hesitation in saying, that I believe there is
no settlement in His Majesty’s dominions, where
the instruction of the rising generation has been
more attended to by the established clergy, and
the government of the Colony, than in New
South Wales. As a proof of this, there are not
less than eleven schools now supported by the
Crown. You state, that the Sunday School Insti-
tution has upwards of three hundred children
under its care; but you omit to mention, that
the greater part of these children are taught
daily in the public schools, and many of them on
the Sabbath Day by the public schoolmasters,


and would have been taught had your institu-
tion never existed. The first object of Sunday
schools was to give instruction to children of
the poor, who were labouring all the week for
the support of themselves and their poor con-
nexions, and not for the instruction of chil-
dren whose parents were able to pay for their
education. The case is very different in this
Colony. . There are no manufactories yet here
for the employment of children; and the bene-
volence of the British Government has provided
for the instruction of the poorer classes in the
week-days. The collecting of the children on the
Sabbath Day in the publip schools, has been
more with a view to induce habits of morality
and respect for the Sabbath than to teach them
to read ; for this was not necessary, for the above
reasons. I have felt it ray duty, as principal
chaplain of the Colony, in common justice to my-
self and colleagues, to make these observations;
hoping that your Committee will see the great
impropriety of the hasty measure that has been
adopted in printing a public letter, and sending
it to the highest authorities in this Colony, which
contains so severe, and I may add, so unmerited
a censure upon the established clergy. Before
the public had been invited to lend their sup-
port to the new Sunday School Institution, the
regular clergy ought to have been consulted by
your committee, and an opportunity given to


them to communicate their opinion upon so
important a subject as the instruction of the
rising generation through these Settlements.
“ Since the receipt of your letter, I have not
had time to consult with my colleagues; but
I am persuaded, there can be but one opinion
on the point in question.
“ I am, Sir,
“ Your most obedient humble servant.
“ Samuel Mars den,”
The above letter will show the first impression
that was made upon ray mind respecting the
views of this society. The children in the prin-
cipal Settlements, such as attended the day
schools as well as the Sunday schools, were col-
lected on the Sabbath, and conducted to the
church, under the charge of the respective
schoolmasters, receiving salaries from the Go-
vernment, in order that they might be taught
to reverence the Sabbath and the sacred ordi-
nances of religion. This Sunday School Insti-
tution came to nothing; and several of the
members of the committee have since shown,
by their improper conduct, how unfit they were
to superintend the instruction of the children of
the poor.
I am also accused of being “ a man of the
most vindictive spirit,” because 1 carried on a


prosecution against a gentletnan high in office
under the Colonial government.
In this paragraph the writer alludes to a pro-
secution which I instituted against the Secretary
to the Governor, but he omits to state the cir-
cumstances that drove me to that measure. As
he has omitted to do this, I feel myself called
upon to notice the case, in order to set my cha-
racter right with resptect to this charge.
On the 4th January, 1817, a false, scandalous,
and malicious libel appeared in the Sydney Ga-
zette upon ray character. As the Gazette was
published by the authority, and under the sanc-
tion, of the Colonial government, I waited upon
the Governor the following morning, and com-
plained that the Sydney Gazette, which was
published under his authority, should be the me-
dium through which my reputation was so scan-
dalously defamed, and called upon him for re-
dress. Not meeting with that protection which
I had a right to expect from the executive au-
thority, for so great an injury done to my cha-
racter, I immediately applied to the Judge Ad-
vocate to file a criminal information against the
printer of the Gazette. This was not the first
time I had been libelled in that paper; nor the
first time I had applied to the Governor without
effect.
As the Colonial Secretary was the censor of the
press, he wrote to the Judge Advocate informing


him, that he would take the responsibility upon
himself. A copy of this letter was sent to me by
the Judge Advocate ; on the receipt of which I
applied to him to file a criminal information
against the Secretary, as I was informed that he
was the author of the libel in question. When the
case came to be tried, a verdict was given in my
favour. The defendant’s solicitor in his address
to the jury, before the judgment of the court was
given, complained of my conduct in bringing my
case before the criminal court, where his client
could not justify the libel, and stated, that if I had
brought my action in the civil court, the allega-
tions in the libel could have been proved, but by
the step which I had taken I had shielded myself
under the criminal court from a fair and equal
investigation.
In reply to these observations, I instructed my
solicitor to say, that I should not call for judg-
ment on the defendant, but was very willing to
give him every facility to justify the libel, in
consequence of which the defendant was dis-
charged when brought up for judgment.
I now removed my cause into the civil court;
and when it came on to be tried, the defendant had
failed to justify the libel; and a verdict was given
again in my favour, to the amount of two hundred
pounds, with costs of suit. As far as these two
verdicts go, awarded by two of the highest courts
in the Colony, they prove that my cause of ac-


tion was just, and that I was not actuated by
fC a most vindictive spirit” in these appeals to
the laws of my country for redress. After
the publication of so gross a libel, it was an impe-
rious duty which I owed to myself, as a minister
of the Gospel, and to the Church Missionary So-
ciety which I had the honour to represent in
this distant Colony, to submit ray conduct to the
investigation of a British court of justice ; I had
as great a right as any other member of society
to appeal to the laws of my country to redress
ray wrongs, and, if I had omitted to exercise that
right, I must have sunk very low in the estima-
tion of the Christian world.
From the various annoyances I daily met with,
on account of the unfriendly terms I was upon
with Governor Macquarie, my situation at length
became intolerable. As the office of magistrate
tended not a little to increase my difficulties,
by bringing me frequently into contact with the
ruling powers, I requested permission to resign
that office; but this indulgence was refused. The
Governor informed me, he would dismiss me
from that office, if I was determined to resign,
but he would not allow me to resign. Sometime
after this, when I found I could retain the ma-
gistracy no longer, with any peace and safety to
myself, I voluntarily resigned ; and my resigna-
tion gave such offence to the Governor, that in
order to show his displeasure, he afterwards


dismissed me by a Governmental Order, pub-
lished in the Sydney Gazette, as a mark of
public censure and disgrace.
I also made application to the Governor for
leave of absence, which he refused, alleging
that my services were of too great importance
to the Colony for him to allow me to return to
England. As I was very anxious to leave the
Colony, I conceived, if I resigned my commis-
sion as senior chaplain, the Governor might be
induced to comply with my request, and permit
me to return home. I therefore wrote to the
Governor, and informed him I would resign my
commission to him* on condition of being allowed
to retire. In reply, the Governor informed me
he would accept my commission, and transmit it
to Earl Bathurst, but I must wait for his lord-
ship’s answer before I could leave the Colony.
Finding that it was impossible for me to obtain
the Governor’s permission to return to Europe, I
wrote to Lord Bathurst for leave of absence, and
his lordship, with great kindness, immediately
complied with my request.
About this period, the Commissioner of En-
quiry, John Thomas Bigge, Esq., was appointed
to examine into the various concerns of these
Settlements, and his arrival soon afterwards in
New South Wales rendered my return to Eng-
land no longer a matter of necessity. I therefore
remained in the Colony during the residence of


the Commissioner; and when he had executed
his commission, I proposed to return to Eng-
land, to answer before my superiors there to the
various charges that had been alleged against me
by Governor Macquarie, if upon my examination
before the Commissioner the explanations I had
given were not satisfactory. I wrote to the Com-
missioner on this subject, and informed him what
ray intentions were; but I was given to understand
by him, that my return was not necessary, and
therefore I remained in the discharge of my
public duty. It ever appeared to me an act of
power in the Governor, which could not be jus-
tified on the common principles of justice, to
oblige me to continue in the magistracy, when
that duty had become so painful and unpleasant
to me ; and neither to give me leave of absence,
nor to accept the resignation of my commission
when I wished to leave the Colony altogether.
The only reason which the Governor ever gave me
for refusing either or both of these favours, was,
that my services were of too much importance to
allow him to comply with my request. If I had
been, as my accuser states, a “turbulent and
ambitious priest, quarreling with almost every
Governor who had presided over the Colony,”
I may ask, why did Governor Macquarie keep
me in office ? Why did he compel me to remain
in the Colony ? And why have all the Governors
in succession, for the last thirty years, appointed


me a magistrate, and placed me in other situa-
tions where I had it in my power to be trouble-
some, if I had been so inclined ? The strongest
testimony that I was not “ turbulent and am-
bitious,” is the public confidence that every Go-
vernor placed in me, not excepting Governor
Macquarie himself.
Had my accuser stated that I did not approve
of the system generally, by which this Colony
was governed, his statement would have been
correct. I ever conceived that the arbitrary and
uncontrolled authority, which the Governors at
different times laboured to exercise over the
judges, magistrates, clergy, and all others dn sub-
ordinate situations, was injurious to the general
interests of the Colony; and on this subject, I
addressed a letter, containing my views, to the
Commissioner of Enquiry.
What formerly happened, cannot occur again.
The independence of the judges, the formation
of a legislative council, and the establishment of
an ecclesiastical jurisdiction, will secure to the
community at large a more just and equitable
administration of the British laws for the future.
These wise regulations will be found such ines-
timable public blessings, as the inhabitants of
these Settlements can never be sufficiently thank-
ful for, to the British Government.
As my reputation has been vilified, with ail
the bitterness of vituperation that the most ma-


lignant feelings of human nature could dictate,
I trust I may be permitted, without being charg-
ed with indelicacy or vanity, to conclude by
submitting the following documents to the im-
partial reader, which, under other circumstances,
would never have met the public eye, as they
may afford some testimony relative to my con-
duct, for more than thirty years.
The first is an address presented to me, upon
my leaving, the Colony, under date of the Ist of
January, 1807, by the magistrates and land-own-
ers in the interior, and signed by more than
three hundred persons—of which the following is
a copy :
“ Most Reverend Sru,
“ We, the holders of landed estates, public
officers, and other principal inhabitants of the
large and extensive Settlements of the Hawkes-
bury, Nepean, and Portland Head, and adjacent
parts of the Colony of New South Wales, at the eve
of your departure, most sincerely return you our
grateful thanks, for your pious, humane, and exem-
plary “conduct, in the various and arduous situa-
tions, in and throughout this whole Colony, as a
minister of the Gospel, superintending magistrate,
inspector of public Orphan and'Charity Schools,
and other necessary offices. We have every rea-
son to fear and feel the greatest loss, from the ab-
sence of a person so jusfand indefatigable in the
public concerns and welfare. 1


“We console ourselves in the hope of your
speedy return to this Colony; and, at the same
time we regret your departure, we consider that
every private convenience must give way to pub-
lic good, the evident result of your voyage.
“ Please to receive our most unfeigned thanks
for all your past generous and disinterested
conduct, in the indefatigable labours you have
used for the general improvement, of these set-
tlements, as well as the Colony in general.
“We also thank you for your attention and
care in the improvement of stock, agriculture,
and all other beneficial and useful arts, for the
general good of the Colony, and benefit of civil
society, in this remote part of the globe; and for
your unremitting exertions for the prosperity
and welfare of this very extensive Colony, for
which our posterity will have reason to bless you
till time shall be no longer.
“ Your sanctity, philanthropy, and disinterest-
ed character, will ever remain an example to
future ministers :—•
“ And may that God whom we serve pour
down his blessings upon you and your’s to the
latest posterity, is the sincere prayer of those
who sign this Address.”
[Signed by 302 Persons.']
To the Rev. Samuel Marsden.
“ New South Wales, January 1, 1807.”


I had been thirteen years resident in the Co-
lony when the above address was presented to
me; a period sufficiently long to enable the inha-
bitants to form some judgment of my character
and conduct; I never made, nor ever intended to
make, any use of this document. It has been
kept in my possession as a private paper, un-
known to any until now; and nothing but the
scandal, that has been cast upon my character,
would have induced me to make it public at the
present time.
. The second document is dated the 20th Janu-
ary, 1821, thirteen years after the first. This
originated in the following circumstance. At
the close of my examination before tire Commis-
sioner of Enquiry, after replying to all the al-
legations which the Governor made against
mej I requested the Commissioner to ask Go-
vernor Macquarie what I had done to offend him,
as I was not conscious of having done any act,
knowingly and designedly, to give him offence.
The Commissioner was kind enough to comply
with my request, and returned the following an-
swer in writing;—
“ The Governor admits that Mr. Marsden’s
manner to him has been constantly civil and ac-
commodating, and that nothing in his manner
could provoke the Governor’s warmth. The Go-
vernor admits Mr. Marsden’s qualifications, his
activity, and unremitting vigilance as a magis-


trate, and, .in society, his cheerful disposition
and willingness to oblige.”
This testimony, coming from Governor Mac-
quarie, 1 may venture to presume, merits some-
weight, particularly when it is considered upon
what unfriendly terms he had been with me for
years. This testimony was also given at a time
when his mind was most wounded; at the con-
clusion of my examination, when he had failed
to establish his charges against me before the
Commissioner. This was the last communica-
tion that took place between me and the Go-
vernor, whilst the Commissioner remained in the
Colony. The Governor’s admission, that I had,
at all times, behaved to him in a respectful
manner, is, at least, a presumptive proof that I
entertained no hostile feelings against the Go-
vernor, or it would not have been in my power,
upon all occasions, to have suppressed them ; es-
pecially when, at different times, the Governor laid
to ray charge things I knew nothing of, and in lan-
guage that tended to excite a spirit of retaliation.
The last document I shall print, after which I
shall not say another word, is an official letter
transmitted to me, under date 9th April, 1825,
of which the following is a copy :
" Private Secretary’s Office,
“ Sydney, 9th April, 1825.
“ REVEREND SIR,
c< I have the honour to acquaint you, by com-
mand of his Excellency the Governor, that Earl


Bathurst, having taken into consideration your
long and useful services in the Colony of New
South Wales, has determined upon increasing
your stipend to the sum of four hundred pounds,
sterling, per annum.
“ I have further the pleasing satisfaction of
coupling with it, his Lordship’s, instructions to
the Governor, to acquaint you that it has been
done in consideration of your long, laborious,
and praiseworthy exertions in behalf of religion
and morality.
“ I have the honour to be,
“ Reverend Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ John Ovens,
“ Private Secretary.”
“ To the Rev. Samuel Marsden,
11 Principal Chaplain.”


APPENDIX.
“ Parmatta, Nov, 16, 1821.
“ Honodheb Sib,
“ It was not my intention to have taken up my pen
again, to address you, on any subject relative to the con-
cerns of this Colony, having had occasion so often to
trouble you already. However reluctant I feel at the
present time to do this, I cannot, in justice to my own
character, forbear, in consequence of the arrival of a
printed letter, which his Excellency Governor Macqua-
rie addressed to the Right Honourable Lord Sidmouth,
at the time you were in the Colony, in answer to a for-
mer publication of the Honourable H. G. Bennet, M. P.
“ The Governor has departed so far, in this Letter,
from the truth, that it is impossible for me, consistent
with my own ideas of propriety, to pass it over in total
silence ; or to feel for the Governor, as I should willingly
do, under his circumstances.
“ I can most solemnly declare that it never was my
wish to give him one moment’s uneasiness, though he has
pressed the hand of power hard, and I may say unjustly,
upon me for years, and for no crime; and often laid
things to my charge, that I knew nothing of.
“Had his Excellency confined his incorrect assertions,
relative to myself, within the confidence of His Majesty's
Ministers, he could not have done me that injury, nor
wounded the feelings of my friends, in the manner which
the letter he has published to the world is calculated to
do. Since it is published, lam sorry it did not arrive pre-
vious to your departure, as the allegations stated in it
would then have been much easier settled, than they are
likely to be now.


“ The publication of this letter at all appears to me an
ill-advised measure, as it will certainly increase the Go-
vernor’s difficulties: with respect to myself, lam well
assured, that there is no person in the world, that is bet-
ter acquainted than you are with my manner of life, as a
member of society, as a minister of the gospel, or as a
magistrate formerly, as far as information can go, and
therefore none can form a more correct and impartial
judgment. I did not live in a corner; my actions were
open to public view ; my friends and enemies were equal-
ly acquainted with ray conduct.
■ “ I may here remark, you possess such a local knowledge
of the political, moral, and religious state of the Settle-
ments, and of all the leading characters that have lived in
them during the administration of Governor Macquarie,
and more particularly, the individuals mentioned by his
Excellency in his Letter, that I can throw no additional
light upon this publication.
“ I believe there will scarcely be found a single line,
hut you will know how to apply it. Though the principal
observations, which Governor Macquarie has made re-
specting me, were attempted to be established on my ex-
amination before your Honour, (as the letter in question
appears to have been written previous to that period,) yet
I beg your indulgence to notice a paragraph or two.
“ The Governor assigns, as a reason why I complained
of the great number of licences to sell spirits, that
I was a trafficker in that article myself. The Go-
vernor barely asserting that I trafficked in spirits, and
my denying the charge, which I do, is no proof either
way. But if I can show that it was physically impossible
for me to do this at the time the Governor alludes to, the
balance of evidence must be in my favour: and this I can
most clearly show.
“ It is well known that Governor Macquarie entered


into a contract with three persons, for building the Ge-
neral Hospital. It is equally well known that these con-
tractors, jointly with Government, had the sole privilege
of purchasing and landing all spirits brought-to the Co-
lony for three years and a half, and upwards, and that
no individual could land a gallon for sale but themselves.
“ It will be admitted, I could not sell or traffick in spi-
rits if I possessed none; and as these contractors were
the only persons, at the time, from whom spirits could
be procured, if I, therefore, did deal in spirits, I must
have retailed them on account of the contractors.
“ The public Gazette will show, that a much greater
number of licences were granted, during the period of
the contract, than at any former period ; and of this I
complained. I believe, in March 1812, there were more
than one hundred spirit-licences granted.
" The penalty for selling - spirits without licence, was
also very heavy. I had no licence, and had I sold spi-
rits without a licence, it is most probable that some per-
son would have informed against me, either for favour or
reward ; but as no information was ever lodged against me
for this offence, it may be presumed I was not guilty of it.
From the watchful eye that was kept upon my whole
conduct, by night and by day, if I had been guilty of
that, or any other impropriety, it would have been im-
possible for me to have escaped detection; I therefore
trust you will acquit me of this charge. If his. Excel-
lency saw any thing in my conduct which he conceived
was derogatory to my character as a clergyman, and
injurious to the public service, surely it was his Ex-
cellency’s imperious duty, as Governor of the Colony, to
have called upon me for an explanation ; and afterwards,
if his Excellency disapproved of my future conduct, to
have then reported me to my superiors at home.
“ His Excellency is well aware that the ground, upon


which his charges are laid, would give way, when once
brought under examination; and, therefore, he hath
thought it safer to make his public assertions in his Let-
ter to Lord Sidmouth, than to bring the charges against
me in this Colony, where he knows he never could esta-
blish them.
“ If it were possible for him to prove his assertions, both
the time and place are favourable to him; all the eviden-
ces are upon the spot. He is Governor of the Colony;
his exalted situation would give him considerable advan-
tage; any witness coming forward in support of his
charges would have nothing to apprehend. In every so-
ciety power gives influence ; the more absolute a Gover-
nor’s power, the more corrupt the society, and the greater
influence he will command. Wo Governor cun possess
greater power than the Governor of New South Wales;
and no society can be more void of moral principle. All
these circumstances the Governor is well aware of; but
he does not venture to meet me on open ground, where
our strength could be fairly tried before proper witnesses.
vK - '#•
“ I have the honour to be, &c. &c. &c.
“ Samuel Mars den."
“ To the Honourable Commissioner of Enquiry.”
“ Government House, Cape Town, Bth August, 1823.
“ My dear Sir,
■s* 7'ff
I can hardly venture, at this moment, to allude to the
mention that I have made of you in my Report. I wish
that it had been in my power to have offered a more pointed
contradiction to the assertions of Governor Macquarie
that you had “ dealt in spirits." No evidence of that kind
ever reached me in New South Wales ; and as the charge
was not known to me until 1 returned to England, it never


occurred to me to enter into Investigation of it in the
Colony, or to make it tire subject of a general or special
report. I now can trace the sources from whence Gover-
nor Macquarie derived the information; but I do not
believe it.
“ X remain, my dear Sir,
“ Your’s very faithfully,
“1. T. Bigge."
“ The Ilcv. S, Marsden, Paramatta,
New South Wales.”
“ Sydney, May 21, 1525.
“ Sill,
“The Rev. Sam. Marsden begs to he informed if you
are the author of a work, lately published in two volumes,
upon the subject of New South Wales, to which your
name is attached.
“ I am. Sir,
“ Your most obedient servant.
“James Norton,
“ Solicitor.'”
“To W. C. Wentworth, Esq.”
“ Macquarie-Place, May 23, 1825.
" Sin,
“ I decline furnishing the information which the Rev,
Samuel Marsden has sought through you.
“ I am, Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ W. C. Wentworth
“ James Norton, Esq.’’


I'KINXEW BY S. AND B. BENTLEY, DORSET STREET, LONDON.
