

&
«
h|
ac I
10
SUGGESTIONS UPON THE ORIGIN OF THE
AUSTRALIAN FLORA. •
SPENCER MOORE, B.Sc., F.L.S.
Reprinted from Natural Science, September 1899.
Edinburgh and London: Young J. Pentland.


\
1
I
* \
... ' i
i
I
1
i
J


I
%


Suggestions upon the Origin of the Australian
Flora.
Spencer Moore, B.Sc., F.L.S.
Of all the problems which have engaged the attention of those
biologists for whom questions relating to the distribution of life upon
our globe have possessed special interest, none has appealed with more
fascinating insistence than that one which concerns the stocking of
Australia with its animal and vegetable inhabitants. Many are the
memoirs wherein this subject is treated either as a whole or in some
special and subsidiary aspect. The former method, the method
adopted, for instance, with so much brilliancy by Mr. Wallace, is,
of course, the more satisfactory one, inasmuch as the same general
principles must—due regard being paid to special circumstances in
their application to each individual case—have been operative in all
departments of both kingdoms of nature. But although only the
scantiest reference to zoological problems is made in the following
pages, it is believed that the views maintained in them are in no way
discordant with the ascertained facts and recognised deductions of
zoology: indeed, were this not the case, the task I have set myself
would be a hopeless one. But it is otherwise difficult enough, involv-
ing, as it does, rejection of views which have received such weighty
advocacy, both here and on the Continent, as has raised or almost
raised them into the rank of axioms of science.
Before explaining my ideas, however, it will be necessary to dwell
for a time upon one theory to which general adhesion has been given,
in my opinion, without sufficient warrant. Basing their conclusions to
some extent on zoological data, and swayed by the bias imparted by
those data, botanists have assumed that the Australian flora is of a
lower and less specialised type than that of the northern hemisphere
and the tropical regions. It exists to-day, we are told, simply because
it has remained isolated from the great land areas of the Old World,
and but for this, an exotic flora would have overrun the island-
continent as certainly as, without the interposition of the ocean, the
Marsupial and Monotrematous fauna would have disappeared before
the inroads of higher Mammalia better adapted to the conditions of


existence. It is proposed now to throw the search-light of analysis
upon this theory, with the object of ascertaining whether it rests on a
real substantive basis or no.
The first point to be dealt with is the idea that species belonging
to genera predominantly extra-Australian must necessarily have had
their origin outside Australia, whither they have migrated, some in-
herent superiority possessed by them over forms truly endemic
having enabled them to maintain themselves and gain ground in their
new home. In this relation the two floras of special concern are the
Scandinavian and the Indo-Malayan. “ The Scandinavian asserts his
privilege of übiquity,” writes Sir Joseph Hooker, 1 and the same botanist
tells us he regards “ the Indian plants in Australia to be as foreign to
it, botanically, as the Scandinavian, and more so than the Antarctic.” 2
Mr. Darwin 3 goes so far as to ascribe the “aggressive power of the
Scandinavian flora to the fact of that flora having been differentiated
in the most extensive land-area of the globe, where competition has
been most severe and long-continued. But the supposed long con-
tinuance of this competition traverses well-established geological data,
which teach us that the undisputed sway of this flora over Northern
Europe and Asia dates only from post-Miocene times; while as regards
the nature of the competition, who can possibly say that European
plants have been subjected to greater stress than those of the old and
new world tropics, of South Africa, or of Australia itself ? Mr.
Wallace 4 has no doubt about this Scandinavian predominance, though
he is neutral as regards Mr. Darwin’s explanation of it; and Professor
Tate, 5 who has recorded his recent experiences in Central Australia in
an ingenious and suggestive memoir, finds warrant for the belief that an
exotic vegetation is there gaining the upper hand over the indigenous
flora. In the face of such authority, and more could be cited were
it necessary, 6 it will, I hope, be believed that the attempt here made
to maintain a contrary opinion is undertaken in a spirit of diffidence,-
and without the slightest desire of asserting a rebellious originality.
It is not to be doubted that during past ages facilities have existed
for the transport of northern forms through the tropical highlands into
southern countries and vice versa. Whether this migration has been
largely favoured by cooling of the tropics during glacial periods, or
whether, as is perhaps more plausible, it has been in great part due to
transport by ordinary agencies such as the winds, the movements of
birds, etc., is not a question we have here to discuss. Under the
first supposition it is difficult to understand, as Sir Joseph Hooker has
pointed out, 7 how tropical species could have survived, though, as the
1 “Flora of Tasmania,” Introd. Essay, p. ciii. 2 Loc. cit.
3 “Origin of Species,” ed. vi. p. 340. 4 “Island Life,” p. 511.
5 “ Botany of the Horn Expedition,” p. 120.
6 These remarks being of the nature of suggestions merely, I have refrained from
quoting bibliography except when that course seemed unavoidable.
7 Trans. Linn. Soc. xxii. p. 259.


supposition deals with secular changes, that is with conditions entirely
outside the limited range of our experience, speculations on the subject
cannot be said to be quite conclusive. The fact we have to recognise
is that migration has taken place, whatever may have been the agency
or agencies whereby it was effected.
Now, the most successful migrants should be herbs, for the seeds
of herbaceous annuals falling upon favourable soil will rapidly
germinate, and the seedlings will run through their life-history in a
season lasting only a few weeks. So, too, free-seeding biennials and
perennials will take possession of an unoccupied area, and produce
offspring soon ready in their turn to extend the range of the species
whenever occasion offers. Far otherwise is it with shrubs and trees,
which require several years before they bear seeds. Competition, too,
between trees and shrubs will be much keener than between herbs;
for each of the former must have a considerable space for the support
of its assimilating organs; their area also will be limited by such a
condition as depth of soil, and they are liable to destruction by storms.
Moreover, unoccupied spaces are left between them, and here herbs can
flourish. And when it is remembered that the stepping-stones, as it
were, which have been made use of in the transport of plants across
the tropics—the mountain-ranges, that is to say are especially
adapted to herbs, many of them living above the regions of trees and
shrubs, we see how great an advantage in migration has been enjoyed
by herbaceous plants over woody ones.
We come now to the next point, which is, that while in the north
part of the northern hemisphere the proportion of herbs to shrubs and
trees is so large as to justify our calling this portion of the globe a
herbaceous zone, the south part of the southern hemisphere, where it
is not occupied by the ocean or by glaciated land, comes for the most
part within what I shall term a dendritic zone, meaning by this a zone
where woody vegetation predominates over herbaceous. New Zealand,
temperate Australia, South Africa, the greater part of. extra-tropical
South America are all dendritic lands. Given, therefore, opportunities
of transport from either hemisphere into the other under conditions
similar or approximately similar to those now existing, and herbs
being better adapted to transport than woody plants, the probabilities
are that the preponderating trend of migration will be from north to
south, and this without any inherent superiority in the northern flora
due to competition in the largest land-area of the world, or to any
other cause whatsoever.
“ But,” one fancies an objector saying, “ consider how large a
number of northern species have passed over into the southern hemi-
sphere, and how few and far between, and even then how limited in
their range north of the Equator, are the southern types which have
succeeded in gaining a foothold in the northern hemisphere.” But
this statement assumes our possession of more knowledge than is at


our command. Is it so certain that all the species of the Scandinavian
flora have originated in the northern hemisphere ? Sir Joseph Hooker,
it is true, guards himself verbally from this assumption by enumerating
certain genera found south as well as north of the tropics as “ emi-
nently characteristic ”of the northern flora. But the inference remains
nevertheless, and we have only to consider the case of the Marsupials
and Monotremes —orders “ eminently characteristic ” of Australia, but
which we know upon zoological evidence not to have originated there—
we have only to consider this case to see how unjustified is the inference,
and how liable we may be, by adopting it, to fall into complete error.
And it will be well here to deal, by way of example, with a few genera
usually regarded as of northern origin, but which, it is maintained,
may have originated in the southern hemisphere. There is Senecio,
for instance, a genus strongly represented in extra-tropical South
America (Philippi enumerates no less than 117 species as members
of the Chilian flora alone) and in South Africa, and less strongly in
Australia and New Zealand. The general view about such a case as
this is that the areas just mentioned are isolated from each other,
while each is in complete or almost complete connection with the
great northern continent; hence the probability is that they were
stocked from the latter. But, given a means whereby the species of
Senecio could pass from north to south, there is no inherent reason
why they might not have migrated in the opposite direction, say, for
example, from South Africa by way of Eastern Asia into America on
the oue hand, and via what is now the Indian Archipelago into
Australia on the other, and certain affinities between the floras of
South Africa and Australia seem to show that some such migration
has actually occurred. Again, take Drosera, a genus which, from the
bias of early association, is usually regarded as having originated in the
northern hemisphere, but which, in point of numbers and of differentia-
tion, is far better represented south of the Equator than north of it, and
very strongly .in Australia itself. Then there is Veronica, with
15 Australian and no less than 40 New Zealand species, with 18
species in India, chiefly the Himalayas, about 20 species in North
America, and not quite so many in China. Out of a total of some
160 species for the whole world rather more than one-third are
natives of Australia or New Zealand or both. Aster, too, is a case in
point, for though the Australian Olearia and the South African Felicia
have been separated from it, and may still be kept up for convenience
sake, in no essential respect do they differ from Aster, of which over
200 species are North American, while there are about 50 species of
Felicia and nearly 70 species of Olearia in Australia and 20 in New
Zealand. Now Aster is a genus eminently characteristic of the nearctic
portion of the great northern land-mass, but if it had a northern origin,
why is it so rare in Europe, a region where many of its species have
become naturalised and are able to maintain themselves ? Why may


not the genus have originated in Australia and passed thence via
Eastern Asia, where it is represented by several species, into North
America ? Only on the hypothesis that a genus must have arisen in
a larger area and that its presence in a smaller area must be due to
migration, which is a mere begging of the question, can the possibility
of a southern origin for Aster be denied. Mention may be made, too,
of Bassia, in Mueller’s sense of the term, that is, as comprising Chenolea,
Sclerolaena, Anisacantha, Threlkeldia, and part of Kochia as understood
by Bentham. Of these Sclerolaena , Anisacantha, and Threlkeldia are
endemic in Australia, aud the two species of Kochia, referred to Bassia by
Mueller, are also endemic there, Chenolea alone being extra-Australian
with nearly one-third of its species restricted to the island-continent.
Yet Bassia is held by Professor Tate to be a genus exotic to Australia!
So, too, Kochia proper lias 19 Australian species, all endemic, leaving
only 13 to be shared between South Europe, temperate Asia, North
and South Africa, India, and North-West America; and when wo
remember that several peculiar genera allied to Kochia are exclusively
Australian, is there anything extravagant in the opinion that proba-
bilities point to this genus as having originated in Australia ? And
what shall we say of Atriplex, of which many species are Australian,
and some of them extraordinarily abundant in individuals ? The
evidence for a southern origin of such genera as Ranunculus and
Clematis, Myosurus and Samolus is not so strong; but when we come
to aquatics, such as Callitriche and Oeratophyllum and Potamogeton, all
very extensively distributed, I do not see upon what grounds the
possibility of a southern origin for some of them can be scouted, and it
must not be forgotten that Myriophyllum belongs to an order reaching
its maximum of species in Australia. Then take the Grasses, an order
very abundant in both hemispheres. Why may not such genera as
Deyeuxia, Hierochloa, Stipa, and Eragrostis, to mention a few only, have
originated in some southern land or lands, and migrated thence to their
present homes in the north ?
These are merely a few cases mentioned by way of example : by
no means do they exhaust the list of genera for the southern origin of
which there is at least some probability. But it may be objected that
most of the genera cited above are not found in antarctic lands, and
how, it will be asked, is their absence explained if they had a southern
origin ? I reply that, for all we know to the contrary, antarctic lands
may, at some former time, have supported many supposed northern
genera now not found there. This traverses Mr. Darwin’s opinion
when he says; 1 “I am inclined to look in the southern as in the
northern hemisphere to a former and warmer period, before the com-
mencement of the last glacial period, when the antarctic lands, now
covered with ice, supported a highly peculiar and isolated flora.” But
with all deference to Mr. Darwin, why should the pre-glacial antarctic
1 “ Origin of Species,” 6th ed. p. 341.


1899] ORIGIN OF AUSTRALIAN FLORA 203
flora necessarily have been peculiar and isolated ? If there is one
point on which students of biological geography are agreed it is this,
that the antarctic continent must formerly have extended considerably
farther north than it does now, an extension which permitted the
migration of certain animal forms from South America to New
Zealand, and must equally have allowed the southward migration of
South American and New Zealand plants. This stocking of the
antarctic continent may have occurred comparatively early in Tertiary
times, and so long as glaciation did not supervene, a large and by no
means peculiar or isolated flora may have flourished in the antarctic
continent. But now, communication with lands lying to the north
being cut off, if a glacial period occurred, the result in the southern
hemisphere would be very different from one in the northern, for
while in the latter there would be nothing to hinder the southward
migration of plants, their escape from the antarctic continent would
be cut off by the ocean, and since all antarctic lands must have been
covered with an ice-cap during a glacial period, all, or almost all, but
the lowliest organisms must necessarily have perished. Obviously the
nature of the flora of the antarctic continent previous to the last
glacial period must have depended upon the occurrence or no of a
glacial period or of glacial periods intercalated between the last of
such periods and the stocking of the continent when it was in connec-
tion or close relation with lands to the north. If no such period
intervened, then the flora must have consisted of a mixture of South
American, New Zealand, and possibly to some extent of Australian
types, or of descendants from such, together with endemic genera, of
which many, for all that we know, may have been identical with
genera characteristic of northern lands. But if a glacial period was
intercalated, and that after the connecting lands to the northward had
disappeared beneath the waves, then the flora of the antarctic con-
tinent during the subsequent warm period must have been closely
similar to that of other antarctic lands, since it would have been
derived from the same source or sources; while if the connection with
lands to the north was still open at the commencement of the interca-
lated glacial period or periods, the antarctic flora would have migrated
northward, and, the connection being still maintained, would have
advanced southward on the return of warmer conditions, so that it
would have borne approximately the same facies after as before the
glaciation of the continent. If this reasoning be sound, therefore, in
no event does it seem likely that the antarctic flora could have been
in any special sense isolated and highly peculiar.
As an instance of the way in which the brief —if the term may be
allowed without offence—for the predominance of the northern flora has
been handled, I shall cite the assumption that glaciation first affected the
northern hemisphere. Let us hear Mr. Darwin. After alluding to
the southward migration of species when glacial conditions obtained


in the north, “ then,” he says, “in the regular course of events the
southern hemisphere would in its turn be subject to a severe glacial
period, with the northern hemisphere rendered warmer; and then the
southern temperate forms would invade the equatorial lowlands. The
northern forms which had before been left on the mountains would
now descend and mingle with the southern forms. These latter, when
the warmth returned, would return to their former homes, leaving some
few species on the mountains, and carrying southward with them some
of the north temperate forms which had descended from their mountain
fastnesses. Thus we should have some few species identically the
same in the northern and southern temperate zones and on the moun-
tains of the intermediate tropical regions.” 1 Now we have as much
right to assume that glaciation first affected the southern hemisphere;
and a clear idea of the result will be gained if the reader will sub-
stitute “ south ” for “ north,” and vice versd in the above admirable
quotation. Yet what a different idea of the trend of migration it
gives us!
But ray imaginary opponent now proposes to crush me with an
argument he has carefully held in reserve. “ Consider,” he exclaims,
“ the evidence furnished by introduced plants. Wherever man settles,
his footsteps are dogged by Scandinavian species, which rapidly
establish themselves in their new home and at the expense of the
indigenous vegetation; how could this happen unless there is some
potency inherent in northern forms over and above that possessed by
the southern flora ? ” While admitting that a considerable number of
northern plants have become naturalised in southern lands, it must
not be forgotten that some, though a far smaller number, of southern
species have gained a foothold north of the equator. But in order to
estimate properly the value of this preponderant naturalisation of
northern forms, we must not be contented, although even Mr. Darwin
seems to have been contented, with merely drawing up lists of the
colonists of either hemisphere; before ascribing any aggressive power
to the northern flora, we must ascertain that no other explanation of
the facts is possible. And firstly, we note, and it is a matter of great
importance, that almost all the plants naturalised in southern lands
are herbaceous. We may take as an example Sir Joseph Hooker's
list of introductions into New Zealand. 2 It amounts to 170 species,
of which fully half are annuals, thirteen are biennials, and over fifty of
the remainder, although perennial, are herbaceous. Now what has
happened in New Zealand since the first batch of colonists landed on
its shores ? The densely clothed forest-lands have been cleared to
make room for the herbaceous vegetation on which man depends for
his sustenance; in other words, a dendritic zone has been artificially
converted into a herbaceous one.. And not this only, but the seeds
1 “Origin of Species,” 6th ed. p. 339.
2 “Handbook New Zealand Flora,” p. 757.


of these economic plants have been introduced from the north, and
at the same time the seeds of other plants accustomed from time
immemorial to flourish in association with them, as well as the seeds
of species which have been allowed, for the sake of old recollections,
to obtain a foothold in the new homes of the race. We have seen
how advantageous it is for a migrating species to be herbaceous, and
a still greater advantage should obtain where migration has been so
effectually assisted by human effort. Then again,- a point we ought
to have information about, for it has material bearing on the case, is
whether the indigenous herbaceous vegetation has benefited by the
introduced changes. 1
But the case becomes still stronger when we take Australia into
consideration. The fierce droughts experienced by so large a part of
that country have brought about the survival of a vegetation to a very
large extent xerophilous. Now there is one peculiar feature about all
desert countries except the very dryest, a feature necessarily tending
to favour the spread of any herbaceous vegetation of which the seeds
may chance to be introduced into them, namely, that at least during
some part of the year there are always places where water is apt to
collect, and where the ground will remain moist during the short time
while the life-history of a herb is being enacted. 2 This is simply
what one sees in the interior of Western Australia. For a period
long enough to ensure the maturation of their seeds, introduced plants
enjoy, in normal seasons, conditions precisely similar to those obtain-
ing in their native habitats. But no sooner does the sun gain in
power, and the ground become dry and warm, than these herbs com-
pletely disappear; they show, in fact, none of that capacity for adapt-
ing themselves to their altered surroundings which we should expect
members of an “ aggressive ” flora to possess. This is, however, not
the only advantage “ Scandinavian ” species enjoy when introduced
into a country with a dry climate such as Australia. If one or more
seasons of drought supervene, what happens ? Considerable though
varying power of latency is possessed by the great majority of seeds,
and under these circumstances the introduced herb is in precisely the
same position as the indigenous, both having to await a favourable
season in order that their seeds may germinate. Contrast this now
with the fate awaiting seeds of dry southern climates introduced into
a country with a climate like ours. A short spell of warmth sets in,
1 Authoritative information on this subject has recently come to hand (vide T. Kirk,
Presidential Address to the Wellington Philosophical Society, 1895 ; abstracted in Journ.
of Botany, 1896, p. 338). From this it is clear that in some cases indigenous species have
benefited by changes due to human agency.
2 The conditions in Australia are specially favourable to the introduction of cold
temperate herbs, inasmuch as it is only when the temperature is low, that is, when the con-
ditions approximate to those of the summer of Northern Europe, that the ground remains
moist for any length of time. Then is the Only chance for herbaceous vegetation whether
endemic or introduced.


and under its influence the seeds germinate; hereupon the temperature
suddenly falls, and the young and tender seedlings are exposed, at a
critical period in their career, to entirely new and unfavourable con-
ditions, and they perish accordingly. It is therefore no matter lor
wonder, and still less for drawing conclusions as to “ aggressive power ”
and “ superiority ” of the northern species, if introductions from the
northern hemisphere are enabled to exist and multiply in the southern,
while an embargo is placed upon southern species in Northern and
Central Europe. Moreover, that this' is the real reason why southern
species are not domiciled with us seems clear when it is remembered
how, in northern countries where the conditions are approximately
similar to those obtaining in the southern hemisphere, southern intro-
ductions are able to maintain themselves. One may cite, for example,
the Western Mediterranean seaboard and the coast of Portugal, where
a fair number of southern species—most of them, it is true, South
African, from greater facility of intercourse—have succeeded in estab-
lishing themselves, and apparently at some expense to the indigenous
flora.
There is one country north of the equator where Australian species
readily become naturalised. Botanists who hold fast by the theory
that the Australian flora is a mere geographical survival have been
puzzled —as assuredly they ought to be puzzled—by the headway
that species from Australia make when introduced into Southern
India; nor does Mr. Wallace’s solution of the problem, ingenious
though it be, at all relieve matters. Mr. Wallace cheerily avers that
this fact is quite in harmony with the presumed predominance of
northern forms. “ For,” he says, “ not only is the climate favourable,
but the entire Indian peninsula has existed for untold ages as an
island, and thus possesses the insular characteristics of a compara-
tively poor and less developed flora and fauna as compared with the
truly continental Malayan and Himalayan regions. Thus Australian
plants can compete with a fair chance of success.” 1 But what
evidence is there for Mr. Wallace’s idea ? We venture to maintain,
on the contrary, that the Indian flora is, in all essentials, a continental
one, and, moreover, the “untold ages” Mr. Wallace alludes to are
scarcely in point, for what we want is evidence as to the continued
insularity, in a botanical sense, of a region which, for many thousands
of years at least, has ceased to be an island. But why travel so far
in search of an explanation when one is ready to hand ? Why not
admit that Australian species flourish in the Neilgherries simply
because the present climate of that district is suitable to them ? And
why not go a step further, and allow that if a land connection existed
between Australia and South India, and the intervening country
enjoyed a climate like that of Australia, a considerable number of
1 “Island Life,” p. 496, note. The fact there cited was communicated to Mr. Wallace
by Sir Joseph Hooker.


Australian species, or of descendants from such, would to-day form
part of the Indian flora ? But if this he admitted, and it is only a
logical deduction from the facts, the theory of the predominance of
northern forms collapses, and the restricted area occupied by Aus-
tralian species must no longer be viewed as depending upon some
inherent inferiority to northern forms, but simply upon fortuitous
geographical conditions. 1
But we are told that the Australian flora stands less high in the
scale and is less specialised than are the floras of northern climates,
and if this be true, the point 1 am trying to argue must at once be
given up. But is it true ? In what respect, it may be asked, is the
flora of Australia less highly specialised ? Are not most of the great
natural orders strong constituents of it ? Trees, some of them of
gigantic size, shrubs, undershrubs and herbs, parasites and saprophytes,
climbing and carnivorous species, flowers adapted to profit by the
visits of insects, and sometimes provided with a complex mechanism to
ensure such profit, all these are met with in Australia. In addition,
we have wonderful adaptations to a dry climate, and in this respect,
taking into account the variety of ways in which the destructive effects
of a scorching sun and parched soil are guarded against, the Australian
flora is without a parallel the world over. And if these be not
evidences of high specialisation, it is difficult to know where one must
look for such. In one respect, and in one only, is any inferiority
shown, namely, in the comparatively small number of seeds produced.
But this does not apply to the herbs, and as for the woody species, it
is absolutely essential that the ripening seeds be safeguarded against
drought, and the laying on of thick tissues to this end may well be
effected at some cost as regards fecundity.
But Mr. Wallace himself gives us an instance where land adjoining
the, according to him, previously isolated home of the Australian flora
has been stocked to a considerable extent with Australian forms. As
I shall have something to say hereafter about this supposition, I will
now merely assume its truth for argument’s sake. Mr. Wallace, 2 then,
supposes the greater part of Northern Australia, previously submerged
beneath the ocean, to have become dry land in the middle or latter part
of the tertiary period, and the area so exposed to have been colonised
partly by Indo-Malayan forms from the north, partly by Australian
forms from the south. Now, assuming with Mr. Wallace that the
species with Indo-Malayan facies in Northern Australia were emigrants
from the north, their considerable numbers prove that there could have
been but slight, if any, embargo upon migration from the north when
1 Since this passage was written, Mr. C. B. Clarke has informed me, upon his personal
knowledge of the Neilgherries, that the success of Australian species there has been much
exaggerated. In spite of this, I prefer to leave the paragraph as it stands, for it shows, at
any rate, to what lengths an upholder of the “northern predominance” theory may be
inclined to go when in search of an argument .to meet alleged facts hostile to the theory.
2 “ Island Life,” p. 493.


Northern Australia was stocked. Why, then, if Australian forms are
less highly differentiated and less capable of adaptation than Indo-
Malayan, do we find them holding their own to-day side by side with
the more favoured northern migrants ? Assuredly this is precisely
what we ought not to expect if the theory of northern predominance
be sound. We ought rather to expect that those migrants from the
south which happened to penetrate into the newly raised area would
have been rapidly overcome by their better adapted competitors; and
the fact that they have not been so overcome should suffice to convince
us that, supposing Mr. Wallace’s view of the stocking of Northern
Australia to be correct, Australian species can compete not unsuccess-
fully with Indo-Malayan ones in the struggle for existence on a fresh
area. In short, what Mr. Wallace supposes to have actually happened
in Northern Australia is exactly what I have just now surmised might
have happened in India, but for the wide stretch of intervening sea
which has prevented Australian forms from entering the Indian
peninsula.
And when we come to consider the extinctions that have taken
place in the Australian flora since earlier tertiary times, we find
ourselves face to face with a number of facts which contradict in toto
the doctrine of northern predominance. The only way of escaping
from these facts is to deny the soundness of the conclusions upon
which they are based, that is, to throw doubt upon the determinations
of the palaeontologists. This is the position taken up by Professor
Drude, 1 who not only denies that a flora in many respects more
northern than the present flora formerly flourished in Australia, but
also questions the former presence in the European flora of many
species belonging to orders now characteristic of Australia. Professor
Drude cites as an example the genus Quercus, which has a wide dis-
tribution in space, and contains species showing much adaptability to
diverse conditions, facts rendering it difficult to understand how such a
genus could disappear from any large area it formerly occupied. This
instance, however, is not a very happy one, for Quercus is now known
to flourish in New Guinea, and it may still be found living in Australia
when the northern part of the island-continent has been more
thoroughly examined. Moreover, we are only imperfectly informed as
to why species become extinct. Why, for example, should so few
Brachiopods now tenant our seas ? Why is it that the great group of
the Ammonitidae, so abundant in Mesozoic times, is represented to-day by
but one solitary asmQmmttiay nay^JiV—ttaae ? What reason
can be given for the extinction of the numerous mammals characteristic
of earlier tertiary times ? The general principle underlying extinction
is, of course, a mere commonplace to-day: it is the application of it to
individual instances that is obscure; so much so indeed that, in spite
of Mr. Darwin’s injunction to a contrary view, I do hold, with all due
1 “ Handbuch der Pflanzengeographie,” s. 450.


deference, that a fact such as the survival of Lingula through countless
ages, while multitudes of closely related and equally effective forms
have long been extinct, is not devoid of the element of mystery. Such
a consideration as that adduced by Professor Drude seems wholly
insufficient to outweigh the life-labours of men like Unger and
Goeppert, Heer, Ettingshausen, and others. True, their determina-
tions may sometimes he open to objection; but in such a case as this
there seems no alternative but to accept, as correct in. the main, the
conclusions unanimously recorded by specialists in this branch of the
science. When, therefore, one finds in the Australian tertiary flora
such characteristically northern genera as Myrica, Betula, Alnus,
Quercus, Salix, Fagus, Laurus, Magnolia, all of which, with the exception
of Fagus, now scantily represented on the south-eastern highlands,
and possibly of Quercus as mentioned above, have vanished like the
fantasies of a dream, one cannot repress a feeling of wonder that such a
phrase as “ the Scandinavian privilege of übiquity ” should ever have
been called into use. Most of the above genera, if present distribution
is to be relied on, and present distribution is the main support of the
northern predominance theory, have had their origin in the most
extensive land area of the globe, where, according to Mr. Darwin, com-
petition has been most severe and long-continued, and moreover they
are still important elements in the northern flora. On the current
hypothesis these favoured forms should have entirely or partially
eliminated their competitors, instead of which they have themselves
none to the wall. But besides this we are not entitled to assume that
Australia was inhabited in earlier tertiary times by no other “ northern ”
genera than have already been found in tertiary deposits there. It is
also inconceivable that herbaceous vegetation did not then exist side by
side with the shrubs and trees whose harder parts have ensured their
preservation in the fossil condition. But before we are in a position
to state what this herbaceous vegetation really \Vas, Australian tertiary
deposits must be examined in the way in which Mr. Clement Keid is
now examining our tertiary beds with such interesting results, for the
ordinary organs of herbs are of too fragile and evanescent a nature to
allow of their preservation, and recourse must be had to the evidence
yielded by fruits, and especially by seeds, involving a tedious opera-
tion indeed, but one which must be undertaken before we can feel
ourselves on safe ground. Meanwhile we cannot close our eyes to the
possibility that a fair number of herbaceous species belonging to
“ northern ” genera may have become extinct in Australia since the
time when the “ primitive tertiary flora ” flourished there.
And while we recognise how favourable to the northern flora are
the geographical and climatal conditions of Northern Europe at the
present time, it should not be forgotten that such was not always the
case. In Miocene times, for instance, when Greenland enjoyed a
climate similar to that of Southern Europe to-day, where was the
II NAT. SC. VOL. XV. NO. 91.


“ Scandinavian ” flora ? A considerable portion of it must have been
in existence then, and it is difficult to conceive how the ancestors of so
large and important an element in the earth’s vegetation could have
found sufficient room in the few extreme northern lands then suitable
to them. But during Eocene and Miocene times a large part of
the antarctic continent must have had a climate suitable to the
support of “ Scandinavian ” forms ; and if we can suppose, and there
seems little difficulty in the supposition, warranted as it is by facts of
distribution, that the antarctic continent was then continuous with
South America, and had outlying lands permitting of interchange with
South Africa and Australia, a portion, and no inconsiderable portion, of
the flora now considered to be of northern origin may well have taken its
rise in these southern lands. It was probably during the Pliocene
period that the Scandinavian flora first became important in Northern
Europe. Pliocene times must have been highly favourable to the
diffusion of herbs which flourish best in colder temperate climates, for
not only did cold conditions then prevail, but there were ready for
colonisation large areas raised during the mountain-making Eocene and
Miocene periods. It is conceivable, therefore, that much interchange
between northern and southern lands may have taken place during
this period.
But it may perhaps be that the Pliocene age is too recent for such
a relation as has been sketched to have existed between the antarctic
continent and lands lying to the north of it, though the recent
discovery in South America of a carnivorous Marsupial allied to
Thylacinus suggests that such a relation existed during later tertiary
times. Yet the point to be remembered is that large areas in the
south have enjoyed a climate eminently suitable to the evolution of
forms best fitted to flourish in the colder temperate zones, and,
moreover, that during long periods the larger extent of such areas has
been in the south. The problem, too, how southern forms could have
reached the north is no greater than the problem how northern forms
could have penetrated into antarctic lands. All we know is that a
genus could have had its origin in but one area, and that, as regards
temperate forms, there is much generic resemblance between the
northern flora and the southern; but there is no justification for the
view that all the genera common to both had their origin in the north
and none of them in the south.
It is also necessary to receive with grave doubt any conclusion
relative to the inherent superiority of certain floras as a whole over
others, and this although several species of supposed northern origin
are capable of ready acclimatisation in foreign lands, and can some-
times flourish at the expense of endemic forms; for in every flora there
are species more widely diffused and with greater powers of adaptation
than others. Has anybody ever argued, from the rapid spread of
Anacharis alsinastrum in our streams a few years back, from the way


in which, for instance, Galinsoga parvijlora, and species of Aster are
enabled to maintain themselves in Europe, any inherent superiority of
the American flora over the European ? Yet argument of this kind we
find constantly applied to the flora of Australia. Nor is present dis-
tribution an infallible index to the place of origin of a genus or
species. To take two instances showing the general trend of argument
on this subject as hearing on the flora of Australia: Helichysum and
Hdipterum, although well represented in Australia, are -found also in
other countries; consequently, it is said, they are exotic genera which
have at some time migrated into Australia. Why may not they, as
well as other genera, be descendants from the constituents of the
“ primitive tertiary flora ” ? Professor Tate partially adopts this view,
for he remarks, apropos of certain genera found fossil in tertiary
deposits, such as Ficus, Loranthus, Fittosporum, Santalum, and Cassia—
that most of these genera, “ when viewed by their present geographical
distribution, are considered Oriental; but in regard to their distribution
in time they belong to a cosmopolitan flora, which originated in late
Cretaceous times in Europe, North America, and Australia ; hence their
modern representatives may actually be descendants of primitive
Australian species, and not modified immigrant forms.” 1 But though
he makes this highly important admission, in practice he adopts the
conventional view, for we find him distinguishing “ immigrant ” genera
and species from “ endemic ” ones with confidence as serene as though
he had himself been privileged to watch, through long ages, all the
various steps in the stocking of Australia. Of course the view lam
advocating cuts both ways. The Cambodian Centrolepis, for instance,
may possibly be the sole Indo-Malayan survivor of a genus which had
its origin in the Indo-Malayan region, and migrated thence into
Australia. So too Patersonia may be of Indo-Malayan origin : even
Casuarina equisetifolia may be, for all we know, the original species
from which its Australian congeners have been derived. Not until all
later secondary and tertiary deposits have been thoroughly ransacked,
and their respective relations in time established beyond dispute, will
it be possible to fix upon that part of the earth where a genus or a
species first made its appearance. Until this is accomplished our con-
clusions can rest on nothing more satisfactory than inferences from
present distribution, which, unless they be applied with the utmost
caution, may lead us far from the truth.
The most recent and, as having been deduced witli full knowledge
of modern geological discoveries and after personal inspection of part
of the country, the most authoritative conclusions relative to the origin
of the Australian flora are those of Professor Tate. 2 The Darling
1 “Botany of the Horn Expedition,” p. 131.
2 Professor Tate’s three memoirs, The Influence of Physiographic Changes in the Dis-
tribution of Life in Australia; Association for the Advancement of Science
(1887) ; Inaugural Address, in the Association’s volume for 1893, and the “Botany of the
Horn Expedition ” (1896), are most interesting contributions to the subject under notice.


range, lie tells ns, which is of granite, is capped by conglomerates
doubtfully referred by Mr. F. T. Gregory to the Devonian age, but,
perhaps, as suggested by Mr. Etheridge, really Mesozoic. Since Upper
Devonian times there have always been land surfaces, at any rate in
Eastern Australia, where there was partial interruption to absolute
continuity during deposition of the Carboniferous rocks. The country
presented the aspect of a vast archipelago while the extensive marine
cretaceous beds occupying the low-level tracts of the interior were
being deposited ; and not until the close of the Cretaceous period was
the continent formed. These marine beds—the so-called Rolling
Downs formation, of Lower Cretaceous age—were laid down in a com-
paratively narrow sea connecting the Gulf of Carpentaria with the
Great Australian Bight, and there is no evidence for the existence of
interoceanic connection since that age, that is to say for the tertiary
sea of Professor Duncan and Mr. Wallace. Following close upon the
end of the Cretaceous epoch was another submergence during deposition
of the older tertiary strata ; but this did not involve so large an area,
as these marine tertiary beds are not found more than fifty miles inland
except round the Great Australian Bight and in the Murray Desert.
After this, by unequal movements of depression, Central Australia
became a lacustrine area, for the low-level deposits of this region are
of lacustrine origin as their remains prove. Lacustrine conditions
continued into Pliocene times, unless the formation known as the
desert sandstone, which is of Pliocene age, be eolian, as Mr. Tenison-
Woods conceives. The extinct rivers, the circumscribed lacustrine
basins marked by their coincident sand-beaches, and the remains of
large herbivores prove the climate of Central Australia to have been, up
till comparatively recent times, much moister than it is to-day. The
subsequent history of the district has been one of gradually increasing
desiccation.
{To he continued.)




Suggestions upon the Origin of the Australian
Flora.
Continued from page 212.
Spencer Moore, B.Sc., B.L.S.
Our scanty knowledge of the geology of the West Australian
desert has recently been materially added to by Mr. Victor Streich, 1
who traversed the southern part of the desert lying between Mount
Squires on the eastern border and Yilgarn on the west. Mr. Streich
finds that Mesozoic rocks, covered in many places by abundant tertiary
deposits, extend from Mount Squires as far west as Queen Victoria
Springs, except in one place where Palaeozoic cliffs were seen. The
rocks regarded as Mesozoic are clay, jasper-rock, conglomerates, and
quartzite sandstone, and they are assigned to this age on lithological
grounds alone, there being no fossils in them, but their lithological and
stratigraphical features being the same as in the typical area outside
the western colony. West of Queen Victoria Springs there are
quartzite ridges, and at the Fraser Eange hornblendic schists are met
with. From the Fraser Eange towards Lake Lefroy and the Hampton
Plain, that is in the Coolgardie district, a series of metamorphic rocks
are met with, the country having a general elevation of 1200 to 1500
feet above sea-level, while to the west lies an immense high plateau,
1300 to 1400 feet above the sea, terminating at the steep western
escarpment of the Darling Eange ; there are several formations in this
plateau, the granitic and the flanking schistose being the most con-
spicuous. The sandy flats covered with efflorescent salts on this
plateau represent, Mr. Streich thinks, depressions of the granitic uplands
in which has been accumulated the saline matter remaining over from
isolated parts of the ocean. In the north-western part of this plateau
the Crystalline hills are capped with desert sandstone, which directly
overlies the granite and is invariably horizontally bedded. Fossils were
not found in this sandstone, which Mr. Streich considers to be probably
identical with the similarly named formation of Central Australia.
1 “The Geology of the Elder Expedition,” Transactions of the Royal Society of South
Australia, vol. xvi.


The granites wherever they outcrop bear a most distinct eruptive
character, elsewhere they are overlain by rocks of Palaeozoic or Archean
age, composed chiefly of hornblendic schists and slates in different
varieties, and themselves overlain by feldspathic schists and quartzites
of the same age, with talcose and micaceous schists and siliceous
ironstone.
I am unable to add anything of the least value concerning the
northern part of the district visited by me, and which lies beyond the
country traversed by Mr. Streich ; indeed, a fair knowledge of British
secondary and tertiary deposits is a most inadequate preparation for
effective study of coeval formations in Australia whose lithological
characters are so different from those of European deposits. I will
merely remark that what, • judging from Mr. Streich’s description,
appear to be secondary rocks are to be met with in the country
between Mount Flora and Lake Darlot, although in the absence of
fossils I must candidly confess I considered these formations to be
much older. What I have specially in memory are sandstones and
conglomerates; and the so-called “ breakaways ” of the country in
question correspond apparently with the terraced outcrops of Mesozoic
rocks Mr. Streich found in his eastern section. 1 But Mr. Streich’s
observations suffice to give us an idea of the changes undergone by the
southern part of the West Australian desert since earlier Cretaceous
times. We may infer from them a westward extension, probably in
the form of a wide arm of the cretaceous sea which divided Australia
into an eastern and a western island, while during earlier tertiary
times the eastern part of the desert would seem to have shared the
fate of Central Australia, that is to say, that after having emerged
from the waves, submergence again took place while the tertiary forma-
tions were being deposited. Whether this part of Australia was
subsequently u lacustrine area or whether it was dry land, does not
appear from the evidence, though the presence of desert sandstone near
Yilgarn suggests the former condition. The western part of the desert
was above water during Mesozoic times, and if the Darling con-
glomerates be Palaeozoic, a considerable area west of what is now the
desert was also dry land during these times. In earlier tertiary times
the district must, in its eastern part, have borne the character of an
archipelago, and by subsequent upheaval the sea was divided into a
number of inland salt lakes which gradually underwent desiccation.
1 Altitudes were taken during the course of this expedition. The country east from
Queen Victoria Springs is from 1000 to 1200 feet above sea-level, thence it descends to the
Springs (830 feet), and rises west of it to from 1200 to 1450 feet. The highest point of
the Fraser Range is 2010 feet above the sea, and the plateau to the west of the range, as has
been already mentioned, 1300 to 1400 feet, while Mount Monger near Coolgardie is 1700
feet above sea-level, A plan showing the elevation of the country between the Darling
Range and Mount Burgess, the work of West Australian government surveyors, was
issued about three years back in connection with the' proposed Coolgardie water-scheme. It
bears out, in the main, so much of the above statement as concerns the country in question.


It will be well here to refresh the reader’s memory by giving a
short risumi of the ideas enumerated with such acumen by Mr.
Wallace. The fact that this celebrated naturalist’s conclusions respect-
ing the geological history of Australia are faulty, should in no wise
render us blind to the immense ability revealed in his brilliant pages,
one’s only regret concerning which is that the requisite data were not
to hand when the work was undertaken. Mr. Wallace holds that at
one period, perhaps during the middle or latter part of the secondary
epoch, Australia was connected with land lying to the north, whence
it received the ancestors of its Monotremes and Marsupials. As he
points out, for such a connection the general level of the country
would have to be raised at least by 6000 feet, and this would change
the whole country, including the deserts of the interior as well, into a
mountainous and well-watered region, and in such a region the rich
and peculiar flora characteristic of the south-west (the Autochthonian
flora of Professor Tate) was evolved. While the western flora was in
process of evolution, Eastern Australia, if it had arisen from the ocean,
must have been widely separated from Western Australia, so that the
present continent then consisted of a large and fertile Western Island,
and a long and narrow island stretching from far south of Tasmania to
New Guinea, with one or more large islands to the north. A depres-
sion afterwards occurred which buried the greater part of North
Australia beneath the ocean; whence it emerged in the middle or
latter part of the tertiary period, and was stocked with vegetation from
South-West Australia on the one hand, and from Indo-Malaya on the
other. The flora of Eastern Australia has been derived from three
sources: its south temperate element coming from Antarctic lands,
the tropical element of Polynesian types from the north or north-
east, and the typical Australian from across the dividing strait.
Thus Mr. Wallace accounts for the “ mixed ” flora of Eastern, the
isolated flora of Western, and the intermediate k flora of Northern
Australia.
There are several objections to these views of Mr. Wallace. One,
the existence in tertiary times of a sea separating the eastern and
western part of the continent, has, as we have seen, no warrant from
ascertained facts of geology, neither is there evidence for the sub-
mergence of Northern Australia on a wide scale at the period when
Mr. Wallace supposes it to have taken place. Moreover, unless the
Mesozoic upheaval was accompanied by much differential movement,
the upraised area would be converted, not into a mountainous region,
but into a raised plateau; while if mountain ranges of the sup-
posed height were formed at all, their disappearance, with the excep-
tion of some insignificant hills, from hundreds of miles of country is
wholly inconceivable. Besides, unless the geological record be extra-
ordinarily defective, the date of the introduction of Marsupials is too
early, seeing that remains of those animals are, with one exception in


Tasmania (Eocene), not met with earlier than the Pliocene age. 1 Mr.
Wallace, it will be observed, adopts the conventional notions based on
present distribution to which objection has already been made. On this
view, if an Australian genus or species has the Indo-Malayan facies
and is found outside Australia, or is closely related to extra-Australian
forms, it must have migrated into its present habitat; but the palpable
errors into which Mr. Wallace has been led while formulating what he
believes to be the true explanation of the case, may perhaps lead us to
suspect that there is something wrong in the inference from present
distribution whereupon his views are founded.
Professor Tate’s conclusions are also based upon notions as to
present distribution. He considers the Australian flora to be composed
of two elements, an endemic and an immigrant. The endemic flora is
of three kinds: Euronotian in the south and east, Autochthonian
in the south-west, and Eremian in the desert. The immigrant flora
has two constituents—an Oriental, dominant in the littoral tracts, but
mixed there with typical Australian genera, and an Andean, restricted
for the most part to the highlands of Hew South Wales, Victoria and
Tasmania, and with this he includes north temperate forms, that is
species characteristic of north temperate regions. The Autochthonian
element was dismembered in Cretaceous times, and except for possible
inter-communication with the Euronotian via the present Eremian region
during the period of tertiary submergence, and perhaps, too, by means
of land in the south now submerged, it has remained in a state of
isolation. The Euronotian element was modified during early tertiary
times by the irruption of a primitive cosmopolitan flora. The Andean
element was introduced during a glacial period, and since then the
Eremian flora has been developed from Autochthonian and Euronotian
constituents, largely modified by an incursion of Indian types, while at
the same time the Euronotian gained accessions from the Indo-Malayan
province, although migrants have probably been received at all times
since the specialisation of the flora of the Indo-Malayan province.
It will be observed that Professor Tate is not content with making
Australia a sort of botanical dumping ground during recent times, but
that he ascribes a migrant character to the primitive tertiary flora as
well. Is there sufficient justification for this ? The primitive tertiary
flora makes its appearance to all intents simultaneously in various
parts of the earth, in North America, in Europe, at Perim, in Borneo,
etc., as well as in Australia, and we have no evidence in any of these
cases as to its origin in one of these localities, and of its migration
into others. There seems also no conclusive evidence that the western
part of Australia was absolutely isolated from the eastern half during
earlier tertiary times, and it seems incredible, unless the climate of
Western has greatly differed from that of Eastern Australia, that a flora
which flourished over such a wide area as w r e have indicated, shall jA^LC
1 Tate, “Inaugural Address,” p. 37.


have failed when it encountered a region which, except for some fresh-
water lakes, interposed no bar to its advance. Moreover, Professor
Tate’s generalisation is the more unsatisfactory, inasmuch as we know
nothing about the tertiary flora of Western Australia.
The idea that the primitive tertiary flora was an immigrant one, so
far as concerns Australia, must therefore be regarded as exceedingly
problematical. The wide distribution of that flora seems to show that,
no doubt with local variations, all the countries inhabited by it enjoyed
an approximately similar climate, and it is surely no extravagant
hypothesis that Australia played a commensurate part with other
countries in the evolution of the flora. Certain forms were of extra-
Australian origin, doubtless; but we are not justified in assuming that
one part of the great area peopled by that curious flora was shut out
from the drama of evolution and condemned to be a passive recipient
of forms generated elsewhere.
The key to the problem before us seems to tya in the recognition
of the fact of there being two main elements in the Australian flora,
one xerophilous, the other hygrophilous, and by applying the same
classification to fossil floras, and regarding the bulk of the forms having
a typical Australian facies as xerophilous the disappearance
from countries outside Australia of natural orders and genera now
confined to or characteristic of it ; can be accounted for without assum-
ing the possession of some natural superiority by one flora over
another. Let us take the case of Europe, which, during Miocene and
still more during earlier tertiary times, had a climate considerably
warmer than it has to-day. Now if, under these circumstances, the
country were open and included stretches of desert (and this is pre-
cisely the character Mr. Wallace 1 considers it had during the Miocene
age), here would be conditions exactly parallelism some parts of
Australia, particularly Queensland, to-day. And what do we find
there ? In the drier parts typical Australian species flourish, while
species of Indo-Malayan facies predominate elsewhere. It is therefore
probable that the species of European tertiary floras referred to
Australian genera were, for the most part, dwellers in the desert
patches, while the moister places were occupied, to a large extent, by
forms adapted to the conditions there obtaining. That the climate of
Europe gradually changed during tertiary times we know, not only
because the floras indicate decreasing warmth until the cold Pliocene
age arrived, but because the great upheavals during the mountain-
making epochs must undoubtedly have affected, in a marked degree, the
annual temperature of the upraised districts and of the countries
in their neighbourhood. The diminution of its temperature would
have the effect of rendering Europe better fitted to herbaceous vegeta-
tion ; it would, in fact, change it from what I have previously called a
dendritic to a herbaceous zone, and thus would be set up a tendency
1 “Geog. Diet, of Animals,” vol. i. p. 117.


towards the elimination of xerophilous forms. But it is not certain
that the xerophilous vegetation completely disappeared from South
Europe and Asia Minor, for it may well be—to cite a few instances
only—that some Chenopodiaceae, and species of Helichysum (and a fair
number of these still survive in countries bordering on the Mediterranean),
may actually be descendants from herbaceous members of the xero-
philous flora, and when the present distribution of these genera is borne
in mind, there is, it is submitted, at least some probability for this
view.
An objector will, of course, ask why it is, if the theory above
sketched be true, that we do not now find species of Eucalyptus and
Banksia and BryandMa flourishing in deserts north of the equator.
These, he will remark, are precisely the places to which a xerophilous
flora would retire for shelter when driven by stress of climate from its
former homes. Undoubtedly it would do so, if the desert then existed,
and if no stretch of sea interposed to cut off the retreat of xerophilous
species. The available desert country reaches from the Atlas Moun-
tains across Arabia into Baluchistan, but from this the Sahara must
be deducted, since it was, till quite recent times, submerged beneath
the sea, and until the nummulitic limestone emerged from the waves,
the ocean in which that extensive formation was laid down would be
an effectual barrier to migration. Since Eocene times, however, this
barrier has not existed ; but it is not clear that Arabia and the drought-
stricken regions bordering on it were deserts at the time when the two
o o
floras, xerophilous and hygrophilous, were engaged in their life-and-
death struggle. If Perim can be taken as a guide—and there is no
reason why it should not be —there is every reason to believe that
Arabia enjoyed, in Eocene times, a climate much like that of Europe;
and all we have to suppose is that the same change went on there as
in Europe, namely that the climate became more favourable to hygro-
philous forms, which were thus enabled to eliminate their xerophilous
competitors, and that desert conditions subsequently prevailed, and the
absence of Australian genera from the great northern deserts is
explained. That this explanation presents difficulties is not to be
denied, for the elimination, at least of arborescent forms, has been so
complete/ we should have expected that at least some few forms would
have been able to adapt themselves to the altered conditions. 1 Still
the disappearance of these forms is scarcely more remarkable than is
the disappearance of “ Northern ” genera such as Quercus and Alnus
and Salix from a country which must have afforded them, one would
imagine, many eligible stations where they should have been able to
survive.
Let us now turn to Australia. And first, one must express a
1 The Indo - Malayan and East Asian species of the Proteaceous genus Hehcia may
perhaps be cases of adaptation in the sense used above ; so, too, East Asian species of such
genera as Drimys, Baeckia, Leptospermum, Leucopogon, etc.


doubt whether Professor Tate does not estimate too highly the rainfall
of Central Australia during the Diprotodon period. The evidence
relied on by Professor Tate is, it will be remembered, of two kinds,
biological and physiographical. Now if the districts where Diprotodon
remains are found were to a considerable extent lacustrine, conditions
might well have prevailed there essentially similar to those occurring
now in Central and South-Eastern Brazil, where, during the dry season,
when the cerrado country is completely parched, a rich flora, maintained
by condensation of vapour during the early morning hours, flourishes
in the river-valleys. The remains, therefore, of large Herbivora by no
means prove that the whole country afforded subsistence to those
animals; and although the existence of lakes warrants the conclusion
that the rainfall was greater than it is at present, there may still have
been many places adapted to xerophilous vegetation, and to that alone.
As regards the physiographical evidence, we have to take into calcula-
tion the probable effects of a great lowering of temperature, even if the
agency of ice cannot be invoked. Professor Tate and Mr. Watt, 1 after
a careful examination on the spot, deny the evidence of ice-action,
although to explain certain phenomena easily susceptible of such an
explanation, they are driven to resort to a theory they themselves
admit is “ wild in the extreme.” On the other hand, Professor Baldwin
Spencer and Mr. T. M. Byrne, 2 as the result of a recent investigation,
have no doubt of ice-action in Central Australia, though they decline
to say at what period it was in operation. But apart from this, we
have incontestable evidence for a cold climate in South Central
Australia during past Miocene times, when the southern part of South
Australia, as is well shown at Hallett’s Cove, was glaciated. Now,
under these circumstances, much of the precipitation falling on Central
Australia would take the form of snow, which, during the summer
months, would melt and thus release large bodies of water sufficient
to cause a considerable amount of denudation. On the whole, there-
fore, we need not suppose that the rainfall of Central Australia during
the period under review, although doubtless greater than at present,
was so excessive as to prevent xerophilous vegetation flourishing side
by side with hygrophilous, and contrasting Central Australia with
Europe there is reason for supposing that while in the latter case
conditions favouring a mixed xerophilous and hygrophilous flora were
gradually changed in the interest of the hygrophilous element, in
Australia the converse held, the tendency in favour of xerophilous
forms continuing into the present day.
What was the climate of South-Western Australia during early
tertiary times ? Did the primitive tertiary flora flourish there as in
other parts of the world ? There is no reason to doubt that it did,
1 “Report of the Work of the Horn Scientific Expedition,” p. 70,
2 Reported in Nature, vol. Ivii. p. 495 (1898). A supposed Queensland case is also
alluded to here.


provided the climate was suitable to a mixed flora. Unfortunately
this is precisely the question to which no answer is possible in the
present state of our knowledge, and it is greatly to be wished that
steps should be taken to examine the lignite beds of the Fitzgerald
River, 1 which would in all probability suffice to solve the problem.
But whether the primitive flora in its entirety flourished there or not,
it is submitted that the peculiar flora of the south-west can be ex-
plained on the assumption of a great difference in climate between
the south-west and other parts of Australia, a difference dating either
from Eocene (possibly late Cretaceous) times or from some period shortly
after the Eocene. We have to suppose that long before the great
plains of the central and eastern interior became desiccated, a consider-
able area in the south-west was already under the influence of drought.
Westward of this dry district, which could have supported only a
meagre flora, a somewhat more genial climate must have prevailed,
but one favourable, except in isolated areas, to xerophilous vegetation.
And if any difficulty is felt in adopting this view on account of
the proximity of the ocean, it must not be forgotten that in the Shark
Bay district desert conditions actually prevail up to the sea-coast, and
moreover that, although southward of this district there is a fair annual
rainfall near the ocean, the precipitation rapidly diminishes in amount
at short distances from it. I saw many scenes of desolation in the
interior, but they were almost equalled in the neighbourhood of York,
barely sixty miles inland, in the early summer of 1894; even on the
coast itself, periods of drought, during which non-xerophilous vegetation
has but a slender chance of survival except in specially favoured
localities, are frequent in the summer season. In such a country as
this, then, I venture to believe the rich flora of the south-west to have
been mainly evolved, and not, as Mr. Wallace supposes, in one
diversified by lofty mountain systems, which, if they ever existed, have,
except for the lowly Darling and Stirling Ranges, the upland districts
of the far North-West, and the insignificant hills scattered over the
vast intervening territory, vanished without leaving a trace of their
former presence.
I cannot agree with Professor Tate in thinking that, except very
rarely, there has been no interchange between the floras of Eastern
and Western Australia. The flora of the Western desert has a fair
number of species common to the two areas; there are also a
considerable number common to the desert and the south-west, and
some eastern species which advance to a greater or less distance into
the desert, but without reaching the western coast region, and all this
seems to indicate a filtration, most probably very slow, across the
desert plains. It may also be remarked that recent discoveries have
diminished the number of large genera having no species common to
1 This and a thorough exploration of the North-Western territories are the two most
interesting and important achievements now remaining to naturalists in Australia.


the two areas. But the evidence from species is not a satisfactory-
disproof of communication, for desert varieties are, as is well known,
rather frequent, and if in the course of ages species have been
differentiated from such varieties, a fair amount of concealed inter-
change may have taken place. The evidence is much stronger in
respect of genera restricted either to the east or the west side of the
country. Of these there are a large number which have not succeeded
in making the passage, although many—xerophilous ones especially
—have advanced some way towards doing so. These cases give
emphasis to the conclusion that interchange across the desert has
taken place very slowly, and to no considerable extent on the whole,
although I cannot help thinking that Professor Tate decidedly under-
estimates its amount.
For long periods, perhaps since Cretaceous times, the evolution of
the flora of Eastern and Western Australia has proceeded along
different lines. So far lam in accord with other writers, and indeed
this seems the only inference to be drawn from the facts. But the
main reason for this is to be sought, as I venture to think, not in the
simple isolation of the western part of the country while the eastern
has been accessible to migrants from outside which have made
headway against the endemic vegetation in consequence of their
inherent superiority, but in climatic difference which had already
become pronounced while the eastern interior was still a comparatively
well-watered country. In short, I see Western Australia to-day
supporting a vegetation similar, in its chief elements, to that which
would now have been flourishing in Europe if our continent had been
undergoing desiccation since Eocene times, and without lowering of
its mean annual temperature. The interposition between the two
halves of Australia of a sea and of a desert has, no doubt, laid an
embargo on migration from one to the other. But for these barriers
many restrictedly eastern forms would now be found upon the
western seaboard, and vice, versa . But we are not warranted in
supposing that interchange would have taken place to such an extent
as to result in a homogeneous flora; for the areas in Western Australia
suited to hygrophilous forms are strictly limited, and the pre-
ponderating xerophilous element in the western flora is so well
adapted to the extraordinary conditions prevailing in the west as to
render its displacement in the highest degree unlikely.
Turning now to Eastern Australia, we find there a flora with little
ordinal difference from that of the west, but containing many genera
and a large number of species which, if they advance westward into
the desert at all, do not reach the coast. Moreover, speaking
generally, as we proceed northwards, and this applies generally to the
moister regions near the coast, the number of forms possessed in
common with Indo-Malaya and of forms allied to such tends to increase.
There is also a sprinkling of species now characteristic of northern


lands and of species congeneric with these. A few of these species
occur also in Western Australia; in the eastern districts they are
more abundant in the cooler mundane country, and it is especially
in the latter that are found forms conspecific with, or closely allied
to, forms now forming part of the Antarctic bora, accepting this term
in the conventional sense, that is, as embracing genera now largely
or entirely restricted to southern cold temperate lands. It is admitted
that these facts do, at first sight, favour the view of migration on a
large scale followed by partial overpowering of the indigenous flora.
But when we consider what is known of the history of Australia since
late Cretaceous times the matter wears a different aspect. We have
every reason to believe that since these times considerable portions of
Eastern Australia have enjoyed a climate almost identical with that
of Indo-Malaya, a climate, too, still prevailing in the north and north-
east. We know, moreover, that in early tertiary times the floras of
both countries were in a large measure identical. Is there anything
remarkable, therefore, in the evidences of fioristic affinity between the
two regions ? It will perhaps be conceded, as Professor Tate himself
has conceded, that a certain proportion of the Australian species of
genera common to these two neighbouring areas are descendants from
the primitive flora, but that by far the larger number are immigrants.
This, however, assumes our possession of complete records respecting
the two floras from Eocene times to the present; and that we have
anything like such records is an assertion no competent person would
take upon himself to maintain.
But migration there has been, and the number of identical species
and such a fact as the discovery of outlying forms allied to Indo-Malayan
on the Bellenden-Ker range in North Queensland prove it, as also does
the existence of “Australian” forms on the mountains of New Guinea,
and in less number in various parts of Indo-Malaya and Eastern Asia,
if, indeed, these last be not descendants from the primitive flora.
Moreover, the trend of migration from the north has undoubtedly
predominated over that from the south. But are we justified in
assuming from this that any superiority is inherent in the Indo-
Malayan flora over the Australian ? What are the data ? A number
of hygrophilous genera and a certain proportion of hygrophilous species
are common to the two regions. Now the Indo-Malayan flora,
exception made for that of Timor, in some measure xerophilous, is and
has long been a hygrophilous flora; while in Australia since Eocene
times, if the view above enunciated be correct, hygrophilous types
have had to struggle with xerophilous ones, which latter to-day still
form a large element in its flora. Whatever in this case the means
whereby migration has been brought about, its trend must, other things
being equal, have borne direct relation to the size—or what comes
approximately to the same thing, the comparative fioristic richness—
of the areas between which the interchange has been made. We have


also only to consider the hygropliilous element in the two floras, since
the Indo-Malayan climate is not suited to xerophilous ones. While,
therefore, the considerable areas in Northern and North-Eastern
Australia 1 favourable to hygrophilous species have been open to the
incursions of the whole of the rich Indo-Malayan flora, only those
Australian forms adapted to hygrophilous A have had a chance of
penetrating into Indo-Malaya. It is submitted, therefore, that a
preponderant migration from the north is only what ought to be
expected on the doctrine of chances, and that there is no need to
import into the discussion notions as to relative superiority and
inferiority. We thus stand here upon precisely the same ground as
that taken up in considering the supposed aggressive power of the
Scandinavian flora.
The case is different with the Antarctic element of the Australian
flora. This comprises forms suited to the lower grades of temperature,
and all available evidence teaches us that colder conditions have been,
of course in a geological sense, temporary only in Australia. But
bearing in mind that glacial effects must have lasted a very long time,
as contrasted with the span of human life, we may suppose that
species of which the ancestors were received from the south may have
been differentiated within the wide area in Australia suited to Antarctic
forms during glacial times and times immediately preceding and
following them, and that some at least of such species, accompanied by
native ones which had become adapted to colder conditions, would
migrate south when glacial conditions passed away, and so add a new,
if small, element of Australian origin to the Antarctic flora. In any
event, the Antarctic element seems to be an immigrant one. 2 Ido not
remember any attempt to prove from the presence of Antarctic forms
the possession of “ aggressive power ” by the Antarctic flora, though,
as the evidence for migration is so much stronger in this case, the
omission, to say the least of it, is somewhat strange.
But Professor Tate tells us that a flora of exotic origin is in the
act of displacing its indigenous vegetation from Central Australia.
Let us see upon what evidence this conclusion reposes. Most of the
truly Australian forms, he says, 3 usually grow gregariously or in
isolated colonies from a few square yards to several square miles in
area. But in a country like Australia, where good patches of soil
alternate with bad ones, this gregarious habit scarcely implies want of
adaptation. I saw precisely the same thing in Western Australia, and
the inference I drew from it was directly contrary to Professor Tate’s,
namely, that the large numbers of a species monopolising or almost
monopolising considerable portions of ground argued success in their
1 And to a somewhat more limited extent the North-West too.
2 Some of the herbaceous genera now characteristic of northern lands represented in
Australia may have been introduced from the south during the glacial period.
3 “ Report of the Horn Expedition ” (Botany), p. 120.


competition with other forms. Further, Professor Tate thinks the
aggressive nature of alien plants to be exhibited not only by their
extensive distribution, but by their ability to adapt themselves to
extremes of soil and climate. He cites the following species in
illustration: Tribidus terrestris, Cicome viscosa, Malvastrum spicatum,
Boerhaavia diffusa, Salsola kali, Mollugo hirta, and Pollichia zeylanica.
How, even granting these to be aliens, and I think there are grave
reasons for doubting the exotism of more than one of them,- if these
alien migrants from a hygrophilous zone are better adapted to desert
conditions than native species which have had the advantage of long
adaptation, it is strange that their distribution in the desert should be
so restricted. Only four of the seven have been recorded from the
western desert at all. I myself met with but two of them, viz,
Tribidus terrestris once only, and Salsola kali about half-a-dozen times,
but on only one occasion in any quantity. 1 Moreover, it should be
remembered that these are all herbs of wide extra-Australian dis-
tribution, and provided, most of them, with special means of diffusion.
Their presence in the desert is, therefore, easily explicable, and there
is no warrant for drawing, as an upholder of current notions might
wish to draw, from the fact any inference as to the superiority of an
exotic flora over the native flora as a whole. On the gorges of the
tablelands and on the basal part of the craggy escarpments and their
taluses Professor Tate found a mixed flora in which the endemic
element predominated, ten per cent only of it being of (supposed)
exotic origin. The exotic species are seven in number; of these,
except Hybanthus enncaspinnus, reported only from Mount Squires, on
the eastern border of the western colony, Parietaria debilis alone has
been found in the western desert. And when we compare the two
lists above-mentioned, a curious fact comes out, namely, that the name
of not one species occurs in both, and this forces one to suspect that
Professor Tate has overestimated the adaptability of these supposed
alien species. It would be wise, therefore, to reserve judgment on so
difficult a point as that mooted by Professor Tate.
The view here taken up, it will be observed, is one intermediate
between that of writers who, basing their conclusions on present
distribution alone, profess to trace “ currents ” of vegetation from one
part of the world to another, and ascribe the moving force, if the term
may be allowed, of these currents to some natural inferiority of forms
native to the country towards which the current is supposed to set—
between this view and that of Baron von Ettingshausen, 2 who, while
1 I should have been only too happy to come across Salsola kali more frequently, as it is
an excellent fodder for camels. Doubtless it is much more common in South Australia, for on
the occasion referred to above, our Afghan, who had worked at camel establishments in the
eastern colony, at once recognised the plant, calling it “ South Australian salt-bush,” and
informing me that it is an important fodder-plant there.
2 “Contributions to the Tertiary Flora of Australis,” Mem. Geol, Surv,, N. S. Wales,
1888.
19 NAT, SC. VOL. XV. NO. 92.


maintaining that the evolution of the existing floras from the tertiary
flora was effected through differentiation of climate—and this, I
venture to think, has been a main cause of floral diversity—dismisses
as “ absurd ” the doctrine that certain floristic identities and affinities
between regions now separated by the ocean are to be explained on
the hypothesis of a former land-connection between them. I believe
such land-connections to have existed, and, indeed, the present
distribution of animals vouches for the truth of the theory. But until
we know a great deal more than is at present known about the
floras of any two countries previous to their being placed in continuity,
I fail to see the possibility of estimating, except as mere guess-work, the
respective effects upon the two floras so connected. Further, I believe
the inferences from present distribution and from floristic superiority
and inferiority upon which the current notions as to the origin of the
Australian flora are founded, to be in the highest degree misleading.
So facile a solution of the problem may commend itself to some; but
it may be that many an observer will have to add his contribution! of
fact and suggestion before the final solution is reached; and if the
notions here propounded, though they should fail to find acceptance,
should at least drive home the conviction that much yet remains to be
done in this fascinating field of research, the writer’s object will have
been fully attained.
3 1508 00246150 2




