

AUSTRALIAN EDITION,
n BY ARRANGEMENT WITH THE AUTHOR.
U)
twenty-seven
IDENTIFICATIONS
fto/t
OF THE
BHCUSH IATIOI
WITH THE LOST
ROUS I OF ISRAEL,
Founded upon 300 Scripture Proofs
containing]
MANY NEW & IMPORTANT IDENTITIES,
AND SHOWING
THE ANGLO-SAXON ANCESTRY (hitherto not traced).
THE CHARTER OF OUR COLONIES FROM THE BIBLE.
ENGLISH EMIGRATION WILLED BY GOD.
ENGLAND TO BE EXEMPTED FROM THE TERRIBLE
COMING WARS.
THE CLEAR DISTINCTION OF ISRAEL FROM JUDAH.
THE CHIEF OBJECT OF SUNDAY SCHOOLS.
HOW TO REMOVE PAUPERISM.
THE SCRIPTURAL REMEDY FOR INTEMPERANCE.
THE IDENTITY THE CLIMAX OF CHURCH AND
MISSIONARY SUCCESS, &c., &c., &c.
VERBATIM FROM THE TWELFTH ENGLISH EDITION.
London: G. J- Stevenson, 54 Paternoster Row.
ENTERED AT STATIONERS’ HALL.
PRICE ONJE SHILLING.
A T SMITH 35 Swanston Street, and all Booksellers.
’ ' \%l


** *
* ' * *»
* r
.
♦
0 1


ENGLISH NATION IDENTIFIED
WITH THE
LOST HOUSE OF ISRAEL
CtomtjT-sebnt |&mtxftratious.
DEDICATED TO THE (SO-CALLED) BRITISH PEOPLE,-
THEIR KINSMAN,
EDWARD SINE.
COUNTRY PUBLISHERS.
Manchester : J. Heywood. Birmingham : Richard
Temple Row.
Edinburgh :J. Menzies & Co. Glasgow : James McGeachy.
Brighton : H. &C. Treacher. Bristol : Wm. Mack.
Bath : B. Pearson, Milson Street.
Bradford : J. F. Hammond.
mdccclxxi.
The immense popularity of this pamphlet in England has led
to the publication of an Australian edition.


MASON, FIRTH, AND M'CUTCHEON,
GENERAL PRINTERS,
FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.


EPISTLE TO THE NATION.
My Kinsfolk,
It is not my province to write a book. lam without
ambition that way; my great desire is to serve my country, giving
forth such flashes of light to the people, as shall convince them
that they are the Heirs to the greatest temporal, political, and
social blessings, our God has ever vouchsafed to any one particular
and distinct Nation, blessings that are now coming to us of a
value far beyond what we have ever yet received, notwithstanding
that throughout our history we have always occupied the most
exalted position on the earth, but the blessings now about to
dawn upon us, will be unmistakably greater, giving us nationally
a standing far superior to any former period. The very first that
we shall inherit, is that of living in peace, entirely freed from the
turmoils and convulsions of Waiffare, that have already commenced
to engulf the continent of Europe ; with these Wars England will
have nothing to do, we cannot be embroiled in them, they will
last through some years, and while the other nations will be in
the midst of sufferings, famines, and dire perplexities, we shall be
enabled throughout this time to live peaceably and without
anxiety. God has said it, and His word is sure, we inherit these
blessings by being Heirships to Israel, we are the very descend-
ants of this lost people, in whom so many valuable promises are
vested. It has been the will of our God that we should be
politically lost, until the latter days, we were not to be discovered
until the times of the “ wars and the rumours of wars” had arrived.
These times are now, this is the exact time specified by God
for the political resurrection of Israel, effected in ourselves, they
were to be “ blinded” until the fulness of the Gentiles had come
in, this has been fulfilled, which is proved by the fact that the
Coolies of China are emigrating by thousands, because their country
is overcrowded, and that the Chinese themselves confess that
they cannot afford to allot ground for the cultivation of cotton,
though it would largely swell their revenues, and give employment
to millions of unemployed. The same may be said of Germany
and Prussia, whose people have swarmed our possessions, because
they had not land of their own. Belgium and other countries
testify to the same fact. That this time has come, is further
proved by the restoration of the Latter Rain to Palestine, a rain
withheld for centuries, its Withdrawal, and the Captivity, being
a 2


events that Solomon in his prayer connected together, and they
return together, the rain is restored, and now Israel is found—
found in ourselves, the time is now at hand, when God has promised
to bless us more largely than ever, we have not to wait for the
Coming of the Lord, before He settles us after our “ old estates”
he will do this before our swords are beaten into ploughshares.
The positive promise that He “ will do better unto us than at our
beginnings,” Ezek. xxxvi. 11, is almost immediate, we shall begin
to realise this directly after we have effected our Identity Nation-
ally, and it is of the utmost importance that this should be effected
at once, as in these critical times of Warfare, it might save us
from many grave mistakes. God will not effect it for us, without
inquiry from us, Ezek. xxxvi. 37, therefore let the Church plead
for it, it is our duty, it is vital to us, for when established it is our
Peace. The disciples were Israelites, of the tribe of Benjamin,
that one tribe that was purposely left behind to be a light in Jeru-
salem in the days of Christ. 1 Kings xi. 13—36.
Christ privately instructed these Israelites about the very times
we are now in. Matt. xxvi. 3. They wanted to know about
the latter days, and were told that they would not be until “Ye
hear of wars, and rumours of wars, nation shall rise against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom, and there shall be famines, and
pestilences, and earthquakes.” This was to be the lot of the
Gentile nations, but not of Israel, we have no part in them, and
this is Christ’s special instruction to our nation, when we hear of
these wars. “See that ye be not troubled.” Matt. xxiv. 6. Mark
says the same, “Be ye not troubled,” Mark xiii. 7. Luke says
“ Be not terrified,” Luke xxi. 9, therefore let England build upon
God’s sure word, which has never yet failed. These are instruc-
tions alone given to our nation, it is impossible for the so-called
English to be mixed up with these quarrels, having other matters
to attend to, our Mission is to give testimony to the truth of the
Bible, God will call us to the front to be His witnesses, Is. xliii.
12, the nations in their troubles, will find out that they have
followed after vanities, and will flow to us to be taught of the
Lord, Jer. xvi. 19. Grand and blessed times await our Identity.
We have to claim the land. The earth will be more productive
to supply our wants than before. The Lord will do better for us
than at our beginnings. Then will be to us essentially times of
peace, of gladness and rejoicing. “ When God bringeth back the
captivity of His people, Jacob shall rejoice, Israel shall be glad.”
Ps. liii. G. It is the climax of our national history; the ushering
in of joyous times; but let me not be understood as saying a time
of disarmament, for it is not. We cannot be indifferent to our
Army and Navy matters, for a time of Warfare is coming to us,
even to us—but not yet; Armageddon looms in the distance.
This is the time when almost the entire world will be gathered to


battle against ns, and for which we have to be prepared. Our
Volunteers have been raised up for this Time, and will be called
to actual service, but the fate of this battle is decided more by our
Colonies, than by ourselves, in our favour, hence our duty, and
interest to look after their growth. There are endless uses in our
subject, but as our object here is only to establish the Identity we
purpose devoting another pamphlet in showing the uses.
It is right to say the subject is partially old, Mr. "Wilson, in
“Our Israelitish Origin,” and the Rev. F. R. A. Glover, M.A.,
in “England the Remnant of Judah,” have both, in part, treated
upon it, their works being well worth perusal, though we fail
entirely to agree with either of them, inasmuch as they seek to
Identify England with the tribe of Ephraim only, Mr. Glover speak-
ing “ of all the other members of the Israelitish tribes wherever
they are,” as though in doubt where to find them, and Mr. Wilson
concluding they compose some of the modern nations of Europe,
this view has led to confusion, has hindered the full development
of the subject, and is the reason why the matter is so little known.
Scripture does not warrant us to suppose that the tribes were
separated, the ten tribes are together, they may have different
characteristics, but the whole form one compound body, thus we
have drunkards and ritualists from Ephraim, but we also have
farmers and cattle breeders from Reuben, as well as mariners from
Dan, lawyers and writers from Zebulon, soldier 3 and artillerymen
from Asher, and are indebted to Benjamin, and not to Rome, for
the tidings of the Gospel. We are altogether, an entire body,
addressed by the Scriptures as a whole. It is not Ephraim, but
“ Israel shall bud and blossom and fill the face of the world with
fruit.” It is “what one nation in the earth is like thy people
Israel,” not like thy people Ephraim, it is “ blindness in part hath
happened unto Israel,” not unto Ephraim, and so on, indeed had
we been kept separate, God’s purposes in keeping us a lost nation
would have been frustrated, as it would have led to Identity before
the time.
EDWARD HINE.


The Author is prepared to Lecture upon
“THE IDENTITY,”
The Importance of Emigration,
THE GENERAL USES OF THE SUBJECT..
Communications addressed to him, 73 Little Britain,
London, E.C., will be attended to.


IDENTIFICATIONS.




THE ENGLISH NATION IDENTIFIED
WITH THE
LOST TRIBES OF ISRAEL,
TWENTY-SEVEN IDENTIFICATIONS
BASED UPON SCRIPTUEE.
Two great questions have for many generations puzzled and set at
defiance the intelligence of the great and learned of our land. The
first, What has become of the Lost Tribes of Israel? The second,
Who were the ancestors of the English people ?
The object of these pages is to show that the latter are identical
with the former, and out of very many others that could be pro-
duced, to advance twenty-seven identifications that shall clearly
establish the proposition. A few introductory remarks are needed.
We take for granted that the reader is well informed as to the
past Israelitish history—that they were once One People, and after-
wards became Two Houses : the House of Israel, and the House
of Judah. Since their captivities this distinction of the two
houses becomes the grand essential to be borne in mind. To con-
found Judah with Israel and Israel with Judah, is the root of all
mistakes in reference to this subject; these two peoples are as
distinct as France from Russia, as fire from water, so that to speak
of Israel as meaning the Jews, is to fall into an error which
destroys the sense and meaning of much of the prophetic word;


yet this mistake is almost universally made, the result being that
in the pulpits of our divines the prophetic word is seldom touched
upon; the great command to “ take heed ” to the sure word of
prophecy is disobeyed, or, if brought forward at all, it is generally
so wrested, by its literal meaning being disregarded and a spiritual
one substituted, that from a dozen different pulpits a dozen
different interpretations are given; and under this teaching the
word can no longer be said to be the “ Sure word ” (2 Peter i. 19),
or be taken as the “ light that shineth in a dark place.” It is
quite contrary to the spirit of prophecy, when a plain literal in-
terpretation can be accepted, to substitute a figurative or spiritual
one. “No prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpreta-
tion,” and the greater number admit of a literal sense. Thus,
with the Jews, or the House of Judah, it is most interesting to
mark how literally the prophecies have been, and are still being
carried out. Thus—“ I will cause thee to serve thine enemies in
the land which thou knowest not.” Jer. xvii. 4. “And I will
deliver them to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth for
their hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in
all places whither I shall drive them.” Jer. xxiv. 9, Jer. xxix. 18.
“ I will fan them with a fan in the gates of the land; I will be-
reave them of children.” “ Thy substance and thy treasures will I
give to the spoil without price.” Jer. xv. “ Thou shalt not pros-
per in thy ways; and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled
evermore, and no man shall save thee;” “ and thy life shall hang
in doubt before thee, and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt
have none assurance of thy life.” Deut. xxviii. 29, 66.
These and many other dreadful curses have been literally
fulfilled, and to this day in our own country the Jew is a taunt,
a hissing, and aby word. Then surely if they have been so
minutely fulfilled with the one House, so surely shall a literal
fulfilment take place of the prophecies concerning the House of
Israel. Very many of these have been fulfilled most wonder-
fully, yea, marvellously; indeed so many, that but few are
left yet to be accomplished, and these few must shortly come
to pass. The most remarkable feature of the prophecies con-


cerning Israel, is their exactly opposite character as contrasted
with those concerning Judah. Thus, instead of being a marked
people, known by all nations, Israel was to become a lost people,
known by none, not even to themselves. Hosea i. 9; ii. 17.
Instead of being a small people, bereft of children, Israel was to
have the multitudinous seed as the “ stars of heaven.” Instead
of being a dispersed people, and no nation, Israel was to become a
fulness of nations, kings coming out of her. Instead of being a
trembling people, smitten before her enemies, Israel was to be the
most warlike nation, possessing the seat of power, “ the gate of
her enemies.” Instead of being a standing witness to the
prophetic word, Israel was to become the overwhelming witness
to the truth in the Latter Times. Instead of being under the
Mosaic Law, Israel was divorced from the Law, and is to be found
in Christ. Judah is represented as Deaf, but Israel as Blind. It
was treacherous Judah. Backsliding Israel. From Judah one
seed. Of Israel seeds, and so forth. Israel was never Judah, but
Judah was of Israel, and will, eventually, be one with Israel.
Sometimes Judah is referred to in Scripture as of Israel, when the
distinction is still kept up, for then Israel as the Ten Tribes is
distinguished as “ All Israel,” “ the whole House of Israel,” the
“ House of Israel wholly,” &c. These distinctions are more
generally to be found in the Book of Ezekiel.
A review of the leading prophecies concerning Israel, will
enable us most clearly to identify the English people as the
Lost House of Israel.
IDENTIFICATION THE FIRST.—THE CAPTIVITY.
It was not until 72 5 b.c. that Israel or the ten Tribes was
carried captive by Assyria, “ and the King of Assyria did carry
away Israel unto Assyria, and put them in Halah and in Habor
by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes; because
they obeyed not the voice of the Lord their God, but trans-
gressed his covenant.” 2 Kings xviii. 11, 12. It was in these
parts that Israel was lost, which includes the southern border of
the Caspian Sea, and as far west as Araxes, beyond the Euphrates.
Here her name was to be taken from her, “ they shall no more be


remembered by their name.” Hos. ii. 17. Hitherto they had
been known by the name of God’s people, “My people.” “ Then
said God, call his name Lo-Ammi,” Hos. i. 9, meaning “ not my
people.” They were only to be lost in name, they were to be
“ blinded,” become ignorant of their ancestry, and as this “ blind”
people, were yet to accomplish the marvellous works allotted to
them as the “ pre-ordained,” “ chosen,” and “ special” seed. “ Yet
doth he devise means that his banished be not expelled from him.”
2 Sam, xiv. 14. “ And I will bring the blind by a way they knew
not; I will lead them in paths they have not known,” Is. xlii.
16; thus Israel, though in captivity, inasmuch as they were “cast
out” of their land, yet would not remain under the dominion of
the Assyrians, for God twelve years after the event says through
Nahum, “ though I have afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.
For now will I break this yoke (the Assyrian) from off thee and
will burst thy bonds in sunder. Nahum i. 12, 13. This the
prophetic word plainly recognises as having been done, for
afterwards Israel is addressed as being in the North, and then
North West of the seat of Prophecy: “Behold these shall come
from far, and 10, these from the north, and from the west.” Is. xlix.
12. “To the islands will he pay recompense, so shall they fear the
name of the Lord from the west.” Is. lix. 19. “Go and proclaim
these words towards the north, and say, return thou backsliding
Israel.” Jer. iii. 12. That Israel did not go to the East is
positive, because God in prophecy declared they should have “ the
Assyrians before, and the Philistines behind.” Is. ix. 12. Had
they gone eastward this would have been reversed; therefore, this
assures us they went first to the north, then to the west, which is
farther proved by the direction Paul went when he journeyed after
them, and Christ himself never went to the south of Jerusalem,
where the Jews were chiefly to be found, but always to the north,
through Samaria. Had his mission been to the Jews, he would
have gone southwards, but he did not.
Thus it be evident that from this point they would become
wanderers, without any fixed design of their own; whether their
tribeships would be kept as distinct as they were when in the
Land, I am not prepared to affirm, though I think the probability
is that they would endeavour so to preserve them, at least for a
time.
Since the publication of the former Editions of this work, I
have been amazed to find the amount of ignorance that exists upon
the Captivity of Israel, having been told, even by Ministers who
presumably should know better, that Israel did return, they
confounding Israel with Judah, and the 70 years, that I must be
allowed the indulgence now and then of showing the difference of
the two Houses; Israel never returned, they went into captivity
725 b.c.; Judah went into captivity 588 b.c.; but Israel at this


time was in captivity, and had been so for 134 years. Israel’s
captivity was in Assyria; Judah’s in Babylon. Israel’s was
complete, “ there was none left but the tribe of Judah only.” 2
Kings, xvii. 18. Judah being then a distinct nation. Judah’s
was partial, the poor being left behind. Jer. xl. 7. Israel never
returned, their captivity “is unto this day.” 2 Kings xvii. 23.
Judah did return after the 70 years. Neh. vii. 6.
THE IDENTITY. In just such a state as that of these
people now, were our ancestors found. The Anglo-Saxons were
wandering tribes among the Germans, with so much of the warrior
spirit, that the Ancient Britons invited them into these isles to
help them in their national difficulties. To trace the origin of our
forefathers has been the perplexing problem for ages. Who were
the ancestors of ‘these Anglo-Saxons 1 To this day nationally we
are in positive ignorance as to our true ancestry, a mystery which
these pages are intended to remove. From the very parts through
which the tribes of Israel wandered, we came. So interesting has
been the tracing of our ancestry to our historians, that to some it
was a life study. Sharon Turner is foremost in the search, and he
traces us to the very spot where Israel was carried captive, the
one where the name of Israel was taken from them. Arriving
here, he loses all further trace of them. Here was the connecting
link, but had he seen and lain hold of it, the purposes of God
would have been frustrated, for the “ time of the end” was not
then come, for which reason was it hid from him. The fact, how-
ever, is most important, and forms the ground-work of our argu-
ment. Our own historian, Sharon Turner, in treating of the
second or Teutonic stock of European population in his “ Anglo-
Saxons ,” (vol. i., 93-102) says, “It is peculiarly interesting to us,
because from its branches not only our own immediate ancestors,
but also those of the most celebrated nations of modern Europe,
have unquestionably descended. The Anglo-Saxons, Lowland
Scotch, Normans, Danes, Belgians, Lombards, and Franks have all
sprung from that great fountain of the human race, which we have
distinguished by the terms Scythian, German, or Gothic.” “ The
first appearance of the Scythian tribes in Europe may be placed,
according to Strabo and Homer, about the eighth,* or, according
to Herodotus, in the seventh century before the Christian era.”
“ The first scenes of their civil existence, and of their progressive
power, was in Asia, to the east of the Araxes.t Here they multi-
plied and extended their territorial limits for some centuries,
unknown to Europe.” The account of Diodorus is, “That the
* The date of the Assyrian Captivity.
f The identical part into which Israel had been carried captive.


Scythians, formerly inconsiderable and few, possessed a narrow
region on the Araxes; but, by degrees, they became more powerful
in numbers and in courage. They extended their boundaries on
all sides; till, at last, they raised their nation to great empire and
glory. . . In the course of time they subdued many nations
between the Caspian and Moeotis, and beyond the Tanais.” “In
the time of Herodotus they had gained an important footing in
Europe, and to have taken a westerly direction.” Having refer-
ence expressly to the Saxons, Sharon Turner observes, “ They were
a German or Teutonic, i.e., a Gothic or Scythian tribe, and of the
various Scythian nations which have been recorded, the Sakai, or
Sacae, are the people from whom the descent of the Saxons may be
inferred, with the least violation of probability. They defeated
Cyrus, and reached the Cappadoces on the Euxine. That some of
the divisions of this people were really called Sakasuna is obvious
from Pliny; for he says that the Sakai who settled in Armenia,
were named Sacassani, which is but Saka-Suna, spelt by a person
who was unacquainted with the meaning of the combined words.
It is also important to remark, that Ptolemy mentions a
Scythian people sprung from the Sakai, by the name of Saxones.”
These extracts are invaluable to our purpose, as they call to our
aid Strabo, Homer, Herodotus, Diodorus, Pliny, and Ptolemy to
prove that our so-called Saxon ancestors came from the parts where
Israel was lost, making their first appearance in those parts at the
exact time that Israel was lost—two most important points, by
which wo are enabled to gather another most important fact, viz.,
that in the days of Christ our forefathers were then occupying the
north-west of Asia, and gradually making their way into Europe;
that in the very days of the Apostles our race were located in Cap-
padocia, Galatia, Pamphylia, Lydia, Bithynia, Mysia, Achaica,
Thessaly, Macedonia, and Illyricum. We are traced in this direc-
tion seven hundred years before Christ, and we did not reach these
isles until 430 years after Christ; so that between these periods
and at the time of Christ we were in the regions specified. This
is important to see, because one of Christ’s most pronounced decla-
rations was, that He was “ not sent but unto the lost sheep of
the House of Israel.” Matt, xv. 24. He instructed his disciples,
saying, “ Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of
the Samaritans enter ye not, but go rather to the lost sheep of the
House of Israel,” Matt. x. 5. And, in obedience to this com-
mand, we find the apostles making their journies to the precise
localities where our English forefathers then were, preaching the
word and forming churches.
This is an indisputable interesting historical coincidence, which
fully justifies the inference of an Identity.


IDENTIFICATION THE SECOND.—“ THE ISLES.”
After Israel’s captivity, after they had freed themselves from
the Assyrian yoke, and after their wandering in a blind state in
the north-west of Europe, the suse word of Prophecy which cannot
fail, plainly intimates that their course would be directed to “ the
Isles,” “the isles afar off.”
“Keep silence before me, O Islands.” Is. xli. 4. “The Isles
shall wait for His law.” Is. xlii. 4. “Sing unto the Lord a new
song—the Isles and the inhabitants thereof.” Is. xlii. 12.
“Listen, O Isles, unto me.” Is. xlix. 1. “Hear the word of the
Lord, O ye nations, and declare it in the Isles afar off, and say,
He that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him.” Jer.
xxxi. 10. These all refer to Israel; and there are many more
that testify that Israel would locate themselves in the Islands
north-west from Palestine, the seat of prophecy, and when they
reached these Islands would have to accomplish great and arduous
missions only given to them, and of a nature so grandly gigantic
and expansive, as would become utterly impossible for any other
nation on earth to accomplish, and the positive and literal accom-
plishment of which become the fruit by which they shall be
known.
It must be borne in mind that all the Israelites were not
literally carried into captivity by Assyria, for a remnant of them
escaped. (Obadiah xiv.) The captives were carried to the north,
the remnant that escaped went southwards, by the Mediterranean
Sea, consequently there was a great distance between the two
bodies, and one would not know the movements of the other.
Yet God’s design was to bring them together, those in the south
would, by a different route, be sent to the “Isles afar off,” for in
Is. Ixvi. 19, it is said, “I will send those that escape of them
unto the nations,” “to the isles afar off.”
THE IDENTITY. Presuming that the tribeships would have
been kept distinct, that they would have conducted their wander-
ings in separate bands, and so at different periods have entered
these British Isles, which are certainly afar off from the seat of
prophecy, and in a north-westerly direction; this would exactly
tally with the mode that our forefathers actually made their
appearance here, and would furnish us with the reason why they
made ten distinct migrations at various times, and at different
points into this country. If Israel did this, of course being
blinded, they would only be known as Gentiles, and those that
escaped would not enter Britain by way of Germany or Denmark
as most of our forefathers did, but through France as the direct


way from the Mediterranean, and would thus account for our
Gauls and Normans. This much is certain, that if Israel had been
kept in tribeship up to the point of their reaching the isles, after-
wards this distinctiveness would not have been preserved, but
would merge into one great nation being always addressed as one
united people, just as our ancestors ultimately became. Of course
this theory revolutionises our popular acception of English History,
that of being a mixture of ten different people from whom have
come the mightiest Nation on the face of the earth, which is most
vague, and by no means plausible; nay more, such a theory after a
careful consideration is most unsatisfactory, as it conveys a cruel
reflection on the word of the Almighty, which is tantamount to a
direct insult to our God, inasmuch as we, the so-called English,
have accomplished without one exception (thus far), every mission
God so faithfully promised should come forth from Israel, whereas
no other nation has touched them, and it is now an utter impos-
sibility for any other people to do so. Therefore our old theory
would make it appear that God had substituted another Nation in
the place of Israel to bring forth those Marvellous Works, which
are the glory of the Almighty God, whereas He has distinctly
promised that He would not take His Glory away from Israel, and
give it to another people. God says, “For mine own sake, even
for mine own sake, will I do it. . For how should my name be
polluted 1 ? And I will not give my glory unto another.” Is.
xlviii. 11. No! “God is not a man that He should lie, neither the
son of man that He should repent; hath He said, and shall He not
do it? or hath He spoken, and shall He not make it good?” Num.
xiii. 19. “I am the Lord: that is my name : and my glory will
I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images.” Is.
xlii. 8. This promise is not given to Judah, but only to Israel,
and was sent after them when they were living in the Isles.
IDENTIFICATION THE THIRD.—RENEWING
STRENGTH.
Israel, after their wanderings through the north-west, and their
settlement in the isles afar off, were to “renew their strength.”
Though a warlike people from the first, still their wanderings,
with the conflicts that would result as they passed through the
lands of strangers, would greatly enfeeble and impoverish them,
this was the case before they crossed the Jordan to possess the
land, when they had the special and visible token of God’s help,
how much more so now, when apparently they were left entirely
to themselves, every new passage through fresh country would be


by might, not by right, every inch of ground gained would be by
use of the bow; work, not of a day, but of generations, and would
be the cause of much weakness and fatigue.
But when the isles are reached prophecy comes forth with her
edict, and says —“ Keep silence before me, O Islands; and let the
people renew their strength,” Is. xli. 1, giving as a reason in the
Bth verse, “Thou Israel art my servant. Jacob, whom I have
.chosen, the seed of Abraham, my friend.” And saying in the 10th
verse, “ I, thy God; I will strengthen thee.”
THE IDENTITY here with the English nation is so plain
that it is needless to enlarge further than to bring out the fact,
that we did exactly what Israel was to have done, that is, renewed
our strength. The Saxons had been for years in the north-west
parts of Europe before their coming into Britain, as likewise the
Gauls in for one of the reasons why Julius Caesar invaded
England was, that the Britons had assisted the Gauls in their
battles against his armies, and the last Roman legion sailed from
England 475 years after Caesar had landed, most of this time was
one of warfare and of depopulation, but mark how wonderfully
have we increased since then.
IDENTIFICATION THE FOURTH.—STARS
OF HEAVEN.
There were three grand birthright promises made to Abraham,
but that of the multitudinous seed is the only one we notice here.
That this was to be literally a national seed as distinguished from
other nations is most clear from the careful way in which God
Himself preserves its descent. Abraham was lamenting that he had
no seed, and says, “Lo, one born in my house is mine heir, and the
word of the Lord came unto him, saying: This shall not be thine
heir, but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be
thine heir. And He brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now
toward Heaven and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them.
And He said unto him, So shall thy seed be.” Gen. xv. 3-6.
Great care was made to confirm this promise to Isaac —Gen. xxvi.
4, as also to Jacob—Gen. xxviii. 14. Jacob, who was afterwards
called Israel, had twelve sons, representing the twelve tribes, and
that there should be no doubt as to whom out of the twelve
should inherit this promise of the multiplicity, we find that
Joseph, whose name means Increase, was to be a “ fruitful
bough,” saying, “ The blessings of thy father have prevailed above
the blessings of thy progenitors unto the utmost bound of the
“everlasting hills. They shall be upon the head of Joseph.” Gen.


xlix. 26. We then find the promise descending most minutely
unto Ephraim, saying, “ And his seed shall become a multitude of
nations.” Gen. xlviii. 19. Thus it is most plain, that after the
separation of the twelve tribes into two houses, the inheritance of
the promised multitudinous seed was with Israel, now the lost
house, and not with Judah. For at the very time of their cap-
tivity, at the time when God was withholding His name from
them, that they should become a lost people upon the earth, at
that exact time God ratifies His ancient promise, saying, “ Yet
the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the
sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered.” Hos. i. 10.
“ IJnto Judah was given the sceptre,” Gen. xlix. 10, from whom
the lion of the tribe of Judah should come,” the one seed Christ
so very beautifully distinguished from the “ seeds as of many” by
Paul. Gal. hi. 16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the
promises made. “He saith not, and to seeds, as of many; but as
of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ.” Indeed, the multi-
plicity could not be with Judah, otherwise the promises would go
for naught, and prophecy have failed (which is impossible), for
the Jews, inheriting their curse, do not increase to draw forth
remark, not now being nine millions strong in all the countries
of their dispersion, numerically insignificant in comparison with
other nations, therefore this fulness of nations must now be on
the earth, they cannot be hid in a corner, they must have inter-
course with other nations, and be identical with some powerful
nation, whose origin is obscure, making THE IDENTITY so
plain with our own immense nation, that it is needless to enlarge,
and will become more plain in the other Identifications.
IDENTIFICATION THE FIFTH.—A MONARCHY.
In connection with the promise of the multiplicity, is one
having reference to Government, for in the first edition of the
promise given to Abraham, it is said, “ Kings shall come out of
thee.” Gen. xvii. 6. And again, showing the importance of this
promise, we have in Gen. xxxv. 11, “And Kings shall come out
of thy loins.” This promise was also given to his wife, the Lord
saying, “ Sarah shall her name be, and I will bless her, and she
shall be a Mother of Nations; Kings of People shall be of her,”
Gen. xvii. 16, and let it not be said that this was fulfilled when
Israel was in the land. It was not. None of the promises were
fully realised when Israel was there, she not having full possession
of the land according to the promise. It was in her captivity that
the Monarchy and Nations would be fully accomplished. So


that in searching for lost Israel, this should be an important con-
sideration, for wherever they are, they must be under a monarchy,
therefore could not be the Jews, who have no king, or government
of any kind of their own, nor could they be a small people, such
as the Nestorians, not being a recognised power—nor still more an
uncivilised tribe such as the North American Indians. Prophecy
makes it also very plain that after their captivity, after their
wanderings and their settlement in the isles—after they had lost
their children through fatigue and warfare, and while yet feeling
themselves captives, moving to and fro, and even after the renew-
ing of their strength with “ the children which thou shalt have,
after thou hast lost the other,” that then in this primeval state
“ Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing
mothers.” Is. xlix. 23. So that soon after their settlement in the
isles, after they had become a people lost as to name, they would
be under a strong government in the form of a Monarchy, one
able to protect them, and make them a people to be feared by
other Powers.
THE IDENTITY. This is just the state of things appear-
ing in our early history. Directly after our strength was suffici-
ently renewed, and we were able to throw off the Roman yoke.
Egbert, the so-called Saxon, was chosen as king, and from him has
descended the most powerful Monarchy the world has ever known,
with its power supreme in action to the present day.
IDENTIFICATION THE SIXTH.—THE STRAIT.
So inconvenient was the possession of the multitudinous promise
to be to Israel after her settlement in the isles, because of the
vastness of the increase of her population, that there would be no
room for her full developments. The isles were to become too
small for her rapid growth. Thus we have prophecy telling us in
Is. xlix. 19, concerning Israel, that “ the land shall even now be
too narrow by reason of the inhabitants,” and in verse 20 they
cry, “ The place is too strait for me, give place to me, that I may
dwell.”
THE IDENTITY. Our forefathers soon found themselves in
the same circumstances as these Israelites were to be, and had not
other countries been opened up to us, it would have been difficult
to say what would have become of us. One of our very greatest
national blessings was the discovery of America, and though the
fulness of a nation has already come forth from us there, still, in
our present day, we have reason to cry in Britain, “ The place is
B 2


too strait for us;” and the fact should quicken our national ac-
tivities in schemes for a large emigration, on a scale that shall be
sensibly felt in our over-crowded cities.
IDENTIFICATION THE SEVENTH.—COLONIES.
One great and grand mission that was given only to Israel to
accomplish was the filling up or peopling of the waste places of the
earth. She is likened unto “ a fruitful bough by a well; whose
branches run over the wall.” Gen. xlix. 22. In Is. xlix., where
Israel is specially addressed as in the “ Isles,” we have that
beautiful “Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time have I
heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee; and I
will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to
establish the earth, to cause to inherit the DESOLATE
HERITAGES;” verse 8. And then as they go forth from the
isles to these waste lands God promises to show them the way, to
“ lead them,” to “ guide them,” removing all difficulties from their
way, saying, “ I will make all my mountains a way, and my
highway shall be exalted.” Thus God most plainly intimates that
He had provided Colonies for the convenience of the multitudinous
seed to come forth from Israel. He foresaw the horrors always
resulting from an over-crowded Country. He heard their prayer
for more room, and tells them He had opened up New Countries
for their use, implying that some would lay in Torrid Zones, for
He says “neither shall the heat nor sun smite them.” The same
idea is again expressed in Is. liv., where Israel is represented under
the figure of the divorced woman and Judah, the married wife,
“for more are the children of the desolate, than the children of the
married wife, saith the Lord.” Then she is told to make use of the
provision made for emigration. “ Enlarge the place of thy tent,
lengthen thy cords and strengthen thy stakes, for thou shall break
forth on the right hand, and on the left, and thy seeds shall
inherit the Gentiles and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.”
It was in this way that Israel would be sown in the earth, as the
Lord says, “ And I will sow her unto me in the earth.” Hos. ii.
23. “ They of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man, they shall
increase as they have increased, and I will sow them among the
people, and they shall remember me in far countries.” Zech. x,
8, 9. Then surely Israel must be found in no unimportant posi-
tion on the earth. It is utterly an impossible thing that she be a
small people, as the Jews really are. She must be a nation, with
colonies of extraordinary growth, and these in all parts of the
world; for she was to spread abroad, “to the west, and to the


east, to the north, and to the south.” Gen. xxviii. 14. And at
the time of the restitution, from these quarters will she be gathered,
and that this shall be accomplished we have the emphatic warrant
of Scripture, which now is saying to literal Israel, “ And behold I
am with thee, and will keep thee in all the places whither thou
goest, and will bring thee AGAIN into this land; for I will not
leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee
of.” Gen. xxviii. 15.
THE IDENTITY. It may truly be said that no’ other
nation but the English have done anything towards a real filling
up of the waste places of the earth, and it is also a most re-
markable and indisputable fact that at the time the above pro-
phecies were given, the only “ desolate heritages ” then in ex-
istence that could claim the prefix of the definite article, were
America, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa. St.
Paul testifies that Italy and Spain, and indeed the Continent of
Europe, were in possession, and History affirms the same with
Asia; so that it becomes patent that the “ desolate heritages ”or
Colonies that God has declared He had provided only for Israel,
have all of them, one by one, come under the dominion of our rule.
Therefore, if Israel was to do this, and the English is the only
nation that has done it, the identity is self-evident, and unless we
see this fact, and connect with it the great reason why they were
provided for us, because of the multiplicity of our race, it is
impossible for us to understand the precise relationship or uses of
our Colonies to these British Isles, or for us to entertain any
adequate idea of the immense advantages embodied in Emigration.
I maintain that this is the only correct light in which to see the
great questions of Colonial management and Emigration, and
unless laid hold of, our Colonial Office will be constantly repeating
the mistakes they have made, and our Colonial Minister still
enjoy his apparent luxury of being continually in hot water and
perplexity.
IDENTIFICATION THE EIGHTH.—THE UNICORN’S
HORN.
One great characteristic that must be discovered in Israel will
be her pushing propensity. The idea given is, that whenever she
acquires new country for her own use, that the original possessors,
or the aborigines of that country, will be pushed as by the “ horns
of Unicorns,” that with them “ he shall push the people together
to the ends of the earth, and they are the ten thousands of


Ephraim.” Dent. xxxiii. 17. The same idea is given by the
Psalmist in writing about Israel, xliv. 4 and 5, “ Thou art my
King, O God, command deliverance for Jacob. Through Thee
will we push down our enemies.”
THE IDENTITY. We need only give a few instances to
shew that this characteristic is most remarkably possessed by the
English people. In our own country we have the Welsh de-
scended from the ancient Britons, pushed into a corner of the
country once their own, and subject to our rule. The same' may
be said when our sons went forth to America, there we have the
Indians pushed into the back-woods of that country, the same
thing will be found in Canada and Australia, with the Maories of
New Zealand, and the Caffres of the Cape.
IDENTIFICATION THE NINTH.—ISBAEL
A CHRISTIAN PEOPLE.
Wherever Israel shall be recognised, she must be found pre-
eminently a Christian people. When God caused her to be lost, it
was done by simply taking away her name, by which act a blind-
ness happened to her, that she became ignorant of the stock from
which she had sprung; but though not called by His name, and
ignorant herself of her own ancestry, God never intended to
forsake her, but still to accomplish by her the purposes He had
designed—thus, at the very time He took her name away He made
her a promise, saying, “ I will be to them as a little sanctuary in
the countries where they shall come.” Ezek, xi. 16. Can He be
said to have been this to the Jews'? this were impossible, until
they turn their face to acknowledge their Saviour. The Jews, or
Judah, are under the Law, Israel is not. She is now, and must
be found a people entirely free from the Mosaic covenants, not
regarding the Mosaic rites, either in worship, sacrifices, or circum-
cision. Lost Israel has been completely divorced from this
ceremonial law. Judah is not. This distinction is so plainly
made to us by God. “ And I saw, when for all the causes
whereby backsliding Israel committed adultery I had put her
away, and given her a bill of divorce, yet her treacherous sister,
Judah, feared not.” Jer. hi. 8. “ Thus saith the Lord, where
is the bill of your mother’s divorcement, whom I have put away?”
Is. 1. 1. Thus, a divorced woman, she becomes “ desolate ” and
“ forsaken,” and that we may know that Israel was this desolate
forsaken woman, we are told of the multitudinous seed. “ For
more are the children of the desolate than the children of the


married wife, saith the Lord.” Is. liv. 1, Paul saw this when
speaking of the allegory of the two covenants, and says, “ The
desolate hath many more children than she which hath an hus-
band.” Gal. iv. 27. The whole gist of his argument being that
the Galatians should free themselves as Israel had done, from the
Judaising ceremonials, and “ stand fast” in the liberty of Christ.
That they must now be taught in Christ is manifest, for this was
Christ’s mission. “I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.” Matt. xv. 24. That Christ would have no
part in spiritualising away the “Sure word,” but meant the literal
seed, is equally manifest by his first, earnest instructions to his
twelve disciples. “Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into
any city of the Samaritans enter ye not; but go rather to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel.” Matt. x. 5. It was unto Israel
God spake, “For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken,
and grieved in spirit. For a small moment have I forsaken thee,
but with great mercies will I gather thee.” Nay, Israel must
now be literally a distinct national seed, waiting on God and
believing in Christ, a people on whom God is bestowing His grace
in a measure beyond what He is doing unto other nations.
“Ephraim also is the strength of mine head.” Psalm lx. 7. “The
isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arm shall they trust.”
Is. li. 5. “And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it
was said unto them, ye are not my people, there it shall be said
unto them, ye are the sons of the living God.” Hos. i. 10. Paul
says the same, “ There shall they be called the children of the
living God.” Rom. ix. 26. “I (said not unto the seed of Jacob,
seek ye me in vain.” Is. Ixv. 19. “Israel shall be saved in the
Lord 'with an everlasting salvation.” Is. xlv. 17. “Shew the
house of Jacob their sins, yet they seek me daily, and delight to
know my ways, they take delight in approaching to God.” Is.
Iviii. 2. “The Redeemer shall come to them that turn from
transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord.” Is. lix. 20. “Arise,
shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen
upon thee.” Is. lx. 1. “ Though Israel be not gathered, yet
shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be
my strength.” Is. xlix. 5. “The Lord sent a word into Jacob
and it hath lighted upon Israel.” Is. ix. 8; Is. li. 7; Is. Ixiii. 8;
Ps, xxii. 23; Jer. xxxi. 18-20; Hos. ii. 23. “The Kingdom of
God shall be given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.”
Matt. xxi. 43. “ Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for He hath
visited and redeemed His people.” Luke i. 68, “To remember
His holy covenant, the oath which He sware to our father
Abrqham, that He would grant unto us, that we being delivered
out of the hand of our enemies, might serve Him without fear.
to give knowledge of salvation unto His people.”
Luke i. 73, 74. These are all given to Israel, not one refer to


Judah; and many other passages, if we had room to produce them,
testify to Israel being a Christian people. As to Judah, so far
from her being in Christ, it is vain to expect it for some years to
come; it would be contraiy to Scripture; Christ, who came from
Judah, “came to His own, but His own received Him not;”
hence their rejection. Many times it is said, God would not
hearken to them. Zech. vii. 13. They will return to the land
under the Mosaic law, and will there re-establish the Temple
Service, or chapters of Ezekiel xl. to xlvii., ending twelfth verse
mean nothing; and men who solicit subscriptions in aid of Jewish
conversions will almost invariably be found quoting Scripture
referring only to Israel, and applying it to Judah, simply because
no such texts exist for Judah. It is money thrown away, as facts
themselves prove. It is only in the latter days that Judah will
turn to Christ. Zech. xii. 10. And not until then will the two
sticks become one: though both will be in the Land, still the Law
(Mosaic) will go forth from Zion, “and the word of the Lord
(Gospel through Israel) from Jerusalem.” Mic. iv. 2. “Let God
be true, but every man a liar.” Rom, iii. 4.
THE IDENTITY. That the English have been more
highly favoured with divine light above any other existing nation,
has long been acknowledged. As a nation we are almost alone in
being able to worship God according to our conscience, sitting
under our own vine and fig-tree, none daring to make us afraid.
God has literally been to our people a sanctuary, and our lands
are filled with His houses. Truly as a nation we may be said to
have been exalted unto the heavens by our special privileges. He
hath not dealt so with any other people. Indeed it is most
pointed to remark, being, if not an identity, a most marvellous
coincident, that in the time of our Saviour and his apostles our
Saxon forefathers were not then in possession of Britain, but were
wandering, in tribes, along the north-west of Europe and Asia (as
proved by our own great historian, Sharon Turner), coming from
the very parts where Israel was lost, and proceeding to the very
parts that prophecy says Israel would take; that it was when we
were in these parts that Christ sent His own disciples to them,
that is—that when the apostles were sent after lost Israel, they
went to Cappadocia, Galatia, Pamphylia, Lydia, Bithynia, and
round about Illyricum; and it was in these very parts that our
Saxon forefathers were passing through at this very time. With
such light, the Lord may well say, “Who is blind but my
servant 1”


IDENTIFICATION THE TENTH.—
DENOMINATIONAL SECTS.
Though prophecy has declared that Israel in her Captivity
should become a Christian Nation, it as plainly declares that the
people should not be united in their religious opinions, but should
be divided Sects, and be known under Denominational Names.
The prophecies contained in the forty-fourth of Isaiah, which
were given to Israel 712 b.c., or about thirteen years after their
captivity (and 124 years before the captivity of Judah) promises
assurances of favour, saying, God “will help thee;” though in
captivity they were not to fear upon this point, for they were yet
the chosen Nation, and whoever among the people became
“thirsty,” desiring to be God’s, such should be watered; upon
such, God would pour His Spirit, and give His blessing upon their
children; that the time was coming when these watered ones
should “ spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water
courses.” Yet there would not be a thorough union in their
Christian views, for “ One shall say, I am the Lord’s; and another
shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall sub-
scribe his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name
of Israel.” Is. xliv. 5. Thus their different Churches, called by
various names, would represent the opinions of each Sect. God
declares this shall be the case with Lost Israel, and when they are
nationally recognised, this shall be an identity; yea, this very
division God says He is Himself going to call forth as a Witness
to]the Majesty of His Almighty Being, saying, “Have not I told
thee from that time,” the time “ since I appointed the ancient
people that these things should be,” “ that are coming, and shall
come,” and that shall shew the marvellous foreknowledge of the
Most High; even Christ Himself declared that there should be
divisions on account of religion, and this can only refer to the time
during which Israel is lost, for after her discovery we shall have
no bigotry, no priestly assumptions, for it is this very discovery,
her very identity, that leads to the time of which God speaks,
when He says of Israel, that “ with the voice together shall they
sing, for they shall see eye to eye, WHEN the Lord shall bring
AG AIN Zion,” Is. lii., 8, which most plainly implies, that now,
during the present time, there does not exist a oneness of heart
with Israel.
THE IDENTITY of our Nation on this head is most
pointed. The diversity of opinion upon religious subjects is really
painful to behold; perhaps on no other topic are we so much at
variance with each other. The church stamped with the Nation’s.


name is cut up into sections, oppressed by divisions; churches
that are surnamed by the name of men, suffer under the same
affliction, and churches called after the name of the Lord, still
want much of the spirit of their Master. This is a most humiliat-
ing aspect of our Church History, plainly testifying that our very
church life is under captivity. The very Heathen in their idol
worship are more united, they have different idol gods, but there
is more uniformity in the method of worship. All sincere lovers
of our Lord must deplore division, and should be found ready at
the very earliest moment to seek a remedy to cure the evil. It
can never be done by Evangelical Alliances, or Christian Unions;
these can only shew a desire for union, indicative that the time is
close at hand for its enjoyment, but can never effect it; it can only
be done by God’s own means, and that is by our National Identity.
It is one of the practical uses of my subject, and I call upon all
Christians who earnestly desire the unity of the Spirit to act with
wisdom, use God’s means; remember it is nowhere promised until
AFTER the Identity of Israel, God faithfully promises after
our recognition to “ take away all the detestable things,” “ and
all the abominations,” saying, “ I will give them one heart.”
Ezek. xi. 19. The passage already quoted, Is. lii. 8, says the
same thing, it is AFTER the Identity, not before. “For
THEN will I turn to ■ the people a pure language, that they
may ALL call upon the name of the Lord, to serve Him
with ONE CONSENT.” Zeph. iii. 9. Surely, my fellow Chris-
tians, if there were no other blessing to obtain from our Identity,
this alone would be invaluable; the most blessed service ever yet
rendered to the Church. And, Brethren, be not deceived, the
enjoyment of this oneness of heart and opinion does not imply the
immediate dawn of the Millennium; it shall be ours to possess
before this grand Age, for Israel shall dwell many years safely in
her Land, before our Lord shall come in Glory. Ezek. xxxviii. 8.
This we are distinctly promised, and God cannot lie, though the
teachings of many of our Divines have appeared to make Him out
unfaithful, yet Glory be to God, He is not. We shall have this
union of heart, we shall reclaim possession of our Land, and when
there the Gentile Nations shall flow to us to be taught of the
Lord; this alone will occupy some years, and there are other great
events that will in themselves be a work of time, and that must
be accomplished before the appearing of our Lord; and though
men have uttered error against the Lord by saying that He will
not come, yet He will as surely come as we shall be Identified,
the Spirit be poured out upon us, living as Christians in the royal
law of love and unity, and that before He comes, which is not so
immediate as some have led us. to suppose.


IDENTIFICATION THE ELEVENTH.—SUNDAY
SCHOOLS.
Israel in captivity, in her lost estate, must be distinguished
from all other Nations of the earth by the fact that she must have
a careful solicitude that her children should be taught in the Lord.
God distinctly declares that this shall be the case with Israel,
whereas I do not find that He has given the same instructions to
any other Nation. Israel went into captivity 725 b.c., if the
Chronology of our Bibles is correct. I find that in 698 8.c,, or 27
years after the captivity, and while Judah was still in the land,
that the Lord sends this after Israel. “As for me, this is my coven-
ant with them, saith the Lord; my Spirit that is upon thee, and
My words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out
of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
mouth of thy seed’s seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for
ever.” Is. lix. 21. Similar passages are to be found given before
the children possessed the land, but I produce this to shew that the
promise was not cancelled by the punishment of captivity. “I
will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine
offspring.” Is. xliv. 3. “All thy children shall be taught of the
Lord ; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” Is. liv., 13.
Israel only is here addressed, not Judah; the very next verse says
she should be established in righteousness, and be far from oppres-
sion, whereas Judah was to be oppressed, which is a fact of the
present day. Thus Israel must be a Nation that brings up her
children in the knowledge of the Lord.
THE IDENTITY says that the English race are the only
people so doing. Sunday-schools, especially provided for the train-
ing of our children in the Lord, exist with us, and our race as a
National Institution, perhaps the greatest in point of blessing that
we possess ; true, they are modern in origin, still our forefathers in
their more primitive ages were always particular in the religious
training of their children, and reared some of the finest examples
we have of Christian endurance and fortitude. It was only as the
population increased, and poverty among the masses became more
abundant, that the organisation of Sunday-schools became a
necessity. Of our present population nearly seventy per cent, may
be said to have passed through our Sunday-schools, Charity-
schools, and Ragged-schools. In America the proportion is
greater. Among the Upper and Middle classes, another twenty
per cent, have been trained in the home circle in the Lord, so that we
may safely say that ninety per cent, of the entire people have been


taught of Christ. God does not work by miracles in these days.
He works by the use of means, He has faithfully promised after
our Identity is accepted by the Nation, to pour out His Spirit
upon us as a people; the ground is already prepared for this out-
pouring, the instructions given by the Christian teachers are
merely latent, “ train up a child in the way he should go, and
when he is old he shall not depart from it.” We are not told
there shall be no departure from the training between the period
of childhood and old age; the reverse is implied, and the large
mass of the ungodly testify that depax-ture is a fact. Alas ! alas !
too apparent; still, Sunday-school teachers, you are not to be dis-
couraged in your work, present results are not your promises, your
great reward is future. I believe that Sunday-schools have been
raised up purposely for the event of our Identity, and is the reason
why they were not in existence over 70 years ago. The Lord is
only waiting for our National anxiety to be Identified. We are
to “give Him no rest until,” &c. The matter is really in our
hands; promulgate the truth of the Identity. God’s promises are
sure, He has only to breathe upon this prepared soil, and the
masses of the people will declare for God, it will be no miracle,
simply the workings of God’s law of Nature, and then will be the
harvest, and the fruit of all Sunday-school labour. Teachers, is
there not a power for you to use in this subject 1 Be worthy of
your vocation, it is in the power of nearly all of you to realise the
positive reward of your past toil in your own life-time. You are
the real power of the Church. Your Thought has led the way in
many Questions. You cannot forget how you have achieved
great things, notwithstanding opposition. We must remember
that many of our ministers have publicly committed themselves
to grave mistakes in Bible renderings, as a learned Divine ex-
pressed himself in my hearing recently; many of them have
been too eager to appear to have found out what is not written,
that they might seem to be abreast of an advanced age, and
obtain a false fame for their scholarship. Experience has always
testified that human nature is not too fast to acknowledge the
committal of a mistake; therefore wait for no one, the Bible is
common property, belongs to us all, and is as accessible to our
understanding as to anybody else’s; therefore, teachers, go to it,
see for yourselves that these things be, and only abide by God’s
word, if you see therein these statements are facts; take the matter
in your own hands, send it through the Nation like wildfire, and
very soon it shall come to pass, that the Williams and Jameses,
your Marthas and Marys, whom you remember to have taught in
your Infant Schools, but who now, in the prime of their lives, are
found by millions in the haunts of vice, shall once more pay heed
to your voice, their early associations of your faithful labours in
their school-life shall be revived in their memories, and they shall


in masses return to our God as your harvest, your reward. God
has promised this, and He is ever faithful.
IDENTIFICATION THE TWELFTH.—“ ANOTHER
TONGUE.”
Abundant Scripture evidence has been advanced to prove that
Israel in captivity would receive the gospel tidings, and be estab-
lished as a Christian people. My next object is to shew that she
would not receive these gospel truths or teach them to her children
in her original or Hebrew language. God only refers to Israel,
and not to Judah, when He says, “With stammering lips and
another tongue will He speak to this people.” Isa. xxviii. 11.
Therefore it be plain that after the Assyrian captivity, Israel
would acquire another speech, foreign to that she had used when
in the land.
THE IDENTITY of ourselves to Israel, which is surely
established, would render this point most striking. We have
acquired a new speech, and it is “ another tongue ” to that used by
our forefathers which the masses of our kindred read their Scrip-
tures in. It is not too much to say that there are not more than
one in every two hundred thousand of our race who understand
the Hebrew language, a remark that cannot apply to Judah, for
the very children of the Jews are instructed in Hebrew, and are
trained to read their Old Testament Scriptures in that tongue.
We do not wish to underrate scholarship, but it is a remarkable
fact that our most learned linguists have been singularly unfor-
tunate in their interpretation of Scripture. We should be very
sorry to understand the Old Testament as the Jews interpret it,
who resort to the old tongue; and the very churches in our midst,
who pride themselves most in being able to secure the services of
scholars in Hebrew and Greek, really have made the least pro-
gress, seem to have the least light, and are the most inactive in
home and foreign missionary operations. We have most faith in
God’s Word. He said He would speak to us in “ another tongue,”
and in this, the “ another tongue,” we have been the most success-
ful and triumphant, and have secured Christian vitality and
spiritual health in the largest degree.
IDENTIFICATION THE THIRTEENTH.—
PHYSIOGNOMY.
When Israel became a lost people, not only was she not to be
known by her speech, but also by the cast of her features. To


suppose that she would be recognised by her physiognomy is most
illogical. If we wanted any person or thing to be placed in
obscurity for a given time, we should obliterate all traces in dis-
guise, or be chargeable with folly. Surely God would not be less
wise than ourselves. If He had set a mark upon Israel, as He
has done upon Judah, He would have defeated His own purposes;
this very mark would have led to identity, as it has done in all
countries in the case of the Jew. God has nowhere said that
Israel should be known by her features; the idea is not given in
the Bible. The supposition testifies to an incomplete knowledge
of Scripture. God has only placed His mark upon J udah. It is
of Judah only that it is said, “ The shew of their countenance doth
witness against them,” Is. iii. 9. Hay, that the very reverse
would be the case of Israel we have a clear type in Joseph, who,
after he was sold in captivity, after only a few years’ absence, was
not recognised, either by voice or feature, by his own brothers.
THE IDENTITY need not be further extended. The
Saxon or English race do not bear the Jewish cast of face; it is
right that they should not. Whether we really bear the Israel-
itish stamp I am not so clear, for hitherto we have taken a false
notion of Israel—we have been looking for them through the Jew,
whereas the Jews are not Israel, but simply “of Israel.” It may
turn' out that we have the Israelitish feature, which is not the
Jewish; and it may be, even with the Jews, that their present
features materially differ from what they had before they inherited
their curses, for this very mark is one of the curses. They had it
not in Babylon, for though there in captivity they were not
under the curses, which did not overtake them till their second,
or Roman captivity, after their rejection of Christ. Queen Esther
in Babylon was not known as a Jewess. Esther ii. 10,
IDENTIFICATION THE FOURTEENTH.—
THE MISSIONARY WORK.
Israel was not only to be a Christian nation with her children
taught in the Lord, but to her alone, of all the people of the earth,
has been entrusted the great and glorious Missionary work. She
cannot help being a missionary people, for God has decreed that
she should be. It is her work, and she must be found true to her
mission, for it is impossible for The Book not to be true. The
missionary work has been entrusted to Israel, but most certainly
not unto Judah; it would be nonsense to expect to find Judah’s
heart in the missionary cause; it is a fixed decree of the Almighty
that she remain under the Mosaic Law during her captivity, and


even when she returns to the Land—when she is placed there by
Israel—even then will Judah be for a time under this Law; but
Israel, the Christian nation, who remains in captivity until she
comes to a knowledge of herself—this Israel, even in captivity,
must abound in the work of the Lord; it is one of her birthright
promises that Christ came not to destroy, but to confirm. Matt,
v. 17. The missionary work was confided to her before her posses-
sion of Palestine: “In thee shall all families of the earth be
blessed.” Gen. xii. 3. “ And in thy seed shall all the nations of
the earth be blessed.” Gen. xxvi. 4. Christ, who came from
Judah (Judah being his own tribe), is the one seed in whom all
living souls can be saved; but the seed of Israel—the “seeds as of
many”—are to be the medium of conveying the glad tidings of
this Saviour.
Christ came to His own, but His own (tribe) received Him not.
“ Therefore,” said Christ, “ say I unto you, the kingdom of God
shall be taken from you, and given to a NATION bringing forth
the fruits thereof.” Matt. xxi. 43. So the work was alone
entrusted to Israel. She by no means forfeited this high and holy
prerogative by her captivity. Prophecy is most clear upon this
point, as the following passages given after this event will shew:
“ Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with
fruit,” Is. xxvii. 6. “I, the Lord, have called thee in righteous-
ness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee
for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles.” Isa. xlii.
6. “This people have I formed for myself; they shall shew forth
my praise.” Isa. xliii. 21. “ Thou art my servant, O Israel, in
whom I will be glorified,” Isa. xlix. 3. “ I will also give thee
for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto
the end of the earth.” Isa. xlix. 6. “ And their seed shall be
known among the Gentiles, and their offspring among the people;
all that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed
which the Lord hath blessed.” Isa. Ixi. 9. “ And I will
strengthen them in the Lord; and they shall walk up and down in
His name, saith the Lord,” Zech. x. 12, “O, bless our God, ye
people, and make the voice of His praise to be heard.” Psalm Ixvi,
8. Israel was told what to say unto the heathen through
Jeremiah : “ Thus shall ye say unto them, the gods that have not
made the heavens and the earth, even they shall perish from the
earth.” Jer. x. 11. “And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the
midst of many people as a dew from the Lord, as the showers upon
the grass.” Micah v. 7. “ And your eyes shall see, and ye shall
say, The Lord will be magnified from the border of Israel.” Mai.
i. 5.
All the Gospels testify to the same fact. Christ tells us that
He came after lost Israel, and says that all Scripture must be
fulfilled, saying, “ I have given them thy word.” John xvii. 14,


And alone speaks of Israel as the missionary people when He says,
“ Neither pray I for these alone, hut for them also which shall
believe on Me through their word.” John xvii. 20. Surely
nothing could be plainer than that Israel must be the great mis-
sionary people of the earth.
THE IDENTITY must be established on this point. Our
race alone have the great missionary work in hand. We alone
of all the nations have positively and literally obeyed Christ’s
commands by preaching the Gospel “ in all the world for a witness
unto all nations.” Matt. xxiv. 14. Both in England and America
Christians of each denomination endeavour to vie with each other
in this glorious work. Our missionary societies' are the glory of
both lands, and of our colonies; each are in receipt of enormous
revenues, and represent a world of zealous energy. In no other
department of labour have our kindred displayed more courageous
daring, determined boldness, and matchless bravery, than our men
who, single-handed and undefended, have risked their lives in the
cause of the Lord in missionary work. The so-called valour we
have been taught from our childhood to admire in military men,
pales when compared with the valour of the missionary. I fail to
discover any real courage displayed by the soldiers of our forefathers
when they marched round Jericho. The work was alw T ays done
for them. It was always a question of mere blowing of rams’
horns. They could not help succeeding; God willed it, and they
had little more to do than to butcher runaway men as the war
terminated in their favour, that the spoil might be greater and
their pockets filled by the division of the prize-money. And all
our wars ever since have been on a par. Bravery cannot consist in
slaying fugitives. But the case of the missionary is quite another
thing—here is valour. He braves odds fearfully against him ;
positively throws himself before the very teeth of cruel and wild
savages, who have looked upon the white man as a rich dainty.
Dr. Livingstone to wit, who, unaided by a single European, has
fearlessly marched thousands of miles in the very thick of an
unknown, unexplored country, daring to face tribes of man-eaters
with the open Bible in his hand; and besides Moffat and
Williams, we have a host of others who shall answer “ Here,”
when God shall shortly call over the muster-roll of the missionary
army. Yes, we only are in possession of this work that was only
given to Israel to undertake, and thus we are furnished with
another evidence that we are identical with that people. If we
are not, .then most assuredly, wherever Israel must be at this
present time, she would be foremost in this great work, and her
seed would be known among us, for she would make both England
and America and all our Colonies her missionary stations. If we
are not Israel—then wherever Israel may be, she would have
translated the Bible from her language into ours for our own


special use by her own Bible Society; she would have inundated
our land with tracts and gospel books from her own Religious
Tract Society, she would have built for us churches and chapels
throughout the length and breadth of the British Isles, and surely,
with our universally recognised advanced civilisation, she would
have taken especial care to have cut up our country into Bishop-
rics, and Ecclesiastical Districts; she surely would not be less
foolish than Rome in such a matter as this. But no Nation is
doing this for us : Germany sends to us her missionaries of infi-
delity; and Rome, which has ceased to be a Church, became a
mere French machine immediately the French troops entered
the confines of Italy. She is now simply a French instrument
in the hand of God, to raise the ire of the Greek Church, who
will be the means of swamping Rome entirely in a few years
hence, so that we have no nation sending missionaries to us.
Therefore if we are not Israel, and Israel wherever she be is not
doing this for us, then the Bible is not true, but a fabrication
from beginning to end, and the many passages I have quoted
stand for nothing, without meaning; but this is impossible; every
word of the Bible is true, and the very fact that we in blindness
have accomplished without one exception every mission given to
Israel, irrevocably stamps every word as true, and witnesses that
God is God. Is. xliii. 12. “ Let God be true, but every man a
liar.” Rom. iii. 4.
And now, reader, may I say there is a fearful responsibility
resting upon you, after reading this one Identity? The whole
Missionary Work now rests upon this subject. It is utterly im-
possible to secure the universal knowledge of the Lord, until lost
Israel be recognised. God has not given a single promise of such
a blessing in the entire Bible, until AFTER our Identity; it is
not until then that the Gentile and Heathen Nations will flow to
Israel to be taught of the Lord; therefore to go to our churches
and pray, as we constantly do, for the prevailing knowledge of
God, and, ignore the Identity of Israel; is merely hypocrisy. God
Himself says that He will be inquired of by the House of Israel
to do it for them, He commands us to give Him no rest until He
makes Jerusalem a praise in the earth; therefore, to sincerely
desire the universal knowledge implies the use of means, we must
each seek to have our Nation Identified, it cannot come before;
but God has faithfully promised that it shall be after. The gospel
was first to be preached as a witness to all Nations; this we have
done, there does not exist a nation where we have not published
it. We now only wait for the political resurrection of Israel,
“ For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the World,
what shall the receiving of them be but life from the dead ?”
Romans xi. 15. My subject might save millions of money now
spent in missionary work, if the Identity was speedily effected,


because after this event we reverse the order of proceedings;
instead of our sending the Gospel out to the people, the Nations
themselves will come to us. God has said it, and no man dare
deny it. “The Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the
earth, and shall say surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity
and things wherein there is no profit, and they shall know that
My name is the Lord.” Jer. xvi. 19. “God shall bless us, and
(afterwards) all the ends of the earth shall fear Him.” Ps. Ixvii.
7. “ The Heathen shall know that lam the Lord God WHEN I
shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.” Ezek. xxxvi. 23;
Is. ii. 2,3; Mic, iv. 1,2; Is. xi. 9; Hab. ii. 14; Is. Iv. 5; Is. lx.
2-12; Is. Ixii. 2-4; Is. Ixii. 10-12.
The day has now arrived when it no longer rests with the mis-
sionary to secure this long prayed for result, but with our Iden-
tity. Why is not this grand discovery in the hands of the Clergy?
Mr. Wilson, a layman, gave the key note to this great subject
more than 30 years ago; why have not the ministers takemthe
matter up? Why should the subject still be in the hands of a
layman, and why should it be left to the congregations to force the
question into the pulpit, when it should have been there from the
first? Let but the church take the matter up, and seven yeai-s
hence we could wind up the affairs of all the Missionary Societies
in existence, dating them with things of the past, and even now
it would be a justifiable and wise economy on the part of our large-
hearted wealthy Christian merchants, to give their thousands in
promulgating the truth of this Identity, which alone is to effect
the crowning success of all missionary labour, rather than to the
Societies. It would be a wise economy, saving millions. I say
again the Gospel has been published AS A WITNESS unto all
nations, its universal acceptation is nowhere promised until after
lost Israel repossess her land, which repossession can only be
secured by her Identity being known and establishe d.
IDENTIFICATION THE FIFTEENTH.—
PHILANTHROPY.
Still continuing the cry, “ where is the lost house of Israel,” and
how shall they be found? we must answer, “by their fruits ye
shall know them,” and under this heading we will give another
description from Scripture of Israel in addition to the many
already given. Wherever she be, her religious element, which
shall be found largely to predominate, and be infused into all her
Institutions, shall stamp her as having a kind and humane heart.
I wish to be understood; to speak only of what shall come forth


from her religious convictions, because politically, as represented
by her Government, I find that until she becomes nationally
Identified the reverse would be the case. Israel politically and
commercially, as distinct from her better and religious life, will be
found loving to oppress, Hos. xii. 7; but religiously she shall be
found as a power throughout the world, uncompromisingly the
hater of oppression, the unflinching opponent of despotism and
tyranny, a people having a Christlike sympathy with all kinds of
distress, and a manly and generous hand ever ready to relieve
suffering. Her country would be a free asylum, a city of refuge
for the persecuted and the exile, and to her, and her alone, lias been
entrusted the holy mission of the abolition of slavery. It was
Israel, and not Judah, who was told to undo the heavy burdens, and
to let the oppressed go free, by no possibility could this mission
be given to Judah; for she was to be a servile people, serving
her enemies in all countries. Jer. xvii. 4. It would therefore be
absurd to suppose that Judah, herself oppressed, could let the
oppressed go free. God is reasonable and never enjoins an impos-
sible service from any people. It was after Israel had left the
land, that the Lord found them fasting for strife and debate, and
rebuked them. These fasts evidently nationally prescribed were
not such as God desired, therefore He thus instructed them: “Is
not this the fast that I have chosen 1 to loose the bands of wicked-
ness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free,
and that ye break every yoke ? Is it not to deal thy bread to the
hungi’y, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy
house 1 when thou seest the naked that thou cover him; and that
thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh V’ Is. Iviii. 6,7.
THE IDENTITY. In Philanthropy no nation has taken
the strides that the English race have. We have enjoyed the
three essentials, and employed them, the power, the will, and the
means, and under the examples of such noble pioneers as Elizabeth
Ery, Howard, Wilberforce, Buxton, Thompson, Forster, Pease,
Brougham, and a host of others of greater and lesser lights, we
have sacrificed millions, and achieved wonders on behalf of
.oppressed peoples, nor have our sons in the New World been
behind in the work, under the influence of the teaching of such
men as William Lloyd Garrison, Wendle Phillips, Elihu Burritt,
and Abraham Lincoln, they were led to have compassion for the
bonds of slavery, and waged the most dire and complete war that
has ever been fought, at the cost of immense wealth and streams
of blood, that they might burst those bonds asunder. Can we not
also point to stately buildings positively teeming throughout our
land, many of them magnificently endowed by the hand of
benevolence, whose doors are opened to suffering humanity 1 ? At
home or abroad, in countries our own, and not our own, when a
• real necessity presents itself our hand is opened to assist, so that
c 2


this Identity must be considered complete. The only thing that
might seem to mar its completeness is that scandal to England,
the mode of poor relief in this country, where poverty is treated
as crime, where our Unions are generally made as uncomfortable
as possible, the officials selected for their excelling in harshness,
and heavy rates squandered upon interests that do not administer
to the comfort and well-being of the poor in their declining days.
But this abomination springs from our political, which is apart
from our better life, and the time is at hand when our Nation
shall no longer be governed by party Spirit, but by Bible principles.
Goshen is a town of Judah, and interpreted means “approaching,”
“ drawing near,” therefore let us see an omen that the oppression
of the Poor Law Board is “drawing near” to a close. We have
no business with much poor in England. The Bible says so,
Deut. xv. 4, and we have to thank our Governments for most of
the pauperism and poor rates that they have indulged us with. I
shall have to recur to this matter specially, but must say here that
if we only took the advice of Florence Nightingale, and sent forth
our poor to till God’s earth in the millions of acres that He has
given us for this express purpose, and that are now, to our shame,
and to the disgrace of our Government, lying waste, in a few years
we could sweep pauperism entirely .away and abolish the devil-
born term, and along with it the Poor Law Board and its iniqui-
ties. Let but the cash that is now wasted upon Privy Seals and
objectionable sinecures be diverted to this channel, and then we
shall be able to say that the real welfare of the Nation is studied.
Surely true Statemanship would see wisdom in doing this volun-
tarily, rather than have to pass through the mortification of having
to do it by the pressure of opinion, or resigning office as unprofit-
able servants.
IDENTIFICATION THE SIXTEENTH.—THE AEMY.
As the grandeur of our subject opens up to the mind of the
English Nation, perhaps no point will take them so much by
surprise as that of the army. Most certainly there are but few
topics that will more plainly testify to the masses of the people the
unerring sureness of God’s word. The Bible as handled by our
ministers has been divested of so much of its beauty by its national,
political, and social aspects, being almost entirely submerged under
the one ruling thought of their mind, by which everything is turned
to a spiritual account, that the political subjects of the Book, com-
prising a volume in themselves, have been toned down and ab-
stracted, by their having been made to give way to spiritual appli-
cations; thus we are distinctly told in Scripture that Israel, after


she was lost, would become the most powerful nation on earth;
would have the first and best army in the world; and that by their
soldiers they would not only obtain a “Balance of Power,” but posi-
tively have lordship, become dominant, and exercise authority over
the Gentiles; and this subject, given forth to the people in its en-
tirety, its purity, and proved before them, would have rivetted their
attention, and have gained their admiration for our grand old Bible
as a book of truth; but with a class of men, when God speaks to
our nation and tells us that we should “possess the gates of our
enemies,” they at once turn aside its natural and true meaning, by
saying that God simply means that souls in Christ should possess
mastery over the devil, and so it is not to be wondered at that under
this everlasting spiritual mutilation, applying every iota of the Scrip-
ture to the soul, soul, soul, that the book has ceased to be interest-
ing to so great a proportion of our population. The vindication of
God’s sure and precious word is higher in purpose, and in duty,
is a more Divine purpose of life than the salvation of a human
soul ! The majesty of God’s word must ever be esteemed a more
important matter than the well-being of His children! “ Let God
be true, if thereby every man becomes a liar.” Rom. iii. 4. Hay,
may we as a people ever desire to esteem God, before we esteem
-ourselves, knowing that it is only as He is glorified, that we
ourselves can shai’e His Glory, let us take Him at His word;
dreading to “ add unto ” or to “ take away from ” the words of the
prophecy of this book; so that when He says Israel shall be war-
like, we may be quite sure that He means it, in the matter of
powder and shot, bayonet and sword, and not simply warriors for
truth; therefore, in looking for Lost Israel we must find her
“ Chief of the Nations ” in the art of war, still maintaining her
ancielit character, that of being “ terrible from the beginning
hitherto.” Is. xviii. 7. This is Israel’s birthright, of which she
has never been divested, and it is impossible that any nation can
be identified with her unless so found; she must be foremost in
power. “By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord,” unto
Abraham, “thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies,” Gen.
xxii. 17 ; ; and when Rebekah was blessed it was said, “let thy seed
possess the gate of those which hate them,” Gen. xxiv. 60. Unto
Jacob it was said, “let people serve thee, and nations bow down to
thee; be lord over thy brethren.” Gen. xxvii. 29. The Gate was
the Seat of Government—the Cabinet—to possess which was to
conquer, to defeat; Israel of old always effected this by the instru-
ments of war, the spear, the bow, and battle-axe, and in these days
would be found using this power by the more modern appliances;
by no means did she forfeit this prerogative by the punishment of
her captivity, she must still be chief in military matters, because
13 years after their captivity this was sent after Israel, “thou
art my servant; I have chosen thee and not cast thee away” * * *


“they that war against thee shall be as nothing,” Is. xli. 9-12, 2 T
years after God says to Israel, “for the nation and kingdom that will
not serve thee shall perish,” Is. lx. 12, and 130 years aftei’wards
God says to Israel, and not to Judah, “thou art my battle-axe and
weapons of war: for with thee will I break in pieces the nations,
and with thee will I destroy the kingdoms.” Jer. li. 20. Luke saw ,
this truth, and records “That we should be saved from our enemies,
and from the hand of all that hate us, to perform the mercy pro-
mised to our fathers; the oath which He sware to our father Abra-
ham.” Luke i. 71. There are many other passages to prove the
fact that Israel must be, by the will of God, chief in war, making
THE IDENTITY so plain that it is needless to dilate, or pages
might be consumed by the bare mention of our conquests. Inter-
esting accounts of many of tljem may be found in a work recently
published, entitled “ A Synoptical Account of the GREAT
EUROPEAN BATTLES.”"' I have no delight in war, therefore
forbear to treat further on this head. If I proceeded it would be
with the object of detracting from the merits of the long boasted
daring and bravery of our officers and men, which we have so
unduly been called upon to admire. We readily grant that we
have some few individual cases where real courage has been dis-
played, but generally there has been no need for courage. We
have gone forth confident of victory; the raw recruit, the mere
clodhopper from the field has been sufficient for the service. God
has willed that we should triumph, without the exercise of daring
or feats of bravery. He Himself has said so, and I take Him at
His word, for in speaking to Israel about her wars He distinctly
says, “Thou shalt be far from oppression; for thou shalt not fear:
and from terror; for it shall not come near thee.” Is. liv. 14.
And this is why inexperienced young men are found sufficient to
officer our regiments, whereas other powers require men of judg-
ment. I do not speak of our civil wars here, for, as in the days
when our forefathers were in the land, real bravery would be
required for these, and we have always displayed it in such wars,
and never was it more fearfully manifested upon any part of the
earth, than by our sons across the water in their recent conflict
with each other; but as to our wars with other Nations, the great
fear that our men have suffered under has been from the woeful
blunders of our War Office officials in the peaceful abode of Pall-
Mall. But in positive war, David’s experience has always been
ours—“ Through Thee will we pushdown our enemies; through
Thy name will we tread them under that rise up against us, for I
will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me, but
Thou hast saved us from our enemies, and hast put them to shame
* Simpkin, Marshall and Co.


that hated us.” Ps. xliv. 5. “ Ascribe ye strength unto God,
His excellency is over Israel;” “the God of Israel is he that
giveth strength and power unto His people.” Ps. Ixviii. 34.
“ Through God we shall do valiantly, for He it is that shall tread
down our enemies.” Ps. cviii. 13. Of Israel it is said—“ who if
he go through, both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none
can deliver; thine hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries,
and all thine enemies shall be cut off.” Mic. v. 9.
IDENTIFICATION THE SEVENTEENTH.—
THE NAVY.
It being so indisputable that Israel must be the most famous
Nation in army matters, and having such positive testimony that
her seat of Government would be in “the isles,” it would be an
absurdity to suppose that she did not also occupy the first position
in Naval affair's. Wherever Israel is, the tribe of Dan. is still
with her to supply her mariners, and also the tribe of Asher
to superintend her marine artillery, these were specially trained in
maritime operations when Israel was in land, and would more
fully develope their training in after years, for be it observed
that nearly the whole of the sea coasts were allotted to the tribe-
ships of Israel, Judah having no portion of the Mediterranean,
but only a small slip of the Dead Sea Coast, comparatively
worthless for acquiring skill in naval art. This training was
not required from Judah, therefore the facilities were not given
to her, but we know Israel did acquire this knowledge; for
we are told that “Hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen
that had knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon,”
1 Kings ix. 27, and after her captivity this knowledge would
become most important, because when they reached “ the isles,”
and formed their Government, as their people increased, they were
to take their surplus population from these islands and make new
conquests elsewhere, God promising to “ lead them, even by the
springs of water shall He guide them.” Is. xlix. 10. It is said
of Israel, “ that his seed shall be in many waters, and his kingdom
shall be exalted.” Num. xxiv. 7. The Psalmist speaks of God
making His way in the sea, and His path in great waters. Ps.
Ixxvii. 19. Israel is of those who go down to the sea in ships,
and do business in great waters.” Ps. cvii. 23. It is Israel that
is thus specially commanded, “ Sing unto the Lord a new song,
and His praise from the end of the earth.” And then his Naval
power is recognised, for it is said, “Ye that go down to the sea,
and all that is therein, the isles, and the inhabitants thereof.”


Is, xlii. 10. “The enemy shall not exact upon him. ... I
will beat down his foes before his face. . . . My mercy shall
be with him. ... I will set his hand also in the sea, and his
right hand in the rivers.” Ps. Ixxxix. 22-25.
THE IDENTITY here is so plain that it is needless to
enlarge; all our school-children have for ages been taught to laud
the supremacy of our Nation in matters of the Navy, and to assign
to Britain the favourable position of being Mistress of the Seas, a
position that was only to be occupied by Israel, and that is alone
occupied by us.
IDENTIFICATION THE EIGHTEENTH.—
STOCK-BROKING.
I am so anxious to annihilate the very prevalent notion, that
Israel in these days refers exclusively to the Church, or pro-
fessed believers in Christ, that in the present edition of this
work I have introduced Stock-Broking as an Identity, a func-
tion clearly belonging to Israel, but certainly having nothing
to do with the rites of a religious service. It is distinctly assigned
unto Israel to be the most wealthy Nation upon the face of the
earth, and she must be so found. This was a distinguishing
privilege from her beginning, and not a single iota of her privi-
leges has been taken from her, but rather added unto. Israel
was to acquire such wealth as to be in a position to lend money
to every Nation requiring Cash, and who could offer reasonable
security for the Loan, no other Nation but Israel was to do
this; not only was she to be able to lend to such Nations large
sums, but she would be so wealthy as never to require to bor-
row from them; thus we shall find Israel holding a long string of
securities from other Nations, with a long list of loans, bearing
interest, which in itself would entail almost endless negotiations,
ramification of accounts, transfers of stock, settlement of dividends,
and cashing of coupons, for thus is this distinct promise given to
Israel. “ For the Lord thy God blesseth thee, as He promised
thee; and thou shalt lend unto many Nations, but thou shalt not
borrow.” Deut. xv. 6. The same promise is repeated word for
word, xxviii. 12, and as each separate promise would imply the
creation of the needful apparatus to give it force, so this promise
undoubtedly would call into being a Stock Exchange, a choice of
Investments, a staff of Stock-brokers, professional Accountants,
and Banking operations, settling days and commission agencies,
and as nothing as yet is perfect in the world, from these things
would spring abuses, as well as legitimate uses, that it by no


means -would become unreasonable to suppose that we should hear
of “ Bulls ” and “ Bears,” “ puts ” and “ calls,” and gambling
speculations.
THE IDENTITY simply has to declare that the English
Nation is‘the only Nation on earth lending to many Nations,
and not requiring to borrow from them. This was only to be
done by Israel, but is alone done by us, and should be sufficient in
itself to establish the Identity. Any Stock-broker would testify
that we lend to all the more powerful Nations, to Russia, to France,
to Austria and Italy, and some capitalists may remember some-
thing about Spanish and Mexican stocks; reference to any current
Stock List would shew our position. Such is our wealth, that
while the Argentine and Honduras States might think they were
doing a great thing in borrowing from us a million, we would think
it a very little and immaterial thing to make the very trifling
mistake of two or three millions in our Abyssinian accounts.
This would be too Lowe an affair to call forth much comment.
IDENTIFICATION THE NINETEENTH.—
COMPANY OF NATIONS.
Another characteristic under which Israel must be found is that
of not only having become a Nation, but afterwards having grown
into a Company of Nations; as sure as God’s word is true, so surely
must she be found in this position. One of God’s first promises to
Abraham was, “I will make of thee a great Nation.” Gen. xii. 2,
This promise was afterwards enlarged, thus.“ Thou shalt be a father
of many Nations.” Gen. xvii. 4. “ I will make Nations of thee.”
Gen. xvii. 6, and it was said unto his wife Sarah, “ She shall be a
mother of Nations.” Gen. xvii. 16. This promise was ratified to
Jacob, “A Nation, and a Company of Nations shall be of thee,”
Gen. xxv. 11, and was again passed unto Ephraim, “his seed shall
become a multitude of Nations.” Gen. xlviii. 19. Again, I protest
against the injustice that certain men do to the Bible, when they
spiritualise away the literal meaning of these passages. It is not
meant that Nations who receive Christ should form a Company of
Christian Nations; Abraham would be indignant at this idea; he
sent to his own country, and to his own kindred, for a wife for his
son, that the legitimate seed might be preserved; Sarah said “ the
son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, with Isaac,”
and God Himself, to show that He did not include the,Gentile
race in these promises, said, “in Isaac shall thy seed be called.”
Gen. xxi. 12. Give but the Bible its true and natural rendering


to our people, and it will become as a new book in tlieir bands,
full of historic and sacred interest, a book which the masses
will delight to study; whereas, with the many nonsensical in-
terpretations rendered by our ministers, it has been divested
of interest and put aside. In such a matter as this, let them
but see that after Israel was lost, God decreed that they should
become a Nation, and a Company of Nations, and their interest
would be excited to look for a people upon the face of the earth
answering to this description, and would be led to agree with
THE IDENTITY that our own people was the only people on
the Globe that had so become. Having formed a “Strong Nation”
in Britain, we went forth and formed another in America, another
has been formed in Canada, who has her separate Parliament,
under her own Prime Minister, for enacting her own Laws, and
with the same privileges we find another in Australia, and another
in New Zealand, and another in South Africa; these have sprung
forth from our own race, without taking into account our Indian
possessions, governed by a separate Parliament, and other depen-
dencies, so that we have positively become a Nation, and a Company
of Nations. Israel only was to become this; and we are the only
Nation on earth that have so become. .
IDENTIFICATION THE TWENTIETH.-x
THE MEASURING LINE.
Under this heading we present one of the most sublime and
powerful proofs of the majesty and truthfulness of God’s sure
word that can be found throughout the entire volume. This alone
when it is seen, which it eventually will be, and that shortly,
will win the admiration of the entire world. Perhaps more than
any other point, it shews that the whole creation, from the very
beginning, has been a splendid design, that could only originate in
the mind of the Omnipotent, Omnipresent, and Omniscient GOD.
The Almighty from the very first foresees, from the time that He
places our first parents in the Garden, all the Nations and kindreds
that should come forth from them in after ages; He sees the crea-
tion of different families, He sees how some would grow into vast
multitudes, He decrees how some Nations should rise to great
power, and then become extinct, He sees the different locations of
separate people on the face of the earth, how single Nations would
grow into such multitudes as to defy the power of man to grasp
with his intellect any adequate conception of the magnitude. Yet
God arranges for the whole, provides their plans, and settled, nearly


6000 years ago, that for the 800,000,000 of souls or thei'eabouts,
that are now upon the earth, there should be one selected Nation
from this mass that should be more highly favoured than the rest, and
that this one Nation should have such a host of possessions in all
parts of the world, not so much situated in the interior of Conti-
nents, but along the sea coasts, by the “sides of the earth,” so as
to form a cord or measuring line, to go right round the globe and
enclose or encircle all the other Nations of the world, and for this
arduous, superhuman, gigantic undertaking, Israel was selected;
it is alone her work, and it is utterly impossible that any other
Nation should be found accomplishing it. The character of the
work is distinctly told us by Moses, who says, “ When the Most
High divided to the Nations their inheritance, When He sepa-
rated the sons of Adam, He set the bounds of the people according
to the number of the children of Israel. For the Lord’s portion
is His people, Jacob is the lot (measuring line) of his inheritance.”
Deut. xxxii. 7-9. This truth is recognised by Jeremiah, who, in
talking about the Gentiles, says, “The portion of Jacob is not
like them; for He is the former of all things, and Israel is the rod
of His inheritance,” Jer. x. 16; this is also repeated, Jer. li. 19.
“Remember thy congregation which thou hast purchased of old,
the rod of thine inheritance which thou hast redeemed.” Ps. Ixxiv.
2. “ I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth,
and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father, for the mouth
of the Lord hath spoken it.” Is. Iviii. 14. Thus, this mission
given to Israel is a masterpiece of Divine arrangement, an appoint-
ment that only could be executed by the Almighty; a matter in
which the power or the will of man is left entirely out of the
question. He coidd not conceive the plan, far more carry it out;
so much so, that though plainly told us from the beginning, even
Christians among our own people, who have made the Bible a life
study, have not themselves understood this point; have passed it
over with some vague notion, and it is only as the thing is
effected, completed, positively accomplished, and seen by us as
done, that we are called to come and look, and lost in wonderment
and admiration, we cannot but be amazed and convinced of the
Supreme Power and Wisdom shewn forth by God. Surely in
searching for evidences to the truth of God’s word, we want no
dead stones dug up from the depth of the earth, for we have but to
call forth THE IDENTITY and we have living witnesses,
speaking masses to testify that His word is true. We are the-
people that have done this thing. Our Nation have possessions
that literally dot round the coasts of the entire world; we only, by
our possessions, have become a people that form a boundary line,
a cord, or Measuring Line that encircles all the other Nations of
the earth; Israel only was to do this, we alone have done it.


“On the sceptre of Queen Victoria the sun never sets.” “ The
Queen’s morning drum beats all round the world.” We not
only encompass the earth, but form a complete circle round
each Hemisphere. It is a grand fulfilment of prophecy by us,
a perfect marvel in itself. We become a living power to prove
God’s Word inspired. Let but the masses be brought to see the
speaking splendour of this accomplishment, in its pure and natural
signification, apart from the puny interpretation of man, and they
could not fail to recognise the power and the wisdom of the
Creator, and to give their verdict that their entire submission to
Him is due. Get a map and trace how literally we have done
this thing; take the Eastern Hemisphere, and begin with British
Islands, Heligoland, Gibraltar, Malta, Gambia, Sierra Leone, Gold
Coast, Lagos, Saint Helena, Cape of Good Hope, Natal, Mauri-
tius, Straits’ Settlements, India, Ceylon, Labuan, Western Aus-
tralia, South Australia, Victoria, Queensland, Tasmania, Hong
Kong, and then West Canada, thus completing the circle. The
same thing is done round the Western Hemisphere, by our
Hudson’s Bay Territory, Canada, British Columbia, United States
(our own race), Islands in the Pacific, New Zealand, Falkland
Islands, British Guiana, Trinidad, Windward Islands —Grenada,
Barbadoes, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent, Tobago—Leeward Islands
—Antigua, Montserrat, Saint Christopher, Nevis, Virgin Islands,
Dominica, Jamaica, British Honduras, Turks’ Islands, Bahamas,
Bermuda—United States (east coast), Nova Scotia, Prince Edward
Island, New Brunswick, Newfoundland, when we again complete
a second circle, which establishes our Identity as indisputable.
And writing in the midst of the “rumours of wars,” should the
great power of the South make conquests rapidly, and should
these conquests, instead of being strength, become the source of
weakness, that in the mighty efforts made, it becomes exhausted
in the very climax of success, and thus falls an easy victim into
the hands of the King of the North, who in this way would
become possessed of the entire Continent of Europe, and much of
Asia (Palestine excepted). Why ! should these arrangements be
shortly accomplished, and the life of our Queen be spared, then
we should have the literal fulfilment of that remarkable prophecy,
“ The Lord hath created a new thing in the earth; a woman shall
compass a man.” Jer. xxxi. 22. But this is merely given as a
thought, and is apart from the mission of my work; nevertheless,
our Identity, and the “ rumours of wars,” are contemporary
events.


IDENTIFICATION THE TWENTY-FIRST.—
THE SPOILER SPOILT.
Another most interesting test in the Identification of Lost
Israel is the fact that there could not now be in existence any
Nation who had made war upon her. Israel, in the exercise of her
mission, to have lordship over the Gentiles, might be the first to
declare war with others, and after having put forth her authority,
such Nations might continue imbeing, but whatever Nation should
take upon herself to declare war with Israel, by the sureness of
God’s word, that Nation should cease to be. This we know to be
a fact with those Nations that warred against Israel when she had
a political existence, such as the Midianites, Philistines, and others,
or the more powerful Nations, such as the Babylonians, and the
Assyrians. But God’s word is still in force, for the promise was
again and again re-delivered to them, after their captivity, for even
when she was Lost, Nations would gather against them. “ Behold
they shall surely gather together, but not by me; whosoever shall
gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake; no weapon
that is formed against thee shall prosper. This is the heritage of
the servants of the Lord.” Is. liv. 15-17. “ For the Nation and
Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish.” Is. lx. 12.
“Behold at evening-tide trouble; before the morning he is not.
This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that
rob us.” Is. xvii. 14. “Though I make a full end of all Nations
whither I have scattered thee, yet will I not make a full end
of thee.” Jer. xxx. 11. “All they that devour thee shall be
devoured; and all thine adversaries, every one of them, shall
go into captivity; and they that spoil thee shall be a spoil, and
all that prey upon thee will I give for a prey.” Jer. xxx. 16.
These are not promises given to Judah, but only to Israel; they
become utterly nonsensical when spiritualised and applied to
Churches, after the manner of some of our learned Divines, be-
cause cruel infidelity has long made aggressive war upon spiritual
truth, and yet is rampant; and if in ignorance we should apply
them to the Jews, we then make them to speak what is untrue;
because every Nation now on the earth has fulfilled God’s word
by oppressing the Jew, and has grown in strength; and it was
decreed that Israel herself should war against Judah, for “ Man-
asseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh; they together shall be
against Judah.” Is. ix. 21. And the time is not now, but is yet
to come, when these Two Houses shall cease to vex each other.
THE IDENTITY is most clear upon this point, for our
Ancestry, traced to the very spot where Israel was lost, finds our


early forefathers under the Assyrian yoke at the time when that
Nation was the most powerful on earth, and from that point to
these isles, all the tribeships that History affirms made war with
our race have ceased to be; and when we arrived here the
Homan Empire who opposed us, the mightiest Nation the world
had then seen, after a lapse of years, politically expired, so that
now, there does not exist a single Nation who had been the first
to spoil us. This cannot be said of any other Nation upon earth,
' as a reference to the strongest powers will prove ; for we ourselves
have warred against Russia, and forbad her to take Turkey, and are
yet in being. When France was in her prime, we buried her first
Emperor in our own ground. Through our troops, we made China
open her ports to our trade. This very day we possess Gibraltar,
which is a part of Spain. Shewing that we not only exist after
having made war with the strongest powers, but have also used
the prerogative given to Israel, that of having lordship over the
Gentiles and exercising authority upon them, and are the only
Nation that have so done.
IDENTIFICATION THE TWENTY-SECOND.—
“ THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.”
Solomon, who was given to foresee the captivity of Israel, made
special entreaties with God concerning this people when Captive,
and it is worthy of remark he connects the two great events - ,
the withdrawal of the Latter Rain from the Land, and the
Captivity, together; and it is interesting to see that as they
went together, so they have returned together; after this rain
has been withheld for hundreds of years, it has only recently
been restored, according to promise, and with it the Identity of
Israel, which is surely a certain testimony that it is God’s set time
for her discovery. Solomon’s petition, accepted by God, was, that
Israel when Captive and given to national prayer, should in prayer
have their faces towards the East. He says, “ When the heaven
is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have sinned against
Thee; yet if they pray TOWARD this place, and confess Thy
name, and turn from their sin—then hear Thou them from heaven,
and forgive the sins of Thy servants, of Thy people Israel, and
send rain upon Thy land;” and further on he says, “If they carry
them away captives unto a land far off, or near, If they return to
Thee with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of
their captivity, whither they have carried them captives, and
PRAY TOWARD THEIR LAND,” &c. 2 Chron. vi. 26-38.
The whole chapter is most beautiful and worthy of being read, as
it proves that Israel is a nationality, and in a natural capacity


would be found in prayer with their faces turned toward the East,
which gives us a clear IDENTITY in our own National Establish-
ment, the Church of England, whose practice has ever been
(though in entire ignorance of our subject) to confess their sins
with their faces turned towards the East; and even in the burial
of the dead the idea is recognised, by the body being entombed
with the face turned Eastward, and though this has been regarded
by some sections of the Dissenting Church as verging upon Super-
stition, yet it is not; it is a most literal carrying out of the plan
recorded, 1 Kings viii. 44, and accepted by God on our behalf, and
should be a standing obligation until our Captivity is turned and
the Land is restored to us, for this is the consummation of the
arrangement.
Also as to the Architecture of our Churches in the days of our
forefathers, Mr. Wilson makes the following interesting remarks.
“ The English Cathedrals appear to have been built after the
fashion of the temples they frequented previous to their conversion
to Christianity. And these Cathedrals, it has been observed, seem
evidently to be built after the design of the temple at Jerusalem.
Like this, they have their most holy place, the altar; and the holy
place, the choir; and the court outward from thence, for the body
of the people; the more minute parts and ornaments will, in
general, be found to be exceedingly correspondent.”
Do not let me be understood as saying that the Church of
England therefore is the one perfect Church, for she is not. No
Church can be perfect until after our Identity has been nationally
recognised, when God faithfully promises to pour out His spirit
on our seed, and to give us a oneness of heart, when even our
Ritualists will forsake their idols; this is promised ; until then, we
can “ let them alone,” for they are childishly powerless. But
the Church of England is distinctly recognised in Scripture as a
National Establishment, and has only by-and-bye to make a few
alterations, when she will become the most glorious Church ever
founded on the earth. Her present description will be found in
Ezek. xliii. 7-9. Nearly all the rest, from the 40th chapter to the
12th verse of the 47th, refers to the re-establishment of the Temple
service for Judah, but not for Israel, for the Law (Mosaic) is yet to
go forth from Zion, and the word of the Lord (the Gospel through
Israel) from Jerusalem.
IDENTIFICATION THE TWENTY-THIRD.—
FREEMASONRY.
It is not my intention to enlarge upon this heading further than
to remark, that Freemasonry has a direct Israelitish origin, and


one of the main reasons why the North American Indians and
the Nestorians have been reputed to be the descendants of
the lost ten tribes, was because a species of Freemasonry was
found in their midst. But surely, if Freemasonry in the nineteenth
century has any head-quarters, it is to be found in Britain, and
our subject might give to the craft new life and impetus in extend-
ing their operations; information on this subject had better be
obtained from the Lodges, or from • Bro. Geo. S. Kenning, Little
Britain.
IDENTIFICATION THE TWENTY-FOURTH.—
DRUNKENNESS.
This is a painful Identity, but to bring forth our subject impar-
tially, we must be true, and shew forth the dark side as well as
the bright. Israel must be found with the shame of drunkenness
active in her midst. It must be one of her prominent vices, or,
if the private interpretation rendered by a large class of the
ministry be correct, to wit, that Israel in these days is exclusively
the Church, then most surely the Black Cloth must carry the sad
signs of debauchery and revelry about with them to a fearful
extent, surely it would be a folly with them that Church discipline
would not touch, for the Bible infers that this sin in Israel would
so largely prevail. But I call upon my readers not to credit the
Ministry when they say that Israel is the Church, for she is not.
Israel is a nation, distinct from other nations, more highly favoured
than France, Russia, Prussia, or any other power; this the Bible
declares, which is the safe guide, better than the dictum of any
man, whatever reputation for learning he may have. “ The Lord
hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto Himself, ABOVE
ALL THE NATIONS that are upon the earth,” Deut. xiv. 2.
“ What ONE NATION in the earth is like thy people, even like
Israel.” 2 Sam. vii. 23, “AN HOLY NATION,” 1 Peter ii. 9,
and until the promised Spirit be poured upon her after her
Identity, Israel, as a distinct nation, would include the good and
bad of that nation, and this in a fair and natural way accounts for
the drunkenness that prophecy declares would be found in Israel.
“ Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim whose
glorious beauty is a fading flower which are on the head of the fat
valleys of them that are overcome with wine! * * * But they
also have erred through wine, and through strong drink are out of
the way; the priest and the prophet have erred through strong
drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way
through strong drink, they err in vision, they stumble in judg-


ment.” Is. xxviii. 1-7. From this we gather that Ephraim is not
only given to Ritualism, but also to drink, but the “they also”
includes Zebulon and Napthali, Dan and Asher, for these are
they “ that turn the battle to the gate,” and they, like Ephraim,
together with Issachar and Reuben of the valleys, would be at
times “ overcome -with wine.”
THE IDENTITY of our nation here surely speaks for it-
self ; drunkenness is a dark page of our national history, it has
a world-wide notoriety, it infests * all our institutions at home,
and perhaps the greatest difficulty that our Missionaries abroad
have had to contend against, has been the example set forth to
the Gentiles by the drunkards of our own nation, and has severely
counterbalanced the good they have sought to effect. Amd here
let me say to our Temperance friends throughout the country,
that their organisations, however well arranged, will never eradi-
cate this evil; it will only be overcome by God’s own plan, and
can alone be effected through the medium of Our Identity; nothing
else can remove drunkenness. God Himself says so in this very
chapter, “ IN THAT DAY shall the Lord of hosts be for a crown
of glory,” instead of “ the crown of pride to the drunkards.” “By
this, therefore, shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this is
all the fruit to take away his sin.” Is. xxvii. 9. Nothing can be
plainer; after our Identity drunkenness will be removed, and we
shall be able to use the good gifts from God, instead of abusing
them. David, the prophet, more than once says, “ WHEN God
bringeth back the Captivity of His people, Jacob shall rejoice,
Israel shall be glad.” Ps. liii. 6. This is AFTER THE IDEN-
TITY, not BEFORE.
IDENTIFICATION THE TWENTY-FIFTH.—
FALSE WEIGHTS.
Israel must be found with a section of her people inclined to
fraudulent trading, lending themselves to the abominations of false
measures, deceitful balances, and unjust scales. These are Iden-
tities of Israel, and we introduce them that we may make one
more effort to destroy the injurious impression that Israel signifies
the spiritual Church, for it is manifest that the Church of Christ
could have nothing to do with such sins. It is said of Israel,
“Heis a merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand,” Hos,
xii. 7. The next verse acknowledges that he had “become rich” by
such means. “I have found me out substance,” and implying
that it was done without offending the legal law: “ they shall find
none iniquity in me that were sin.” “ Saying, When will tha


new moon be gone, that we may sell corn ? and the Sabbath, that
we may set forth wheat, making the ephah small, and the shekel
great, and falsifying the balances by deceit 1” Amos viii. 5. These are
the characteristics of a portion of the trading community in Israel.
“ Tricks in trade,” “ clever strokes of business,” merchants with
“eyes standing out in fatness,” given to the “winking of the eye,”
“ speaking with the feet,” “ teaching with the fingers.” God saw
all this in Israel after her captivity, and says, “ Are there yet the
treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the scant
measure that is abominable? * Shall I count them pure with the
wicked balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights? for the
rich men thereof are full of violence.” Micah vi. 10. Thus it is
evident that the Judgment will record the history of many men in
Israel who increased their substance by unrighteousness, Bankers
Merchants and Tradesmen who in their day passed as respectable
men, but who at last will testify to the truth of the Scripture that
says, “ The bread of deceit is sweet to a man, but afterwards his
mouth shall be filled with gravel;” and it is interesting to observe
that in the same category are placed the fraudulent merchant and
the Ritualistic priest. Israel was punished “ because they sold
the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes,”
Amos. ii. 6; and after their captivity Isaiah distinctly recognises
the dealer in Ritualism, saying, “ The vile person will speak
villainy, and his heart will work iniquity, to practise hypocrisy,
and to utter error against the Lord, and to make empty the
SOUL of the hungry.” Is. xxxii. 6. Jeremiah was commissioned
to say to them, “Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter
the sheep of my pasture.” xxiiii. 1. Ezekiel gives a third testi-
mony against them, “ Son of man, prophesy against the shep-
herds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them, Thus saith the
Lord God unto the shepherds: Woe be to the shepherds of Israel
that do feed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the flocks?
Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill them that
are fed: but ye feed not the flock.” xxxiv. 2, 3.
THE IDENTITY has no obscure corner here, need not
speak with an uncertain voice. Surveyors of weights and mea-
sures have long been a necessity with us, many tradesmen have
reason to hang down their heads with shame as they call to mind
their official visits. The very mention of Adulteration would
create a world of suggestion. What chapters the Counter might
dictate of 11 yards sold for 12, old patterns for new. What tales
our County Courts tell of good fish and fruit packed at the top,
the rest running down inferior. What a long list many of us
could write, of large city Warehousemen, Merchants, Bankers,
and Stock Exchange Firms, known in our youth, who have
succumbed to the principle of the passage which says, “As
the partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not; so he


that getteth riches, and not by right, shall be a fool.” Jer, xvii.
11. Here we have our Railway Directors, curses, instead of
blessings, who rob the land of the Sabbath, and pay away their
profits in accident compensations. Then as to the passages bearing
on the priesthood, they were given to Israel, they must apply to
some Class in our midst. They cannot apply to the standard
Clergy of the Church of England; they have ever been the salt
of our country, rich blessings in our land; we all have need to
thank God for their evangelical teachings; they have fed the soul,
and have not caused “The drink of the thirsty to fail.” The
standard Clergy of the Church of England have been far better
taught than “ to utter error against the Lord;” nay, those who do
thus are our hireling priests, wedded to idols, who impiously
accept sacred payment, while they do their utmost to destroy the
rich power of a holy, devotional service, by intonation, uncertain
nasal sounds, childish, petty, and absurd ceremonials, perverting
solemn praise to a brilliant oratorio, in which the flock can take
no part, or reading the Scriptures in an unknown tongue, that
they should not be understood. These are our Ritualists:
“Ephraim is joined to his idols, let him alone.” They might have
furnished a separate Identification, but for the fact that God
Himself classes them with the swindling tradespeople. “As for
them,” &c. Ezek. xi. 21. Their power to do harm is “limited,”
like other joint-stock frauds. They cannot take us to Rome,
simply because there is no Church of Rome. It had only power
to continue forty and two months, or 1260 years, when it was to
cease. God’s word is sure, and cannot err. Its power commenced
with the crowning of the first Pope, 606. Add to this the limit
of its time, 1260 years, and we arrive at A.D. 1866. This was
the year of the Infallible man’s difficulty, when he ceased to trust
in God, and placed his faith in Napoleon, the year that his
temporal power was wrenched from him, and became embodied in
the might of the French army. From that moment the Church
of Rome ceased to exist, and supplies us with another proof of
God’s sure word of prophecy; therefore let not our nation talk
more about Rome, or be anxious about the follies of those whom
God bids us leave alone. They are the “ silly doves of Ephraim,”
Hos. vii. 11, and will yet return. Hos. xiv. 8.
IDENTIFICATION THE TWENTY-SIXTH.—
OPPRESSION.
I prefer bringing forth this Identity next, though a host of
others crowd upon the mind. I do not find from the prophecies
d 2


that any of the national propensities to which Israel was addicted
when in the Land, would depart from her during the time of her
captivity; on the contrary, Scripture clearly recognises that the
same sins would cleave to her in captivity, and nationally she
would not be found willing to forsake them until the time that
her Identity was established; so that the very Identity of Israel
is the instrument that God will use to give the death blow to
many abuses that now afflict His ELECT. Thus Ritualism,
which was with them in the land, and is with them still, can only
be swept from the earth by the power of the Identity. But the
cruelty of oppression has far more baneful results upon the masses;
it has been to Israel the one great curse that has checked the full
flow of her national prosperity, and her people’s happiness. Her
love for using the power of oppression was one main reason why
she was expelled from the land, why she forfeited her high estate,
and has cost her generations of reproach, toil, and misery. “Thus
saith the Lord, For three transgressions of Israel, and for four, I
will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they have
sold the righteous for silver (Ritualism), and the poor for a pair
of shoes; that pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the
poor, and turn aside the way of the meek.” Amos ii. 6. These
sins were not charged against Judah. She had been separately
addressed in previous verses, God not laying the crime of
Ritualism against her; and reference to the Book of Kings will
shew that with but few exceptions, the Kings of Israel “ departed
not from the sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who made Israel
to sin ” (in the ritual service of Baal), whereas, on the contrary,
the Kings of Judah generally “ did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord,” and Judah to this day cannot be said to oppress
her poor, nor does she suffer our poor rates to be burthened by
their keep. Oppression was with Israel, and is so still; it is
written against Israel during captivity, “ He loveth to oppress.”
Hos. xii. 7. Of course this is the national and commercial aspect,
apart from the religious life, and furnishes another proof that
Israel could not be the Church, for it is an impossibility for a
Chi’istian to love oppression, those in Israel who are really Chris-
tians are the light of the world, but those who are not in Christ,
are still the curse of brethren: of these God asks, “ What mean ye
that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor?’
Is. iii. 15. “Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees,
that turn aside the needy from judgment, and take away the right
from the poor of my people.” Is. x. 2.
THE IDENTITY is too apparent; few things have tended
so greatly to retard our national prosperity, and marred the real
happiness of our people so much as this love of oppressing
others. Exorbitant hours of toil, exacted for minimum of pay,
testify of it—wealthy City Warehousemen who have more than


the heart should desire, pay wicked and starvation prices to their
sempstresses, calling forth Tom Hood’s sublime protest in his
noble and matchless “Song of the Shirt.” We have a little
nation of ill-paid Curates, Clerks, and Workmen, whose principals
enjoy princely revenues, and the very luxuries of earth, while their
dependents are oppressively struggling in the meshes of poverty,
dictating the text —“ Woe unto him that buildeth his house by
unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong; that useth his neigh-
bour’s service without wages, and giveth him not for his work.”
Jer. xxii. 13. Our Farmers and Agricultural Squires are not
exempted from the sin of oppression, as the few shillings doled out
to their labourers, and the wretched hovels so many are suffered to
live in, testify. God specially addresses the wealthy farmers of
Israel, saying, “Behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped
down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth.”
James v .4. Oppression is in us, and permeates through all
society; our very governments have been oppressed by the people,
the people by the governments, and so forth. How shamefully is
this exemplified by our treatment of paupers. Homeless poor, like
felons, are handed over to the supervision of the police when they
want a night’s shelter, and have to file outside the railing of a
police station, that passers-by might gaze upon their misery,
submit to the rough questions of the Inspector, at times passed
long distances to a workhouse, to undergo cross-questioning by
Officials of another stamp, and then have to pay by labour seven
times the value of the accommodation. All this is a grave
mistake, by which the full prosperity of our Nation has been
hindered; we have wealth in our Country, and could have multi-
plied it a hundredfold (but for this dark blot), resulting in almost
universal contentment among the masses of the people. It is our
own fault that we have pauperism, a consequence of Oppression.
God has declared, and His word is sure, that He did not intend
much poor to be in our midst, that He wished so to bless our
English Nation that there should be times when we should have
no poor at all. Deut. xv. 4. He has made special provision for
us against poverty, not having done the same to any other nation,
and if we had carefully hearkened to His voice, pauperism would
have been unknown to us; we suffer from it through our sin;
every department of trade is crippled, railway receipts are
dwarfed, and poor rates form a millstone about our necks, simply
because we have not properly used the provision God has made.
God gave to us our Colonies expressly to prevent pauperism;
the 49th of Isaiah is nothing more than a chapter of English
History, entirely without point or meaning if applied to any
other people. It contains the Charter of our Colonial Office,
the history of our Colonies; addresses us in these “ Isles,”
tells us they had become too small for us, “by reason of the


inhabitants,” because we had the multitudinous seed in us. We
ourselves, in the 20th verse, cried out for some new country, for
more room, saying, “ the place is too strait for me, give place
to me that I may dwell.” This was Israel suffering the inconve-
nience of an overcrowded country, and in the same chapter God
tells us He had heard the prayer, that the request was granted,
that He had provided for us the “ desolate heritages,” and we have
before seen that all the waste heritages that were then existing are
now in our possession. Had we made use of them in the way God
intended we should have done, we should be entirely without work-
houses in our land, Philanthropy would amply have provided for
all the Charity needed. We should have sent forth our surplus
populage to till these waste lands; but Oppression has kept them
at home, that the labour market might be overstocked and labour
become cheap, and this is why our wealthy Manufacturers, Farmers,
and large employers of labour are generally found decrying down
Emigration. They know that to thin the country means the raising
of wages, would enforce them at last to pay honestly; so they
meanly and subtlely pretend to oppose Emigration upon humane
grounds. The time has now come to sweep this cant away ; grave
times are ushered in. These are the latter days; the wars have
commenced; the fulness of the Gentiles* have set in; the injunc-
tion has been obeyed, to preach the gospel as a witness to every
nation; the Latter Rain has been restored; knowledge runs
swiftly to and fro; and ISRAEL IS FOUND. These are the
great proofs of latter-day times. Now we are about to enjoy a
season of refreshing and quiet, a few years of rest, with a thorough
immunity from the troubles that will beset the other nations; but
still Armageddon is before us; it is coming upon us; we cannot
avert it; it may be 100 years before it comes; it may be sooner.
It is the time of our trouble; we are the Elect; and for our sakes
alone it is promised these days shall be shortened. It is the time
that “ wheresoever the body is, thither will the eagles be gathered
together.” The time that God will avenge Israel, “His own elect,”
the time when the entire armies of the Continent shall be gathered
against us, suggesting Christ’s question, “ Nevertheless, when the
Son of Man cometh, shall He find faith on the earth ?” This question
has no manner of reference to truth. We are positively assured
that there will be hundreds of millions of sincere, Christ-loving and
expecting soids at this time, but it means shall we, the elect nation,
the Israel, after all God’s marvels done for us; shall we, with the
earth against us, with all the modern appliances of skilled warfare
before us, have faith in the promise that we shall prevail?
Victory will be ours, but it will be obtained for us more by our
Colonies than by ourselves. It is the young lions that come
forward. Ezek. xxxviii. 13. The tidings out of the east and out
of the north, shall trouble Gog. Dan. xi. 44. Hence the impor-


tance of developing our Colonies. Every workhouse is a reproach
to us; each represents a town of wasted strength; an army
extracted from us. Instead of herding our poor in physical weak-
ness in these nests of infamy, had we sent them forth to till the
wastes and beautify God’s earth, we might have had hundreds of
new towns for the commerce of Old England to supply. They would
have become a blessing to us, not a curse ; a strength, not a weak-
ness ; but the advocate of cheap labour says, “ Utopian !” Believe
him not; every town formed is the result of first settlers. New
York, Quebec, Adelaide, Wellington, and Cape Town, with all the
others,testify against him. What has been done can be repeated, and
there is yet ample room to duplicate the whole. Keeping up our
ratio of population, which we shall, in 100 years hence our race
will have increased to 300,000,000, what will become of England
unless we make the proper use of our blessings'! Let hateful
Oppression no longer stand in the way; let the Nation insist
that Government take Emigration in hand ; let our workhouses
be emptied, and free passages with grants be made; then shall we
have a Government attending to the real well-being of the people,
and not until then. God never enjoined upon us the duty of sup-
porting the able-bodied man; He only commissions us to take care
of the stranger, the widow, and the fatherless; for the widower
and the motherless provision is made, if not in England, in our
immense possessions; but having made the mistake by discourag-
ing emigration, and wasting national strength, through the horrors
and immorality always resulting from overcrowding, it becomes
our duty to rectify this mistake by providing from the national
purse sufficient to enable these impoverished ones comfortably to
settle in the countries God Himself has given them. The same
amount of money we threw away over ten of our people in Abys-
sinia, without any “ value received,” applied in this direction would
be a stroke of real statesmanship, and directly, and sensibly bene-
fit the whole of the country. If the people Milled it, no earthly
power could hinder it. Heaven M r ould not oppose, because it
grieves that it has not been done before.
IDENTIFICATION THE TWENTY-SEVENTH.—
“BLINDNESS IN PART.”
Perhaps one of the most marvellous incidents connected witlr
the history of Israel since they were lost is that of their “ Blind-
ness,” their utter ignorance of themselves; it is said of them, “ His
watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant.” Is. Ivi. 10. They
were to accomplish all the wonderful works given to Israel; yet


they were not to know themselves, were to be forgetful of the rock
that begat them. Paul calls this a mystery and says, “ I would not,
brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye
should be wise in your own conceits, that blindness in part is
happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in.”
Rom. xi. 25. In the first verse he glories in being “an Israelite,”
“of the tribe of Benjamin,” and speaks only of Israel, and not of
Judah, when he asks, “ Hath God cast away His people?” And
refers to Israel as being the elect Nation, and not a Church, when
he says, “ God hath not cast away His people which He foreknew.”
He had the authority of Scripture for saying this ; for God Him-
self had said “ they shall be as though I had not cast them off.”
Zech. x. 6. Yes, even in this blind state, they should be the
favoured people, not for their own goodness, but that the faithful
promises made should stand; for Paul says “Israel hath not
obtained that which she seeketh for; but the ELECTION hath
obtained it, and the rest were blinded.” Rom. xi. 7. By “the
rest,” he referred to the nine tribes who had been carried into
captivity by Assyria —the bulk of the nation—for in the two
previous verses he spoke only of the remnant that had bedn
preserved, and who in the time then present—the days of Paul—
were Christians, not having given themselves to the service of
Baal, just as the seven thousand men in the days of Elijah had
been lovers of truth, and proof against the wickedness of Ritualism.
This remnant did not belong to Judah, but to Israel; being of
Benjamin, that one tribe especially left behind to carry out
Christ’s woi’k in the days of the Apostles. 1 Kings xi. 13 and 36.
“The rest,” i.e., —the nation of Israel, were “blinded,” but yet as
a Nation they were fore-ordained, pre-destinated, elected to fulfil
all the missions given to them. Hence the Apostle says, it was
not so much they that performed them, for they were “ blinded,”
but “ the election.” God speaking of Israel says, “ I will bring the
blind by a way they knew not; I will lead them in paths they have
not known, * * * These things will Ido unto them, and not
forsake them. * * * Who is blind but my servant? * *
Who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lord’s
servant? Seeing many things, but thou observeth not.” Is.
xlii. 16-19. And surely THE IDENTITY can testify to
this fact. We have established by Twenty-seven Identities, the
Identification of the English with Israel, and could yet bring
forward as many more if needed. We have proved that we are the
only nation that have brought forth their works, that there is not
a single flaw, not a link missing, that we have, without one excep-
tion, accomplished all, whereas no other nation has tou'ched them,
and now, by no possibility whatever could do so, and yet hitherto
we have been blind to this fact, notwithstanding the remarkable
coincident, that we have, as a nation, been - confessing for ages,


through the Common Prayer Book of the Church of England, that
we were positively and literally Israel, as the following quotations
prove. “ O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers
have declared unto us the noble works that Thou didst in their
days, and in the old time before them.” “ He, remembering His
mercy, hath holpen His servant Israel, as He promised to our
forefathers, Abraham and his seed for ever.” Surely nothing
could be plainer than that “ blindness in part” has happened to
us, it has been designed by God that it should have been so, but
He also designs that it should be removed, and is now about
to make most valuable use of this blindness. It is now specially
to serve the welfare of the Church, our dear Redeemer’s King-
dom, for while some men, in their zeal to confirm the truth of
Christianity, have been eager to establish Christian Evidence
Societies, Exploration Funds, and have been digging in the
bowels of the earth for inscription stones, collecting anything that
could in the slightest degree testify to Bible truth, God himself
designs to bring forth living testimony; He intends through the
medium of our “blindness” to destroy Infidelity; that while
Tom Paine, and his school have been asserting “ there is no
God,” we are to be called forth, and invested with the sublime
mission to testify that there is a God, and that our God is God;
a holier, more heaven-born mission could not be given to any
people, it is alone given to our nation, for God now says to us—
to us, the so-called English, but now identified as Israel—“ Bring
forth the blind people that have eyes, * * * let them
bring forth their witnesses that they may be justified. * * *
Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have
chosen; that ye may know, and believe me, and understand that
I AM HE; before me there was no God formed, neither shall
there be after me; I, even I, am the Lord; and beside me there
is no Saviour. * * * Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord,
THAT IAM GOD.” Is. xliii. 10-12. Christians! if no other
purposes were served by our Identification, surely this one alone
should fire our souls with living zeal to effect its national acknowledg-
ment. Ye that love the Lord, is it nothing to you that God’s cha-
racter should be vindicated 1 ? We are this “ blind people” that have
to be brought forth. It is God’s own adopted means of certifying
to truth ; the only method that can prevail, and effect the purpose ;
waste not valuable time, and insult not your God, by resorting to
your own judgment, and using your own appliances, but obey God,
do as He bids you, bring Israel to the front, “ bring forth the blind
people,” establish our Identity, for this is the only power that will
be used by God to bring the Gentile Nations to be willing
to be taught of the Loi'd, and receive salvation through our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. The word of the Lord has said
this; remember God works by the use of means; we must shew


-our anxiety for this to be done, before He will do it. “ Thus saith
the Lord God ; I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of
Israel, to do it for them.” Ezek. xxxvi. 37 “Ye that make men-
tion of the Lord, keep not silence. And give Him no rest, till
He establish, and till He make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.”
Is. Ixii. 7.
Christians, this matter is now fairly in your hands; it is a new
power for you to use, for the glory of God, the salvation of souls,
and the welfare of our individual Nation. I leave you accountable
to God for the way you make use of this power, and to Him be
all the Glory, now and ever. Amen. (I have said.)
POSTSCRIPT.
Our Divines often tell us how easy it is to build theories upon
individual, and isolated passages of Scripture, and are most choice
with their advice that we should be careful to compare Scripture
with Scripture. This has been an anxious study—from between
two and three hundred texts that have been advanced, not one has
been used to bear upon Israel that was not given to her, and
her alone, without having any bearing upon Judah; also, the
passages brought forward to distinguish Judah, only refer to her,
and not to Israel. For each single text supplied, at least ten others
could be brought forward having direct substantiating testimony ;
indeed very much of the Bible could be reproduced. So that, if
ever a subject has been introduced adhering to the rule of com-
paring Scripture with Scripture, surely this subject has in the most
copious manner.


N O T I C E.
This Edition is considerably enlarged upon the former issues,
containing more abundant Scripture Proofs, and many new Identi-
fications; but still there are several other great uses that the
subject serves that it were impossible to introduce without mate-
rially increasing bulk and cost; this we have studied to avoid,
because the subject is essentially a National one, the Nation’s
coming glory and prosperity being dependent upon it; so that to
increase price might prevent general circulation, and retard the
Identity from being quickly acknowledged, which would delay
the bestowal of those rich blessings God has promised to us im-
mediately after the Political Resurrection of His Chosen People
Israel. We therefore propose issuing another Pamphlet, under
the title of
“FLASHES OF LIGHT;”
shewing in outline other really valuable uses, as well as flashing
light upon certain topics that have been thought hard to compre-
hend, such as—The Doctrine of Election.—“ Faith on the Earth.”
—“ They are not all Israel that are of Israel.” —The 9th chapter
of Romans (reputed to be the most difficult chapter of the entire
Bible). —“Moses and the Prophets.”—The Disciples and the Tribe
of Benjamin.—The Coming Amnesty v. Prison Building.—The
Gospel v. Capital Punishment.—lsaac’s Stone under our Corona-
tion Chair.—Solomon and our Coronation Oath.—Complete
Exemption of England from the coming Continental Suffer-
ings.— Seven-eighths of the Bible now generally misunderstood.—
The Wars and our Neutrality.—The New Jerusalem.—Events
that must take place before the Second Coming of Christ.—“ All
things (do not) continue as they were,” &c., etc.


MASON, FIRTH, AND M f CUTCHEON,
GENERAL PRINTERS,
FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.
3 1508 00075040 1




