





■
DEPOSIT COPY
NOT FOR LOAN




JENNIFER STANDS


the same author
THE LITTLE ROUND GARDEN
THE LITTLE ROUND HOUSE
THE HOUSE THAT BECKONS
THE SONG GOES ON


-
■


THE GHOST MINER


JENNIFER STANDS
GLADYS LISTER
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON LTD
SYDNEY :: LONDON


Set up, printed and bound
in Australia by
Halstead Press Pty Limited,
9-19 Hickson Street, Sydney.
Registered in Australia for
transmission through the
post as a book
A shorter version of this story appeared in serial
form in the Sydney Morning Herald under the
title Phantom Gold.


TO
ROBERTA
■


.
I
-


PAGE
1
7
15
21
27
33
38
45
51
56
63
71
76
83
CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I. JENNIFER 1
11. DR BERRY 7
111. JOHN 15
IV. THEIR FATHER 21
V. UNWELCOME NEWS 27
VI. THE PHANTOM 33
VII. A SURPRISE VISIT 38
VIII. THE MINE 45
IX. JENNIFER ARRIVES 51
X. DRUMMOND 56
XI. SIMON - - 63
XII. THE GHOST MINER 71
XIII. STALKING THE GHOST .... 76
XIV. THE REAL GHOST 83
XV. MR HOGARTH INTRODUCES THE GHOST 91
XVI. RONALD LEAVES FOR SYDNEY - - 95
XVII. SIMON COLLAPSES 101
XVIII. SIMON MISSING 107
XIX. THE TELEPHONE CALL - - - - 112
XX. JENNIFER GOES WITH THE MINERS - 119
XXI. THE PLAN 125
XXII. JOHN ASSISTS SIMON - - - - 131


CHATTER
XXIII. SIMON’S STORY 137
XXIV. JENNIFER RUNS AWAY - - - - 143
XXV. RONALD HOGARTH RETURNS - - 149
XXVI. JENNIFER IS LOST 155
XXVII. JENNIFER’S ABSENCE CAUSES ALARM - 161
XXVIII. THE THREE MINERS DISAPPEAR - - 166
XXIX. THE WATERFALL 172
XXX. THE TOP OF THE FALLS - - - 178
XXXI. BELOW THE WATERFALL - - - 183
XXXII. THE RESCUE 190
XXXIII. ANOTHER SURPRISE - - - - 198
XXXIV. JENNIFER REMAINS FIRM - - - 205
XXXV. THE NEW MANAGER - - - - 210
XXXVI. AT THE MINES 214
XXXVII. THE CAVE 219
XXXVIII. PHANTOM GOLD 224
XXXIX. THE HOMESTEAD 229
XL. TREE-TOPS 234
XLI. HIDDEN GOLD 239


CHAPTER I
JENNIFER
Dr Berry drove through the wide open gates of
“Oakleaves” and, stopping his car at the foot of the
long drive, put his hand on the horn and sounded it
in a particular way. Then, taking his pipe from his
pocket, he lit it, leant comfortably back against the
seat and puffed at it contentedly. How few were the
times when he could call his soul his own. Hurry to
this patient, hurry to that—but “Oakleaves”! He need
not hurry there. He smiled and sounded the horn again
in the same strange way, three quick little toots and
one long one. “Oakleaves” cast a spell over him.
He stared with half-closed eyes at the long drive
that swept upwards and in a half circle above terraced
slopes, widening before disappearing from view. He
thought of the house around the bend where lived the
child Jennifer. At any moment she would run to meet
him and climb in the car beside him and drive with
him to the house. How often they pretended there
was no house, and this was the way to another land.
The drive was a highway to adventures, winding, in


their imaginations, on and on; and the great oaks
shading it were rooted in a valley in an enchanted
land.
He thought of Jennifer as he had first seen her. She
danced ahead of her nurse, running from the shadow
of the trees into sunlight, laughing when he stopped
his car and spoke to her. His smile deepened at the
thought of the friendship that had sprung up between
him, the staid doctor, and the tiny golden-haired child.
Now she was nearly grown-up, but still she kept her
tryst with him when he visited “Oakleaves”.
When she heard the sound of the horn she came
running to meet him at the great iron gates, so that
she might drive with him to the house and enter into
the game he had invented at their first meeting;
driving swiftly one moment, slowly the next, pretend-
ing they were birds flying beneath the trees. It was
spring then, it was spring again, and the branches,
clothed in delicate shimmering green, stretched away
and away into the land of enchantment.
“Where is she?” Once again he sounded the horn.
Then he sat up and stared about him. “What’s hap-
pened to the little imp?” He chuckled: “I know! She’ll
come running from nowhere and spring on the run-
ning board as soon as I start the car. If she wishes to
ride with me, I must insist that she sit beside me
and behave like a young lady should. I must make
her understand that she is growing up.”
He waited a little longer, then, with reluctant sigh,


knocked the ashes from his pipe and started the car.
He did not see a pair of mischievous, blue eyes peeping
from behind a tree, or a pair of long legs running
away through the trees.
Jennifer had a reason for breaking the habit of years.
She was developing a cold and had been told by her
grandmother to go out into the garden for a sunning.
She had no idea the doctor was coming, and when
she heard the familiar sound she thought that he had
been called because of this cold. A little indignant
about being coddled, she decided to hide. The time
had passed when she could count upon the doctor’s
visits being for her grandmother, because her grand-
mother’s health had improved; so there seemed only
one explanation for this unexpected visit.
When the doctor reached the house, Jennifer was
already there. She had slipped through an open french
window into the library, chosen a corner near the
bookshelves and, sitting upon the floor behind an
armchair, was completely hidden. Taking a book from
the shelf, she setded down, intending to hide until the
doctor had gone. She was surprised when he was
shown into the library. Before she had time to come
from her hiding-place, her grandmother walked into
the room.
It was not until she had heard part of the con-
versation that she realized she had overheard something
not meant for her ears.
“I sent for you to ask your advice. I am worried


about the number of London evacuee children the
authorities want me to take. I am willing to do my
share, but it is out of all proportion—it is absurd.
There is Jennifer to be considered, and I feel that I
should take her away.”
“Why not take her to Australia ? . . . She has a right
to know the land of her birth.”
“Australia! You forget about Jennifer’s father and
brother. Nothing would induce me to go there, or let
her meet them, or know about them!”
Jennifer’s heart beat rapidly. A brother and father!
She had always understood that she was an only child
and had lost both parents. For a few moments she sat
quite still, too stunned to move. Dr Berry and her
grandmother stood with their backs to her and went
on talking. Jennifer came to herself, slipped out of
the room unnoticed, and fled up the stairs to her
bedroom. She closed the door, threw herself on to the
bed, and lay staring at the ceiling, wondering and
puzzled.
Why had she never known that she had a brother
and father? Why had she been brought up to think
that her grandmother was her only relative? Why
didn’t she know she was an Australian?
Her thoughts went back to her earliest recollections,
and scenes that had once puzzled her took shape. A
playmate—someone she had thought about, dreamt
about; someone of whom she had come to think as a
dream companion. Games that she had played in her


dreams —a game of racings on a windy day. A tree
with wind-blown foliage sweeping and swishing a
smooth lawn; a game of jumping on to a box and off
it, with sensation of flying. Laughing and breathless,
hair over eyes, tangled and blown by the wind, face
tingling; a race surely! Perhaps a race with the wind?
But always there was someone who held her hand —
the playmate of her dreams. They raced together hand
in hand.
A hand that meant protection, too, when running
over rough ground, and reaching a high fence impos-
sible to scale; when the only way back to somewhere,
was through a small hole near the ground, and squeez-
ing through this, helped by the same hands, to find
huge creatures on the other side. Terror —and protect-
ing arms. She knew that the creatures were cackling
hens; but how small were she and her companion
that they could crawl through a hole meant only for
hens, and how small when these hens could seem so
large ?
But the hands that helped her to safety! Whose
hands? Comforting arms —whose arms?
Jennifer put her hands to her head. Jumbled
thoughts, blurred and incomplete, had always haunted
her. What did it mean? Why had these thoughts
always left her with a sense of loneliness? WTiy had
she so often been homesick? And why homesick for
a home she could not remember, and why lonely for
a brother and father she had never known? Why


should granny have wished to keep the knowledge of
them from her? Perhaps her father had married again;
but her brother! “Brother! ” Jennifer repeated the
words slowly, tears filling her eyes. “I always wanted
a family like every one else, and all I had was a granny.
If Australia wasn’t so far, I’d go by myself and find
them.”


CHAPTER II
DR BERRY
A knock came on Jennifer’s door, and Jane the
parlourmaid called:
“Tea is served. Miss Jennifer! Your grandmother
wishes you to come down.”
“I don’t want any tea, thank you.”
“Aren’t you well, miss?”
“I have a headache.”
Jennifer, conscious of red eyes and not caring to be
seen or questioned, wished to stay in her room, and
when a few moments later her governess knocked at
the door, she said:
“Oh! please leave me alone.”
“Jennifer, I wish to come in.”
“Oh dear! Come in then,” Jennifer said, drying her
eyes hastily.
“Is your cold worse, Jennifer? Can I get you anything
for it?”
“No, thank you. Tell granny I don’t want any tea.
I don’t want to go downstairs, because my cold has
made my eyes red.”


Miss Towers went away, closing the door quietly.
Jennifer settled back on the bed, back to her puzzled
thoughts which, every moment, became more per-
plexed. But another knock disturbed her.
Jennifer sat up quickly as Mrs Denbigh walked into
the room. She was surprised. Her grandmother did not,
as a rule, follow her messages, but expected to be
obeyed without question. Mrs Denbigh was a woman
nearing seventy, with an erect figure and a face
strangely unlined for a women of her age. She had
the expression of one not easily moved but possessing
the power to stir others, a woman who could command
attention wherever she went.
“Is your cold worse, Jennifer?” she inquired.
Jennifer shook her head.
“Dr Berry is here. He will see you.”
“I am not ill.”
“Then you can come down to tea.”
“I don’t want any tea.”
“Surely you would like to see Dr Berry?”
“I am miserable. I don’t want to see any one.”
“If you are miserable, there can be only one reason
for it. You must be sickening for something! An illness
often starts with depression.”
“No, no! I’m unhappy!”
Jennifer’s fits of unhappiness had been a puzzle and
also a source of annoyance to her grandmother, who
treated these moods and all ailments in the same way.
“I will get Dr Berry to see you at once,” she said.


“Please, please don’t! I’m not really ill. My cold is
better already. I’m only miserable.”
“Have you a reason for this unhappiness?”
Jennifer shook her head.
“It is unaccountable. I cannot understand you. You
have everything in the world a girl could wish.” Mrs
Denbigh looked round the luxurious room.
Jennifer’s eyes followed listlessly. The carpet was
her favourite blue; the bright chintzes a delight to her;
the book-case filled with her favourite books meant
many happy hours of reading; expensive toys, left over
from early childhood, were still treasured, because
these had taken the place of playmates. All spoke of
indulgence.
Mrs Denbigh left the room, closed the door and
walked slowly down the wide staircase to the library.
Dr Berry stood staring through an open window. He
turned eagerly—and his face fell when he found that
Mrs Denbigh was alone.
“Jennifer is in one of her moods again,” she said.
“I’d be glad if you’d see her after tea. I thought she
had outgrown these moods. You are the only one who
can do anything with her on these occasions.”
“I think these ‘moods’ as you call them, would never
have occurred if she had had companions of her own
age.” Dr Berry laughed, suddenly remembering why
he had been summoned to “Oakleaves”. “How many
children did you say the authorities insisted on your
having, in the event of London being evacuated ?”


“I intend to close my house and take Jennifer away.”
“Perhaps it would be better to stay here. I think it
would be a great blessing for Jennifer to have young
people about her.”
“They would hardly be companions for Jennifer,”
Mrs Denbigh said slowly. “You know I have always
chosen her companions.”
“Jennifer has always craved playmates—and play-
mates are not chosen, they just happen. Governesses
have been a great mistake. She has needed school and
to be able to choose her own friends.”
“You know I have had very good reasons for keeping
Jennifer away from school. I did not wish her to feel
the difference between herself and other children who
had father and mother, brother and sister.”
“You expected the impossible. A child must feel the
difference, even if not conscious of it. Jennifer has
been a lonely child. You parted her from her twin.
She would at least have had his companionship for
short periods. You thought a child of three would
forget. Twins always miss one another.”
“That is nonsense! She was too young to remember,
and hardly ever spoke of her twin after I brought her
here. Her father would not be deprived of both
children.”
“Can you blame him ? As for forgetting one another
—you brought one child to strange surroundings and
her twin’s name was never mentioned before her.
Naturally she could not talk of something she did not


understand. I’ve always thought it a mistake, and I
am sure that some day you will realize that yourself.
She should have been told about her twin—she could
have built a picture of him which would have been
a satisfactory solution to a sensitive child, deprived of
a companion.”
“Your ideas on this subject always surprise me, and
you know that I shall never forgive my son-in-law.
He consented to my adopting Jennifer legally. I wished
to make sure that my granddaughter would never be
subjected to the kind of existence my daughter had
to experience through his fault—mining towns and
moving from one country to another, living in climates
not fit for women, which I consider caused her death.
He has no claim to Jennifer. He gave her up. That
subject was closed long ago, and he has his son. He
can do what he likes with one child, but not the other.
I thought it my duty to let Jennifer grow up in
ignorance of their existence.”
Dr Berry drank his tea while he listened to Mrs
Denbigh. Now he put the cup down and sighed. He
had so often listened to this before. “I will see Jennifer
at once,” he said.
A few moments later, he knocked on Jennifer’s door
and bustled into her room cheerfully.
“Now, now, Jennifer! What ails you, lass? Where’s
that pain ? Put out your tongue.”
Jennifer put out her tongue, and put it out a little
farther than necessary.


“I’m not ill,” she said. “I’m miserable.”
Dr Berry sat on the bed, taking Jennifer’s hand
gently in his.
“Well, you can tell me exactly what makes you
miserable.”
“NoJ no!” Jennifer shook her head.
“But Jennifer! Jennifer! You have always told Berry
everything and you must do so now,” Dr Berry insisted.
Jennifer did not always have a reason for being
unhappy, but Dr Berry sensed that she had a real
reason now.
“I found out something,” she said; “but it’s a secret
and I can’t tell you.”
“Oh, yes you can! You must tell your doctor every-
thing.”
“It is something I found out by accident. Something
I should not have heard. Oh, Berry! It is very puzzling
—because I heard something that I am sure I have
always had the right to know.”
“Well, well, if you don’t tell me what it is, how do
you expect me to make you feel better? I am sure
there is nothing so bad that it can’t be remedied. I
have a suspicion that I know your secret, and I may
be able to help.”
“Oh, could you?” Jennifer sat up and brushed away
her tears quickly.
“But tell me what ails you first. You know I am
only guessing.”
Dr Berry listened while Jennifer told of how she


had overheard the conversation between her grand-
mother and himself.
“Well, well! It had to come sooner or later. I knew
that some day you would hear about your twin
brother.”
“My twin? Twin!”
Dr Berry nodded.
“I did not know my brother was a twin —that makes
it more puzzling. Why were we parted?”
Jennifer puckered her brow, and sat still, thinking —
all kinds of thoughts raced through her brain. Light
was breaking. She was beginning to understand the
thoughts that had puzzled her for so long.
“That’s why I’ve always been lonely,” she said slowly.
“I remembered someone, but never knew who. Many
times I’ve cried myself to sleep because I was lonely,
and I didn’t know why. And you are the only one
who has ever understood me.”
“I understand you so well that I will find a way to
undo the past. I have not approved of your being
parted from your twin.”
“But why have I never known about my brother
and my father? And why was I taken away from
them?”
“I shall let your grandmother tell you her story,”
Dr Berry said quietly. “And now I am going to see
her.”
Dr Berry got up, looked back again and waved
from the door to a smiling Jennifer, then put his


fingers to his lips and shook his head before disappear-
ing.
Jennifer hugged herself with excitement.
Dr Berry went downstairs feeling that at last he had
a cure for his favourite patient. He was sure, now that
Jennifer knew everything, that Mrs Denbigh would
no longer put an obstacle in the way of allowing the
twins to meet. He felt that, not only his influence—
but the threatened world war, would help in deciding
Jennifer’s fate.


CHAPTER 111
JOHN
Barnsdale School boasted several Houses, most popular
of which was Barnsdale House, to which }ohn
Hogarth was proud to belong.
However, on the day before school was to break
up, he waited outside his House with no thought for
anything but the mail. He waited anxiously for the
postman’s whisde, hoping to hear it before the bell
rang for assembly. He did not notice the beauty of
the old House; its grey walls, creeper-clothed, or the
long drive with trees on either side, that, by repute,
had seen all the pomp and splendour of a glorious
past, when it had belonged to one of the early governors
in Australia.
John had been expecting a letter from his father
daily, but it had not arrived. Surely it would come this
morning, the last day before breaking up. Every one
had made holiday arrangements and it seemed as if
he alone was without plans.
Fretting and fuming, he watched for the postman.
He thought of Teddy Ainsley’s invitation to spend


tfic holidays with him. A sheep station was tempting.
He wondered if he had been foolish to refuse. No,
surely a letter would come to-day.
“It’s not like the old man to let me down,” he
muttered. “His last letter made it plain enough.”
He remembered every word. “I have a surprise for
you,” his father wrote. “I hope we may spend the
holidays together as usual. I will write again giving
full instructions and keep the surprise till then.”
“Hullo, sport! Waiting for your letter? I’m expecting
one —get mine too!” This from Teddy Ainsley, who
hurried past calling over his shoulder: “Bell for
assembly in two seconds.”
John hated the thought of hours of suspense in the
classroom, with the added annoyance of hearing
holiday plans whispered and discussed on all sides.
The chaps with homes were lucky! As far back as he
could remember, the only relative he had ever known
was his father, whose profession of mining engineer
had taken them to many strange places. This had
meant no settled home, no companions of his own
age. It was not until he became a boarder at “Barns-
dale” that he had had real friends.
“I wish I were more like other chaps, with a home
and everything,” he said to himself. “But it’s not any
use kicking about it. Dad has been a great pal.”
He knew, in fact, that he would rather spend his
holidays with his father than any one else. No one
could make life as exciting or interesting. If something


had happened to prevent this holiday—would it be
too late to accept Teddy’s invitation?
The bell rang for assembly.
“Oh heck!” John waited, but he was ready to sprint.
The postman’s whistle came shrill upon the air.
John ran down the drive and, breaking all rules, seized
the letters. He searched through them, scattering many
in his haste, found one for Teddy first, then one for
himself!
“Hooray! Hooray! Here it is!” he shouted, thrusting
the remainder of the letters back into the postman’s
hands, and, leaving him to gather those scattered on
the drive, he dashed to the schoolhouse, arriving
breathless, but in time for assembly. The head was
about to start prayers. John sidled to his place beside
Teddy.
“Got it! Got it! And yours too!” he whispered.
“Give it to me! What’s your news?”
“Here!”—thrusting Teddy’s letter into his hand.
“Haven’t read mine yet. Will read it in recess. Meet
me! If it’s a fishing excursion, will you come?”
“Rather!”
John felt the letter in his pocket many times during
the lesson, making sure it was really there. When the
bell rang he and Teddy were the first out of the
schoolroom. They found a quiet spot behind the
gymnasium. John took the letter from his pocket, but
before opening it looked at the postmark. “Winoona
? Never heard of it.”


“Read yours first!” Teddy said. “Winoona? I’ve
heard of it. Not important enough to be on the map,
though; it’s up north, beyond our place.”
John’s attention was on his letter; he did not notice
this remark, but turned the pages quickly and, reading
here and there, gave little gasps.
“What’s the news?” Teddy said.
“Pretty tough!” John said fiercely.
“What is it? Read it.”
John’s face turned white, then red. His grey eyes
became serious; he raised them slowly and stared in
front of him. “Oh heck!” he said.
“What’s wrong? What’s the news? Cough it up.”
“I’ve got a sister.”
“Well, so have other chaps. I suppose your father’s
married again and you’ve found out you’ve got a
step-sister or something.”
“No, it’s a twin sister!”
It was Teddy’s turn to show surprise.
“How could you? I’ve never heard of one twin not
knowing about the other,” he said. “That’s a bit queer!
Why haven’t you known yours?”
“I don’t know why I haven’t,” John said. “I haven’t
the foggiest idea.”
“Well, look at the letter and find out. Read it aloud.
Perhaps your old man’s pulling your leg.”
“He sounds too deadly in earnest. Listen to this.”
John read aloud: “‘You and I, old boy, have been
together in many odd corners of the world, as my


JOHN
calling has necessitated. We have been through many
troubles, but have always remained good pals. You,
no doubt, thought you knew everything about us,
because we shared every thought ’ ” John coughed.
“Go on!” Teddy said.
“Sounds rather private,” John objected
“Well, you and I share everything as room-mates,
even one another’s secrets, so go on!”
John continued to read: “‘There is one thing, and
one thing only, that I have kept from you, and that
is the knowledge that you have a twin sister ’ ”
“Go on!” Teddy said impatiently. “Don’t look so
tragic. It isn’t murder!”
John read from the letter again: “‘The reason this
knowledge was kept from you is not my fault. Your
grandmother, your mother’s mother, adopted your
sister, making her heiress to a large fortune, on condi-
tion that I gave up all claim to her and did not let
her know of either your or my existence. You and
your sister were not even to know about one another.
Recently, I received a curt letter from your grand-
mother, telling me that she had seen fit to tell Jennifer
everything. She gave no reason for this unexpected
action, or as to why she had changed her mind; so
what I expected never to tell, I am able to tell you
now.’ ”
“Well, that’s all right! You may never see your
sister, and being an heiress makes it handy.”
“Makes it worse,” John said. “But I’m glad I’m not


to be worried by her. Listen to this: ‘I will let you
know if I am able to arrange that you join me for the
holidays. I have a new and interesting appointment,
but something unexpected has occurred, so I will not
give you any details. It may mean cutting out our
holidays together—but don’t give up hope. I will wire
you. The wire may arrive before this letter.’ ”
The boys looked blankly at one another; no telegram
had come. To-morrow all the boarders would be off
for their holidays.
“Come with me,” Teddy said. He opened his letter
and glanced through it. “I’ve got a surprise too,” he
said. “And it means I could not come with you, at any
rate, not at once. My old man will be home for the
holidays. He’s been abroad, you know, and he thinks
terrible things will happen soon. He hurried back
because he thinks there is going to be a war.”
“War!” John said. “Every one thinks that!”


CHAPTER IV
THEIR FATHER
The telegram did not arrive, and had not arrived
when Teddy, one of the last of the boarders to leave the
next morning for holidays, stood waiting for his taxi.
He had delayed his departure till the last moment,
hoping it would come.
“It’s sure to come,” John said over and over again.
The boarders who were going on the train had left
on hour earlier. John, hopeful of being able to start
out too, had his suitcases packed and in the hall, ready
for any emergency. He walked resdessly up and down
the drive, his eyes on the gate, where at any moment
he expected to see a telegraph boy with his belated
telegram.
“Better change your mind and come with me,”
Teddy said as he had been saying for the past hour;
then added, “You’ll get over the shock about your
sister quicker if you do, and the telegram could be
forwarded, if it ever comes.”
“It will come all right,” John said. “The old man
has never let me down.” He was sorely tempted, how-


ever, to accept the invitation. Holidays with Teddy
seemed, at the moment, desirable beyond anything,
for there was every possibility of his being left behind
at the school —the worst thing that could happen to a
fellow. Holidays! He swallowed hard.
“The telegram will come all right,” he repeated.
“I wish I knew where to phone pop. I hope he’s all
right.”
“Sure to be!” Teddy said.
“He did say there might be some hitch in the
arrangements.”
“Well, so long! Here’s the taxi. Good luck! You
know my address if you want to come later.”
John’s heart sank. He should have gone with Teddy,
he thought, as he watched him spring into the taxi.
He waved until it was out of sight and stood wonder-
ing what he would do with the long day ahead of
him.
“Telephone, Mr John!” a housemaid called from
the door.
John rushed to the telephone in the hall and, shak-
ing with excitement, picked up the receiver.
“Hullo!”
“Hullo! That you, John?” A far-away voice came
over the phone. “Had difficulty in getting the con-
nexion, old son. Sorry about the delay. Have you time
to catch the 10.15 north? Book for Winoona.”
“Yes, yes—what? A goldmine!” John shouted.
“You’re manager?— Whoopee!”


His father’s voice died away. John put up the
receiver, took it off again, and dialled the number of
the nearest taxi depot. “Taxi! Barnsdale School! Meet
me outside,” he shouted. He turned to the housemaid:
“Please tell the Head I’m off. I’ve only just time to
catch the train.”
He seized his suitcases, dashed out of the door, down
the steps, sprinting along the drive. He arrived at the
gates just as the taxi drove up.
Heigh, stop! Central Station!” he said, jumping in.
“Step on it—we’ll just make it.”
The taxi driver stepped on it and arrived at the
station three minutes before the train was due to leave.
John dashed to the ticket window, got his ticket, ran
through the turnstile and on to the platform.
“Plenty of time,” the porter exclaimed irritably, as
John hurried into the train, hardly waiting for his
ticket to be examined. He flung his suitcases into the
rack, caught in a medley of struggling boys, all
endeavouring to get to a window where others were
already crowded. The noise was deafening. Leaning
out of the windows, they shouted to their friends at
other windows on the long train. The shrill whistle
and grinding of the wheels, as the train started, added
to the noise, then songs and shouting all along the
train, and they were off. John did not calm down until
the train was well on its way. Then he looked for
Teddy. He found him in the end compartment of the
carriage, deep in a discussion of holiday plans.


‘'Well, my sainted aunt!” Teddy exclaimed when he
saw John. He stared as though John were a ghost.
John’s grey eyes sparkled with suppressed excite-
ment. He was bursting to tell his news, but listened
quietly to the plans of the other boys. He was content
to wait for the right moment to throw his bomb. At
last an opening came.
“What kind of holiday do you think it would be on
a goldmine?” he said.
“Goldmine!” the boys shouted.
“I know the kind I’d have,” Teddy said. “I’d look
for a fortune, and find one, too, and come back with
my pockets bursting with nuggets.”
“Come with me, and the fortune will be yours,”
John said.
“What do you mean?”
“I am spending my holidays on a goldmine.”
“Where?”
“A goldmine!”
Every one’s attention was immediately focused on
John, and there were hints that plans could be changed
if he needed extra help in looking for a fortune. Con-
versation about gold, once started, continued through-
out the long journey. Wild tales were told and
speculation ran high in John’s compartment.
The train travelled fast through level country, puffed
over hills, gathered speed on plains, and no heed was
taken by the boys of the tedious hours. John was the
hero of the moment. He had the farthest to go and


there were farewells at many of the stopping places
on the journey. Every farewell was prefaced with —
“Hope you find a huge nugget. . “I’ll touch you for
a loan later . . or something of tjie kind.
When finally John found himself alone in the train,
he hardly missed his companions, so exciting were his
thoughts, A huge fortune floated before his mind’s eye.
Teddy’s last words rang in his ears: “I’ll be with you
in the fortune hunt,” That pleased him. With Teddy,
his pal, an adventure would be something worth while.
Late in the evening, the train drew into the small
station of Winoona. John found it was little more than
a siding. He had expected something more important
for a goldfield.
A lone figure waited; he knew it was his father. A
tall lean man stepped forward: “Hullo, old son! You
made it all right. It must have been a narrow shave.”
“It was. Great news about your being manager. Any
luck? Struck it rich yet?”
“Don’t you call being manager luck? What else do
you want?”
“A big find—nuggets!” John said.
His father laughed, eyes twinkling. “I’ve hardly got
my bearings as director of affairs, and striking it rich
is not as easy as it sounds.”
John’s first thrill was the new model car his father
led him to, outside the station.
“I say! Is this ours?”
“Yes. As manager of the mine, it belongs to me.”
c


“Is that the mine, over there?” John said, pointing
to where tall cranes loomed against a bright evening
sky.
“Yes, you’ll see it in the morning. Hop in!”
John’s father drove the car away from the mines,
past miners’ dwellings of a type well known to John,
primitive and rough. The country was interesting when
they left these dwellings behind —a rim of blue hills
in the distance, others close by, thickly wooded, falling
away into sharp and rugged cliffs. These spelt romance.
“It’s great, pop. I’d like Teddy to spend the holidays
with us.”
“That will be a bit awkward,” his father replied,
stopping at a house, a little better than the miners’
shacks, except for its position. It stood by itself on a
rise, and commanded a magnificent view of the sur-
rounding country.
“This is our home.”
John had expected something better. Something
more befitting the importance “manager” suggested.
“It is modest,” his father said apologetically.
“Can Teddy come and stay with us?”
“I’m afraid he cannot,” his father replied shortly.
“Did you get my letter telling you about your sister?”
“Yes,” John said uncomfortably. It was a subject he
wished to avoid. “I suppose it won’t make much
difference to us, though, considering she is on the other
side of the world and likely to stay there.”
“I have since had other news,” his father said, “and
it looks as if it is going to be rather a shock to you.”


CHAPTER V
UNWELCOME NEWS
John's mind registered only one fact—Teddy would
not be able to spend the holidays with him. He would
have no one to share his adventure, no one to help
seek a fortune.
“Shock,” he repeated slowly, following his father
into a narrow hall, then into a plainly furnished room.
Nothing could be a worse shock to him than to be
denied Teddy’s companionship for the holidays. He
put his suitcases on a chair and waited for his father
to speak. Mr Hogarth, however, did not speak at once,
but looked around the room as if he saw it for the first
time. It was both living- and dining-room.
“A little cramped,” he said, “and not much room
for visitors.”
“Teddy wouldn’t mind,” John said hastily. “He’s
used to roughing it. Goes out with the boundary-
riders, and camps out for days.”
“I am not referring to Teddy,” his father said, “but
to your twin sister.”
“Why?” John asked.


His father smiled ruefully, ran his hand through his
thick hair, a habit he had when worried. “She is com-
ing to live with us,” he said.
John stared blankly. The full meaning of the word
“shock” came to him.
“Shock!” he said in a low voice. “It’s a knockout!
I thought she was well out of the way on the other
side of the world, and I’d never have to be bothered
with her. Besides, how could she live in a place like
this?”
“That’s what is worrying me,” his father said. “I
am placed in an awkward position. I cannot conceive
why this should happen. You know, John, it has always
puzzled me how completely you forgot your twin
sister. Have you no recollection of her whatever?”
John shook his head.
“You were not quite four when you were parted,
but your devotion to each other was extraordinary. I
thought that parting you would have left so big a
void in your small lives that you’d be bound to have
some memory of each other left.”
“I do not remember her, and I can’t understand why
we were parted.”
“It was a case of needs must when the devil drives.
It was the hardest thing I ever had to do. Your sister
was a winsome little person and was more to me than
even you. However, you know the kind of existence
we have had to lead, and how impossible it would have
been for a little girl, and my only way out was to


accept very hard conditions from your mother’s
mother.”
“Of course a girl couldn’t have roughed it as we
have. It’s a pity my twin wasn’t a boy. Why is she
coming now?”
“The fear of war makes strange things happen. I
imagine your grandmother has made up her mind
to get out of the war-zone while there is still time.”
“Is grandmother going to live with us, too?”
“No, no!” His father laughed heartily. “She is only
bringing Jennifer to us, delivering her safely. She has
other plans for herself. It appears that Jennifer wishes
to meet us, also to live with us. She has decided for
herself that she should be given the choice whether to
live with her grandmother, or us. If she chooses us, it
may mean losing a fortune; but she is determined to
make her own choice.”
John whistled. “It won’t take her long to know,
when she sees the kind of place she’ll have to live in.”
“I think not, I should have liked to warn her, but it
appears that Jennifer’s first idea was to give us a sur-
prise. She would have done so if your grandmother
had not persuaded her against it, and I knew too late
to do anything but accept the situation. They are on
their way now, by car, and should arrive at any time.”
A knock came at the door. John had no time to ask
the many questions that crowded into his mind. A
man’s voice came from the narrow hall, calling, “May


1 come in?” and in walked a short, stocky man, with
a ruddy complexion.
“This is my son,” Mr Hogarth said. “John, this is
Mr Hitchens, head foreman of the mine.”
“Glad to meet you.” Hitchens held out his hand to
John. “Here to learn something about mines?”
John nodded.
“Sorry to worry you, Mr Hogarth,” Hitchens said. “I
want to tell you . . .”
John listened for the next few moments to a conver-
sation between Hitchens and his father, and became
interested when he heard of a lost vein of gold.
“What do you mean by a lost vein?” he inquired.
“There is a gamble in this mining venture,” his father
explained. “At the moment we are getting only small
stuff —no free gold. Our principal aim is to find a lost
vein. Many years ago these fields had a rich vein which
disappeared suddenly —not an unusual happening in
goldmining, but as a rule the vein is located again.
However, although there has been intensive search,
this one has never been found.”
“Could any one look for it?” John asked, thinking
back on his and Teddy’s ideas about a fortune. But
the thought of Jennifer’s visit interrupted this rosy
dream.
“Yes,” his father said. “It has been a long story of
disappointment. Company after company has aban-
doned the search after heavy losses, but now the value
of gold has given fresh impetus to the goldmining


industry. Even silt, which at one time was not worth
the trouble and expense of mining, has a good market
value.”
“When do you look for the lost vein?”
“We are looking all the time,” his father said,
“drilling and tunnelling. At the moment we find only
enough gold to help defray expenses, to pay wages
to the miners. The shareholders want more for their
money, so it is necessary to get something big.
Incidentally, my appointment holds good only if we
are successful.”
“How do you know where to look?” John asked.
“We don’t!” Ronald Hogarth laughed. “But we may
strike it at any moment.”
“Could I do a bit of prospecting myself?”
“Of course you can! And mark out a claim, if it
isn’t owned by the mine.”
John was excited again. What an opportunity, and a
girl—a sister —to spoil his chance of sharing such an
adventure with his best pal.
Hitchens rose to leave and, refusing an invitation
to stay to dinner, said good-bye. But before leaving, he
said to John:
“I’ll take you over the mine in the morning. You
had better learn a few things before you start pros-
pecting yourself.” He laughed and poked John in the
ribs.
“Put your suitcases in your room,” Ronald Hogarth


said and walked to the door with Hitchens. “It’s the
first door to the left!” he called over his shoulder.
John carried his suitcases into the room, which was
small and bare of any luxury, but he was too pre-
occupied with his thoughts to notice this. He walked
to the window and looked out curiously. The moon
had risen. He could see that the house was set on a
small allotment, that bush grew thick and dense as
far as the fence surrounding it.
He saw a dark figure leave the gate and walk
stealthily along the road, keeping close in the shadow
of the scrub that grew thickly along the side of the
road. He recognized the short stocky figure and
wondered at the strange behaviour of Hitchens. Some
distance back from the road, he saw another figure,
and farther still, the glimmer of something white. His
attention was drawn to this, for he could not make out
what it was. He stared curiously.
At first he thought it might be a white horse, or
cattle of some description. But the figure that moved
swiftly with a gliding motion from tree to tree, in
shadow one moment, in the moonlight the next,
puzzled him. He had heard of apparitions! No sooner
had this thought entered his head than hoarse whispers
came from the other side of the fence. “Ghost miner,”
came a muffled shout.


CHAPTER VI
THE PHANTOM
John returned quickly to the sitting-room. His father
walked resdessly up and down the small room, puffing
savagely at his pipe.
“There’s a white figure out there and a couple of
people lurking about. I can’t make out whether it’s a
man or an animal. What can it be?” John said.
Ronald halted a moment, took his pipe from his
mouth, and looked at John, sharply.
“Imagination!” he said irritably.
John was surprised. Here was a mystery —something
to be interested in—something to be thrilled about,
even something to joke about. In all their adventures
together they had not yet struck a ghost.
“But I saw a white figure, and heard someone talk-
ing about a ‘ghost miner’.”
“You must be dreaming. Forget it!” Ronald Hogarth
answered, and closed the subject as though it were
distasteful to him.
This was so unlike his father, who shared all his
adventures and interests, that John was puzzled—and


became more so when he had a silent companion
through dinner. Dinner over, he had another dis-
appointment.
“I’m afraid I have to leave you, John. There’s some
important business I must attend to to-night. Mrs
Brown, our daily help, cannot stay late and leaves as
soon as she has cleared away. She gets here early, in
time to prepare breakfast. You can unpack your things
and have a look round. Don’t wait up for me, I may
be late. Good night!”
John went to the door with his father, stood watch-
ing him as he walked away down the road, and
lingered on the narrow veranda when he was out of
sight. He stared at the rugged hills in the distance
and thought these hills a likely place to find a lost
vein. Then he remembered about Jennifer. She might
arrive before his father returned. What would he do
about it? The thought made him panicky; he wished
his father had not left him to face this ordeal alone.
“What on earth is she coming for?” he said aloud.
“Curiosity! It can’t be anything else. All girls are like
that; can’t mind their own business!”
Then an idea came to him.
“Teddy and I could have a tent,” he thought.
“Miners often live in tents —and then she won’t be
able to worry us.”
He would get his father to agree to this. He became
excited at the thought. Footsteps sounded on the road.
Someone came to the gate.


“Is your father there?” It was Hitchens again. He
panted a little, as if he had been running.
“No! Dad’s gone out! Important business.”
“I’ll come in for a while,” Hitchens said.
John was glad of someone to talk to, and invited
Hitchens into the sitting-room.
John wanted to ask many questions, and found
Hitchens ready to answer them. He learned a great
deal about mines, of the main shaft where they drilled
for gold, tunnelling in all directions, and the winzes
where the waste was dumped.
“But where do you get the nuggets?” he asked.
“We don’t come across many; it’s poor stuff here.
We bring the quartz to the surface to feed the battery
that crushes and washes and sifts it. Fine gold dust is
collected, and that is our product at present.”
John grew to like Hitchens. He was anxious to ask
him a question, and at last screwed up enough courage.
“I say,” he said presently, “was that you running
away from our gate and creeping stealthily along the
road?”
“Yes,” Hitchens replied.
“Were you after that white figure?”
“Yes”
“I heard something that sounded like ‘ghost miner.
There can’t be a ghost. Nobody believes in that kind
of thing.”
“You are quite wrong. There are people who do
believe in it. I am making it my business to prove that


it is not a ghost, but someone who wishes to be mis-
taken for one.”
“I saw someone else, too.”
“Did you?” Hitchens said. “What was he like?”
“I couldn’t say, and it might have been two people.”
“Probably miners. Some of them believe in the ghost,
and some of them, like me, are determined to waylay
whoever it is. Those who believe the ghost story say
that this apparition appears at intervals of years and
always before some kind of disaster comes to the mines.
The men are resdess and it is difficult to keep them
on the job. The unfortunate part of the whole affair
is,” Hitchens continued, “that the apparition is sup-
posed to haunt your house. I think there is a perfectly
natural explanadon of the phenomenon, but in the
meantime I fear for your father’s success here; the men
are beginning to suspect that he is in league with it.”
“Oh!” John said. “I’ll soon tell them that my father
is above anything mean. He’s straight and wouldn’t
do anything wrong. I’ll tell them!”
“I wouldn’t do that, John, for it is only a whisper
among a few ignorant miners. We would do much
more for your father if we could prove that their
suspicions are ill-founded. The way we can do this is
to lay the ghost.”
“That would be more exciting than looking for
gold,” John said, “and more important. I’d like to prove
to the miners that they are barking up the wrong tree
when they suspect my father.”


“You’ll have to go to work very carefully,” Hitchens
warned him; “and I think in the meantime you had
better leave this business to me. I must go now. I think
you’d be safer looking for gold. I’ll see you in the
morning and show you over the mine. Good night.”
John followed Hitchens to the door and stood on
the small veranda again; he was less lonely there than
inside. A few moments after Hitchens left, John saw
the lights of a car approaching along the road, and in
a few seconds the car pulled up at the gate.
“Do the Hogarths live here?” a girl’s voice called,
a voice that John thought affected.
“Yes,” John said, and knew that his twin sister had
arrived.
“Who are you?” the voice called again.
“I am John Hogarth ”
“And I am Jennifer!”


CHAPTER VII
A SURPRISE VISIT
Before John had time to reach the gate, Jennifer
sprang from the front seat of the car. He was sure she
had been at the wheel, and as she ran towards him he
thought: “She’s not old enough to have a licence; she
has no right to be driving.”
A slight figure ran up the path to meet him, and
the next moment a pair of arms were flung around
him and he heard the voice he had thought affected,
but which he now found to have a joyous ring and a
depth of sincerity that held him.
“Isn’t it exciting about being twins?”
John grunted an unintelligible and embarrassed
“Yes,” and pulled himself away from the impulsive
arms.
“Fancy finding you’ve got a family when you think
you’re an orphan!”
“Orphan!” John repeated. “What about father? And
you had granny!”
“Granny—she does not make me not an orphan.


And of course it wasn’t so bad for you, you were only
half an orphan—you had a father. Where is he?”
“Oh, he’s out. You’d better come in.”
He glanced at the car. “What about grandmother,
won’t she come in, too?”
Jennifer laughed. “Grandmother! Why, she’s in bed.
We stopped at an hotel thirty or forty miles away.
Granny wouldn’t come on because it was too late, but
I couldn’t wait, and I persuaded Drummond to let me
drive over.”
“You didn’t drive yourself?” John’s voice showed
the surprise he felt.
“Of course I did! Drummond came too. He’s our
chauffeur, but he’s always nervous when I drive, so I
made him sit in the back seat.”
“But !” John exclaimed, “you’re not allowed to
drive in this country until you’re old enough to get a
licence.”
“I know, but Drummond has let me drive for years.
Granny doesn’t know.”
“He takes a risk here.”
“Oh no! He knows what I can do. He trusts me,
and has been with granny ever since I can remember.
Driving granny to pay calls isn’t very exciting for a
chauffeur, and sitting outside in the car waiting and
waiting, so sometimes when I went too, and it was a
quiet place without any traffic, he taught me how to
drive and I learned quickly.”
“Not bad for a girl to be able to drive a car. I’ve


never had a chance,” John said enviously. “I could, of
course, if I had the chance.”
“Oh, let us look at the ducky little house! I knew
it would be like this, just big enough for me to look
after.”
“You! Why, it’s an awful dump. You’ll hate it.
You’ll soon notice the difference to the way you’re
used to living.”
They went inside and John led Jennifer to the
sitting-room. She looked round.
“I could make it look better with a few bright
cushions,” she said, anxious to hide her shock.
She took off her coat and threw it on the chair.
John noticed her dress. It was short, but an elaborate
affair a girl would wear to a party. “I always have to
dress for dinner. Granny makes me,” Jennifer said
apologetically.
John noticed her height. She was tall and slender.
She had a mop of hair that curled naturally. A pair
of sparkling blue eyes smiled mischievously at him.
“Well, we are a little bit alike, aren’t we?” She
looked at him intently. “But I thought twins were
exactly alike—that no one would be able to tell us
apart.”
“You couldn’t expect that, seeing that you’re a girl
and I’m a boy. And I can’t see that there’s very much
likeness between us.”
“I’ve got something to tell you, John. Perhaps you’d
better not tell father until granny sees him.”


“What is it?”
“I’ve decided to leave granny for ever.”
“What for?” John’s voice was not enthusiastic
“Because I had to make a choice between a fortune
and a family. I chose the family.” Jennifer’s voice was
triumphant.
“Well!” John did not try to disguise his disappoint-
ment. “You’ll probably be sorry for that. We haven’t
much to offer; we never have a proper home, and you’ll
be poor.”
Jennifer bit her lip. She had expected to be ap-
plauded.
“What’s the good of money when you’re always
bored ? I’ve wanted a near relation all my life. Grannies
don’t count; they’re too remote,” she said.
“Doesn’t she mind?”
“Of course she does! She’s furious.”
“But she could have stopped you, because she is
your proper guardian. Dad gave you up. He told me
so.”
“I know, but—it was cruel!” Jennifer’s voice broke
and there was a pathetic note in it as she went on:
“But I have found a way to make granny realize she
should allow me to choose for myself.”
John was at a loss. Here was his sister calmly arrang-
ing her life to suit herself, regardless of any one else’s
feelings. He felt resentful. She could not know what
she was doing, calmly throwing away a fortune just


at the time when he, himself, planned to find one. It
was ridiculous!
“Girls are queer,” he thought.
“Aren’t you glad that I’m going to live with you,
that you have a sister instead of being an only child?”
Jennifer asked.
“Well, it makes things a bit awkward,” John said.
Jennifer’s cheeks flamed suddenly, then the colour
died down, leaving her pale. “Show me the rest of
the house,” she said.
“I suppose this will be your room,” John remarked
as he showed her his bedroom. “I’ll share dad’s across
the hall.”
“I’m sorry to crowd you out, but it’s too late to
change my plans.”
They peeped into the room which was a little larger
than John’s, and plainly furnished.
“That’s all,” John said, “except for the veranda that
goes half way round the house, and there’s a kitchen
off the sitting-room.”
Jennifer was silent; she was too much at a loss to
know what to say. She had expected a different wel-
come, dreamed of this meeting as the most wonderful
thing. When they returned to the sitting-room, she
perched herself on the table and swung her legs non-
chalantly—although she did not feel like this at all.
She found it difficult to hide her disappointment.
“We’ll be quite comfortable here,” she said. “We


could have a blue carpet instead of linoleum; new
curtains and some new furniture.”
John whisded. “Were not likely to,” he said. “You
never know how long dad will be here. We are never
in one place for long, and I am at boarding-school,
and we can’t waste money.”
“You don’t seemed to be very thrilled about things,”
Jennifer said.
“I am about some things.” Jennifer knew instinc-
dvely that she was not one of the things he was
enthusiastic about. “There are lots of things to be
thrilled about. There’s a chance of a fortune if I find
the lost vein of gold—at any rate, I’m sure to come
across some nuggets when I do a bit of prospecting.
My pal, Teddy, is coming to stay with us. Dad thinks
there isn’t enough room in this house, so I’m going to
ask if we can have a tent in the back yard.”
As Jennifer listened, she became jealous of Teddy.
John had not missed her because he had Teddy, who-
ever he was.
“I meant that you’re not very thrilled about me and
finding you’ve got a twin.”
“Well ” John said slowly.
Jennifer sprang from the table; her blue eyes changed
their expression, lost their sparkle for a moment.
“At any rate, I have a right to choose. I was too
young to protest when father decided to give me up,
and now that I’m old enough, I am allowed to make
my own choice. Granny will bring me to-morrow and


I know she will try to persuade father not to let me
stay. Promise not to tell him you’ve seen me! Promise
—promise!” She spoke fiercely and for a moment tears
gathered in her eyes. She shook her fair head, held
her chin up and hastily brushed away the tears. Then
she ran quickly from the house.
John followed. The sound of an engine, and the car
started before he reached the gate. He heard voices.
“You’ve got to let me drive, Drummond!”
Then a firm voice: “No, Miss Jennifer, I’ll drive
back.”
He heard Jennifer’s voice raised in protest as the
car drove away.
“She’s a bit of a tiger,” John said to himself, but he
remembered the tears hastily brushed away.


CHAPTER VIII
THE MINE
John returned to the house as soon as Jennifer went
away, and went to bed. It was a great relief to
him that Jennifer had gone again, if only until the
next day. It gave him time to get his bearings, and to
get used to the idea of having this superior being for
a sister. He could not sleep, but lay awake thinking
about her, tossing and turning this way and that. Why
should she talk so calmly about throwing away a
fortune, and just at a time when he was planning to
find one? Why should she spoil his life as well as
her own? She had managed to spoil his holiday
already. It would be nothing without Teddy. He would
like to show her a thing or two! Suppose he should
find this lost vein, this important thing for their father’s
success. It would enable him to lord it over her, just
a little bit, and enable him and his fadier to give her
all that she thought she could do without. That would
be something! These thoughts restored his self-esteem,
and he was just lulling himself to sleep with them


when suddenly he became wide awake. The thought
of that white, elusive figure had come to him.
“Ghost miner!” he heard in imagination.
That was his job. A mystery that had to be cleared
up. Hitchens’s story worried him; he became indig-
nant. How dare the miners suspect his father? He
tossed and turned. It seemed hours before sleep came.
He dozed, became conscious of voices, but the voices
became part of his dreams and he knew nothing more
until morning. He sat up in bed. Perhaps the voices
he had heard meant Jennifer was back again. How-
ever, when he went in to breakfast his father greeted
him:
“Hullo, son! Had a good night?”
“Fair,” he answered, and remembering his sister’s
request did not mention Jennifer’s visit, but remarked
casually: “When do you expect Jennifer? You said
they were on their way.”
“They are, but I understand your grandmother
intends to do a little sightseeing and to stay where
fancy takes her. Expect them any time in the next
few days.”
“Couldn’t a couple of fellows pitch a tent at the side
of the house?” John asked.
A step on the veranda and a voice calling, “May I
come in?” interrupted the conversation. It was
Hitchens again. This time he accepted an invitation
to a meal and joined John and his father at breakfast.
The conversation between Hitchens and Ronald


Hogarth was centred upon the day’s work, and John
had no further chance for questions. Directly after
breakfast they drove to the mine. .
A clear sky and a fresh morning intensified the blue
of the distant hills, but John’s interest was on the land-
scape scarred with mining activity. He had seen many
mines, but a goldmine never lost its romantic interest.
Arriving at the mine, he found Hitchens ready to
answer questions and show him over it.
“Can I go down the shaft?’’ John asked, as he
watched the men descend.
“Certainly, son!”
They stood waiting for the cage that descended the
main shaft, and Hitchens pointed to the drills at work.
“See those drills? That’s how we tunnel. The
quartz is brought to the top in buckets and deposited
at the battery, ready to be crushed.
“I’d like to see the battery working!” John exclaimed,
walking towards the huge machine. It crushes the
stuff almost to powder, he remarked, staring at a grey
deposit pouring into a tank-like compartment through
which water constandy flowed.
“That is where the gold is washed out after the
machine crushes the quartz.” Hitchens pointed lower
down still. “See it?”
John was fascinated by the fine grey deposit that
collected on the iron plates.
“Is that gold?” he said, disappointed that it was the


wrong colour. “Don’t you get nuggets with the
quartz?”
“When we do,” Hitchens said, “we ll know we’ve
found the lost vein.”
John whistled. He felt helpless and very small
indeed, when he looked at the huge machinery that
drilled and bored the mountain slopes. How could
he dream of out-rivalling this great machine? How
small would be his search compared with this. But
after all, the adventure counted, especially sharing it
with a pal. To find a nugget —what a thrill!
“The cage has come back”—Hitchens interrupted
his thoughts. “Come on!”
John had been warned to wear old clothes, and when
he got below with Hitchens, he knew why. Hitchens
led him* into side tunnels, holding a candle to show
the way. The tunnels were small and he had to stoop,
and was soon covered with clay.
“Gee! It’s exciting,” he exclaimed.
He had a thrilling half hour as he followed Hitchens.
They returned to the main shaft from each tunnel.
“The tunnels don’t go far,” John said.
“Testing tunnels,” Hitchens explained. “Don’t for-
get that we are looking for the lost vein.”
When they reached the surface again John wandered
around by himself, keenly interested in the surround-
ings, forgetting everything but the mines—even his
annoyance about Jennifer’s decision to live with them.


He watched the miners, then he overheard a conversa-
tion between two of them.
“Did you see the ghost miner last night, Bill?” one
man said.
John turned quickly and noticed a quick warning
glance pass between the men.
“I saw him too,” John said quickly.
“Near your house,” the man said.
There was a contemptuous tone in his voice. John
felt uncomfortable and added: “I suppose it’s someone
playing a hoax.”
The men grunted in reply.
“Surely you couldn’t believe that it’s a real ghost!”
“You had better ask your father. Hadn’t he, Dave?
He knows more about it than we do.”
John clenched his hands. How he would like to
punch the man. He found it difficult to keep his
temper.
“My father has not been here long enough to know
everything that happens, and if one of the miners likes
to play a practical joke it’s up to someone to put a stop
to it. And I mean to try.”
The two men left off work for a moment and looked
at John, then burst into shouts of laughter.
“You’ll find you are not quite so smart as you think
you are,” they said.
John thrust his hands deeply into his pockets; then
sauntered away with as casual an air as possible. He
wanted to fight these men. Their manner, which left


him in no doubt as to their attitude, made his other
problems seem small indeed, and it did not matter
to him now whether he had Teddy for the holidays
or Jennifef to spoil them. His father’s reputation was
at stake.
“I’ll find out about this ghost, and I’ll show them!”
he said fiercely.


CHAPTER IX
JENNIFER ARRIVES
John returned to the house, expecting to find Jennifer.
The travellers, however, had not arrived when he and
his father sat down to the evening meal. He noticed
that his father was tired, absent-minded and not in
his usual jocular mood. He decided not to mention
the miners’ behaviour, and talked instead on the sub-
ject that he really wished to avoid.
“I wonder when Jennifer will be here! I thought she
might have arrived to-day.”
“I did not think so,” his father said. “But I think
she should be here to-morrow.”
“I wonder why girls get such queer ideas?” John
said in a tone of exasperation.
“I suppose hearing of a brother and father for the
first time in her life must have been exciting for the
young lady. And when you come to think of it, it is
rather a natural curiosity that she wishes to see us. She
has to make a decision, you know.” Ronald smiled in
his old whimsical way. “As far as I can see, she is a
young person who likes her own way and your grand-


mother, as I remember her, was a woman of iron will.
She disliked the opposite sex, including us, of course,
and that is why she wanted Jennifer and not you. But
it amuses me to read between the lines of her letters
that she has met her match in the child she moved
heaven and earth to adopt.”
“If grandmother didn’t like you, why did you let
her adopt Jennifer?”
“It was a difficult situation. I’ll tell you everything
one day. One deciding factor, however, was that I
could not deny Jennifer the advantages that your
grandmother offered her.”
“I can’t make out what’s made granny change her
mind.”
“Jennifer may have found out by accident and
probably gave your grandmother no peace until she
knew the truth. I think the whole thing a girlish
whim.”
“You don’t think she’ll stay long, do you?”
“I should not think so. How could she prefer this
to a beautiful old English home? It is ludicrous even
to think such a thing. I only wish I could give Jennifer
a home and some little luxury and comfort. Nothing
in the world would make me happier than to have her
live with us.”
“I suppose the length of her stay will depend upon
how long she can stand roughing it?”
“Jennifer is a very important young person. She is to


inherit her grandmother’s wealth, and has been brought
up with ideas to suit these expectations.”
John smiled and thought it would soon be his father’s
turn to receive a shock. “What a pity we didn’t meet
her in Sydney and explain about this place,” he
remarked.
“That’s not Jennifer’s idea,” his father answered.
“She first planned to surprise us. I told you your
grandmother thought better of it. Jennifer evidendy
wants to know us as we are, and thinks the only way
to do that is to live wi!h us.”
“It’s a bit ridiculous! She’ll soon get fed up.”
“The child has no idea of the conditions in this
country and this will be a shock to her,” Ronald
Hogarth went on. “I would rather that her stay with
us had been under different conditions. But it will be
wonderful to see my little girl again. I have tried not
to think of her in all these years. She was a winsome
little creature —you both were —and I never saw two
children so devoted.”
“I hope we’ll find out about the ghost miner before
she arrives,” John said, a little embarrassed and anxious
to change the subject.
“It hasn’t taken long for you to hear that story,” his
father said irritably. “And please, John, close your ears
to that kind of gossip and talk. Ghost miner! Some of
these men are using the idea for their own purpose,
but what that purpose is, I have not yet found out.”
“But ” John began.


The horn of a car sounded loudly, interrupting John’s
words.
“Who’s that?” Ronald said, jumping to his feet and
walking to the front door.
John followed. They saw a car at the gate; a dignified
old lady peered through a lorgnette, out of the side
window.
“Good heavens! Your grandmother!” his father said.
“I’d have known her anywhere; she has not changed
in the slightest in all these years.”
They hastened to the car. It was a large limousine
and seemed to dwarf the tiny house. Mrs Denbigh
stared at the house through her lorgnette and the house
seemed, to John, to shrink to meaner proportions as she
gazed. Before any one had time to exchange greetings,
the car door flew open and Jennifer sprang from it, ran
to her father, and threw impetuous arms about his neck.
“Father!”
“Jennifer!” Ronald said delightedly, holding her at
arm’s length. “What a great big girl! This is your
brother John.”
“Hullo John!” Jennifer said and kissed him.
John greeted her and neither of them showed any
sign that they had met before. Jennifer talked quickly
and exclaimed in terms of delight over her surround-
ings. John was bewildered; she seemed to be acting a
part. He did not realize that her enthusiasm was to
cover her grandmother’s obvious scorn of the house,
its inmates and its surroundings.


John held out a dutiful hand to his grandmother,
who took it and said coldly: “How do you do, John?
You have very little resemblance to the small boy I
remember.” Then, turning to her chauffeur who stood
beside the car, she said: “Drummond, you need not
bring the suitcases to the house. Miss Jennifer will
probably change her mind.”
As she turned and walked towards the house with
Ronald, Jennifer said to Drummond:
“Take the suitcases in, Drummond. I’ll never change
my mind —never!”
When John heard this, he had an unaccountable
glow of pleasure, but was a little embarrassed when
Jennifer squeezed his arm and whispered:
“Oh John, here I am! Aren’t you glad? Isn’t it
exciting?”


CHAPTER X
DRUMMOND
John looked at Drummond, the chauffeur, and felt a
little awed by the way he stood to attention beside the
car. The smart uniform gave him a grand appearance.
It was a relief to see him relax a little as Mrs Denbigh
walked away, and to hear him speak in a natural voice
and smile when Jennifer ran after her grandmother
with her handbag.
“She is a wonderful litde lady,” he said, “and beg-
ging your pardon, sir, I see a great likeness between
you.” The smile widened and John felt that Drum-
mond was prepared to like him. “I have known Miss
Jennifer all her life,” Drummond continued. “I might
even say I’ve helped to bring her up. A bit of a pickle
she’s been at times, but on the whole very easy. It’s
her loving nature. Every one takes a fancy to her. She
has a way of getting her own way, and of making every
one think that her way’s the right way, too.”
“You taught her to drive pretty well,” John re-
marked.
“She’s taught herself. She can ride too, and I’ll
guarantee she can sit any horse,”


“Ride a horse!” John said aloud, and to himself
‘What next?”
John tried to show indifference, but he was a little
jealous of Jennifer; she seemed to possess all the
accomplishments he had always attributed to his own
“I’d like to know how to drive,” he said, “but I have
never had a chance to learn.”
Jennifer returned in time to hear John’s last words,
and said impulsively to him:
“Would you like a lesson now?”
“Rather!”
“Jump in, sir,” Drummond said. “There is time for
a short run before it gets too dark. Perhaps you would
not mind driving towards the mine; I have never seen
one and am very interested.”
The “sir” made John feel important. He drew him-
self to his full height. “Certainly,” he said.
“I’ll come too,” Jennifer said. “I don’t want to stay
and listen to granny.”
She jumped into the back of the car and leant
forward, her elbows on the back of the front seat.
John climbed in beside Drummond who drove away
towards the mines. It was John’s turn to talk. He
talked about mines, airing his newly acquired know-
ledge. He spoke of the lost vein, then described the
battery, the pneumatic drills, cyanide washing. . . .
It was dusk when they reached the mine. They
could not go close, but were able to see the machinery


looming high. John explained how the machinery
worked. On the return trip Drummond allowed him
to sit in the driver’s seat and gave him a driving lesson.
“You’d learn to drive in no time,” Jennifer said, and
Drummond said: “You’ve certainly got the right idea,”
“Yes, but it’s not much good,” John replied. “It will
be a few years before I’ll be allowed to have a licence.
Still, it’s useful to know how.”
They arrived back at the house and entered the
sitting-room just as Mrs Denbigh rose to leave. She
turned to Jennifer: '
“Well, Jennifer! What have you decided to do? You
can see the conditions under which you will live. It
may be a proper place for your father and brother,
who are men, but it will be very terrible for a girl.
I think you had better postpone your visit to them
until they are in another home.”
“I mean to stay,” Jennifer said in a low voice.
The grandmother rapped her walking stick upon the
floor.
“Jennifer! You are just being obstinate. It is non-
sense. I wish I had not listened to Dr Berry’s advice.
However, I give you one week and expect that by
that time you will have had enough. Good night to
all of you! Drummond —help me!”
Mrs Denbigh walked to the door, refusing help
from any one except her chauffeur, and a few minutes
later the car drove away and every one gave a sigh
of relief.


“What does she mean by ‘Dr Berry’s advice’?” John
asked.
“Dr Berry —he is always on my side,” Jennifer said.
“I guessed that,” her father said. “It appears to me
diere are only two people your grandmother heeds —
one, the family doctor, and the other, Drummond.
I can gather that Drummond slyly drops words of
wisdom and she does not realize she is influenced by
him. The doctor, she obeys on the subject of health.
His advice was to let Jennifer come and live with us,
and to allow her to make her own decision, suggesting
that die experiment would bring her to her senses,
and the change improve her health.”
“He’s on my side, although granny doesn’t know it,”
Jennifer said. “She doesn’t always take his advice, either.
He thought I should attend school instead of always
having governesses and tutors, and he told her so, but
granny has stupid ideas about bringing up children
and wouldn’t let me. So I had to have governesses and
private lessons for everything. No classes.”
“Your grandmother always had her own ideas about
everything.”
“A bit trying to live with, I should say,” John said,
although he still did not understand how his sister
could calmly throw away so much in exchange for so
little. His father evidently felt the same, for he said:
“It is a pity that you made the break, for your
grandmother tells me she had planned to send you to a
finishing school in Switzerland now that you are at the


right age, and it seems to me, Jennifer, that you are
throwing away a chance that you will regret later.”
Jennifer ran to her father and threw impulsive arms
around his neck.
“This is better than an old school in Switzerland,”
she said. “Besides, every one thinks there is going to
be a war, and it’s too late now for granny to make up
for all the mistakes she’s made. She wouldn’t even let
me have the friends I wanted: she chose them all.”
“Well! we’ll see. Your grandmother now knows
she has made a mistake, but she is willing to make
up for it. I think she has been afraid of losing you if
she allowed you away from her. She thought you
could take the place of her own child. There is some
excuse for her, for your mother was the only thing
she held dear in life.”
“It should have made her more understanding,”
Jennifer said, setting her mouth firmly.
“What made her tell you about us?” John asked.
“She decided she never would.”
“She didn’t tell me! I overheard her mention your
names to Dr Berry, I had never heard of you before.
It was a shock to me and I hated granny for deceiving
me. Twins should never be separated. I know they
shouldn’t.”
“I’ll show you your room and take your suitcases in,”
John said, anxious to change the subject.
Jennifer entered the small room. She had given it a
hasty glance the night before. Now she swallowed


hard. It was worse than she had expected. However,
she was determined not to worry about it. She was
with the brother and father whom she had longed to
know. She had her wish, and nothing else mattered.
She unpacked a few articles, found places for them
and left the rest of her things in her suitcases. When
she returned to the sitting-room, she found John busy
with odd jobs.
“May I help?” she inquired.
“Thanks, nothing to do,” he answered. “Mrs Brown
leaves everything ready.”
“John has learned to do things,” Mr Hogarth said.
“We have always roughed it together.”
They sat talking for a long time after the meal
was over. Jennifer told them about the sea voyage and
her first sight of Australia, and what she thought of
it. Ronald Hogarth told them about their early child-
hood, which, it appears, was spent in South Africa.
“You were the strangest little pair,” he said. “Mis-
chievous!” He whistled. “And when you were up to
the worst devilment, you used to sit back to back. It
was nothing for you to take a clock to pieces, and I
have a vision of you with the springs wound round
both of you as you played with the rest of the works.”
“Did we ever play on a green lawn, near a tree that
swept the ground?” Jennifer asked.
“The pepper-tree! You remember that? Well, I
never!”


“Did we ever run across that lawn and jump on to
a box?”
“You did, you witch, and how you made me
laugh, and it was a time when laughter did not come
easily. It was just after I lost your mother ”
“Why did you laugh?” Jennifer asked hastily.
“Because it was supposed to be a hurdle race with
your brother; you jumped on to the box instead of
over it.”
“And that’s what’s always worried me. How simple!”
Jennifer said.
“I don’t remember,” John said. “How would you
like me to show you over the mines in the morning?”
he asked.
“I’d love it,” Jennifer said and, noticing that John
eyed her clothes, she added quickly: “I have riding-
breeches; I could wear those.”
Her family nodded approval and warned her to be
up early.
“You had better be off to bed now,” her father sug-
gested. “You’ve had a long day and you’ll need to be
up early.”
Jennifer kissed both her father and brother good
night, and John was a little embarrassed by this show
of affection.


CHAPTER XI
SIMON
When Jennifer awakened, she looked around the tiny
room, first at the small window and then at the wooden
walls.
“It’s a kind of log cabin,” she said to herself. The
idea consoled her. It reminded her of the kind of
adventure that Berry invented to amuse her —adven-
tures imagined, but which she had felt to be real.
Jumping out of bed, she flung on her dressing-gown
and went in search of the bathroom. The bathroom
she found even more primitive than her bedroom, and
the bath was iron and rusted in parts. There was a
shower over the bath, and she decided to risk only
this. She stepped gingerly into the bath and turned
on the tap. A miserable spray of water fell upon her
shoulders.
“It’ll do me good,” she thought. “Of course there
must be a drought and a water famine —that is always
happening in this land. I shall have to get used to
very little water; it’s rather exciting, really.”
Returning to her bedroom she unpacked riding-


breeches and shirt, ready to wear, and dressed hastily.
When she appeared at the breakfast table later, she
was pleased to notice approval in John’s eyes. Her
father laughed and teased.
“Where’s your steed?”
“I suppose I could hire a horse from somewhere
about here?” she asked eagerly.
“Not the kind you would like to ride,” John replied.
“Of course, I forgot! Scarcity of water —no feed! I
wouldn’t expect a horse!”
John opened his eyes and his mouth to speak, but
Jennifer chatted on and on. Direcdy after breakfast
they set out for the mines.
Both Jennifer and John sat in the front seat beside
their father, who talked to them as he drove, laughing
in his old gay way. He often glanced at Jennifer with
pride and affection in his eyes. He pointed to the
scenery, clear-cut against the blue sky.
“Isn’t that wonderful? Did you ever see such a sky?”
“It makes me feel as if I had floated away in a soap
bubble high up in the sky, with all the iridescent
colours making the scenery,” Jennifer said.
“It’s a good description, but, alas! the little bubbles
burst and down we come to earth.”
“Of course!”
“Here we are! And here’s Hitchens!”
Hitchens came forward as the car drew up at the
mine.
“My word, the family is getting larger,” he said. “I


suppose you, young lady, would like to see over the
mine, too?”
“I should love it,” Jennifer said. “Do you think I
could go right down into it, right under the earth?”
And turning to her father —“That will break the bubble
quickly!”
“Yes, it will! Wouldn’t you like to stay in it a little
longer?”
Jennifer shook her head. “No, I love adventures.”
She carried her hat, and her hair shone like spun gold.
Several of the miners stared at her and spoke to one
another as she passed; others smiled and touched their
hats.
Hitchens said: “You must pardon them if they stare,
Miss Hogarth. They do not often see your sex in these
surroundings and they are for ever looking for lucky
signs. I do believe the colour in your hair —the colour
they dream of night and day—catches their fancy.
They do not mean to be rude.”
Not only the gold in Jennifer’s hair caught the
miners’ attention, but the charm of her ways, her
keen interest in everything. They were all anxious to
talk to her, to tell her about the mine, and to explain
everything to her. John noticed this and compared
it with the surliness the two called Dave and Bill had
shown towards him. He noted a decided change in
their manners when they addressed his sister.
Hitchens offered to take them down the mine, and


they descended the shaft, deep into the earth. Jennifer’s
exclamations caused amusement.
“It’s thrilling!” she said on the way down, and as
she stepped from the cage, she said it again. The
miners used candles, and the first thing she said was:
“They look like glow-worms. There should be
gnomes and dragons, too! I thought that miners
worked with electric light!”
“They do, in the coalmines where they get power
from the coal, but in goldmines, of course, there is no
power.
“I never thought of that. The candles make it more
fascinating.”
Hitchens acted as guide and led the way into different
tunnels. He showed them how the tunnelling was done
and explained many things. He was constantly amused
by Jennifer’s remarks, and surprised at the intelligent
interest she took in her surroundings.
“You’ll be a miner, too,” he said. “I’ve heard of
women miners, way up in New Guinea.”
“But all the work is done by blacks up there,” John
said.
“Yes, but the natives have to be directed, and I
believe women direct the natives better than men do.”
“I’d like to go to New Guinea and see the mines,
Jennifer said.
“You’d better see this one first,” Hitchens said,
laughing, and leading the way to yet another tunnel.


“One thing at a time.” This tunnel led them back to
the cage.
“Come, now! Up top again, and you can look
around above ground,” he said.
They crowded into the cage, and when they reached
the top Hitchens left them. “I must get to work now,
but you may look round up here. Cheerio!”
“Thank you ever so much,” Jennifer called as he
walked away. “It has been awfully interesting.”
“You are welcome,” Hitchens called back, and
waved his hand.
“Oh, you’re a pretty sight!” John said, looking at
Jennifer. “You’re covered in clay.”
“And so you are!”
They both laughed. “Come over here,” John said,
leading the way towards the battery. They stood and
watched how the quartz was crushed into thin powder
and washed. They knew this grey substance to be
gold. Then they went farther afield. John thought he
saw a shaft in the distance and questioned a miner at
work close by.
“Is that a shaft over there, Tom?” he said, pointing
to it.
“Yes!” Tom answered. “If you go over there, don’t
walk on the timbers; they are rotten with age. It needs
re-timbering.”
“We may as well look at it,” John said to Jennifer.
They walked away from the mining activity and
wandered off towards the old shaft, chatting and talk-


mg. When they neared it, they heard a sound and
paused to listen.
“What’s that?” The sound of music on a goldmine
seemed out of place! “I believe it is an accordion,”
Jennifer said.
They walked towards the sound and presendy came
upon a queer looking shanty. The shanty was built
beside the old shaft—it had a rusty old iron roof, walls
of bark, and a piece of bagging for a doorway.
An old man, with a long white beard and white hair,
sat in front of the shanty playing an accordion. When
he saw John and Jennifer, he stopped playing and
beckoned to them.
“What a strange looking old man. Do let’s talk to
him,” Jennifer said.
“He looks like a prospector.”
As they approached the old man, John called: “Any
luck?”
“No, no!” the man shook his head. “The ghost miner
was about again last night. Can’t expect any luck.”
“A ghost!” Jennifer laughed.
“Do you know anything about this ghost?” John
said seriously, and glanced quickly at Jennifer. “I want
to hear more of this,” he whispered.
“Of course I know,” the old man nodded. “I know
all about the ghost miner.”
“Ghost miner!” John repeated.
“Tell us about the ghost,” Jennifer said, sitting down
on the ground, “I love ghost stories.”


“This isn’t a joke,” John said.
John asked the strange looking person many ques-
tions, and Jennifer listened, amazed by the conversa-
tion. Looking around she wondered that any one could
think of ghostly things under so bright a sky. She
had never seen a landscape so clearly cut; the noonday
sun cast no shadows.
“The ghost miner was abroad last night,” she heard
the quavering voice of the old man say. He is the
ghost of £n old miner, Amos Turner, who died a long
time ago. He had been hiding gold for years, piling
it up somewhere. He died and left it in its hiding-place.
And it is he who haunts the place. He still searches.
When his ghost goes wandering, things always happen.
Bad luck follows—bad luck comes to the mine. I’d
like to know where this gold is hidden. It would mean
a fortune. Don’t tell any one I told you about it.
John listened intendy. The old man might put him
on to some clue. He felt sure that someone was
impersonating this ghost; someone had a reason for
wishing it to be thought that the real ghost was about.
He was puzzled about hidden gold. Lost veins and
nuggets were natural to goldmines, but hidden gold!
Why, the drilling and the dredging, even the pick
and the shovel, would have unearthed the hiding-place
long ago.
“Can you tell me if there is any special place the
ghost haunts?” he asked.


“No, it may be anywhere. He’s always looking for
the hidden gold. He looks in strange places.”
Hidden gold! Hidden gold! John was puzzled.
“Why did he hide the gold?” John said.
“Because it was gold that did not belong to him.
He was a miner, working for owners.”
“Oh, and the one who finds it will have a fortune?”
“Wouldn’t it still belong to the owners?”
“Yes, so it’s no use looking for it,” the old man
said, glancing suspiciously at the two young people.
“Good-bye!” Jennifer said, jumping up. “I do hope
you find the hidden gold.” She smiled. The old man
smiled too, then picked up his accordion and played
again.
“He knows how to play,” Jennifer said.
She was fascinated by the quaint old man.
“I hope you have luck, soon!” she called as she
followed John.
“Thank you! Thank you! Come and see old Simon
again. It’s a sight for sore eyes to see a young lady.
You are the first I have seen on these mines.”


CHAPTER XII
THE GHOST MINER
On the way home, John told Jennifer about the
apparition he had seen the first night of his arrival.
“How strange!” she said. “It’s no wonder some of
the miners think it a real ghost. The old man made
me feel creepy and I nearly believed the story myself.
“I think some of the miners, knowing the story, are
playing a trick on the others, but it beats me why
they should use it against dad and try to ruin him,
“Ruin dad? What do you mean?” Jennifer ex-
claimed.
“I don’t know exacdy, except that they make out
that the ghost is seen near our house, and that dad
has some kind of dealings with it.”
“Rather stupid,” Jennifer said thoughtfully, “and
any one spreading such tales would be thought to be
a little out of their minds, I should say.”
“Perhaps some of the miners believe there is hidden
gold and want to find it, and they may think that dad
is getting an unfair advantage.”
“By talking to a ghost?” Jennifer laughed. “Oh,
John, how awfully stupid!”


“It’s true! They rub it in about the ghost haunting
our house. The miners were horrible to me.”
“I thought they were nice,” Jennifer said.
“They were quite different to you; I noticed that.”
“They were only teasing you; you took them seri-
ously.”
“But what about Hitchens? He was quite serious
and very worried.”
“It’s rather puzzling really, but as Mr Hitchens says
to leave it to him, I think it is best to do so,” Jennifer
said. “I think we should tell father about it.”
“I think so, too! We’ll tell him to-night.”
At the evening meal, Ronald Hogarth was pre-
occupied and seemed worried, so Jennifer and John
did not approach the subject of the ghost. During the
meal John asked Jennifer many questions about life
on board ship.
“I learned all the deck games.”
“You’ll have to find something to amuse you here,”
Ronald said. “You will soon get tired of having nothing
to do.”
“Nothing to do! Why, there’s so much. It’s all thrill-
ing!” Jennifer said.
“Just the novelty—something new. The interest will
soon wear off.”
“There was someone on board ship who said the
same thing when I told him I thought ship-board life
was thrilling. He was about as old as you; and I never


got tired of ship life. I loved every moment of the
trip out.”
“Things are not so thrilling at my age,” Ronald
laughed.
“He could beat me at games, even if he was old.
That seemed to thrill him. We had a game of our
own, too. We had a secret code; nobody could guess
what it was.”
“What was it?”
“He drew wonderfully. Instead of writing notes, or
sending messages, he sent drawings to me.
“What kind of drawings?” John asked.
“There was always a drawing of a ship with smoke
coming from its funnel. There was a drawing on my
plate at breakfast every morning. I knew, just by
looking at it, if it was a good day for slithers, quoits,
or deck tennis, and what time we would play.”
“How did you know that?” John asked.
“By the shape of the smoke as it curled from the
ship’s funnel. He could draw anything into any shape.”
“Pretty clever!”
John plied Jennifer with questions for a great part
of the evening, and Ronald sat quietly smoking his
pipe, listening with an amused twinkle in his eyes
to all that Jennifer had to say. When Jennifer said she
was tired and wanted to go to bed, John was sorry.
He had enjoyed talking to his sister and, this time, it
seemed quite natural that she should kiss him good
night.


“Sleep well!” Ronald said, and smiled affectionately
at Jennifer. Then he turned to John. “You’d better be
off, too,” he said. “I have some work that will keep
me up late.”
John said good night and went to his room, but
instead of going to bed he stood looking out of the
window. He now shared his father’s room and this
window was on the opposite side of the house to the
one from which he had first seen the ghost miner. The
room was larger, also the window, and looking from
it he was sure he saw the same figure again. He
watched for a while, became sure that it was the same
figure, and decided to call Jennifer, whose door was
on the opposite side of the hall. He knocked quietly
and waited for her reply, then whispered:
Come outside, I have something to show you. Put
something on and come quickly!”
“Coming!” Jennifer whispered and was out of bed
in a second, putting on a gown and slippers. A
moment later she stepped into the narrow hall and
followed John through to the front veranda. She stood
beside him while he stared towards the thick scrub.
Suddenly he grabbed her arm.
“Look!” he said and pointed to the trees. Something
moved among the shadows cast by a bright moon.
Jennifer watched intently. One moment it was visible,
the next it was not. She went on staring—then clutched
John’s arm.


“The ghost!” she whispered. “Perhaps Simon’s story
is true after all.”
“Fm going to find out!” John said.
“Can I come too?”
“Are you game?”
“Of course!”
“Is that you, John?” Ronald Hogarth called from
the sitting-room.
“Yes!” John answered. “Come on, wed better go
in,” he whispered to Jennifer. “Don t say anything
about this.” They went back to the sitting-room.
“I thought you two were in bed,” Ronald said,
without looking up from the work spread out on the
table in front of him. “I wish you would not wander
about. I can’t work when I am disturbed. Be off, the
pair of you, like good scouts.
A knock came at the front door.
“I’ll answer it!” Ronald said quickly, jumping up,
and went to the front door.
“Quickly!” John said. “Come on, out through the
kitchen. I’m determined to find out about this ghost.”
Jennifer followed John, thinking to herself that their
father wouldn’t mind if he knew how important it
was. She was anxious, too, to do anything to please
John; this thought outweighed all else.


CHAPTER XIII
STALKING THE GHOST
Jennifer and John walked quickly through the
kitchen and out on to the back veranda. They heard
their father’s voice, then another one.
“I suppose that’s Hitchens, come on business,” John
said. “I wonder if he knows the apparition is about
again. He’s anxious to find out about the ghost miner,
I know. Maybe he’s come to warn father; if so, it’s all
the more reason that we should keep watch and get
some useful information.”
“Yes,” Jennifer said, staring towards the bush, “but
I can’t see a sign of anything now that even looks like
a ghost.”
“It needs patience,” John said. “We may have to
watch for a long time before he appears again; he’s
pretty cunning.”
“I hope we do see him. I love adventures and this
is the most exciting thing that has ever happened to
me. Wouldn’t Dr Berry be surprised? It’s more excit-
ing than any game we ever made up between us. I
hope the ghost hasn’t disappeared for ever.”


“Come along! Well go out and see if we can find
him. No use staying here.”
John stepped off the veranda and Jennifer followed.
In a few strides John was at the fence. Climbing on to
it, he turned and gave Jennifer a hand. For a moment
she was a tiny child again, jumping on to a box. The
old memory of running with a companion who held
her hand came vividly to her. She had never felt so
happy in her life. The happiness increased as she crept
stealthily, through the bush, holding John’s hand.
With the gum-trees on all sides, the trunks of these
gleaming weirdly in the moonlight, she felt like one
walking in a dream—a dream dreamt many times.
“Those tree trunks, John! Perhaps that’s what you’ve
been seeing all the time; the moon plays tricks with
your imagination sometimes,” Jennifer whispered.
“Not with mine!” said John. Then his voice changed;
“Look —look! Over there! I see it again!”
“Where? Where?”
“Gone again, disappeared behind that tree; hiding,
eh? It doesn’t seem like a ghost to me. There it is
again! There it is again!” he added, in a sharp whisper.
“Just dodged away from our house, too. There may
be some reason for the miners’ suspicions—hanging
around the house like that. I’d like to know why?
I’ll find out, too.”
“How will we be able to catch him?” Jennifer asked.
“I think he knows we’re here and is dodging away
from us.”


John whistled sofdy. “Close in on both sides, that’s
the idea,” he said. “You go over there and I’ll go
this way.”
Jennifer was excited and shivered a little.
“Are you too frightened to go over there by your-
self?” John whispered.
“Of course I’m not!” Jennifer would not have ad-
mitted that she was afraid, and walked in the direction
indicated by John. It was towards the place where
they had seen the strange figure.
John walked quietly, dodging from tree to tree,
intent upon getting to the other side of the elusive
figure. Jennifer’s heart beat quickly and her knees
shook a little. She stepped carefully on dried leaves
and twigs, which crackled beneath her feet, however
carefully she walked. As she came close to the place
where the figure had last been, the crackling sound
came from other footsteps—cautious, stealthy footsteps.
She caught a glimpse of a white form. She stood still,
her heart beating rapidly. One moment the figure was
there, the next it was lost in deep shadows. The white
trunks of the trees were confusing. She heard heavy
breathing—someone gasped. Was it fright or fatigue?
Quite suddenly a voice sounded on the night air—a
whispering voice that called hoarsely: “Ghost miner!”
“0000h —oooh!” Jennifer gasped and put a hand
to her mouth. She wanted to scream, to run away.
But she must not do that. She must help John. The
white figure moved towards her. She was unable to


move: it would pass her in a moment. She must do
something! Stop it—anything! She started forward.
Crash —crash —crash!
Something, white and crumpled, lay in a heap a few
feet from her. She sprang forward and bent over a
prostrate form. In the moonlight she saw an old man.
He lay moaning, a pathetic figure, white face framed
with white hair and white beard.
John ran quickly back to Jennifer, calling, “Jennifer!
Jennifer! Anything wrong? Oh! You’ve got him! ’
“It’s only an old man, not a ghost at all,” Jennifer
said, and knelt down beside the figure, all sympathy
and concern for his distress.
“Are you hurt?” she said, peering into the man’s
face. “Oh, it’s you!”
“Yes, it’s me, Simon. I thought you were someone
else. What are you doing, scaring an old man like
this?”
John and Jennifer helped Simon to his feet. They
were surprised to see that he was dressed in night
attire. He wore a long white night-shirt.
“Goodness! Why are you dressed like that?” Jennifer
exclaimed.
“Where’s my accordion?” Simon said.
John and Jennifer laughed a little hysterically.
“It’s all very well for you to laugh,” the old miner
said. “What do you mean by chasing me?”
“Well, you shouldn’t look so much like a ghost.”
“Ghost! What do you mean? Oh ”He looked


down at his night attire as if suddenly aware of it.
“Well, well, Ive done it again.” He was apologetic
and explained. “Sometimes I wake suddenly from
sleep. I think of something very important and I forget
everything else. If I waited to dress, I’d forget that
too. My memory plays me tricks.”
“Looking for your phantom gold?” John hazarded.
“If I am, it’s no business of yours. And it’s quite bad
enough having the miners chase me, without you
doing it too.”
“We didn’t know it was you,” Jennifer said in a
shaky voice. She found it difficult to keep from laugh-
ing- “Did you have your accordion with you?”
“Yes, of course I did! Where is it?” The old man
looked around him. John and Jennifer looked too, and
in a few moments found the accordion. -
“1 wish you wouldn’t come round our house,” John
said, as he gave the accordion to Simon. “If the miners
see you, they 11 take you for the ghost—more than
likely they have.” Then he remembered something.
“By the way, I heard somebody call out ‘Ghost miner’,
and I heard it once before, too. Do you know anything
about that?”
Simon shook his head. “Don’t tell your father you
saw me, is all I ask. He told me that I must go away
and not let any one see me.”
“It was you knocking at the door a while ago?”
John said. “We thought it was Hitchens. What did
you want, Simon? I say, are you hurt?”


They both noticed that the old man was trembling.
His breath came rapidly—he gasped painfully. John
repeated:
“Are you hurt? You must be. You had a terrible
shaking.”
“Come into our house with us and wait until you
feel better,” Jennifer said.
“No, no! The boss told me not to come back, and
he’d be angry if he knew I’d let any one see me. I’m
all right, I’m all right; just a bit shaken.”
“I don’t believe father would be angry; you are
making a mistake,” John said. “There’s some explana-
tion needed here, and I’m going to take you back.”
“No, no, no!” the old miner moaned.
“We’ll take you in and explain to father,” Jennifer
said, trying to pacify Simon. “We’ll confess everything;
he thinks we are in bed, but we’ll tell him that it is our
fault, that we insisted upon your coming back.”
“I’d rather go by myself. I won’t go unless you let me
go alone. I feel a bit shaken and you two are to blame.”
They decided to let the old man go by himself, but
insisted upon walking with him as far as the gate.
They stood and watched him safely to the door—heard
his knock. They waited until the door was opened and
saw their father lead Simon into the house, then they
followed quietly and slipped into the hall and went
back to their respective bedrooms.
Jennifer went straight to bed, but John stood staring
gloomily through his window. The sound of voices


kept Jennifer awake at first —her father’s deep notes
and Simon’s quavering ones. By and by she grew
drowsy and was just falling asleep when she heard
music. She smiled to herself, recognizing Simon’s tune.
“He must be all right again, if he is able to play.”
Then she fell asleep.
She was awakened by a sharp rap on her door. Her
father’s voice called to her:
“Come quickly, Jennifer; I need your help!”


CHAPTER XIV
THE REAL GHOST
Jennifer jumped out of bed, caught up her dressing-
gown and slipped it on as she went to the door, where
her father stood waiting for her; he was holding a
glass in one hand and a bottle in the other.
“I have an old man in here; he is ill. I want your
help,” he said curtly and walked quickly to the sitting-
room.
Jennifer followed, her heart sinking. She wondered
what she could do; she did not understand illness. She
was relieved when she heard John’s voice.
“What’s the trouble?” he said, walking quickly from
his bedroom. The old miner lay on the couch in a
state of cxhausdon. Ronald Hogarth poured a little
brandy into a glass and held it to the old man’s lips,
Jennifer and John stood staring and Simon, noticing
them, shook his head and refused to drink. Jennifer
went to him.
“Drink it. It will do you good,” she coaxed, slipping
her hand under his shoulders and supporting his head.
“You should have let us look after you,” John said.


“What do you mean by—‘should have looked after
him’?” Ronald inquired.
“He had a fall. We found him.”
“Yo« found him?”
The brandy had had its effect upon Simon. He re-
covered and glared wrathfully at the two young people.
“It’s your fault that I fell,” he said in his quavering
old voice. “You chased me. You all get me so muddled,
I don’t know what to do. First, I mustn’t tell any one
I’ve been here, and then you two chase me to bring
me back, and when I get back the boss tells me to go
away, not to let any one see me.”
“I don’t understand what it’s all about,” Ronald
Hogarth said. “What does he mean?”
“I didn’t know it was a pair of kids chasing me. I
thought it was the miners again. The fall surely upset
me,” he meandered on.
“I thought you two were old enough to know better
than to play practical jokes on an old man.” Ronald’s
voice was sharp with annoyance. “And I thought you
had gone to bed.”
“So we had, but I saw the white figure I told you
about, and it wasn’t a joke; we thought we should find
out, and we did not know we were chasing an old
man. We thought we were chasing a ghost!”
Ronald’s annoyance vanished. His eyes twinkled and
he laughed.
“After the ghost, eh, John?”


“Well,” John said, “there is a ghost of sorts haunting
the place.”
“Does the ghost resemble Simon?” Ronald inquired,
laughing quiedy.
“I never thought of that,” John said slowly.
“I did,” Jennifer said. “When we went after the
ghost and found old Simon, it seemed quite plain to
me.
“You found him first,” John said. “He was running
away from me.”
“He fell just as he got close to me, but it wasn’t
until you came up that we recognized him.”
“I did not know that you knew old Simon.”
“We saw him camped in one of the old shafts when
we were walking about the mines to-day,” John
explained. “When we found out who it was and saw
that he was a bit shaken by his fall, we wanted to
bring him into the house, but he wouldn’t let us.
When we persuaded him, he insisted upon going alone.
He thought that you would be annoyed for letting
us know he had been to see you.”
“There arc reasons why I do not wish any one to
know that he visits me.”
%
“Perhaps he is causing the suspicion, sir,” John said.
“What suspicion?”
“That you have dealings with a ghost. Hitchens told
me about it. Hitchens told me that the miners suspect
you”


“Hitchens told you? Well, John, my advice to you
is to hear, see, and say nothing.”
John was disappointed. Evidendy his help was not
required.
“It worries me when the miners have no respect for
you because of this silly story,” he said.
“Perhaps there is a little explanation needed, John.
I shall have to take you and Jennifer into my con-
fidence.”
Ronald looked towards the old man, who was
dozing. “I realized that he was ill when he came back
to me. He was very shaken, but insisted that he was
all right. He played his accordion to prove this to me,
and of course you are not surprised to know that he
is your ghost; a pretty healthy one, too —nothing
supernatural about him.”
“Simon is the real ghost!”
John and Jennifer laughed foolishly.
“How could he be the ghost; the miners could easily
find him?”
“He has a very good reason for not letting them
find him, also for wishing them to think he is the
ghost, and I will tell you what I can of his story. It is
a strange one, hard to believe, but very interesting. He
is looking for hidden gold, hidden sixty years ago. He
worked on these mines as a lad of fourteen. He has a
secret that no one else in the world knows except
myself. He shared it with one other person, and that
person is dead.”


“He said something to us about hidden gold, and I
thought that he must be dreaming, for a goldmine
is surely a stupid place to hide gold, with every one
looking for it.”
“Not at all! Not at all! He has been a little indiscreet
and the miners have tried to get the secret from him;
finding that they followed him when he went search-
ing, he became cunning and went looking for his
treasure at night only.
“The miners, however, soon discovered this and still
followed him. He was in a dilemma until one night
he was mistaken for the ghost. After that, he played
ghost and for a time this deception helped him, be-
cause there was a real ghost story being circulated
among the miners. This was only a coincidence, but
Simon took advantage of it. You admit he looks the
part. He has a plan of the mine; the place is marked
upon it where his treasure is hidden. However, you
must understand that the character of a mine is always
changing, and old land-marks mean nothing; so he
tries to visualize the place as he knew it some sixty
years ago.
Several times he had a sudden inspiration in the
night, and on those occasions did not wait to dress
but went out in his night-shirt. It was then that some
one seeing him mistook him for the ghost. The ghost
story was being given full credence at the time and,
as I told you, old Simon was quick to take advantage
of this and decided to encourage the miners in their


delusion. He endeavoured to keep them from follow-
ing by shouting ‘Ghost miner!’ —hoping to scare them
off. And now you know all about the apparition —an
apparition that nearly caused you to miss your holiday.”
“Was that the reason for the delayed letter?” John
asked.
“Yes, I had a very worrying time. It’s not over yet.”
“Do tell us all about the hidden gold!” Jennifer said.
“That is a very long story and one that took me a
great deal of patience and time to get from the old
man. I had first to get his confidence and make him
believe that I would not rob him.”
“They all want to rob old Simon.”
They had forgotten Simon for the moment, and
now turned to look at him. He was wide awake and
listening with interest to the conversation. No one
spoke for a moment. Simon sat up suddenly, and
leaning forward, listened intently.
“I hear those miners coming,” he said. “Don’t let
them hear you talk of my hidden gold. Give me my
accordion!”
“Do you feel all right again?” Jennifer inquired.
“His accordion is a god-send,” Ronald said. “He is
never lonely, and when the miners want entertainment
they go to him, and when they try to get the secret
from him, he diverts them with music. They enjoy his
music and he thinks they forget to question him.”
Footsteps sounded on the front veranda; Simon
played his accordion.


“May we come in?” It was Hitchens’s voice.
Hitchens walked into the room, followed by several
miners. They stood about the room and glanced in a
surly manner at Ronald Hogarth.
“Old Simon is ill,” he explained, “We are looking
after him until he feels better,”
“It doesn’t interfere with his music. He plays a good
tune,” Hitchens said.
The men glanced casually at Simon, but their interest
was centred upon Ronald Hogarth. Hitchens became
the spokesman.
“These men,” he said, “demand an explanation. They
swear that they saw the ghost miner enter your house
this evening.”
Jennifer’s heart beat rapidly. She wondered what her
father would say, and as she wondered, she thought
delightedly: “What an exciting adventure.” She looked
at the surly miners, at her father, whose eyes were
stern and whose mouth was firmly set in angry lines;
at John whose fists were clenched and whose eyes
were flashing; at old Simon who softly and uncon-
cernedly played his accordion; at the miners who
crowded the small room, looking sulky and surly.
Fully aware of the dramatic situation, she was de-
lighted to be part of it. She thought of her grand-
mother’s home—nothing unexpected ever happened
diere—day after day, year after year, just orderly
routine, and she, Jennifer, had escaped from such
monotony into events so thrilling. The colour flamed


to her cheeks. She was part of a drama, and John,
with his clenched fists, and her father, the chief actor
—the hero about to clear himself of suspicion and
confound the rough men who accused him of wrong-
doing. Instead of doing this, her father turned to John.
“John! You and Jennifer have been out to-night on
the same errand as these men, looking around this
house for a ghost. Tell me, did either of you see any
one enter it, other than old Simon here?”
John said eagerly and emphatically:
“No, we did not. Simon was the only one who came
into the house.” Jennifer wondered that her father did
not immediately denounce these men for their sus-
picion, why he did not tell them the exact truth.
Simon, who had ceased playing to listen, now picked
up the accordion and played a tune —a tune with notes
of triumph. The miners turned and walked out of the
house without further words.


CHAPTER XV
MR HOGARTH INTRODUCES THE GHOST
Hitchens did not leave with the men, but stayed to
talk.
“These men have been trying to find out about the
ghost—got wind that he was about, lay in wait for
him, watched him, and saw him enter your house.
Then they came to me. I brought them to you. I wanted
to prove that they were wrong. I am very sorry that
they are causing this trouble.”
“You needn’t worry, Hitchens,” Ronald said. “I
know a few of the facts and the attitude of the miners
does not interest me at the moment. All will be clear
to them later on.”
“I am glad of that, sir. It is making difficulties for
me, the way things are. Would you like me to take
old Simon home? I have my car —it may save you
trouble.”
“Don’t worry about him. He is used to walking. I
will keep him here for a while, until he is well enough
to go back by himself.”
Hitchens said good night and left the house.


“Aren’t you going to tell him about the ghost?”
John said to his father. “He’s been terribly worried
about you.”
“I wonder?” his father said.
Jennifer was interested in old Simon. “How did you
learn to play the accordion so well?” she asked him.
“My father-in-law taught me. He was an Italian. I
worked with him in the mines, when a lad. Later, I
married his daughter and worked in his shop, so I got
plenty of practice. He was the one who made the plans
of the mine, but he wrote it up in Italian and I’ve
never been able to make head or tail of it.”
“That is one of the difficulties with which I have had
to contend,” Ronald said. “I 'would have been more
help to Simon had I had a knowledge of Italian. If
only I knew someone who understood the language—
someone I could trust, or I should say, someone that
old Simon could trust —we might be nearer to the
solution of everything.”
“I know something about Italian,” Jennifer said.
“Do you, indeed!” her father said in a surprised
voice.
“Yes, I had an Italian governess and I’m sure I can
help.”
Ronald laughed. “Governesses may be an advantage
after all, but you will have to get old Simon’s con-
fidence. Then you may be very useful to us.”
“Will you let me help?” Jennifer said to Simon.


“I don’t know. Young things are too flighty; but it
doesn't matter just now, for I have lost the plan.”
“Good Heavens!” Ronald exclaimed. “Why didn’t
you tell me this before?”
“That is what I came to tell you to-night,” Simon
said; “but you wouldn’t let me stay. You sent me away
again.
“I knew the miners were looking for you, Simon,
but for goodness’ sake —where did you lose the plan?”
“I put it away in a safe place, and I have forgotten
where I put it.” Simon picked up his accordion and
played it unconcernedly.
“Really!” Ronald sighed. “This memory of his causes
me more trouble than I can tell. Because of it I have
had great difficulty in piecing his story together. Events
of the past are clear to him, while the present is
clouded. But both present and past are important to
his story. However, I have managed to piece it together
up to a certain point and have been able to prove that
it is authentic. There is one thing left, however, which
is difficult to clear up. If I could clear it up the rest
would be plain sailing. I have endeavoured lately to
get his mind clear on this point, and just as he seems
about to remember, he forgets again. That is why I
have had so many visits from him. He talks about
this hidden gold when he forgets that he is keeping
it a secret. It is rather fortunate that he says the gold
is hidden, for it causes a little confusion in the minds
of his listeners. Reason tells them that it is an unlikely


story, and so they put it down to the wanderings of
a senile old man.”
“It sounds exciting all the same —hidden gold—he
calls it phantom gold, too,” John said.
“Phantom gold!” came in a loud voice from the
window.
To every one’s surprise, the miners—Dave, Bill and
Tom —who a short time before had been inside the
room, were now staring through the window.
“Well, phantom gold if you will,” Ronald Hogarth
said, “and it is time you met your ghost.”
“That is just what we are here for. We are looking
for the ghost.”
Ronald pointed to Simon. “There is our ghost!”
Old Simon picked up his accordion and played a
merry tunc. The men looked a little crestfallen, and
one of them spoke in a surly voice:
“You can’t get away with it as easily as that! Old
Simon tells the story and talks of phantom gold, but
he is no ghost. You are trying to bluff us. We want a
better explanation than that.”
“You are hard to please,” Ronald said. “You don’t
want to believe simple facts. You wish to uncover
the supernatural; it is a dangerous game.”
“We are not talking about pharitom gold; we
strongly suspect that it is only a blind for this hidden
gold.”


CHAPTER XVI
RONALD LEAVES FOR SYDNEY
Ronald answered quiedy.
“The hidden gold is not ‘hidden gold’, but lost gold.
If you can find it, you will be doing us a great service.
Come in!”
“I suppose you mean the lost vein. We know all
about that, and we are no nearer to finding it now
than when the mine first opened,” Tom said.
“If you come inside, we can talk better. Go round
to the front door,” Ronald insisted, and as the men
left the window, he turned to Jennifer:
“Go to the door, quickly, Jennifer! Delay the miners
before bringing them in—any excuse. Talk to them,
bring them in slowly, and don’t be surprised at any-
thing that happens.”
Jennifer went to the door, and Ronald turned to
John.
“I have an idea that Hitchens is on his way to
Sydney. I must get there before him. I shall have to
start immediately, and I don’t want these men to
know that I am going. Talk to them. You, Simon,


play your accordion, make as much noise as possible
so that they will not hear me leave in the car. Make
any excuse for me. Say I’ll be back in a minute. Good-
bye! I’ll telephone.” He hurried out of the room and
through the kitchen out of the back door. The garage
was at the side of the house, set back a little.
Jennifer went to the door. The three men walked on
to the veranda.
“Oh, do come in,” she said. “John and I are excited
about the hidden gold, too. We want to hear about
it. Oh! What’s that over there?” She pointed to the
other side of the road.
The men turned. “Where? What? Can you see
anything Dave?”
“Over there. Look!” Jennifer kept pointing.
“Can’t see anything, can you Bill?”
“No, darned if I can, Tom.”
“Oh! It’s only a horse; a white one,” Jennifer said,
with assumed relief.
( “Seeing things, miss? I don’t wonder,” Bill said.
“We’ve been seeing things for the past few weeks.
That old Simon, if he’s the ghost, has led us on a
pretty chase, he has!”
“I don’t think he meant to.” Jennifer stood at the
door delaying the moment to show the men inside the
house. “Simon has a bad memory and forgets that he
is in his night-shirt, and his long white beard and hair
make him such a queer object. The thing he likes best


in the world is his accordion. Listen to him now! Do
come in!”
Jennifer slowly led the way to the sitting-room.
“Sit down,” she said. “Father won’t be a minute,
and if you’ll excuse me, I think I’ll get dressed.”
She ran back to the hall, expecting to get a word
with her father. Looking into his room, she found it
empty. She went to her own room and dressed hastily.
Simon continued to play the accordion, and John
felt uncomfortable and did not know what to say. He
listened for the sound of the car, and then realized
that if he could hear it —the men could, also. He must
talk—make a noise.
The miners sat silent and John spoke several times.
They did not answer. Old Simon played. Was his
music loud enough to drown any other sound? John
doubted it. What was Jennifer doing? She could talk;
why on earth did she go away at this critical moment?
Perspiration gathered in beads on his forehead. He
put his hands in his pockets, took them out again,
and tried to appear at ease. The men would suspect
something if he didn’t pull himself together.
He was sure he heard his father start the engine of
the car. The sound was faint. He must do something
to prevent the men hearing it too.
“Jennifer!” he called. “Jennifer! Simon is playing
the tune for the new dance you promised to teach me.
Play up, Simon! Come on, Jennifer!” He sprang up,
tapped his feet on the floor and jumped about noisily.


“Your father’s taking a long time!” Bill said.
Jennifer came dancing in.
“Here I am, John. Couldn’t dance in a dressing-
gown. This is how it goes.” She danced around the
room, tapping and stamping her feet on the floor. Old
Simon grinned, quick to follow the lead they gave
him; he played louder and louder.
“Keep it up, keep it up!” he cried in his quavering
voice.
The miners joined in, clapping their hands, applaud-
ing, and stamping their feet. Suddenly Bill said:
“What’s all this about? Your father invited us in to
talk about the gold. Where is he?”
“I’m sorry he’s so long,” John said. “I think he
must have gone for Hitchens. He wanted him to be
here so that you could all talk about it together.”
“Well, he’ll have to go a long way, I’m thinking,
for Hitchens is on his way to Sydney!”
“Why, he was here only a short time ago,” Jennifer
exclaimed.
“Yes, but when he got home, he found a message
about his mother in Sydney. She had been taken bad —
heart or something, and he had to start out straight
away.”
John felt queer for a moment. Hitchens had had a
good start. Even if his father caught up and tried
to pass him, he would recognize the car and there
would be a race for it. John did not believe that
Hitchens had gone to his mother’s sick-bed. It was


an excuse and something to allay suspicion. Whatever
his reason for going to Sydney, he had not been straight-
forward; there was something underhand in his action.
This turn of events was exciting, but there was worry
attached to it. It was a little too upsetting to be the
kind of adventure he relished. He was disappointed,
too, about Hitchens. He had liked the man and
believed that he was anxious to help his father —that
he was loyal. Now he did not know what to think.
“I suppose father has been looking for Hitchens,”
he said shakily to the men. ‘That’s what’s kept him
so long.”
“Well, we’ll get along. No use waiting,” Bill said,
and turning to Simon: “What’s this we heard about
your lost plan?”
“Nothing, Bill; nothing at all! Just my memory
again. I can’t remember where I put it.”
“Well, so long, all of you. We’ll be getting along.”
“Thank goodness they have no idea that dad has
gone to Sydney, too,” Jennifer said.
“That won’t help me,” old Simon said. “Those
men will go to my place and search for my plan, and
there’s no one to stop them. Oh dear —Oh dear! Help
me up. I’m going back there myself. I’ll have to stop
them!”
“You can’t go,” John said; “you’re too weak.”
“Oh, please, Simon, don’t go. You’re not well
enough,” Jennifer pleaded.
“Not well enough!” Simon said scornfully; “Why,


I feel as strong as a lion. I’ll frighten them all if they
come nosing around my place. Yes, I must go!”
“We won’t let you go alone,” Jennifer said. “We’ll
come with you.”
Old Simon shook his head, but Jennifer and John
insisted.
“Oh, well, well. I might know by now that you are
a determined pair of youngsters. I suppose I’ll have to
let you come,” he said.
Walking shakily to the door, followed by Jennifer
and John, he leant against the wall in the narrow
hall, and quite suddenly slumped over and fell in a
heap on the floor.


CHAPTER XVII
SIMON COLLAPSES
“Get some brandy, quickly!” John said, and Jennifer
ran to the sitting-room for it. John held the old man’s
head, and when Jennifer returned with the stimulant,
took it from her and poured a little between his lips.
Slowly Simon recovered, but it was some time before
he was strong enough to get to his feet. He swayed
shakily. Jennifer, knowing that her father’s bed would
not be needed that night, gently guided the old man
into the room and John assisted him to bed, where
he lay, a pathetic and shaken figure.
“Do you feel a little better?” Jennifer asked anxi-
ously.
“Oh yes, oh yes! But I’m thinking that fall didn’t
do me much good.”
“I’m sorry about that,” John said; “and I only wish
we had known it was you.”
“I’ll be all right in a minute, then I’ll be able to go
and see what those miners are up to.”
“You mustn’t do that,” John said. “I’ll go for you.”
“What good would you be against those three men?”


“They mightn’t have gone there,” John said. “I’m
only going to make sure about it, and if they are
there, I can see what they’re up to.”
That s a sensible idea. I’ve got lots of hiding-places
for the plan, and more than likely they won’t find the
right one. Just go along and tell them that they needn’t
look for it, that they’ll never find it.”
I think I should go with you, John,” Jennifer said.
“You couldn’t possibly do that Jennifer! You’ll have
to stay with old Simon.”
Wouldn t it be better if I went? ’ Jennifer sug-
gested. “The miners don’t like you and I know they
wouldn't do me any harm.”
“I’d like to fight the lot of them. I hate them! Just
give me a chance. I m going to see what they’re up to.
It’s not a girl’s job—it’s a man’s,”
Do be careful, John. Even if you hate them, it is
better not to let them know it. Be nice to them, then
they won’t suspect anything.”
“Uh!” said John. “That sounds like a girl!”
Don t forget that a girl has to fight with her wits
and not with her fists, and as you are outnumbered
and ha\ en t got a hope of fighting three men, you
might take my advice.”
“I mightn’t even get near enough to talk to them,
or to fight them, for that matter. I guess I’ll just have
to watch them and see what they get up to, and if
they find the plan, 111 follow them, see where they
put it and get it back for old Simon somehow.”


SIMON COLLAPSES
“Where’s my accordion?” Old Simon sat up, his
eyes shining, “That’s the way to talk, lad. And we’ll
beat them! I’m feeling now I’ll play a little tune —a
tune always cheers me up.”
Jennifer ran for the accordion, brought it back and
gave it to the old man. “It cheers me up, too,” she
said. “I’m glad you feel well enough to play it and
it’ll keep us happy while John’s away.”
John walked out of the front door and the sound
of Simon’s accordion cheered him, too. He was quite
sure of success, and thinking of Jennifer’s advice, he
decided that he would follow it as far as possible.
However, his first difficulty arose when he realized
that the way to Simon’s shack was through the mines.
He knew that the mines were picketed at night. He
would' not be able to pass without being questioned;
he would not, in fact, be allowed to go through the
mines.
“There must be another way,” he said to himself.
“But how on earth I can find it —I don’t know.”
He stood thinking, trying to get his bearings; but
the more he thought about it, the more confused he
became. At last an idea came to him. He would go to
Mrs Brown, the daily help, and ask her if she knew
how to get to Simon’s hut without going through the
mines. Mrs Brown lived half a mile down the road.
He ran all the way, and on arrival, knocked at the
door.


“Mr John!” Mrs Brown exclaimed, when she opened
the door.
“Can you tell me if there is a way to old Simon’s
shack, without going through the mines?” John asked.
“What on earth do you want with old Simon at
this time of night?” Mrs Brown said.
“He has been taken ill at our house and I have to
go to his place to get something for him.”
“Poor old man. Can I help you at all?”
“No thank you.”
“Couldn’t you leave it until the morning? There
have been a lot of rumours to-night of all kinds. Some
of the miners are very rough men, and it may be better
for you to be in your own home.”
“Oh, I’m not worrying! And the walk will do me
good. Can you tell me the way?”
“Well, that’s easy enough. There’s a track through
the bush. It’s just opposite here. You’ll need a torch;
I’ll lend you mine. You just keep on walking till you
get to the place. You can’t miss it.”
“Oh, thank you. And I’ll be glad if you’ll lend me
the torch.”
Mrs Brown went inside and returned with the torch.
“If my husband was home; ■Pri get him to go with
you, but he’s out to-night. Are you sure you’ll be all
right? Not nervous at all? This ghost miner business
has been getting on all our nerves lately. I’ll be glad
when the mystery is cleared up.”
“I will, too! Thank you, Mrs Brown,” John said.


SIMON COLLAPSES
“You can get your torch when you come in the
morning. 11l be oil now. Good night!
“Everybody talks about the ghost,” John said to
himself. “I’m glad I know all about it, and I suppose
she’ll know soon enough. It was no good telling her
about it—there is too much to explain.”
He walked across the road and into the bush. He
found the track easily. It was rough, and became
rougher as he walked, and the bush became denser.
The track wound in and out and around large boulders.
He slipped on loose stones but was too intent on
finding his way to worry about anything.
After walking for a mile or so, the track sloped
gently upwards, and quite suddenly he came out upon
a large clearing. He recognized it as the place where
he had seen the old shaft that very day—only that
day, and it seemed a year! Without difficulty, he made
his way towards the shaft, where old Simon had his
rough home. He could not find the shack, although the
moon shone brightly. He was puzzled and thought at
first that he had come to the wrong place. But no,
he recognized the old shaft and he was quite sure that
he was not mistaken. Then suddenly he realized what
had happened. It was the right place, but Simon s hut
was gone. It lay wrecked. Galvanized iron, bagging
and bark, bedclothes and bedding—were strewn in all
directions. But there was no sign of life anywhere.
“I knew that I hated those men,” John said under


his breath. You bet they did this! He turned away,
depressed, miserable. Then a startling thought came
to him—“ They must have found the plan, or else they
would still be searching. I missed them, and I can’t
even tell poor old Simon whether the men found it,
and if so, where they have hidden it.”


CHAPTER XVIII
SIMON MISSING
John stood looking at the wrecked hut, at a loss to
know what to do about it.
“I’ll find where they live and demand an explana-
tion,” he said fiercely. He turned away from the pa-
thetic sight, and walked back to the bush track.
It was some time before he could locate tne track,
although he used his torch. When he found it, he
hurried back, tripping over stones, and bumping into
bushes on either side. He used the torch at first, but,
anxious to make haste, found that it hindered him; so
he put it into his pocket and trusted to his own sense of
direction. He pushed his way through bushes, heedless
of his torn clothes, and the scratches on his face and
hands. He was gready relieved when he found the
way again. He had a definite purpose. He would find
the men who had pulled Simon’s hut to pieces and
stolen the plan.
He stood hesitating, wondering which way to turn;
then once again he thought of Mrs Brown. She would
be sure to know where to find the men. He went to


her door and knocked. When she appeared he said:
“Can you tell me where Bill, Dave and Tom live?”
Mrs Brown was even more surprised by this inquiry
than by his first.
“What can you be wanting with men like that?”
she said. “They are too rough for you. They live in
tents, but are mostly out prospecting, or fishing when
they are not at the hotel.”
“Where are their tents? Do you know?” John said.
“No, I don’t. I have no truck with those kind of
fellows. They never have any settled employment; they
go from mine to mine, spreading discontent wherever
they go.”
“Why does Hitchens employ them if they are like
that?” John asked.
“Because that kind of miner knows where to look
for gold. They’ve got a nose for it. They do nothing
but prospect a life of gamble. What do you want
them for, at any rate?”
“A message from Simon,” John said, thinking up an
excuse quickly and remembering that Simon had sent
a message to them.
Did you get what Simon needed?” Mrs Brown
then asked. “It’s a wonder he didn’t tell you where
these men hang out; he’s the same kind himself—a
wanderer with no decent place to live. The only thing
is that he’s harmless, and they’re not.”
“I think I’ll go back and ask him,” John said. “He
must have forgotten to tell me, Here’s your torch.


Thank you very much. See you in the morning good
night, Mrs Brown.”
John walked slowly; he felt it was useless looking
for the men and he might as well go home. He did
not want to tell Simon about his wrecked hut and
he was at a loss what to say. However, when he arrived
home, Simon was sleeping peacefully.
Jennifer had also fallen asleep. She was in the
sitting-room with her arms resting on the table and
her head on her arms. Just as John entered the house,
the telephone rang. He ran to it and picked up the
receiver.
“Hullo! —Hullo!” His father’s voice!
“Dad!” John shouted.
■“That you, John? I got away all right. Have those
men gone? Did they give any trouble?”
“Yes, dreadful trouble. Not here though! I told them
you had gone to fetch Hitchens and they said you’d
have a long way to go, that he had gone to his mother
who was ill in Sydney.”
“That was only Hitchens’s excuse, I am quite sure.
Didn’t suspect me of following, did they ? What trouble
did they make?”
“They’ve done a horrible thing, or at least I guess
it was they. They wrecked poor old Simon’s home.”
“Did they? That’s a dastardly trick! Looking for the
plan, I suppose. Didn’t suspect I had gone to Sydney,
I hope?”
“No! But I’m afraid they’ve got the plan. What


shall I do about it ? It will nearly kill old Simon when
he knows.”
“You can’t do anything. Doesn’t he know about it,
or his hut?”
“No; he is pretty ill and we kept him here. He’s
asleep now. I went after the men —Simon was sure
they had gone to look for his plan. They weren’t at
the hut when I got there. I suppose they found it
when they pulled his hut to pieces.”
“Listen to me, John! Don’t tell Simon anything;
keep him with you; he is a very important personage
in an extraordinary drama.”
“Oh, I wish I knew what it was all about!” John said.
“You will know it very soon now, and in the mean-
time you can get Simon to tell his story. It is very
interesting. There is a sequel, one that he does not
know, and I thought that I was the only one who did,
but I am afraid now that Hitchens knows it too.”
“Did you see Hitchens?”
“Yes. Drove behind him for many miles; kept behind
purposely. He stopped off at an hotel a few miles back;
I came on, only stopping to telephone you. I don’t
know how long Hitchens intends to stop there. Hope
it’s for the night, but I can’t risk it. I am only a short
way ahead of him. No time to waste —I must get along
now. Keep old Simon with you. Look after Jennifer.
Good night, John—will ring you in the morning.”
Good night, dad. John hung up the receiver.
Jennifer stood beside him.


“Oh, John! I heard you tell father about Simon’s
hut. Is that true?”
“Yes. I think the brutes have got his plan, too. It
didn’t seem to worry dad, except to keep the news
from Simon. So don’t tell him. I feel I ought to do
something about that plan all the same, and I will as
soon as I can find those men.”
“I think bed’s the only place now. I’m terribly tired.”
Jennifer yawned.
“So am I,” John said, “and I’ll have to sleep in the
same room as old Simon.”
“That’s all the better,” Jennifer said quickly. “You’ll
be able to keep an eye on him and see that he doesn’t
leave without your knowing.”
“That’s true!”
They both went to their beds and the last thought
that John had before he slept was that old Simon was
safely under his care. Nevertheless, when he awoke in
the morning, Simon’s bed was empty. The old man
had gone and he had not heard him go.


CHAPTER XIX
THE TELEPHONE CALL
John slept soundly. His first thought when he
awakened was Simon. He sat up, stared blankly at
the empty bed.
Jennifer! Jennifer!’ he shouted, jumping from his
bed. “Where’s Simon? Did you see him? He’s gone!”
Jennifer came from her bedroom. “No, I didn’t hear
a thing. I slept and slept, I was so tired.”
“Oh, this is awful!” John said. “Dad said I had to
keep him here, not to let him go away. What am I
to do about it?”
Have your breakfast,” Mrs Brown stood at the
kitchen door, smiling at them. “You are making a
great fuss about that old man. He’ll be all right. He’s
used to looking after himself. You can be quite sure
that no harm will come to him.”
B ut John said. Then he remembered that he
must not speak about the ruined hut.
“But he was ill,” Jennifer said; “and I think you
should find him.”
“Well, have your breakfast first, while it’s hot. And
where’s your father, may I ask?”


“Oh, he had to go to Sydney on business.”
Jennifer and John sat down to breakfast. They felt
a little lost. Their father away, they even missed
Hitchens; they had liked him and found it difficult
to think that he was other than a friend to them both.
“Funny about Hitchens,” John said. “And it must
be pretty awkward for dad and him to be away from
the mine at the same time. I suppose Hitchens gave
his orders for the day, before he left, so everything
will be all right. I wish Teddy were here; we’d be
able to run things between us.”
“How could you? You wouldn’t know how!”
Jennifer said.
“If Teddy had been with me, we’d have done all the
things we’d planned to do, and we’d jolly well know
how to run a mine by now.”
“I thought you were going to have Teddy to stay
with you and live in a tent.”
“Yes, I know that, but I haven’t had time to do
anything about it yet. This house is pretty awful. You
must feel it a terrible difference to the kind you’re
used to living in.”
“I like living with you and father. The house doesn’t
matter much.”
“But you can’t live like this for long. Granny was
right about that. I suppose her place is enormous. How
many rooms has it got?”
I never counted, really. About twenty, I suppose


John whistled. “That’s huge. Was it a cracker kind
of place?”
“Yes, but I liked the garden best. Lovely lawns, trees,
and a drive —with branches low down over it, and a
lake. And the country was so green. Everything is
different here. At first I didn’t like it —I couldn’t get
used to it. The sun is so bright, and the sky so blue,
and everything else is so dull —the trees and earth I
mean. It’s just the opposite over there; everything is
green and bright—the earth dark and the sky dull.”
“It is funny,” John admitted. “Of course I don’t
notice it, because I don’t know any other country; but
I suppose it’s because we don’t get enough rain and
the sun burns everything.”
“I became used to it when we were motoring, and
grew to like it, and I seem to like it more and more.
I like it not raining, and the sun always shining, and
to be able to go out. The sky is so blue, and when
there are no clouds and no mountains and it arches
into a great round globe, it is wonderful.”
“You’ll get tired of this place, though, I bet! You
couldn’t possibly go on roughing it for ever.”
“I’m sure I’ll neyer get tired of anything, and I’ll
never —never go back!”
“I can’t understand it,” John sighed.
“Can’t you, John? It’s strange that you can’t—l
thought you would. It’s really because I’ve always been
lonely, and I’d rather be poor and not lonely, than
rich and lonely.”


“But why were you so lonely? You had granny and
Drummond and plenty of servants.”
“Berry was my only real friend. None of the others
counted. Weren’t you ever lonely, John?”
John was a little embarrassed and thought it time
to change the subject.
“We’d better hurry. We’ve got to find old Simon.”
But Jennifer insisted upon an answer to her question.
“Weren’t you ever lonely, John? Being a twin must
make a difference. I always felt as if there was some-
thing missing in my life, and I didn’t know what it
was. And I remembered things!”
“Come on!” said John. “It’s important that we should
find Simon before he gets to the hut. It’ll be a terrible
shock to him when he finds that it has been pulled
down.”
“But Jennifer was persistent. “I’ll come when you
answer my question,” she said. “Didn’t you ever miss
me?”
“How could I, stupid, when I never knew anything
about you? I don’t remember a thing except moving
about with dad.”
“But I didn’t know you and I missed you. I was
lonely. It’s a funny thing that you weren’t lonely.”
“I always had dad, you know, and he’s a pretty
good pal. Then I’ve had Teddy, and he’s one of the
best pals a chap could have. We were called ‘*The
Inseparables’ at school.”
Jennifer swallowed hard. She was jealous of Teddy.


Tears smarted her eyes, but she managed to hold them
back and say casually; “Well, I suppose I was lonely
because granny couldn’t be a pal and she wouldn’t
let me go to school, and I didn’t have a chance to get
a pal.”
That s about it, John said. “Come on, it’s very
important to look for Simon.”
Just as they were about to leave the house, John
remembered that his father had said he would tele-
phone. He stood a moment, wondering what to do.
Should he leave the house? Then he had an idea.
“Perhaps you’d better stay,” he said to Jennifer. “Dad
is going to ring; someone should be here to speak to
him. You can follow me later. Mrs Brown can tell
you the way.”
“Very well,” Jennifer said, a little crestfallen. But,
hoping her father’s telephone call would come through
quickly and she would be free to join John, she went
to the gate with him and waved cheerfully as he
walked down the road. After a few yards, he ran, and
she watched him until he was out of sight; then she
wandered into the house.
For the first time since her arrival, Jennifer was
alone. She looked at the house. It was small, and she
realized how very cramped it was. Without John or
her father it had no attractions whatever. She realized
how different everything would be when John re-
turned to school, and her father was away at the mine
all day. What would she do with herself then? There


THE TELEPHONE CALL
would be nothing to fill the long hours. She walked
restlessly from room to room and looked listlessly
about. From the window in her bedroom she had a
view of the road. She stood looking at the road as it
stretched monotonously away. There was no sign of
life anywhere. How long she stood staring, she did not
know, for she suddenly became aware of three figures
walking along the road. They walked towards the
house. She watched them approach and her heart
suddenly missed a beat: she recognized the three
miners. She washed John had not left her alone.
However, she decided that she must not show sur-
prise or let them know that she knew anything about
the hut, or about unusual happenings. She walked on
to the front veranda and waited to greet the men.
They reached the gate, and at the same moment the
telephone rang. She went to answer it and realized
that the men would be able to hear every word she
spoke. She returned quickly, closed the door with a
bang, hoping they would think it had happened
accidentally, then ran to the telephone and picked up
the receiver.
“Hullo! That you, Jennifer?”
“Is that you, father? I must speak quickly. The
miners are just coming on to the front veranda. Tell
me wdiat I am to say to them. Old Simon went away
before we were up this morning and John has gone
to find him.”


Then she heard heavy footsteps on the veranda and
loud knocking at the front door.
“They are knocking now —tell me quickly,” she
said in a low Voice.
“Don’t talk, just listen,” her father said. “Treat the
men as if nothing had happened. Invite them in,
apologize for my absence. Tell them I was called to
Sydney on unexpected business.”


CHAPTER XX
JENNIFER GOES WITH THE MINERS
Jennifer listened to her father’s quick instructions.
“Yes! Yes!” she answered, then “Good-bye!” and
hanging up the receiver, went to the front door and
opened it wide. She was satisfied that the men had not
heard the first part of the conversation.
“I’m sorry the door banged,” she said. “I heard the
telephone and went to answer it. Won’t you come in?”
No need for us to come in, miss. We want you to
come with us.” Bill spoke, while Dave edged to the
door, putting his arm across it at the back of Jennifer
and barring her way inside.
She was nervous and wished that Mrs Brown had
answered the men’s knock. She knew that Mrs Brown
was in the wash-house, under the back veranda. She
spoke loudly, hoping that she was within hearing.
“Where do you want me to go?” she said.
“You needn’t shout, we can hear.”
“We have something interesting to show you, and
we want you to come. No fuss, just come along with
us,” BUI spoke.


“I’ll be delighted. I’ll just put my hat on”—planning
to call Mrs Brown as she went for her hat.
“Don’t bother about your hat; you seem to get along
well enough without it. Make haste! Saw that young
brother of yours rushing off —something bitten him —
eh?”
“Not that I know of,” Jennifer said, smiling to hide
her nervousness.
She thought of her father’s instructions. He had
advised her to treat these men frankly, to be obliging,
keep them in a good humour.
“That was my father at the telephone,” she said.
“He told me to tell you that he was sorry to miss you
last night; that his business was as important as
Hitchens’s and it was nothing to do with a sick
mother.”
The men threw their heads back and laughed.
“Well, we’re taking a holiday on the strength of it.
What with the boss away and the foreman—it’s hardly
worth working to-day.”
“Come on, miss, we’ve got something better than
work.”
“What is it? I would like to know something about
“It’s something very interesting—a real curiosity!
We heard you say last night that you could speak
Italian, so we reckoned you’d be able to explain this
curiosity to us. It’s a bit of a puzzle,”


“You’ve got the plan of the mine!” Jennifer ex-
claimed.
“You've hit it, first shot. You’re a smart one! Come
along now. It may take a long time, but we can make
a day of it,” Bill said.
“I’d like to leave word with Mrs Brown; she will
wonder where I am.”
“Nothing doing! That old woman’s a gossip. We
don’t want this talked about. Come on!”
“Why couldn’t you bring the plan to me?” Jennifer
suggested.
“You’d better come, miss. It’ll save you a lot of
trouble.” Bill spoke again.
“You needn’t fear us, little lady—you’re our mascot.
That gold was never spun into that little head for
nothing,” Dave said quietly.
Jennifer laughed; she remembered Hitchens’s words
about the miners’ superstitious ideas. Her nervousness
vanished; she felt that no harm would come to her
by going with the men. Here was a real adventure!
However, she would like John to share it.
“Couldn’t you get John to come too? He’d be
interested.”
“That spiky young ’un! No thank you!”
Jennifer walked slowly with the men to the gate,
hoping that Mrs Brown would put in an appearance
before she left. She was anxious to leave a message
for John. She knew that he would be worried about
her. But no, Mrs Brown was nowhere in sight, and
i


in a few moments she was walking with the men
down the road.
They were in good spirits and talked and joked. She
walked ahead with Bill. Dave and Tom walked close
behind. They did not mention their destination, and
she showed no surprise when they turned off the road
and took the bush track opposite Mrs Brown’s house.
She was excited and interested in the Australian bush.
Her spirits rose, for she was rather enjoying the
adventure. The morning air was fresh and the bush
fragrant with the scent of wild flowers. Red gum tips
shone in the slanting rays of the morning sun. The
birds were noisy; their calls sounded on all sides. She
was amused by one bird that seemed to echo its own
loud note and when she heard a kookaburra laugh
she stopped to listen. Bill pointed to a pair of these
birds sitting on the low branch of a tree, and she was
surprised at their solemn appearance —so great a con-
trast to their humorous chuckles.
“Are they tame?” she inquired.
“No, but they don’t expect any one to harm them
because nobody bothers to disturb them. They take
people as a matter of course.”
Lizards caught her attention next. She jumped aside
when one scurried in her pathway.
“I hope there are no snakes,” she said nervously.
“Snakes! Don’t worry about them. If there are any,
they are more nervous than you and soon get out of
your way.”


“Hush! Be still!” The whisper came from Tom. He
pointed. “Look over there! That’s a rare sight for the
little lady’s eyes.”
Jennifer followed the direction of Tom’s pointing
finger, and upon an open space she saw strange
animals.
“Kangaroos!” she whispered, recognizing them.
She stared at the extraordinary creatures. They sat
on long ungainly haunches and grazed with their
small graceful heads bent to the ground. They held
their forepaws daintily in front of them.
“You’re a mascot all right!” Bill said. “That’s a
sight we very seldom see in these parts.”
The men were interested. “We might get close to
them.”
They crept cautiously through the bush towards the
kangaroos, but the animals lifted their heads, long
ears twitching. They listened for a moment, then
hopped away, disappearing, with great bounds into
the bush. Jennifer, staring after them, noticed that
the country had changed.
“What lovely scenery!” she exclaimed, and stared at
a high cliff. “Is that a waterfall?” She pointed.
Water fell from the cliff and spray hung about it
like a silver veil. Water shot out over the top and
tumbled in a long stream down the cliff. A clear pool
at the bottom of the cliff reflected the rugged face of
the cliff and mirrored the blue sky and the clouds
above in a glass-like surface.


“I’ve never seen anything so beautiful! I never would
have guessed it was there.”
“Come on! We’d better be getting along. Plenty of
time for scenery later.” Bill caught Jennifer’s arm and
led her back to the track. As he did so, she heard a
sound that made her heart jump. It was Simon’s
accordion.
“Keep back!” Bill said sharply. “Keep out of sight.”
He pulled Jennifer down beside him, and they all
crouched low behind bush and scrub.


CHAPTER XXI
THE PLAN
Bill held Jennifer firmly by the arm. “Not a word!”
he said. “No screaming. If you do, your brother will
suffer for it. No harm will come to our mascot, I
promise you that. But your brother—you are fond of
him, aren’t you? Well, he is happy enough, but he
won’t be for long if you play any funny games. Look
there!”
Bill pushed the bushes aside, and Jennifer, peeping
through, was amazed to see that the bush track they
had been following led to the old shaft where Simon
had his hut. He now sat among the ruins, playing his
accordion. John sat in front of him.
“What’s happened?” Jennifer exclaimed, purposely
showing surprise. “How did his hut get wrecked like
that?”
“Something to do with Simon’s bad memory,” Bill
drawled.
“Poor old Simon, he must be very worried.”
“He sounds happy enough playing that old accordion
of his,” Bill said.


“He always plays when he wants to steady his nerves;
he told me so. It’s very sad to see him without his
home, and I don’t see how his bad memory could
cause it to fall to pieces.”
The three men chuckled sofdy. “Well help him to
build it again, later on, perhaps. We had to find that
plan you know.”
“You did that? You treated an old man in that way?
That was very unkind of you,” Jennifer said indig-
nantly. “And all for something that does not belong
to you. You can’t expect me to help you translate what’s
written on that map. That would be dishonest of me,
too.
“Steady now! Steady, mascot!” Bill said. “You’ve
done very well up to date. Keep up the good work
and no harm will come to that brother of yours, or
old Simon either.”
“But you are doing him harm when you take his
plan and try to find out his secret.”
“Well, that’s something you don’t understand. Find-
ing is keeping when it comes to gold outside the
boundaries of a mine, and Simon’s treasure, we suspect,
is beyond the boundary of the Winoona property. It
can belong to any one and any one can peg out a
claim. But it’s no good pegging out a claim unless
we know where to peg, and that is where you are
going to be useful. 5 ’
“It doesn’t seem right to me,” Jennifer said.
“Well, look at it this way —There’s an old man,


old and doddering, not strong enough to look for
anything. He might look until doomsday, or even die,
before he finds the treasure that he reckons is some-
where on these fields. He may be right, and he may
be wrong. It’s all a gamble and when there’s a gamble
—we’re for it.”
“It’s hard to understand. If I do help, and you do
find it, you’ll promise to give old Simon his share of
it, won’t you?”
“Now little mascot, that’s exacdy what we will do.
We are kind-hearted and you guessed right the very
first time. You seem to know us through and through.”
He winked slyly at the other men. “We’re that soft-
hearted! Well more than likely give the biggest wad
of the treasure to him.”
“We’d better push along through the bush,” Dave
said, “and get to the slope below Simon’s hut. Well
be out of sight there,”
They started off again. Leaving the track, they
pushed their way through rough bush. Two men
walked ahead holding back the bushes for Jennifer.
The third man walked behind, helping when she
slipped on the rough ground. She soon tired. The heat
of the sun increased and the dense bush kept any
breeze away. The walk seemed never-ending. She was
glad when the men called a halt and suggested that it
was time to boil the billy.
She was tired, but interested in billy tea. She had
looked forward to this Australian habit, little guessing


under what circumstances she would first encounter it.
Tom was an expert. He made a fire, hung a billy on
a forked branch, watched for it to boil, then brewed
the tea, poured it into mugs, and handed one to
Jennifer. Bill cut thick slices of bread and butter and
handed these out, too. Jennifer was thirsty, even
hungry, and found that she enjoyed this rough repast.
They set out again and soon came to another clearing,
similar in appearance to the place where Simon’s hut
had been.
Tom, the silent member of the party, carried a
knapsack with the billy and utensils hanging from it.
He now put it on the ground and, opening it, took
out a leather case. He opened the case and inside it
Jennifer saw something carefully folded. She guessed
it was the plan.
Tom unrolled the plan, spread it out on the ground,
and put a stone on each corner to keep it flat. The plan
resembled a map.
“Now,” he said, “the little lady can get to work.”
He handed Jennifer a pencil and a notebook. “All
you have to do,” he said, “is to write down each word
you see on the plan and then write the meaning beside
•
It.
Jennifer looked at Tom with surprise. His voice was
more refined than the others. She had not noticed it
before. She looked at the plan, studied the words care-
fully and then said: “I don’t understand one word of it.
I can’t make it out at all.”


“None of that! None of that!” Bill said. “We heard
you say that you could translate it, that you knew
Italian, and it’s in Italian, isn’t it? So none of your
tricks. You do not understand the mining terms. You
translate —we’ll do the rest.”
It is Italian, but I truly can’t understand it.
“Study it carefully,” Tom said. “And I’ll do what
I can to help you. I have an idea it’s in dialect. Even
being able to translate one word might give us a clue,
so go ahead.”
Jennifer was really puzzled. She had been con-
sidered an apt pupil. She had learned Italian early. The
task she had now was a difficult one and she had little
inclination to puzzle her head. Here was an excuse —
this would hinder the men.
So she sat with pencil and notebook, and copied out
all the words written on the plan. While she did so,
she watched the men out of the corner of her eyes.
She was surprised to see them take from their knapsack
a number of instruments, among them a long tape
measure, the kind she had seen surveyors use. They
measured the ground with it, first looking at the map
and then taking measurements.
“Were you able to translate any of the words?” she
asked, curiously.
“No, that’s your business, but a map’s a map, and
we may be able to trace something by the drawing.
It’s a very old map and the landmarks have changed.
We’ve got to do a good bit of guessing. So you needn’t


think that you are hindering us altogether, if you
refuse to translate those words. The only good you
are to us is that you can help shorten the search, and
we are not anxious to keep you too long. So the
quicker you get to work, the better.”
“But if I honestly don’t understand it, how can I
help?”
“You’ve got to understand it, and you’re going to
stay here until you do. No nonsense either—no wrong
translation. We can easily prove whether your trans-
lation is correct,” Tom said.


CHAPTER XXII
JOHN ASSISTS SIMON
While Jennifer was puzzling her head over the plan,
John was puzzling his over Simon, wondering how
to pacify the old man.
He had found him sitting in a dazed state upon an
upturned box among the ruins of his hut. Tears were
streaming down his cheeks. He held his accordion on
his knees.
“They’ve got my plan—the robbers!”
“They might not have it,” John tried to comfort
him. “Considering you don’t remember where you put
it —could not find it yourself—they may not have
found it either.”
“They’ve got it all right. I remembered in the night
where I’d hidden it. That’s when my memory is good.
I set out at once, and this is what I found! Not even
a pillow to put my head on. The plan was in the
middle of that pillow—right inside the stuffing. They
had no need to pull the whole house to pieces to find
it. Cruel—cruel . . . hard! That’s what it is.”
“Never mind, Simon. I’ll go after those beastly men.


I'll get your plan for you, and I’ll build up your house
again. In the meantime, you had better come home
with me and 111 make you comfortable until your
place is fit to five in again.”
“What! Leave home again? Never! See what’s
happened the first time I stayed away. I’ve lost my
home; I’ve lost my plan; I’ve lost everything—and it’s
all your fault.”
“You haven’t lost your accordion, Simon!” John
said, trying to pacify the old man. “How about giving
us a litde tune? That might make you feel better.”
Simon took up his accordion and started to play.
By and by he was lost in a world of his own. John
looked round. He found a pillow among the debris.
It had been ripped open and the kapok blew hither
and thither. Picking it up, he closed it together, put
a stone on one end of it to keep the rest of the kapok
intact, and continued his search. He found that Simon’s
provisions had not been touched and that all his other
possessions had only been scattered about. He collected
these and piled them into a heap.
“It won’t take long to get this shipshape,” he said
to Simon. “In the meantime, I’ll boil the billy and get
you some tea. Your provisions are all right.” He went
on talking, and Simon played on, taking little notice.
John collected dry twigs and laid a fire, lit it, and
filled the billy with water, setting it over the flames.
When the water came to the boil, he threw a handful
of tea into it and took the billy from the fire. Setting
it on the ground, he banged it with a stone.


“You know how to do it,” Simon said. “You’re a
bit of a bushman yourself.”
John grinned with pleasure. “Had plenty of practice
with dad.”
Leaving the tea to draw, John cut thick slices of
bread, using an upturned box for a table. He spread
the slices with golden syrup from a tin he had found
among Simon’s provisions. He had also found Simon’s
enamel mug and filled it with the steaming amber
beverage. Simon put his accordion aside and held out
his hand eagerly.
“Plenty of sugar!” he said.
John heaped sugar into the mug. “There’s something
to eat, too,” he said. “The bread’s a bit stale, but it’s
got plenty of syrup on it.”
“That’s fine, lad. There’s nothing like a drop of tea
to refresh you.”
“A drop of tea!” John smiled to himself as he
watched Simon empty his mug, then hold it out to
be filled again. “You’ll feel strong after that,” he said.
“Strong enough to come back with me. You’d better
get into some clothes. I’ve got them ready for you.”
“I don’t mind getting into my clothes, but I’ll have
you know I mean to stay here. And here I’m going
to stay, to straighten things out a bit. I mean to have
a shelter above my head by the time night comes.”
“You’re not well enough to stay alone, or strong
enough to clear up this mess. I’ll help you build up
the shanty again,” John said, coming to the conclusion
it was the only thing to do. So while Simon changed


into a pair of trousers and old shirt, John set to work.
He was surprised when Simon joined him, took charge,
and directed him, “I mean to build it again and to start
right now. The posts are still standing, and that’s a
help,” he said. “Get all that stuff out of the way.”
“Right-oh!”
“Be careful of that bit of tin! That’s a fine piece, no
leakages; it goes over my bed. Put it to one side. Come
here, now! Help me to strengthen these posts. They
need strengthening before we start on the roof.”
They both worked hard, and after several hours
there was a hut again. They surveyed it with pride.
“Why, it looks better than it did before!” John
exclaimed.
Oh, well, it s an ill wind that blows nobody any
good. It needed a bit of renovating. I meant to do
it when I had a bit of time.”
Then, without any warning, the old man again
showed signs of exhaustion. John feared he might
collapse.
“You’ve been working too hard,” he said, with
concern. “You’d better take a rest.”
Simon took up his favourite seat on a box in front
of his hut, and John, tj/ed too, threw himself on the
ground beside him.
Do you feel all right?” he asked, anxiously.
“How about another drop of tea?” the old man said
in his quavering voice. “That’s the thing that revives
me.”


John jumped up quickly and set to work. Collecting
more twigs, he built up a fire and set the billy to boil.
When it boiled, he brewed the tea and filled the mug
for the old man. Then he watched him gulp it down
and noted how quickly the steaming beverage revived
him.
John had been so busy he had forgotten Jennifer.
Now, with everything done and resting quietly beside
Simon, he wondered why she had not joined him.
“I suppose dad’s call didn’t come through in time,”
he said to himself. Then his attention was drawn to a
sound. He thought it was the distant sound of a plane
he heard—the thrum of the engine.
“That sounds like a plane,” he said to Simon.
“More than likely it is. They often pass over here.”
John looked up and saw the plane flying at a great
height, then drop and come down thousands of feet
and circle as if about to land.
“I did not know there was an aerodrome about
here.” John was excited.
“Not a regular one, lad, but a place where a plane
can land. They do use it sometimes, when there’s
anything urgent.”
“Do you think that that one is going to land?”
“It looks like it. It must be something important.”
John immediately thought of - Hitchens and his
father. He wondered if there was the same urgent need
for one to get back before the other, and if his father
or Hitchens had used this means to get back first.


“I’d like to see it land,” he said to Simon. “Is the
landing ground far from here?”
“A good few miles. And it will be down long before
you get there.”
“I suppose so.” John stood up.
He was satisfied that he had done all that was
necessary for the old man. Simon was happy now that
he had a roof over his head, and John had a glow of
satisfaction that he had helped in this achievement.
There was no longer any need to feel responsibility
towards the old man. His father would be satisfied
about that —he had surely done everything that was
necessary, and was quite sure now that the plan was
gone. Old Simon would not be molested again. He
was anxious to hear from Jennifer about his father’s
telephone call.
“I’ll be getting along now, Simon. You’ll be all
right!”
“Don’t go lad. I’ve a fancy to talk to you. Now that
the plan has gone, there is no need to keep the secret,
and I’d like to tell you about it. I remember things
clearly to-day. Another day I might not remember so
well.”
John hesitated. He wanted to listen to Simon’s story.
He was also anxious to know about the telephone call.
He was beginning to be worried about Jennifer. Then
he remembered that his father had said, “Get Simon
to tell you his story”, so he decided to stay and hear it.


CHAPTER XXIII
SIMON’S STORY
Simon started his story.
“I’m an old man,” he said. “Seventy-four, come this
spring. It is sixty years ago that I first saw this country
and a flourishing goldmine it was, too. I started work
at fourteen.”
“What kind of work could you do then?”
“I was on the trucks. I worked the points. The
miners dug up the quartz with pickaxe and shovel.
There was plenty of gold in those days.* It came out of
the ground rich and plentiful.”
“Did they have machinery to crush the quartz as
they have now?”
“Battery, yes; but it was free gold more often than
not. They did some such thing as crushing, but I
forget how they did it.”
“Did you work both trucks? The ones that carried
the mullock as well as the quartz?”
“Yes, and busy it kept me in the tunnels. The
miners were a happy crowd and everything went well
until one day they found that the mine had changed
hands.”


“How do you mean?”
“There were different owners. I heard a lot about
outsiders buying up all the shares and getting control.
I didn’t understand much of this talk, but I soon
learned that the miners would not work for their new
bosses. The first owners had always payed a bonus
which kept the miners interested and keen. The new
owners refused to pay one.”
“That was a bit tough!” John said. “The men must
have been used to earning a bit extra.”
“You’re right, lad; and the miners resented the loss
of it and talked about revenge.”
“What did they do?”
“Most of them did nothing. They just left the mine
and looked for work elsewhere. However, there was
an Italian called Tony. He stayed on and waited his
chance of revenge.”
“Did he ever get it?”
“That he did, and cleverly too. After the new
owners took possession, they struck a rich patch of
gold, Tony, being one of the old hands with a know-
ledge of mines, had been made underground foreman.
One night he came to me with a plot. I was frightened,
being only a lad, and did not want to fall in with
his plan. However, he threatened me and I was too
terrified to do anything but obey.”
“What was his plot?”
“It was a very simple one. We had been ordered to
fill up a winze with mullock. It was on a level near


where they were getting rich quartz. He made me
fill it with the quartz as well as the mullock. The
mullock went on top of the rich stuff.”
“Phew!” John whistled.
“Yes, loads of rich quartz full of free gold were
dumped away like water through a sieve, and how my
heart beat when I saw that gold tipped into the winze
and then covered with the mullock and lost for ever.”
“Surely the miners missed it? The bosses would
soon find out that it wasn’t coming to the top,” John
said.
“I suppose they did.”
“How puzzled they must have been,” said John.
“Yes, and we were not there to be questioned. It
would be impossible to know what had happened.”
“Where did you go?”
“I went with Tony right away. He opened a shop
later on and I worked for him. At first he had had
no idea of anything but revenge. But that rich and
hidden gold worried him. He thought about it and
thought, and thought, and I was the only one he dared
to talk to about it. He had to keep the secret, and not
even his daughter, whom I married later, ever knew
about it.”
“It’s a wonder it hasn’t been discovered long ago,
the way they are always tunnelling mines.”
“That’s not the end of the story,” Simon continued.
“That rich vein was the next thing that got lost. It
just disappeared and they couldn’t pick it up again.


The new owners went broke and the mine was idle
for many years. Tony by now had a nice little business
of his own, but he plotted and planned about that
gold and, unknown to me, he started buying up the
shares, which had dropped pretty low. He was scared
about what he had done and, thinking he might be
caught, he made me his partner in everything and
put the shares in my name. After he had bought all
these shares, the mine closed down. He was stumped.
He didn’t know what to do. He tried to work out a
scheme to get the gold, but found this would cost too
much. It got on his mind and he worried and worried.
He went away for a long time, then returned. He just
sat about brooding. Then one day he had a kind of
stroke. He lost his speech for a long time, and when
he got it back again, he’d forgotten all his English:
he could only talk his own lingo. I soon found out
that there was something special that he wanted to
tell me, but I never could make head or tail of what
he was getting at, and he wouldn’t let his daughter
hear. He worried about her, something he wanted to
keep from her. I guess that he had something on his
conscience and wanted to load it on to me. He had
plotted and planned about this gold for so long that
he couldn’t get it off his mind. It nearly drove him
mad. It wore his daughter out and it helped to kill
her, too, I guess. I know it killed him, and it nearly
wore me out too. His business went to pieces.”
“What was his business?”


“He was a fruiterer. I drove his truck to the markets
and delivered his goods to his customers, and he and
his daughter had always looked after the shop. When
she died, we had to get strangers. Everything went
wrong.”
“When did you first find out about the plan?”
“That was his secret, I’m thinking. What he wanted
to tell me. He gave it to me on his deathbed. I pre-
tended to understand him, just to give him a little
comfort, but I’ve been puzzling over it ever since.”
“How long have you been back on the mine?”
“Twenty years, lad. Just doing a bit of prospecting
here and there and making a living, and in between
whiles looking for his gold. I was here long before
the mine opened again, and long before they set up
all this newfangled machinery that’s doing jobs men
used to do. They are looking for the lost vein and
expect to find it! They were not the first to look and
won’t be the last. They’ll give up like the others. It’s
my opinion the gold just petered out and there’s none
to find except the hidden gold.”
“But what about all those shares of yours? Some
of the mine must belong to you.”
“That’s where your father comes in. He seems to
know what to do about it. The shares were only bits
of paper to me. The only solicitor who ever saw them
said that they were not worth the paper they were
written on, and I believed him.”
“What made him say that, I wonder?”


“It was true enough then,” old Simon shook his
head. “If a mine’s not working (and who’d have
thought it would be again?) what good is it? Now
that there are new owners, it’s probably still worthless
paper because the property has been divided in two.
But your father’s got some idea they are worth some-
thing. He found out that Tony bought them after the
place was cut in two. Tony probably knew what he
was doing when he bought them.”
“Well, he ought to know! But —I say ” John
said, “if you find that gold it will probably belong
to the new owners.”
Simon looked blankly at him.
“New owners, new owners? Well, well! Causing
trouble again. No bonus, no bonus!”
John wondered for a moment, then realized that
Simon was back in the past. He slipped quietly away,
anxious now to get home and hear the news from
Jennifer.
He ran most of the way along the track. Once on
the road, he went more slowly, beginning to feel
worn out. Nearing the house, he was surprised to see
his father standing at the gate. He started to run then
and arrived breathless.
“Where is Jennifer?” were his father’s first words.
John looked blankly at him.
“I left her at home,” he said.


CHAPTER XXIV
JENNIFER RUNS AWAY
While John listened to Simon’s story, Jennifer’s
adventure was becoming serious. At first she sat looking
at the plan, determined in her heart not to help the
men. She slowly copied the words from it into a
notebook, and with head bent studied it carefully.
She found there was a number of words she under-
stood, and these she wrote down first. After a while
the heat of the sun beating down on her head made
her feel dizzy. She put her hand on her hair; it was
burning. She felt her face flush and grow unbearably
hot.
“Oh, dear! I wish I had my hat.”
Tom was sitting beside her. The other two men
were still measuring the ground.
“You’ll get a touch of the sun,” Tom said. “Here!
Put this on —I’m used to it!” Tom pulled his old felt
hat off his head; it was wet with perspiration. She
drew back.
“No thank you!”
“It’s better than nothing. You’ll get sunstroke if you


don’t!” He put his hand in his pocket and pulled out
some papers. “I’ll make a paper cap for the inside,”
he said, “and then you won’t mind so much.”
Jennifer blushed. “Oh, I’m used to being without a
hat. I never wore one on board ship.”
“Well, you’d better wear one now —here!” He
handed the hat to her. It was fully lined with paper.
She put it on her head and pulled it down over her
curls.
“That’s better,” he said. “We need your brains and
we don’t want the sun to affect them. Now get busy
and I’ll see what I can do too. I might be useful.”
Jennifer realized that Tom noticed everything. She
was trying to think of a way to deceive him, but found
it too difficult. Getting weary and bored, and not enjoy-
ing the adventure as much as she had expected, and
being in the habit of doing only what she wished,
this enforced task began to annoy her.
“I feel tired. Can’t I have a little rest?”
“Rest afterwards,” Tom said gruffly.
“What are Dave and Bill doing now?” Jennifer
inquired, delaying her task by watching the men. “See,
they have left off measuring and are digging. Perhaps
they have found something.”
“Perhaps; but don’t worry about them. You go
ahead and do your own work! What’s that word now!”
Tom pointed to the first word she had written in her
notebook.”
"Due passi.”


JENNIFER RUNS AWAY
“What does it mean?” Tom asked.
“Two steps.”
“And what’s this one?”
“Davanti al: it means ‘in front of’.”
“In front of what, I wonder,” Tom mused. “Come
on, we are getting somewhere. What’s that?”
‘‘Verso il sud, towards the south.”
“You’re pretty good,” Tom said, and there was
admiration in his voice. “We’ll get somewhere soon.”
Jennifer decided not to be so clever, so she puzzled
over the next word, and said she did not understand it.
“Hurry, this is important! We may get at it now.”
He whistled to Dave and Bill, who waved, but were
busy and intent on something.
“You come here!” they shouted to Tom.
Tom took the book from Jennifer’s hands. She had
written the translation beside the words. He was
excited.
“You go on thinking out the other words. Study the
plan. I’ll show this to Bill and Dave.” He hurried
away.
Jennifer watched him and quietly pushed the stones
off the corners of the plan. The other two men were
stooping. They were below an embankment, heads
and shoulders only in view. Tom reached the men
and jumped down to their level. Jennifer saw them
put their heads together and become deeply interested
in her notebook. Now was her chance! Quickly she
rolled up the map, jumped to her feet and turned


and ran towards the bush. If she could only reach it
before the men missed her! she could easily find the
track and race for home.
She heard the men give sudden shouts, and guessed
they had seen her running away. They were now
running after her. She did not look back, but kept
running on, her long legs covering the ground at an
astonishing rate.
“No use, mascot!” Tom called. “You can’t get away
with it! You’ll get lost in the bush, and you’ll never
be found.”
“Go slow!” Bill called. “You haven’t a hope —three
against one!”
She sped on without answering and reaching the
bushes found a tangled mass of thick growth that
almost barred her way. Pushing desperately through
it, unable to hurry, but glad of the shelter, she fought
her way along, heedless of scratches. She heard the
men call; heard them thrash the bushes behind her,
heard them break away the tangled growth. They
seemed close. She expected at any moment that their
large hands would seize her. Dodging behind great
trees, pausing only for a moment to take breath and
listen to her pursuers, she kept on.
Very soon she realized that the men were making a
ring around her. Her only hope of escape was to find
a hiding-place. She chose a large solitary rock. The
trunk of a great tree grew against it. She pushed her
way through bushes to it, found that the base of the


JENNIFER RUNS AWAY
stone was slightly hollowed, and that the tree trunk
was in front of it. Hardly enough room for a hiding-
place, but it was her only choice. She pushed and
struggled into the hollow at the back of the tree. So
tightly was she wedged, that she wondered if she
would ever be able to get out again. However, this did
not worry her now. Her only anxiety was to evade
capture.
“Cooee —cooee! Come out of your hiding-place. It’s
getting dark —you’ll be lost.”
The men were very close —she heard them breathing
heavily, heard them swear in low voices, then call
loudly. She was startled by this, so close were they
that she hardly believed it possible they could miss her.
“Come out! Come out! We’ll take you home. You
can keep the plan.”
She held the plan tighdy under her arm.
“The little tiger cat! I’ll get even with her for this.
Wait till I find her,” Bill said softly.
She squeezed farther into her hiding-place, then her
heart beat suffocatingly as she heard one of the men
say:
“This is a likely place to hide. Give it a thorough
search—right round the rock. I’ll go one way —you
go the other.”
She caught glimpses of the men as they walked
round and round. She saw their legs through the
bushes as they bent to peer through them. She
wondered that they did not see her. She thought that


this might be because her khaki riding habit was
almost the colour of the stone she crouched against.
But she held her breath, expecting at any moment to
hear a shout —a shout of triumph.
By and by, however, the men moved away, their
voices became fainter. They continued to cooee and
to call, and every moment these calls were farther
away, and she knew that she was safe for the time
being, so she crept from behind the rock. She was
stiff and cramped.
Everything was quiet and very still. She had no
idea in which direction to go, and Bill’s words came
to her—“lost in the bush”. Which way should she go ?
Where was the track? She had no idea. She almost
wished that the men were searching close to her—close
enough for her to be able to call to them. She suddenly
became nervous. Suppose she could not find her way?
Night came so quickly in this part of the world. She
walked this way and that. The sound of birds seeking
their nests made her realize darkness was near, and
the scurrying of little animals as they sought shelter
for the night. Darkness quite suddenly, and the bush
filled with alarming sounds!
Jennifer was alone in the bush.


CHAPTER XXV
RONALD HOGARTH RETURNS
“I am sorry you left your sister alone in the house,”
Ronald said a little sharply. “It was thoughtless of
you, John.”
“But she was going to follow me. You told me to
keep an eye on Simon, and he disappeared and I
went to look for him.”
“And didn’t Jennifer follow as she promised?
Haven’t you seen her?”
John shook his head. “No, I came back to find out
why she was so long, and to hear about your telephone
call. How did you get back? Oh! The plane, was
that you? I suppose you had to beat Hitchens back.”
“No, John. I was anxious about Jennifer. That is
why I came by plane. I am still worried. Where is she?”
“Perhaps she went off to see the mine again. She
was very keen about it.”
“I can’t imagine her doing that and staying away all
these hours. At any rate, we’ll go to the mine and find
out if she has been there. We’ll have to walk. My
car’s in Sydney.”


As John walked down the road beside his father,
he was puzzled, but not worried about Jennifer. He
was more anxious to hear his father’s news. But Ronald
Hogarth walked quickly and John, keeping in step
with him, had little breath to ask questions.
After walking in silence for some time, Ronald
lessened his pace.
“Tell me exactly what happened, John. You told
me that Simon’s hut was wrecked. Did you find out
who did it?”
“No, but the plan has gone.”
“How do you know that ? Simon said he had lost it.”
“In the night he remembered where he put it, and
that was why he went away. I went after him directly
after breakfast, and found him sitting among the ruins
of his hut. He was terribly upset at first, and worried
by the loss of his plan. However, he was more worried
by the loss of his home. I helped him build it again,
and he was more cheerful when I left him. And I
say, dad, he told me his story. It’s a stinger!”
“Tell me, John, about those men. Have you seen
them since last night?”
“No.”
“I wonder why they came to the house? It seems
strange. It is evident that they wrecked the hut, and
the reason for that must have been to find the plan.
If they found it, what else did they want?”
“How did you know that they were at the house?”
John asked.


“Jennifer told me when I rang. I told her to treat
the men naturally, as if she knew nothing about their
actions, and to apologize for my absence last night.
I thought they would go away when they found that
I was not there. Then I became worried, and later
I rang again and Mrs Brown told me that Jennifer
had left the house without leaving word, and that she
had heard threatening voices. She was sure something
dreadful had happened to Jennifer. I know that Mrs
Brown is an alarmist, and tried to calm my fears; but
I could not afford to take any risks. I decided to
charter a plane. My anxiety may have been unnecessary.
I only hope so. But I am very puzzled and worried
that Jennifer should be away so long. This is a small
mining town and there is no place for her to go. It
seems strange to me.”
“It does seem a bit strange,” John said. “Except, of
course, that Jennifer might have gone exploring a bit,
looking for wild flowers or something.”
“I hardly think that. Her first thought would have
been to join you and, as she didn’t, I still think that
there is something very wrong.”
John became a little anxious. He thought, too, that
girls caused a lot of bother, and he might have known
something like this would happen. He wanted to hear
his father s story, and discuss Simon’s with him. But
his father was silent all the way to the mine. When
they arrived there, a foreman came forward.


“How are things ?” Ronald inquired. “Men working
all right? Are they all on the job?”
“All except Dave, Tom and Bill, sir. They took a
holiday, their excuse being that Hitchens and you
being away, they were not under orders.”
John glanced quickly at his father and was surprised
to note the casual way in which he addressed the
foreman.
“What do you think these men would do with a
holiday?”
“Go fishing, I should say. There are plenty of fish
in the creek. They might even go prospecting. More
than likely they would, they’re that type.”
Ronald Hogarth said: “Where do they do their
prospecting?”
“Along by the creek, or round about the old shaft,
up yonder.”
“Where are their tents?”
“Pitched just over there.” The man pointed. “Not
far off the roadside. You can see the top of them from
here.”
“Thank you, Lane. Closing down now ? I’ll see you
in the morning. We’ll go now, John. Keep things
moving until Hitchens comes on the job to-morrow,”
“Right, sir!”
“Oh, by the way. Did my daughter inspect the
mine at any time during the day?”
“No,” Lane shook his head; “she hasn’t been here.”
As they walked away, John once again found it


difficult to keep up with his father’s long strides. They
went to the tents first, but there was no sign of any one.
Ronald called the name of each of the men, and looked
into each tent, but found no one and heard no one.
“We'll take the track to the old shafts first, it is
better than going through the mine. We can go
along the river later,” John’s father decided.
They hurried back along the road until they came to
the track and, taking this, had to lessen their pace.
It was some time before they came to the clearing
where Simon had his hut. They cooeed and called.
An answering call came from Simon, thrusting his
head out through the opening that served as a door.
John surveyed the hut proudly.
“Made a good job of it, didn’t we?” he said.
But Ronald Hogarth was too preoccupied to answer.
“Oh, boss, how glad I am to see you back!” Simon
called. “Those scoundrels have got my plan! They . .
“Have you seen those same scoundrels lately,
Simon?”
“No, but I heard them not long since, shouting and
calling as if someone was lost. First, I thought they
were coming after me, but their shouts went off in that
direction.” He pointed to the densely wooded country.
“How long ago was that?”
“Not long since, and they kept up shouting and
calling for a long time.”
“Did you hear what they called?”


“It sounded as if they threatened someone, and
sometimes they seemed to be coaxing.”
“I’ll see you again, Simon. I have something impor-
tant to tell you. It will have to wait. Come along, John!”
“Where are we going?”
“Into the scrub, I have an idea that those men were
looking for Jennifer. She may have run away from
them and be hiding. We can do a bit of shouting
ourselves.”
They walked into the thick scrub —cooeed and
called and shouted —“Jennifer! —Jennifer!” But Jenni-
fer was a long way out of hearing. Terrified by the
darkness, she had wandered far away.


CHAPTER XXVI
JENNIFER IS LOST
When darkness descended so suddenly upon Jennifer,
her first thought was to find the track. She was sure
she knew the direction, and ran through the scrub,
breaking brushes away, scrambling over fallen logs
and tripping over stones in her anxiety to find it. When
she could not find it, her anxiety increased. She ran
hither and thither becoming more hopelessly lost every
moment.
What shall I do? What shall I do?” she sobbed.
Tripping against a log, she sat down upon it.
“Pull yourself together, Jennifer,” she said firmly.
“Don’t run about in that stupid way. Stay in one
place. John will come looking soon.”
After that she felt better. The plan was safely inside
her blouse where she had thrust it. She felt a glow
of pride that she had been able to get it back for old
Simon.
“That’ll surprise John,” she said.
The thought cheered her. She wished more than
anything in the world to please John. She wanted him
to think more of her than of his pal Teddy.


“Bother Teddy,” she murmured. “If it hadn’t been
for him, John would have been glad to have me. He
thinks I can’t be any use to him, and that I’ve spoilt
his holiday. Getting the plan will make him feel a
little different, anyway.”
These thoughts calmed her a little. She was less
nervous. Then something rustled at her feet, and it all
came back. It was perhaps a harmless lizard, but she
shrank away, drew her feet up to the log, and crouched
in a huddled position, not daring to stir.
“Might be a snake,” she thought.
Then a sound startled her. A mopoke in a tree, close
by, gave its mournful cry —“Moo-poke!”
Terrified, she sprang to her feet, wishing to run, to
keep on running; but common sense came to her aid.
“There are no wild animals in the bush, I know
that; and there is nothing that could really do me any
harm.”
She stayed quietly leaning against a tree, trembling
a little, her breath coming in short gasps.
“Oh, I must stay in one place,” she whispered, “or
John will never find me.”
She walked cautiously and found another log, sat
upon it and stared about her. Her eyes had become
used to the darkness. She saw the dim shapes of the
trees; everything was very still. Something small and
white bobbed past her. She knew it was the tail of a
rabbit. Then again that rustle—rustle.
She did not like creepy, crawly things. She drew


JENNIFER IS LOST
her feet up beside her again. Scurry—scurry—! The
little bush animals pattered about.
“They’re quite harmless,” she assured herself, over
and over again.
“Moo-poke!” That horrible cry again.
“Oh, dear! I must move. I can’t keep still!”
She clung to die log as if to hold herself in one
place.
“I’ll have to stay here! I’ll have to stay here,” she
murmured.
Then she heard another sound. She listened for a
moment, puzzled. It was like the roar of the wind—
but there was no wind and everything was still. Then
she remembered.
“The waterfall!” she said aloud.
She thought about the scene that had attracted her
in the morning and remembered how lovely the fall
looked in the sunlight.
“There was clear ground about it, I remember. If I
could get there, I could easily find the track.”
She stood up and listened intently.
“I’d never lose my way if I followed the sound,”
she whispered. “I’ll try. I can’t—can’t keep still any
longer.”
She moved forward, walking cautiously, making
sure of her direction, by following the sound of the
falls. She became interested, less distressed, and made
her way more easily, not knowing that she was getting


far out of reach of any other sound. John and her
father called, but she did not hear them.
They called and shouted until they were hoarse. At
last, disheartened, they gave up, and returned to the
track.
“It may have been a mistake. I must find these men,
it’s the only way. Let us go back,” Ronald said.
“Yes, and if we get too far off the track, we may
not find it again,” John said. “The men may be back
in their tents by now.”
“That is what I think, and we had better get back
there now.”
They had gone only a short distance in the bush,
but found it difficult to get on to the track again and,
because of the darkness, had to go slowly. When they
reached the road, it was quite dark.
They turned towards the miners’ tents, and when
some distance away saw lights and heard the men’s
voices.
“They are back,” John said.
“Bill—Dave!” Ronald shouted.
Bill came slowly from his tent
“Anything I can do for you?” he said.
“Yes! I want to know if you have seen my daughter.
She told me on the phone this morning that you had
just arriyed at the house. She has been away all day
and no one has seen her. Mrs Brown tells me she
went away with you men.”
“Didn’t she get back?” Bill drawled. “We took her


JENNIFER IS LOST
to see a bit of the country. She wanted to see the
scenery and she was so interested, she ran off on her
own. She must have missed the track.”
“You had another reason for taking her. What was
it?” Ronald demanded.
“We heard her say she was interested in Italian and
we thought she might like to read some,” Bill said
flippantly.
Ronald Hogarth held his fists tightly closed, and
John clenched his. “You stole Simon’s plan,” they
both said at the same time.
“Well, you’d hardly call it stealing, boss. He had
no right to the plan, any more than we had.”
“It was his property,” Ronald said sternly, “and you
stole it. Call those other men out!”
“Tom —Dave! The boss wants a word with you.”
Tom and Dave walked out of their tents. They had
their hands deep in their pockets, and their manner
was insolent.
“Good evening, Mr Hogarth. How’s Sydney?” Tom
said.
Mr Hogarth ignored this question.
“I want Simon’s plan back, and also to know where
you left my daughter.”
“Bill, here, told you everything we knew. Your
daughter was interested in Italian, and she proved
how great her interest was by walking off with the
plan.”
“My daughter has the plan ? How do you expect me


to believe that? It seems to me an unlikely story.
Simon heard you calling to someone. Perhaps my
daughter ran away from you. If she did, and you were
able to find her, it is quite certain that you know her
whereabouts.”
“I can assure you we don’t. We know nothing more
about her than we’ve told you. She’s probably gone
home by now. You’ll find her there, and the plan, and
she’ll be able to tell you anything else you want to
know.”
“I’d like to believe you.”
“Is is just as well to. It will save you a lot of worry.”
John and his father turned and walked away with-
out another word.


CHAPTER XXVII
JENNIFER’S ABSENCE CAUSES ALARM
Jennifer kept steadily on towards the sound of the
waterfall. It was farther away than she expected. At
one moment she seemed quite close to it —the next,
very far away. The bush was dense. She wondered
why she did not reach clearer ground. She kept think-
ing of the waterfall as she had seen it in the sunlight
—a bright silver ribbon down the face of the cliff.
The thought calmed her fears. She felt less afraid, too,
when the moon rose. There were dark shadows, but
rays of light filtered through the trees and helped her
find her way through the bushes. By and by, the
sound of the falls increased to a roar, and closer still
came the sound of gurgling water. Emerging from
tangled growth, she came suddenly upon a mignificent
sight. She was on a small hill. A great cliff loomed
some distance away: The falls cascaded down the cliffs,
showing brightly in the moonlight. Between her and
the falls, there was a chasm of dark shadow. She
decided to stay on the hill and wait for John. Finding
a tree where the protruding roots formed a hollow,


she curled herself into the shelter of the roots, leant
against the trunk of the tree, and decided to stay there
for the night. The sound of the falling water became
a lullaby, and growing drowsy, she wondered if it
would be safe to sleep. She tried to keep herself awake
by staring at the stream of falling water.
Meanwhile, her brother and father were striding
quickly back to the house, hoping thajt Jennifer had
returned home.
“Those men may have been speaking the truth,”
John said cheerfully. “And if she’s got that plan, she’s
a bit of a marvel. But it’s hard to believe that a girl
would have so much sense.”
“John,” Ronald said, “you seem to have a poor
opinion of the opposite sex.”
On the way back John asked questions.
“Did you get to Sydney before Hitchens?”
“Yes. I got there first, but I had a hard race for it.
I saw Hitchens s car pass me again just as I came out
from telephoning to you, and I had to keep behind
all the way. I did not wish him to know I was follow-
ing. I managed to slip ahead when near Sydney—took
a side road.”
“Why was it so important to get there before him ?
Did he have anything to do with these other men and
their plan to steal from Simon?”
“No, no! Not exactly. It’s a complicated business
and I’ll tell you about it later; but there is something


you may as well hear at once. I am no longer manager
of the mine. Hitchens takes my place.”
“Oh!” John gasped. “How beastly.”
“It may not be as beasdy as it sounds. We’ll see. At
any rate, Jennifer is my main worry now, not only
because of her absence from home, but the impractic-
ability of her continuing to stay with us under the
new circumstances. As I am no longer manager, it
means we shall shortly be without a home. I shall
have to persuade Jennifer that the best thing she can
do is to go back to her grandmother until we are
settled again.”
“You surely won’t be staying on here, now that you
are not manager.”
“Yes, I will. Oh, look John! There are lights in the
house. Jennifer must be back.”
They hurried to the house. Mrs Brown was standing
in the open doorway. They had not expected to see
her. It was her habit to leave early.
“Where is that poor child?” she called. “Didn’t you
bring her back with you?”
Jennifer’s father and brother stood where they were,
unable to speak. They had comforted themselves with
the thought that Jennifer would be home and this was
really a dreadful shock.
Ronald was the first to recover. “Quick, John!” he
said. “There is no time to waste. I’ll get the miners to
help. We’ll have to get out a search party. If those


men were speaking the truth, Jennifer has wandered
away and got lost.”
For the second time in one evening, John found it
difficult to keep up with his father. Mr Hogarth ran
back along the road. He stopped first at Mrs Brown’s
house and, finding her husband at home, said;
“Brown! I want you to get as many of the miners
together as you can, and form a search party. My
daughter has wandered into the bush and got lost.”
“I’m sorry about that,” Brown said. “Well help you,
sir. Well all do what we can. The men know how
to look for any one who is lost. Many a time they’ve
been out after a prospector, one not used to these parts,
and it’s surprising how easily they get bushed. But
no harm has ever come to any one. Don’t you worry.”
Mr Hogarth was striding towards the gate while
Brown talked.
“Thank you, Brown,” he called. “Make haste!”
Brown’s cheering words made John feel Jennifer
would be found, and safely home in a few hours,
talking gaily of her experiences.
It was surprising how short a space of time it took
to get a search party together. Men quickly gathered
outside Brown’s house which was to be the starting
place. All searchers set out in couples and each couple
was told which direction to take. John went with his
father.
In the meantime, Jennifer was still struggling against
sleep. She had overcome her fear of little beasties, but


had now a new fear that if she slept she would miss
John—so sure was she that he would come. She listened
for his call, not realizing that the roar of the waterfall
drowned any other sound.
The exciting events of the past few days passed
through her mind. She wondered if she were really
Jennifer, or somebody else. Her thoughts flew to the
ghost story that old Simon had told. She shuddered
and crouched closer to the tree, looked again at the
waterfall, which gave her comfort, sat up suddenly
and stared —a phantom figure floated about the falls.
“Perhaps old Simon’s story is true, after all, and
there is a real ghost!” Then she laughed. “It’s a silver
veil in the sunlight,” she said, “but a ghost in the
moonlight.”
She closed her eyes, and sleep, that she had struggled
against, came to her. Worn out, she slept as soundly
as if she were in her own bed.


CHAPTER XXVIII
THE THREE MINERS DISAPPEAR
When Jennifer opened her eyes the next morning, she
wondered for a moment why she was surrounded by
trees. She sat up quickly.
“Where am I?” she said.
Then she remembered, and sprang to her feet. She
looked upon what she had imagined in the night to
be a deep chasm, and found it a sunlit valley.
Oh, oh! How lovely, I thought it was a gulf between
precipices.”
The shadowy chasm was a valley of lovely trees, and
the early dawn filled sky and land with a rosy glow,
burnishing the tree-tops a bright copper. The rising
sun shed golden light upon the side of the great cliff
down which the falls tumbled with a merry sound.
She listened. It seemed an accompaniment to the notes
of a thousand birds that filled the air with joyous
sound. But Jennifer listened for something else
John’s call.
“I wonder where he is?”
She ran to a place where the hill sloped away sharply
. . her knees trembled a little.


“I must have come a long way. That’s why my
knees shake,” she said aloud.
She stood looking about her, expecting to see a
clear pool of water, with mountain and sky reflected
in it, as she had seen it the day before; but trees spread
out before her in a dense forest.
“I wonder . . .” Then suddenly she realized what
had happened.
“I am on the wrong side of the falls. How did I
manage to walk so far ? I shall have to get to the other
side now and it is a long way.” She sighed.
She started walking, little knowing that searchers
had been out all night looking for her, and that these
searchers were straggling back to Mrs Brown, after
an all-night search, each and all expecting to hear
news of the missing girl, and puzzled that there was
none.
The miners’ wives had gathered to serve tea and
sandwiches to the men.
The work of the day had to go forward, and most
of the miners had to be back on their jobs. Other
volunteers came forward. Further searching continued.
The first three new volunteers were Dave, Tom and
Bill.
John did not know whether to be pleased at this, or
not, and Mr Hogarth, who could not refuse help, was
still suspicious of the men.
“One or other of us will have to join up and keep
with those men,” he said to John.


They waited, intending to start away at the same
time as the new men. While they waited, Ronald said:
“It’s a bad business, John! Your sister is not used
to this climate; it may affect her. I had hoped to find
her before the heat of the day. It looks as if she may
have become exhausted by wandering around in a
circle. We must find her quickly.
John bit his lip. He felt unmanly enough to want
to put his head against his father’s shoulder, as he
had done so often when very small, and shed the tears
he found difficulty in holding back. He hated, more
than anything, the thought that Jennifer might be
hurt, frightened, or in some desperate plight, and
worst of all, that she was alone.
She had spoken of her loneliness so often that he
felt that this was the worst thing that could befall her
—to be alone. And how terribly alone she must be in
this strange country. She would not know that her
greatest safety was to keep in one place. He was
afraid that Jennifer, with her impulsive ways, might
have run hither and thither, and been overcome with
exhaustion. He could not bear his own thoughts. He
wished Teddy were with him so that he could talk
to him. He wanted to be the hero of the hour, to find
his sister himself. The searchers were in twos —if only
Teddy had been with him, they would have gone
together.
He noticed that his father looked tired and ill.


“Go home, dad, and have a spell. I’ll keep after those
men and not let them out of my sight.”
“You are looking as if you need a rest yourself, lad.
I think you had better go off. I’ll keep with the
searchers. I could not rest —I am too anxious.”
“I couldn’t rest, either. But I think you ought to.
You haven’t had a break for a couple of days, what
with driving to Sydney, being up all night, and then
out in the bush all last night.”
“Perhaps you’re right, son. I’ll take a spell, I’m not
much good as I am. . . . When I’ve had a rest, I’ll
change places with you.”
Mr Hogarth was walking off when a man walked
up to him. John was surprised to recognize Hitchens
and also to see him hold out his hand. His father took
it, and there was no trace of enmity between the
two men. Hitchens’s manner was sympathetic and
friendly.
“I’m sorry about Jennifer. This is bad, but she’s sure
to be found very soon. She’s a sensible girl and won’t
lose her head. You look as if you need a rest. I’ve got
my car out on the road; let me drive you back to your
house.”
“That is kind of you. I’ll be glad of your help.”
Hitchens turned to John. “I’ll see you later,” he
said. “I’m joining the searchers. I have a great admira-
tion for that sister of yours and would hate any harm
to come to her.”
John smiled at Hitchens and was glad that they


were still able to be friends. He was puzzled about
the hasty visit to Sydney and the rivalry that was
apparent —wondered why such a drastic thing should
happen, that his father should no longer be manager.
Why was Hitchens to take his father’s place? And
why, under the circumstances, did his father still speak
of remaining at the mine? He could not believe that
his father would work under Hitchens, and yet, why
should he stay?
The searchers started off again and John attached
himself to the three miners.
“You seem to know what to do better than any of
the others,” John said, “and I’d like to keep with you.”
“That’s all right,” Bill said. “You’d better get some
provisions. It’s going to be a long trek this time. We’ve
beaten up every inch of bush around here. It seems
to us that that little sister of yours has made a beeline
somewhere. Most people who get lost go round in
circles. It looks a sure thing she hasn’t done that.”
“Don’t worry too much,” Tom said. “She’s got her
wits about her, and I should say she’s the last person to
lose her head. When she finds she gone too far away,
she’ll sit down and wait until someone finds her.”
I only hope so,” John said. “But what worries me
is that she’s not used to this country. The heat may
affect her and she’ll get terribly thirsty.”
“If she gets as far as the waterfall—but that’s a good
distance—there’s plenty of water there. We mean to
search there.”


“Surely she’ll never get as far as that!” John said.
“Well, it’s surprising how many miles people can
walk when they're lost, and come to no harm, either.”
The men delayed their departure for several hours,
stayed about giving instructions to the other searchers.
John wondered about these men. Surely they would
not do such a dastardly thing as to keep all these
searchers out if they knew his sister’s whereabouts.
At last they were ready to start. John decided to
leave word with his father where they intended to
search.
“Do you mind if I leave word for my father that
I’m with you, and we’re going as far as the waterfall ?”
“Not at all. Run along.”
The three men threw themselves on the ground,
and took out their pipes.
“We may as well rest while we’re waiting,” Dave
said, “and don’t forget some provisions.”
I won’t forget!” John said. “The women are sure
to have some and I’ll only be a few minutes.”
John raced back to the temporary camping ground
the women had made. Keeping the men in sight he
left a message for his father, and asked for some pro-
visions. The women gave him water in a bottle and
a packet of sandwiches. He ran back towards the place
where he had left the three men. They were nowhere
to be seen. Running here and there, shouting their
names, he made off in one direction, then in another,
but there was no trace of them.


CHAPTER XXIX
THE WATERFALL
When Jennifer set out to walk through the forest of
trees, she decided again to use the sound of the water-
fall as a guide. The thought of water made her realize
that she was extremely thirsty. So she started out at
once, and had not gone far when she heard the sound
of water close by. She pushed her way through dense
bushes and came above a small gully, rock-strewn and
steep. At the bottom of the gully a stream of water
tumbled over boulders and broke into small falls.
She ran down the steep slope, heedless of the
rough ground and, clambering over boulders, reached
a pool. Cupping her hands, she drank thirstily. Then
she splashed her face with water and sat down by the
stream, refreshed and with new energy.
“That’s the strangest breakfast I’ve ever had,” she
said. “It tasted better than any I can remember,
although it was only one course.” She smiled ruefully.
“If John doesn’t hurry up it will have to be my lunch,
too. In that case, I’d better walk beside the stream. I
wouldn’t like to miss my lunch, and it’s sure to take
me to the falls,”


She walked by the stream, but found she made slow
progress, for the stream twisted and turned over rough
ground. However, she was determined not to have to
endure the pangs of thirst again. By keeping close to
the stream, she actually chose the best course.
“I don’t really feel afraid,” she said, wondering at
herself. “Just tired—l suppose I’ll feel hungry soon.
The blue sky and the sunshine keeps one from feeling
nervous, I suppose.”
The heat was trying, but she was glad of the sunshine
and the blue sky. What if it had been cold—rain or
storm. Rabbits scurried with bobbing white tails up
the slopes of the gully. She laughed aloud, glad to
hear her own voice. It was good to hear other sounds
than those of magpies.
“They’re all funny,” she said. “Everything is happy.”
She saw a flight of brightly plumaged parrots, birds
that she had never seen before except in cages.
“You happy, lucky things,” she called to them.
“Even if John doesn’t find me, I’ll find my way,”
she assured herself. “I’ll come to a house soon. I’ve
walked for miles now, without even seeing one. There
is sure to be one somewhere.”
Jennifer did not realize that long stretches of un-
inhabited country were part of this new land, and
did not know that she might walk for many days
without coming within sight of human habitation. As
the morning wore on, she became exhausted, her knees
shook, but she was determined to walk as far as the


waterfall and would not give in until she reached her
destination. Stopping only to refresh herself from the
stream, and to bathe her hands and face, she kept
steadily on.
The waterfall at last!
“I’ll wait here for John,” she said, little knowing
that at that very moment John was just setting out
for the waterfall.
Jennifer was upset when she found that the falls
were surrounded by wild, uninhabited country. There
was no sign that man had ever set foot there. She was
dismayed once again and, sitting on a stone, put her
head on her knees and sobbed with fear and loneliness.
She felt small and helpless and realized for the first
time in her life what it really was like to be lonely—
to be absolutely alone.
“Pull yourself together, Jennifer!” she said sternly,
and shaking away her tears, she set her lips firmly.
She turned once more to her only friend, and bathed
her face and hands at the small stream. Then she
looked at the waterfall and far up to the top of the
cliff where the spray shone in the sunlight like a silver
veil.
“I like it like that,” she said, to herself, “much better
than in the moonlight.”
She shuddered a little, remembering how like a
phantom it had looked in the night. Then fears came
to her again.


“Oh, dear! I hope I won’t have to stay out again
all night.”
Shaking herself, as if to be rid of such thoughts, she
sprang to her feet.
“If I could only find that pool of water I saw
yesterday—it must be on the other side of the falls —
I’d be able to find the clear ground and the track,
and I’d soon be home,”
But she could find no way to cross the stream to
the other side of the falls. Her heart sank and terror
gripped her.
“Pull yourself together, Jennifer!”
She sat looking at the falls, determined to keep
calm at all cost, and wondering what to do next.
“It is no use trying to go any farther,” she said.
“How long can any one live without food?” she
wondered. “There doesn’t seem to be anything I can
. »
eat.
She stared at the trees, wondering if there was fruit
or berries on them; but no, there was no sign of any
kind of food.
“Perhaps there are some birds’ eggs.”
She shuddered at the thought of eating raw eggs.
“Oh! What’s the good of thinking all these stupid
thoughts? John is sure to find me. But perhaps I’d
better look for some birds’ eggs, just in case.”
She found this a good excuse for something to do,
anxious to keep her thoughts from her predicament.
She walked towards the cliff and examined its ledges.


She was surprised to see that the waterfall, before
reaching the bottom of the cliff, fell from a protrud-
ing rock, beneath which there was a dry patch of
ground. Curiosity drew her to it. This was interesting.
The water fell straight and made a screen. She walked
along a narrow ledge against the cliff and found that
she could walk at the back and under the falls. The
cliff was hollowed and a large single rock was in front
of it. There was a small opening at the side of this
rock. She peered into it, expecting to find that it was
dark, but strangely enough, there was light at the
back of the rock. Looking up she found the reason
for this was a wide cleft between the rock and the cliff,
which made a natural skylight. She pushed through
one of the openings and found herself in a cave. There
were dark corners which were rather frightening, but
which she nevertheless could not resist exploring.
She walked cautiously and in a far corner her foot
kicked against something soft. She stooped, and in the
half light she was able to see that it was a sack. She
pulled at it, but finding it heavy, tugged harder. The
sack came away in her hands, its heavy contents rolling
about her feet. “Quartz!” she exclaimed. “Goodness, it
might be gold!”
Jennifer had heard so much about quartz and gold
since her arrival at the mine, that this thought was
quite natural. She gathered several pieces and went
to the cave entrance and even to her unaccustomed
eyes it was rich with gold.


“Oh, dear. I wish John were here.”
She went to the back of the cave, and it seemed
to her excited eyes that there was a great deal of the
quartz piled away in the corner. The sack, when full,
had evidently been thrown on top of the pile.
Jennifer, kneeling down, sat on the back of her
heels. John had longed to find a fortune!
“I wish I could get him to find this,” she murmured.
“He would be so excited.”


CHAPTER XXX
THE TOP OF THE FALLS
John was completely nonplussed at the sudden dis-
appearance of the miners and, in his anxiety, spoke
to several of the miners’ wives and asked them how
to get to the falls.
“Go by the road,” Mrs Brown suggested. “There is
a track down from the top and you would be there
long before those men.”
John did not wait for any further suggestions, but
dashed to the road. He knew which direction to take;
he remembered seeing a signpost showing the way to
the falls. He walked and ran by turns along the road,
and half an hour later reached the signpost. He turned
into a narrow track which led to the top of the falls.
It had many twists and turns and there were rough
steps here and there, hewn from the natural rock.
This hindered his progress somewhat, and the twists
and turns seemed never-ending. Quite suddenly the
track ended and he came upon a magnificent scene.
He gazed upon it from above a veil of mist, little
knowing that this mist screened him from Jennifer’s
eyes.


Even though he was anxious to make haste, the
unexpectedness and grandeur of the scene held him
spellbound. He looked down upon a great expanse
of undulating country and upon the tops of the trees,
dwarfed by the great height from which he looked.
“Marvellous! Who would ever think so much water
could come from such a small stream,” he thought
as he looked at a flat expanse of water that gurgled
and ran shallowly over a rocky bed, falling with great
force over the top of the cliff. As the water fell it
struck a protruding rock some twenty feet below
causing the spray to fly and giving the falls their
misty beauty. The falling water made a continuous
roar.
That must be the sound we hear so far away.
Perhaps the miners are right. Jennifer could easily
have followed the sound. The miners will be heading
for it themselves and may be they are there by now.
Gosh! I don’t see how I can get down. If I do, it’s ten
to one I won’t find any one. The country is pretty
dense and I’ll probably get lost myself; but here goes.”
John looked about him apprehensively. A rough
track led down the side of the cliff. Steps were hewn
out of the rock, and he had to grasp the bush to help
in his descent. Sometimes he lost the track, but always
found it again. He scrambled and climbed over rocks,
clinging to bushes, slipping on loose* stones, but always,
when the way seemed impassable, he found steps to
help him.


“I hope it won’t get dark before I get down,” he
thought, “If it does, I’ll just have to stay put for the
night and find a place where I shall be sure not to
roll off.”
Half way down the cliff he found no more steps.
He was in a precarious position on a flat piece of rock
that seemed safe enough but which, he found, shelved
off dangerously. He lay face downwards and, peering
over the top, saw a sheer drop of several hundred feet.
He caught sight of a figure far below.
“Oh!” he gasped. “There’s someone down there.”
He stared at a tiny figure far below. “It looks like a
girl too.”
He was about to shout, when his eye caught sight
of something else. He saw in the distance the figures
of three men, making their way along the side of the
gully in a direct line towards the foot of the falls.
“I must get there before them.”
John was sure that the tiny figure he saw was
Jennifer.
He pushed himself backwards from his precarious
perch, and, trembling with excitement, scrambled here
and there trying to find a way down. There were no
steps. He took little heed of the danger, slithering and
sliding to a projection a hundred feet farther down.
Here he lay down again and peered over the top. The
figure was still there.
“It is Jennifer!”
• Then he heard someone cooeeing.


THE TOP OF THE FALLS
“The miners!”
He realized that the noise of the falls would prevent
Jennifer from hearing the men. He was nearer, how-
ever, and she would probably hear him. So would
they, but he must take a risk. He cupped his hands
to his mouth and cooeed.
Jennifer looked about her. He cooeed again and she
jumped to her feet and listened for a moment. Then
she disappeared from sight.
“That’s strange!” John thought. “Perhaps she can’t
hear where the sound comes from. I must hurry!”
He scrambled from the ledge, and lost sight of the
ground below for a short time. The way was extremely
difficult and he made slow progress. He found the
steps again and gave a sigh of relief, thankful for the
sure foothold that would quicken his pace. When
within a hundred feet of the level ground, he came
out upon another ledge and looking down, he saw
Jennifer standing gazing around her. He heard cooees
and realized that the three miners were dangerously
close. Jennifer seemed puzzled. It would be risky to
call her, but he knew he must take the risk once again.
“Jennifer!” he shouted. “Jennifer! Jennifer!”
Jennifer looked up.
“John! John! I knew you’d find me!”
“Those miners are coming too. Is there anywhere
you can hide?”
“Can’t I come up to you?” she called. “I’m so
lonely!”


That was just like Jennifer. She was lonely.
“No, hide quickly! I’ll be down. Quick! Quick!
There’s no time to waste.”
Jennifer disappeared. John was puzzled and
wondered where she had gone so suddenly. The three
miners arrived and stood near where she had been
only a few minutes before. They cooeed and called.
Jennifer was nowhere to be seen, and John wondered
how long it would be before the men found her.
His nerves tingled and he started off again in great
haste to help her.


CHAPTER XXXI
BELOW THE WATERFALL
John never remembered how he managed that last
hundred feet. His anxiety increased at every step. When
he reached level ground, his first idea was to rush out
and confront the three men, but he saw that they were
still looking for Jennifer. They were walking back-
wards and forwards, staring around them.
He kept out of sight until he was sure that the
men would not see him, and watched them walk back
towards the gully. Still he waited, then walked
cautiously from his hiding-place and looked around
him. He called and whistled softly to Jennifer. He
could not risk calling loudly, for fear of the men
hearing. He walked towards the falls; there seemed
no place where Jennifer could be safely hidden, yet
there was no sign of her.
He looked everywhere, then walked towards the
cliff looking at the falls as he walked. Quite suddenly
Jennifer seemed to walk from under the falling water.
John was speechless.
“How on earth did you hide yourself there?” he
exclaimed.


Jennifer did not answer, but ran to him and threw
her arms around his neck and hugged him. John was
so glad to see her, he did not mind this show of
affection.
“I knew you’d find me!” she said.
Suddenly she felt weak. She found difficulty in keep-
ing back her tears. She sat down quickly. John was
concerned.
“Here! Take a little of this.” He held out the flask
of brandy he had with him in case it was needed.
Jennifer put the bottle to her lips and drank a few
drops, shuddered, but finding it did her good, she
drank a little more.
“Eat something!” John held out a sandwich. “How
did you manage to come so far? How did you get
lost?”
“John!” She looked around her fearfully. “Those
miners—they chased me. They’re sure to come back
again. Let us hurry! I ran away from them with the
plan and they want to get it back.”
“You’ve got the plan!”
Jennifer forgot her trying experience for a moment
and was rewarded for everything by the admiration
she saw in John’s eyes.
“Where is the plan?”
“I’ve hidden it. It’s in a safe place.’'
“Mascot!” A man’s voice shouted.
“What do they mean by that?”
“That’s me.” Jennifer smiled.


“They’ve got a nerve calling you that!” John said.
“They’re funny men. I don’t think they’d really
harm me. If you hadn’t come, I’d have been glad to
be found by them. They think they are entitled to
the plan as much as old Simon, but I was determined
they should not have it.”
“They told us you had taken it,” John said. “But
we didn’t believe them. We’d better hide. You had
a safe place before, let’s go there. How do you get
to it?”
Jennifer led the way towards the waterfall and
pointed to the ledge that led to the cave, and in a
few seconds they were safely hidden inside the cave.
John looked around him with interest.
“It’s a great place to hide,” he said. “How on earth
did you find it?”
Jennifer laughed a little hysterically.
“You’d never guess,” she said. “I was looking for
birds’ nests. I thought if the worst came to the worst,
I’d have to eat raw eggs to keep myself alive. That
is if I should find any.”
“You didn’t expect to find birds’ nests in a waterfall,
surely?”
“No. But I was looking at the trees, close to the cliff.
I knew if I had to climb one, it would be a help to
have rocks to start me on the way up, and I was just
looking along the cliff when I noticed the ledge that
led under the falls.”
“Where did you hide the plan?”


“Inside the cave.”
“Is that why you disappeared when I first cooeed?”
“Yes. I was afraid that the miners would try to get
it. I was determined they would not.”
“You’re pretty game.”
“I hid it. I meant to tell them I had lost it.
“We must watch. Hush!”
From their hiding-place they saw the three men,
noticed swags on their backs, saw them throw these
on the ground and sit down beside them. They saw
them talk animatedly together, and look up the side
of the cliff and point. The roar of the waters kept any
sound of the conversation from reaching them.
By and by the men made a fire and boiled a billy.
They sat around and ate a meal. While they ate, they
talked, still looking up at the cliff.
“They know of the track. They mean to climb back
that way,” John hazarded.
“I wonder why they have those packs with them?”
Jennifer said.
John whistled.
“Gee! I know. They mean to do a bunk! They must
have gone back to their tents to get their belongings
when they disappeared that time. That s how I missed
them. I looked in the other direction. They know
they’ll get into trouble when you tell your story, so
they’re off.”
After the meal, the three miners took out their pipes
and with their backs against some trees sat and smoked.


“It looks as if they are going to make a day of it.
I hope they don’t stay too long. If they do, we’ll have
to stay here all night.”
Jennifer caught John’s hand impulsively.
“I don’t mind now that you’re here, and it’s quite
safe here.”
“If they get nosing round, it’s easy to find us. You
found it easily enough.”
“Oh!" Jennifer suddenly thought of the gold. She
wondered if these miners had hidden it, and had come
for it now. She wished John to find it and have the
thrill of finding a fortune, even if only for a short
time.
“John,” she whispered, “go right to the back of the
cave; the plan is hidden there.”
“Where abouts?”
“I forget which side. I think it is on the right.”
Jennifer knew exactly where she had hidden the
plan, but would not tell John because she wished him
to search for it, and while doing so to find the treasure.
When John went to the back of the cave she became
nervous. The men might make their way to the cave
at any moment. She found it difficult to keep still,
could not bear John out of her sight for even a
moment.
He was away only a few seconds; he returned to the
front of the cave holding some quartz in his hands.
“A fortune!” he whispered. ‘Tve found one. Won’t
the boys get a shock?”


“Where? How?” Jennifer attempted surprise.
“Come quickly I” , . f .
John dragged her by the arm to the back of the
cave. Together they knelt beside the pile of quartz.
“John! Do you think these men know anything
about this gold?”
John whisded sofdy. s
“I never thought of that. Perhaps they weren t look-
ing for you after all. Were for it if they come in here.
Where’s the plan?”
“In that corner. It is safely hidden.”
“I’ll make it safer still.”
He found the plan, hid it in the crack of a rock,
pushing it far in. Jennifer went back to the front of
the cave, and when John joined her she whispered:
“The miners are packing up their things. It looks
as if they are going away from here.”
John looked over her shoulder.
“So they are!” he said. “I wonder if they are going
back or if they will take the track up the side of the
cliff.” .
He was left in doubt for only a short time. Ine
three men slung their swags over their backs and made
their way to the cliff. ,
Brother and sister waited together until they heard
the sounds of falling stones. Waiting until this sound
ceased, they came from their hiding-place, keeping
close to the cliff for fear the men should catch sight
of them.


“They’re off!” John said. “I bet we never see them
again. They wouldn’t have the nerve to show their
faces at the mine.”
“I hope not,” Jennifer said.
She was looking along the gully as she spoke. Catch-
ing a glimpse of three figures some distance away.


CHAPTER XXXII
THE RESCUE
When they saw the three men walking towards them
along the gully, Jennifer and John felt an impulse to
hide again. At first they thought these were the men
they had been hiding from. They realized, however,
that this was impossible, and thought of rescuers. They
cooeed and called, heard answering shouts, became
excited and ran to meet the men. They recognized first
Hitchens, then their father. The third figure puzzled
them. John stared.
“Teddy! It could not be!” Then he shouted,
“Teddy!”
For a moment, Jennifer lost the thrill of bemg
rescued. Teddy! What did he want? He would spoil
everything for her. She was more convinced of this
when she saw the way Teddy and John rushed at one
another. She heard John say:
“Know the fortune you said I’d find? Well, I’ve
got it!” She did not hear Teddy’s answer, for Hitchens
and her father, close now, were both speaking at once.
“How are you, Jennifer? Are you sure you’re all
right?” And John brought Teddy forward.


“This is Jennifer,” he said.
Jennifer held out a slacking hand: “How do you
do?” she said.
“Which way did you come, John?” Ronald Hogarth
asked.
“That way,” John said, pointing to the falls. “We’ve
got the plan, too.”
“You have?”
“The men were right, then! Jennifer did have it
after all. That was a wonderful thing to do.”
Jennifer smiled at her father, then turned white and
would have fallen had he not sprung forward in time
to catch her and support her in his arms.
“Jennifer, I have been terribly worried,” he said.
“Are you all right? You have come a great distance.
You must be exhausted. Sit down.” He lowered her
gently to the ground. “Don’t talk now. Tell me every-
thing later. There is no time to waste. We’ll have to
make haste if we wish to start on the way back before
dark.” He turned to Hitchens who stood smiling down
at Jennifer.
“We’ll have to make a stretcher and carry her back.”
“That will be quite necessary,” Hitchens replied,
shaking his head at Jennifer. “You’ve had every one
worried, and hundreds of people out looking for you.”
“Oh, dear!” Jennifer said. “Did I cause all that
trouble?” Her lips trembled.
“Here!” John said, holding out the flask to her.


Jennifer shook her head, laughing a litde hysterically,
“I don’t need it now. I’m quite all right.”
“I’ll leave her to you, John,” Ronald said. Hitchens
and I will cut some saplings for a stretcher.”
“Teddy’s a bushman; he knows what to do,” John
said.
“Come on, then, Teddy!” his father said.
The three walked away. Jennifer turned and whis-
pered to John: “I thought Mr Hitchens and daddy
were both in Sydney! Who got there first, and when
did they get back? Don’t say anything about the gold
just now. Daddy doesn’t seem to trust Hitchens.”
“Good for you, to think of that! Although that
seems to have changed now. They seem to be friends
again. They must be, the way they came together to
look for you. The gold’s in a safe place anyway, and
there it can stay. I’ll slip over and get the plan while
they are busy. Xpu’d better eat something while I’m
away. Here’s a sandwich. Don’t talk any more.”
Jennifer took a sandwich, ate a little, found she was
hungry, finished it and ate another. Then she rested
and watched the men cut a couple of saplings from
the young trees. Teddy selected these, cut them down,
and her father pruned them with a pen-knife. Hichens
hastily untied a knapsack he had been carrying. She
saw him unroll a piece of canvas, stretch it between
the poles and hold it while the other tied it strongly.
“I don’t want to go on that,” she said. “I feel quite
able to walk. I don’t need to be carried.”


“You couldn’t walk the distance,” her father said
gendy, “and this is the easiest way to carry you. We
can all take turns.”
Jennifer sat on the stretcher then lay down and
John put the plan beside her as the two men lifted
it from the ground. They started away, Teddy walk-
ing ahead, leading the way.
When the little procession had gone a short way,
Jennifer nodced marks on the trees. “What are those?”
she asked.
“It’s a blazed trail,” Hitchens said. “We chopped
the trees with tomahawks to mark the way as we came,
so as to be sure of the way back.”
Jennifer looked at the marked trees as she lay back
on the stretcher, and thought it a clever idea. The
fresh cuts showed clearly in the late afternoon sun.
She asked what would happen when it was too dark
to see them.
“We have our torches,” Hitchens said. “And later
there’ll be a moon.”
She found it a pleasant sensation, lying on the
stretcher and looking up through the trees at the bright
evening sky above. It reminded her of a time, long
ago, when she sat beside Dr Berry and sped with him
in the small car beneath the arched branches of the
driveway of “Oakleaves”. It was wonderful then to
feel like a bird. She was lighthearted now and had
almost the same sensation. It was wonderful to feel
safe again, and she knew at last that she meant a great


deal to her father and brother. Then the thought of
Teddy spoilt everything for a moment She tried not
to be jealous and to put such thoughts away from her,
interesting herself in watching the marks on the trees.
She was happier when John walked beside her, which
he did occasionally, and talked to her, pointing to
anything of interest. He told her that he and Teddy
would take their turn in carrying the stretcher.
“Didn’t it waste time, marking all the trees?” he
said to Hitchens. “It’s a wonder it didn’t delay you.”
“Hardly delayed us at all,” Hitchens said. “There’s
an old track here, a bit overgrown, but easy to follow.
It was used at one time by prospectors who looked for
gold in these parts.”
Jennifer thought of the treasure in the cave, wonder-
ing who had put it there and to whom it belonged.
Thinking of this, she fell into a short sleep. She
awakened when there was a halt, and John and Teddy
took their turn to carry her. It had grown dark. It
was night time and the moon had risen. She caught a
glimpse of the falls and shuddered a little.
“What is it?” John said.
Jennifer pointed to the falls. “The moonlight makes
the mist around the falls look like a ghost,” she said.
The little party paused a while to rest. Jennifer stared
at the falls. She distincdy saw a phantom figure, as
she had seen it the night before. She whispered to
John and Teddy.
“Gee!” Teddy whistled.


“Perhaps that’s what makes the miners think there
is a ghost,” John said, looking at the mist which, even
to his practical eyes looked eerie and ghost-like.
“Oh, I am glad that I won’t be out again by myself
to-night!” Jennifer said, shuddering again.
“Did you see that last night?” John asked sympa-
thetically.
“Yes, but I can laugh at it to-night, because the
phantom figure is guarding our hidden treasure. If it
is the hidden gold that Simon told us about, the gold
that caused the miner to die with worry, it belongs
to any one who finds it.”
John nodded. “Keep it dark. I’ve only told Teddy.
I tell him everything. It was pretty decent of him to
come to help in the search for you.”
“How did he know I was lost?”
“It was broadcast, you know, and it was in the
papers.”
“Oh dear! Was it? But I thought Teddy lived a
long, long way away?”
“He does, but it didn’t take long by car. He came
with ”
“Your turn now!” Ronald said, getting ready to
start again.
John took one end of the stretcher and Teddy the
other, and they started out again.
Not long after this, Jennifer fell asleep. She knew
nothing of the long weary tramp, or of the many


changes as the men took their turn at carrying her. She
was awakened by shouts.
A group of searchers first came upon the rescuers,
and word went quickly forth. By the time the party
arrived at Mrs Brown’s house, many had gathered to
see the little lady who had been lost.
“Three cheers!” one of the miners cried, “for the
little lady with the gold in her hair.”
Jennifer sat up and stared around her. For a few
moments she did not seem to realize what had hap-
pened and wondered why the miners were there to
welcome her. She waved to them all, and insisted
upon getting off the stretcher. She was helped from it,
and carried on the men’s shoulders. She laughed
excitedly, and thought that being lost and rescued was
rather exciting.
Cheering and shouting, the miners carried her to the
road, where many others had gathered in front of Mrs
Brown’s house. From her position, and over the heads
of the crowd, she was surprised to see her grand-
mother’s car.
“Granny!” she exclaimed, “How did she get here?”
The men carried her to the car and put her down
beside it.
Jennifer!” Mrs Denbigh called, “Are you quite all
right? Are you sure you haven’t been hurt?”
“Oh, granny! Of course not!”
“I knew you’d come through all right, Miss Jennifer,”


said Drummond, who was standing beside the car
and now helped her into it.
Teddy walked to the car. “I hope you are all right,
Mrs Denbigh, and not too tired after your long drive.”
“My one thought was for Jennifer, and I feel only
relief that she is safe. The anxiety has been terrible.”
“Of course,” Teddy said. “But she’s all right!
Nothing wrong with her.”
Jennifer was puzzled by Teddy’s easy and friendly
manner towards her grandmother.


CHAPTER XXXIII
ANOTHER SURPRISE
While Jennifer sat in the car beside her grandmother,
Ronald Hogarth spoke to the miners. He shook hands
with them all, thanked them for their assistance, then
invited them to his house.
“I cannot express my gratitude and thanks as I
would wish, but I am sure you understand how grateful
I am. I think it calls for drinks all round.”
“You haven’t got to thank us, boss. It’s this lad who
did the job. He found the little lady, and he was
successful where older hands failed.” One of the miners
spoke, and while he did so, the others crowded around
John and patted him on the back.
John was a little embarrassed, and even more so
when they insisted upon hoisting him on to their
shoulders. As they approached the car, some of them
rushed to it and Drummond, realizing that they
wanted to carry Jennifer too, started the engine and
drove slowly. Some men jumped on the running
board, others ran beside the car cheering and shouting.
The car headed the procession towards home, the
miners insisting on carrying John on their shoulders.


Jennifer put her head out of the side window of
the car and waved, laughing excitedly.
“Jennifer, you surprise me. You seem to like these
rough men.”
Jennifer did not answer, for she noticed that her
grandmother looked at these men with interest and
was as excited over the procession as she was. In fact,
she showed more sympathy and interest than Jennifer
had ever seen her show before.
When they arrived at the house, the miners crowded
into the small sitting-room, their demeanour entirely
different from the last time they had been there.
Jennifer looked around, half expecting to see Tom,
Dave and Bill. She missed them, and was even sorry
they were not there. No one else seemed to notice their
absence. And so Jennifer stood talking to the men
and answered many questions about her experiences.
A keg of beer had mysteriously arrived, and the
men were served with drinks. They continued to talk
to Jennifer and ask questions. None of them spoke
of the stolen plan, or seemed to know how she got
lost. She was glad of this.
“I want you all to be at the mine on time in the
morning. I have something to tell you,” Hogarth said,
addressing the men.
Mrs Denbigh waited until the men had left. They
did not stay long, since Hitchens reminded them of
the exhausting and trying time every one had been


through. They shook hands with Jennifer and John
and Mr Hogarth and Mrs Denbigh, and said good-
bye. When they had all gone, Mrs Brown took charge
of Jennifer, insisting that she needed a hot bath.
Jennifer was glad of the attention, even glad to be
assisted to bed.
When she was in bed, she looked around the plain
little room and was so glad to be there. It seemed as
good to her as the luxurious room in her grandmother’s
home. She was happy when her father sat on the bed
beside her and talked to her before he said good night.
“Jennifer, I lost you for twenty-four hours, and it
seemed longer than all the years I have been without
you. It makes me wonder how I ever parted with you,
and hope that it will never happen again.”
“Never—never—never!” Jennifer said, pulling his
head down and kissing him several times. “It was
worth getting lost, if only to hear you say that.”
“You are like your mother, Jennifer. She was the
most affectionate and impulsive little person in the
world, and the most adventurous. I have missed her
ever since she left us; now that I have you, I feel that
I shall not miss her so much.”
“Oh, daddy! I do want to know all about everything
and why granny behaved as she did. Don’t strange
things happen? When granny lost her own child, she
took yours, because of her loneliness, and I had to be
lonely instead and lose you and John.”


“There were other reasons than loneliness, Jennifer,
but don’t worry about anything just now.”
John knocked on the door and interrupted this con-
versation, and entering, stooped to kiss Jennifer good
night.
“You’re right about twins,” he said as he kissed
her. “It does seem to make a difference.”
“Where’s Teddy?”
“Oh, he’s about. Here’s granny!”
Mrs Denbigh entered the room. “God bless you,
child,” she said. “It’s a great relief to see you safe and
in bed. You must be completely exhausted. You are
over-excited too, and surely need a powder to calm
your nerves.”
“No! no!” Jennifer said. “I don’t need anything. It
was thrilling being lost now that I’m found, and 1
want to stay here.”
“And I believe you mean it—you strange child!
How you can throw away the habit of years and allow
your upbringing to mean nothing to you, is something
I cannot understand. I still think you will come to
your senses. I’ll give you a few more days.”
“Oh, but granny! You don’t understand—really you
don’t. It’s so thrilling and exciting with something
happening all the time, and I’m never lonely.”
“Lonely! Why should you have ever been lonely?”
“I was more lonely at times when we lived in
England, than I was when I was quite alone and lost
in the bush.”


“Impossible! You’ve surely felt how terrible it was
to be lost? You must have been lonely then.”
“I was, but I knew John would find me, and that
kept me from feeling the same kind of loneliness that
I’ve always felt.”
“Well, go to sleep now. I think you need rest. You
are a little overstrung. I will write to Dr Berry and
tell him how well you stood up to the ordeal.”
“He won’t be as surprised as you think! Oh, granny
I wish you could understand!”
“I am beginning to understand, and it seems to me
that I am going to be very lonely for the rest of my
life.”
“But we won’t let you, granny. You’ve got John
as well as me, now.”
“You forget that my home is on the other side of
the world, Jennifer. But I mustn’t worry you now.
Good night!”
Jennifer opened her eyes wide. A sudden thought
came to her.
“Where are you going to sleep, granny? There’s
no place good enough for you, and no room here.”
“Drummond is driving me back to an hotel, to stay
on our way back to the Ainsleys’, where I was staying
when we heard the news.”
“The Ainsleys’! Oh, of course. Mr Ainsley invited
you to stay on their station property when we met
him on board ship.”


“He invited you, too, and I am sorry that you did
not accept the invitation, for they have a beautiful
property, and thousands of acres of sheep country. It
would be a wonderful experience for you.”
“I am sure it is wonderful, but I would rather stay
with father and John.”
“So I gather! You are a strange child. You may come
to your senses yet.”
Jennifer closed her eyes, pulled the bedclothes over
her face. Would her grandmother ever understand?
Then she remembered something, pulled the bedclothes
from her face.
“How did you get to know Teddy?”
“He is Mr Ainsley’s son.”
“Oh!” She closed her eyes again, too tired to be
even surprised. So Teddy was the son of Mr Ainsley,
who had played games with her on board ship—the
man who had drawn smoke signals and left them on
her plate at breakfast time! She did not hear her
grandmother slip away, or even hear her leave the
house. Had she heard Mrs Denbigh’s parting words,
she would have known that her wish —to live with
her father and brother, instead of returning with her
grandmother—was assured.
“Ronald Hogarth,” Mrs Denbigh said, “this is the
second time you have taken out of my life the only
thing I love. You cannot expect me to forgive you,
but I think I understand a little better than I did before.


Jennifer is very like her mother, and is as obstinately
determined to have her own way. I have always blamed
you, but I see now that it was not all your fault, but
something to do with an inherited obstinate trait of
the Denbighs. Something I cannot expect to fight.
Good night!”


CHAPTER XXXIV
JENNIFER REMAINS FIRM
Jennifer awakened to the sound of the accordion. She
was tired and a little stiff, but wished to see Simon
and tell him that his plan was safe. She dressed quickly
and went to the small veranda where she found Simon
sitting on the top step, playing his accordion.
“I got your plan away from those men, Simon,” she
said, sitting beside him.
“I heard about it, young lady, and it was a brave
thing to do.”
“I did it without thinking, and I did not expect to
get lost. You do play well, Simon. Your father-in-law
was a good teacher.”
“He couldn’t teach naught else.”
Jennifer heard her father call to her. She went inside
and was surprised to find Teddy was still there.
“I thought you had gone with granny,” she said.
“They have only gone part of the way and are
staying at an hotel for the night. I am joining them
to-day,” Teddy said.


“I want him to stay longer,” John said.
“My father told me a lot about you, and it was a
big surprise to find you were John’s sister,” Teddy said.
“I was terribly surprised too. I like your father,”
Jennifer replied. She could have added, “But not his
son.
“Come here, young lady,” her father said. “It’s too
early for you to be up.” He put his arm around her,
his hand under her chin, and tilted her head back
against his shoulder. “Any ill effects?” he asked.
Jennifer’s arm went quickly round her father’s neck.
“Oh, daddy! I feel wonderful, and so happy.”
“You strange little person,” he said, holding her close
for a moment. “But you must rest to-day. You have
been under a great strain,”
“I want to hear what you say to the miners. Please!
please, let me come!”
“Really, you surprise me! What interest could it be
to you? However, since you insist, you may come.
Hitchens is coming to take us after breakfast.”
Hitchens arrived by car, Simon met him at the gate
and climbed into the back seat, his accordion clutched
to him. Jennifer ran from the house and down the
small path, and jumped in beside him. Teddy and
Mr Hogarth followed. John got in beside Jennifer,
and the car drove off.
“I am completely fogged about everything,” John
said to Jennifer. “All the excitement of the last few
days, and I can’t make head or tail of anything. No


sooner do I clear up one mystery, than another crops
up. When I first got here, there was a ghost mystery.
Just as we cleared that up, dad dashed after Hitchens
as if he were his worst enemy, and as if his life
depended on getting to Sydney before him. He gets
there first and, when he returns, says he’s lost his job
and that Hitchens has got it. You’d think they’d be
the worst enemies, but no! Hitchens returns and they
are just as friendly as if nothing had happened.
“Hush!” Jennifer said. But Ronald and Hitchens
were talking earnesdy, too occupied with their own
conversation to hear anything going on behind them.
Teddy, however, had his head turned and was listen-
ing with intense interest.
“Thought me a ghost!” old Simon chuckled.
“You wanted us to think so, you know you did, and
the miners, too,” John said.
“Why should I want that?” Simon said, assuming
an air of innocence.
“To hide your secret, of course! It was pretty clever
of you. You were able to do what you wanted and
were left in peace for a while, but not for long. The
miners got curious and wanted to find out about the
ghost.”
Simon nodded.
“You wait and see what your father has to say,” he
chuckled. “You’ll know everything soon —and won’t
those miners get a surprise?”


“You haven’t told them your story, have you?”
John asked.
“No! no! Of course I haven’t.”
“I don’t know Simon’s story, either,” Jennifer
interrupted.
“It’s a long story and hard to follow,” John said.
“It’s about when he worked here sixty years ago and
an Italian called Tony dumped gold instead of
mullock.”
“Sounds mysterious, but I don’t know what mullock
is,” Jennifer said.
“Mullock is waste stuff they dig out when they are
looking for quartz. The Italian made Simon help.
He was only a boy on the trucks and worked under-
ground. Tony was underground foreman. He had given
orders to the men to fill up a winze.”
“What’s a winze?”
“A tunnel on a different level to where they are
working—a tunnel that has been proved useless. The
miners working on another level separate the mullock
from the quartz. It is then carried away in different
trucks. A winze is often filled up when they wish to
save the expense of carrying the mullock right up to
the top. Tony ordered the quartz to be dumped as
well as the mullock.”
“What on earth for?”
“Because they hated the new owners; they had de-
prived the men of a bonus; the men wanted to make
them suffer a loss too.”


“You’ve got it off pat,” Simon said.
“Do you think you could ever find stuff that’s buried
for sixty years, Simon?”
“That’s why the plan is important. Tony made a
plan and wrote it all up in Italian.”
“Jennifer understands Italian —that’s why the miners
kidnapped her.”
“I could not translate much of it,” Jennifer said.
“Here we are!” said Hitchens.
They had arrived at the mines. The miners were
standing about in groups. All seemed surprised to see
Jennifer jump out of the car looking none the worse
for her experience of the day before.
Mr Hogarth looked round, walked to a pile of
earth, climbed upon it and stood head and shoulders
above the crowd. He called to Simon and Hitchens.
They walked to him. He made them stand beside
him. The miners crowded around, anxious to hear
what their boss had to say. His first words drew
exclamations of surprise and displeasure from the
crowd.
“This is the last time I shall address you as manager
of this mine. I have given up my position and think
you will be very satisfied with the change.”
There were shouts of “No! No!” from the miners—
“We don’t want to lose you.”


CHAPTER XXXV
THE NEW MANAGER
Jennifer and John stood among the group of men
listening to their father, anxious also to hear what he
had to say.
They were pleased to hear the men’s exclamations
of disappointment at the thought of losing him as
manager.
“I wish to tell you, men,” Ronald Hogarth con-
tinued, “the name of your new manager. This is your
man,” he said, putting his hand on Hitchens’s shoulder.
“Hitchens.”
There was silence for a moment and John, who
could not help but resent Hitchens taking his father’s
place, was glad that the men showed no enthusiasm
at this change. He felt that it proved beyond doubt
that the men liked and trusted his father.
“When I tell you everything, I think you will be
satisfied that you are getting the right man,” Ronald
went on. “There is a very good reason, and when
you know it, you will welcome him as your new
manager. You all know him and there is no need to


tell you that he is a man who knows how to handle
men. He is fair, above board, and always ready to
listen to reason.”
The men cheered.
“Whew!” John whisded. “Didn’t seem to me that he
was above board when he tried to get to Sydney before
dad.”
“Your new manager put the interest of his employers
before anything else. He did not know of other facts.
Simon here”—Jennifer stood on tip toes to catch a
glimpse of Simon —“is the man who caused me many
hours of worry.”
Laughter.
“The old ghost!” someone shouted.
“You know, or you may not know, that the owners
of this mine have, for some time now, been trying to
get the rights of the adjoining property. At one time
this property and the one beside it were one. For
some reason it was divided. Evidently for a short time
the two properties were worked by separate owners.
This was many years ago. The work was costly and
did not pay, and the mine was closed down. Before
this happened, the market was flooded with the shares
of the mine. They dropped very low. One man bought
them up and kept buying until he owned most of
them. The mines closed down and the shares were
useless. The man who bought all these shares was a
mystery and has been one ever since. No one could
find him. It became important to find him. The


owners of this mine advertised for him—he did not
show up. I found him, however!”
A long pause.
“The mystery man is Simon!”
There were exclamations among the miners. Every
one talked at once; all eyes were upon old Simon.
Simon became embarrassed, picked up his accordion,
fingered it nervously and seemed about to play.
“Silence!” Hitchens shouted. “There is more to hear
yet.”
“Old Simon himself, was completely ignorant about
the importance of this, .and I only discovered it by
accident. The owners of this mine had given instruc-
tions to me, to find out the date of the expiration of
the mining lease and to take up the lease for them.
“Legally they had a right to take advantage of a
mining law if the owner still remained unidentified.
The present owners were anxious to put in a claim.
Their intention was a further search for the lost vein.
When I discovered that Simon was the owner, I did
not know whether it would be any advantage for him
to appear at all, but his story of hidden gold changed
the whole situation. Coming upon his secret by
accident, I felt in honour bound to protect the old
man. Hitchens —smart man —found out something,
guess-work mostly, I believe. He also knew the date of
the expiration of the lease. He started for Sydney to
put in a claim for the owners. I raced him to protect
old Simon. . .


There was a great buzz of talking among the men.
“I got there first.”
Loud cheers. John and Teddy yelled the loudest.
“Simon’s story of hidden gold is true. We do not
know how much gold was dumped in the winze, or
if it is possible to get it. It is all a hazard.”
“Tell us his story! We don’t know it!”
“Give it to us!” —from several miners.
“Get it from him yourselves —he tells it well. I have
something else to tell you. I am manager of Simon’s
mine.”
Loud cheers.
“I shall need volunteers for the work.”
Many hands went up. There was loud shouting and
many offers to start work.
“You know that, in order to secure a mining right,
it is necessary to give a guarantee that a certain number
of men will be employed by the owner. So I need
many of you. Hitchens will need some more men,
but I am not worrying about him.”
Hitchens laughed, but appeared satisfied with the
arrangement.
Ronald Hogarth finished speaking. The men
crowded around him, shook him by the hand.
Someone called, “Three cheers for our old boss.”
There was long and uproarious cheering.
Every one then shook hands with Hitchens.
“Congratulations, and good luck!”


CHAPTER XXXVI
AT THE MINES
Before the miners dispersed, they crowded around old
Simon, shook his hand and patted him on the back.
“You old ghost!” they said. “Good luck to you!”
“Steady now! Steady now!” old Simon said. “My
nerves can’t stand this any more than when you chased
me around the mines as if I were a fox.”
The men shouted with laughter.
“Well, give us a tune, Simon. That will steady your
nerves.”
Simon sat down, took his accordion and played a
tune. The miners crowded around him, applauding.
John and Jennifer and Teddy watched this demon-
stration amusedly, until Ronald walked over to them.
“You three had better go home now,” he said.
“Can’t we stay? I’d like to show Teddy over the
mines,” John said.
“I’d like to stay, too,” Jennifer added.
“John and Teddy may stay, but you need to rest
to-day, Jennifer. I understood you only wanted to hear
what I had to say to the miners. I think you should


go home. Mr Hitchens has offered to drive you back.”
Jennifer looked at John; she hoped that he would
ask for her to stay, too; but he was preoccupied, talking
animatedly to Teddy. She walked away to the car.
“To work, now, you men!” Hitchens called. Then,
turning to smile at Jennifer, “I’ll drive you back at
once,” he said.
So Jennifer went with him, and in the car on the
way home, he told her many things: of how distasteful
it had been to have to deceive her father, and how
glad he was that everything had turned out so well,
how glad he was for old Simon’s sake. He left her
at the gate.
When Jennifer went into the house, she found that
she was really very tired and was glad of Mrs Brown’s
care and attention. Mrs Brown insisted that she undress
and go back to bed, and she was surprised when she
awakened to find that she had slept throughout the
day. John and her father had returned—Teddy was
still with them.
“Persuaded Teddy to stay!” John explained. “We
rang up his home, and then granny.”
Jennifer was not really happy that Teddy should
still be there. “I know why John’s kept him,” she
thought. “He specially wants him to share the excite-
ment of finding that fortune they are always talking
about.” She was jealous of Teddy again.
At the evening meal, Ronald Hogarth spoke of
difficulties ahead. There would be no home for a while.


“All the better!” Teddy exclaimed. “That means that
they will simply have to come back with me.”
“It would certainly solve my problem,” Ronald said.
“I have to go down to Sydney almost immediately.”
“Not at once, I hope,” John said. “There’s something
important I want to do before we leave.”
“I can’t think of anything left for you to do,” Ronald
said. “You found the ‘ghost’.”
“Oh, that!” John said, turning red, and every one
laughed.
Jennifer knew what the important thing \yas, but
it was still a secret, and she had guessed that John
wished to share his adventure with Teddy. She was
right, for John had made up his mind to take Teddy
with him and to keep his promise to share and share
alike. “I want to show Teddy the falls,” he said.
“It will have to be to-morrow,” Ronald said, “for
I cannot leave it later than the day after to go to
Sydney. My car will be back to-day, or at least the
car that belongs to the manager of the mine. Hitchens
is lending it to me for a week. As a matter of fact, I
am still entitled to it, since there is work to be cleared
up for my employers.”
“We could easily go to-morrow,” Ronald said, “if
Jennifer is well enough.”
“Oh, does Jennifer want to come too?”
“Of course I do,” Jennifer said, flushing with annoy-
ance, and determined that she would go with the
boys. After all she had found the gold and she would,


at least, share the adventure. “I’ve been resting all day
and feel all right.”
“We could make a picnic of it,” John said.
“Start out very early and go in easy stages,” Teddy
suggested. And so it was arranged to go to the falls
die next day, and the conversation turned to other
things.
“You know, Teddy,” Mr Hogarth said, “Jennifer is
a strange little person. She has given up a beautiful
home to come and live with us, and seems to prefer
the existence.”
“I’m beginning to understand why,” John said, and
Jennifer was grateful for these words. “And of course,
Jennifer knows that it is not for ever, and that we’ll
have a home some day,” he added.
“We certainly will, and you will both be at school
as well, which will give me time to get a home to-
gether,” their father said.
“If you make a big fortune from the mine, will
you buy a sheep station? I’ve made up my mind to
be a squatter!”
Ronald Hogarth laughed heartily. “That’s a strange
things John, for I had made up my mind to retire
from my profession and become a squatter, too. But
being the manager of Simon’s mine won’t help much
towards getting the necessary capital.”
“Won’t you share in his fortune when you find the
hidden gold?”
“I may have to, but we have to find it first.”


“What do you mean, you ‘may have to’?”
“Well, it is quite patent that Simon is penniless, and
capital is needed to work a mine; so I am putting my
small bit into his mine by buying half his shares.”
“So you and Simon are partners?”
“Farmers in a gamble,” Ronald Hogarth said, and
his brow puckered into worried lines. “Perhaps I have
been foolish in throwing away a certain job, because
of an old man’s story.”
“It was really to protect an old man,” Jennifer said,
“and it was a wonderful thing to do.”


CHAPTER XXXVII
THE CAVE
Jennifer awakened early the next morning and sat
up in bed. This was the most important day of her
life!
How wonderful to think that, through her, John
had found his fortune. She was determined that John
would never know that she had found the gold first.
She looked from her window; the sun shone brightly
and there was a deep blue sky. Dew lay on the bushes—
the scent of wattle floated to her—magpies called
musically, and other birds chirped noisily.
“I could live in a tent and be happy when the sky
is always blue and the sun always shining,” she thought.
“I wonder where we shall live next.”
A little later on, she asked this question at the
breakfast table.
“More than likely we shall have to have a tent,” her
father replied, ‘ that is, if other and more serious things
do not interfere with our lives. It looks as if your
grandmother’s fear of having evacuated children to
fill her home, will soon be true. War is getting very
close, I’m afraid.”


“What would granny do, I wonder?” John said.
“She does not like the idea of children overrunning
her house,” Ronald said, “and she hinted to me that,
in the event of war, she would think seriously of
giving her house over as a hospital for the wounded
and put Dr Berry in charge of it.”
“Oh, what a wonderful idea. Dr Berry would love
that!” Jennifer said.
“If world affairs continue their present trend, I think
your grandmother will have to stay in Australia,”
“Oh dear!” Jennifer sighed, and did not know
whether the thought of war made her sigh, or the fact
of her grandmother staying in Australia.
“Well, let us be cheerful and not talk about these
depressing things. I am more than grateful that you
two are too young to be in the war, should it come, and
also, Jennifer, that I have you safely here.” Ronald
Hogarth rose from the table. “You must start at once,
if you wish to get back home before dark,” he said.
John jumped from the table. “I’ll get the things,”
he said. “Mrs Brown has packed a hamper for us.”
“Don’t forget the billy!” Jennifer called.
“Not likely!—and something else too!” he said. He
and Teddy had three sacks bundled and strapped
together which they intended taking with them.
It was still early when they set out. They went by
the track in front of Mrs Brown’s house, and followed
it for some distance until they came to a place where
the trees were freshly marked.


They walked for several miles through the thick
bush.
“How you made your way through this in the dark,”
John said to Jennifer, “I cannot understand.”
“It beats me,” Teddy said.
And Jennifer wondered, too.
“If you hadn’t marked the trees, I am quite sure
we’d not be able to find the way to-day,” John said
to Teddy.
They came to the over-grown track and the way was
easier. Later, they came to clearer ground and decided
to have a spell; throwing themselves on the ground
in a shady spot they talked while they rested.
Teddy described a station property to Jennifer; told
her of the huge acreage that was necessary. Jennifer
found it difficult to comprehend and asked many ques-
tions. Her main interest was in horses.
Teddy told her about his horses. “When you come
to stay with us, you can have one for your own use.”
Jennifer became interested, and the picture Teddy
painted of station life made her think that perhaps
it would be very nice to accept his father’s invitation
to stay with them. She wished to hear more, but Teddy
jumped to his feet. “We’ll have to get a move on,”
he said, “if we wish to get there and back in daylight.”
He had had the experience of the walk, both ways,
and knew.
They started out again, and it was midday when


they came to the rise where Jennifer had slept two
nights before. She found the tree with the hollow
between obtruding roots, and pointed to it.
“That is where I slept. It was almost comfortable,”
she said. “I lay there looking at the falls. How different
they look in the daylight.”
This amused the boys. They stood looking at the
falls. The spray hung like a silver veil.
“Let’s have lunch here,” Jennifer said.
John looked for a place for a fire. “I’ll start a fire
for the billy,” he said.
Little time was taken over lunch. Jennifer and John
were both impatient to show Teddy the cave and the
gold, which they were beginning to feel might be
only a dream. Jennifer was the first to finish her
lunch. She jumped to her feet. John rose, too. Teddy
got to his feet reluctantly. He had not been given time
to finish his lunch.
“I can’t wait any longer,” Jennifer cried. “Oh, do
hurry!”
They scrambled down the side of the gully and
followed the same course Jennifer had taken. She
wondered why it seemed so much shorter than it had
done when she was alone.
Arriving at the foot of the falls, Jennifer and John
knew the position of the cave would be another sur-
prise to Teddy. They had not told him about it’s
position, and when they pointed to the ledge against


the cliff, which ran along at the back of the falling
water, he wondered what they meant.
“There is a cave at the back of the fall of water.
You’d never believe it. Jennifer was terribly clever to
find it.”
“Impossible!” Teddy exclaimed. “I’ll wait while you
two go into the cave.”
“No, no! I’ll wait! I want you and John to go.”
Jennifer stood back.
“Very well.”
John led the way along the ledge; Teddy followed
and both disappeared behind the screen of water, and
no sound came except that of the falls.
Jennifer stood waiting. She stared up at the falls,
admiring their beauty. She was excited; her breath
came in quick gasps; colour flamed in her cheeks.
She waited to hear a sound from the cave. It seemed
ages before anything happened. Then a shout came
from John.
“I say! I say! You’re right about the phantom gold,”
he called.
He made his way along the ledge and came running
towards Jennifer, holding an old steel tin in his hand.
He took a piece of faded paper out of it.
“Listen to this!” he shouted. “ TBBO. This gold was
found by me. Signed Amos Turner.’ That’s the name
of Simon’s ghost.”


CHAPTER XXXVIII
PHANTOM GOLD
Jennifer stood staring at John. “Amos Turner!” she
murmured. •
“Funny name,” Teddy said. He had followed John
and stood beside him with several pieces of quartz in
his hand, which he turned this way and that, staring
as the gold glinted in each piece.
“It’s a fortune all right!” he said in a dazed voice.
“A fortune! And I was only joking when I suggested
we should find one! I never dreamt really that such a
thing could happen. I just was thinking of the adven-
ture, and looking for one!”
“/ meant it, though,” John said. “And I said we’d
be partners. Share and share alike; and I meant that,
too. Hand me those sacks, Jennifer. Bring them with
you. We’ll have to get busy.”
Jennifer picked up the bundle of sacks and walked
to the falls and then slowly along the ledge at the
back after Teddy and John. She was thinking of the
ghostly figure above the falls. “Perhaps ” she shook
herself. “What nonsense!” Then she thought of some-


thing else. “Share and share alike!” The full signifi-
cance of John’s words came to her. She had wished
John to find the gold—to feel the importance of finding
a fortune. Now he talked of sharing it with Teddy.
This was something she had not expected and she
felt angry with John, angry with Teddy, angry with
herself. What could she do? What could she say?
She felt inclined to tell her part in finding the gold,
but would she be believed?
She followed the boys into the cave and gave John
the bundle, which he untied.
“We can divide the quartz into three,” he said,
“And make it easier to carry.”
“That’s the idea,” Teddy said. “Make a light one for
Jennifer.”
They all worked silendy for a time. John then
suggested that Teddy and Jennifer hold open the top
of the sack while he filled it. They did so, and he
picked up the precious stuff and threw it in. Realizing
that their burdens would make their return trip very
slow, they decided not to waste time, but to set out
for home at once. They had not gone far when Teddy
had an idea.
“If we had a pole, and carried it on our shoulders,
and slung the sacks in the middle, we’d get along
quicker.”
So they halted, while Teddy selected a strong young
sapling. Being a bushman, he had a penknife with
him. It took a while to hack through the sapling. The


work was too slow, so they bent it to the ground and
snapped it off. Then, having all helped to cut away
the branches and leaves, they tied the sacks to the
pole, hoisted it to their shoulders and set out again.
Jennifer carried the picnic hamper, but exacted a
promise from the two boys that they would allow her
to take a turn and relieve one or the other occasionally.
As she followed the two boys, her thoughts turned
again to Teddy sharing the fortune. “John got his
wish about finding the fortune,” she said to herself.
“He should be satisfied. After all, Teddy did not find
it.” She did not listen to the conversation between the
boys. They discussed many things, interesting to one
another only. She felt a little out of it. Tears smarted
her eyes several times.
“Oh well, I’ve got daddy,” she said to cheer herself.
The boys were anxious to get back with the news of
their wonderful luck, and kept up a pace that was
tiring to Jennifer. It was dark when they neared home.
Jennifer was grateful to be there at last. She felt she
could not have walked any farther.
Ronald stood on the small veranda, waiting, and
waved to them as they turned in at the gate.
“What have you got?” he called.
“We’ve got the ‘phantom gold’!” John called back.
“Dreaming again, John?”
“Not this time, sir. Look at this.” John handed the
old rusty tin to his father, as he rushed to the veranda.
Ronald opened it, took the paper from it, and stood


staring at the faded writing. He was puzzled, and
looked up when Teddy called.
“This is more to the point! Look at this!” He took
from a sack several pieces of quartz and held them up.
Ronald ran down the steps, took the quartz from
Teddy and examined it carefully. “As far as I can see,
it is rich with gold,” he said.
“And what about this?” John said, taking a piece
out of his sack.
Ronald whisded.
“And it’s all the same!” John said. “Every bit of it
rich with gold.”
“I can’t believe it! It’s incredible! Where did you
find it?”
“Not on this mine,” Teddy said. “Nobody can claim
it from us. That paper tells its own history.”
Ronald looked at the piece of paper again—'“lBBo,”
he murmured. “That is just about the time the vein
was lost. Where did you find this?”
“At the falls,” Jennifer said, and wished at that
moment with all her heart that she could have said:
“I found it.”
“In a cave at the back of the falls; you’d never know
a cave was there.”
“How did you find it?”
“Jennifer found it. She hid there from those men.”
“Then it is Jennifer who found the fortune?”
Colour flooded into Jennifer’s face.
“I never thought of that,” John said. “I was only


thinking about us—that Teddy and I had found the
fortune we had been looking for.”
“Weil, that is true too, you have found your fortune
—you and Teddy. There is no doubt about that.”
“Not me, sir!” Teddy said. “I wasn’t in on this;
it was Jennifer and John.”
Jennifer looked up quickly. Teddy! And she had
been jealous of him!
“I know what they can do with it—the money they’ll
get for it,” he said.
Ronald smiled. “What’s that, Teddy?”
Buy the property adjoining ours. Father says it’s the
best proposition going.”
“There is hardly enough here to buy ...”
“Oh, you don’t need all the capital. I’ve heard father
say so. Just a few thousand.”
“You’re a business man, Teddy. I’ll take this stuff
to Sydney to-morrow, when I go, and get an expert
to work on it. You will know later what it is worth.”
Can Jennifer and John come back with me and
stay while you are away?”
Yes! I would be glad to allow them. I am driving
down to Sydney. The car came back to-day and
Hitchens is lending it to me. I will drive you all to
your place first.”
“Wonderful idea!”
“Come on now! You need a wash and a good meal,
all of you.”


CHAPTER XXXIX
THE HOMESTEAD
Although they were all tired, they could not go to
bed; they were too excited to sleep. They wanted to
talk, so they talked and planned. However, going to
bed late did not prevent them from getting up early
the next morning.
After an early breakfast they set out. The quartz
was stored in the boot at the back of the car, and
the luggage and suitcases piled in the back, and even
on the seat, leaving little room for Teddy and John.
Jennifer sat beside her father. She wondered if any
one in the world could be as happy as she. Any trace
of jealousy she had felt for Teddy had gone, “I don t
wonder John likes him,” she thought. “He is the nicest
boy I ever knew.” She was excited about the station,
and at the thought of the different Australian life she
was about to see.
“Mining is a very small part of Australian life,” her
father said, “only one side of it. The side you are now
to see is the most important thing in Australia.”
“Important! I should think so,” Jennifer thought,


when they drove through gate after gate after they
had entered “Canawarra” property and had not even
sighted the homestead. Teddy told her that the pro-
perty stretched as far as she could see and then farther.
It seemed to her to be the whole world. Teddy jumped
out of the car to open the gates they passed through,
then closed them again, explaining that the property
was divided into paddocks—pointing to different
groups of sheep, and all of different breeds, which made
these paddocks necessary. A paddock sometimes meant
several hundred acres.
Jennifer looked at brown country stretching for
miles in all directions, dry and grassless surely, and
she wondered what the sheep were nibbling at. “I
thought they ate grass.”
“So they do. That’s grass; good feed,” Teddy said.
She noticed a great many horses, fine looking
animals.
“Are they all yours?”
“Yes, we breed them.”
At last they came in sight of the homestead. A
rambling old house with wide verandas, cool and
inviting. Mr Ainsley was waiting for them. Jennifer
waved to him excitedly and was out of the car, almost
before it stopped, and rushing up the steps caught
both his hands.
“I was terribly surprised to find that you were
Teddy’s father,” she said.
“And I was surprised that the brother you told me


so much about, was my boy’s friend. It shows what a
small world we live in.”
“This seems the biggest world I’ve ever seen,” Jenni-
fer said. “So much space, and hills, and trees. Hardly
a house, hardly any people, just sheep.”
This remark made someone laugh. It was an infec-
tious laugh and Jennifer turned to see who laughed
so delightfully. She found Teddy’s mother beside her
—a charming and delightful mother, with white hair
contrasting strangely with aiace young and unlined
and a pair of mischievous brown eyes. Jennifer fell in
love with Teddy’s mother.
“So glad to see you all,”’ she said. “We love visitors,”
shaking hands with each of the Hogarths in turn.
Mrs Ainsley led them inside, showed each of them
to a bedroom. There were so many rooms and so
much space —it was all wonderful.
“Where’s grandma?” Jennifer inquired, when they
were all gathered in a large sitting-room for afternoon
tea. Mr Ainsley said:
“Gone to Sydney on a little business.”
“Granny, on business!”
“Yes, you’ll never guess,” turning to Teddy. “Who
do you think has bought the property next door?”
“Not Mrs Denbigh?”
“Yes!”
“Ooooh!” from John and Jennifer.
“I wanted them to buy it for themselves,” Teddy said.
“Same thing, I should imagine.


“Why did she want to go and do that,” John said.
“I advised her to. This war is getting close; very
soon it will come. Then it is very likely that no one
will be allowed to take their money out of England.
I advised her to get some of it away while there was
yet time.”
“It’s a wonder she would dream of living away from
England,” Jennifer said.
Mr Ainsley looked at Jennifer and pinched her cheek.
“There is someone she wants to live near.”
“I wonder who’ll run the place,” John said.
“There is a manager there now but she has her
eyes upon a very good man.” Mr Ainsley looked at
Ronald.
“Not me, I can assure you!” Ronald said. “My
mother-in-law has never thought anything of my
ability.”
“She may have changed her mind.”
Ronald shook his head.
Ronald was persuaded to stay the night. When he
put the car away, he saw that the boot was securely
locked. He had warned the young people to say nothing
about their treasure. When he said good night he told
them he would be gone before they awakened in the
morning.
“Oh, we’ll be up,” they all assured him.
However, in the morning they all slept late and
when they came from their rooms Ronald had gone.
Later in the morning they went to the paddocks


specially to choose a horse for Jennifer and one for
John. This took some time. The rest of the morning
was spent in trying their mounts, Jennifer was an
excellent horsewoman, and Teddy soon discovered this.
“You can ride” he said. “John will be all right
soon.”
“You said I would be all right soon,” John remarked
to Teddy at lunch time. “All right! I am stiff and sore
from head to foot.”
“No good giving in; better ride again!” Teddy said.
John felt he was too stiff to attempt to ride again that
day, but Jennifer was fresh and showed no effects
whatever.
“Can’t be beaten by a girl,” he thought. So, with
many groans he climbed into the saddle again and
persevered, riding all the afternoon. Mrs Ainsley said
to him, when they all returned from the ride:
“A hot bath, a very hot one; soak yourself and rub
some liniment into your muscles. We’ve got a good
one. I’ll get it for you.”
John, glad of her advice, felt himself a new man
after following it.
“Your mother’s a wonder!” he said to Teddy, and
Jennifer thought her wonderful too, when Mrs
Ainsley’s arm stole around her. She remembered other
arms—a memory that had always puzzled her.


CHAPTER XL
TREE-TOPS
The next morning they all rode again.
“You were right about keeping on with the riding,”
John said to Teddy. “I thought I’d never be able to
ride; now I feel as if I could go on for ever.”
“Well, let us ride all to-day, the three of us. Take
some lunch and go over to your gran’s property.”
“Wonderful idea!”
The three set out shortly afterwards. The day was
hot, the flies troublesome, but they cantered along at
an easy pace, happy and carefree. They took spells
when they came to waterholes, to water their horses
and to eat their sandwiches.
The country was flat and monotonous. They rode
across country, leaving the road. Early in the after-
noon, Teddy said: “Here we are!”
“Where?” John said.
“Here!”
“Of course we are here, but where?”
“At your gran’s.”
“I can’t see any difference,” Jennifer said
“This is the boundary.” Teddy pointed to a wire


fence, then to a gate farther on. They rode through
this and many others, and on until the house came
into view. A low rambling place with trees all round
it, set on a small hill. A long, curving drive, beneath
trees, led to the house—a drive that brought the
memory of another one to Jennifer. “Strange that
granny should have another house with a drive that
curves and winds upwards under trees. It isn’t really
like ‘Oakleaves’, but it reminds me of it.”
The three young people rode their horses at a canter
up the long drive, coming to a halt at the house. At
the steps of a wide veranda a woman stood, waiting
to greet them.
“This is Mrs Shaw,” Teddy said, introducing
Jennifer and John. “And these are my friends,
Jennifer and John Hogarth. Their grandmother is
Mrs Denbigh. She has just bought this place.”
“Oh, come in, do!”
Jennifer sprang from her horse and ran up the few
steps to the veranda. “How do you do?” she said to
Mrs Shaw and, turning to speak to John and Teddy,
stood speechless for a moment. The view before her
was lovelier than she had dreamed possible. She looked
over green hills—other hills gold in the sunlight—and
at hills of the same colour with dark brown patches
set in squares in the green and the gold, and last at
purple hills in a rim against the blue horizon.
“Oh!” was all she could say.
“Bonzer!” the boys said.


“Come inside,” Mrs Shaw said. “You’ll be thirsty
after your long ride. I’ve got lemon syrup and plenty
of ice.”
“Ice! Sounds good,” Teddy said as diey followed
Mrs Shaw.
She led the way from the wide veranda, through
the front door, straight into a large living-room. This
seemed strange to Jennifer; she wondered why there
was no hall.
“Wait here and make yourselves at home. Sit down
while I fetch the drinks,” Mrs Shaw said and left
them.
They were too anxious to look round to want to
sit down; so they wandered about the room, looking
at things, and staring curiously about them.
“The kind of room I like!” Teddy remarked.
“Plain, and plenty of room to move about. Not clut-
tered up with too much furniture.”
“It is plain,” Jennifer said dubiously, and thinking
to herself: “Granny will change all this!” she ex-
claimed: “Oh, look at the windows; no blinds, and
so wide that all the scenery seems to be inside.”
“A bosker fireplace!” John said.
“Takes half a tree,” Teddy said, “and you need
big fires in the winter up here. It’s cold, I can tell
you.”
Jennifer wandered over to the windows and stood
staring out at the view. Here was the scenery that


had so enthralled her, from a different angle. “Tree-
tops, and more tree-tops!” she said.
“Tree-tops!” came Mrs Shaw’s voice through the
doorway as she came back with a tray of glasses to
the sound of tinkling ice. “Tree-tops! That’s just what
we all call this place. Living here is just like living
in the tree-tops.”
Jennifer turned from the window, smiling with
delight.
“It sounds delicious!” she said.
“I wish we were going to own it, and that granny
wasn’t,” John said enviously.
“It is a bit tough!” Teddy remarked, “though it
will probably be the same thing.”
“Not on your life!” John said. “From all I gather
from Jennifer, it wouldn’t be the same thing at all.”
Jennifer's face fell; her joy was clouded for a
moment.
“Granny has got a very possessive way with her,”
she said slowly. “Perhaps she’ll let us buy it from
her,” she added hopefully. “She’s sure to, when she
hears about our fortune.”
“Well,” Teddy said, waving his glass, “here’s hop-
ing!”
Jennifer and John lifted their glasses, and laugh-
ingly repeated the toast. Then they turned to Mrs
Shaw and eagerly asked for permission to explore the
property. And so they spent the rest of the afternoon.


Jennifer looked over the tops of the trees over and
over again; the scene fascinated her.
“It is the most beautiful place in the world,” she
thought. “When I was little, I used to love to feel I
was flying beneath the branches of the trees. Now I
want to fly over the top of them.”
The time came, only too soon, for them to set out
on their return journey. They said good-bye to Mrs
Shaw, thanking her warmly, and waved to her as they
rode away.
The horses, eager to be home, galloped fast, and
above the clatter of their hooves joyous young voices
rang out, as the three shouted to one another enthusi-
astically about “Tree-tops”.


CHAPTER XLI
HIDDEN GOLD
Jennifer and John stayed on at “Canawarra”, and
heard from their father a few days after he had left.
He said the quartz was rich in gold and would be
valued very shortly. He told them he had deposited
it in the vault of a bank in the names of John and
Jennifer. John still felt worried about Teddy, and
thought he should have his share of the fortune.
The three young people sat together on the veranda
in the late afternoon, discussing the letter that had
just arrived.
“Teddy should be in it,” John said.
“I think so, too,” Jennifer said. She liked Teddy
now, and because she thought she had misjudged him
about sharing the fortune with John, she was anxious
to make amends. The only way she could think of
was to see that he shared the fortune.
“I don’t think so,” Teddy said, “because it was
Jennifer who found the cave. We’d never have looked
there. No one would—and she also got the plan away
from those men. So I can’t see where I come into it.”
“But a bargain’s a bargain,” John said.


“Our bargain was only if we found the fortune
together,” Teddy said.
“And we did!” John persisted.
“How long did you say you were in the cave before
John arrived?”
“It seemed hours,” Jennifer said.
“And there is nothing wrong with your eyesight?”
Colour flew into Jennifer’s cheeks, and she turned
her head away to hide her confusion. “There is nothing
the matter with my eyes at all,” she said with emphasis.
“And when you hid the plan at the back of the
quartz, you didn’t see it?”
“Well, if I had, it would have just seemed like old
bits of rock to me.”
“And when you sent John for the plan by himself,
you didn’t have a reason?”
John stared at Teddy. “You sound like a lawyer,”
he said.
“And you seem a bit thick in the head.”
It was John’s turn to flush. “I say, what are you
driving at, Teddy?”
“Simply that I think Jennifer found the gold first.”
“No, no, no, Teddy!” Jennifer cried, jumping up,
“I didn’t, really I didn’t!”
“I’ll believe you if you say nothing more about my
sharing it with John. My old man’s got plenty of
sugar.” .
“I’ll promise you I’ll never mention it again,” Jenni-
fer said eagerly.


HIDDEN GOLD
Teddy shot a shrewd glance at her and turned away
to hide a smile; then he sauntered casually away.
“She’s a sport!” he muttered to himself.
And Jennifer thought: “I like Teddy, and I don’t
blame John for wanting to share things with him.”
“I can quite understand that when you saw the
quartz,” John said, “you wouldn’t think it any good.
You were too excited, at any rate, to think of anything.”
“Of course,” Jennifer replied.
“I say —suppose we drop it —about Teddy sharing
it. He doesn’t seem to like it; don’t mention it again.
I suppose father is back at Winoona by now, living in
a tent. He said he was leaving Sydney at once.”
“Do you think he’ll be lonely without us?”
“There you go again—lonely! Of course he’s not.
He’s used to it. He’ll be only too glad to be relieved
of the responsibility of us while he’s on this important
work.”
John was right. Ronald had a tent pitched near
Simon’s hut, and was glad that Jennifer and John
had better quarters. He had a number of men at work
on the mine, and had invested his small capital in
scant machinery for the preliminary work. “The hidden
gold may be the only thing worth considering,” he
told Simon. “And we may not even find that. It is all
a gamble and the less machinery we buy at the moment,
the better.”
Simon left himself entirely in the boss’s hands.
Ronald was glad to be busy. There was disquieting


news from abroad. He spent his evenings beside his
wireless and listened eagerly to every scrap of news
that came through.
One Sunday, the battery of his wireless ran down
and he could not get news. He felt that he was missing
something important, and decided to go early the next
morning to get the battery recharged. He was delayed,
however by a shout from the men working on the old
shaft. The quality of the quartz had changed suddenly.
For days they had been bringing mullock up to
the top, and now, in the last load, they had found
several pieces of rich quartz. Ronald walked over to
investigate and, after examining the quartz, was sure
that the hidden gold had been found at last. He called
to Simon, and together they waited until the next load
came up. This load showed a still greater percentage
of the quartz, and each load improved until there was
no mullock, but rich quartz filled with free gold.
This put all other thoughts from Ronald’s mind for
the day. Late in the afternoon the quality of the ore
changed again, and more mullock appeared. Ronald
stood thinking. Simon’s story must be true. The quartz
they had brought to the surface was only what had
been thrown in the old winze for revenge. This had
been taken before the rich vein had petered out.
Further work on the mine would be useless and un-
profitable. The owners of the other mine could put
in a claim if they wished. Simon, he knew, would be


satisfied now that his search had proved successful,
and be glad to retire. So would he.
These thoughts were interrupted. He was surprised
to see John and Jennifer rush towards him, Teddy
with them. They shouted a word that made his heart
stop beating for a moment—“ War!”
So it had come at last—war, and a world that would
soon be in flames. It was difficult to grasp the enormity
of the word — war —and the three young people talked
excitedly, not understanding it at all. It appeared that
Drummond had driven them over in their grand-
mother’s car; the trend of the news had sent her post-
haste to Jennifer. She had arrived at Canawarra the
day before, and they had all listened to the announce-
ment that night. Jennifer’s and John’s first thought
was of their father. Mrs Denbigh had consented to
their going to him.
“You’ve found the hidden gold!” John said, when
the excitement died down a little.
Ronald nodded and pointed to old Simon, who stood
looking at his unearthed treasure. They walked over
to him and told him that war was declared, and they
told the miners too, as each came to the top. After
hearing the news, the men stood about in groups,
talking in subdued voices.
Simon stood silendy, tears streaming down his
cheeks. “I have been looking for gold for so long,”
he said, shaking his head, “and now that I have found
it, this terrible thing happens —war.”


They all tried to comfort old Simon, patting him on
the back; and they reminded him that there was a
great deal he could do to help in war time, with a
fortune such as he had.
But I am thinking of the years that have passed,”
he said, “and of how much I have missed while looking
tor the gold. It cannot buy back the years that have
gone. It seems to me that we prospectors, looking for
gold with bent backs and fixed eyes, miss all the other
gold in the world.”
“What do you mean?” Jennifer asked.
“This is a land of gold—golden wattle and golden
sunsets. We mineys miss it all.”
They didn t miss this gold,” Ronald said, pulling
a piece of Jennifer’s hair and laughing. “We mustn’t
be too sad, for some of us are going to get the things
we wanted most.”
“A sheep station?” John asked.
Ronald nodded.
Dr Berry drove through the wide-open gates of “Oak-
leaves” and stopped at the foot of the long drive.
Taking a letter from his pocket, he read the contents,
which he knew almost by heart.
I wish to lend ‘Oakleaves’ for the duration of the
war to be used as a hospital for the wounded. I wish
you to be in charge of it.” (“Oakleaves” to be as good
as his own!)
“I shall probably never return. The last time we


talked together about evacuee children, you will
remember that I was rather terse about the number
the authorities wanted me to take into my home. I
have a place in Australia now, and the number they
suggested can be doubled. I prefer to have boys who
could be trained to work on station properties. I will
undertake the expense of their education, and see that
they get proper training. I will also pay their fares,
and meet all other expenses.”
“A truly wonderful old lady!” Dr Berry said to
himself. Then smiling, “This has all come about
through my little Jennifer.”
He started his car and drove slowly up the drive,
staring at the leaves above him.
“She was a bird after all. She took wings and flew
a very long way. Migrating, they call it.


Halstead Press Pty Limited,
9-19 Nickson Street, Sydney
✓


■


■


■
' ■
■ ■


• ■
*


Well known as a writer of quaint
and charming fairy-tales lor small
children, Mrs Lister, in Jennifer
Stands By shows dial she can also
wrhe tales to enthrall their big
brothers and sisters.
A lonely child brought up by her
wealthy grandmother in a stately
English home, Jennifer learns one
day that she has a father and twin
brother living in Australia—a fathei
and brother whose existence has been
kept from her. Persuading her dis-
approx ing grandmother to take hei
to them, putting aside riches in
fax our of lixing in a mean cottage
in a mining settlement, winning hei
brother's affection and respect—Jen-
nifer is no ordinary heroine. She has
orit and charm and good looks, and
in the mvstcry of the ghost miner and
the hidden gold she plays an exciting
pan that makes all the difference to
the familv fortunes.
With romance and mystery,
adventure and intrigue, Jennifer
Stands By will hold an immense
appeal for voting readers.


