

COLONEL LIGHT’S LOG
OF THE
"NILE STEAM SHIP"
18341835
WITH AN INTRODUCTION
BY
A. FRANCIS STEUART
Reprinted from the EGYPTIAN OBSERVER
Price five Piastres
CAIRO
Printed by the Société Anonyme Egyptienne de Publicité
1911


COLONEL LIGHT’S LOG
OF THE
“NILE STEAM SHIP”
1834-35
WITH AN INTRODUCTION
BY
A. FRANCIS STEUART
Reprinted from the EGYPTIAN OBSERVER
Price Five Piastres
CAIRO
Printed by the Societe Anonyme Egyptienne de Publicity
191-1,




EXTRACT
FROM THE
EGYPTIAN OBSERVER
November 13, 1911.
We are indebted to Mr. F. R. Sanderson for kindly
enabling us to publish the “Log of the ‘Nile Steamship’,”
kept by Colonel Light when in the service 'of Mohammed
Ali, Khedive of Egypt, in 1834-5. The original manu-
script is in the possession of Mr. A. Francis Steuart, a
great-grand-nephew of Colonel Light, who has written an
introduction to the Log, which contains a short account of
Colonel Light’s adventurous life .
EDITOR’S NOTE.
The Egyptian naval records for the period covered
by Colonel Light’s Log are practically non-existent.
Special interest, therefore, is attached to this Log, and
it is at the request of many of onr readers that we have
undertaken to reprint it in pamphlet form.
The Editor,
EGYPTIAN OBSERVER.
December ign.


INTRODUCTION.
So little is known of the navy that Mohammed Ali,
Pasha of Egypt, tried to get together after the de-
struction of his fleet at Navarino, that we think it is
not •uninstructive to print, for the first time, the Egypt-
ian and Syrian portion of the rough Diary, in 1834-35,
of Colonel William Light, (*) at that time an officer in
the Pasha's navy. Colonel Light was a man with
a remarkable career. Born in Malaya about 1785,
he was sent to England by his father Captain
FVancis Light, the founder of Prince of Wales Island
or Penang, and educated by his old Suffolk friends
the Doughtys of Theberton Hall. He was placed in
the navy and then, after being for a short time one
of Napoleon's prisoners, through the influence of the
future Duke of Wellington, entered the army, be-
coming in 1809 a Lieutenant in the 4th Light
Dragoons. With this regiment he served with dis-
tinction all through the Peninsular War, his linguistic
powers making him very useful as an intelligence officer,
and he was appointed Aide-de-Camp to the Duke of
Wellington. His bravery was great and his experi-
ences after Reduiha and his adventures at the battles of
Albuera and Vic Bigorre may be read in the pages of
his friends Sir George and Sir William Napier. In
1814 he obtained a company in the 3rd Buffs (East
Kent Regiment) and retired as Captain and Brevet-
(•) Most of his journals perished (to his great grief) in a fire
at Adelaide Jannary 2, 1839. Only a few rough fragments
remain.


Major in 1821, betaking himself to a life of travel. His
illustrated books on Sicily and Pompeii were the
fruits of this but there was another warlike episode
in 1823, when he followed Sir Robert Wilson as Col-
onel of the Constitutional Forces in Spain and was
severely wounded at Corunna. Voyages all round the
Mediterranean coasts with his beautiful wife, in his
yacht ( 2 ) (he was an early member of the Royal Yacht
Club) the “ Gulnase,” succeeded, and in 1830 we find
them in Egypt. They obtained from the Pasha a
firman containing “ something more than the ordinary,"
and Mrs. Light entered deeply into the study of Egypt-
ology. They explored as far as the second Cataract,
and the Pasha, impressed by Light, desired to employ
him in his navy and to give him the command of
one of his line-of-battle ships. The desire of the Pasha
for English assistants was so great, however, that, before
the Syrian campaign began, he sent Light to England
on the 7th August 1831 in his own yacht with a
mission “to bring out about seventy officers, from an
Admiral, if he can get one, down to a boatswain."
The Log which, with its curious style of hasty writing
half French half nautical, we print now is that of
‘The Nile Steam Ship' which Light brought out
from England to Egypt three years later, leaving Black-
wall on the 19th September 1834 and arriving in Alex-
and on the 18th October.
Colonel Light’s subsequent career may be briefly
given. He left the Pasha’s service shortly after the
completion of this Diary or and in 1836 went
out, on the recommendation of the Duke of Wellington,'
to the newly founded Colony of South Australia as
Surveyor-General. Captain (afterwards Sir John)
(-) We are told that he wore at sea “a straw hat, bluejacket with
an anchor on the button, and white trowsers... the Yacht Club
button.”


Hindmarsh, who had been with him in the service of
the Pasha of Egypt, was made Governor. In South
Australia after much opposition and terrible iracassenis
Colonel Light managed to found the beautiful city of
Adelaide, and it is as “The Founder of Adelaide”
that he is now best known, but the opposition to which
he was subjected wore out his health and broke his
spirit, and he died 5 October 1839. The inhabitants
of Adelaide showed their recognition of his wisdom
by erecting a statue to his honour in 1906, in the
city which it cost him his life to found.
At the time Light entered the Pasha’s service the
Egyptian navy was in rather a nebulous condition. It
was manned chiefly by fugitive Frenchmen. M. de
Besson who was reported to have projected a plan
for the escape of Napoleon from Saint Helena, had
married a wealthy Danish lady, settled in Egypt, and
became Chief or Vice-Admiral of the Fleet. Cerisy
Bey was naval architect and there was one English
official, Galloway Bey. We learn from Mrs. Light’s
journal, 3 December 1830, “The dockyard (of Alex-
andria) has only been built within these last two
years, and is very spacious. On the stocks are three
three-deckers, to be called Alexandria , Mohammed All,
and Ibrahim. There is also a seventy-four, and a
small corvette, and as soon as they are launched,
others will be commenced immediately. In short
Mohammed AH, nothing daunted by his defeat at
Navarino, is determined to have a fleet. He offers
the command of his ships to any officers who have
served in the English navy. One of them, a very fine
frigate, ( The Kaffir cs Sheikh) was built at Archangel,
and was brought to Alexandria by Mr. Prissick, a
master in the English navy, who now commands her,
with a handsome salary. His first lieutenant is like-
wise an Englishman, but there is a strong French
party who do all in their power to oppose the English.”


C. Rochford Scott ( 3 ) says that one of the attractions
of the Pasha’s service was the pay which was not
only “remarkably good” but “pretty regularly issued.”
The desire for European officers was perhaps not
lessened owing to what we are told of the Orientals
employed. In 1834 the Egyptian navy was placed
under the Command of Moutouch Pasha in succession
to Osman Pasha. The latter, “ deserting the Egyptian
service in 1833, added the crime of treachery to the
faults of drunkenness, ignorance and cowardice by which
he was previously distinguished.”
A. FRANCIS STEUART
( 3 ) “Rambles in Egypt and Candia”, 1837.


COLONEL LIGHT'S LOG
OF THE
“NILE STEAM SHIP”
1834-35
October 1834. Sat. 18.-E.N.E. —a.m. Fine clear weather,
running for Alexandria.
p.m. At i made the land on the starboard how ;
at 3, stood in for the harbour. The Turkish Admiral
and several visitors came on board. At 4 came to an
anchor in Alexandria Harbour.
Oct. 20. —We had this day a visit from Marshal
Marmont. I had alwavs been so strongly impressed
with the idea of his having lost an arm at Salamanca
that I was astonished at seeing him come up the ship’s
side with a complete set of limbs, but it occurred im-
mediately to me that false arms are now made so a-
droitly as to deceive one for a time ; however, I soon
after saw that all was right, for the fingers on both
hands moved with equal facility. The Marshal had
been on a visit to Egypt and (was) about to return
to France. He seemed, as the French all do, very
affable and unreserved.
Oct. 22. —Moharem Bey came on board. Received
orders to prepare for a trip in the morning.
Oct. 25.—Early part calm. At 8 a.m. Mutus Pasha,
Cerisy Bey, Besson Bey, Said Bey, the Pasha’s son,
Capt. Hussard and many other officers, with a gang of
civilians, came on board, and two boat-loads of viands,
pastry, wine, rum, and porter, etc., with waiters and
ragamuffins of all ages, sizes, and colours, to have a


trial of the steamer and a regular good jollification. At
8.15 got under weigh and proceeded. Went as far
as Aboukir castle and in coming back took a man-of-
war brig in tow. The time for regaling having arrived,
as many as could get seats at the table set to with a
will. Not being one of the party I remained on
deck but from the appearance of some of the gentlemen
after dinner one could see that the wine had not been
spared. At 2.30 p.m. we came to an anchor, and at
4 moored ship.
November 26. —At 4 p.m. weighed one anchor and
slipped the other, and proceeded to sea in a dreadful
hurry with Husne Effendi, Mahomet Captain, and Sayd
Ali Captain, the former with an order from the Pasha
for his son Ibrahim to come to Egypt, the two latter
going to meet him and get what they can from him.
Our skipper being so anxious to perform • this mis-
sion that he could not spare another half hour to get
both anchors up, but left our small bower to keep its
bed in the mud till our return.
Nov. 29. —At 1 p.m. came to anchor in 6 fms. in the
Bay of Tripoli.
NOV. 30. —Blowing strong from E.N.E. Went on
shore. The landing place very bad, on some large
stones close to one of the Old Towers. If there is
any swell the boat must be immediately hauled off.
The old Tower close to the water’s edge presents a
pleasing aspect, one more agreeable to the feelings of
an Englishman than Alexandria. Situated on flat
ground with private houses looking on the Bay, while
outside the town we see gardens and some consider-
able vegetation. The walk from this to the town is
about 2 miles on a hard sandy road, having fields and
gardens on each side and two or three little brooks
running across it. One is more struck with this after
coming from Egypt. The town is walled, and has


good Bazaars, much better than any I have yet seen.
The shops are clean and the streets paved, having a
large gutter in the middle about 4 feet wide. There is
an exchange for the merchants, in the middle of which
is a large tank of good water, and the town is supplied
with several good fountains. The river running through
the town has two good stone bridges over it. The
staple article is silk, raw and manufactured. Tripoli
is famous for the sashes worn by almost all classes
in Egypt. On the whole, I have been more pleased
with Tripoli than Smyrna. The men are the hand-
somest I ever saw. Hindmarsh, ( 4 ) Read, Dr. Spence
and myself dined with the English Vice-Consul Sigr.
Catzaflio, We had an excellent dinner and at 3 p.m.
returned to the Marina to embark in a deluge of rain
with distant thunder and lightning.
Dec. 7. —The Barometer, from the 3rd to sth, rose grad-
ually from 29.61, to 29.88 and the weather during the
whole time getting worse, strong gales from S. W. to
W.S.W. with heavy squalls of rain, thunder and lightning.
From yesterday, the weather has been getting finer
and the Barometer which was yesterday forenoon at
29.94 has now fallen to 29.69. The wind variable
from N.E. to S.W. by the Southward.
Omar Effendi arrived at Tripoli and we, of course,
all expected him. He came with the Pasha’s ad-
vanced guard, but a short time set us in better inform-
ation for he had come to attend the process of pres-
sing the olives for oil and to ascertain the quantity
likely to be made this year. He brought us intelli-
gence that Ibrahim did not mean to return to Egypt
on account of the plague. This I took to be mere
( 4 ) Afterwards Sir John Hindmarsh. He became Governor of
South Australia and disagreed with his former friend Light, then
Surveyor-General. Then he became Governor of Heligoland,
and died in iB6O.


pretence and that Ibrahim had about as much dread
of the plague as he had of a Turkish soldier, but I
found some time after that he really had a great
horror of this malady.
An English T.G., a Mr. Woodford, ( 5 ) came on board.
The state of the Syrians had not been improved
since the conquest but on the contrary the heavy
contributions have made all classes dissatisfied. About
two months ago 24 of the principal men of Tripoli
were beheaded by Ibrahim’s order for being leaders of
a conspiracy. He came himself to attend the trial and
execution of the men. He is universally detested.
The Bay of Tripoli is large and open to the North-
ward. At the Bight stands the old town and there
are several old castles at short distances from each
other along shore. They are now in ruins. There is
good anchorage in from 3 to 4 fms., and keeping about
three cables lengths from the rocks you are quite
clear of everything coming in or going out. The
mountains of Lebanon towering above form a fine
sight.
December 13, This day Husne Effendi arrived
from Ibrabim Pasha. The heat yesterday and to-day
from 12 to 3 p.m. has been excessive, and remaining
on a rock yesterday making some angles, then sitting
in the shade after having been half broiled in the
sun has produced a cold and sore throat.
Dec. 14. —At noon lighted the fires; at 2.40 got under
weigh and laid to for our passengers. At 3.30 Husne
Effendi, Sayd Aly Captain, Mahomet Captain and some
others came on board. At 5 we proceeded : at 5.30
rounded the rocks and shaped our course. At 6
spoke a Turkish brig bound to Acre.
, ( r >) A Dr. Woodford followed Colonel Light out to South Aus-
tralia and died there 11 April 1866. Aged 57.


Dec. 16. —At daylight saw the land on the larboard
bow. At 8, fresh breezes and squally with rain. At
noon finding ourselves very near the land and not
knowing exactly whereabouts (at least the skipper did
not. For my own part having had a good sight in the
morning and having so much reliance in my
observations, I felt quite sure of our position )
we hauled off to N. by W., being then in a quarter
less six. There must have been a very strong set to
the southward and lead should be attended to as
soon as you get into coloured water, which colour is
caused by the discharge of the Nile. At 4, blowing
N. W. strong with squalls of rain. At 8, laid her to
under main storm topsail and fore topmast staysail.
Dec. 17. —At a.m . strong breezes and squalls of rain :
at 5.30 bore up : at daylight saw Alexandria bearing
S. S. W. 10 or 12 miles. At 8, strong breezes and
squally. At 8.30 observed the pilot boat among the
reefs, bore up and ran down to her. At 10.30 came
to anchor with the small bower and moored soon
after. Found all the ships in quarantine on account
of the plague in the town which had now assumed
an appearance that admitted of no further trifling. At
noon, weather squally with rain. Landed Husne Effendi
at the Pasha’s Baths, Sayd Ali and Mahomet Captain
remaining on board. We got some consolations in
the shape of letters and newspapers. Suffered severely
from sore throat.
Dec. 18. —All last night suffered severely from my
throat which towards morning suppurated and I got
some ease, but the gout has succeeded the sore
throat so that my case is not much improved. How-
ever. . . . gout is not so bad to me as even a trifling
sore throat.
Dec. 21. Received pratique this day for Tripoli but
we are now to put the town in quarantine with our


selves. The band which came on board with Husne
went on shore. I forgot to mention this band before.
It consisted of an instrument of oblong and flatfish
shape with a hollow depth of about 4 inches, about
2Y 2 feet long and about 9 inches broad with several
wire strings, a flute, tambourine of primitive con-
struction, a set of fiddles, and a very small pipe. To
this there was added a singer. Nothing in the world
could be more execrable ( r> ). The beauty of singing
here is in the noise and throwing the noise as much
into the roof»of the mouth as they possibly can. I
was really well pleased when they went over the side.
Dec. 31. From the 18th to this day nothing partic-
ular. Occasional squalls of wind and rain. Some-
times very cold, others, for the season, very warm.
At 6.30 this evening the whole of the men-of-war in
harbour illuminated for the commencement of the
Ramadan. It was really well done and displayed
more taste than I should have given them credit for.
Jan. 2. 1835. From Alexandria to Tripoli. — a.m. at
9, light airs with a little rain. Unmoored ship and
prepared to go to sea. At 2 p.m. took in more coals
and water. At 4.15 got under way. At 5.30 the
Pasha's palace bearing S. Y 2 W. about 6 miles, shaped
our course N.N.E. till midnight. Light winds and fine
all night. Bacchi Bey on board with orders for
Ibrahim,
Jan. 3. a.m. at 1, course E.N.E., wind N.E. ;
some part of the day we had light squalls of rain but
nothing occurred except seeing a frigate on the star-
board boom standing to the westward.
Jan. 4. Tripoli, a.m. at 5, saw the land, and
stopped the engines. At daylight proceeded. At 9
(°) Sir William Napier describes Colonel Light as ‘soldier sea-
man, musicia,= artist, and good in all.’


Cape Madonna N.E. */ 2 E. about 20 miles. A heavy
head sea running. Wind N.E. at noon ; fresh breeze
and fine with a high head sea. At 3 p.m. rounded
the outer rock ; fresh gales and fine weather. At 4
came to an anchor in the Bay of Tripoli. At night
moderate and fine.
Jan. 5. Employed the forenoon repairing paddle
board. At 11 the Governor of the town came on
board to see the Bey and the ship. At 11.45 we hove
short having learned that Ibrahim Pasha is at Antioch.
At 4.50 p.m. weighed and stood out. Moderate breezes
and cloudy; at 7, moderate with rain. At Bto 9,
fresh breezes and cloudy with rain; at 11.30 wind
shifted round to N. by E. blowing strong with heavy
rain and dark weather; at 12 slackened the engines
to 18 revolutions.
Jan. 6. a.m., strong breezes with rain. At day-
light—Cape Passidi E.S.E. about 25 miles—reefed and
set the fore storm staysail and main storm trysail. At
9.45 in main S. trysail and down fore staysail : blowing
very strong from N.E. Altered course to N.E. by
E. Ya E. at 11 ; altered course to N. N. E. */» E. at
noon; blowing very strong with fine cold weather. At
5 p.m. rounded the Cape and ran up the Gulf of
Suadiah close to the shore, the coast being bold and
picturesque. Strong gales and very cold. At 3.15
came to an anchor in 5 l fa fathoms water opposite
the river Orontes ; at 3.30 Bacchi Bey landed. Strong
gales and very cold.
Jan. 7. At Single Anchor , Suadiah. a.m., light
breezes and foggy (wind N.E. to W.); at 4 very thick
with snow. About noon the snow turned to rain. The
latter part blowing in a strong gale with very cold
weather.
Jan. 8. —N. N. E. a.m., fresh breezes and thick
weather with rain which lasted till 10, then cleared


away. I went on shore with Bill and my guns, i.e.
rifle and fowling piece. After toiling several hours in
deep mud—the latter part so exhausted whenever
I sank deep that I became a little alarmed and glad
to seek something like a hard path, altho’ about 2
miles —returned to the boat with three birds of dif-
ferent kinds and one snipe. The Orontes is a fine
stream and has as far as I went up, about 3 miles, as
much as 4 feet of water. Much might be made of this
river in other hands. Mr. Barker, ex-Consul of Alex-
andria has a house at Suadiah about 4 miles from the
sea. He has considerable property in the country and
deserves it all for his resolution in living in such a
place. He says no one here can recollect such severe
weather as we have had these two days. At 6 p.m.,
light breezes and fine, —fires all night. At 8 received
a letter from Omer Effendi to go to Iskenderoon.
Jan- 9- —N-N. W- a.m.; light airs and cloudy. At
3 got the fires : at 5 hove short : at 6.30 got under
weigh and proceeded for Iskenderoon. At 9, running
up the Gulf; at 11 hailed to the northward to take a
brig in tow, the Grace of London, Capt. Gull. At 12
the hawser parted and the sea breezes setting in fresh
we parted and each stood in for the anchorage. At
1.20 p.m. came to an anchor near the village. We
found two English schooners here. At 2 the Vrce-
Czmsul came on board : at 3 hove up and shifted
berth more to the northward, and moored ship.
Jan. 7. Mr. Woodford, the T. G. whom we had
met at Tripoli, came on board with two English
Captains. He left Tripoli a month ago for Smyrna
but somehow had found his way to Iskenderoon and
from this place I believe will go back to Tripoli, and
further south to Beyrout.
Jan. 10. —S. S. W. a.m.; all this morning occasional
showers of rain with freshening breezes and cold. At


i p.m. Omer Effendi came on board to prepare us
for receiving his master Ibrahim.
Jan. \\. a .m.; light breezes and fine weather. At
10 went on shore and walked to the Tower, said to be
erected on the spot where Jonah landed after his trip
in the whale’s belly. The distance from the ship
appeared about 3 miles, but we walked full seven
over very uneven ground and, when we came near
it, we were some time e’er we could scramble through
the bushes to get to it, and then what was to be seen
but a massive sort of gateway built of marble. What
it could have been one cannot learn. As to the
memory of Jonah, he must have chosen, —or rather the
whale have chosen a very bad spot for delivering his
cargo, for the cliff is upwards of 100 feet almost
perpendicular in height, and rocky. The story the
Consul told me afterwards I think most probable.
Several years since the Levant Company carried on a
great trade in this Gulf and the castle they built is
still in existence about a mile from the Tower, and
this Tower was built by that Company as a light-
house for their ships in the night to know the
position of their factory.
Jan. 12.
Dined on board the Crescent schooner, Capt. Hayes,
and met there the Captain of the Grace.
Jan. 13. — a.m.N. W. ; p.m. E. by S.
airs and very fine weather. Went to the village ; called
on the Consul, Sig. Martinelli. Poor man, what a miser-
able hole he has got into ! There is not a human
being nearer than Aleppo with whom he could associ-
ate. The village is entirely in ruins, the only habitable
house is the one he is in and that's a horrid one. The
inhabitants are half savages and the country unhealthy.
There must have been a considerable trade here by
the English formerly, if we may judge by the remains


of the English factory. It is a very large building con-
sisting of several rooms and a kitchen on the first floor,
and on the ground are large store rooms and two
large stables capable of containing upwards of a
hundred horses. There is also a very large courtyard
on each side of which are several smaller warehouses,
and at the gate a small lodge or perhaps, custom-
house. The whole, however, is now in ruins, the
roof entirely away, and long grass growing in the
several chambers. There are also the remains of
French and English Churches, with tombs of many
who have left their bones in this place. Some of the
sculptures were very good and the names of the buried
quite distinct. The most recent was a slab erected
on the wall to the memory of Hugh Alexander
Olphert, of the Castle of Ayas, June 20, 1812. Capt.
Beaufort, commander of that ship, I believe was
wounded by the natives about this time while
surveying.
Jan. 14. E. by N. The first part of this day we had
light breezes and fine weather ;at noon calm. Ibrahim
Pasha arrived last night and slept at the Consul’s. In
the afternoon we were employed taking in about 800
old muskets, —trophies of his victories. They were
from all countries, —French, Turkish, Eastern, and
some very modern English ones.
Jan. 15. S. S- w. Strong gusts of wind the whole of
this day, and very cold. There was a great movement
of troops along shore and in the village, and report
says the Pasha has enough to settle before he leaves
the country.
Jan. 16. S. S- w. Early this morning we received
orders from the Pasha to take on board about 200
Riflemen. At 8.30, sent our boats on shore to em-
bark them. Unmoored ship and hove short on the
best bower : at 10.30 the Pasha came on board


accompanied by about 60 or 70 of the most rascally
looking people I ever saw he being the worst looking of
the whole ( 1 ). At 11.40 got under way with strong
breezes and fine. At noon fine weather, p.m.,
fresh breezes and fine ; at 4, strong breezes set in ;
set the T. trysail. At 7, set the F. T. M. staysail; at
8, moderate and fine ;at 11 took in all sail. Midnight
fine.
Jan. 17. —E. S. E. —am,, Fresh breezes and fine. Sounded
every hour in the middle watch with 50 fathoms and
no bottom. At 7, altered course from W. by S. */ 2 S.
to W. by W. At 10 saw the land on the larboard bow;
at noon, moving in for the land. At 1.30 p.m., laid
to off Rosetta; at 2 a boat came alongside and put a
pilot on board. At 2.30 this boat left the ship with
some of Ibrahim’s followers on board and they took
two of our men, I. Stanmore and Thomas Stemson,
poor fellows, with nothing on them but trovvsers and
shirts. We then made sail for Aboukir and at 4.30
came to an anchor. Commenced landing the baggage.
The shore being in quarantine, none of their boats
could assist us and it took us the whole night landing
troops and baggage, the ship being more than two
miles from the shore.
Jan. 19. —Var. a.m. very light breezes and fine, employ-
ed landing troops, &c. At 6.45 the Pasha left the ship
with Hindmarsh for Cairo. Ibrahim engaged with
him as a valet our cabin steward, Wilkinson ; and
Omer Effendi, John Steele, a foremast man, for the
same purpose. The command of the ship was now
given to me. At 11.40 got under weight. We some-
times got into very ( ) shoal water. The pilot I
(*) Mrs. Light writes in her diary in 1831. “Ibrahim’s coun-
tenance is not near so pleasing or clever looking as that of his
father. He has a severe look and rather a Jewish appearance.”


had on board knew nothing of the place. At 3 p.m.,
I took in a pilot off Alexandria ; at 4 came to an
anchor, and moored at 8; dark cloudy weather with
much lightning in the east during the night.
Jan. 20, 21, 23. All the first part blowing strong
with occasional showers. Employed clearing ship
after the horrible state all' Ibrahim’s crew left us in.
There never was so dirty a set on board any ship. At
least 2 / 3 of them laid themselves down as soon as they
came on board at Iskenderoon, some on deck, some
below, and never moved from that spot until they
got up to disembark at Aboukir, at least 60 hours
later, when they were sick Our sailors could not
put their hands anywhere without getting dirt. My
own cabin I could not go into for a whole week.
It took two whole days to wash.
Jan. 24. Employed repairing the boilers.
From the 24th to the end of January nothing particu-
lar doing. At times weather bad. Taking in coals
from the Brig ‘William and Henry’ and received
pratique on the 29th for Syria but kept ourselves in
quarantine with the town. An occurrence, singular
enough, happened which to many might seem beneath
notice, but sailors have odd fancies about these things.
On the 30th of January an English (bark) barque and
a French brig arrived, the English barque entering the
port first. The next day about the same hour, a
French barque and an English brig arrived; the
French barque entering the port first.
Feb. 2. —E. N. E. still taking in coal from the
‘William and Henry.’ Mr. Terry came alongside and
said Mr. Phinbern wished to see me about taking tho
command of this ship.
Feb. 3. —N.N- E. Light breezes and fine. Cleaning
decks, scraping studding sail, booms, &c.


Feb. 11. The last six clays variable weather, some-
times cold with squalls of rain. The plague now
increasing fast and all the men-of-war preparing to
leave the harbour as soon as they can. A close
scirocco wind. At night fine.
Feb. 19. Employed paying seamen’s wages.
Feb. 23. The last four days very unsettled weather,
squally and rainy. Admiral Besson came on board
to prepare us for hoisting the Turkish flag. Employed
transferring the men to the Beatrice brig (Captain
Wickelow).
Feb. 24 —S. w. Alexandria, —Early part, fresh gales
and squalls of rain. At 9 Admiral Besson came on
board and hoisted the Turkish ensign and pennant.
Latter part moderate and fine.
Feb. 26. Lieut. Read left us this forenoon for the
Beatrice.
Feb. 27. Fresh breezes and tine with cold airs. We
received 75 Arab sailors on board, with two Lieu-
tenants and two Midshipmen.
Feb. 28. — N. E. to N. Light airs and fine. At 9, Hind-
marsh left the ship. At 9.20 the Beatrice sailed. In
the afternoon received an order to tow some line of
battle ships out in the morning. Wound up the
towing hawsers and got everything ready.
March 1. Calm and fine. At 9.30 laid ahead of
the Admiral (having slipped both cables) and sent
hawsers on board. At 9.50 took him in tow. At 11,
took No. 1. in tow; at 3.15 No. 7 in tow; at 9.30
returned to our moorings.
March 2. Calm and fine. At 8.30 took No. 3 in
tow. At 4 took 5 merchantmen in tow. Time occu-
pied in picking up the 5 merchantmen and taking
them outside the reefs.


March 4. Alexandria. —A report of 130 dying yester-
day of.the plague.
March 5. —s. E. to E. Report of 150 dying yesterday
of the plague.
March 6. —s. w. Fresh gales and showery; at 4 p.m.
blowing hard with thick sand. Heavy gales all night.
March 9. Weather much finer. An account of 190
dying daily.
March 12. This day Haleel Captain and Ushroof
Captain joined. The Turkish officers are all Captains
above the rank of midshipman, although they have
their different grades. Thus we have the 2nd Captain
Haleel Captain, the Ist Lieutenant Ushroof Captain,
2nd Lieutenant Hassan Captain, and 3rd Lieutenant
Soffian Captain.
March 13. —The Turkish officers employed taking an
inventory of stores. We now find it necessary to give
up everything to their charge, and very glad am I to
do so, for everything lost or wilfully destroyed would
be otherwise laid to the English.
March 14. Alexandria. Moderate and fine. Sad
accounts of the plague on shore. Sent all the old
muskets brought from Iskenderoon on shore.
March 17. A report of 300 dying daily. Employed
getting down yards and topmasts, and overhauling
rigging.
March 18. Fine; employed setting the yards afresh;
strapping blocks.
March 19. Fine weather. Spread the awning. To fit
them roused up all the spare sails, boat sails, and
gave them in charge of the separate coxwains and
employed in various ways throughout the dav.
March 20. All our boats out sailing.


March 27. Strong breezes and fine with cold airs.
At ii p.m., an English steam vessel in sight. This
long-talked-of packet now appears for the first time.
What a lovely stir it creates; already are various boats
coming off from the shore, some with Consuls’ Janis-
saries, and others with idleness from curiosity. At i
p.m. she came to an anchor close by us. About 2
hours after my old acquaintance Pearse, the com-
mander, formerly of the Melville, came alongside
to see me. By this vessel we received a supply of wine
and ale from Mr. Barber. At 6 p.m., received an order
to get under weigh to-morrow and to go to Damietta
for Ibrahim Pasha.
March 28. —a.m., light airs and fine at 5. . . Received
1 day's coals on board, p.m. at 1, while heaving up,
the large wheel of the windlass at the larboard side
gave out by one cog giving. Then a segment of the
circle got a trial on the cable and hove up at 3 out-
side the reefs.
March 29- Fresh breezes and fine. At 9.30 came to
an anchor off Damietta. At 11 sent the 2nd cutter
for orders ; 2nd cutter away all night.
March 30. —At 7 a.m., 2nd cutter returned from the
shore. We got no intelligence of Ibrahim Pasha
except that he had been at Damietta and gone again
to a country house not far distant. But as to his em-
barking, no one had heard a word about it. So much
for old Neris’ intelligence, who told us that we were to
bring Ibrahim round to Alexandria. Received in-
structions from the Pilot to get under weigh and shift
our berth more to the northward.
March 31. All this day lying here without further
information as to our movements. Weather fine.
April I- East. Off Damietta. Fine breeze and
fine weather; at 7.30 sent the 2nd letter to a Djerm


near the shore, making a signal at 8.15. Cutter re-
turning with a letter saying Ibrahim Pasha would
embark at 4 p.m. At 2 p.m., got under weigh and
stood in to the shore. At 4 Ibrahim came on board
sending two Djerms loaded with luggage and as usual
causing considerable dirt. At 6.40 proceed for Acre.
April 2. E. N. E. Fresh breezes and fine weather.
At 4 p.m., Cape Carmel in sight bearing E. by N. At
8 drawing in with the land stopped the engines and
hove to with head to the westward under gaff-fore-sail,
fore-stay-sail, and mizen.
April 3. E. N- E. At 5.30 proceeded for Acre.
Light breezes and fine weather. At 8.20 came to an
anchor near the town in 7 fathoms. Ibrahim Pasha
landed at 9 a.m. At 10 sudden heavy squall of wind
from S. S. W. At 10.30 strong breezes with rain. The
rest of this day squally and rainy. At 9 p.m., much
lightning in the N. N. E. At 10 thunder and light-
ning with rain. Heavy rain with thunder and lightning
all night.
April 4. N. N. E- All the first part continued
heavy rain with thunder and lightning. At noon lain
ceased. Weather thick and gloomy. At 2 began
clearing ship of the filth and dirt left by Ibrahim
Pasha and his followers, the latter, tho' not near so
numerous as before, have contributed abundantly in
dirt. Latter part finer weather.
April 5. Many strangers from the shore to visit
the ship. Weather moderate and fine.
April 6. Acre. Went on shore to see the town,
a most miserable place ; those houses that had been
damaged during the siege are left in the same wretched
condition and the walls next the sea half in ruins.
Walking out from the town towards Abdalla Pasha/s
Palace we fell in with Ibrahim Pasha with his train


of Engineers, Aides-dc-Camp, &c., &c., :md returned
with him as he was going to make an inspection of
the fortifications. What a poor weak place to have
made so much noise in history ! Bonaparte was
repulsed. With what men did he attack, and with how
many ? But I am convinced the French, however
brave and excellent they may be in military art, have
not that bold reckless daring push at a breach the
British possess. But what shall we say to Ibrahim
being seven months before this place and losing up-
wards of 10,000 men. Five thousand good British
hearts would have carried it at once by escalade. The
works are now extending much beyond the old boun-
dary and will consequently require a larger garrison.
There is an extensive plain about Acre of rich soil
and in other hands might be a considerable trading
port. At present nothing but military concerns are
thought of.
April 7. Went on shore again to see what might
be picked up with my gun but found nothing. At
night lanterns were hoisted at each mast-head and
jib-boom, in honour of a Turkish festivity to-morrow.
April 8. Nothing extraordinary except the dinghy
capsizing with Reeves, the engineer, and Jenkins,
the carpenter, in a sudden puff of wind. They sat on
the bottom of the boat till assistance went to them.
April 9 and 10. Nothing.
April 11- — S. E. —Rigged the ist cutter and sailed
over to Kaifa. At times very heavy gusts of wind.
We found the landing at Kaifa very bad. We have
found a hotel kept by an Italian where we get some
bread and wine. How dreadful a man’s circumstances
in his own country must be that would induce him
to live in such conditions here. He and his wife
(a Syrian woman) were pictures of sickness. I was


very glad to return to my boat as soon as possible.
At 8 p.m. we had a most horrible squall of hot wind
which lasted about an hour. It then became pleasant
weather.
April 12.
men on board this day prisoners. They are sons of two
of the wealthiest men in this part of Syria. One of
them had been entrapped in a very shameful way. As
soon as Ibrahim landed he sent for this young man
to come and visit him. He accordingly came with all
his attendants, and with as much splendour as he could
muster. On his arrival and making his salaam to
Ibrahim : “Now you may go on board the steamer
and remain there," said he ! The poor fellow was con-
ducted by a guard on board, nor was he allowed to
have any communication with his servants whom he
could discern, with an aching heart, from our decks
strewed about the plain. The other had been seven
months in prison in Acre. There was no crime further
than opposing Ibrahim when he first invaded.
April 13. We sailed from Acre with Ibrahim Pasha
and a whole host of blackguards for Tripoli. Touched
at Seyde and Beirout.
April 14. At 5.30 p.m. came to an anchor in the Bay
of Tripoli.
April 15 and 16. Single anchor at Tripoli. Heavy gales
of wind and rain.
April 23. —Hull Brig Columbine came in from Suadiah.
April 24. —The Columbine sailed. From this day up
to the 19th May we were employed in various ways,
sometimes out in boats catching turtles, others sur-
veying, dining on the beach, fishing, exercising Arab
sailors at the head sails, and in every way we could
to kill time, the weather being generally fine.


May 19. —In the Bay of Tripoli. —Light breezes and
cloudy. At 8, received orders to prepare for sea. p.m.
fresh breezes and cloudy. At 1.30 fitted runners to
the main mast, and getting the Pasha’s luggage on
board. At 6 got under weigh. Light breezes and
fine weather.
May 20— At 9.45 came to an anchor in the roads of
Suadiah. At 10 Ibrahim Pasha went on shore, p.m.
at 1, landed all the Pasha’s things.
May 23. —Dark gloomy weather with variable gusts
of wind. At 1 heavy squalls, at 2. heavy rain and
vivid lightning. At 10 weather finer. Got under weigh
and moved for Alexandria.
May 24. —Light breezes and fine weather. At 10.30 a.m.
came to an anchor in Alexandria harbour.
ERRATA
In the Introduction :
Line 22, for Reduiha read Redin ha.
„ 3Sf »» Gulnase „ Gulnare.
~ 62, „ iracassenis „ fracasserics.


COLONEL LIGHT
IN THE
PENINSULAR WAR
A REMARKABLE RECONNAISSANCE




COLONEL LIGHT
IN THE
PENINSULAR WAR
A REMARKABLE RECONNAISSANCE.
11l the Introduction to Colonel Light’s Log reference
has been made to his adventures in the battles of
Albuera and Vic Bigorre. We have thought it worth
while to append the following account of the battle
of Vic Bigorre from Napier’s Peninsular War, and
in which there is an allusion to Colonel (then Cap-
tain) William Light.
Combat of Vic Bigorre. — The French left was secur-
ed by the Lechez river, but their right towards the
Adour was loose, and menaced by the German cavalry
while the front was attacked by Picton who drove
Paris back in disorder. But then D’Armagnac entered
the line and extending to the Adour renewed the fight
which lasted until D’Erlon saw his right turned be-
yond the Adour by the light division and the hussars,
who were now close to Rabastens, whereupon he re-
tired behind Vic Bigorre and took post for the night.
The action was vigorous; two hundred and fifty Anglo-
Portuguese, men and officers, fell, and amongst them
died Colonel Henry Sturgeon so often mentioned in
this History. Skilled to excellence in almost every
branch of war, and possessing a variety of accomplish-
ments, he used his gifts so gently for himself and so
usefully for the service that envy offered no bar to


admiration, and the whole army felt painfully mortified
that his merits were passed unnoticed in the public
despatches.
Soult’s march through the sandy plain of Ger was
harassing, and would have been dangerous if Wellington
had sent Hill’s cavalry, now reinforced by two regi-
ments of heavy dragoons, in pursuit; but the country
was unfavourable for quick observation, and the
French covered their movements with rear guards
whose real numbers it was difficult to ascertain. One
of these bodies was posted on a hill the end of which
abutted on the high road, the slope being clothed
with trees and defended by skirmishers ; it was essen-
tial to know whether a small or a large force thus bar-
red the way, but all who endeavoured to ascertain the
fact were stopped by the fire of the enemy. At last
Captain William Light, distinguished by the variety
of his attainments, an artist, musician, mechanist,
seaman, and soldier, made the trial. He rode for-
ward as if he would force his way through the French
skirmishers, but in the wood dropped his reins and
leaned back as if badly wounded ; his horse appeared
to canter wildly along the front of the enemy’s light
troops, and they, thinking him mortally hurt, ceased
their fire and took no further notice. He thus passed
unobserved through the wood to the other side of the
hill where there were no skirmishers, and ascending
to the open summit above galloped along the French
main line, counting their regiments as he passed. His
sudden appearance, his blue undress, his daring con-
fidence and his speed, made the French doubt if he
was an enemy and a few shots only were discharged;
but he, dashing down the opposite declivity, broke
from the rear through the very skirmishers whose
fire he had first essayed in front, and reaching the
spot where Wellington stood told him there were but
five battalions on the hill.


Soult now felt that a rapid retreat on Toulouse by
St. Gaudens was inevitable ; yet being determined to
dispute every position which offered the least advan-
tage, his army was on the morning of the 20th again
in line of battle on the heights of Oleac, two or three
miles behind Tarbes and covering Tournay on the
road to St. Gaudens —he however still held Tarbes
with Clausel's corps, which was extended on the right
towards Trie, as if to retain a power of retreat by
that road to Toulouse. The plain of Tarbes, apparent-
ly open, was full of deep ditches which forbad the
action of horsemen, wherefore he sent his brother
with five regiments of cavalry to the Trie road, with
orders to cover the right flank and observe the route
to Audi. He feared lest Wellington should intercept
his retreat by that line, but at day break the allies'
right wing under Hill advanced by the high road,
while the left under Wellington moved by the road
from Rabastens. Vivian’s cavalry followed from
Beaumarchez and La Devege, sending detachments to
watch Pierre Soult on the side of Trie, and Cole was
bringing the fourth division up by forced marches.




