

NEW GUINEA.
FURTHER CORRESPONDENCE
RESPECTING
NEW GUINEA.
(In continuation of [C.-1566], July 1876, and [C. 3617], May 1883.)
LONDON:
FRINTED BY GEORGE E. B. EYRE AND WILLIAM SPOTTISWOODE.
To be purchased, either directly or through any Bookseller, from any of the following Agents, viz.,
Messrs. HANSARD, 13, Great Queen Street, W.C., and 32, Abingdon Street, Westminster;
Messrs. EYRE and SPOTTISWOODE, East Harding Street, Fleet Street, and Sale Office, House of Lords ;
Messrs. ADAM and CHARLES BLACK, of Edinburgh ;
Messrs. ALEXAMSER THOM and Co., or Messrs. HODGES, FIGGIS, and Co., of Dublin.
1883.
[C.—3691.] Price 3 d.
Presented to the House of Commons by Command or her Majesty,
July 1883.


Serial
No.
From or to whom.
Date.
Subject.
Page.
1
Foreign Office
May 8, 1883
Transmitting copy of a despatch from Her
Majesty’s Ambassador at Berlin, relative
to a Company about to be formed in
Germany for the colonisation of New
Guinea.
5
2
To the Aborigines
Protection Society.
May 22, 1883
Staling that the question of the annexation of
New Guinea is receiving the careful con-
sideration of Her Majesty’s Government.
5
3
Chief Justice of
Queensland. -
May 23, 1883
Letter to Editor of the ‘Times” from Sir
Charles Lilley, as to the legal protection
of Natives, and the acceptance of their
testimony in Courts of Justice.
5
4
Royal Colonial Insti-
tute.
May 23, 1883.
Requesting an interview with Lord Derby on
the New Guinea question.
6
5
Royal Colonial Insti-
tute.
May 25, 1883.
Transmitting copy of a memorial which it
is desired to present to Lord Derby at the
interview asked for.
6
6
To Administrator Sir
A. H. Palmer
(Queensland).
May 29, 1883
Telegraphic.
Inquiring truth of report that a vessel has
left Mackay to obtain labourers from New
tiuinea.
9
7
Administrator Sir A.
H. Palmer (Queens-
land).
May 31, 1883
(Rec. May 31, 1883.)
Telegraphic.
Stating that no labour vessels, so far as can
be ascertained, have left for New Guinea,
and that if the annexation is confirmed,
recruiting cannot, by the Pacific Islands
Labourers Act, take place there.
9
8
Governor Sir A. E.
Kennedy (Queens-
land).
April 19,1883
(Rec. June 1, 1883.)
Transmitting two letters from the Premier,
Sir T. JVPIIwraitli, on the annexation
question.
9
9
To Administrator Sir
A. H. Palmer
(Queensland).
June 1, 1883
Telegraphic.
Inquiring what specific information led the
Government to believe that the occupa-
tion of New Guinea by a foreign Power
was probable.
13
10
Administrator Sir A.
H.Palmer(Queens-
land).
June 4, 1883
(Rec. June 4, 1883.)
Telegraphic.
Stating that there were general rumours of
annexation by Germany and Italy, and a
special rumour as to the movements of the
German corvette ‘‘ Carola.”
13
11
The Agent-General
for Queensland.
June 4, 1883
Forwarding copy telegram of 4th inst. from
Premier of Queensland, as follows : “ Press
“ annexation to Queensland or Crown
“ Colony. Protectorate not acceptable to
“ Australia.”
13
12
Governor The Mar-
quis of Norraanby
(Victoria).
April 19. 1883
(Rec. June 6, 1883.)
Enclosing copy speech on proroguing Parlia-
ment in which reference is made to the
proposed annexation of New Guinea.
13
13
Governor Sir W. C.
F. Robinson (South
Australia).
April 25, 1883
(Rec. June 6, 1883.)
Communicating the opinion of his Ministers
that New Guinea should be under British
rule, and their hope that the action of the
Queensland Government will lead to that
result.
14
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
B TMI. Wt. 887». A 2


Serial
No.
From or to whom.
Date.
Subject.
Pag*.
14
Agent-General for
Queensland.
June 19, 1883
Forwarding copies of correspondence regard-
ing the pearl and beche de mer fisheries
in Torres Straits, together with copy of
Mr. Chester’s report of his visit to Port
Moresby, and of the formal taking posses-
sion of New Guinea.
14
15
Governor Sir A. E.
Kennedy (Queens-
land).
April 26, 1883
(Rec. June 19, 1883.)
Expressing entire approval of the action of
his Ministers, and stating that he does not
anticipate any difficulty in providing for the
cost of maintaining authority.
19
16
The Hon. Sir A. H.
Gordon.
June 16, 1833
Transmitting copy of a letter from the Baron
Miklouho Maclay renewing, in view of the
proposed annexation of New Guinea, the
requests made by him in January 1879
and April 1881, as to the protection of
Natives.
19
17
F, P. Labilliere, Esq.
June 16, 1883
Enclosing letter from Captain Yule, furnish-
ing information respecting New Guinea.
20
18
Foreign Office
June 30, 1883.
Transmitting copy despatch from Lord Lyons,
stating that in a conversation with
M. Jules Ferry the latter very positively
affirmed that the French Government enter-
tain no designs of annexation in New
Guinea.
21
19
Royal Colonial Insti-
tute.
June 30, 1883.
Transmitting copy of resolutions passed at a
meeting of the Institute held on the 29th,
respecting New Guinea.
21
20
To the Royal Colonial
Institute.
July 4, 1883.
Acknowledging letter of the 30th June en-
closing copy of certain resolutions.
22
21
To Administrator Sir
A. H. Palmer.
July 11, 1883.
Conveying the decision of Her Majesty’s
Government on the question of annexation.
22
22
Governor the Marquis
of Normanby.
(Victoria).
July 12, 1883.
(Rec. July 12, 1883.)
Telegraphic.
Forwarding substance of resolutions by both
Houses of Parliament to the effect that a
Protectorate over New Guinea and the
adjacent islands is essential, and that the
Colony is willing to contribute its portion
of the expense.
24
23
The Agent-General
for. Victoria.
July 12, 1883,
Stating that a resolution was passed by the
Victorian Parliament on the 11th instant,
in favour of annexing New Guinea and
other islands in the Western Pacific, and
that the Government and Parliament of
Victoria have expressed their willingness
to contribute towards the expense of such
an undertaking.
24


FURTHER CORRESPONDENCE.
No. 1.
FOREIGN OFFICE to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sie, Foreign Office, May 8, 1883.
I am directed by Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to transmit
to you, to be laid before Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for the Colonies, copy of a
Despatch from Her Majesty’s Ambassador at Berlin relative to a Company about to be
formed in Germany for the colonisation of New Guinea.
I am, &c.
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) T. V. LISTER.
Colonial Office.
Enclosure in No. 1.
My Lord, Berlin, May 3, 1883.
With reference to Sir John Lumley’s Despatch of the 31st of March,* upon the
subject of a Company about to be formed in Germany with the view of colonising New
Guinea, I asked the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs whether I was correct in
reporting to your Lordship that the above-named Company was a private one, and not as
yet supported by the Imperial German Government. His Excellency replied that ray
impression was correct, besides which the Imperial Government did not promote any
scheme for the increase of emigration from Germany, as I well knew.
I have, &c.
The Earl Granville, K.G., (Signed) Ampthill.
&c. &c. &c.
No. 2.
COLONIAL OFFICE to the ABORIGINES PROTECTION SOCIETY.
Sir, Downing Street, May 22, 1883.
I am directed by the Earl of Derby to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
14th instant,t on the subject of the annexation of New Guinea. His Lordship desires
me to request that you will inform the Committee of the Aborigines Protection Society
that the question is receiving the careful consideration of Her Majesty’s Government.
I am, &c.
The Secretary to the (Signed) EDWARD WINGFIELD.
Aborigines Protection Society.
No. 3.
LETTER FROM THE CHIEF JUSTICE OF QUEENSLAND.
Natives in Queensland.^
To the Editor of the “ Times.”
Sib,
Since my arrival in England on Thursday evening last I have read two com-
munications published in the “Times” of the 15th and 18th instant on the proposed
annexation of New Guinea.
• Enclosure in No. 63 of [C. —3617] May 1883.
t No. 64 in [C.—36l7] May 1883. ‘
j This letter was published in the “ Times” of May 23rd, 1883.
A 3
NEW GUINEA.


Upon the policy of that step Ido not propose to offer any comment. I have no doubt
the matter will be settled with full knowledge and perfect ability by those whose business
it is to consider and decide upon it.
In justice, however, to my fellow Colonists, I am bound to ask you to publish what I
deem to be a most important correction of serious errors of both your correspondents,
that is to say, their statements that “ the evidence of a Native is absolutely excluded
“ from consideration in all courts of justice in Queensland;” that “even the most
“ ordinary legal security against the perpetration of injustice on the weaker race is
“ absent in Queensland ; ” and that “ heathen testimony is excluded from the courts of
“ that Colony.”
As ex-Premier and present Chief Justice of Queensland, I am enabled to state that
your correspondents are absolutely in error in all these particulars. Ample provision
exists for the administration of justice to all races in Queensland by independent judges,
whose tenure of office is the same as that of the justices of the High Court of Justice of
England, and justices of the peace are appointed throughout the Colony. Moreover, I
and my colleagues have judicially received the testimony of “heathen and Native”
witnesses and submitted it to juries in cases even where prisoners were charged with
capital offences. Polynesian heathens and Native aboriginal blacks have thus given
evidence in court under the existing law of Queensland. Under the old law the
testimony of Native blacks was not receivable, for reasons which it is not necessary I
should discuss; but under an existing statute, enacted five or six years ago, such
testimony is received in all courts of justice.
So far from being unprotected .by the law, provision has always been made for the
defence of Polynesian and Native blacks charged with criminal offences, the expense of
counsel and attorney being paid by the Crown. In this respect they enjoy a more
extended privilege than that granted to white men under similar circumstances.
I am, &c.
London, May 22, (Signed) Charles Lillet.
No. 4.
ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE to COLONIAL OFFICE.
My Lord, 15, Strand, W.C., May 23, 1883.
The Council of the Royal Colonial Institute are desirous of having the honour
of an interview with your Lordship on the subject of New Guinea.
On their behalf, therefore, I have to request the favour of your appointing a time
when it will be convenient to your Lordship to receive a deputation from them on this
important question.
I have, &c.
(Signed) FREDERICK YOUNG,
The Right Honourable the Earl of Derby, Honorary Secretary.
&c. &c. &c.
No. 5.
ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, 15, Strand, W.C., May 25, 1883.
Referring to my letter to Lord Derby of the 23rd instant,* requesting his
Lordship to appoint a time for receiving a deputation from the Council of the Royal
Colonial Institute on the subject of New Guinea, I now have the honour to transmit
to you, for his Lordship’s information, a copy of the Memorial which it is desired to
present on that occasion.
I have, &c.
(Signed) FREDERICK YOUNG,
The Under Secretary of State, Honorary Secretary.
Colonial Office.
• No. 4.


Enclosure in No. 5.
To the Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for
the Colonies.
The Memorial of the Council of the Royal Colonial Institute
Sheweth,
That your memorialists are the elected governing body of the Royal Colonial
Institute, which society was founded in 1868, obtained a Royal Charter in 1882, and
now comprises more than 1,900 members, amongst whom are residents in every part of
Her Majesty’s dominions.
That your memorialists have for a considerable time been impressed with the impor-
tance of the island of New Guinea, in relation to British interests, whether regarded
from Home, Colonial, or Imperial points of view.
On April 29th, 1875, a deputation from this Institute had the honour of presenting a
memorial to your Lordship’s predecessor, the Earl of Carnarvon, advocating the speedy
annexation of New Guinea.
Among the reasons assigned for this annexation were:—
I.—The proximity of the shores of New Guinea to those of Australia, and the
danger to British and Australian interests which would arise from a foreign
nation establishing itself on the northern shores of Torres Straits, or
occupying the valuable harbours of the island.
II. —The increased expenditure for defences which a foreign occupation would
entail, even in time of peace, upon both the Imperial and Colonial Govern-
ments, an expenditure which would be greater than the cost of establishing
and maintaining British rule in the island.
111. —That the best prospect for the Papuans was to be brought under British rule,
before Europeans were attracted to the island, either to settle in or visit it.
IV. —That the establishment of a penal settlement in New Guinea, such as that of
the French in New Caledonia, from which convicts continually escape to
New South Wales and Queensland, to the great detriment and expense of
those Colonies, would be a source of most serious injury to the whole of
Australia.
V. —That the coast should be occupied, in order that the claims of the British
Crown, arising from formal possession having been taken in Her Majesty’s
name by British officers, should not be allowed to lapse.
Your memorialists submit that all the preceding reasons not only exist at the present
moment, but are now much stronger, and more urgently call for action, than when they
were stated eight years ago.
That the published returns of the Board of Trade show, as your Lordship has
recently pointed out, that there is a great and increasing necessity for obtaining fresh
markets for the manufactures of the United Kingdom.
That the well-known fact, that “ trade follows the flag,” is proved by those same
returns, which clearly show that the best and most profitable customers that England
has are the people who live under the British flag, and under British rule.
That all experience shows that the introduction amongst an uncivilized people of
British manufactures, to which they have previously been strangers, speedily creates a
large and rapidly increasing demand for those manufactures.
That New Guinea contains a large population, with whom at the present time no
trade is carried on by any European country.
That New Guinea under British rule would obtain all her supplies of manufactured
goods from this country, giving in return her own raw productions.
That, if New Guinea should pass into foreign hands, England will lose that trade, as
the restrictive fiscal systems of all other nations practically exclude England from trade
with their Colonies and dependencies.
That the Government of Queensland is extending its railway system to the Gulf of
Carpentaria.
That the Government of South Australia is now busily constructing
railways from the north southwards, and from the south northwards. In a very few
years these railways will be united, and will form a Central Australian Trunk Railway,
with a northern terminus at or near Port Darwin.
A 4


That the South Australian Government has constructed, and since its establishment
maintained, the Central Australian Telegraph line, the northern terminus of which is
at Port Darwin, and which telegraph line is the only means of electric communication
with Australia.
That the trade between Australia and the British possessions in the Bast is now very
large, is greatly increasing, and, by the rapid growth of population in the Australian
Colonies, will soon acquire most important dimensions, especially when aided by the
above-mentioned railway lines.
That at present this trade, or the greater part thereof, passes through Torres Straits,
and would be at the mercy of a hostile Power in possession of New Guinea.
That a hostile Power in possession of. New Guinea could easily cut off telegraphic
communication with Australia, and could greatly hamper, if not entirely destroy the
trade that will be carried on by means of the railways now in course of construction,
the termini of which will be on the northern shores of Australia, closely adjacent to
New Guinea.
That the soil of New Guinea is very fertile, whilst the geological formation indicates
great richness in minerals, metals, and precious stones.
That owing to the elevation of much of the land, the climate of a large portion of
New Guinea is as well suited for the carrying on of British industries, or industries
under British supervision, as that of other tropical countries.
That in these days of progress no part of the earth’s surface can long escape the
spirit of enterprise which, with the necessities of trade, will soon attract large numbers
of adventurers to New Guinea.
That the presence of large numbers of uncontrolled adventurers in New Guinea will
lead to evils and complications such as occurred in Fiji, though on a much larger scale,
and the cost to this country of restraining the actions of such adventurers will equal, if
it does not exceed, the cost of maintaining in New Guinea a simple and efficient form
of government.
That a large staff of highly paid officials would not be required, as a Government
Resident, with a body of police for his protection, would, aided by the periodical visits
of war ships from the Australian station, be sufficient for the present.
That though it has been urged that the natives of New Guinea have not requested
Great Britain to extend her rule over them as the Fijians did, it must be remembered
that the cases are not analogous, as the Fijians were of one race, with one single
Chief having authority to speak on their behalf; whilst in New Guinea the tribal
system prevails, and there is no paramount Chief whose voice would be the voice
of all.
That the rights of the Natives to the lands occupied by them can and ought to be
as easily recognised, and as fully protected in New Guinea as in Fiji, while the increase
of civilization, resulting from the British rule, cannot fail to be of great advantage to
the native inhabitants of New Guinea.
That the possession of New Guinea by any other European Power would, even in
time of peace, cause many inconveniences and expenses to England and her Australian
possessions, and in time of war would be a standing danger to Australasia, and a
menace to British interests in the East generally.
That the annexation of New Guinea to Great Britain would confer many benefits on
the inhabitants of that large island, and would most materially add to the security, the
prestige, and the wealth of the Empire.
It appears to your memorialists, from the correspondence which was laid before
Parliament in July 1876, that the Imperial Government would have annexed New
Guinea if one or more of the Governments of the Australian Colonies had been willing
to contribute to the expense. This, they understand, Queensland has now offered
to do.
Your memorialists, therefore, respectfully urge that the island of New Guinea, or
those parts thereof to which any other recognised Government can not establish a clear
right, should be annexed to, and in due form be declared to be part of, the British
dominions, and your memorialists feel assured that should Her Majesty’s Government
not accede to the various and renewed requests which have from time to time been
made, the deepest disappointment will be occasioned throughout the whole of
Australasia, as well as amongst those both in England and the Colonies, who take the


warmest interest in questions which concern the different dominions or provinces of
the Empire, or affect its general prosperity, security, and welfare.
In witness whereof, the said Council have caused the common seal of the Royal
Colonial Institute to be affixed hereto, this twenty-second day of May 1883.
(1.5.) Manchester,
Chairman of the Council,
and the following members of the Council:—
Sir Charles Clifford.
Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart.
Sir Charles Stirling, Bart.
Mr. J. A. Youl, C.M.G.
General Lowry, C.B.
Mr. H. J, Jourdain.
Dr. Rae.
Mr. J. Denistown Wood.
Mr. G. Molineux.
Mr. Rivington.
Mr. F. P. Labilliere.
Mr. Frederick Young.
Mr. Jacob Montifiore.
Mr. William Walker.
Mr. Archer, Agent General for Queensland.
Sir Arthur Blyth, Agent General for South Australia.
Sir Saul Samuel, Agent General for New South Wales.
No. 6.
THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF DERBY to ADMINISTRATOR SIR A., H. PALMER,
K.C.M.G. (QUEENSL AND
Telegraphic.
May 29, 1883. —Newspaper reports vessel left Mackay obtain labour New Guinea
Is report true ?
No. 7.
ADMINISTRATOR SIR A. H. PALMER, K.C.M.G. (QUEENSLAND), to THE RIGHT HON.
THE EARL OF DERBY. (Received May 31, 1883.)
Telegraphic.
May 31. —Cannot ascertain that any labour vessels have gone to New Guinea. Vessels
clear for South Sea Islands only, no labourers have come from New Guinea. If annexa-
tion confirmed cannot recruit there ; see Pacific Islands Labourers Act. Some labourers
have come from New Britain.
No. 8.
GOVERNOR SIR A. E. KENNEDY, G.C.M.G., C.B. (QUEENSLAND), to the RIGHT
HON. THE EARL OF DERBY. (Received June 1, 1883.)
My Lord, Government House, Brisbane, April 19, 1883.
Referring to my despatches, and telegrams named below,* I have the honour
to transmit two letters from my Prime Minister, Sir Thomas M‘llwraith dated the 6th
and 13th April, on the subject of the annexation of New Guinea.
* Nos. 3, 54, and 55 in [C. —3617], May 1885.
R 7381. B


2. I am not in a position to afford your Lordship any farther information than you
at present possess.
I have See
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, (Signed) A. E. KENNEDY.
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 1 in No. 8.
Queensland.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Brisbane.
Your Excellency, April 6, 1883.
With reference to the Executive Minute passed on the 151 h ultimo, authorising
the despatch of an officer of the Government to take possession, in Her Majesty’s name,
of the island of New Guinea, in anticipation of a reply to the despatch addressed by
your Excellency to the Secretary of State upon the subject, I have the honour to inform
you that, in pursuance of the authority granted by the minute alluded to, Mr. H. M.
Chester, Police Magistrate at Thursday Island, was instructed on the 20th ultimo to
proceed in the Queensland Government schooner “ Pearl ” to New Guinea, and to take
formal possession of so much of the island as was not already in the occupation or
possession of the Dutch.
Advices have since been received apprising the Government of the departure of that
officer from Thursday Island with this object on 22nd ultimo.
The Government have been thus prompt in taking action in this matter, because in
the opinion of those most conversant with the subject and from information obtained
from various sources, there appeared to be every probability of the island being taken
possession of by a foreign Power, and thus not only a valuable territory be lost to the
British Crown, but a source of danger to the Colonies established, the extent of which
cannot at present be fully appreciated,
I have, &c.
(Signed) Thomas M‘llwkaith.
His Excellency Sir A. E. Kennedy, G.C.M.G., C. 8.,
Governor,
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 2 in No. 8.
Queensland.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Brisbane,
Your Excellency, April 13, 1883.
I had the honour to inform you, in a communication dated the 6th instant, that,
in anticipation of a reply to the despatch addressed by your Excellency to the Secretary
of State on the subject of the annexation of New Guinea, Mr. H. M. Chester, Police
Magistrate, Thursday Island, had, in accordance with instructions from the Government,
left Thursday Island for New Guinea on the 20th ultimo, with a view to take formal
possession of so much of that island as was not already in the occupation or possession
of the Dutch.
Advices have since been received from that officer apprising the Government of his
arrival at Port Moresby, and of his having, on the 4th instant, taken possession, in the
name of Her Majesty, of all that part of New Guinea and the isles adjacent thereto lying
between the 141st and the 155th meridian of East longitude.
In view of a possible request for an explanation of this summary step, it is considered
desirable that your Excellency should impress upon the Secretary of Slate that the
Queensland Government have acted under the full belief that the matter was too urgent
to admit of the delay necessarily involved in waiting for instructions from the Imperial
Government. As the possession of this valuable territory depended on mere precedence
in the formality of annexation, and as the Queensland Government, from information
received from various sources, had strong reason to believe in the possibility, and even
the probability, of being anticipated in their proposed course of action by a foreign
power, —a contingency which could not but gravely affect the Australasian Depen-
dencies of Great Britain, as tending not only to limit the range of their development,


but possibly also to imperil their safety;—it is hoped that the Secretary of State will
perceive that in the step taken by the Queensland Government they have been guided
by considerations of expediency which justify their promptness in taking action in the
matter. In anticipating instructions from the Imperial Government they have been also
largely influenced by the consideration urged in a former despatch, viz., that by
undertaking the whole expense in connexion with the formation, maintenance, and
defence of a British Settlement in New Guinea, they effectually dispose of the only
objection raised on the part of the Home Government, daring previous correspondence
on the subject, to the annexation of New Guinea by an Australian Colony.
I have, &c.
(Signed) Thomas M'llwraith,
His Excellency Sir A. E. Kennedy, G.C.M.G., C. 8.,
Governor,
&c. &c. &c.
Enclosure 3 in No. 8.
“ The Brisbane Courier,” Wednesday, April 18, 1883.
The cablegrams we publish to-day concerning our annexation of New Guinea and
the reception which the news of that action has obtained in the Imperial Parliament
convey impressions of a somewhat contradictory' nature. From one we learn that the
Hon. Evelyn Ashley', Parliamentary Under-Secretary for the Colonies, announced
in the House of Commons that the Queensland Government had taken possession of
New Guinea in the name of the Queen, pending the decision of the Home Government,
and that the object of the annexation was to prevent foreign Powers obtaining possession
of the island to the detriment of British interests. From this, one would be led to
suppose that our action had the approval of the Imperial Government, and at least the
tacit consent of the Imperial Parliament, but this is supplemented by another message
that the members of the House of Commons were greatly annoyed, and that pressure,
was being exercised on the Government to induce it to repudiate the annexation. This
is quite likely to be true, but notwithstanding the strong doubts expressed as to the
approval of the Imperial authorities, we have no serious fear for the result. If the
Queensland Parliament support the action of Sir Thomas M‘llwraith, it is not likely
that the Home Government will order the flag, once hoisted, to be hauled down, and
the beginning of occupation made at Port Moresby to be stopped short.
Enclosure 4 in No. 8.
“The Brisbane Courier,” Thursday, April 19j 1883.
The overt act of the annexation of New Guinea by the authority of the Queensland
Government has no doubt created some sensation in Downing Street. Lord Derby, in
the interview which he lately granted to the missionary societies connected with the New
Hebrides, expressed himself strongly against further annexations in the Pacific. Lord
Granville, by his presence on the occasion, also lent the sanction of the Foreign Office to
the statements then made to the effect that an arrangement might not improbably be
arrived at by which foreign Powers who were interested in the commerce ot the Pacific
would mutually abstain from annexation. It cannot be doubted that representations of
this character must have been made by this time to the French Government. It can be
understood, therefore, how extremely awkward under these circumstances must have
been the intimation given that a formal act of annexation had been applied to a territory
so vast as New Guinea, a territory which, as compared with thq New Hebrides, is a
whole continent
It will be replied, probably, that this annexation has not been authorised, and that the
assertion of a merely formal claim, such as that made by Mr. Chester, is no more binding
on the Imperial Government than was a similar act of annexation effected by Captain
Moresby in April, 1873. When John Moresby, 10 years ago, in the name of the Queen,
read a proclamation at Hayter’s Island to the officers, marines, and seamen of the Basilisk
assembled round a flagstaff, on which he hoisted the British ensign, he did nothing more
than Mr. Chester has done acting under instructions from the Queensland Government.
He felt, as he says, that the occupation by any foreign maritime Power of the islands
B 2


■which he then claimed to annex would be a “ standing menace to Queensland.” The
reasons which lie gives for his action on that occasion are so excellent that they will bear
to be repeated here : “ I was so surprised by the richness and beauty of the new islands,
“ and the number of their vegetable products, fine timber, the cocoanut, the sago-palm,
“ sugar cane, maize, jute, and various vegetable fibres and rich grasses; and my
“ conclusion, after weighing all the considerations involved, was that it was my duty to
“ take formal possession of our discoveries, in the name of Her Majesty. Such a course
“ secured a postponement of occupation by any Power till our Government could
“ consider its own interests, and whilst the acquisition of these islands might commend
“ itself, and my act result in annexation on the one hand, it might be negatived on the
“ other with easy simplicity by a neglect to confirm it.” These are the reasons given
by Captain Moresby for his formal claim on behalf of the Queen to the group of islands
at the south-eastern extremity of New Guinea. If they are good as applied to them,
they are equally good as applied to the mainland of New Guinea. The annexation
authorised by the Governor and the Government of Queensland has been effected very
much in the same way as Captain Moresby made his claim in 1873, in connexion with
the islands which he described in his proclamation. It has been done by the authority
of Sir Arthur Kennedy, acting on the advice of his Executive Council. It is, of course,
a somewhat more formal and important act of executive authority than that of Captain
Moresby. It applies to a magnificent island of which as yet very little is known. But
this annexation does not differ in kind from that effected by Captain Moresby. As it
stands it is simply a preferential demand, and it may either be acted upon or allowed to
lie dormant as Captain Moresby’s claim was.
Will Lord Derby repudiate it and disavow it ? We think he will scarcely venture to
do that. The previous correspondence which took place in connexion with this subject
all points to the ultimate annexation of New Guinea in the interests of the Australian
Colonies. An address to the Queen, on the motion of Mr. Douglas, was adopted by the
Assembly in 1875. It was maimed, it is true, by Mr. Palmer, who was then leading the
Opposition, when he moved an amendment omitting that portion of it which referred to
the co-operation of Queensland in sharing the burdens of expenditure in connexion with
the annexation; and the amendment was carried, but the address in favour of annexation
was adopted, and even acknowledged by Lord Carnarvon as an important representation
of Australian feeling. Similar addresses came from South Australia and Victoria,
and the Government of New South Wales went so far as to recommend not only the
annexation of New Guinea, but also of all the adjacent islands. Mr. Robertson, who
was then Premier in New South Wales, was very anxious to have everything annexed,
but like Mr. Palmer in Queensland, he declined to “ co-operate ” with the Queen’s
Government. He did so, however, for different reasons. He assigned as his chief
reason “ the apparent impossibility of this Colony having any share in the control of the
“ Colony contemplated commensurate with the amount subscribed.” That is to say
he was very anxious to have a finger in the pie if he could pull out all the plums. But
Lord Carnarvon could not see it in this light. If the Australian Colonies would not
contribute, they could not expect the Queen’s Government to annex New Guinea and
the islands of the Pacific for nothing. And so the matter ended for a time with a polite
refusal, but an assurance that “ Her Majesty’s Government would contrive to examine
“ the arguments for and against the extension of British sovereignty over New Guinea
“ by the light of such information as they may be able to procure.”
And so must Lord Derby. The light now shed upon this subject is the provisional
annexation which has been authorised, accompanied by the offer to bear the preliminary
expenses. The proposal has already, as we now learn, been favourably received by the
leading journals in England, and whatever reluctance Lord Derby may feel in giving
effect to the proclamation, the annexation will ultimately be carried out. The course
adopted by Sir Thomas M‘llwraith in appealing to the several Australian Governments
to support his action is quite justified by the position of affairs, and we trust that he
will be successful in his spirited endeavours to bring to an issue such an important
negotiation.
We understand that the Governments of the various Australian Colonies have been
requested to communicate with their Agents-General in London, and to authorise them
to support the proposed annexation of New Guinea. In doing so, it has been explained
that no preferential right has been set up to any special territorial advantages on the part
of this Colony further than this, that the Government of Queensland has expressed its
willingness to accept a territorial extension, if it is considered desirable to carry out the
annexation in that form. But it is to be clearly understood that Queensland desires no
exclusive possession, and that the action in this case has been taken chiefly in order to


sec at rest any doubt as to the ultimate possession of New Guinea by some foreign
Power. It is sought, in fact, in the first place, to extend the sovereignty of Great
Britain to that portion of New Guinea not claimed by the Dutch. Whether it should
be included within the territorial definition of Queensland, or whether it should be
constituted a separate territory under the protection of Grsat Britain, must be matters
for further consideration, and the Premiers of the several Australian Colonies have been
advised that the action taken has been with a view to serve the interests of the Australian
Colonies as a whole, without any undue prominence being given to the special interest
which Queensland undoubtedly has in the settlement of the question.
No. 9.
THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF DERBY to ADMINISTRATOR SIR A. H. PALMER,
K.C.M.G. (QUEENSLAND).
Telegraphic.
June 1. —Governor’s despatch 19th April.* What specific information led Government
to believe occupation New Guinea by foreign Power probable ?
No. 10.
ADMINISTRATOR SIR A. H. PALMER, K.C.M.G. (QUEENSLAND) to THE RIGHT HON. THE
EARL OF DERBY. (Received June 4, 1883.)
Telegraphic.
General rumours of Germany and Italy ; special rumour, German corvette “ Carola ”
was leaving Sydney for South Seas withoutf object of annexation. She left on 18th
March.
No. 11.
THE AGENT GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Queensland Government Office,
1, Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street,
Sm, London, S.W., June 4, 1883.
I have the honour to forward you, for the information of the Right Honourable
the Earl of Derby, a copy of a telegram I have received this morning from the Premier
of Queensland, the Honourable Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, K.C.M.G., dated Brisbane,
4th June 1883 :
“ Press annexation to Queensland or Crown Colony. Protectorate not acceptable to
Australia.”
I have, &c.
(Signed) THOS. ARCHER,
The Under Secretary of State, Agent General.
Colonial Office.
No. 12.
GOVERNOR THE MARQUIS OF NORMANBY, G.C.M.G. (VICTORIA), to the RIGHT
HON. THE EARL OF DERBY. (Received June 6, 1883.)
Government House, Melbourne,
My Lord, April 19, 1883.
I have the honor to inform your Lordship that I prorogued the First Session
of the Twelfth Parliament of Victoria this day. I beg to enclose herewith copies Jof
the speech I read on that occasion,
I have, &c.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, (Signed) NORMANBY.
&c. &c. &c.
• No. 6. t Query “ with,” but sic in original. | Extract only printed.
B 3


Enclosure in No. 12.
(Extract.)
The proposed annexation of New Guinea to British territory has been received with
great satisfaction by the people of Victoria, and my advisers have taken prompt action to
support the Government of Queensland in urging that course on the Imperial Govern-
ment.
No. 13.
GOVERNOR SIR W. C. F. ROBINSON, K.C.M.G. (SOUTH AUSTRALIA), to the
RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF DERBY. (Received June 6, 1883.)
My Lord, Government House, Adelaide, April 25, 1883.
I have the honour to report that in consequence of representations made to this
Government by the Governments of Queensland and Victoria, the Chief Secretary has
requested me to communicate to your Lordship the opinion of my Ministers, that in
their judgment New Guinea should be under British rule, and that they trust that the
recent action of the Queensland Government in regard to that island may lead to the
result which they desire to see accomplished.
2. I have this day telegraphed to your Lordship to this effect.*
1 have, &c.
(Signed) WILLIAM C. F. ROBINSON.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby,
&c. &c. &c.
No. 14.
THE AGENT-GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Queensland Government Office,
1, Westminster Chambers,
Victoria Street,
Sir, London, S.W., June 19, 1883.
I have the honour to forward you herewith, for the information of the Earl of
Derby, copies of correspondence received to-day from the Colony relative to the pearl
shell and beche de mer Fisheries in Torres Straits, and of the number and tonnage of
vessels passing through the Straits to and from the Colony during 1882, and also a
printed copy of Mr. Chester’s report of his visit to Port Moresby, and of the ceremony of
taking possession of New Guinea in the name of Her Majesty.
In laying these papers before Lord Derby, I would desire to bring to his notice one
other point in favour of the annexation of New Guinea which has not been mentioned in
my previous correspondence, but which has been brought to my knowledge in a despatch
from the Colonial Secretary, viz., “ that in addition to the contingent danger of occupa-
“ tion by a foreign and possibly hostile Power, there is an actual and present danger to
“ Queensland interests in the fact of a coast line so near to the scene of several of her
“ industries, and dominating one side of the direct channel of communication between
Queensland and Europe, being in the hands of a savage race.”
“In view of the many necessities for landing on that coast, and the possibilities of
“ shipwreck and other accidents, which may reasonably be looked for, owing to the
“ development of the industries referred to and the rapidly increasing communication by
“ the Torres Straits route, it is evident that the time has arrived for taking seriously
“ into consideration whether we can now, with safety to our interests and the lives of
“ British subjects, allow this territory to remain outside the control of civilisation.”
I have, &c.
(Signed) THOMAS ARCHER,
The Under Secretary of State, Agent-General.
Colonial Office.
* See No. 61 in [C.—36l7] May 1883,


Arrivals.
Vessels.
Tons.
48
66,363
Departures.
Vessels.
Tons.
42
56,978
Her Majesty’s Customs, Brisbane,
April 24, 1883.
(Signed)
T. M. Kino,
Collector of Customs.
Enclosure 1 in No. 14.
Sir, Thursday Island, May 2, 1883.
At the request of the Under Colonial Secretary, I have the honour to furnish the
following information Re the pearl shell and beche de mcr fisheries in Torres Straits.
There are now 192 vessels and boats employed in these«fisheries, and some 1500 men,
principally South Sea Islanders and Malays. There are also a number of beche de mer
vessels sailing out of Cooktown, and fishing on the New Guinea Coast of which I have
no statistics.
The fisheries are extending rapidly, no less than 25 new vessels having commenced
operations since the beginning of the year, and more are expected. The trade of the
port is consequently increasing, and from 10 to 12 large steamers call here every month.
The revenue last year was over 7000/. and this year it will not be far short of 10,000/.
I have &c.
The Agent-General for Queensland, (Signed) Henry M. Chester,
London. P. M.
Enclosure 2 in No. 14.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Brisbane,
Sir, April 24, 1883.
In continuation of my letter of yesterday with reference to the annexation of New
Guinea, I have the honour to forward to you the accompanying Return, showing the
number and tonnage of vessels arriving at and departing from Queensland Ports, via
Torres Straits, during the year ending 31st December 1882.
In drawing the attention of the Secretary of State to this Return, it would be desirable
to mention that the figures supplied by no means represent the total of the vessels taking
advantage of the Torres Straits passage during that period, but only such number as has
come within official knowledge.
I have &c.
(Signed) R. Gray,
The Agent-General for Queensland, London. Under Colonial Secretary.
Return showing Number and Tonnage of Vessels arriving at and departing from
Queensland Ports, via Torres Straits during the Year ending 31st December 1882.
B 4


Enclosure 3 in No. 14.
Annexation of New Guinea.
Mr. H. M. Chester has furnished to the Colonial Secretary the following very
interesting report of his recent visit to Port Moresby, and of the ceremony of taking
possession of New Guinea in the name of Her Majesty :
Sir, Port Moresby, New Guinea, April 7, 1883.
I have the honour to report that, in accordance with your instructions, I left
Thursday Island in the “ Pearl ” on the 24th ultimo. There being a difficulty in
engaging a crew, I took with me three of the water-police, and two men from the pilot
cutter. Mr. Prank Walsh also accompanied me as a volunteer. I proceeded to Somerset
to water the vessel, and left for Port Moresby on the 27th idem. We experienced light
easterly winds with a strong westerly set, and did not reach the Port until noon of 3rd
instant. The same afternoon the annual large trading canoes arrived from Motumotu
(Freshwater Bay) with supplies of sago.
At 10 a.m. on the 4th instant I took formal possession, in Her Majesty’s name, of all
that portion of New Guinea and the adjacent islands not already in occupation by the
Dutch, and read the accompanying proclamation in presence of about 200 Natives and
13 Europeans. A royal salute was fired from the “ Pearl,” and at the close of the pro-
ceedings three cheers were given for Her Majesty the Queen. I then, in presence of
the people, recognised Boe Vagi as head chief of Port Moresby, and gave the flag
into his charge until such time as an official should be sent to represent the Government.
Mr. Lawes kindly explained the meaning of the ceremony to the people, and assured
them that they would remain in undisturbed possession of their lands. A short impres-
sive prayer by Mr. Lawes terminated the proceedings, after which about 501. worth of
trade was distributed to the heads of families by Ruatoka, the Ilarotongan teacher, in
the name of Her Majesty. In the afternoon a long procession filed up the hill to the
mission-house, each man bearing some small present, such as two or three spears, an
armlet, a grass petticoat, or an ornament, and after this the Europeans present, the
teachers and their wives, and Boe Vagi, were invited to a banquet, given by Messrs.
Lawes and Chalmers, at which, after the usual loyal toasts, “ Prosperity to the latest
gem added to the British Crown ” was drunk, and the health of the missionaries who
have done so much for the civilisation of the people. Great regret was expressed by all
at the absence of Mrs. Lawes, a lady of whom it is no disparagement to our beloved
Queen to say that she alone reigns in the hearts of this people.
It is now five years since I first visited Port Moresby, and I was much struck by the
improved appearance of the town. The mission premises are situated on a small hill to
the westward of the harbour, overlooking Ethel Island and the village built on piles in
the sea at its base. They consist of two neat wooden houses with iron roofs, one of
which is the residence, and the other a training college for the mission students, drawn
from all parts of the coast, who occupy six neat grass houses on the right of the college.
A fence surrounds the whole, and well-kept paths, covered with shingle and bordered
with handsome variegated crotons, lead up the hill from the beach. Two years ago the
village on the eastern side of the harbour was totally destroyed by fire, and the people
have not yet recovered from the loss, the most serious part of it being the flooring boards
of the houses, made of the sides of old canoes, and handed down for generations. There
are 221 houses in the two villages, and the population now numbers about 800 souls,
having increased during the last five years.
During the evening the missionaries received information that the Motumotu men on
their return voyage intended to attack Kabadi, a village inland in Redscar Ray, having been
subsidised to do so by a tribe at enmity with them. If De Quincey had visited New
Guinea he might have added a chapter to his essay on “ Murder considered as one of the
Fine Arts.” In no part of the world probably is murder as an art more cultivated than in
New Guinea. Apropos of this I relate a tragic story told me by Mr. Chalmers of the recent
massacre of an entire village by the Lesi tribe. It may be remembered that a Dr. James
and Mr. Thorngren were murdered on the coast near Yule Island in 18/6 by the Roro
tribe, who occupied a village some distance to the south-eastward of the Lesi, in Plall
Sound. During one of Mr. Chalmers’ visit to the westward, being in the neighbourhood
of this tribe, he determined to visit them and make peace, it being too late to punish
them for the murders, but he narrowly escaped meeting the same fate, and reached his
boat with difficulty. In an evil hour they surprised three of the Lesi and killed two of
them. Their doom was sealed. The Lesi turned out in force, and lying concealed by
day and travelling in their canoes at night, arrived after dusk at one of the many streams


running into Hall Sound. Here they were at fault, not knowing which to ascend ; but
fortune favoured them, they captured a canoe in whioh was a Roro man and two women,
and gave them the option of guiding them to their village (Paitana) or being killed.
The man consented to pilot them, and the women were let go. When near Paitana they
allowed the guide to escape in his canoe. Sending a party to surround the village the
rest camped in the middle of it and sat silently down to ’await the first streak of dawn.
One of the villagers awoke, and to his astonishment found the place occupied by
strangers. “ Who are you ?” said the Roro man. The others sprang to their feet and
cried out, “We are the Lesi come to pay you! You murdered foreigners ; they did not
“ pay you, they were afraid! That we have nothing to do with ; but you tried to kill
“ Tamate, and you murdered our men, and we are here to avenge them ! Come out and
“ fight! ” At the same moment they let fly a cloud of arrows, until, wearying of the
slaughter, the Chief called out, “ We have no time to kill them all, burn the houses and
those inside.” The order was obeyed, and when the sun rose Paitana was a blackened
heap of ashes. This happened last July, and Mr. Chalmers, meeting a Chief of Roro in
August inquired how many were killed. “ Ah! Tamate,” said the Chief, “I cannot
“ number the slain, I can only tell you how many are left alive.” A lad of seven years
old was brought to Mr. Chalmers, his father had lowered him down through a hole in
the floor of his house, and he hid in the scrub. After all was over he returned to find
only the charred remains of father, mother, brother, and two sisters. The murderers of
James and Thorngren perished with the rest.
On the sth April, thinking that a little shell practice from the “ Pearl ” migfht deter
the Motumotu from attacking Kabadi, we took the chiefs and several of their people on
board, and fired six rounds of segment shell. In the afternoon I attended an examina-
tion of the school children. The building which is used both as a church and school-
room is 66 feet long by 24 feet, Cool, and well ventilated. About 120 boys and girls of
all ages between 5 and 20, were assembled in classes. Large maps were unrolled, and
it was pleasant to see the quick, bright intelligence displayed by the pupils. Scarcely
did the wand of the teacher touch an ocean or a continent than its name was shouted by
all simultaneously. Chief towns, rivers, and mountain ranges were given in rapid
succession. The globe was produced, and I found to my astonishment that zenith and
nadir, equator and ecliptic, zones and signs of the zodiac were “ familiar in their mouths
as household words,” Each class was presided over by a pupil teacher, mostly native
girls from Port Moresby, the Chief’s daughter being one of the most intelligent. Only
the most advanced scholars arc privileged to attend the writing and English classes, and
in a very few months a valuable staff of interpreters will be available should settlement on
the coast progress.
In laying in a supply of trade from the limited sources available at Thursday Island
I had not forgotten the children. A number of really good mouth harmonicons, and some
toy watches, lockets, and chains make capital prizes, while the system adopted in the distri-
bution was not only novel, but relieved Mr. Chalmers of the invidious task of selection.
“ Who best deserves the prize for arithmetic?” cried Tamate. Without an instant’s
hesitation the children unanimously shouted the name of the girl or boy; and so on in
geography, reading, &c., and in every instance the prize fell to the one whom Mr.
Chalmers would have selected. Then ensued a scene which would have horrified an
English School Board inspector. The children formed a line on either side and Mr.
Chalmers and a native girl advanced from opposite ends. As he passed the girl, who,
by the way, was remarkably pretty, he raised his hat, and with a bow, said, “ Good
morning.” “ Good evening,” and “ Good night,” followed with the like ceremony.
Then the children, placing their hands on the shoulders of the one in front, pranced
round the long room in high glee, singing the multiplication table. A little elementary
drill followed, and a distribution of lollies. Then a scramble for pieces of tobacco,
which the children took home to their parents, and school broke up with the same
boisterous mirth that is so characteristic of English lads of the same age. Too much
credit can scarcely be given to Mr. and Mrs. Lawes and Mr. Chalmers for the
wonderful results produced among a people who only eight years ago were pure savages.
School work is interspersed with sufficient play to prevent it becoming irksome, it being
evidently the aim of the missionaries “ to make the people happy in their own way, even
“ if that way should be quite opposed to European theories of how they ought to be
** happy.”
The average daily attendance at the Port Moresby School is 140, and the total
number of children attending the various schools at places where teachers are established
is 1,000.
R 7381. C


The following morning the mission teachers and their families, with the pupil
teachers, came up to the mission house, each bearing some little present for Mamoose
(my native name), a plume of paradise feathers or some other token of their goodwill.
If Yule Island has been thought of as a site for the first settlement, I trust the
Government will reconsider the matter. Hall Sound as a harbour is not to be com-
pared with Port Moresby. In consequence of the strong set of the current to the
eastward, it is at times almost impossible for sailing vessels to enter the Sound. The
land opposite Yule Island is one vast swamp, and the neighbouring tribes are fierce and
turbulent. The unhealthiness of the climate is such that the inhabitants have recently
removed to the mainland, leaving only a few men to look after the plantations. Port
Moresby, on the contrary, is now fairly healthy. The Motu tribe, inhabiting the port,
are the great traders of the coast; their dialect is understood from Bald Head to Milne
Bay, and the missionaries, after eight years’ experience, have come to the conclusion that
Port Moresby is the only locality suitable. It is the real key to New Guinea, and from
it civilising influences will radiate as from a centre. The Laloki river, which takes its
rise in the Owen Stanley range, and receives the Astrolabe waters, runs through fine
agricultural land, well watered by a chain of lagoons, and falls into the sea in Redscar
Bay. There is a depth of 6 feet on the bar at low water spring tides, and the river is
navigable for vessels of light draught to within five miles of the digger’s camp at the
back of Port Moresby. Cooktown is so situated that it must necessarily become the
port of communication between Queensland and New Guinea. Vessels bound to and
from Now Guinea have a leading wind at all seasons.
Sixteen years ago small-pox was introduced via Torres Straits, and decimated the
coast and inland tribes. Old men still speak, with tears in their eyes, of the frightful
disease that carried off their children and friends. Eight years ago measles was imported
from Somerset, and the mortality was very great. This points to the necessity of strict
enforcement of quarantine regulations at Cooktown and Thursday Island, the portals of
New Guinea.
In 1878, before leaving Port Moresby, the diggers and others purchased large areas
of land from the Natives with the trade they had no further use for. lam informed
that one man bought a square mile almost in the town. These lands have never been
improved by the owners, and are still cultivated by the Natives. The people complain
bitterly of the damage done to their plantations by the horses left behind by the diggers.
These have increased to about 60, and the marvel is that they were not speared
long ago.
Cooktown, 13th April.
We were detained at Port Moresby until the 9th instant by calms, met the south-east
trades about five miles outside, and carried strong trades to the Barrier. Entered at
Lizard opening (Cook’s) on 12th instant, and arrived at Cooktown at 9 p.m. of 13th
idem, all well.
I have, &c.
(Signed) Henry M. Chester.
Proclamation read at Port Moresby on 4th April 1883:
I, Henry Majoribanks Chester, resident magistrate at Thursday Island, in the colony
of Queensland, acting under instructions from the Government of the said colony, do
hereby take possession of all that portion of New Guinea and the islands and islets
adjacent thereto, lying between the 141 st and 155th meridians of east longitude, in the
name and on behalf of Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria, her heirs, and
successors. In token whereof I have hoisted and saluted the British flag at Port Moresby
in New Guinea this fourth day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and eighty-three.
God save the Queen!
(Signed) Henry M. Chester.
The following is a list of places visited by Mr, Chalmers, with the population of each
village or district. They are included in a coast line of 60 miles from Boera to
Kerepunu, say 60 miles by 40 to the Owen Stanley range:—Moumiri, 100; Muna-
kahila, 300; Eikiri, 200; Kupele, 600; Logeri, 600; Faveli, 400; Moroka, 400;
Maiara, 200; lovi, 300; Epakari, 500; Epara, 300; Taburi, 400; Makapiii, 400;
Tubuselei (inland), 400; Kaile (inland), 1,000; Kapakapa (inland), 1,000; Palanai,
500; Boera, 300; Porebada, 200; Port Moresby, 800; Vapukeri, 200; Pari, 300;
Tupuselei, 350 : Kaile, 350; Kapakapa, 300 ; Hula, 600 ; Papaka, 400; Kamari, 200 ;
Kalo, 1,500; Kerepunu, 1,500; Kuaipo, 600; Animarupu, 300; scattered Koitapuans,
1,000. Total, 16,500, equal to nearly seven persons to the square mile.


No. 15.
GOVERNOR SIR A. E. KENNEDY, G.C.M.G., C.B. (QUEENSLAND), to the RIGHT
HON. THE EARL OF DERBY. (Received June 19, 1883.)
My Lord, Government Hftuse, Brisbane, April 26, 1883.
I do not propose to trouble your Lordship with a repetition of details already
before you in reference to the colonial annexation of New Guinea.
2. I have only to express my entire satisfaction with the action of my Government,
especially Sir Thomas M'llwraith, in the matter.
3. I think his apprehension of New Guinea being annexed by another European
Power was reasonable, and his promptitude in adopting our only safeguard very
laudable.
4. Sir Thomas has laid his views before you, and we have the satisfaction of knowing
that they are heartily adopted by all the Australian Colonies, which we trust may be our
excuse for any irregularity we have committed.
5. I have never heard any well-informed person doubt the great disaster which the
occupation of New Guinea by a European Power would prove to Australia.
6. I have had less difficulty in dealing with this subject from the knowledge that Her
Majesty’s sanction was necessary for its completion.
7. I do not anticipate any difficulty in providing for the cost of maintaining our
authority.
(Signed) haVe, A. C E. KENNEDY.
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby,
&c. &c. &c.
No. 16.
THE HON. SIR A. H. GORDON, G.C.M.G., to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, 5, Bryanston Square, W., June 16, 1883.
I have the honour to enclose for the information of the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, the copy of a letter which I have just received from the Russian explorer,
Baron Miklouho Maclay.
I have, &c.
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) ARTHUR GORDON.
Colonial Office.
Enclosure in No. 16.
Baron Maclay to Sir A. Gordon.
Your Excellency,
Sir, Hong Kong, May 2, 1883.
Learning from newspapers about the desire of the Government of the Colony of
Queensland to annex the S.E. part of the Island New Guinea, I take the liberty, in the
case if Her Majesty should sanction this annexation, of reminding respectfully your
Excellency of request made by me in January 1879 and April 1881, which I now repeat
again:—
1. That the right of the Natives of the Maclay Coast (New Guinea ) to the soil in the
fullest extent of the word should be respected.
2. That the importation of spirits should be prevented.
Allow me also to quote here the own words of your Excellency (from a letter to the
Secretary of State for the Colonies, dated Armitage Hill, April 9) 1879) : —“ I entirely
“ agree with Baron Maclay in thinking that ‘ les tentatives genereuses des Gouverne-
“ ‘ments Europdens pour protdges les indigenes centre les violences et les injustices des
“ ‘ envaliesseurs blancs sont ordinairement venues trop tard, quand le mal etait ddjk fait,’
“ and that comparatively slight precautions taken in time might avert misunderstandings
“ which lead too often to the murder of white men, and to the steps, too generally of a
“ most unsatisfactory nature, which have then to be taken for the punishment of those
C 2


“ who have committed them. I also agree with him as to the importance of recognizing
“ the native titles to land and of discouraging the importation of spirits and firearms
Knowing well that your Excellency is a friend of justice, and is not afraid to take the
part of the weak, I have reasons to hope that my request shall not always remain “ vox
“ clamantis in deserto.”
I have, &c.
Address: (Signed) N. de Miklouho Maclav.
Biological Station at Watson’s Bay,
Sydney, N.S.W.
No. 17.
F. P. LABILLIERE, Esq., to COLONIAL OFFICE.
5, Pump Court, Temple,
Sir, June 16, 1883.
On looking over my papers about New Guinea, I have felt that the experience
and opinions of Captain Yule, given in the enclosed letter, ought to be contributed to
the other valuable information on the subject collected in your Department. I therefore
send you the original letter which I received from Captain Yule, in reply to an invitation
to be present at a private conference of gentlemen, which was held to consider the
question of the annexation of New Guinea, just 10 years ago.
I shall be much obliged by your kindly returning the letter when you have made any
use of it you may think fit.
I am, &c.
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) F. P. LABILLIERE.
Colonial Office.
Enclosure in No. 17-
Mr. Yule to Mr. Labiluere.
Anderton, Devonport,
Sir, June 19, 1873.
As I have no intention of going to London at present, I regret not being able to
avail myself of your invitation to be present at the meeting which is to take place at the
Royal Colonial Institute on the 25th instant, more especially as I take a great interest in
the part of New Guinea you refer to, having been engaged in the survey of its southern
coast and that of the Louisiade Archipelago, very little of which had been previously
known to the civilised world, especially in the vicinity of Cape Possession, which I so
named from my having formally taken possession of that part of New Guinea in Her
Majesty’s name, as it had previously appeared as a blank on the old charts.
The chief aspect of our survey of this part of the island having been of a hydrographic
nature, we were not prepared for exploring the interior, but its general aspect reminded
me much of the island of Java, with its lofty range of inland mountains, and vast tracts
of undulating and apparently alluvial plains, with much wood and vegetation and
numerous rivers, some of which are doubtless navigable between the mountains and the
coast.
We had frequent communication with the Natives, who are of various shades from
copper colour to black, well formed and intelligent, their canoes and dwelling-places are
of superior construction, and they pay much attention to the cultivation of yams and
other vegetables, as they brought off in their canoes yams, bananas, cocoa-nuts, sugar
cane, and a quantity of coarsely manufactured arrowroot or sago, all of which were
evidently indigenous as the inhabitants possessed no iron or any other article indicative
of their ever having had any previous communication with civilised man. They are very
warlike, and probably, like most untamed people of the kind, are treacherous, although
they spared the lives of myself and two boats’ crews at Cape Possession when we were
upset in the surf and, unarmed, were quite at the mercy of a large body of armed
Natives.
The greater portion of the coast is fronted by a barrier of coral reefs, within which
are perfectly sheltered harbours, and although the coast we surveyed lies within 8 to 12
degrees of the Equator, we found the climate very healthy, which may, I think, in great
measure be attributed to the south-east monsoon or trade wind which blows home to the
coast during a great part of the year.


I am very glad this apparently fine country is now attracting the attention of the
influential gentlemen you name, as I have often thought the portion of New Guinea
that I have seen is quite adapted to the cultivation of all such productions as those of
Java.
The “ Voyage of the Rattlesnake ” gives, as far as. it goes, a correct account of ‘the
parts of New Guinea we visited; and the second volume of the “ Australia Directory,”
compiled by myself, will afford some hydrographic description of its coasts, and I shall
at any time be most happy to give you any farther information in my power, for I think
it a great pity that such an apparently fine country, and so near our Australian
Colonies should remain fallow, or perhaps worse still, be eventually taken in hand by
some Foreign Power.
I am, &c.
F. P. Labilliere, Esq. (Signed) C. B. Yule.
No. 18.
FOREIGN OFFICE to COLONIAL OFFICE.
Sir, Foreign Office, June 30, 1883.
I am directed by Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to transmit
to you to be laid before the Earl of Derby copy of a despatch relative to New Guinea.
I am, &c.
The Under Secretary of State, (Signed) J. PAUNCEFOTE.
Colonial Office.
Enclosure in No. 18.
My Lord, Paris, June 27, 1883,
This afternoon, in obedience to the instructions conveyed to me by your
Lordship’s despatch of the 20th instant, I recited to M. J. Ferry the conversation
which your Lordship had on that day with Count d’Aunay on the subject of .New
Guinea.
When I mentioned that your Lordship had said to M. d’Auuay that you presumed
you might feel confident that the French Government had themselves no designs of
annexation in New Guinea, M. Jules Ferry affirmed very positively that no design of the
sort was entertained by the French Government.'
I have, &c.
The Earl Granville. (Signed) Lyons.
No. 19.
ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE to COLONIAL OFFICE.
My Lord, 15, Strand, W.C., June 30, 1883.
Referring to a memorial* from the Council of the Royal Colonial Institute which
was presented to your Lordship on the Ist instant, advocating the annexation of New
Guinea by Her Majesty’s Government, I now have ‘the honour to append a copy of
resolutions on the subject which were adopted by the Fellows of the Institute at the
annual meeting held yesterday:—
“1. That the Fellows of the Royal Colonial Institute in annual general meeting
assembled approve of the action of the Council in presenting the memorial respecting
the annexation of New Guinea to the Right Honourable the Secretary of State for the
Colonies as expressed in the annual report.
“ 2. That his Grace the Chairman of the Council be requested to transmit a copy of
the foregoing resolution to the Right Honourable the Secretary of State for the
Colonies.”
I have, &c.
Signed) MANCHESTER,
The Right Honourable the Earl of Derby Chairman of the Council.
&c. &o. &c.
* See enclosure in No. 5.
C 3


No. 20.
COLONIAL OFFICE to the ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE.
Sir, ’ Downing Street, July 4,1883.
I am directed by the Earl of Derby to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 30th ultimo,* containing a copy of resolutions in support of the proposed annexa-
tion of New Guinea by Her Majesty’s Government, which had been adopted by
the Fellows of the Royal Colonial Institute at the annual meeting held on the
previous day.
I am, &c.
The Chairman of the Council of the (Signed) JOHN BRAMSTON.
Royal Colonial Institute.
No. 21.
THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF DERBY to ADMINISTRATOR SIR A. H. PALMER,
K.C.M.G. (QUEENSLAND).
Downing Street,
Sir, July 11, 1883.
Her Majesty’s Government have given their careful consideration to the request
of the Government of Queensland, as placed before them in the correspondence with Sir
Arthur Kennedy and with the Agent General for the Colony, which has been laid before
Parliament, that the eastern portion of the Island of New Guinea, with the islands
adjacent thereto, may be annexed to Queensland. Although the first communication
reached me through Mr. Archer on the 28th February, it was not until the 10th of June
that I received Sir A. Kennedy’s observations on the subject, and, through Mr. Archer,
a copy of the proclamation with which Mr. Chester, the magistrate, took possession of
the territory in the name of the Queen. It has therefore not been possible to com-
municate to you before now the conclusions at which Her Majesty’s Government have
arrived.
2. They are unable to approve the proceedings of your Government in this matter.
It is well understood that the officers of a Colonial Government have no power or
authority to act beyond the limits of their Colony, and if this constitutional principle is
not carefully observed serious difficulties and complications must arise. If there had been
any evidence of the intention, which is said to have been apprehended, of a foreign
Power to take possession of any part of New Guinea, the views and proposals of the
Colonial Government could have been placed before Her Majesty’s Government by
telegraph, and if the circumstances had justified immediate action it could have been
taken without a delay of more than a very few hours. It is therefore much to be
regretted that your advisers should, without apparent necessity, have taken on themselves
the exercise of powers which they did not possess.
3. The apprehension entertained in Australia that some foreign Power was about to
establish itself on the shores of New Guinea appears to have been altogether indefinite
and unfounded, and the inquiries which have been made by Her Majesty’s Government
have given them the strongest reasons for believing that no such step has been con-
templated. Nor is there at the present time any sufficient ground for anticipating the
early settlement on the shores of New Guinea of a white population from the Austral-
asian Colonies which, in the absence of any established authority, would become a
source of trouble and danger to the Colony. The results of former expeditions have
been disastrous, and unless there should be indications of their intended renewal on a con-
siderable scale, no question would arise with respect to the prevention of disorders
resulting from that cause.
4. Her Majesty’s Government are, moreover, clearly of opinion that even if the time
had arrived for asserting and exercising the Queen’s authority and jurisdiction on the
shores of the island, or on some portions of them, there would be no necessity or
justification for including in these measures the whole of the vast territory to which
the proclamation of the Queensland Government purports to apply. It is estimated that
the interior of the country contains several millions of savage inhabitants of whom little
or nothing is known, but it is certain that they have given no sign of a desire that
their land should be occupied by white men. It would require exceptionally strong
• No. 19.


reasons to justify the annexation of these tribes and their territory, and in the absence
of any such reasons, a grave responsibility would be incurred in establishing the Queen’s
jurisdiction over a large coloured population which would certainly resist subjugation and
has apparently nothing to gain by it.
5. If, however, it had been shown that the extension of the Queen’s sovereignty to the
eastern portion of New Guinea has become necessary, the proposal that the territory so
annexed should form part of the Colony of Queensland would be open to strong
objections. The Colony already comprises an immense extent of territory: the seat of
Government is situated in the south, a thousand miles from the south-eastern point
of New Guinea: it is practically governed by a Parliament which represents the white
population, whose interests are altogether different from those of the coloured races,
aboriginal and imported, within the Colony ; and while I am aware of the difficulties with
which the Colonial Government has had to contend in connexion with the labour traffic
and other questions affecting native interests, the fact that those difficulties have not in
all cases been successfully dealt with cannot be disputed, and has often of late been
the subject of much comment. The Queensland Government is at present undertaking
heavy charges and responsibilities in connexion with the settlement and development of
its vast northern territory, which cannot be fully occupied for many years to come, and
even if it could be reconciled with former precedents and sound general principles that
the Imperial Government should devolve upon any Colony the duties incident to the
establishment of British dominion in such a country as New Guinea, neither the time
nor the circumstances would appear favourable for the assumption by the Queensland
Government of the control of a large native population owning a territory not required,
and, to a great extent, at least not suited, for the occupation and labour of European
settlers. It has been stated in the press that one reason for which some persons in
Queensland desire the annexation of New’ Guinea is the facility which would thereby
be afforded for obtaining a large supply of coloured labour for the sugar plantations
without going beyond the limits of the Colony. It is no doubt generally understood that
the Natives of New Guinea would not willingly accept or be suitable for labour engage-
ments at a distance from their shores, but the fact that the suggestion has "been made
indicates a special difficulty which might present itself if the request of the Colonial
Government were complied with.
6. Her Majesty’s Government have not failed to give due attention to the represen-
tations made by the Governments of New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia in
support of the action taken by your Government. Those Governments do not, as
I understand, definitely endorse the proposal that the island should form part of Queens-
land, nor do they undertake to share the expenses which might be entailed by any attempt
to govern it, but they express in general terms a desire that it should be brought under
British rule. Such an expression of opinion has, necessarily, much weight with Her
Majesty’s Government, but it does not indicate any substantial advance towards the
more effective settlement of a question of this nature. The affairs of the Pacific Ocean,
and the political and commercial relations of the Australian Colonies with adjacent places
and nowers, are matters of the highest importance to those Colonies, and require to be
dealt with on broad and clearly defined principles, and by the united action of the
Colonies. Her Majesty’s Government regret that it should be necessary from time to
time to refuse assent to proposals coming from individual Colonies for the assumption
of large and serious responsibilities in regard to places and questions not specially
concerning those of Her Majesty’s subjects who live in other parts of the empire ; and
I trust the time is now not distant when, in respect of such questions, (if not for other
purposes of government,) the Australasian Colonies will effectively combine together, and
provide the cost of carrying out any policy which after mature consideration they
may unite in recommending, and which Her Majesty’s Government may think it right
and expedient to adopt.
7. In the meantime Her Majesty’s Government are of opinion that they must
continue to decline proposals for large annexations of territory adjacent to Australia, in
the absence of sufficient proof of the necessity of such measures. In the case of New
Guinea there is already in existence a jurisdiction which may be made to suffice for
immediate exigencies. The powers of the High Commissioner for the Western Pacific
extend to that island, and if the Colony of Queensland, with or without assistance from
other Colonies, is prepared to provide a reasonable annual sura to meet the cost of
placing one or more Deputies of the High Commissioner on the coast, Her
Government will be willing to take steps for strengthening the naval force on the
Australian station so as to enable Her Majesty’s ships to be more constantly present
C 4


than hitherto in that part of the Pacific. A protectorate thus gradually established over
the coast tribes would be capable of meeting the principal requirements of the case for
some time to come, and would be free from the grave objections to which, as I have
shown, the course now urged upon Her Majesty’s Government is open.
I have, &c.
(Signed) DERBY.
The Officer Administering the Government of Queensland.
No. 22.
GOVERNOR THE MARQUIS OF NORMANBY, G.C.M.G. (VICTORIA), to THE RIGHT
HON. THE EARL OF DERBY. (Received July 12, 1883.)
(Telegraphic.)
12th July.—Am requested by both Houses of Parliament to forward resolutions
unanimously agreed to by them, viz., that it is essential to the future well being of the
Australian Colonies that New Guinea, and the Pacific Islands lying between New Guinea
and Fiji, including New Hebrides, should be annexed to the British Crown, or that
England should establish a Protectorate over them ; that concerted action on the part of
the Australian Colonies is desirable in order to accomplish this result; that this Colony
is willing to contribute its proportion of the expense entailed by such annexation or
Protectorate.
No. 23.
THE AGENT GENERAL FOR VICTORIA to THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL
OF DERBY.
8, Victoria Chambers, Victoria Street,
My Lord, Westminster, S.W., July 12, 1883.
I have the honour to inform your Lordship that, at the instance of my Govern-
ment, a resolution was passed unanimously by both Houses of the Victorian Parliament
yesterday, in favour of the annexation of New Guinea and other Islands in the Western
Pacific; or, pending the adoption of such a course of policy, the assumption of a pro-
tectorate over these territories, in order to prevent the establishment of any foreign power
within them. lam also to inform your Lordship that the Government and Parliament of
Victoria have expressed their willingness to contribute towards the expense of such an
undertaking.
I would take the liberty of urging on your Lordship the evidence thus afforded of the
strength and sincerity of Colonial feeling on this subject, which is further stimulated by
the uneasiness excited by French movements in the Pacific, which my Government are of
opinion indicate danger to the New Hebrides group of islands.
I have, &c.
The Right Hon. The Earl of Derby. (Signed) ROBERT MURRAY SMITH.
&c. &c. &c.
LONDON:
Printed by Geobge E. B. Eyre and William Spottiswoode,
Printers to the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty.
For Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
