

f r ■ ' »
f 4 & |'f A A
QUEENSLAND:
« %
HER
HISTORY, RESOURCES,
AND FUTURE PROSPECTS.
A PAPER
READ BY
THOMAS ARCHER, Esq.,
GRACEMERE,
QUEENSLAND.
67 CORNHILL
.■r \ ,
. ... , ■


■
I


QUEENSLAND:
HEE
HISTORY, KESOURCES, AND FUTURE PROSPECTS,
A PAPER READ BY
THOMAS ARCHER, ESQ.
GRACEMERE, QUEENSLAND,
AT A MEETING OF THE ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE,
ON APRIL 12th , 1881.
Reprinted from “ The Colonies and India.”
STAS
LONDON
S. W. SILVER & CO., SUN COURT, 67 CORNHILL
- 1882,
#, r '


LONDON- : PRINTED BY
BEAN, WEBLBT & CO, 9, CROSS LANE, E.C., AND
ST. GEORGE’S WORKS, BERMONDSEY NEW ROAD, S.E.


QUEENSLAND: HEE HISTOET, EESOUECES, AND
FUTURE PROSPECTS,
In coming before you to say some words about Queensland, I cannot but be con-
scious of labouring under a great disadvantage as compared with the gentlemen
who have immediately preceded me at this desk. The eminent diplomatist and
statesman who two months since addressed the members of this Society on the
important subject of the Confederation of the South African Colonies, had a theme
to dilate upon that could not but be deeply interesting to all who had the privilege
of listening to his lucid and eloquent handling of a very difficult subject. The
great events that were then and still are occurring in South Africa cannot fail to
give to everything relating to our Colonies in that part of the world an absorbing
interest for every subject of this realm to whom its reputation, its honour, and its
prosperity are dear. The lion, gentleman who last month addressed you on the
subject of Emigration, also dealt with a question that is of the very first impor-
tance, not only to Great Britain and Ireland, but to every Colony in the Empire,
and to none more than to Queensland, where very large tracts of the finest country
are lying unoccupied and crying aloud for the labour and capital that are alone
needed to convert them into homes for thousands of the surplus population of
these islands. The thanks of every colonist, and I may say indeed of every
subject of this Empire, are due to Mr. Torrens for the Address with which he
favoured us on this most important question, equally important to the Colonies
and the Mother-country. That address could not fail to carry conviction to every
reflecting mind amongst the large and appreciative audience that gathered to
listen to it; the interest taken by Mr. Torrens during so many years in the
Emigration question, and the untiring labour he has bestowed upon it, entitle
him to speak with an authority that can be claimed by few. I have, unfortu-
nately, not the privilege of addressing you on subjects of such absorbing and
universal interest. In Queensland there are neither wars nor rumours of wars
to excite the imagination and cast a halo of adventure and romance around us ;
our lives and transactions are as prosaic and commonplace as if the first were
passed within the sound of Bow bells, and the second carried on in Mark Lane
or the Stock Exchange. Queensland belongs to the category of those happy
communities that have no history, in the military and diplomatic sense, and our
only battles are those waged with the tongue and the pen, by our statesmen, our
lawyers, and our divines. But if we have no hairbreadth escapes and moving
incidents by flood and field to excite the imagination and stir the blood, we have
some compensation in the privilege of being able to sit in peace under the shadow
of our own vine and fig-tree, in the full assurance that the fruits of our labours
and our lives are as secure as they could possibly be in any part of her Majesty’s
dominions ; and what an inestimable privilege this is can be fully realized by
those only who have had experience of a state of society where the idle, the
worthless, and the dissolute are allowed full play to exercise their evil propensities,
whilst the industrious, the thrifty, and the peaceably-disposed have to stand help-
lessly by and see their property become the prey of the spoiler. My theme,
therefore, is in comparison commonplace and uninteresting, though not altogether
unimportant in its way, and I must ask your kind indulgence while I endeavour,


as shortly as possible, to bring under your notice a very prosaic subject, treated
in an equally prosaic manner.
Queensland, though she is the youngest of the Australian group of Colonies,
bids fair to rival the most prosperous of her elder sisters. Her seaboard of 2,000
miles, studded at frequent intervals with fine harbours, her rivers (though not
navigable for any great distance from the sea) depositing large tracts of the finest
alluvial soil, much of it fit in the southern parts of the Colony for producing all
the fruits and cereals usually grown in temperate climates, and in the central
and northern districts for most tropical products ; her apparently inexhaustible
deposits of minerals ranging from gold to coal, and including very rich deposits of
tin and copper; her natural pastures extending over the larger proportion of her
surface and rivalling in fattening and wool producing qualities any pasturage
of the same extent in any part of the world yet discovered ; all these advantages
combine to make Queensland one of our most promising Colonies. Already her
progress has been very rapid. I can well remember when, in 1841, the commerce
of Brisbane (which then meant the whole Colony) was carried on by a small cutter
trading to Sydney; when a schooner was added to the fleet a great stride was
thought to have been made : and when, a year or two later, a couple of small
steamers took up the trade, there was no end to the jubilation of the inhabitants.
As a contrast, I find that in 1879 the entrances inwards were 1,261 vessels, of the
aggregate tonnage of 637,695 tons, with crews of 42,206 men, and the clearances
were about the same ; there were registered 28 ocean steamers, with 3,500 horse-
power, and 14,000 tonnage, and 38 river-going steamers, of 1,300 tons aggregate
measurement. The population in these old times consisted of a few squatters, as
the pastoral tenants of the Crown were called, and their men, scattered over the
districts of Darling Downs and Moreton, perhaps a dozen storekeepers and publicans
in Brisbane and Ipswich, and half a dozen Government officials. These were the
times when the “ cormorant ” squatter ranged at will over the face of the land,
turning into profit for the community, and occasionally for himself, vast tracts of
country that had lain waste and desolate since creation, and would, but for him,
probably have continued so for centuries to come ; for it is an axiom in the history
of Australian settlement, to which there has yet been no single exception, that in
the interior the squatter or pastoralist must precede the settler or agriculturist;
nor are the reasons for this far to seek. Agricultural produce is so bulky and
heavy in proportion to its value that it cannot be grown profitably when it has to
be sent over long and often difficult roads to market. When there is no population
on or near the place of production to consume it, and no navigable rivers or rail-
ways to carry the produce to market, the cost of carriage must inevitably prove
fatal to any chance of profitable farming; and these conditions unfortunately obtain
in the far interior of Australia. The principal articles produced on a grazing station
are, on the contrary, comparatively easily brought to market. Wool can be com-
pressed into small bulk in proportion to its value and weight, and is easily handled
and carried; while beef, mutton, hides, tallow, have the advantage of walking to
market on their own legs at a comparatively trifling cost to the producer. When
the country is opened up by railways and becomes more populous, these conditions
are to a great extent altered, as I hope to show further on, when treating of
settlement.
In the times of which I was speaking the squatter was his own explorer, his
own surveyor and road and bridge maker, his own carrier, and too often his own
shepherd, cook, bullock driver, and laundress ; transportation to New South Wales,
of which the Moreton Bay district was then a province, had suddenly ceased some
years before, immigration was in its infancy, and labour was scarce, clear, and bad ;
consequently, no kind of employment, save one, was considered infra dig. The
blight of gentility had not then, nor has it yet in the bush, spread over the surface
of society like a canker, destroying everything like manly independence; the only
exception to this liberal code was keeping a public-house; the line had to be drawn
somewhere, and we drew it there ; if a gentleman stooped to this degrading occu-
pation, he was ruthlessly sent (where Mr. Parnell sent his emissaries lately, with
such happy results) to Coventry,
Many an Eton and Harrow schoolboy and University man had to strip off his
coat, turn up his sleeves, and submit to the most servile but salutary labours, rea-


lising the old Danish axiom, that he who would have a faithful, interested, and
attached servant, should serve himself; and much good the lesson did them. Since
my return home, I think I have detected one or two of these victims of adverse
circumstances disporting themselves in the sublime atmosphere of fashionable life,
“ doing the block ” in this end of the town with an assurance worthy of so good a
cause, trying their utmost to look innocent of ever having done anything useful in
their lives. But the Nemesis that follows our evil deeds has overtaken them; the
eye of one not easily deceived is upon them, and unless they all join this Society and
contribute handsomely to the building fund, he will certainly “ split upon them.
But for the present their secret is safe. I breathe not a word about that time when
I came across one of these exquisites washing his only shirt by the edge of a water-
hole, and afterwards disporting his manly figure under the shade of a swamp oak
while the venerable garment was being hung up to dry; or of that other whom I
found on his knees concocting on a sheet of bark the mixture that was to serve as
suet-pudding for our Christmas dinner. The immortal memory of that pudding
can never fade : its dark colour, its glutinous consistency, its lumps of rancid suet,
about the size of small walnuts, profusely scattered through the mixture ; how re-
pulsive it appears now to our fastidious memory, and yet how savoury it then
seemed to unsophisticated palates ! The accompanying sauce, composed of Mauritius
sugar, black as the nigger who made it, and plantation rum, fiery as liquid lava,
may have contributed to the rapidity and appreciation with which the rather
nauseous mess disappeared. The mention of shepherding has brought back to my
memory a story told about himself by a very old friend of mine. One day, when
he was shepherding a flock of his sheep (this was when the Burnett district was
first taken up), dressed in the regulation moleskin slops, striped shirt, and battered
old cabbage-tree hat, a rather dandily-dressed gentleman rode up and said, “ Ah!
my man, can you direct me to Mr. -’s station ?” “ Certainly,” said my friend;
“ you follow up this gulley for a mile, then turn to your right,, run up a blind creek,
then cross a ridge, and bear a little to your left, and you will strike a big creek j
cross it, and follow up the other side for a mile, and you will get to Mr. ’s.”
“Ah ! thank you,” said the traveller, and rode off. On reaching the station, where
my friend’s younger brother acted as cook and hut-keeper, the traveller informed
him that he would hardly have found the place if he had not lucklily met a very
respectable-looking shepherd, who directed him. The traveller’s surprise may be
imagined when, at sunset, the respectable-looking shepherd appeared with his flock,
and dispensed the hospitalities of the station with the grace and dignity of a
gentleman of the old school. These brothers were, in fact, scions of one of the
oldest Border families (on the right side of the Tweed), and I used to tell them that
their proficiency as drovers was no credit to them, as it had descended to them from
a long line of ancestors illustrious in that, if in nothing else. The younger brother
has for twenty years lain at rest on the banks of the Fitzroy Diver, where the
brothers were amongst the earliest pioneers. The respectable shepherd I saw the
other day in Pall Mall; in fact, I condescended to dine with him at a club not ten
minutes’ walk from this spot. The dandy traveller has now a prefix of honour (a
handle, I believe, it is sometimes called) to his name; reports circulated that he
used to carry a spare shirt and a tooth-brush in his saddle-bags, and he was even
suspected of blacking brushes ; but this requires confirmation.
There was at the time I am now speaking of no paternal Government to open
the way for the squatter, to direct his steps through the wilderness, and to tax him.
Crown Lands Commissioners reigned over districts as large as three or four English
counties, and a 10k licence fee and an almost nominal assessment was all the direct
taxation to which he was liable. Now we have changed all that. Cultivation,
civilisation, taxes, matrimony, and intense respectability reign supreme in regions
where they were little known in the good old days of which I speak. The exports
—which then, and long after, consisted almost entirely of wool, tallow, and hides—
were so insignificant that no record, as far as I can discover, was kept of their
value ; everything was shipped over to Sydney, which was the capital and seat of
government. Not till 1859, when separation from New South AVales was obtained,
can I find any record of the value of our imports and exports; for the following
year (1860) the imports amounted to 742,023 k, and the exports to 523,476 k, and


from this time the progress of the Colony has been rapid and nearly uninterrupted.
In 1868, the value of imports amounted to 1,890, 1191., and exports to 2,107,437 Z.,
while in 1878 the imports had risen to 3,436,077/!., and the exports to 3,190,419 Z.
The revenue, which in 1863 was only 295,215 Z., had, in 1873, increased to
1,124,000 Z., and in 1879 to 1,461,823 Z.; while the production of sugar increased in
the ten years from 1868 to 1878, from 12,380 cwt. to 270,510 cwt., or more than
twenty-fold. In 1879-1880 the production had risen to 374,280 cwt., and there
were also in that year 641,486 gallons of molasses, and 238,710 gallons of rum
manufactured ; of the sugar, 240,000 cwt. was exported, principally to the other
Colonies, where Queensland sugar is rapidly taking the place of many kinds for-
merly imported from the Mauritius, Java, and other settlements in the Indian
Ocean. Of the rum, 92,600 gallons were exported: the remainder is possibly
ripening in the vaults of the producers, acquiring the mellow flavour so highly
appreciated by connoisseurs ; it took seventy sugar-mills and nine distilleries to
produce this outturn of sugar and rum. This very large increase in the cultiva-
tion of sugar occurred principally in one district, that of Port Mackay, where the
rich alluvial deposits on the banks of the Pioneer River have been found extremely
well adapted for its production. The industry is, however, rapidly spreading north-
wards, where great tracts of land have been recently discovered that are eminently
suited for sugar planting; it is also known that an immense extent of land round
the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria is well adapted for sugar and other tropical
cultivation. Sugar-planting bids fair to become at no distant date one of the lead-
ing industries of Queensland.
When it is remembered that at the time of the separation from New South
Wales, and indeed up to 1870, railways were in their infancy, while the richest
districts in the interior of the Colony were undiscovered, it must be conceded that
her progress has been rapid, solid, and satisfactory. But that progress has been
but tardy when compared with what may be expected in the future when railways
shall have pierced the remote interior, and developed the immense resources lying
buried there for lack of easy and certain communication with the seaboard.
Queensland may be compared to a fruit with a hard and thick rind enclosing a vast
amount of the richest and most nutritious aliment; and railways may be regarded
as instruments for piercing that rind, and making the rich interior available for
the support of civilised humanity. The coast districts, though abounding in large
tracts of good country fit for cultivation and the rearing of cattle, must be con-
sidered insignificant when compared with the almost boundless extent of rich
country in the interior, where the traveller journeys on, day after day and week
after week, over an almost unbroken expanse of open down and plain country,
covered with grasses and herbage that for richness and fattening qualities has
seldom been equalled, and never excelled, by anything yet discovered in Aus-
tralia.
From the main dividing range in the east to the border of South Australia,
and from Roma in the south to the Gulf of Carpentaria, an area measuring upwards
of 500 miles square, there is an almost unbroken continuance of country, such as I
have described, extending with fatiguing monotony before the weary traveller,
who, after the first week or so, begins to long for greater variety of scenery than
these seemingly endless plains and undulating downs afford; and yet to the eye of
the practised pastoralist the monotony of the scene is largely compensated by the
anticipation of a rich reward for all his toils and troubles, in securing the right to
lease a few hundred square miles of the grazier’s paradise he sees spread out
before and around him mile upon mile on all sides. Nor need the farmer turn
away disappointed. Though grass, the great staple of Australia, seems to
monopolise the whole country, many a mile of rich alluvial land stretches along
the banks of the water courses, and in the valleys, where some day, when these
districts are made accessible by railways, a population of agriculturists will find
ample scope for their industry: for the theory that farming cannot be carried on
profitably in the inland districts of Australia has long since been exploded by the
teachings of experience, as the following extracts from local papers will show: —
A contributor to the Western Star describes as follows a Roma vineyard and
orangery:—“ Mr. Bassett is now reaping the fruit from his vineyard (Roma Villa),


which covers over twenty acres of ground and contains 22,000 vines, all bearing
and looking as healthy as it is possible for them to look. We were unable to learn
the names of the different kinds of grapes grown by Mr. Bassett. The names by
which they are generally known are, the black ones —black prince, black cluster,
and black wine grapes ; white ones —sweetwater, white table grape, and white
wine grape. Then there is the red muscatel, undoubtedly the best grape in the
vineyard, and one which produces an excellent wine. At present, however, there
is not much chance of testing the red muscatel wine, as Mr. Bassett can command
a ready sale for all the grapes of that kind he has growing. The black prince is
a beautiful large grape of an oblong shape, the largest grown in this district; it
has a pleasant taste, and produces a very good wine. The black clusters and the
black wines, although smaller than the black prince, are equally as profitable, if
not more so, especially the black wine grape, which produces a really excellent
wine. Of the white grapes, the white wine grape is the best. A stranger to the
vineyard would probably take this grape to be diseased, as it is slightly speckled
with brown —which is, of course, its nature. It is a good yielding grape, and pro-
duces a very good wine. The sweetwater and the white table grape'are very good
for eating; and although they yield a larger quantity of wine, it is of an inferior
quality. Mr. Bassett has now in his cellars at Roma Villa about 600 gallons of
wine, the produce of 1879-80; in a few more weeks he will have added materially
to his stock, having just completed the erection of a large press for the crushing of
this year’s produce. We have said how many vines Mr. Bassett has in the ground.
As a further proof that it is a lucrative industry, we might just mention that, the
season permitting, they intend putting in at Roma Villa other 15,000 vines, which
will cover about fourteen acres of ground, making a total of 37,000 vines, and
covering an area of about thirty-four or thirty-five acres of ground. This is not
for Roma.- Besides the twenty acres of vines, Mr, Bassett has three acres of fruit
trees, oranges, lemons, figs, peaches, &c. There are about 150 orange trees, a sight
of which (to use a vulgar and much hackneyed phrase) is ‘ good for sore eyes.’
The oranges are all of very good classes, being the navel, St. Michael, and man-
darins. The trees are literally loaded ; on two small topmost branches of one
St. Michael tree we counted no less than thirty-five oranges. This was not the
pick of the orangery either, but a fair specimen. There are about two dozen fig
trees bearing fruit; also a large quantity of peach trees. There are also several
lemon trees; but the severe frosts of the spring of the year cut them up in such a
manner as to prevent most of them bearing this season, only one having any fruit
on ; that one is a peculiar fruit, commonly called the ribbed lemon. They are
all, however, looking very healthy now, and in all probability will bear fruit next
season.”
“ROMA WHEAT AND FRUIT GROWING.
“ It will be recollected (says the Western Star of January 22), that some weeks
since Mr. Joseph Carter, Secretary to the Western Queensland Pastoral and Agri-
cultural Association, received a letter from gentlemen connected with the agri-
cultural show to be held in Melbourne, requesting him to forward for exhibition a
few samples of Roma-grown wheat. In response to Mr. Carter’s requisition for
half-bushel samples to be sent in, Messrs. Irwin and Lines have just supplied each
one sample of wheat harvested in November last. There are other contributions
promised, which have not yet been received, but it is hoped they will come to
hand in time to be forwarded with those under notice. The wheat grown by
Mr. Lines is a red grain, of the purple straw variety, and will make a very good
exhibit; but that grown by Mr. Irwin, we think, it will be very difficult to beat.
It is a white lammas, fine and plump in grain, and very even. It is a wheat
that any district may be proud of, and was raised under somewhat unfavourable
conditions—one of which was rather late sowing, and another the absence of rain
from the time of sowing to the end of September. Previous to that rain, hopes of
a successful yield were despaired of; but, after the fall of a shower or two, the
plants shot up wonderfully, and the result was a fairly good yield, although
nothing like so good as would have been secured under more favourable circum-
stances. The sample to be forwarded to Melbourne is a measured half-bushel,
and weighs 83 lbs., and anybody knows that any wheat that weighs 66 lbs. to
the bushel must be of excellent quality.”


“ Mr. Kates, miller of Allora, lias been visiting the Roma larmers and fruit
growers, and, according to the Western Star, says that what he saw has surprised
him, although he expected to find something to admire in Roma. The grapes
which are now rapidly ripening are not surpassed anywhere, while of the samples
of wheat grown here he speaks in the highest terms. " That sample grown by Mr.
Irwin is first-class, and the weight is not often surpassed on the Downs, although
at Allora a farmer has grown wheat weighing 67£ lbs. to the bushel; but this is
not often accomplished. Mr. Kates has great faith in the Californian wheat, which
has yielded in some places as high as sixty bushels to the acre, or rather at that
rate, because the quantity received was distributed in small parcels to the growers,
and very few of them had sufficient to sow an acre. It is reported to be so good,
however, that it will be extensively cultivated on the Downs next season, and we
are glad to learn that a portion will be forwarded to this district. The Downs
farmers will lay down three times as much land under wheat this season as com-
pared with last, and in a short time—not many years—the Adelaide product will
not be required in Queensland. But the Downs farmers are going to make an
alteration in the time of sowing. They will this season sow from the 15th to the
end of April, and take the chance of the crop being slightly injured by frost rather
than that of having it destroyed altogether by rust, and an early harvest will
anticipate the rust.”
The Warwick Examiner supplies the following most gratifying information :
“ From F. Kates, Esq., M.L.A., we have learnt that the wheat harvest in the Allora
and Spring Creek districts has not only turned out well, but has exceeded the
highest anticipations of the growers. In some paddocks the yield has been very
heavy. Forty bushels to the acre will be reached in several instances, while in
some few cases as high as fifty bushels per acre will be realised. One farmer con-
sidered he would have a heavy crop if he filled 150 bags ; on threshing he found
his_ expectations greatly exceeded, and the yield required 220 bags to hold it.
This is only one instance of many which could be quoted. In another case, on two
adjoining farms belonging to Mr. EL Black, ninety-four acres gave 700 bags of wheat,
or nearly 3,000 bushels. Gristing at the Allora mills commenced last week, and,
good as the wheat is in appearance, it is making equally as good flour. We have
a sample of the silk dressed before us, and it is stated by those who are good
judges, to be a beautiful flour, and equal to Adelaide. As a proof of this we may
mention that the local baker at Allora (Mr. Meyer) made some of it into loaves,
and at the same time made some of the finest Adelaide flour. On the bread being
taken from the oven and tested, that made from the local flour was found to be
fully as good as that of the Adelaide flour—in fact, those who were not aware of
it could not distinguish the one from the other. We mention this to show that
the local wheat will make as good flour as that which is imported. It is calcu-
lated that in the Allora district alone, the yield will be about 7,000 bags, or nearly
80,000 bushels. This, as we have said, is for the Allora district alone, and there
is besides the Warwick, Emu Creek, and Toowoomba districts. It is calculated
that there will be a total yield of between sixty and seventy thousand bags, or
somewhere near a quarter of a million bushels. This is a proof of what the wheat
lands will yield in a fair season.”
Allora is a town about the centre of the finest agricultural lands in the district
of Darling Downs, now the granary of the southern districts, and Roma is in the
Moranoa district, at present the terminus of the railway from Brisbane to the
West, and is on the threshold of a very great extent of fine country. Since these
lines were written I have come across a paragraph that exactly bears upon this
subject: it appears in the last number of the The Colonies and India, and is to the
following effect: —
“ NEW WHEAT LANDS IN QUEENSLAND.
“ On this subject the recent report of Mr. Surveyor Watson to the Queensland
Colonies is most satisfactory. After viewing the country lying between Roma, 330
miles west of Brisbane, Charleville, and the further settlement in the interior, he
notes the prospect of railway making thus : —‘ I believe a good, useful, efficient
line can be made at reasonable cost.’ As until very recently this western region
was regarded as little better than hopeless desert, it is well to hear from him that


‘ one-third of the adjoining land is excellent, equal to any I have seen in the
Australian Colonies.’
“Recent news from Roma itself would confirm the expectation of those who
look upon this Colony as a future important wheat field. With twenty-five bushels
to the acre in a district known to have a considerable area of volcanic soil, the
Western Queensland farmer has a hopeful future. But Mr. Watson reports the
new country so much further west to be similar to the best wheat land of Victoria,
and anticipates a great waving of corn in a neighbourhood once deemed compara-
tively useless.”
A few years ago he would have been set down as a lunatic who had invested his
capital in husbandry in either of these districts; but the railway has not only brought
population to consume the produce on the spot, but has made it possible to transport
it to distant markets, and, as usual, demand has created supply. It may be conceded
that there are throughout the interior fifty miles suited for grazing to each mile
that is adapted for agriculture, but even that calculation will leave a very con-
siderable territory for the operations of the agriculturist. In this estimate of the
proportions of farming to grazing land, the country on the waters of the gulf is
not included. In that immense district it will, I have every reason to believe, be
found that at least one-fourth of the country is well adapted for tropical agri-
culture, while nearly all the remainder is unsurpassed as grazing country.
The great problem that presents itself for solution to whatever Government
may rule the destinies of Queensland is how best to utilise the latent resources of
this great estate, and compel it to yield a greater quota towards the prosperity of
the Colony and the wealth of the Empire than it has hitherto done. It is impos-
sible to imagine that this noble heritage is to remain much longer in the position
it has hitherto occupied, as the hunting-ground of a few savages and the abode of
a few hundred graziers, whose stations are scattered at long intervals over its
surface, and whose flocks and herds scarcely occupy one-tenth of its available area.
It seems to me, that the only solution of this great problem is in the encouragement
of settlement, by opening up the country by means of railway communication with
the coast, the only mode of certain, speedy, and cheap transit that can be devised
in countries where nature has neglected to provide navigable rivers to serve as
highways for the commerce of infant communities.
Great strides have already been made in the direction of opening up the interior
by the construction and opening of a line from Brisbane to Roma, 317 miles almost
due west; and a continuation has been authorised by Parliament, and is now being
made to Mitchell, 53 miles farther in the same direction. A branch leaves the
Brisbane-Roma line at Gowrie Junction, on Darling Downs, and runs southward,
through the fine agricultural lands of that district, to Warwick, on the Condamine
River, 166 miles from Brisbane. From Warwick, the line is nearly finished to the
tin mines of Stanthorpe, 41 miles, close to the border of New South Wales, where
it will join the eastern system of that Colony, now rapidly advancing towards the
border. But a glance at the map will show that these lines only traverse the out-
skirts of Queensland, leaving untouched and unprovided for the great tracts of
country I have described, stretching in uninterrupted vastness for 600 miles north-
westward from Roma and Mitchell to the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria. The
resources of Queensland cannot be considered one-tenth part developed until this
great country is brought within the community of nations by the iron horse, which,
as far, at least, as new countries are concerned, seems destined to become the great
civilising and ameliorating agent of the future.
A Bill has therefore passed the Parliament of Queensland authorising the con-
struction of a line on the land-grant system, starting from Mitchell, and continuing
the Brisbane-Mitchell line westward to Charleville on the Wurrego River, whence
a line is projected south to Burke, in New South Wales, to connect with the
western railway system of that Colony, and also one westward, to connect with
the South Australian system. Charleville will thus become the point of junction
with the whole railway system of New South Wales, and through it also with
the Victorian system and that of South Australia. From Charleville the author-
ised transcontinental will turn north-westward to Point Parker, on the Gulf of
Carpentaria, a distance of 1,050 miles from Mitchell, the point of junction with


the line from Brisbane now being finished to that place; and the facilities for the
construction of the line are as great as the resources it would develop. No engi-
neering obstacle exists on the whole of this immense tract of country. No
tunnelling or even very deep cutting will be necessary, and the bridges will gene-
rally be small, and easily constructed of materials found everywhere on the banks
of the creeks and rivers. As regards the resources it would develop, so numerous
are they, and so great are the benefits that must follow on its construction, that I
do not think it can be considered presumptuous to call the proposed undertaking
one of national importance. The very large extent of rich country that will be
opened for settlement to the teeming thousands of these islands alone entitles me
to use the phrase; and when to this is added the very great impetus that will be
given to the wool and meat trades, and to the development of the immense
mineral resources of the country to be traversed by the proposed line, I do not
think the phrase is at all exaggerated or misapplied. The quantity of stock de-
pasturing on January Ist, in the districts that would be traversed by it, or that
are near enough to use it for their traffic, was 590,000 cattle and 2,985,000 sheep;
and by the estimate of officials, confirmed by the opinions of gentlemen who have
resided in these districts for years, the stock-carrying capacity of the country
would be increased ten times by the opening of a railway giving speedy and certain
communication with the seaboard; and, from personal observation on a journey
from Rockhampton to the neighbourhood of the Gulf, I do not consider that esti-
mate at all exaggerated. Sheep-farming can at present only be carried on profit-
ably up to or slightly beyond the line to be traversed by the proposed railway; its
initiation would not only tend to increase the carrying capacity of the country
already partially stocked with sheep, but open up for sheep-farming a large extent
of country to the west of the proposed line and parallel to it, now_ nearly unoccupied
by sheep and only sparsely stocked with cattle. To an Australian stock-farmer I
need not explain the great difference it makes in the population, trade, and general
prosperity of a country that is really well adapted for sheep, as all our western
country is, when it is stocked with them or with cattle only: but to those of my
audience who have not the privilege of being Australian stock-farmers, I may ex-
plain that sheep employ a very much larger number of hands in their management
than cattle, and these hands consume large quantities of provisions, and manu-
factured goods and other supplies, which must be brought from the coast, thus
giving employment to a great many carriers and their teams ; besides, there are
a hundred different articles required on a sheep-station that cattle-stations can
dispense with. Then the wool has to be shorn, washed, and carried to port, and
delivered to agents for shipment, making trade for a set of worthy gentlemen who
take the first of the many nibbles it has to submit to before reaching the consumer.
Cattle, on the other hand, require comparatively few men in their management,
and are complaisant enough to carry their own beef, tallow, and hides to market
at a small expense to their owner, but also without creating any great amount of
traffic. Cattle-stations can consequently be carried on with a chance of profit at
a much greater distance from a port than is the case with sheep-stations.
The large increase in the population which follows the stocking of a district
with sheep, creates consumers for agricultural and garden produce, the raising of
which has now become an important industry in many places where formerly it
was untried for want of a population to consume it. But it is in opening up the
mineral wealth of the interior, which for so many years has lain nearly uselessfor
want of the means of transit, that a line of railway will be found of extreme im-
portance, from the moment it is opened. There is especially one district near
which any line must pass on its way to the only port on the Gulf from the south,
where very rich and extensive deposits of gold, copper, and iron have been found,
and the two former worked, but not to any great extent, owing to the difficulty
and cost of transit to port, the nearest point on the Gulf of Carpentaria being more
than 200 miles from the mines. The accounts we have of the great extent and
richness of this metalliferous district would seem fabulous if they were not proved
beyond the possibility of doubt, by the concurrent testimony of numbers of people,
experts and others, who have seen what they describe. Lest I should appear- to
exaggerate, I will not attempt to give an idea of the mineral wealth of this region


in my own words, but will, with your permission, shortly quote the reports of
persons who have visited the district and seen what they describe.
In the Queenslander of August 9, Mr. Sheaffe writes _
“ And here I may point out a peculiarity never observed by me, or mentioned
by others as far as I know, as existing in any other part of Australia,; the iVLakin-
lay ranges, teeming with an extraordinary wealth of minerals, are flanked for nearly
200 miles by high undulating downs of exceeding fertility, so that, on the one hand,
you have almost boundless pasture, and, upon the other, almost inexhaustible
mines. That lam justified in speaking of these mines as almost inexhaustible, i
shall proceed to show. The first known copper mines approached by this route are
the Mountain Home, the Eio Grande, and the West Briton, applied for some six
or seven years ago by some Sydney capitalists, and of which Mr. W. Wellington,
who was sent from England by Messrs. Bolitho and Sons, reported as follows .
“The principal lode is at Mount Norma, is a well-defined lode, varying from
three feet to six feet wide, running north and south and dipping to the east, it
stands in the face of an almost perpendicular mountain, showing from 4UU to
500 yards. The ore is principally grey, of the following percentage namely,
thirty-four. Thousands of tons could be taken away here at trifling expense, ihe
Eio Grande lodes consist of two, running parallel, with a distance of about 250
yards between them. The out-crops show very distinctly on both these lodes for
about 300 and 400 yards in length, consisting of red oxide and grey ores of the
following percentage—namely forty-four. These lodes appear to be running into
the Mountain Home lode. The West Briton, also running north and south, is
about a mile north-east of the Mountain Home on the top of a small ridge, showing
a large lode from six feet to eight feet wide, chiefly red oxide and grey ore,, of tre
following percentage —namely, thirty-eight. These lodes appear to be well defined
and regular, all running north and south and dipping to the east. The cost of
working these lodes will be very little for a long time to come, in consequence ot
the ore being so near the surface. , „
“The line, after leaving these mines, would then pass near the gold reefs ot
Bishop’s and Fisher’s Creeks, where several auriferous claims are still working and
paying wages at from 61. to 81. a week to engine-drivers, and 41. to rough-and-
ready men as miners, and where numberless other reefs are known to exist, but
are at present not worked, owing to the great expense of getting machinery, and
the difficulty *and uncertainty of getting rations. Near this, also, the Homeward
Bound and Flying Dutchman copper mines are situated, from the_ former ot
which 200 tons of ore have been sent to Sydney, all of which have yielded over
40 per cent, of pure copper. Twelve miles farther on the Cion curry copper mines
are reached, the richness and magnitude of which it is difficult to conceive without
having seen them; and though I have known many skilled miners who have
worked at, and several mining engineers of note (Mr. H. A. Thompson, the chair-
man of the Mining Board of New South Wales, being one) who have inspected
these mines, I have never known one who was not at first sight astonished at the
almost incredible amount of rich ore lying on the surface of the ground. Ha a
mile to the south-west extremely rich and extensive lodes occur, while thirty miles
to the north-west nnnumbered lodes and copper-bearing veins appear. 1 myse
know of nearly a hundred, only eight or ten of which are secured, and none
worked. Mr. Sheaffe enumerates several other marvellously rich deposits ot copper,
and again quotes Mr. Wellington’s report‘ Eight miles to _ the north-west, on
the Leichardt Eiver, are two lodes, containing ores of red oxide, grey and mala-
chite. These lodes are from 20 feet to 30 feet immense deposits of copper.
Big boulders of grey ore are lying loose on the surface, of tons weight. ihese
things,’ continues Mr. Sheaffe, ‘ 1 have seen, and shall be most happy to show to
anyone desirous of seeing them, when I return to the Cloncurry. Thus, I think
I am justified in speaking of these mines as almost inexhaustible, and m my
assertion that this district will find ample remunerative labour for tens ot
thousands of our miners, if only regular and moderately reasonable carriage,
with its natural port, were provided.” , p. noon.
Sub-Inspector Armit reports thus to the Colonial Secretary, Dec. 13, 100 .
“The Cloncurry gold-field is situated on a belt of ranges dotted


throughout by numerous isolated peaks, many of which consist of nearly pure iron
ore. Leaving the Cloncurry, and steering in a northerly direction, the country
for some sixty miles consists of ridges running out from the range and forming the
watersheds between the Cloncurry, Williams, Dugald, and Leichardt rivers ; this
country is well timbered, and second-class pastoral. On reaching the Leichardt,
the country opens out on either hank, forming large plains and slightly rolling
downs, which extend for miles out from the river, and continuously down to
within a few miles of the coast; this fine country, over 200 miles in extent, is
well grassed and watered throughout, composed of fine red or brown loam of great
depth, and does not offer any natural obstacles to engineers.”
Coal has been discovered in nearly all the districts of the Colony where it has
been searched for, principally near Brisbane, in West Moreton, on Darling Downs,
and at Maryborough, and at Bowen and Cooktown in the north. Mr. Jack, a
well-known geologist, is of opinion that the western plains will be found to overlie
very large deposits of this invaluable mineral. The hard oil coals of the Darling
Downs are described as being capable of producing a large percentage of illuminat-
ing oil and paraffine. Tin and antimony have been discovered and worked in
various localities ; and the numerous gold-fields are too well known to need par-
ticular notice. The number of miners for gold engaged throughout the Colony in
1879 was close ixpon 9,000. The estimated value of gold produced was slightly
under 18,010,000.
At Parker point, on the south-western shore of Carpentaria, a harbour has been
recently discovered and surveyed by officers sent for the purpose, that seems to
have been intended by nature as the outlet for the trade of Northern Queensland,
and for the terminus of a railway that must one day form the shortest and most
convenient channel for much of the traffic, not of Queensland only, but also of the
southern Colonies with Europe, by the Suez Canal, and with India, China, Japan,
and the islands of the Eastern Archipelago ; for to this great trunk railway those
of New South Wales, and through them, of Victoria, and probably, ultimately,
South Australia, will be joined, as well as two from the east coast of Queensland,
that are rapidly pushing their way towards the western plains. One from Rock-
hampton, towards Barcaldine in the Barcoo district, is opened for traffic to
Withersfield, 204 miles from Rockhampton, and it is authorised by Parliament to
be continued to the Belyando river, 40 miles farther; thence about 100 miles will
bring it to the point of proposed junction with the transcontinental at Barcaldine.
The other line, which starts from Townsville towards the gold-mining district
of Charters Towers, and is to be continued thence to the head waters of the
Flinders, has only lately been commenced, but is making good progress. It is
intended that this line shall join the transcontinental; and it must be apparent
that when this great railway scheme is carried out, it will be the means of opening
up a very large extent of country, embracing a great variety of soil and climate,
and adapted for many different kinds of occupation, making it available for the
settlement of a very large population.
To foster this greatly-desired object, the land laws of Queensland have been
made as liberal as any land laws well can be. Within the last dozen years these
laws have been completely remodelled, with the sole object of facilitating the
settlement of population on the lands of the Colony. Inheriting a vicious system
of land-laws from the Parent Colony, Queensland continued for some years after
separation to encourage the accumulation of large leaseholds in the hands of
capitalists, discouraging the acquisition of small freeholds by men of limited capital,
by keeping up the minimum upset price of 11. per acre, a price almost prohibitory
except for small lots of more than average quality, or with a situation commanding
large grazing facilities, or some other advantage, beyond the intrinsic value of the
land itself. The consequence was that only the best morsels here and there were
picked out and bought by the so-called poor man, and his stock was turned out to
graze on the neighbouring Crown lands, which were generally held on lease by
some squatter or pastoral tenant of the Crown. In this way the best of the country
was picked out, leaving the rest in the hands of the Crown tenant —a result that
seems to have been aimed at by those who devised this illiberal and exclusive law.
In Queensland it was found to work so badly, and occasion so much ill-feeling and


even crime, in the shape of cattle-stealing, that a compromise was hit upon, by
which the runs or holdings of the pastoral tenants in the settled districts—that is,
those within a certain distance of the coast, were divided into halves—the pastoral
tenant retaining one-half for a term of eleven years, the other being thrown open
for selection to the public, on terms so easy that the small capitalist and economical
working-man who had saved up his earnings had every facility given him for the
acquisition by purchase of as much land as his capital allowed, from the 40-acre
homestead area to the 5,120-acre holding—the largest quantity that can be lawfully
held by one person. The system has been a great success, and much of the country
in the settled districts has been taken up by men of limited means. By a system
of deferred payments, the terms are made more easy to the purchaser than if
the full price had to be paid on purchase. By an annual payment of Is. per acre,
and some other conditions, consisting principally in fencing in and otherwise im-
proving the land, it becomes the property of the purchaser at the end of ten years ;
or the price (10s. per acre) may, after the expiration of three years, be paid up,
when, on proof that the requisite conditions have been fulfilled, the land becomes
the property of the selector. Homestead areas can be selected at 2s. 6 d. per acre
on the deferred payment system of 6 d. per acre per annum, becoming the property
of the selector when all is paid up and conditions fulfilled. One of these is per-
sonal residence. On ordinary selections and pre-emptives, residence by agent is
sufficient. The area selected as homesteads and conditional purchase in 1879 was
278,609 acres, of this area 67,723 acres were homesteads, and 210,886 were condi-
tional purchases. There are still open for general selection 23,130,774 acres, and
1,798,118 acres for homestead areas. The gross area held under conditional
purchase and homestead selection on December 31, 1879, amounted to 3,720,000
acres.
As an instance of the beneficial working of the land laws at present in force I
may adduce my own experiences. Twenty-five years since the firm with which I
am connected discovered, took up, and stocked a piece of country 35 miles by 10 in
extent, on a navigable river, and we were soon followed by others who took up
country in various parts of the same district. In a few years gold was discovered
in several places in the neighbourhood, population was attracted, and a small town-
ship was laid out by the district commissioner on the head of navigation. The
population steadily increasing, the demand for small portions of land became more
and more urgent. The new Land Act was passed principally by the instru-
mentality of one of my partners, who saw with much concern the lawlessness that
prevailed, and the animosity between classes that was fostered by the law as it
stood. Much of the best portions of the half of the runs that had been reserved for
sale under the new Act were soon sold, and the population of town and country
grew apace. A railway towards the interior was started by Government, but was
stopped at the 25 mile peg, bad times having set in. After four or five years
times improved. The railway works were resumed, the town again shot ahead and
grew apace, and now, where the foot of white man had never trod till twenty-five
years since, a population of 8,000 souls is gathered within its boundaries, and the
country for twenty miles round supports a large population, consisting principally
of selectors and agriculturists occupying their own land. The town has nine
churches, three newspapers, seven banks, eight schools, with nearly 1,500 pupils,
besides a grammar-school newly opened at a cost of 5,000 1., largely made up of
contributions by the citizens, and a corporation which for energy and ability, com-
bined with caution (many of the members having been Scotsmen), might with
advantage be taken as a model by the city fathers of many more advanced and pre-
tentious communities. Where little more than twenty years since stood the
squatter’s humble shipping wharf, composed of slabs (rough boards) and a few stakes
and saplings cut from the neighbouring forest, there is now a quarter of a mile of
solid, well-built wharves, at which numerous steamers weekly discharge and take
in cargo, and ocean-going ships may frequently be seen, arrived from or loading
for London or other ports over the sea ; and, lastly, a stately iron suspension bridge
has just been opened, uniting the river banks by five spans of 232 feet each, or 386
yards in all, built at a cost of about 50,000 Z. This is only one instance of many,
and I hope I may be pardoned for dwelling at such length on the progress of this


particular town and district. I adduce it as the instance with which I am best
acquainted of the prosperity that may be expected to follow liberal land laws and
a judicious railway system in a new country.
It must not be imagined that the land open for selection and sale in the settled
districts (the 24,000,000 odd hundred thousand acres I have mentioned) is the only
land that is available for alienation ; except some so-called railway reserves of a few
thousand acres that were sold by auction at 11, per acre in the Eoma and Clermont
districts, and the small pre-emptive rights which the runholders have over an
insignificant portion of the country they lease, to enable them to secure improve-
ments ; with these exceptions and some small holdings round a few of the back
townships, there is not an acre that goes to compose the thousands of square miles
in the interior that cannot at very short notice be resumed by Government when
required for sale or public purposes, by the simple process of six months’ notice to
the lessee ; and if both Houses of Parliament do not demur by resolution within
sixty days, the resumption can be carried out, the pastoral tenant being protected
only against private interlopers, but not against Government. No fixity of tenure
or compensation for disturbance is ever likely to come his way. He is only looked
upon as the advance guard, or rather forlorn hope, of civilisation. When his work
is done and his country wanted by the State, he is turned out, or, in mild official
phrase, his country is “resumed,” with as much coolness as if he were a pachy-
derm or noxious reptile ; but he is an irrepressible animal, that pastoral tenant,
and Queensland is a wide word. When driven out of one place by the “ exigencies
of the State,” as it is euphoniously called, he just pulls up his tent pegs and
“ locates” himself somewhere else. Nor have I ever noticed that the conscious-
ness of the sword of Damocles, which (worse than being suspended over his head
by a hair) is wielded by some cold-blooded and ruthless Premier, causes him to eat
his . dinner with less appetite, or prevents him from sleeping the sound sleep of the
innocent and just. Our present Premier is a large pastoralist, and I have often
wondered how he would enjoy having to perform the “ happy dispatch ” on him-
self. But, in truth, the contingency is, as a rule, so remote out in the Far West,
that removal from one’s run seldom enters into one’s calculations. In the settled
districts it is different.
I hope I have by this time satisfactorily demonstrated that Queensland has the
means to satisfy the land hunger of all the people that are likely to quit the shores
of Great Britain and Ireland during the next generation ; and what kind of recep-
tion those will get who may choose to cast in their lot with us now, I will leave to
the official exponent of the views of our Government to explain. Personally, I can
only say that I sincerely hope some means may be devised for transplanting a pro-
portion of our suffering Irish fellow-subjects to the Colonies. Of the hundreds of
men that have passed through the hands of my firm since we began life in the
bush, I firmly believe that more than one-half were Irish, and better servants than
the majority of them have been it would be hard to find anywhere. Many of our
most trusted men have been of that nationality, and more faithful, upright service
no employer ever received than we have had from them. A great many develop a de-
cided tendency to economy, and invest their savings in land and stock or town
property, and become prosperous and conservative colonists. As this paper is not
a politico-economical disquisition, nor a theologico-polemical lecture, I will not
pause to enquire into the reasons for this happy change in Paddy’s character.
One theory has, however, occurred to me, and as I do not think it likely to offend
anybody’s political or religious prejudices, I will just name it, leaving it as the
groundwork for the speculations of the future ethnologist. It is popularly supposed
here that people going to the Colonies from this portion of the Empire leave their
consciences and all other good qualities behind them at the Line. Well, my
theory is, that Paddy on his way out finds them there, and with the quick per-
ception of the fitness of things for which he is so well known, adds them to his
already bountiful stock, and thus becomes the excellent colonist he is.
I hope it is not imagined that emigrants going to Queensland are cut off from
the ministrations of their clergy or deprived of the advantages of education.
Almost all denominations and churches are well represented; and though State aid
is withheld from all alike, that only seems to act as an additional incentive to the


liberality and zeal of the congregations, judging, at least, by the churches and
chapels that seem to spring up in every bush township whenever the population
leaclies a few score , and itinerant priests and preachers are frequently met in the
most outlying districts. Few communities are so well provided as Queensland with
the means of education. An admirable national school system has been in opera-
+i° 11 a ?0r som f y ears > which children of all classes are educated at the expense of
the State. Schools are started even in the far outlying bush townships as soon as
a score or two of children can be got together, and these are frequently visited by
(government inspectors. The education is free, compulsory, and secular; but hours
are set apart for religious instruction by their own clergymen for those children
whose parents wish it. There are yearly exhibitions, entitling the winners to
attend one of the grammar-schools for three years free of charge." These grammar-
schools for advanced pupils are erected partly by public subscriptions and partly
by Government grant, and a small fee, also supplemented by a Government orant,
is paid by the pupils for teachers’ salaries and the expenses of the school? On
December 31, 1879, there were 314 primary schools in operation, comprising 210
btate or vested schools, 82 provisional schools, 1 reformatory, and 21 non-vested
schools; all of the latter, with one exception, are in connection with the Church
of Rome. The number of teachers employed was 478 males and 446 females. The
number of children on the roll was 41,380. The private schools on January 1, 1874
numbered 65, there being 2 for boys', 10 for girls, and 63 mixed; there were 151
teachers, 21 male and 130 female, and an aggregate attendance of 1,062 boys and
1,858 girls. There are grammar schools for advanced pupils at Brisbane, Too-
woomba, and Ipswich, and two are to be opened at Maryborough and Rock-
hampton this spring. At the grammar-schools there are competitive examina-
tions for university honours, and exhibitions to the universities of Sydney and
Melbourne of the value of 100 Z. per annum, tenable for three years; and I fancy it
will not be long ere Queensland has a university of her own. It will, I think, be
conceded, after what I have said, that few young communities have paid more
attention or bestowed more outlay on the all-important subject of education than
Queensland.
The employments that the working-man has to look to for making his liviim
aie numerous, and sufficiently diversified to enable every one to choose one or other
suitable to his tastes and habits ; the principal are first—mining, embracing gold
copper, coal, and tin ; secondly, trades, embracing nearly every variety known in
the old countries, but workers in wood and iron and all in the building trades are
most sought after; thirdly, pastoral employment, embracing shepherding, boundary
riding, and stock-keeping; fourthly, agriculture in every branch, and some others
of lesser importance. Besides tradesmen, there are many labourers employed by
Government on railways and public works of different kinds; some years ago
tradesmen in towns earned from 15s. to 11. per day, and, though wages have fallen
somewhat of late years, they are still very high for this class of labour. In the
bush the wages for rough carpenters that can use an axe and adze and drive a nail
range from 355. to 455. a week, with rations. At lambing and shearing time a
period lasting two or three months in the year—even ordinary labourers and
lambers are paid at about that rate ; the rates for this class of labour during the
rest of the year range from IZ. per week up to 355., with rations. Unemployed
men are frequently met with looking for work and taking care never to find it; this
is a class of men that I think must be peculiar to Australia—namely, the profes-
sional “ Sundowner.” The sundowner is the Australian representative of the
Euiopean vagrant; and he has got his name from the peculiar circumstance that on
principle he never arrives at the station which he intends to honour with his
presence for the night till at or just before sunset. He will camp a little off the
road for an hour or two to pass the time rather than make his appearance at any
other hour. _ He then crawls slowly up to the men’s hut or kitchen, where he knows
he is suie of a supper and breakfast, flings down Iris “ swag,” and proceeds to make
himself comfortable for the night. Next morning he will sometimes apply for
work (especially if he has heard that no men are required); or, if he thinks he
might be taken at his word, he will be up and away before the manager is about.
If offered work at a trifle below the current rate, he will decline, with the air of a


man whose sense of honour has been wounded in the most tender point, and march
off, to repeat the process at the next station. The sundowner will work at shear-
ing and lambing time, when wages range from 25 to 50 per cent, above ordinary
rates. During this time he will accumulate a cheque for perhaps 10k or 15k, with
which he will set off to the nearest public-house, and “knock it down ” in a week’s
or ten day’s debauch. He will then hang about as long as he can get any one to
treat him; and, when the time comes that his friends are all as impecunious as
himself, he resumes the profession of sundowning until lambing and shearing time
come round once more. He is, in fact, the product of hospitality run to vice, and
a climate that is only too enticing to a man who by nature is inclined to
vagrancy, and disinclined to work. There are sundowners of a higher class
than the one I have described; but their manners and customs are different,
and I have now no time to bestow on them. But however many of these
there may be, wages never fall much below the rates I have named, and
often rise higher. Now, as a man in the bush who is supplied by his employer
with ample rations can live well and indulge in tobacco and small luxuries, such
as pickles, preserves, &c., at Bs. or 10s. a week, including the simple and inex-
pensive clothing required, it follows that, even at the lowest rate I have named,
he can put by as clear saving from 10s. to 12s. a week, and how even that sum,
regularly saved and properly invested, mounts up in a few years is proved by the
experience of those who try the experiment by putting their savings in a bank or
investing them in stock. Those who earn the higher rates I have named can, if
they choose, lay by a very considerable sum in a few years. Many do so ; and from
these men come most of our farmers and selectors—a class that in a few years will
form the backbone of the Colony. Unfortunately those who do not save up their
earnings by far outnumber those who do, and it is lamentable to see the amount
of money that is worse than wasted by these men in drink and every kind of
excess. I have frequently seen instances of men spending in a week’s debauch at
some low bush public-house the earnings of years, amounting in one case that came
under my notice lately, that of a shepherd of my own, to more than 400 k Another
man lately left one of my stations to visit a neighbouring township, well mounted,
with saddle and all appurtenances, and a pair of very grand top boots, a top coat,
a watch, and about 20k in cash in his pocket. In about a week he returned, with-
out horse, saddle, bridle, coat, boots, watch, or money, and some pounds in debt
into the bargain. He was also a shepherd, and returned to his flock to chew the
cud of sweet and bitter reflection for another year or two, and then probably re-
peat the operation. These are only two of many instances that have come under
my notice; but I have, on the other hand, known scores who have saved up their
pay and invested it as I mentioned before. The moral is, that if a working man
iu Australia chooses to be industrious, frugal, andtnonest, and invests his savings
judiciously, he cannot but improve his position; but the idle, the thriftless, the seif-
indulgent, and the dishonest have often very hard times of it there, as in every other
part of the world. It is, however, only the man that is accustomed to manual
labour in some form that I would advise to emigrate—all the so-called higher
kinds of employment are sadly over-stocked. He who has no capital, and can
use no tool but the quill or pencil, had better stop at home. Young women fit for
service are in great and never-failing demand, especially if they entertain no rooted
aversion to matrimony. The proportion of them that “go off” in this way is very
great, but I have no statistics at hand to show what that proportion is. Many a
mistress finds to her cost that a promise to marry overrides all other promises
and contracts whatsoever.
It is now time to say something of the climate and sanitary state of Queens-
land, the boast of those who have lived there, and the bugbear of those who have
not. To an old Queenslander, it is partly amusing and partly annoying to hear the
remarks that are made even in the Colonies by people who have no personal experi-
ence in the matter. After a residence of nearly twenty years, during which I have
explored a good deal of new country and helped to form several new stations, which
involves much hardship, camping out, and general knocking about, and travelled
oyer a large proportion of the Colony, I will venture to affirm that, though the
climate is hot from three to four months in the year, it will in point of healthiness,
compare favourably with that of any newly-settled country in the world that I


have ever heard, seen, or read of. There are not many places save Australia
where a man can with impunity lie night after night with' only a blanket between
him and the damp earth, perhaps finding when he wakes in the morning that his
slender covering has been soaked by some passing shower, or that his hair is stuck
together with hoar-frost; and yet this is the life led by hundreds in all parts of
Australia, and perhaps more in Queensland than in the southern colonies, when
travelling in the bush or camping out with stock. On a journey of four months
from Eockampton to the Flinders and back, I did not pitch my tent half a dozen
times, except for rain, preferring to lie under the glorious stars, with a macintosh
over my blankets to keep the dew from soaking them; and in that time I gained
half a stone in weight, and my groom, who also preferred sleeping out, looked the
picture of health when we returned home.
In the elevated region separating the waters flowing to the Gulf of Carpentaria
from those flowing south (22° south lat.), I have, in the winter, frequently seen
ice on basins and waterbags in the mornings; and any one having to trudge through
the hoar-frost in search of his horses soon realises what the sensation of icy feet
and powerless hands is; a ride over the plains of Darling Downs on a winter night
is about the coldest operation I have ever experienced. In the low-lying country
bordering the coast the heat of summer is no doubt great for some four months in
the year, but it is generally tempered by a trade wind that blows nearly always at
that season from the S.E., imparting coolness and health wherever it reaches.
Anything more delightful than the climate of this coast country during the other
eight months it is difficult to conceive. As a proof that the country is not unhealthy,
I may state that the 700 miles of railway already opened in the Colony, comprised
in six lines, all starting from the coast at various points between the 27th and 19th
degrees of latitude, has been made by European labour, and I have heard of no
excessive mortality on these lines as compared with those in other new countries.
Whether it is, as some say, the sanitary qualities of the gum-tree (Eucalyptus
globulus), that is found nearly everywhere, the wonderful purity of the air, or
some other unexplained reason, certain it is, that no country under the same
latitude, as far as my experience goes, can vie with Queensland in climatic advan-
tages. Sickness, there no doubt is; lam even free to confess that people occa-
sionally die, but that is a habit they have got into all over the world, and it is one
of which, I fear, they cannot be cured, even by the most sulubrious climate. As
in nearly all newly-settled countries, fever and ague is the most prevalent form of
disease in the bush, as it was, at one time, all over the Mississipi Valley and
Western States of America. I have personally sampled both the Australian and
American article ; and if the choice were given me which of the two I would pre-
fer, I think I would take the Australian, as the lesser of two evils. But the
question of the suitableness of central Queensland for European settlement is
already solved by the thousands of Europeans that already pursue their ordinary
avocations, including some very laborious ones, throughout the whole of that
region, as far as 16 degrees south.
There is, however, one employment, confined entirely to the coast districts, that
has been found inimical to the health of Europeans—namely, the work of the
sugar-field; and it is, accordingly, generally performed by coloured labourers from
the different islands of the South Seas, engaged for a term of three years, under
strict Government supervision, which is never removed from them during their stay
in Queensland. At the end of their term, they are paid under the supervision of
Government inspectors, who never lose sight of them till they are fairly shipped
back to their own country. A few elect to remain in the Colony, but by far the
larger number return to their own islands. Formerly, they could be employed in
any part of the colony, but lately an Act has been passed prohibiting their employ-
ment, except in tropical cultivation, within 50 miles of the coast. It is probable
that coloured labour will have to be employed along the whole of the eastern sea-
board and all the coast country on Carpentaria, where large tracts oflow-lying land
fit for tropical agriculture are known to exist; but the proper labour to employ here
is, unquestionably, that of the Indian coolie, which has proved so beneficial in the
Mauritius and some of our West Indian Colonies. It would, indeed, be a boon to
the patient, half-starved millions of India, our fellow-subjects, as well as to the
northern coasts of Australia, if numbers of them could be transplanted there, to


assist in developing its great capabilities for tropical agriculture. Point Parker is
within 20 days’ sail of Calcutta and Madras, and their transport would consequently
he safe and inexpensive. But though the actual field-work in the coast country of
Northern Queensland will probably have to be performed by coloured labour, yet
the numerous other employments that spring from tropical agriculture will give
occupation to numerous whites —overseers, bookkeepers, machinists, builders,
blacksmiths, teamsters, must all be of the white race. I could dilate at length
upon the advantages to our suffering Indian fellow-subjects that would follow on
a well conducted system of emigration from that overcrowded part of her
Majesty’s dominions to Northern Queensland, but I refrain, as the subject is
somewhat beyond the scope and intention of this paper.
From the aboriginal natives no assistance can be looked for in developing the
products of their country. It is difficult to make a guess at their number per square
mile of country, but on the great interior plains I should say one to ten or twelve
square miles would be an ample estimate. I have frequently travelled over hun-
dreds of miles of that country without seeing one native or a sign that any had
recently been there. When smoke and new tracks warn the traveller that he is
approaching a camp, it is generally found to consist of a dozen or perhaps a score
of people of all ages and sexes, unless there happens to be a grand gathering of
the tribes for the purpose of feasting, fighting, and holding corroboree, when from
50 to 100 may be found in a camp, but to muster that number miles of country
round must be cleared of its inhabitants. Their employment is hunting kangaroos
and wallabies and searching for small game, opossums, bandicoots, and rats, or dig-
ging for roots on the margins of creeks and lagoons. When food is plentiful they
eat voraciously; when it is scarce they starve philosophically, or move their camp
to some other place where they hope for better luck. But work, in the sense ap-
plied to the term by a white man—that is, steady, unflagging, persevering work at
the same thing day after day—they cannot be induced to do. At light jobs, such
as shepherding or stock-riding, the younger ones are often very valuable to the far-
out squatter when labour is scarce, and at such employment they can often be in-
duced to remain for two, three, or even six months. But when the wandering fit
comes on, and a corroboree, a fight, or a grand hunt is to be held anywhere within
reach, nothing on earth will induce them to remain. If they can’t obtain leave in
English they take French leave, and are seen no more perhaps for weeks or
months, when they may turn up again, looking woe-begone, repentant, and often
as attenuated as a starved greyhound.
Nearly every denomination has attempted for many years past—by missions,
native reserves, and other means —to reclaim them, and to impart to them at least
the elements of civilization, and ameliorate what to us appears their hard fate; but
hitherto all these efforts have been tried in vain, and I have never yet heard of one
well authenticated instance of an individual native, much less a tribe, having been
cured of their inveterate taste for rambling and deep abhorrence of steady work.
The capacity for work being defective, or rather altogether wanting, there is no
foundation to build irpon. Never were truer words uttered than those spoken in
this room by a gentleman from South Africa (Griqualand, I think) on the occasion
of the reading of Sir Bartle Frere’s paper, when he said that the only way of civil-
ising the native races was by first fostering a taste for work, for accumulating
property, for family life, and for soap, but these tastes can only be fostered if the
germ exists —they cannot be created. The less that is said about the religious
teaching that has been as a rule bestowed on the Australian natives the better ;
if teaching them to repeat by rote a few phrases and verses, of the meaning
of which they are totally innocent, and to mix up with disgusting profanity
names that ought never to cross the lips of man except with reverential awe; if
this be religious teaching, then they are religiously taught. The simple truth is,
that Providence has not furnished them with natural capacity to understand any-
thing except that which appeals to their senses. In all that does so they are quite
equal to most races in intelligence ; but go beyond that —attempt to explain to them
any subject that requires an effort of the reflective faculties to understand —and they
are totally incapable of making it. I say all this in sorrow, for I like the natives,
and esteem them for their many good qualities. Few have had more opportunities of
knowing them intimately; for in my very youthful days I was thrown much among


them, in a country that was then the remote interior, and contained many blacks
and very few whites. I have journeyed with them, camped with them, partaken
of their fare when very little else was to be had, and at one time I spoke one of
their numerous dialects with tolerable fluency. During the whole of my residence
in the Colonies I have seen much of them, and I am not conscious of the least lurk-
ing prejudice against them; but truth is great, and impels me to say what I have
said in answer to those who allege that we are robbing of their country and exter-
minating an interesting and improvable race, and not doing enough for their civi-
lisation and conversion, &c. Sir, I say that these charges are unjust; it cannot be
intended that that vast expanse of glorious country should be for ever reserved to
to the uses of a few scattered wanderers, while in the old countries men are treading
each other into the mire for want of space ; one hundredth part of that country
would suffice for its native inhabitants if they would but condescend to adopt even
the rudiments of civilisation ; but, as they seem quite incapable of the effort, there
can be nothing done but to treat them kindby and justly, and to let them take their
own way. I may add, for the comfort of those who think that men with dark
skins should be exempted from the curse of labour that was imposed on all
alike, that the Australian Aborigine is, by law, exempted from any obligation to
work; he is left perfectly free to come, and free to go, and no man has the right to
coerce him, or interfere with his perfect freedom of choice in any way. The
attempt was made many years since in Tasmania, where a number of natives were
placed on an island near the coast, furnished with every appliance for carrying on
husbandry, and teachers appointed to instruct them. Comfortable dwellings were
erected, and implements and stock furnished ungrudgingly, but the attempt failed.
Even this slight interference with their beloved vagabond habits was more than
they could bear, and in a few years the community had decreased so greatly that
the Government decided on bringing back to the mainland all that survived; but
it was soon found that they had lost the faculty of getting their living by the old
methods, and, at their own request, they were taken back to the island, where the
last of them died some ten or a dozen years ago. This was, as far as I know, the
only attempt at civilisation by coercion that has been tried in Australia, and it
ended in as great a failure as the voluntary system, that has been tried so often, so
long, and with such disappointing results. But the field is still large, and perfectly
open to any one who has a desire to cultivate it. The Australian Governments
have always been ready to assist in any well-considered scheme for ameliorating
the condition of the aboriginal natives that may be proposed to them by responsible
and disinterested persons ; and naturally so, as the gain to the Colonies would be
very great if these idle wanderers could be persuaded to settle down, and adopt
even the rudimentary arts of civilised life. It must be understood that in these
remarks I have alluded more particularly to the natives of Queensland ; in Victoria
and South Australia, where they are said to be of a higher type of humanity,
greater success may have attended the efforts that have been made to reclaim them
—-but I doubt it.
I fear I have detained you much too long over the two first subjects forming
the title of this paper, namely, the History and the Resources of Queensland, to
have much time left for the last —Her Future Prospects ; but, fortunately, there is
no occasion to dwell at any great length on this. Those who have honoured me
with their attention will have no difficulty in forming their own estimate of the
prospects of a Colony combining within herself advantages and resources so great
and so diversified. Judging by what has followed in the other Colonies on the
settlement, and consequent development of their territories by the agency of rail-
ways, it cannot be. doubted that Queensland, which certainly is not behind any of
them in natural resources, has a very great future before her —a future undreamed
of by the hardy pioneers that first took possession of her vast solitudes, and who
little thought that they were laying the foundations of a Colony that is destined
one day to become one of the brightest jewels in the British Crown. In expressing
a hope that the connection between the Crown and the Colony may long continue,
I only echo that sentiment of loyalty for which Queenslanders have ever been
distinguished—a sentiment that it is to be hoped may go on increasing as years
roll by, drawing closer and closer those ties of mutual affection that should ever
distinguish the relations between a Mother-country and her Colonies.


APPENDIX.
Speech by the Eight Kev. Dr. Stanton, Bishop of Northern Queensland: —
“ I find it exceedingly difficult to add anything to the comprehensive and
exhaustive paper just read. I am extremely glad to be here to-night,
and glad to be present in the Old Country, to hear this paper ' read; but
I should have been profoundly thankful had I heard it about three years
ago ; I had then no idea whatever of the character of Queensland, and certainly I
found from all sides a vast amount of ignorance. I believed that I was doing
right in going out to Queensland, I was nevertheless filled with a certain
amount of fear with regard to what awaited me. I was told, on the one hand,
that T was going beyond the line of civilization, and the picture of landing on
some dreary shore with a number of savages with tomahawks all about me, and
having to sleep in a canvas tent, was vividly presented to my mind. But in
contrast to that, ! should hie to say that the time I have spent in Queensland
has been one of intense enjoyment, and a time of very great surprise, for I found
everywhere the presence of advanced social development. The people have
treated me with the warmest and heartiest welcome. Family sorrow has now
brought me home for a short time ; but Igo out again by the next mail—a time
I am anticipating with extreme pleasure, for I feel I have on that side a large
number of warm-hearted attached friends. The resources of Queensland are too
infinite to properly describe them. The northern part of it is that with which I have
been more particularly acquainted. The Mackay district and all along the coast
has suddenly started up through the growth of sugar. Mackay, they told me
when I left, had turned out 10,000 tons of sugar; and, considering the place is
only just commencing, I think that product marvellous. I am glad to be here
to-night to add my endorsement to all that has been stated in the paper; and I
am sure that now is the time here at home when a large influx of thoroughly
qualified persons may be drawn out to the new Colony. (Hear, hear). Since I
have been here I have preached and spoken incessantly, and I have been hard at
work for the Colony from the moment I arrived; and on all sides an intense
desire has been expressed for information touching the Colony. lam sure that
this paper, if it is widely circulated, will do a vast amount of good, and that
good, I feel, will be largely due to Mr. Archer. I earnestly desire when in
Queensland to promote a hearty spirit of patriotism ; but I have detected little
jealousies springing up. I suppose they are the characteristics of a young
community ; but we must try to soften them down and weld the people together
in one_ compact body for the progress of the community, and, sinking petty
jealousies, promote one grand progressive movement —(hear, hear) —and I think
all those connected with Queensland here at home may remember their patriotism
too; and so on this and that side of the ocean, we can work together and make
the young Colony and the Mother-country mutually helpful.”
Information as to Passages, dc,, can he had at the Queensland/ Emigration
Office , 1 Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, London, S.W.


HANDBOOKS ON THE COLONIES, etc.
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND, ; Including the Fiji
Islands. 3rd Edition, with Coloured Map. Crown Svo. limp cloth, 449 pp., price ss.
THE AUSTRALIAN GRAZIER’S GUIDE.
No 1 SHEEP. Crown Bvo. limp cloth, price 2s. 6d,
THE AUSTRALIAN GRAZIER’S GUIDE.
No. 2. CATTLE. Crown Bvo. limp cloth, price 2s. 6 d.
UPS. AND DOWNSs A Story of Australian Life. 312 pp.,
Price 2s.
AUSTRALIAN DICTIONARY OF DATES AND
MEN OF THE TIME. By J. H. Heaton. Royal Bvo. 550 pp., price 12s. 6d.
SOUTH AFRICA (with Coloured Map and Illustrations) ;
including Cape Colony, Natal, the Diamond Fields, Orange Free State, &c.,
3rd Edition, revised and enlarged. Crown Bvo. limp cloth, 576 pp., price ss.
THE. TRANSVAAL (with Map); containing information on the
Political, Physical, Commercial, and Social Aspects of the Colony. Crown Bvo.
limp cloth, price 2s. 6 d.
ON TREK IN THE TRANSVAAL (with Map). By
Harriett A. Roche. Crown Bvo. 367 pp., cloth, price 3s. 6 d.
CANADA ; including Ontario, North-West Territory, Manitoba,
Quebec, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, British
Columbia, &c. With New Coloured Map. Cloth, ss.
THE POCKET DOCTOR I for the Traveller and Colonist,
By Harry Leach, M.R.C.P. With Seasons’-Chart of the World. 2nd Edition,
limp cloth, price 3s.
THE KEY TO FORTUNE IN NEW LANDS. Limp
cloth, price Is. 6 d.
IMPERIAL FEDERATION. By Fredk. Young. Small 4to
handsomely bound, 6s.
THE CULTIVATION OP LIBERIAN COFFEE IN
THE WEST INDIES. By Dr. H. A. A. Nicholls, price Is.
pocket-book: series? containing all the practical infor-
mation the voyager requires for guidance in taking his passage, securing his berth,
getting his outfit, and embarking, points of interest en route , &c
l. WEST INDIES ; two books, (a) Leeward and Windward Islands, and
Trinidad, with Coloured Seasons'-Chart of the World, &c.; ss.
( b ) Jamaica, Hayti, Cuba, the Bahamas, &c., with Seasons’-Chart,
as No. X ; pirice ss.
_____ 2, SOUTH AFRICCA, with Sheet of Sketches of Cape Scenery, &c., price ss.
THE UNION OIF THE VARIOUS PORTIONS OF
BRITISH SOUTH AIFRICA. By Sir Bartle E. Frere, Bart., G.C.8., G.C.5.1.,
D.C.L. Price Is.
THE FUTURE OIF THE DOMINION OF CANADA.
Sir A. Galt, G.C.MI.G., High Commissioner of Canada, price Is.
THE STATISTICS! OF THE INDIAN EMPIRE. By
Sir Richard Temple, IK.C.S.L, C.1.E., D.C.L., price Is.
THE LEEWARD ISLANDS, Past and Present. By the
Hon. T. B. H. Berkeleey, C.M.G., price Is.
S. W. SILVER & Co.’s COLONIAL MAPS (Is. each) of
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND CANADA SOUTH AFRICA
SEASONS’-CHART CDF THE WORLD, &c.
‘ JEPPE’S MAP OF THE TRANSVAAL AND SUR-
ROUNDING DISTRHCTS.’ With Index to 2,000 Districts, Towns, Rivers,.
Mountains, &c. Sheett, 23 in. by 22 in., ss.
S. W. SILVER .& CO., Sun Court, Cornhill, London.
THE COLONIES AND INDIA.-—Published every Friday Evening,
16 pp., price 3d. Contaiins leading Articles on Colonial Questions; News Summaries
from Australia, New Ziealand, South Africa, Canada, India, Ceylon, West Indies;
Home and Foreign Inteelligence, Enquiries and Answers, &c. Subscription, 3s. 9 d.
per Quarter ; 14s. 6d. peer Annum, post paid.
Publishing and Advertisement Offices, 67, Cornhill, E.C,


