

TH fl2.ua 0
CHRISTIAN LIMITS
TO THE DESIRE OF WEALTH, AND THE
CHRISTIAN WAY OF USING IT.
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS,
COLLINS STREET EAST.
lByi.




A SEEMON.
“ Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust
doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: hut lay up for
yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt,
and where thieves do not break through nor steal: for where your treasure
is, there will your heart be also.” — Matt. vi. 19—21.
It is a dangerous, and indeed a completely wrong
and unwarrantable thing to attempt to extract from any
one text a perfect philosophy of life; a universal and
adequate rule of duty. It cannot be done : and the Bible
was certainly not given us for such a purpose. Perhaps a
more frequent selection by ministers of larger passages
would prevent the mischievous as well as superstitious
construction which is apt to be put on the use of single
verses or clauses of verses, as headings for Christian dis-
courses. The truest things that have ever been said in
words, require to be put into right relation to other true
things ; otherwise, consequences detrimental to religion and
morality may ensue. The full law of God and rule for man
as contained in Scripture, is to be taken from the whole of
Scripture. The doctrine of Christ is the sum of all that
Christ taught, connected and arranged with the most
important truths at the centre, and other less important
truths radiating from these, each in its own direction, and
properly limited by the others.
Scarcely any man who wishes to make his Christian
teaching practical, will doubt or dispute the correctness of


this general principle. We see the importance of acknow-
ledging it, and perhaps also the difficulty of wisely applying
it, in the case of such a memorable saying as that which
forms my text. Glancing comprehensively over the arrange-
ments of society on the one hand, and over the different
precepts of the ethical teaching of Christ on the other, a
reasonable man might make, I think, a twofold complaint as
to the treatment which this text has received in the past,
and receives very much even at the present hour.
It has been expounded in the first place as an isolated
maxim away from a general view of the Christian system,
and of the bearing of religion upon life ; and under this
treatment, it has had the effect of introducing an apparently
fatal antagonism between the teaching of Christ, and the
very idea of social existence. I dare say carelessness or
exaggeration in this direction has been the fault chiefly of
preachers. Of course, if it is in Christ’s judgment absolutely
wrong to possess wealth or to engage in lucrative occupa-
tion, there is no possibility of reconciling such a religion to
the necessities of society, for human beings cannot live
together in a higher condition than barbarism, without
occasion inevitably arising for the production of wealth and
the division of society into rich and poor.
A strong declamatory enforcement of the precept of the
text without due regard to the general scope of Gospel
teaching, might therefore, very readily furnish a practical
worldly-minded man with a plausible excuse for setting
Christianity aside altogether, as utterly inapplicable to the
real existing state of human society.
On the other hand, have we not some reason to complain
that if this text has occasionally been used so as to encourage
a fanatical and exaggerated conception of spiritual religion,
it has been more frequently treated with quiet neglect—
assumed to have some lofty transcendental meaning which a


few pious devotees might usefully busy themselves with study-
ing, but was never designed to affect our practical estimate
either of the value of wealth or the right use of it ? Have
we not been content to pass upon it some such commentary
as : “No doubt our Lord means to discourage covetousness,
and that selfish love of gain at all hazards which induces
some men to commit injustice and fraud. But, further than
as a warning against thorough-paced worldliness and love of
pelf, it has no special reference to common affairs, and
offers no suggestions capable of being carried to any good
effect.”
This is where we think many well-intentioned men, even
Christian men, have done injustice to their Master’s teaching
and to their own best interests.
There is surely something more in this text than a mere
rebuke to the sordid and miserly spirit. Precisely because
it does not stand alone, we think it must mean much more.
Let me remind you, that the life which has been left us as
an example, was certainly not that of a rich man. For our
sakes He became poor. Foxes had holes, the birds of the air
had nests, but the Son of Man had not where to lay his
head. You remember also, how deliberately the Lord
observed, that it was easier for a camel to go through the eye
of a needle, than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of
heaven. You remember how coldly He turned away from the
rich men’s gifts, to praise the poor widow for casting in her
two mites. You remember how little there was against the
rich man in the parable, except that he chose to spend his
money on himself. He was clothed in purple and fine linen,
and fared sumptuously every day. You remember the
severe judgment He pronounces upon the successful husband-
man who, not having enough of room for his inflowing
harvests, very naturally resolved to pull down his barns and
build greater.


I do not think we are warranted, in the face of these
facts, in supposing that the whole extent of Christ’s teaching
about wealth is, that we should not be too anxious about it,
that we should not make the quest of it a bondage and a
tyranny —that we should be content with moderate devotion
to business. Perhaps we may succeed in convincing you
that your Master goes much farther than this, lays down a
very definite and noble theory about it; and yet, that his
teaching might be, and often practically is, followed without
any disastrous or revolutionary consequences whatsoever.
Our subject then is :
I. Christian limits to the desire of wealth.
11. Christian way of using wealth.
1, Now, with regard to the accumulation of wealth, that
is of material possessions, the authority of our blessed Master
must not he abused in the interests of a selfish and sloth-
ful communism. Christianity is nothing, if it is not a
revelation of righteousness. “ Thou lovest righteousness,
and hatest iniquity; therefore God, even thy God, hath
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.”
To remedy what appear the inequalities of social condition
by a mere act of judicial spoliation, taking the honest
•winnings of industry to fill the empty pockets of good-for-
nothing indolence, would be a crime concentrating in itself
at once perfidy, injustice, and folly of the darkest description.
Perfidy, because a belief in the good faith of society must
precede the putting forth of any useful exertion whatever in
the community ; injustice, because what a man has honestly
gained by a skilful use of the gifts of nature, belongs of right
to him and to none else, except by his consent; and folly,
because no authoritative interferences can ever bring to a
position of equality those who are unequally gifted by
nature, and who have a weaker or stronger sense of duty


The Christianity of the new Testament has nothing in
common with such crude social theories, which are drawn up
in ignorant defiance of the real conditions of man’s existence
on earth, and of those great laws of nature which contem-
plate every conceivable end rather than the reduction of
men to a dead level of outward circumstances.
On one occasion, a request in this direction was made to
our Lord. “ Master, speak to my brother that he divide the
inheritance with me.” No answer that ever fell from the
lips of Christ conveyed a sterner or more peremptory refusal:
“ Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you ? ”
Yery early, the attempt of a few enthusiasts to carry out
even a voluntary equality as regards wealth in the church was
abandoned. St. Paul, enforcing with the greatest eloquence
his Master’s view of the subordinate importance of wealth
in the highest view of man’s nature —in view of his heavenly
citizenship—still respects those inevitable arrangements of
nature by which some become rich and some remain poor ;
denounces idleness as worse than infidelity, and discourages
recourse to litigation and legal interferences among Chris-
tians altogether. And so in the revival of a purer Chris-
tianity at the Reformation, when the anabaptist fanatics
surged over Germany, demanding an instant division of
property, Luther, in the name not of Protestantism merely
but of religion and of Christianity, encouraged the Reformers
to take up arms rather than to submit to such a destructive
phrenzy of injustice. Christianity teaches human brother-
hood, but not that leaden equality which would be death to
individual ambition. Christianity inculcates a generous
sympathy towards all distress, especially towards the sorrows
of poverty; but neither arrests the intercourse of life by
setting arbitrary bounds to the creation of wealth, nor
consecrates injustice by allowing the idle and incompetent
man’s right to any share in the profits of ability and


industry. “He that doeth wrong shall receive for the
wrong which he hath done,” “We beseech you brethren
that ye study to be quiet and to do your own business,
and to work with your own hands (as we commanded you),
that ye may walk honestly toward them that are without,
and that ye may have lack of nothing.” “ Labour, working
with your hands the thing which is good.”
2. But here and everywhere our Master teaches us that
the wealth which is perishable is scarcely to he considered
wealth at all, in comparison with that which resists decay.
Unless man be altogether a product of nature, born of dust,
doomed to return to dust, different in no respect from the
fading grass, except in the complexity of his functions and
the greater extent of his power; unless the grave bound
all our hopes, and the dream of one day drawing nearer the
Divine presence be a boyish illusion, and the soul whose
redemption is said to be precious in God’s sight, be only a
Hebrew name for breath ; and all that we mean by religion,
fear of God, self-devotion, disinterested love, faith in the
unseen, hunger for the infinite, thirst for life everlasting; be
no more than the artistic bloom cast by frail man’s ambition
over that conflict of dying phantoms which we call life ;
unless, in fine, there be no Father in Heaven, with no children
upon earth, we are bound to regard inwardness, spirituality,
and permanence as the true measure of the highest good.
I hope no one will understand me to maintain that
material wealth can serve only temporary and fleeting ends.
We shall urge immediately a totally different view. But as
the chief, with many the sole, use of material good is to
gratify the senses, and as the gratification of the senses
must needs afford only a transient pleasure, the charge
against wealth as a fading and therefore an inferior good
remains valid as ever. “ All the labour of man, says the
preacher, is for his mouth, and yet the appetite is not filled.”


How soon the best material possessions lose for us their
charm! The soul is infinite, but very soon the sense is
surfeited. Even beauty, physical beauty, a source of real
and often quite unselfish joy, lasts but for a season, and if
the outward object still retained its charm, our power to
enjoy it passes away, A wise and tried and faithful husband
is better after a few years have passed than the most hand-
some lover; and a loveable, thoughtful, tender wife, and
piously careful mother, is a sterling treasure when all out-
ward beauty has utterly faded away. Moth and rust are
therefore powerful preachers. Even robbery can read its
eloquent lessons.
There is a fair and lovely thing. True : but the tooth
of decay can gnaw it, the waters wear it, the winds pierce it,
the sun wither it, and the great spoiler Death is waiting to
snatch it down to his unlovely kingdom of corruption. Why
should we make such ado about this brittle treasure ? Why
should we think it better to be rich than to be wise, better
to have many acres than many sympathies, better to have
credit with usurers than insight into the ways of God, better
to waste life in the effort to reach what can only cheer the
body, than redeem it by gathering up the treasures of the
soul, honour, truth, faith, righteousness—love to the
Redeemer who died for us, and for the immortal fellow men
whom he died to redeem ? What is it to leave millions of
pounds behind us, if our memory is accursed, if not an eye
would shed a tear for us, if we carry nothing to the eternal
world with us but a starved and hungry and desolate soul,
degraded by its long earthly bondage, smitten with late
remorse for its mad endeavour to pour the wealth of
Jehovah’s goodness into broken cisterns that can hold no
water ?
3. The last and most important remark to be made on
this head is, that a society whose main endeavour is to


amass wealth does not correspond to the Christian ideal.
If any man or any class spends more time and labour in the
conscious pursuit of wealth than in the discovery of truth
and the promotion of righteousness, that man falls below
the Christian standard of living, which is to seek first the
kingdom of God and his righteousness. “ Labour not for
the meat that perisheth, but for that which endureth unto
life everlasting.”
This great truth does not imply that commercial occupa-
tions cannot be warmly and zealously engaged in by a
Christian. The man of business, acting honorably and
purely, is not serving himself alone, he is ministering to an
important part of human well-being ; he is helping to diffuse
and increase the means of subsistence among God’s creatures
everywhere. But there is a line which is not difficult for
any right-minded man to draw, between business as a vehicle
for the development of the general good, and business as an
arena for selfish struggle between dangerous competitors, in
which each of us is to attend simply to his own game, and
let others live or die as the conditions of the struggle may
determine. I most fearlessly and confidently with the Bible
before me affirm, that the man who can consent to turn his
life into a succession of such base and wretched conflicts—
the man who is quite willing to sacrifice his finest powers
for the securing of such a selfish triumph, has yet to learn
the very alphabet of Christianity. The irresistible tide of
events, and the natural talents they possess, will ever draw
a large proportion of men into money-making occupations.
For such, we desire no utopian or impracticable law of duty
prescribed in the sacred name of Christ; but we say, that
to observe in their public life a just, pure, and exalted
morality, which will turn it into a contribution to the
welfare of the race, to subdue their covetous passions so as
to leave them a large overflow of living interest in the


grander and more spiritual aims for which life was given;
to leave out of business hours time for the improvement of
their mind, for genial occupation in I their families, and for
doing service as members of the church, is neither beyond
their power nor at variance even with the material well-
being of society. Certainly, less than this is but a pale
ghost of Christianity. How many of us would be ashamed
to offer Christ so little ! Dear friends, why do we allow
life and circumstance to get the better of us at all ? What
kind of manhood is it to yield to the tug of a blind force,
such as social conventions too often are ? Do you think if
every gifted man in this assembly sat down to reflect upon
his own nature, upon God, and upon the noblest objects of
human desire—he would sketch a scheme of society in
which the majority are not looking much beyond food and
shelter and neighbourly intercourse ? Do you think God
has no better wishes for us than gifted men ? Do you think
that unintelligent submission to the traditions of society
will ever lead us higher at all, not to say improve upon the
Divine plan for us ? Let us make our choice. Let us edify
the soul rather than pamper the body; and let us forget
everything rather than forget to love Christ and those poor
ones whom he warns us never to despise. There is a noble
way of losing sight of a man’s own salvation in eternal
ministries to other kindred souls. Such self-divestment —such
self-burial with Jesus—is a holier thing than much fasting
and many selfish prayers. It is a little echo of God’s great
unselfishness dying away on our rugged and inhospitable
world. It is the engraving of Christ crucified on the soul,
such as yields him again the fruits of his travail. Into the
secret heart of such a glorious self-forgetfulness angels
might desire to look.
11. A remark or two on the second point is all that we
have now time for. There is, as we have seen, a Christian


limit to the desire of wealth. Is there a Christian way of
using it ? It cannot be repeated too often, that our Lord
gave his commands in the form in which they were most
directly practical to those who heard him, and that, in order
to interpret him aright, we of this vastly different time will
often have to sacrifice the form of the command in order to
preserve the spirit.
“ Sell that thou hast and give to the poor, and thou
shall have treasure in heaven, and come follow me.” So
Christ spoke to the rich young man, in perfect seriousness.
One who at that time in the history of men professed
greater anxiety about eternal life, than about the cares of
this world, was too valuable a servant to be spared from the
ministry of the Gospel. For him the absolutely best thing
was at once to disencumber himself of worldly obligations
and ties, and devote himself with unreserved enthusiasm
and zeal to the work of promoting the kingdom. But would
Christ have so spoken to all rich men ? Or does he mean
us in all time to gather wealth that we may simply renounce
the use of it, and immediately proceed to scatter it broadcast
among the needy of the people ? I answer these questions
unhesitatingly in the negative. For a rich man now-a-days
to make a simple distribution of his wealth, and turn beggar-
monk himself, would be an unchristian evasion of the
important responsibilities which wealth brings with it. It
is, as if he should say to God, “ Thou has put this great
power in my hands, but I decline to exercise it. I had
rather get down to the level of the one talent. I shrink
from fulfilling such a solemn trust. Give thy great respon-
sibilities to others, I have not the courage to face them.”
Wealth is one of the many powerful forces which carry on
the work of human civilisation. It is not given that it may
be dropped from a nerveless grasp. It is given that it may
be applied to God’s best purposes, through the instrumentality


of him who owns it. And therefore our wisdom is to dis-
cover the Christian principles which should govern the
expenditure of wealth, not that we may evade, but that we
may fulfil, our God-appointed trust.
1. We make bold to say, that wealth hoarded up to
the day of death is not put to a Christian use. It is simply
withdrawn from the service of God for a whole generation.
The miser sins against political economy. We are not look-
ing at his conduct in that light. But he sins also against the
God who has allowed such wealth to fall into his hands, and
against that human brotherhood for whose benefit it might
have been wisely expended. There are some in whom hoarding
is a simple disease. Their mind has come to find a morbid
joy in adding field to field, acre to acre, house to house. If
they employed any part of their wealth to bring in a return
of simple pleasure, or to give the same to others, they should
feel as if the warm flesh were being stripped from their
bones. We can hardly speak for such. Their soul is under
a slavery from which only the might of God’s grace can set
them free. But others leave their wealth unexpended, in
order that the distribution may not finally rest as a responsi-
bility on them at all. If we pervert the counsel of God to
such, w r e commit a grave error. Yet our conviction is, that
their policy is wrong. Perhaps no man should ever seek to
acquire more wealth than he feels himself able to expend
wisely and well. This is not to sacrifice any in the future
whom he may desire to bless, for that is included in a
Christian expenditure. But let him who has spent so much
power in accumulating, accept all the responsibility of
putting that gathered treasure to the best and highest use.
2. Surely it is also a Christian principle that though a
reasonable expenditure of wealth upon oneself, one’s family,
one’s private circle, is not for a moment to be challenged in
the name of religion, yet that is the most Christian applica-


tion of it to self which most increases our usefulness to
mankind. Wealth may secure education. Education helps
us to bless our fellows. Wealth may enrich and retine our
taste. A man of cultivated taste is a blessing and an ornament
to society. Wealth may widen our sphere of observation, and
enable us to greatly enlarge our knowledge of mankind. The
employment of it for such ends, even though the end should
seem to be selfish, is legitimated by the highest principles
of Christian morality. That which makes me more fit to serve
my country, my church, my generation, is an undoubtedly
good thing. That which enables me to do a higher, a richer, a
more delicate, a more difficult service than I am now doing, is
a good thing. If a judicious use of my wealth can effect such
a result, I am justified before God in so applying what he
has given me. But when so deciding we greatly need the
help of the highest Counsellor. Should not one tremble to
think that he may have confused his own little personal
enjoyments with the grand eternal aims of the kingdom of
Christ ?
3. I say, in conclusion: Honour the Lord with thy sub-
stance, and with the firstfruits of thine increase, by a
generous and sympathetic application of it to aims that are
not personal at all. How numerous are the forms of human
misery! How wearily rests many a head, because the effort
to get a daily crust of bread causes it to ache !
How pitifully the ignorant, the needy, the poor, the
sick, the criminal, appeal to the generosity of those who
have enough and to spare ! They cry us to have mercy
upon them, because to show mercy is divine. Will you not
turn again, my brothers, and hear their cry ? I feel the
responsibility of speaking such things to you at all, because
there are many of you who have both the power to do good,
and the heart to do it, if you knew how.
But I think God’s voice to us is clear. Be sure that you


are doing something to help on the Lord’s battle against
darkness, and degradation, and sin, and death. Be sure
that sometimes an orphan voice has blessed you, and you
have caused the widow’s heart to sing. Be sure that no
great scheme of undoubted philanthropy in which your
Church or your country engages, is left to droop and wither,
because you withhold the sustenance it requires.
Dear friends, let me ask you to deal kindly with our
Church, in her yearly appeal to you on behalf of her missions.
We are not very ambitious. We have but few schemes.
But we could not drop one of them, without insulting our
faith. I pray you to remember that heaven has its garners
as well as earth. And there, it is only the rich in faith who
are rich. There, it is the gold of goodness that shines most
resplendently; there, it is the servant who has found the
most lost sheep on the mountains, and wiped away the
largest, bitterest tears from weeping faces, that shall sit
nearest to the light of the Saviour’s eyes, and hear the
blessed music of that glorified voice which, among all that
burst of heavenly minstrelsy, is as the voice of many waters.
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.


