

Visit to Topos,
AND HOW THE
SCIENCE OF HEREDITY
IS PRACTISED THERE.
- by I* i a
WILLIAM LITTL&
- K
Ballarat:
Berry, Anderson & Co,, Printers, &c., Lydiard Street South.
MDCCCXCYII.




•aapio <n ,P , « v /«
6l i«o-°0 OU K ,?* /
v*°°» « 9AS /\
i sa!rt“» ‘"^ a * "'■ j /
Visit to Topos,
AND HOW THE
SCIENCE OF HEREDITY
IS PRACTISED THERE.
WILLIAM LITTLE.
Ballarat:
Berry, Anderson & Co,, Printers, &c,, Lydiard Street South.
MDCCCXCVII.


CONTENTS.
Psychic Attainments of the Topoi
Pre-natal Teaching
A Nursing Mother’s Influence
A Wedding and a Toast ...
PAGE


Miss? J F
A VISIT TO TOPOS,
AND HOW THE
SCIENCE OF HEREDITY IS PRACTISED
THERE-
The stupendous facts that came within my observation
when I visited Topos, are of such public interest that I
must briefly sketch some sights I witnessed there. It
will shock, I fear, Victorians to learn how rapidly “ New
Age ” opinions, and psychic thought, have borne fruit in
that far away spot.
In that land of Sabbath quiet, new scientific fields of
endless wealth are opened up ; new Ninevehs of ancient
treasure are brought to light; deep shafts are put down, ways
are driven into mystic realms ; and resourceful secrets
of the ancient wonder-worker are pierced even to their
birthplace —the genesis of good and ill. Here> the visions
of the ethic alchemist are realized by his transmuting base,
red-handed greed into compassion—sickness into health
—and shade into sunshine. Here, are transformed the
darksome phantoms of the past into bright realities of the
present. Here, are resuscitated into action the buried


truths of ages. Here, they boldly knock, and wait, at the
sanctum of the Great I Am, whose hands unseen hold
fast the destiny of man. Here, the people have attained
unto the wisdom of the demigods, found their equi-
poise, and all this, too, to some advantage for the Topoi
use their boundless wisdom for the blessing of humanity.
These truth-seekers were the first to awaken from the
world’s hypnotic sleep of ages, and were the first to truly
value the pre-natal hour —of all the hours the greatest.
Therefore, this wise Arcadian community has solved the
old, old problem, how to transform jails, asylums, courts
of law, disease, war, and such blots on the brotherhood of
man, into mere records of a selfish past. This community
was first to lower partitions raised by mis-used wealth,
strength, and advantage of circumstance, and to crush out
hereditable taints ; and to use telepathic powers as in the
days of Scripture. It was the first to rescue dethroned
woman from the state of an exquisite chattlehood —from
being regarded as a living asset, and to raise her to a
splendid, voluntary, motherhood.
Reader, can this strange, strange picture find a
credence in thine eyes ? Thou sayest “ Nay.” Then, as
my word does not suffice, I must have recourse to excerpts
from the Topoi press. It will save me from the charge
of romancing, by unbelieving Thomases.
These clippings, with their rhythmic cadences so
common in the daily speech of that fair land, I have poorly
translated from their native tongue, Hellenic in poetic
strength. By these reprints I will throw upon the
mental screen some thoughts of human possibilities.


THE ANTE-NATAL PERIOD.
[Cutting from The Ckaris newspaper.]
‘‘Our readers are informed that Lady Plasso has
recently returned from foreign parts, to which she
journeyed to view great architectural triumphs, the hoary
pyramids of Gizeh, the temple remains of the Pharaohs,
the cathedral splendours of Seville, St. Peter’s, and
Milan, the ruins at Delhi, and the Taj Mahal at Agra.
Our good lady is to-day an honorary attache of the firm
of architects named Psuche Axioma, and is supervising
the erection of the Great Phren temple, endowing it, by
‘suggestion,’ with a mentality and wide personality all her
own. Her devotion to pre-natal education of the great
unborn is for the nation’s glory. Even now her young
son, Mozart, and her fair daughter, Browning, are
undoubted proofs of the success of her devout decision
to leave the world the richer in Masters of the Arts and
Sciences, than she found it. Lord Plasso —who, by the
way, is titled for his personal merit, and not through the
wealth or service of some dead ancestor —is a real lord,
for he is lord over all his own desires, and not a
slave to licensed and unbridled thoughtlessness, unchecked
by Church or State, regarding reproduction of the human
race, a race so oft typed by unblest, yea, unwelcome
babes. This harmonious pair, in justification of the
great attention they have given these methods, of which
their predecessors were grossly ignorant, or wilfully
indifferent, consider that certainly too much intermediary
care can not be given to the subject of pro-creation of


mankind. To the producing men of purpose, heroes, rulers,
queens, creators —by intense systematic suggestion and
the ante-natal feeding of the smouldering forces of the
expanding soul. This noble pair their willing sacrifice
view as nothing when they sec with prophetic eyes
their children crowned with academic laurels to rule in
lofty walks of life, and view them poised in their vast
spiritual and physical inheritance, towering above the
unendowed, like the Alps above the plain. They hold,
that reproduction of eternal man should have, at least, as
much pre-natal thoughtful care and applied science, as
their ancestors gave to the breeding of Show-yard
cattle, which care, alack, was never extended to the
children.”
THE NURSING PERIOD.
Just as I recovered from the above startling paragraph,
this also caught my eye. “It will rejoice Savants to learn
that Madam Klino yesterday presented this community
with a son of science, a pre-natally taught electrician.
And the ‘ wise men rejoiced with an exceeding great joy ’
that a new electric star had appeared in the scientific sky.
Hardly need we say, the odylic wave-force blest the cheer-
ful mater with a painless parturition. As is her custom,
madam will pursue with diligence her old researches
amid the hidden mysteries of nature’s laboratory, during
the nursing days of baby Klino ; and by still observing
laws of thought-transference, she will convey profound


psychic impressions through nature’s sensitive channels
of communication. These, however, are of quite a secon-
dary import to the immensity of the value of the tutelage
given all through the ante-natal days, corresponding to
the time the potter takes to shape the malleable clay, for
one lesson then is worth a thousand after birth.
“ According to the custom of this home, the physical
and the spiritual will for the first six years have primary
consideration. Thence-forward, with the scholastic life,
there will be awakenings of the latent high ideals so
deeply moulded in the plastic fibre during the ante-natal
and nursing days, and so shall be aroused his sovran
Will, and opened wide to him the gates of Wisdom, and
by the humble trust of madam and her consort in the God
of Wisdom, heavenly aid will be down-brought for the
enriching of the new-born king, with power to hold in
control the earth's masked batteries, the lightning’s flash,
the tempest's roar, commanding them securely like
Hercules the wild fierce steeds of Thracia, O, that the
parents in past centuries had obeyed heredity’s fixed laws,
and had then made a few short sacrifices, had observed
the tremendous creative problem, and had known the
sureness of divine parental birth-gifts and child-endow-
ment, all so easily conferred in the days while the
“ Comer ” is embraced in nature’s arms. Then, by the
process of descent this generation would, like Christ, walk
on the sea, would sing to the good Creator as a
full-throated bird to the morning sun, or from some
Pisgah’s heights view heavenly visions like the old-time
seer and walk with angels like men of former days, and


be in very truth a living Ark of Testimony.
For the past regret is vain. Now it is ours to labor
wisely on, and uproot weeds sown in the days ot selfish-
ness until we regain our paradise. Men and matrons, we
beseech you, do not repeat the licensed sins of connubial
life committed in the days agone, but, rise in will-
power, bring into play your gifts, and stretch upward to
the supremest reach of your splendid divine possibilities?
till you touch the angels’ feet. Let not the birth of genius
come only as an occasional and accidental gift of nature,
but, in God-given wisdom, through the heroism of a
restful purpose, strict obedience to the laws of heredity,
and in the cultivated ‘p ower °f silence, repose, and orderly
thinking,’ dethrone the monster Legalized Marital In-
temperance. Thoughtfully create a life, instinct with
intellectual power and heavenly grace, a life as great in
wisdom, as the regiment of giants of Frederick William I*
were in their ‘heredited’ physique. Yes, parents, think of
it. Create a brilliant life, and, in blessing thus your child,
to all eternity be blessed.”
A WEDDING AND A TOAST.
After I had spent a season of delight with that
transparent and most lovable peoples ever seen, I felt
it was my privilege, indeed, my duty to convey to them
through their public press, my sense of gratitude,
before returning to my native land. Those published
thanks I now reprint :


The Editor The Sophos.
My profoundest sense of indebtedness to this
serene community compels my expression of appreciation,
yea, and astonishment. Permit me, a sojourner from
distant shores, whose golden sands are laved by the
Southern sea, to venture to unveil my feelings, and
imperfectly express them for your publication.
This communication is intended as a tribute to the
heavenly wisdom everywhere apparent in your life and
customs. This surprises me more, as lam from a proudly
moral, and, indeed, a missionary people, one professedly
quite freed from old and gnarled excrescences, and
legacies of forceful times, and yet, alas, my countrymen
still follow slavish habits of a sensuous past.
The Wedding.
The recent marriage at the charming home of my
hitherto unknown relation, whose progenitors detached
themselves long years ago from kith and kin, was truly an
unwordable occasion.
I—accustomed to a churchy style of marrying before a
crowd and priest (and why should not all fathers be priests ?),
to feasting at the marriage banquet ‘looking on the wine
when it is red ’ which forthwith rouses up the beast within —
was unprepared quite for the unique and gladsome
ceremony, the wisdom-teaching and the impassioned
utterances of the sublimest truths.
It was a scene bathed in an “ Upper room ” effulgence,
and illuminated with tongues of fire descending on all present.
For at a time like this ‘ all must be of one mind.’ So that


when the door was closed the immanent Spirit was so evident
that each face shone as Moses on Sinai’s heights.
The guests and happy pair had long prepared themselves,
for this supreme event “by prayer and fasting.” Owing to
the much regretted absence of their loved pastor (who with
angels walks and talks like a seer of old) the father
of the bride presided. All subscribed to legal forms supplied
by the State official. Pauline hands were placed upon the
happy pair, and noble potentialities invoked, the while the
Sacred Chart of life was read.
The Chairman’s ecstasy was evidenced in his address 5
and this reduction of it to writing conveys a poor idea
of his Aaronic eloquence. It wafted me into a world
of peace, sweet flowers, and tenderness. It stirred my
stagnant faith, and was to me the newest vision of earthly
possibilities; love, faith, contentment, worship, truth, supernal
teachings, and the crucifixion of all the carnal self. It
showed how all may realize the psalmist’s words that ‘ Ye are
gods, and all of you are children of the Most High ? ’
The Toast.
The father, on rising, did thus speak : “O, daughter
fair with chaplet crowned, and thou our son, our life,
to your unseen Spirits we speak. The rays of heaven we
invoke on this supreme event —not only one of joy to you,
my friends, but also to the angels coming from beyond the
veil. ’Tis fraught with good or ill to you our two young
wedded ones. Here for you the ways again divide. One
through self-control all leading up to light and love; the
other by the flowery winding steps of indulgence, leading
down to dark and dread.


“The True Marriage. —Our ‘young-eyed’ are not
wedded by these symbolled forms alone. Forget not that
the true marriage is the unification of two loving spirits
living in harmonious connection with God. In this way we
are wedded to the Father, His angels, and all good : for such
lives alone is unity endorsed in heaven, and endeth never.
The harmonious and perfect marriage is the union of spiritual
forces found in the vast ocean of complementaries ; or as
the positive and negative, sentiment and music, love and
intellect. May yours be union in the Christ—the Vine.
May your union be as two dew-drops trembling on the
leaf at eventide, until embracing they are joined into one
wedded life, inseparable. Byron sings :
“ There are two souls of equal flow,
Whose gentle streams so calmly run,
That when they part —they part 1 Oh, no !
They cannot part! These souls are one !
“Yes, all marriages made on earth may in heaven
be endorsed. Such unions can never be divorced. Is
it likely covenants once entered into before the Trinity—The
Judges Three —will be revoked? Shout it right along life’s
path, whom God hath joined together neither man nor
death can separate. Say, God is a God of union, and not of
separation. Heaven’s blest union is a binding of verities ■,
that made on earth alone, of short-lived carnalities. O
joyous day, when all our nuptials will be ratified in that
sweet angels’ home; for heaven on earth will then begin !
“ Hence, to our friend (and here he turns to me) who
travels from his southern home, under the starry cross,
these bridal gifts and ornate symbols round this festive


hall may seem unmeaning. But these portray mysterious
affinities and truths, met oft-times in life’s journey.
“Life-Thoughts. —A few brief thoughts (continuedhe)
may here be offered for some future synthesis and widening
meditation by the younger present. So, without further
preface let me say :—The blessing following a disinterested
act of kindness is the strangest mystery of life. The mind
has a tombstone over many a perished possibility. As
members of the human Commonwealth, we each must work
or suffer. Example is advice engraved. A look is vitalised
thought—a look broke the disciple’s heart. Our lives are
mostly copies. View not your friends from one fixed
eminence. The oil of sacrifice smooths life’s troubled waves.
How many lives are wasted in intentions ? Lose not your
own identity—love not the unreflecting stream. Pray for
the gift to know, and keep a friend. Omnipotent forces of
nature may be our good servants. Ease is stagnation, and
stagnation lost vitality, and that brings on decay. Our
influence is far-reaching —’tis like the note of music waking
up its many sympathetics far and near. The sensitive film
of the mind is ever its snap-shots taking. Impressions of
our childhood penetrate the soul, and there remain, just
like the blase on the sapling, which can never be
effaced, but rather in its years distincter grows. A substance
is a community of atoms. The chair you sit upon is but
congeries of particles united by attraction’s law. Tis said the
doorstep has its myriad trembling molecules enveloped in
their atmospheres, and ‘separated each from each like the stars
and planets.’ Is not the world a concrete thought of God ?
Keep your own path weedless. Doubt is failure’s outpost.


Only sanctified success is good. To be blest believe all is
best. Life’s success is subject to unwritten laws, and blest
is he who reads and keeps them. All along life’s path
good angels are ready to release our captured feet, as once
they did imprisoned Paul and Silas. Motive is the crux of
all our actions. Mirror thine own life from three points of
view—the past, the present, and the future. Man is Spirit
clothed.
“ Sex-Life in Heaven. — A Puritan poet sings, ‘What
if earth be but the shadow of heaven, and things therein
each to the other like, more than on earth is thought.’ Is
not this, too, a beautiful conception of Mrs. Browning’s ?
1 Not a natural flower can grow on earth
Without a flower upon the Spiritual side,
Substantial, archetypal, all aglow
With blossoming causes.’
u Is it not true that the sexes here are living their
eternal life already, and, ’mid the varying winds are
sailing sho'eward, where good men and women will
live together a holy love and praise-life ? The boat of
each is nea ing the shore—soon each deathless Spirit must
step out. A charming thinker writes: ‘ Whatever exists in
nature is rejeated in man, whatever exists in nature may
be discovered under some correspondential form in man.
Sex, love, aid marriage pervade both. The principle of
binary combnation, caused by the attraction of two com-
plementary brms or forces, underlies every object, every fact,
every movenent in the world. Sex is the universal form,
love the uni\ersal force, marriage the universal result. If
man be immortal, why are not his sex, his love, his marriage
eternal.’


“Personal Influence. —By thought or deed, man’s
influence is transmitted through pulsing time, across the
threading stream, away beyond the chant of evening stars.
Again, and many times again, our lives will be reflected into
other lives, like as the oft repeated echo from the Jung Frau
rocks. So what we do or say is sure to be returned—a
smile for a smile, a frown for a frown. Then, too, as it is a
basic law that every particle attracts, or is attracted by some
other particle of matter in the wide universe, so in the
moral world a similar psychic law applies, and hence it is
that man’s influence has its boundless orbit. Man, like the
tiny atom floating in the sunbeam, is wrapped in his own
made atmosphere, —the emanation of his true and inner self,
which impinging upon others, will have good or ill
result. O, that our lives were all sublime, and each would
strive
‘ To make the world within his reach
Somewhat the better for his living,
And gladder for his human speech.’
“It is contended that, ‘thought is a mightier power than
steam or electricity.’ Yet man cannot create an original
or good thought. It must come to him from the Wisdom
that, like the atmosphere, envelopes all mankind. Original
thoughts come to us from the Source by way of the Teaching
Voice which speaks within our consciousness. We, like
Socrates, have our advising angel ever by our side. Is not
the world’s neglect to listen to the ‘ Small Voice ’ a
disastrous loss ? We lend ourselves too easily to enchanting
voices which wreck our lives on barren shores. We
train our ears to hear of gold, wool, and the next dance;


but hardly ever listen to Wisdom’s voice. Good thoughts
blossom like the roses ■, evil deeds are Frankenstein creations,
and dog their maker’s steps. Our lives may be benedictions
or maledictions. Gossamer threads are stretched between
the souls akin, and along them flash the psychic impulse of
the heart, regardless of the space between ?
“ Our echoes roll from soul to soul
And grow forever and forever.”
“ An Interlude—Thought-Transference. —Hark!
Har k ! A far-off earth-voice rings for leave to speak. Let it
be heard. ‘ Dear Friends—l am deputed by this ‘The
Heredity Society of Progress,’ of which I am the favoured
President, to send by thought-wave the sweetest greetings to
the bonny bride and manly bride-groom, both so wise in spirit
lore, and resolute. It is engraved in genealogical archives
how both of them possess designedly transmitted virtues,
and are of Spirit-wise lineage. Then, what splendid history,
what laden legacies may come to posterity from the
union of to-day ! A Social Saviour ? It is God alone can tell.
The nations through aeons of eternity may bless, as we do
now this hour. Adelphos ! ’ (Chairman speaking to the
guests.) ‘ I ask a moment’s quiet while I in your name
respond.’ (An interval of concentration during which the
chairman transmitted the company’s appreciation of the
graceful tribute paid by their far-away kindred Society,)
Chairman—‘This a pleasant interlude now ended, 1 resume.’
“ The science of the higher cerebral psychology, has now
its honoured niche in human temples, where man’s Spirit sits
at the feet of Wisdom, and opens the casement of the grosser
self, and lights up all within, Behind the scenes is Lowell


when he pens—
‘ We see but half the causes of our deeds
Seeking them wholly in the outer life,
And heedless of the enriching Spirit world,
Which, though unseen, is felt and sown in us
All germs of pure and world-wide purpose.’
“ The Sexual in Nature. —May be, every particle
was, or is, a part of the great uni-sexual, or bi-sexual life of
the universe. Certainly, the uni-sexual is universal in several
kingdoms of nature; indeed, so pronouncedly active are sexual
conditions, that among plants the bi-sexual is found
(Monoecian, one-housed), and which, as the name implies,
has male and female flowers on the same individual plant.
Of this class are the birch, hazel, begonia, slinging nettle,
pumpkin and cucumber; also in the lowest forms of animal
life hermaphrodites are found. It seems to me, that from
the smallest particles in nature to the highest forms, a
prevailing creative faculty covers and stirs all into activity.
Gerald Massey true record bears when singing—
‘ The veriest atoms (even as worlds above)
Are bridal chambers of creative love.’
“ Nature tolls the matin and the vesper bells of love,
praise, marriage, and maternity; unerringly points the way
to affinities and duplications awaiting their blest union ; to
marriageable complementaries and correspondences, all
sighing to embrace, and thus satisfy their common impulse.
As Coventry Patmore has it;
‘ Nature with endless being rife,
Parts each thing into ‘ him ’ and ‘ her
And in the arithmetic of life
The smallest unit is a pair.’


“ The birds are in the sunshine singing, and the trees
their evenimg harmonies are ever sighing of the unceasing
nuptialitiess throughout maternal nature. Sings the Latin
poet Claudiian,
“ The gentle boughs together live in love,
The happy trees enamoured intertwine ;
Palm nods to palm ; poplar softly sighs
To poplars ; alders, poplars, pines and all
Whisper their tender passions to each other.’
“HEIREDITY. —Dear Friends, I will in closing touch
upon the ggreatest and most neglected theme in life—the
reproduction of the human race. This is my toast —‘ Here’s
to the memnory of the days of great, great grandsires, happily
deceased - f t the days agone, thank God, when first-class live
stock, doggs, and poultry, had more embryonic anxious
consideratioon than children.’
“ It maatters naught to us that the news be flashed from
pole to polee a mare had foaled —‘ that Gallopen Dee has given
birth to a fobal by Carbine, the famous Australian horse.’ It
matters not that by much thoughtful care the breed of cattle
be improvedd —the frozen poles be mapped—a slaughter-gun
invented—tlhat stocks rise or fall—compared with the wise
reproduction of the human race. To our Australian friend
’tis all important he should know, that deep hereditary, yet,
avoidable disease in white blood corpuscles is increasing in
homes of high and low, is stalking through the land where
blooms the golden wattle, and is eating leisurely away the
vitals of his last-born generation, just as did the tunic-hidden
fox the erring Spartan youth.
“ It is much to you. Sir, that, in your England the
cancer death-rate (said, W, Rogers Williams, F.R.C.S.,


when speaking at the last Annual Meeting of the British
Medical Society) was ‘ more than four times greater than
it used to be half a century ago ; ’ that the death-rate from
that disease fifty years ago ‘was i in 129, now it is 1 in 23
of the total mortality,’ a fact surely of serious import, despite
the greater care shown in the diagnosis of disease in later
years. It is much to you. Sir, that about one in eight of
Eve’s fair sex who dies does so of some tumorous growth,
and which, at least so says ‘ The American Text Book
of Surgery ’ is hereditary! —that about one of every sixty-
five is a consumptive, and many of these clink, clink, the
chains forged by thoughtless Christian parents regardless of
the fact that ‘ tuberculous diseases, which often end in
cancer and insanity ’ are, by self restraint, and wise
selection, largely preventable. Does it not matter that King
Alcohol’s besotted army dares invade your homes, and by its
tainted breath curse future generations ? In other words,
battalions of spectral silent generations, with inherited
taints, unfairly penalise the innocent, and force them to
erect asylums, jails, and homes for poor and sick, as well
as to maintain their fleets and armies, and custodians of life
and property.
“ Hear what Paul Paquin, M.D., V.M., says in his
article, ‘lnherited Wretchedness 5 Should Consumptives
Marry ? ’ ‘We know that a tuberculous mother frequently
transmits a weakened constitution and her malady, some way
or other, directly to her offspring 3 we know that a tubercu-
lous father exerts the same influence to a degree not much
less 3 we know further that to consumptive parents can be
traced a large number of deformities and incurable, pitiable


nervous diseases; we know, too, that to them can be traced
several forms of mental disorders and idiocy; we know, in a
word, that besides the contagion ajter birth , millions of souls
annually depart this world prematurely because of inherited
consumptive tendency from their progenitors, and millions
more drag a miserable, loathsome existence to middle age, or
until they feel that death would be a relief. I am not
guessing; I base the statement on figures. Indeed, the
baneful results of procreation in tuberculous people are not
less marked in the variety of defects, specific ailments, and
puny constitutions than are the results of procreation among
the sufferers of alcoholism and syphilis, and they are incom-
parably more common and more fatal. To give some proof
of the above statements, I submit a few cases selected from
a variety bearing on the subject, presented mostly in tabulated
form at the Congress of Tuberculosis in Paris, 1888. Of a
total of 88 families which had in several generations 1,070
descendents, tuberculosis has been transmitted : From
mother to children in 57 families; from father to children in
21 families; from grandmother to grandchildren in 4 families;
from grandfather to grandchildren in 1 family ; from aunt
to nephews and nieces in 14 families ; from uncle to nephews
and nieces in 7 families. Of 59 families in which tuberculosis
existed, the lesions were in the lungs or glands, or bones or
intestinal organs, or meninges, or in several of these parts,
in 181 cases; there was convulsions, or epilepsy, or eclampsia,
or chorea (St. Vitus’s dance), or paralysis, or idiocy, or
puerperal mania, or somnambulism in 84 cases; 20 had
cancers; 38 had hip disease; 33 had deviations of some
bone or other; 23 had chronic throat diseases; 8 were


dwarfed. And yet how is this terrible affliction considered
by the people? Lightly, flippantly.’
“Joseph Cook divides the channels for hereditary
transmissions into the following: —the direct, reversionah
collateral, co-equal, pre-natal, pre-marital, and initial. The
direct occurs when the child resembles one or both of its
parents —reversional is where the resemblance is to its
grand-parent, called atavism —collateral is where the
resemblance is to an uncle or aunt, or to a relative outside
the direct line of descent—co-equal is the name of that
law by which, in the large average, the numbers of the two
sexes are mysteriously preserved in substantial equality ’ —
pre-marital ‘ is seen when the child of a second or third
marriage resembles the husband in aiprevious marriage’—
pre-natal ‘is observed when good or bad, fortunate or
unfortunate influences, which have powerfully affected
the mother as such, are exhibited as good or bad results
of the greatest importance in the life of the offspring ’ —
initial heredity is, says Joseph Cooke, ‘ probably the
most important form of inheritance except the first,
because this portion of the laws of hereditary descent
turns upon the temporary mood, good or bad, fortunate
or unfortunate, of parents when they beaome such.’
Then, how wide is man’s responsibility ? Each action of his
may ultimate itself in the present, or in an age unborn, by
lifting some weak humanity within the gates of Paradise, or
by whelming him, lost, in dark Avernus.
“ Under the cloak of love, the selfish thousand makes the
million die of broken hearts and loathsomeness. Then, when
will society wake up to its creative possibilities ? When


will it with a sword of Michael clear the ground and
prepare it for a brighter genesis ? Through heaven-sought
strength, a vast race colossal in mind and body, would
possess the land. How slow we are to learn, that Spirit-
force may control all matter —that pain and pleasure are
but mental states —that man’s own Spirit may say to its
own body ‘do this,’ ‘be that,’ and, like the Caliban of
Prospero, it will obey his behests ; for, says the Rev. W. F.
Evans, * let it be remembered that a psychological influence
can affect the physiological action of any organ of the body’
—that Spirit has its myriad telegraphic termini inter-
penetrating all nature, has its countless scouts and agencies
at work, and, as avers H. W. Dresser, ‘man a Spirit is
with a body —not a body with a Spirit.’ Will-force, as a
substitute for medicine, can now be used for many human
ills s—it5 —it comes to stay an anesthetic and therapeutic friend.
The mother, by her directed Will-force, ‘ suggestionand a
continued concentration of all her Spiritual forces , may say to
her unborn—Be a master architect, or a prince of science, a
creator of sweet poesy, astronomer, a royal painter, an
impassioned orator, a philanthropist, or prophet. And be
assured, if the conditions be all wisely set, such will be the
result. Repeat your Emersons, Shakespeares, Macaulays,
Gordons, Wrens, Pitts, Miltons, Keplers, Edisons, and
Wellingtons! Give us the giants of the Grecian type of
intellectuality who lived and accentuated between the
sth and 3rd centuries before the birth of Christ. Then
shone like ‘ jewelled spheres of night ’ the brightest
human stars the world has ever seen within so brief
span 5 the days when men were made, who live


to-day—such Titans as Pericles the statesman ; Apelles the
artist j Xenophon the historian ; Aristotle the philosopher ;
Demosthenes the orator; iEschylus the poet; all these, and
a full score of others of such merit, like a constellation
lighted up the world within those two centuries so pregnant
with brilliancy that dazzles even now.
“ Joseph Cook writes in his work, ‘Heredity,’ ‘lt is
said that the mother of Napoleon read ‘ Plutarch’s Lives ’
and other heroic literature, and that her moods of mind were
transferred to her son. This law, as to the existence of
which all are agreed, is pre-natal heredity.’
“ Search the records and see how that pre-natal impres-
sions, tastes, and studies, produced the muse in Burns, and
Elizabeth Barrett Browning; the love of nature in Charles
Kingsley ; sowed in Flaxman, and Thorwaldsen the sculptor’s
art; transferred to Vandyke and Raphael the painter’s
faculty; imbedded in Mozart, Bach, Beethoven, and Mendels-
sohn the musician’s gift; and, in the ranks of scientists and
men of letters, endowed ‘ the families of Aristotle, Bacon,
Bentham, James Watt, Addison, Thomas Arnold, Hallam,
Macaulay, Seneca, and Madame de Stael.’
“ Says Amory H. Bradford, ‘ln the opinion of those
masters of biological science ’ (Darwin, Spencer, and their
School) ‘ heredity preserves and transmits the physical,
mental, and the moral accumulations of the past, as surely and
manifestly as a parent passes on to his children the fortune
which he has acquired.’ Then, is it too much to
say, that, to be a man-creator is man’s highest and most
solemn act of worship, and is more than gifts of brazen
statues, marble steeples, or asylums for hereditary tainted
mankind ?


“ Ennoble, then, yourselves, by placing woman on
her high maternal throne. Remember she is the maker or
unmaker of homes and nations. Raise her, therefore,
from the degradation to which, in certain ways, she is
subject here as well as in China, Turkey, and the East.
Cast off the “ old man ” of sensuality and be forever free !
Have no offspring of passion, or in drink—but only by a
prayerful choice and after a long moral, mental, and physical
preparedness 5 and so antedate a wise parentage. A self-
restrained man is a Daniel. He goes straight on, avoiding
the crowd’s advice,
“ Do thy duty that is best;
Leave unto thy Lord the rest.”
“ A wanton parent is like the hurtful bacillus, and should
be treated as such. Drawing nearer is an equitable day, in
which a hereditary tainted child, on sure and certain
evidence, will have the legal right to tell his father, that his
capriceful pleasuring —his ‘come let us eat, drink and be
merry ” principles, have proved a tragic failure, and must be
atoned for in this world that, in fact, he must stand
abased beside his child in Justice’s hail, and share the
penalty imposed.
“Examples of Heredity. —We, the Topoi, well
know heredity’s certainty, yet, and for our friend’s enlighten-
ment I will repeat what all should know. Deformity of
mind or body of the ‘ coming one ’ may all too easily be
occasioned by fright or injury, or strange intense desires
within the period of gestation. So, in like manner desires,
beliefs, high aspirations, wise employment, and accomplish-
ment, and all the innate good within us (or that may for the


time being be assumed) may then, by our set purpose and
the grace of God, be enshrined within a child before the
natal hour; and thus may parents, responsible to eternity, on
their offspring bestow the greatest gift on earth, against
which, in value, the Koh-i-noor pales its sparkling lire. That
it is true, that physical and mental causes do affect the
* coming ’ and the living, has been for ages known, Mrs.
G, B. Kirby in her interesting work ‘Transmissions,’
etc., at length gives (what I repeat in brief) an account anent
‘ a coarse and thoroughly commonplace family having in it
a daughter Nellie 19 years old, evidently remarkably superior
both in personal appearance and nature, that it did not seem
possible she could belong to the same family, or have been
born in a shed in Northern Tennessee. The explanation
came from the mother. It is this; A pedlar calls with his
wares which include a little book of lovely green and gold.
She must have that book. Buys it, and finds it is poetry,
‘The Lady of the Lake.’ Soon she forgets the pretty cover,
becomes lost in the beautiful story. She appears to live
with those people by the Lakes in the Mountains —Ellen
Douglas, Malcolm Graeme, Fitz-James and others. She
sees Ellen’s picture in all her occupations whether milking,
cooking, weeding. The memorised poetry becomes part of
the mother’s nature, and of Nelly too, before her birth.
Here the mystery is explained why sweet Nelly is so far
removed from her brothers, and sisters, and their surroundings.’
Dr. Carpenter writes more at large than I extract: ‘ A
mother suddenly sees a window sash fall and crush three of her
infant’s lingers. A few hours after, the corresponding fingers
on the mother’s hand pain, swell, become inflamed, and have


to be lanced.’ That was imagination’s power over matter.
Yet another instance much curtailed ‘A mother witnesses
a terrible combat between her husband and a soldier. She
rushes between them, breaks the soldier’s sword across
her knee. He is seized. The mother takes up her child
from its cradle and amidst her great excitement gives it
natural food. Five minutes later the child dies poisoned,
though previously it was quite well. What originated the
poison? Joseph Cook replies, ‘Under the temporary and
purely mental forces, the blood discs change, and the
secreted food of the infant becomes poisoned.’ Professor
Dalton in his ‘ Human Physiology ’ affirms that various
deformities (before birth) and deficiencies originate in
certain cases from nervous impression, such as disgust, fear
or anger, experienced by the mother. ’ Darwin considers
that ‘ forms of disorder, malformation, and even maiming
are transmissable.’
“ These few of thousands of attested instances should
suffice to warn, or else affright society into compliance
with the laws of sure heredity, and cast aside the degrading
wedlock customs. Reclothe thyself, and deal justly with
posterity. Do for it during pre-natal golden days whatever
you would that your forefathers had, in common fairness
done for you. Says a foremost physician of England,
James Pollock, ‘a child begotten during a time of drunken-
ness early falls a victim either to consumption or to
some deep seated disease of the nervons system,’ and that
‘it is the most hereditable of all diseases.’ Amory H.
Bradford, quotes M. Morel, who says ; ‘ I have never seen the
patient cured of his propensity whose tendency to drink


were derived from the hereditary predisposition given him
by his parents.’
“ I must not, however, be understood to convey the
impression that the intemperance taint, or any other taint,
which exists in a parent will of a certainty re-exist in his
child, but, I do say, that there is imbedded in such a child
a tendency to it, which should be guarded against and
resolutely resisted by that child; and, further, that as a
matter of fact, ‘ No one believes that intemperance itself is
transmissible j but that the physical condition that makes
intemperance easy, and if circumstances favour, almost
inevitable, is transmitted is clearly taught by all students of
this subject ! ’ The same may be said and with greater
vehemence of the half-dozen or more stimulants and
narcotics bought of chemists and used as substitutes for
drink. Notwithstanding these tendencies, the offspring
of vicious generations often ‘ rise to pure and even lofty
character.’ Moreover, ‘no child is condemned because of
the sin of his parents, and though many suffer because of
such sins, yet, the successive generations are quickly taken in
hand by nature, and sooner or later purified from hereditary
taint.’ This thought with its silver lining, suggests to me a
further consideration of it: —
“It is this. Outside these fulminations there remains
for us this other word of comfort whatever our burdens be;
namely, Divine Law, appears to limit the existence of some,
if not all, inherited evils ‘ to the 3rd and 4th generations ’ —
within which time-limit such taints will, if permitted by
environments and self-control , work out their nocuous lives.
The time-limit in the Sinaic warning may possibly yet


be proved a great pathological fact, for certainly some
taints appear to be limited to the four generations named
(Ex. 34, v. 7), ‘ Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, and upon the children’s children unto the 3rd and
4th generations ’ but, inherited goodness endures for
‘thousands of generations ’ for the source of Good is
God ! That high authority, Jonathan Hutchinson, F.R.S.,
L.L.D., says ‘it is clear that the inference from what I
have said that inherited Syphilis cannot pass to the third
generation.’ The same may be said in favor of ‘ the children
or the childrens’ children ’ of a leprose father : so, too, it is
believed that many, if not all taints, would, if permitted,
disappear within the time stated.
“ How much longer must we wait for the Renaissance —
for the fulfilment of Jeremiah’s prophesy (xxxi. 29.30)
‘ In those days they shall say no more, ‘The fathers have
eaten a sour grape, and the children’s teeth are set on edge,’
but everyone shall die for his own iniquity. Every man
that eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge.’
“ While the coming century is young, may there be born
daily, not in cycles, tens of thousands of phenomenally gifted
beings pre-natally endowed, by ‘suggestion,’ and sublime)
intense and systematic thinking. Bountiful, responsive,
nature waits to enrich the world with ‘ gods, Sons of the
Most High ’ —with beings, who, by living the Sermon on
the Mount will put an end to strife and usher in the final
age of love. May this the greatest of all subjects early have
the private, social, political attention it deserves ?
“In thanking you my friends for your patient
hearing of this my long paternal talk at this day’s festive


board, I will conclude with a final emphasis and appeal to man’s
‘ better self ’ ; —Forget not thou hast no more the right
to bring a weakling into life filled with thy lower self—a
replica of thy masked heart, than thou hast the right to send
a rotten ship to sea—to propagate thy species racked with
thirst—to haunt thy child with spectres of thy former sins—
to scatter tares in thy neighbour’s field—to poison his well,
or dynamite his home. Indeed ”
Bang ! I started from my easy chair, rubbed my
sleepy eyes, picked up “ Parental Ethics of the 20th
Century ” which had fallen noisily upon the fender.
Ballarat.
Ufa*
Berry, Anderson & Co., Printers, &c., Lydiard Street, Ballarat,
national
LIBRARY of AUSTRALIA


3
in
1508 01846896
mi in i mi i n in in i mi




A VISIT TO TOPOS.
Bt William Little/^
Under the title, “A Visit to Topos, and Ww
the science of heredity is practised there,”
William Little, an ex mayor of the City, -‘' o! * la
with what he regards as the alI-i«aP or l ;ant
subject of heredity. While much that Mr
Litrie has to say will ha agreed to by many,
some of the ideas are Utopian. The pamphlet
is fanciful and novel in design, and elegant in
diction, some of it being in decidedly rhythmic
prose, and the object is evidently to improve
the race. The personal observations are
strongly supported by quotations from
medical authorities. It has evidently been
a labor of love, and the subject of
thought and research. In producing the
work, Mr Little is complying with an oft-
repeated request, and, with his customary
disinterestedness, is distributing his booklet
free to those interested in the topic. The
writer considers that the subject is the
greatest of the day, and that if the principles
he lays down were put into practical opera,
tion they would in time remove the necessity
for institutions for the poor and sick. “By
strict observance of the laws of heredity,” he
holds that not only would much suffering and
crime be averted, but that every mother has
in her power by her thoughts and conduct to
influence the lives and even the gifts of her
offspring.
As an introduction and approach to the
effects produced by “heredity,” the writer in-
troduces “a wedding and a toast,” under
cover of which the chairman at the feast gives
utterance to some terse and thoughtful senti-
ments. He propounds his views on “ the true
marriage,” saying, “By thought or deed,
man’s influence is transmitted through pulsing
time, across the threading stream, away
beyond the chant of evening stars. Again,
and many times again, onr lives will be re-
flected into other lives, like as the oft repeated
echo from the Jung Frau rocks. So what we
do or say is sure to be returned—-a smile for a
smile, a frown for a frown. Than, too, as it is
a basic law that every particle attracts, or is
attracted by some other particle of matter in
the wide universe, so in the moral world a
similar psychic law applies, and hence it is
that man’s influence has its boundless orbit.”
But the subject near to the writer’s heart is
“ heredity” aud its all-round effects. This is
discussed in clear terms, and brings the
pamphlet to an end. This out-of-the-way
chairman continues on to say—“ To our Aus-
tralian friend ’tis all important he should
know, that deep hereditary, yet avoidable
I disease in white blood corpuscles is increasing
in homes of high and low, is stalking through
the land where blooms the golden wattle, and
is eating leisurely away the vitals of his last-
born generation, just as did the tunic-hidden
fox the erring Spartan youth.”
“It is ranch to you, sir, that in your
England the cancer death-rata (said W. Rogers
Williams, P.E.C.S., when speaking at the last
annual meeting of the British Medical Society)
was ‘ more than four times greater than it
used to be half a century ago;’ that the death-
rate from this disease 50 years ago 4 was 1 in
129, now it is 1 in 23 of the total mortality,’ a
fact surely of serious import, despite the
greater care shown in the diagnosis of disease
in later years. It is much to you, sir, that
about one in eight of Eve’s fair sex who
dies does so of some tumorous growth,
and which, at least so says ‘ The American
Text Book of Surgery’ is hereditary I—that
about one of every 65 is a consumptive, and
many of these clink, clink, the chains forged
by thoughtless Christian parents regardless of
the fact that ‘tuberculous diseases, which
often end in cancer and insanity’ are, by self
restraint, and wise selection, largely prevent-
able, Does it not matter that King Alcohol’s
besotted army dares invade your homes, and
by its tainted breath curse future generations?
In other words, battalions of spectral silent
generations, with inherited taints, unfairly
penalise the innocent, and force them to erect
asylums, gaols, and homes for poor and sick,
as well as to maintain their fleets and armies,
and custodians of life and property.
“I mnst not, however, be understood to
convey the impression that the intemperance
taint, or any other taint, which exists a
parent will of a certainty re exist in his child;
but I do say that there is embedded in such a
child a tendency to it, which should be
guarded against and resolutely resisted by
that child; and, further, that as a matter of
fact, ‘No one believes that intemperance it-
self is transmissible; but that the physical
condition that makes intemperance easy, and
if circumstances favor, almost inevitable, is
transmitted is clearly taught by all students
of the subject ! ”
The chairman closes his speech by _ urging
that the ignoring or disregard of the principles
of heredity is no more excusable than to send
a rotten ship to sea —to haunt a child with
spectres of former sins—to scatter tares in a
neighbor’s field—to poison bis well, or dyna-
mite his house. Indeed”
“Bang! I started from my easy chair,
rubbed my sleepy eyes, picked up 4 Parental
Ethics of the 20th Century’ which had fallen
noisily upon the fender.”
The writer, in this last sentence, appears to
have no hope of this high standard of social
life being attained till may be the coming
century, except, perchance, by the resolute
few. But he hopes that this booklet will
incite the medical profession, men of science,
and of thought, to prosecute a search into the
very depths of the science of heredity. Is it
not better, in every way, to try and prevent
the reproduction of disease, rather than at-
tempt to cure it after its reproduction ? The
British Government is now being urged to in-
M vostigate the causes of the alarming spread of
5 transmittable cancer, and there is no doubt
that the unseen health conditions of society,
■> here and elsewhere, are in some directions
a simply appalling, and demand public and de-
?P'lr(mental atts-'iiion. Mr Little’s courageous
of hut convictions, so purely and
pimply expresae| ( -will assuredly command
■much attention.


‘M TRIP TO TOT'(s”/■
to Topes,” by a/
citizen, comes to us with all s %h?at and
3h> one greets
hat we have
new and
startling ideas—ideas wlilcm one cannot easily
grasp or realise the meaning o£f for the more
one ponders, trutfr’ and reality one
finds in.the tersjjpffort, pj/Cential sentences of
the writer. Tiijfc ione, is so correctly inter-
preted, Aot.tlie individual alone, but the true
comprehMra/db of .one—the union of two
by marnyigeA life of that one is
not for srUPI but for the mutual
j betterment of both, the mutual development
and improvement of their own individual
talents, and, most important, the looking for-
ward to the advancement of the common-
wealth, by begetting healthy children, not
only in physical and developement, but also in
moral and mental tone. How truly, and with
what startling effect, this is pictured in the law
of heredity, which has caused so much mental
worry in past and present ages ! This theory,
which is certainly proved in the cases of the
diseases named, demands strict and exhaustive
enquiry by those scientists in whose provinces
these statistics lie. What encouragement is
here given to consumptives, that the
tendency, and not the disease is in-
herited? May not the alcoholic pause and
consider that he is handing down inherited
tendency to the children which will call for
wonderful self control and determination on
their part to resist ? May not the removal of
these, together with the fact, as depicted, that
we live for the improvement of the human race
as a whole, thus compelling one’s own improve-'
ment, and not for the mere sake of money-
getting, lessen to a very great extent the causes
of lunacy ? The suggestion that every father
may be priest will not meet with approval.
America has, if memory serve, disproved the
wisdom of indiscriminate power to marry, and
it has hardly proved a success in our
own colony. Hypnotism, now acknowledged'
as a powerful force, compels, if one
must keep pace with (the times, th%
cultivation of will-force, and the living of
careful strict lives. “Life thoughts,” which
occupy only a page, to be read carefully, will
! necessitate many a spare moment’s deep
thought of their truth and force, and one feels
■ sorry that they have not been more enlarged,
upon. Mr Little is certainly claiming a deep
debt of gratitude for, what is not a book, but
a skeleton frame-work, upon which everyone
who reads can build up for himself his own
story. It is to be hoped, as is the author’s
evident wish, that all those who have it in
their power to aid in proving or disproving the
statements made will not neglect their duty to
the present and future of mankind. That we can
by experiments in the animal kingdom have
proved the wonderful and striking analfey
existing between the human race and tne
animal. Unfortunately the animal, not
possessing the power to reason, places exnlp-
ments in relation to the will or mind beybnd
comparison. As one can produce the excessive
development of any quality one wishes, why
not, as the author evidently desires, experi-
ment upon ourselves, especially as no harm,
but good, can result, to produce by cultiva-
tion a soil suitable for the growth and de-
velopment of “ a master of arts and sciences.”
It is seldom that a work of this description
can be confidently recommended for general
reading, but “The Visit to Topos” is well
worthy of the closest attention of all, not alone
for the benefit to be gained by the study of its
contents, but also for the novel suggestions
which the author brings forward for the careful
consideration of the thinking public.
