

| F* ' T H E
pHmcprirs sni ®wjjarh$ !
SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
(FIRST SERIES)
A SERIES OE ARTICLES
By ebenezer ward,
being
WRITTEN EXPRESSLY FOB
€\t “Inntl; totrato Iterte” unit u Wnkb\ CjcwitU
AND NOW REPRINTED FROM THOSE JOURNALS.
«*
~ . ADELAIDE:
?BINTED AND PUBLISHED AT THE “ADVERTISER” AND “CHRONICLE’ 1 OFFICE3 *
AND SOLD BY
PLATTS, CORNER OF KING WILLIAM AND BINDLEY STREETS ;
B. S. WIGG, BUNDLE-STREET; W. C. EIGBY, HINDLEY-8TBEET,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
$ Price 2s. 1 MDCCCLXH. .$3




Wmquth anb (Dttjmds
SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
(FIRST SERIES)
By EBENEZER WARD,
/w JA*
' BEING
A SERIES OF ARTICLES
written expressly fob
€l n “Inntl; Mraliau raA “Wnkb\ (djranirlp/'
AND NOW REPRINTED FROM THOSE JOURNALS.
ADELAIDE:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED AT THE “ADVERTISER” AND “CHRONICLE” OFFICES,
AND SOLD BY
PLATTS, CORNER OF KING WILLIAM AND BINDLEY STREETS;
E. S. WIGG, BUNDLE-STREET; IV. C. RIGBY, HINDLEY-BTBEET,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
MDCCCLXII.


ADELAIDE : PRINTED AT THE “ ADVERTISER” AND “ CHRONICLE” OFFICES.


DEDICATED
(by permission)
gts sir tlalg, linicjht
CAPTAIN-GENERAL AND GOVERNOR-IN-CHIEE OE SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
AND VICE-ADMIRAL OF THE SAME.




INTRODUCTION.
When I visited Highercombe and wrote the first of the following
articles I had little or no idea that they would ever be published in their
present form. My intention was simply to fill up as usefully and
profitably as possible, to the journal of whose staff I am a member,
the leisure hours thrust upon me by the temporary cessation of my
duties in the Gallery of the House of Assembly during the recent
Parliamentary recess, but not altogether without the hope that the
dissemination of the information I might obtain would be attended with
some ulterior advantages to the proprietors of the establishments I
expected to visit, and to the Colony generally. My scheme has worked
so well that I am enabled thus to republish the articles, with the
advantages of collation and correction. The little book goes forth
without any pretensions to be considered complete, or scientific, or
indeed as anything more than a reprint of newspaper articles, supple-
mented only by revision, and some trifling annotations.
The fact to which I wish to give especial prominence, in these
brief introductory remarks, is that only a portion of the Vineyards of
the Colony are described in the present series. I think I may, never-
theless, say, with perfect fairness, that descriptions are given of most of
the most important, and of some of the less important of them, having
due regard to age, extent, and quality of produce. There are, however,
several large Vineyards on the southern coast, in the Encounter Bay
district, and others in other parts of the Colony which I hope to be
able to visit and describe during the ensuing summer.
Through the courtesy of Mr. Josiah Boothby, the able Superinten-
dent of the Census for the Province, whose elaborate statistical reports
have frequently called forth eulogiums from our leading statesmen in


both Houses of Parliament, I am enabled to quote the subjoined
extract from his forthcoming Report on the Agricultural Statistics of
the Colony for the year ending March 31st, 1802, and I gladly avail
myself of the privilege because Mr. Boothby’s figures and accompanying
remarks afford the most reliable evidence that can be obtained of the
immense increase in the Vine cultivation and Wine produce of the
Colony. He says:—
“ Vine culture in South Australia has attained such considerable
proportions as to demand particular attention to the statistical facts
elicited upon its position at the present time. The rapid strides which
this source of wealth has made of late years require that these statistics
should be obtained as correctly as possible, and that in future the area
of lands planted as Vineyards, and solely cultivated for wine-making,
should be distinguished from the total area under vines.
“ To ascertain the average produce of Wine per acre of Vineyard,
more minute enquiries must be made than are now instituted, but
until this important branch of industry becomes more distinctive in its
operations, the bare facts connected with the acreage and number of
vines planted and the quantity of Wine made must suffice, the figures
relating to which may, however, be considered as reliable as can be
obtained.
“ The acreage of Vines in March, 1862, is returned as 3,918, against
3,180 acres in the previous year. The number of Vines in bearing was
2,361,574, and 2,386,141 not in bearing—the figures for the previous
season being 1,874,751, and 1,948,510 respectively.
“ The quantity of wine returned as made is that produced in the
season 1860-1, viz : 312,021 gallons, an increase over the previous season
of no less than 129,934 gallons, or 70 per cent, on the quantity made in
the previous year, viz : 182,087 gallons.
“ The weight of grapes sold, or otherwise disposed of by the grower
than in the manufacture of wine, was 23,229 cwt., against 23,398 cwt.
in 1860-1, but it is probable that a large proportion of the grapes so
returned eventually reach the wine-maker.”
South Australia will without doubt become one of the most
important Wine countries of the world. The experiments of the past
twenty years have proved the advantages of its soil and climate, and
enough practical knowledge has been acquired to enable its Vignerons
to guard against the common errors which so frequently produced
discouragement in the earlier days of the Colony. And I venture to
say that the enthusiasm for his business which is shared by every
Vinegrower I have encountered in the Colony will have the effect of


speedily overcoming whatever difficulties remain to impede the general
recognition of the value of South Australian Wines. The attempt to
make good Wine is elevated into the earnest persevering effort to make
a better , and the best. Every cottager who has half a rood of vines in
his garden (and there are few who have not) has all the pride of
ambition as to the quality of his wine, and will grudge no exertion
that will serve his purpose either in the acquirement of knowledge, or
in downright hard work. Mr.Batrick Auld, one of the most persevering
and painstaking Winemakers in the Colony, has recently communicated
to me a discovery—new, at all events, to him —which he considers will
he of great value in the manufacture of wine, especially in obtaining a
more uniform quality than has always, hitherto, been practicable. His
practice, in common with many others, has been to rack off the must
after the first fermentation when the Saccharometer indicated that the
required degree of attenuation had been reached, testing the liquor,
however, in only one portion of the vat. Careful observation has now
taught him that the liquor at the bottom of the vat will at any stage of
the fermentation be less attenuated than nearer the surface, and that,
consequently, if it is racked off into different casks the character and
quality of the wines will not be uniform. To meet this difficulty Mr.
Auld suggests the advisability of having store casks proportioned in
capacity to the quantity of must fermented in each vat. Mr. Joseph
Gilbert, of Pewsey Yale, has kindly furnished me with some interesting
statistics respecting his last vintage showing the specific gravities of his
various musts, the temperature of the fermenting room on given days,
and the temperature of the fermenting must at corresponding periods.
1 have however refrained from publishing them because I am uncertain
by what instrument the degrees were taken, and as there are so many
in use, without this knowledge the figures might mislead. And this
induces me to observe that it is highly desirable the Wine-makers of
the Colony should adopt some instrument—Beaume’s, or any other
generally preferred —as a standard, and then the interchange of
information as to the specific gravities of musts, temperature, &c.,
would be of some practical value.
After all, the subject of paramount importance to the Wine-producer
is the wine trade, and it appears to me the greatest bugbear it has to
contend with at present is the large quantities of young immature wines
annually forced into the market, and of which a large proportion is,


unhappily, retailed to the public. Wine-growers without capital cannot
of course hold their wines until they mature, and the absence of
sufficient cellar room is in some other cases a sufficient preventive.
The consequence is that strong, raw liquors are readily purchased at low
rates, and retailed at a larger profit than would perhaps accrue
immediately from the sale of a better article, and many persons having
tasted such stuff become ever afterwards ahominators of Colonial Wine.
Such a prejudice ought to, and I believe soon will, be entirely discarded.
Some little while ago the East Torrens Wine-Making Company was
formed for the purpose of purchasing grapes or must, and manufacturing
Wine, and more recently still, the South Auldana Company has com-
menced operations with every prospect of success. Mr. Auld has
assumed the management of the Vineyard purchased from him by the
Company, and Mr. H. ISToltenius has succeeded him at the Gilbert Place
cellars. Movements of this kind will not be long without their influence
on the Colonial Wine trade, for on the one hand Companies like the
Auldana will be enabled to withhold their Wines from the market until
they are really fit for consumption, and on the other the establishment
of central depots for the storage or sale of Wines must be a great boon
to Wine-growers whose establishments do not afford such a convenience.
I feel that my acknowledgments are due to the Proprietors of the
Vineyards I have visited for the invariable courtesy they have extended
to me, and I must also express my thanks to the Hon. J. H. Barrow,
of the Advertiser and Chronicle, for his liberality in placing the copy-
right of the articles at my disposal.
E. W.
Magill-road, June 18th, 1862.


THE
VINEYARDS AND ORCHARDS
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
ii
THE EESIDENCE OE 'MTE HDJ>T fi»- M. AT \ TEHiHOUtIB/
Thebe are probably but few South Australians, and but fewer residents in
Adelaide and its vicinity, who have not at some time or another visited the
very interesting district of Highercombe. The ride thither is one of the
prettiest, and the view to be obtained from the summits of its hills one of
the most magnificent to be found in the colony. As the tourist ascends the
winding road which leads towards Highercombe round the first hill after
leaving Hope Valley, some idea may be formed of the grandeur of the
landscape which will be seen to still greater advantage when the highest point
of the ascent is reached. The flat lands at his feet are dotted with patches
of cultivation and farm homesteads.; to the north-west verdant waving crops*
attest the rich soil of the unbroken plain; to the southward the stream of
the Torrens is seen winding its tortuous course, the Heservoir of the Water-
works displays its silver sheen, and the spires of metropolitan edifices close
in the view; to the westward the tall masts of the vessels at the Port give
variety to the picture, and beyond them the waters of the Gulf (we witnessed
the scene at an evening hour) reflect the red rays of the setting sun. The
hills which form the range we were then entering are in themselves objects
of interest and for study. Their “steep frowning glories” challenge
admiration, and the striking dissimilarity of their appearances arrests
attention. Some are almost barren of verdure, and comparatively destitute
of either scrub or trees, with huge boulders and stones covering their
surface. Others are prettily crowned with ferns and wild flowers, and on
some there is an absence of almost everything but succulent feed. To the
right of the road, about two miles from the base of the hills, and nearly 1,500
feet above the level of the sea, a white chase gate gives admission to the
* November, 1861.


domain of the Hon. G. M. Waterhouse (our present Chief Secretary), from
which the district takes its name. To a description of the vineyard and
orchard upon the estate, and of the improvements Mr. Waterhouse has
recently effected, we purpose to address ourselves.
Mr. Waterhouse has about 1,100 acres of land fenced in. None of it is
under corn cultivation, but about 100 acres are laid out as vineyards, orchards,
and gardens. The carriage-drive leading to Mr. Waterhouse’s residence
possesses, in one sense, a most cosmopolitan appearance, for on either side
are trees, shrubs, and flowers of almost every clime. Side by side with
English oaks, elms, sycamores, hollies, thorns (now clothed with the old
May blossom;, laburnums, acacias, and bay trees, are pines in almost endless
variety, lemon, orange, and shaddock trees, bananas, and olives. A dividing
range passes through the centre of the domain, and the waters flow into the
Torrens to the south, and into the Para to the north. The portion of
the vineyard, orchard, and pleasure-garden in the immediate vicinity of
the house was planted eighteen yeirs ago, and altogether comprises 10
acres. The varieties of grapes planted there are the Yerdeilho, the
Riesling, and the Stein, from which the white Highercombe wine is made,
and the Shiraz, the Carbonet, and the Madeira, which yield the red
Highercombe—it being now Mr. Waterhouse’s object to produce only two
kinds of wine, the white, and red Highercombe. The Riesling Mr.
Waterhouse considers a useful grape, producing an excellent hock wine, but
the Shiraz, although a favourite sort, he regards as much better adapted for
mixing than for separate use. The four vintages which Mr. Waterhouse has
gathered, those of 1857-’B-’9 and ’6O, have averaged from 230 to 320 gallons
to the acre. The wine has been all manufactured and bottled off on the
premises. On this old vineyard the vines are evidently planted too closely,
there being no less than 2,700 to the acre, but in the new vineyards Mr.
Waterhouse is now planting this objection will be removed. The vines
there are all planted at six feet by four apart, except the strong growing
kinds, such as the Black Portugal, which are planted at six feet by six. Five
acres of the new vineyards were planted in 1858, and will bear this season.
Owing to the richness and depth of the soil selected for the new vineyard,
trenching was unnecessary, and a deep ploughing was all that was required.
The same remark will apply to an additional 10 acres planted during the
present year, and to another five acres, which is now being prepared. When
the latter is planted it will be seen that Mr. Waterhouse’s vineyards will
altogether comprise 30 acres. In the new vineyard some of the Spanish
varieties, amongst them the Amontillado, are being tried, but at present it is
impossible to say how far they will prove adapted to the hills. Mr.
Waterhouse considers that as yet comparatively little is known as to what
varieties are calculated to thrive best upon these hills. The problem he
thinks is still to be solved, and in laying out his new vineyards he has made
the attainment of that result a very prominent object. His experience
hitherto has proved that it is extremely difficult to secure any yield at all on
the flats at the bottom of the hills in consequence of the frosts, but that at
an elevation of only 10 or 20 feet this risk is entirely removed, it having
been found that on the hill-sides, even at that small elevation, there is not


the slightest liability to frosts. We may mention that in all the vineyards an
eastern aspect has been secured.
The wine-house is immediately adjacent to the new vineyards, and its
situation is marked by a magnificent weeping willow, which was planted
eighteen years ago, and is now of really gigantic dimensions. In the wine-
house two monster casks, each capable of containing 1,000 gallons, arrest
attention. Mr. Waterhouse has ordered another from England to hold 2,000
gallons, believing the advantage derived from such large casks to be that by
securing equal fermentation an equal quality of wine is obtained, whereas
when smaller casks are used, because the fermentation is unequal, the quality
of the wine varies proportionately. Mr. Waterhouse has entirely avoided
loss from wine becoming sour in consequence of an excess of fermentation,
by the use of sulphur in purifying his casks, and by the exercise of care to
keep the vessels always full. It is, however, unnecessary to describe his
process of manufacture, because it is that ordinarily practised, and almost
universally understood. It is worthy of remark that his vintage of 1858
produced a rich porty wine, while that of the succeeding year yielded a wine
closely resembling claret.
There are three detached gardens upon the estate. Two of these are
situated in the teatree swamps, and have been well drained with stones,
and irrigated by means of races supplied from springs. The soil is black, light,
very rich, and of unusual depth. The subsoil is a rich black loam. These
gardens have hitherto been used principally as nursery grounds, but owing
to the peculiar advantages their situation offers for that purpose, Mr. W ater-
house is converting them into orangeries. It has been found that in all the
gullies running north the orange trees are killed by the frosts, but in all the
gullies running south they remain quite uninjured. Mr. Waterhouse
attributes this result to the influence of the warm air from the plains. As an
instance of the rapidity of the growth of the orange trees in these gullies we
may mention that some of them have in one year added seven feet to their
height. A number of trees that have been transplanted from the gullies
opening to the north are shooting vigorously, and are now full of promise of
future strength. We understand that tea made from the tree that grows wild
in these swamps, and from which they take their name, was formerly used by
the laborers in the vicinity, and, although perhaps not equal to Souchong,
it was pronounced extremely palatable. In the other garden in the swamps
every species of vegetation is wonderfully prolific. Some Indian bananas are
growing in great luxuriance, but their fruit does not ripen here. W ithin a
very few square feet some striking contrasts are presented. There are
English and tropical shrubs, fruits, and flowers, growing side by side, and all
flourishing as well as in their native soils. Almost indiscriminately are
associated bananas and the common English blackbei’ry, oranges, black
currants, cherries, fuschias, daisies, the old English box, aloes, Chinese
oranges, loquats, and other tropical plants. In the garden nearer the house
there are some splendid specimens of the Moreton Bay fig-tree, and one of
the English bay-tree exceeding 30 feet in height. There are also some olive
trees just commencing to bear. In the ornamental portion of the garden
there is a magnificent Eeodara cedar, a native of the Himalayas, which for


the beauty and elegance of its appearance excels almost every other variety
of the pine. The beautiful foliage of the American ash is also seen to great
advantage, and a lake at the bottom of the garden, well stocked with the
fresh water cray-fish, is bordered with a number of luxuriant weeping willows.
To the right of the lake are English oaks, lime-trees and elms. One of the
oaks bears the inscription of “ Sir Richard,” in boldly and well carved letters,
but the self-assigned task which His Excellency* commenced he has left
unfinished. In the same vicinity there is a specimen of the cork oak, from
the bark of which tree corks are manufactured, and some evergreen oaks
are flourishing in health and beauty. Mr. Waterhouse thinks the last named
tree would generally do well in the colony, as in Florence, with a similar
climate, it grows vigorously. Another object of interest is a large Norfolk
Island pine, which some years ago was struck by lightning and is now sending
forth new shoots. There are some offshoots of cultivation in the gullies
abutting on the garden, and curiously constructed walks in different directions
lead to some of the prettiest and most romantic spots that can be imagined.
In another portion of the garden some of the young oaks have been eaten
down by opossums which abound on the estate and are generally very
destructive. There is a specimen of the stone pine, a native of Italy, which
it would appear is hardly appreciated in this colony as it deserves to be, for
in Italy the nut yielded by this tree is regularly used for dessert, and its
flavor is pronounced to be very palatable ancl delicate.
In concluding our notice, we must devote a word or two to the orchard.
Here there are about 1,800 apple trees, 500 large orange trees, 500 pear
trees, and an immense number of cherry, apricot, plum, walnut, and chestnut
trees, besides filberts and Barcelonas in the hazel groves. Adjacent to the
house there is an apiary, to which great care is devoted.
Jftlhrfofa,
COMPRISING- THE RESIDENCES OE MR. AUGUSTINE STOW, THE RET.
v . T. Q. STOW, AND THE HON. R. I. STOW. >
The village of Payneham is near enough to Adelaide to be familiar even tor
the most unpretending tourist beyond the city boundaries. The locale
being quite within the compass of the pedestrian, and the way thereto as
inviting as the most exacting lover of Nature could desire, it would be
indeed surprising if there were many of our citizens who had not profited by
some opportunity to visit it.
Felixstow, the domain of the Stows—a name that has already become as a
household word in South Australia —is situate to the left of the road from
• Sir Richard Graves Mac Donnell, K.C.B.


Adelaide, on the banks of the Torrens, about half a mile beyond the village,
and not far from the German hamlet of Klemzig. The bearing vineyard
upon the estate is the property of Mr. Augustine Stow, Although of com-
paratively limited extent, it possesses more than one feature which entitles it
to a prominent position amongst the vineyards of the colony. Its rich soil,
the facilities it presents for irrigation, its hitherto prolific yields, and the
advantage that has resulted from the application of manure in some portions
of it, combine to attach more than ordinary interest to the place.
The first planting was done in 1852, when 4| acres were put in. The sorts
selected were the Shiraz, Yerdeilho, the Tokay, and the Carbonet. The
culture of the latter sort in this vineyard has since been found so far
unprofitable that the vines have been grafted with the Mataro and Grenache,
and are now coming into full bearing from these grafts. At the east end of
the vineyard the soil is particularly rich, and the vines have flourished so
vigorously that trellissing has been found absolutely necessary. The soil
throughout varies from a black to a brown loam of good depth, with a
limestone subsoil, but the limestones are very small. The depth and
looseness of the soil rendered trenching unnecessary, and when the vineyard
was planted the ground was only double ploughed. In one or two instances
where gaps occurred in the rows, they have been filled up by carrying layers
from the adjoining vine and “ dipping” them in the ground. Almost all have
borne the first year, and one of these layers is dipped 12 feet from the stock
—a remarkable instance of the rapidity with which vines will sometimes
make wood. Another portion of the vineyard, where some of the vines were
hardly worth gathering two years ago, has been since manured with stable
dung and the refuse of the tvine press. The result was speedily apparent,
and last season the vines thus treated, which were almost worthless before.
yielded an excellent crop.
To the 4| acres we have spoken of, Mr. Stow has added 2| acres more, on
which some of the vines were planted in 1859, and others in 1860. The sorts
chosen for this piece are the Black Portugal, the Mataro, and the Dolcetto,
which produces a light red wine that is coming rapidly into favour.
The only white wine Mr, Stow makes now is from the Yerdeilho alone.
In 1858 the produce of this vine averaged 800 gallons to the acre, and at
20 months old it was sold at seven shillings per gallon. Formerly Mr. Stow
made one other kind of pure wine, the Shiraz —but he has discontinued
doing so, as this kind of grape is better adapted for mixing. His last vintage
was confined to a mixed red wine and the Yerdeilho. We ought not to
omit to mention that amongst the vines is the Zante currant. The fruit, we
are informed, is very much preferred to the currants ordinarily sold.
Mr. Stow has also an orangery, to which a few remarks must be devoted.
In 1854, about 200 orange trees were planted at 15 feet apart, but owing
to the dry summer which followed, they made but little progress until the
following year, and are only now coming into full bearing. At various
times since 1854, about 250 other trees have been planted successfully ; and
last year, out of 100 that were grafted, only five missed. Some of the trees
planted in 1854 exceed 12 feet in height, and there is a great show of fruit on
many. The vigorous and healthy appearance the trees present is in a great


measure owing to the irrigation Mr. Stow has found easy means of applying.
A creek runs through the western portion of his grounds to the Torrens.
This has been diverted from its original tortuous course and straightened, the
bends being filled up with good soil to the depth of from five to six feet. On
the southern side, at the highest point of elevation, a dam has been constructed
which is easily filled from the creek in the winter and spring seasons. By
means of races communicating with the dam and intersecting the orange
ground, all the trees can be watered at pleasure. But this is not all. An
appliance is at hand, by means of which the trees can be nourished with
moisture, even when the creek is dry. A wind-pump at the river side raises
any required amount of water from the Torrens, and it is conveyed to the
orange ground by deal guttering, and carried from tree to tree by ordinary
races. By this process Mr. Stow can keep all his trees growing vigorously
during the driest months of summer. The value of irrigation for all crops
in a country like this cannot be to highly estimated; and certainly where the
simple and inexpensive means we have described are available, they ought
always to be applied. Almost in the centre of the orangery there is a small
patch where the trees have never grown, although all around it others are
flourishing vigorously. Examination has proved that on this patch there is a
vein of stiffer and more retentive subsoil.
Adjacent to Mr. Stows orangery and vineyard is a ten-acre block belonging
to the Hon. R. I. Stow and Mr. Wycliffe Stow, on eight and a-half acres of
which vines have been planted this year. The ground was double-ploughed
only, trenching being unnecessary, as in the older vineyard, because of the
depth and looseness of the soil. The sorts planted here are the Yerdeilho,
the Dolcetto, the Mataro, the Black Portugal, and the Shiraz. Nearer to the
river the Rev. T. Q. Stow has about four acres of garden and orchard
adjoining his own residence. There are a few vines of greater age, we believe,
than those in Mr. A. Stow’s vineyard. Apple, pear, and apricot trees are
abundant in the orchard, and present every indication of bearing largely.
One of the apple trees measures no less than 30 feet from bough to bough,
its age being about 16 years. There are also a large number of olive trees.
On the Swan River the Italians and Spaniards who have settled there are
cultivating the olive tree with success, and they practise a simple but
efficient process of manufacturing the oil. It is much to be desired that
some equally economical process should be devised in this colony, as the
olive-trees in Mr. Stow’s garden and in many other places abundantly
testify to the suitability of the soil and climate of South Australia for the
growth of this really beautiful and, in other countries, profitable tree.
Before closing these remarks, we have one other object of interest to allude
to, viz., the remains of a gumtree standing close to Mr. Stow’s residence,
which, even in its decay, commands respect. The trunk has been completely
gutted by fires, but its gigantic proportions have not yet yielded to the
vicissitudes of time. In its days of vigor and verdure it must have been a
magnificent specimen of its class. For years to come may it remain to shelter
the abode of the venerable and revered gentleman whose career of usefulness
and honor has merged into fitting peacefulness beneath the shadow of its
branches.


moon Jfarnt,
THE RESIDENCE OE MR. A. H. DAVIS. * t /
There is very little in the immediate vicinity of the road from Adelaide to
the Reedbeda to awaken the admiration of a lover of the picturesque. Post
and rail fences enclosing grazing and cultivated paddocks, with a few
scattered houses of every imaginable material, from stone to mud, comprise
almost all that is to be seen for the first few miles. “ Lockleys,” the estate
and residence of Mr. C. B. Fisher, situate on the right of the road, about
four miles from Adelaide, presents the first and a most welcome relief to the
sameness of the plains. Here the majestic-looking trees, both English and
Colonial, the tastefully laid out shrubbery, the well-bred stock depasturing
on the extensive paddocks, and the long range of substantial and roomy
stabling, where repose some of the noblest scions of the best blood of the
Knowsley and other equally famed studs—all these recall memories of old
English sportsmen’s homes, and justify the anticipation that the yeomanry
of Australia will be entitled to rank with the proudest of those who derive
wealth and enjoyment from the broad lands of the old country.
Beyond Mr. Fisher’s estate the country has in places a more English
appearance—green hedge-rows and rustic cottages enlivening the scene.
Hear to Mr. Davis’s the scenery is very pretty, and a beautiful view of the
hills is obtainable, whilst the immediate neighbourhood of Moore Farm is
much improved by two picturesque bridges over the Torrens, built by
private subscription, supplemented by a grant from Government. These
bridges cost about £6OO, and lead, one to the beach and the other to the Port.
Mr. Davis’s residence is on the left of the road, and on the right is the oldest
portion of his vineyard and the orchard. The other portion and the dairy
paddock adjoins the house. The fact that the major extent of Mr. Davis’s
vineyard and orchard has been planted upwards of 20 years, invests it with
more than ordinary interest, because it affords evidence of the value the
gardens of the colony may attain in their maturity. There is, however, less
to write about than in places where cultivation and production are still
experiments, because here everything is so matured, and of such even
excellence, that one descriptive remark will almost suffice for all. During a
recent ramble through the grounds we noted the most prominent objects of
interest, but the fact that our opportunities for observation were somewhat
curtailed by the burning sun and stinging mosquitoes, must be our apology if
some matters of detail escaped our ken.
The older portion of the vineyard is bounded on the west and south by a
stately row of towering aloes ; and the north side of the orchard adjoining this
vineyard abuts on the river Torrens. Commencing our stroll by the banks
of the river the first object which arrested our attention was a magnificent
elder tree. Beyond this avenues of Bigareau, Black-heart, and White-heart
cherries densely hung with fruit,* speak volumes for the richness of the
soil. Adjacent to them are a number of fig trees, including the Turkey fig.
* December, 1861.


as well as the common species. Other fruit trees, such as the peach, apricot,
plums of various kinds, damson and green-gage, are here in large numbers, all
in perfect health and presenting indications of prolific yields. To the east
of the vineyard there are two extensive plantations of pear, apple, and quinze
trees, and soft-shell almonds. There are also some splendid mulberry trees,
which came into full bearing at the unsually early age of six years, At this
portion of the orchard Mr. Davis has had resource to a valuable artificial aid
which will in time add largely to the bearing capabilities of the trees. A
well has been sunk close to the river 35 feet deep, and in this there is 20 feet
depth of water. A double action pump has been erected, and this worked
by one horse will raise 2,000 gallons of water per hour. Communicating
with the pump, galvanized iron pipes have been laid along the surface of the
orchard, and the trees and shrubs are irrigated at pleasure by means of hose
and hand pipes. This irrigation was not commenced until August 1861, but
the beneficial effect of the moisture thus supplied is already apparent on
many of the trees. Mr. Davis states that in former years in the wet seasons
his garden was almost continually flooded several times in the year, and it
was necessary to devise means for carrying off the surplus water. But now,
owing to the increased area of ploughed land on the hills, even with the same
amount of rainfall the floods do not occur. The water which formerly
poured down the hill-sides and overflowed the banks of the Torrens is
absorbed in the higher lying ploughed lands almost as fast as it falls. Nor
is this all. The cloud water is also attracted by the ploughed land on the
hills, and but comparatively little of this beneficial atmospheric influence is
experienced on the plains near the Seedbeds. There is little doubt that
newly turned soil does attract moisture, and it is probably owing to this
circumstance that the climate of Australia generally has within the last few
years become much more moist than it was wont to be. At the north-
eastern extremity of the orchard we were shown the spot where about
fourteen years ago, during a more than ordinarily heavy flood, the Torrens
burst its banks and forced a new channel for its waters from this point to the
Bay. We must not omit to mention one characteristic of Mr. Davis’s
gardening, although we by no means think it a special, and are not sure it is
an unwise one. It is that he allows weeds to grow without let or hindrance,
for the simple, and, if it can be substantiated, sufficient reason that he
considers the cost of removing them exceeds the value of the benefit
attained thereby. The principle is, making it an orchard and not a garden.
Whether the proposition is good or bad will bear argument. There can be
no doubt that with the present price of labour hand-weeding is a too expensive
process, and we are not sure whether, where only large trees are growing, the
absorption of the goodness of the soil by a heavy crop of weeds is not
counterbalanced by the valuable shade their foliage affords. Besides the
trees we have already mentioned, we observed in the orchard a cork elm,
thriving well, and a date palm (Phoenix Sylvestris), which has borne fruit two
or three times, although, as this is a female tree, and stands solitary, the fruit
is not perfect; the tree is now coming into bloom.
We come now to the vineyard. The whole extent of the vineyard and
orchard is about 25 acres. _Of this extent five acres were planted in 1839


and 1840, and the chief portion of the remainder in the intervening years
up to 1850 ; the original portion was gradually added to year by year. In
the older portion of the vineyard there are a large number of table vines.
Most of these are trelissed on wooden frames nearly eight feet high, and are
about 17 years old. They consist principally of Muscat of Alexandria, and
the Chrystal. There is also a collection of various sorts originally obtained
by Mr. Davis from Sydney. Of the wine grapes in the original vineyard
there are Shiraz, Yerdeilho, Frontignac, and G-ouais. In the younger
portion of the vineyard on the other side of the road the sorts are almost
entirely Shiraz and Yerdeilho. The latter are planted in rows 12 feet by
4, with the view of enabling the space between the rows to be ploughed
periodically to keep down the weeds. Mr. Davis, however, asserts that he
would never again plant any sorts closer than 7 feet by 7, which in his
garden, owing to the richness of the soil and the luxuriant growth of the
vines, he computes as equivalent to 6 feet by 4 on the hills. Mr. Davis
confines his manufacture of wine chiefly to two sorts—Moore Farm Red
from Shiraz alone, and the Moore Farm White, from the Yerdeilho unmixed.
Samples of his Shiraz vintages 1858, *59, ’6O, and of the Yerdeilho vintage
of 1858, were selected by the Wine Committee for transmission to the
Exhibition of all Nations. Those which we tasted were of excellent quality.
The Shiraz vintage of last season is a full-bodied fruity wine, and will no
doubt be excellent when matured. By Baume’s saccharometer the must of
the Yerdeilho of last season averaged 19 deg., and the Shiraz 18 deg. In
the year preceding the Yerdeilho averaged 21. The usual average of the
Yerdeilho is 161, and the Shiraz 15. Mr. Davis estimates the average yield
of his vineyard at two gallons to every three Shiraz vines, and one gallon
of Yerdeilho to from two to three vines.
The whole of the vines were planted in deeply ploughed soil, but no
trenching, manuring, or irrigating has been done in the vineyard. The soil
is alluvial, and of great depth—in some places there is a rotten limestone
subsoil, at about nine feet. Mr. Davis has done very little with orange trees,
many that he planted having failed ; but there are, in the orchard, a number
of lemon trees —and a purple guava, a West Indian tree, the fruit of which
resembles the strawberry in flavour, and the damson in appearance.
Mr. Davis’s orchards are well known for their supply of material for
preserves, and a very large proportion of the produce is yearly manufactured
into jam.
®jjt Cliiititbair iiiitprb,
■1 / THE RESIDENCE OP MR. EDWARD .H)HN PEAKE. /
. / AJ. -f **
The township of adjoining which is situate the Clarendon
Vineyard, is probably unknown, except by name, to many of our colonists.
B\ s s


Truth to say the roads by which it is approached are sufficient to deter a
tourist who has no very pressing business there from completing a
pilgrimage to its really picturesque locality, and it scarcely requires the
penetration of a seer to convince the beholder that the present limited
population and somewhat oppressive quietness of Clarendon must be
attributed mainly to the difficulty of gaining access to its vicinity. The
most practicable route from the metropolis at present is to travel the Great
South-road to about half-a-mile beyond the summit of Tapley’s Hill, and
then diverging from the main road on the left to follow a bush track across
the ranges. On this track cuttings have been made at intervals, and the
steepness of some of the ascents reduced, but the eight miles intervening
between the South-road and Clarendon will most assuredly weary the
patience of any ordinary rider, and tax the endurance of his steed. Such at
least was our experience the other day, and when we arrived at Clarendon
we most heartily appreciated Mr. Peake’s assurance that in a few weeks a
more direct and much better road would be opened to the metropolis. When
that is accomplished we have no doubt many persons will avail themselves of
the opportunity to become better acquainted with the advantages Clarendon
possesses, which, we think, are sufficient to render it a desirable site for the
formation of a large inland township.
The Clarendon Vineyard is immediately adjacent to, if it does not
form a portion of, the present township. It is situated at an elevation of
from 700 to 800 feet above the level of the sea, on the first dip of the
Clarendon range towards the Onkaparinga river. Mr. Peake’s residence
and cellars are built on the north-east slope of the first hill, overlooking the
township, about 200 feet above the level of the river. The view from this
point is peculiarly attractive. To the eastward the Onkaparinga presents a
comparatively broad sheet of water, overhung with projecting crags rising
nearly 200 feet above its level. Beyond these crags is seen a pretty white
bridge, on laminated arches, spanning the river on the main route to the
Goolwa. At the foot of the hill are the few scattered residences of the
townsfolk, and on the slopes of the opposite ranges patches of cultivation
contrast with the rugged and. undisturbed wilderness of nature. To the
south the first vineyard hill towers high above surrounding objects, and
appears, as it truly is, a gigantic pyramid of verdure. Its slopes and summit
are clothed with luxuriant vines, and their dense and verdant foliage is
unbroken by one barren spot, and unvaried by one foreign plant.
The aspect of the vineyard ranges from north-east to north-east by
east, to east north-east. The lowest slope of the hill on which vines are
planted is fully 200 feet above the level of the river, and is thus beyond the
reach of frost, from which none of the vines upon it have ever suffered. The
first planting was done more than 12 years ago, at which period four and
a-half acres were put in on the face of the hill, which rises 250 feet above
the slope on which the homestead stands. To the north the hill ierminates
abruptly, with a fall to the N.N.W., and to the south it trends gradually
until it becomes a comparative flat, with a short face to the south-east, and
wfith a gradual slope W.S.W., to a gully which partly separates it from the
adjoining and second vineyard hill. The course of the gully is from the


south to a point or two east of south towards the Onkaparinga, and from it
the second hill (chiefly planted four seasons ago) takes its rise to a continuous
and regular elevation of nearly 300 feet.
The vines originally planted were imported from Spain, and comprise the
Pedro Ximenes, Palo-mino-blanco, Temprana, Doradilla, Mantua, Castellano,
and some other white varieties whose names were lost in transition and have
not been identified, while of the purple sorts there were the Molar Negro, and
Ferastes Colora. Mr. Peake has since planted Shiraz, Malbec, Carbonet,
Mataro, Carignan, Grenache, and Morastel, of the red varieties ; and
Yerdeilho, Gouais, Riesling, and Tokay, of the white. The Grenache he
considers especially valuable for its erect, self-supporting habit, its fecundity,
and the richness of its mast, but his experience has convinced him that
however well many of the French and Gorman vines may be adapted to a
moister region, they are unsuited to the climate of Clarendon, where their
fruit is frequently injured by the hot winds of summer. The Spanish vines on
the contrary are of a more vigorous habit, and have a luxuriant foliage, which
protects the grapes from burning suns and northern blasts. The Temprana
variety yields a very delicate wine, but Mr. Peake considers it is better
adapted to the plains than to the hills, where the fruit is extremely liable to
be destroyed by the early rains of autumn.
Most of the vines in the oldest portion of the vineyard are planted 6 feet
by 6 apart, but with his more recently-planted vines Mr. Peake has adopted
a less distance—6 feet by 4, and in some instances 6 feet by 3—and he
declares that in future he would even plant some varieties at only 3 feet by 3,
because he thinks it is easier to preserve the vines in health (and to obtain
a better quality of fruit) when they are planted closely and pruned in
proportion; as by securing more centres of vitality, or living plants, the
goodness of the soil and the gasses of the atmosphere can be more perfectly
assimilated than by single vines planted at greater distances apart and pruned
to carry a larger crop of fruit.
The soil of the two hills comprising the entire extent of the vineyard is a
rich red marl resting on a decomposed slate subsoil, and with rotten limestone
cropping out abundantly at intervals. On one portion of the first hill planted
in 1858 a considerable extent of Shiraz and Rieslings were put in, and to
these are added the Spanish sorts Temprana, Pedro Ximenes, and Palo-mino-
blanco. The last-named varieties are looking remarkably well, and are
making wood rapidly. The Shiraz and Rieslings are of a sparer habit; they
have a low straggling growth, are difficult to obtain on a single stalk, and
their produce is inferior in quantity. In common with the Yerdeilho and
some other varieties, it is necessary either to stake or trellis them, but this
operation Mr. Peake considers too costly to be remunerative
In the gully we have already mentioned as separating the two hills about 200
orange and lemon trees have been planted, and are now healthy and growing
fast. They are planted 12 feet by 12 apart, and are three years old. A stone
drain has been constructed through the bed of the gully to the river, to
carry off the storm water from the hills above, and it has been found to
answer the purpose most effectually. Mr. Peake purposes at some future
time to construct a large tank to hold this water, in order that he may irrigate


the orange trees in the summer months. We will here endeavour to describe
a very simple but ingenious plan which Mr. Peake practices to increase his
stock of orange-trees. Selecting a branch intended to be pruned from a tree,
he cuts the bark carefully off in a circular form, and afterwards wraps the
branch round with hemp, and buries it in a box 12 to 18 inches square
filled with good soil. In a short time roots appear in the edges of the ring
cut in the bark, and when these roots are sufficiently grown the branch is
severed from the parent tree, and the box, with its thriving contents
planted wherever it is desired the trees should grow. We saw several trees
raised in this fashion, and all of them were full of growth. On the southern-
most side of the second hill a large extent of young plants was eaten off by
grubs in the summer of 1860-61, and Mr. Peake was only enabled to arrest
the wholesale destruction that was going on by employing a number of men
and boys to handpick the obnoxious insects. We are assured that bushels of
them were removed in this way, and it is fortunate that the remedy, expensive
as it was, proved effectual. The sorts especially attacked were Shiraz and
Malbecs. The gaps have been since filled up with Grenache, and although
during the present season* the few remaining Malbecs have been again
attacked by their relentless enemy, the Grenache have almost entirely
escaped. Another remarkable circumstance is that on the top of this patch
21 rows of Morastel —a variety very much resembling the Mataro —were
planted simultaneously with the Malbec, but not one of the plants has been
injured by the grub. Certainly the unavoidable inference is that these
insects are dainty enough to prefer the sap of some vines to that of others,
and that while they will feast upon their best favorite they are contemptuously
indifferent to a less palatable food. As a salutary means of checking the
injuries these pests effect Mr, Peake maintains a strong team of ducks upon
his vineyard. They are kept shut up during the day and allowed to wander
at will amongst the vines after dusk when the grubs begin to work. The
vineyard is kept so free from weeds that the ducks can find none of their
favorite herbs, and therefore do full justice to the fare intended for them. As
an instance of the quantity of the insects they devour, Mr. Peake informed
us that he has once or twice thrown down a bushel of grubs, picked from the
vines by hand, to the ducks, where they could gobble them up without let or
hindrance, and they have done so very speedily, but without filling their craws
to any remarkable degree. But on other occasions when the ducks have
been turned into the vineyard at dusk—with only the grubs to feed upon—
they have waddled home a few hours afterwards with their craws almost
trailing on the ground—a fact from which Mr. Peake infers that several
bushels of his insect enemies have on such occasions ignominiously but
seasonably perished. We had nearly omitted to mention that Mr. Peake has
an idea of treating his grubs to a solution of corrosive sublimate, which
he believes will destroy these insect marauders without injuring the vines.
Beyond the vines on the southward of the second hill, several acres of
orchard have been recently planted. One portion of it is devoted to a
nursery ground for vines, and on the other a number of choice fruit trees of
•December, 1861.


all descriptions have been planted. The ground was trenched to a uniform
depth of 21 inches, and between the young fruit trees a splendid crop of
potatoes is growing. Mr. Peake anticipates that the potatoes alone will
repay the cost of trenching the ground. It is his intention, when these are
removed, to plant the ground with lucerne, reserving a small extent of bare
soil around each of the trees. At the foot of the first hill on the eastern
side there is also a capital orchard, planted upon a rich alluvial flat on the
banks of the river, and to the north the vineyard is bordered by a magnificent
row of olive trees. There are about 200 of them, and they are all growing
with great luxuriance. Mr. Peake contemplates employing his surplus labor
during the less busy seasons in extracting the oil from the olives, and if he is
enabled to do so with success and profit, we trust he will disseminate the
results of his experience, and thus foster what may eventually become in this
colony an important branch of industry.
The wine made by Mr. Peake, especially the first quality drawn without
pressure from the grapes, is very delicate, and resembles in flavor and bouquet
some of the finest champagne wines. It is dry, spirituous, and bright, and if
properly treated would without doubt produce an excellent champagne. The
wine made with pressure, although less delicate, is a sound full-bodied wine,
very agreeable and refreshing. We tasted an excellent sample of light red
or tinted wine made from an admixture of Mr. Peake’s purple and white
varieties, but his best white wine is unquestionably the choicest and most
characteristic. Until last year Mr. Peake has never manufactured pure red
wine to any considerable extent, and as the last year’s vintage is still
disturbed by the periodic fermentation of all young wines, it is impossible at
present to speak confidently of its quality.
The wine-cellar is a two-storied building, erected on a site scarped down
nearly at the foot of the first hill. The lower cellar has an area of 62 feet
by 22 feet 8 inches, and when furni shed with large vats, will be capable of
containing 10,000 gallons of wine. In the back wall of this cellar two arches
have been left with openings 9 feet in diameter, with a view to underground
cellars being at some future day driven into the side of the hill. The windows
of the cellar are narrow, and fitted with shutters to exclude light and heat
in the summer, and thus regulate the temperature. The wine is made in the
upper story of the cellar. The grapes are first of all passed through a
machine called a “stripper,” which separates the berries from the stalks, and
at the same time bursts the skins. The berries fall through a wood grating
graduated from the bottom centre until it closes entirely at something
less than half the radius of its curve, and pass with the juice into a shoot
and then between a pair of large smooth wooden rollers, which are occasionaly
turned by the man who has charge of the presses. The skins of the berries
are thereby perfectly broken, but the grape seeds remain whole. The pulp
is then let into the press troughs at pleasure. Mr. Peake has tried several
other methods —including treading—but has found none so effectual as that
we have described. The wine presses stand side by side, and consist of two
powerful screws passing through a beam crosshead more than 12 inches
square. A castiron piston or plunger is affixed to the base of each screw,
faced with 2-inch Singapore cedar, every portion of the iron being carefully


cased to prevent contact with the must. The troughs in which the “ murk’"
is placed are of Singapore cedar, about 7 feet square and 14 inches deep. The
screws and plungers are easily raised and lowered by the pressman by means
of the racket-lift used in the jacks for raising heavy weights. The murk is
pressed without bags, an indented rim on the face of the plunger being found
sufficient to retain it. The must, as it runs from the presses, is either carried
by hose into hogsheads to ferment, or put into large fermenting vats in
quantities of from 800 to 1,000 gallons ; and in the latter case it is at the
proper time run off into casks to complete the process of fermentation.
Hydraulic bungs have been used with good effect, better to retain the spirit
generated during fermentation, and to prevent the too rapid escape of carbonic
acid gas. The cellar arrangements are not yet perfectly matured, but the
establishment is already exceedingly commodious and convenient. The stock
of wine in the cellars at the period of our visit (December, 1861) was chiefly
of the previous season’s vintage, and comprised about 5,500 gallons.* There
were also 500 gallons of brandy singlings made from wine lees and refuse. We
may add, in conclusion, that it is Mr. Peake’s intention to train two or three
youths as apprentices in his vineyard, and he strongly recommends other
vignerons to endeavor by this means to disseminate practical knowledge off
the vine, and the manufacture of wine.
finkit,
THE RESIDENCE OE MB. ALEXANDER HAY, M.R.
It is certainly not to be wondered at that a number of our most prominent
colonists should have fixed their residences within the township of Beaumont
or its immediate vicinity, for of all the suburbs of Adelaide there is scarcely
any other possessing so many and such great advantages of scenery and
locality. It is situated on the rise of one of the hills of the beautiful range
which forms such a noble background to Adelaide, and it commands a bird s-
eye view of the city, of the plains which environ it,, and of the waters of the
Gulf beyond. The soil is chiefly a rich black or brown loam, with a rotten
limestone subsoil. Mr. Hay has erected an elegant and substantial mansion
upon his estate. We will now devote a few remarks to the orchard and
vineyard he has formed upon his grounds. The orchard adjoins the flower
garden fronting the house, and its extent is about four acres. It was
planted four years ago, and most of the trees are now in bearing. A
considerable portion of its extent is planted with orange trees, and these are
thriving excellently. Two rows of apple and other fruit-trees have been
planted around the orangery in order to shelter the trees from the effects of
the weather, which the oranges are less able to withstand. The latter are
« We have since learned that the present vintage (1862) has yielded 5,300 gals, of wine of all kind*.


planted at a uniform distance apart of 20 feet, and the ground was spade
trenched to a depth of two feet. Near to the house Mr. Hay has had two
underground tanks constructed capable of containing 15,000 gallons. Into
these is drained the refuse water from the house, and with this the orange
trees are constantly irrigated by means of a force pump and galvanized iron
pipes. Mr. Hay purposes enlarging his orangery.
In the orchard large numbers of fruit trees of almost every description are
flourishing remarkably well. Some walnut trees, planted only 16 feet apart,
have in three years attained a height of five feet.
The vineyard comprises altogether about nine acres. Planting was
commenced in 1858, and the sorts selected were chiefly the Black Portugal,
the Grenache, the Mataro, and Carignan. Some of the ground had been
previously cropped with wheat and oats, and on this portion the vines have
not thriven so well as in the virgin soil. The whole of the ground was well
stirred with a subsoil plough before being planted, but on the old cropped
land Mr. Hay has been since compelled to replant after spade trenching it to
the depth of 20 inches; the original subsoiling he regards now as having
been almost useless. A few Verdeilhos have been planted at the lower end
of the vineyard, but Mr. Hay depends almost entirely upon the purple
kinds. His experience teaches him that the Spanish vines are much better
adapted to the foot of the hills and the plains than either the French or
German. In our description of the Clarendon Vineyard we have recorded
the same preference for the the Spanish sorts as entertained by Mr. Peake
for planting in his hilly but dry soil. In Mr. Hay’s vineyard the Grenache
are thriving better than any other kind, and the vines are now loaded with
young fruit. Mr. Hay informs us that since his vineyard has been planted
this variety has done equally well no matter how hot the weather has been.
Next to the Grenache he prefers the Mataro and Carignan, as both of these do
better with him than the Black Portugal, the Shiraz, or the Verdeilho. Mr.
Hay has planted a few cuttings obtained from the Cape for raisins. They
appear quite adapted to the soil, and are thriving well. Hitherto Mr. Hay
has manufactured wine on a very limited scale, and only from the Grenache
and Black Portugal, but the yield of the ensuing season promises to be very
considerable.
Mr. Hay, as is generally known, left the colony in January of the present
year,* for the purpose of paying a visit to the old country, and being present
at the opening of the International Exhibition. We cannot conclude these
brief remarks without recording our appreciation of the valuable services
Mr. Hayj has rendered to the colony as a public man of comprehensive
intelligence, industrious habits, and undeviating consistency, and our
admiration of the qualities of head and heart which have won for him his
honourable position, and ensured him the respect and esteem of his fellow-
colonists. We trust the voyage and his sojourn in his native land will be
eminently beneficial to himself and family, and that we may at no distant
date welcome back amongst us one of our most deserving and respected
colonists.
* 1862.


THE RESIDENCE OF THE HON. WILLIAM MILNE, M.F.
About a mile beyond Mr. Hay’s estate at Beaumont, but at an increased
elevation on the bills, is situate the residence of the Hon. Wm. Milne, M.P.
The view from “ Sunnyside” is as equally striking and picturesque as that
from Mr. Hay’s residence, and an even better view of the Gulf is obtained
on account of the higher altitude of Sunnyside. The house is approached
on each side by a half circular carriage drive, one entrance being from the
Glen Osmond-road, and on the other from the Beaumont-road. The latter
approach leads through a deep ravine, and both are bordered on either side
by rows of gum trees flourishing in the luxuriance of youth. The good taste
of the proprietor is sufficiently evinced by the arrangement of the grounds,
and the character of the substantial and elegant mansion they enclose. The
avenues of gum-trees are as we have said half circular in form, and beyond
them the estate is almost entirely surrounded by a very beautiful and impene-
trable fence of the prickly acacia upwards of eight feet in height. This
fence has been planted about nine years, and is now for solidity and elegance
superior to any other we have seen in the neighbourhood of Adelaide. The
orchard occupies the centre of the ground to the north of the house, and
comprises about two and a half acres planted with peach, cherry, apple, pear,
damson, plum, mulberry, greengage, loquat, apricot, and orange trees. The
whole of these are about nine years bid and are now in full bearing.
Of the vineyard about seven acres were planted in 1856 with the Grenache
Mataro, Carignan, Black Portugal, and Malbec. This portion of the vine-
yard is principally to the westward of the house, with a north-westward
aspect, and the vines are in full bearing. The Malbec have proved the
least and the Carignan and Black Portugal the best adapted to the locality
and soil. The Grenache have grown luxuriantly, but Mr. Milne says they
have been more susceptible of the baneful influences of hot winds than the
other kinds. This older portion of the vineyard extends to a winding gully
to the eastward of the house, in which the slopes with a northern aspect
are planted exclusively with Black Portugal, and those with a southern
aspect with the varieties from which sherry wine is made, comprising the
Pedro Xiraenes, the Gordo Blanco, the Palo-mino-blanco, the Morillon, and
the Cascarella. These latter sorts were procured from Mr. Davis’s vineyard
at the Seedbeds. There is also half an acre of the Gouais, but in the
manufacture of wine Mr. Milne has hitherto mixed the juice of this grape
with that of the other white varieties.
The new portion of the vineyard has been planted on the higher slopes of
the hill surmounting the gully and grounds we have already alluded to.
Thus the aspect of the whole of the vineyard ranges from west to north,
except in some of the windings of the gully. The extent of the new portion
is eight and a half acres, and the whole of this ground has been trenched to
a depth of two feet, at a cost of £4O per acre. The soil on the surface is a
brown loam, but on the highest portion of the hill a thick and (for roots of


almost any kind) impenetrable crust of limestone was found at a depth of 12
to 15 inches. Beneath this crust were rotten slate and limestone, and Mr.
Milne therefore determined in trenching the ground not to be content with
merely stirring the subsoil, but to bring the crust of limestone* to the surface,
and by inverting the ground place the surface loam at the bottom of the
trenching. The theory upon which he proceeded is, that good soil attracts
the roots of all plants, and that, consequently, if the best soil is undermost
the roots of the vinos will be attracted downwards, and so obtain the full
benefit of the moisture in the soil and be better protected from the drought,
whereas if the best soil is allowed to remain near the surface the roots will
not penetrate so deep but will spread about in the better soil, and thereby
lose the advantages of greater moisture and surer protection. This is a
theory upon which Mr. Milne relics, and as such wo state it in explanation
of the system he has practised.
The trenching was all done in April and May of 1861, and so much of
the limestone was brought to the surface that on the higher slopes of the hill
it was found necessary to pick off the stones in rows where the vines were to
be planted. At a distance this portion of the vineyard appears nothing but a
bleak white patch, but closer observation shows that all the cuttings are
healthy and growing vigorously. On the lower slopes of the hill the newly
planted soil is apparently richer, and nothing but good brown loam very
slightly mixed with rotten limestone was encountered in trenching it to the
depth of two feet. But here the first shoots of the cuttings have been almost
entirely eaten off by the grub and wireworm, notwithstanding that on the
adjoining ground where the limestone abounds not a grub or worm is to be
seen, and every plant is flourishing. We suppose there is no thoroughly
effectual protection against the ravages of the grub, although several remedies
are practised with more or less success. Hand picking is perhaps the most
efficacious, but a system less expensive would be desirable. Mr. Milne has
purchased a large quantity of ducks, in the anticipation that they would eat
up the grubs, but they appear to be dainty enough to prefer a highly succulent
plant flourishing here and there in the vineyard in a wild state. With
respect to the wireworm, one of the cheapest and most effectual methods of
destroying them practised in the old country is to jam down the soil where
they appear, either with a heavy roller, or by folding large numbers of sheep,
pigs, and cattle upon it. We have seen young crops of wheat attacked by
the wireworm saved by the latter means, and in one instance although when
the cattle and sheep were removed the field presented the appearance of a
large stock pen, and not a blade of the wheat was visible, without any further
treatment the whole extent averaged 40 bushels to the acre. Of course this
would be entirely impracticable in a vineyard, but there is another system
for destroying the wireworm, recommended by the Royal Agricultural
Society of England in one of the issues of its Journal, which our vinegrowers
might perhaps adopt with advantage when they are troubled with these pests.
The plan is simply this:—Broadcast upon the soil where the wireworms
appear say one cwt. of rape-cake to the acre —the cake of course to be
broken into pieces about as large as walnuts—or in a vineyard it would
probably be better to employ a boy to drop one or two pieces of the cake


near the stem of each vine. The result has been found to be that the wire-
worm, being ravenously fond of the rape-cake, will, when it detects its
presence, leave all other nourishment and absolutely gorge itself to death
upon its favourite food. The theory may appear a strange one, but we give
it as strongly recommended by the authority we have quoted. The
application of the rape-cake would also serve a double purpose, as it
constitutes in itself a valuable manure.
Mr. Milne has already found a means of irrigating his vines to an extent
which, combined with the natural winter soakage, he considers sufficient for
the purpose- On the highest portion of his vineyard he has constructed a
reservoir into which the storm water from the higher hills is conducted by
races cut at their base, and the water is afterwards disseminated over the
vineyard by surface drainage. The rainfall alone Mr. Milne considers
insufficient for the nourishment of the vines, but thus supplemented by
occasional irrigation and soakage he apprehends summer irrigation may be
dispensed with. Mr. Milne has recently added to his estate, by purchase,
the section on which the Wheal Crawler Mine was situate, and on this a
spring has been found, from which the fruit trees in the orchard may be
irrigated as often as is desirable when the necessary appliances are provided.
The aggregate extent of Mr. Milne’s estate, including the Wheal Gawler
purchase, is 120 acres.
THE RESIDENCE OE MB. PATRICK ATJLD.
It was, we believe, in the early period of 1861 that the Auldana Vineyard
was first brought under the attention of the public by the Promoters of the
South Auldana Vineyard Association. At the time this article was written we
were not a ware whether the company had been actually formed, and our remarks
must be regarded as altogether unconnected with the designs of the
Promoters. The extent of the Auldana Vineyard, and the judicious system
that has been pursued in its cultivation, entitles it to prominent notice,
independently of all considerations of the Company which then proposed to
purchase it, and has since done so. Their speculation, however, deals with
only a portion of the vineyards originally planted by Mr. Auld, and known
as the South Auldana Vineyard, comprising about 140 acres of vineyard
land, of which 35 acres are planted with vines and 14 acres are already in
full bearing. We may very reasonably congratulate the Company upon the
excellent choice they have made in the selection of a vineyard for the
commencement of their operations.
Mr. Auld, recognising the importance of enabling the manager of an
extensive vineyard always to overlook as far as possible the proceedings of
his employes, has erected a substantial dwelling-house on the crest of an


adjacent hill, which commands a view of the whole of the south vineyard,
and en passant we may mention that the prospect obtained from the situation
of this residence is magnificent in the extreme. An uninterrupted bird’s-eye
view of the whole extent of the plains surrounding Adelaide'and of the city
itself, with the Gulf and its shipping in the background, is afforded to the
spectator, and it would be difficult we imagine to discover a more enchanting
or more varied scene even in lands of far greater pretensions to scenic
advantages than South Australia. Entering the south vineyard on its
northernmost side, the visitor finds himself at the fool of what is known as
the Yerdeilho Hill, the whole of which was planted in 1860 with vines of
that sort. To the right of the hill are planted some Tokay, Muscat of
Alexandria, and a few Gouais. This hill and those beyond it to the south
are admirably situated for the growth of the vine, inasmuch as they form a
perfect natural basin, and the slopes on which the vines are planted shelter
each other from all winds, especially from the destructive wind which blows
periodically from the south-west. An adjoining hill affords an additional
protection to the vineyard from the ravages of the north winds. At the
very bottom of this natural basin, and where the soil is of the richest and
deepest, an orchard has been planted, comprising a well chosen selection of
the most favorite varieties of fruits. The trees are remarkably healthy and
bearing well.
Above the orchard, on the southernmost slopes of the vineyard, is a
considerable extent of Grenache, Yerdeilho, and Donzelinho, planted in
1856. Parallel therewith is an acre of Carignan grafted with Carbonet for
the purposes of classification. Mr. Auld has been taught by experience the
necessity of ascertaining by careful study and observation the particular
kinds of grapes adapted to produce the best kinds of wine, and the exact
proportion in which they must be respectively used for that purpose, and then
of classifying his vineyard accordingly. Having acquired a knowledge of
this nature upon which ho is prepared to rely in the manufacture of his
wines, Mr. Auld has for the last year or two devoted considerable attention
to classification. To this end a portion of the vineyard has been devoted to
the growth of particular sorts of vines in their required proportions, while
the yield of other vines has been reduced by grafting upon them the necessary
sorts. Thus, for instance, Carbonet have been grafted upon Carignan, and
Yerdeilho upon Muscat of Alexandria. The Grenache on the southern side
of the vineyard are flourishing in great luxuriance, but Mr. Auld has not
thought it necessary either to trellis or stake them. Yet he entirely abjures
the theory of thick planting, multiplied centres of vitality, and close pruning.
His vines are all planted at 10 feet by 5, except the Yerdeilho, which stand
at 7 feet by 7. The vineyard is generally hand-weeded’as many as four times
in each year. The sow-thistle flourishes prolifically there, and as the soil is
rich and has received so much moisture during the past year (1861), additional
labor has been required to check the growth of this obnoxious plant. Mr.
Auld prefers doing this work by hand labor to using the horse-hoe, which he
regards as at the best a slovenly and incomplete process. Amongst the sorts
planted in the south vineyard during the years 1.857-’B-’9 and ’6O, are the
Mataro, the Malbec, Black Portugal, and Shiraz. In the early part of 1860,


Mr. Auld had an additional extent of 30 acres, equally as well situated and
as well adapted for the growth of the vine as is the south vineyard, trenched
and prepared for planting. lie was, however, deterred from carrying out
his intentions of putting in the vines by the high price of labor and the
uncertainty whether he would be able to procure a sufficient number of
laborers to cultivate them. Above the South Auldana Vineyard Mr. Auld
has, however, planted five acres, and to the eastward another five acres were
planted in iB6O with Donzelinho, Yerdeilho, Muscat of Alexandria, and
Shiraz. Besides all these there is the Home Park Vineyard, in which ten
acres have been planted with Donzelinho, Shiraz, and Verdeilho. The soil
is very rich, of unusual depth, and particularly well adapted for vine-growing,
being throughout a good loam, intermixed with decomposed slate and lime-
stone. Mr. Auld’s cellarage is rather limited, but hitherto it has been his
practice to store his wines on his premises in Adelaide'. We presume,
however, the company will erect a suitable wine-house and cellar on their
portion of the estate. Mr. Auld does not use a press in the manufacture of
his wines, but relies solely upon a crushing mill and fermentation.
Stoneyfell.—A little more than a mile south of the Auldana vineyard
and on the same range of hills, is situated Mr. Henry Clark's vineyard
known as Stoneyfell. Tweny-five acres have been already planted with
vines, but only acres put in in 1858 are yet in bearing. The principal
extent of the vineyard was planted in 1860, chiefly with Black Portugal,
but there are 3|- acres of Muscatel. The soil is a rich loam with a limestone
and rotten slate subsoil. The surface soil is extremely porous, and is thereby
enabled to absorb the rain, which permeates to, and is retained by, the
subsoil. The vines are planted on slopes facing from north east round by
north to west. Those on the western slopes have done best hitherto. The
grubs having been found very troublesome among the younger plants, Mr.
Clark has tried as a remedy painting the stems of the vines with gas tar,
but this has been found ineffectual for the purpose. Preparations are already
being made for the erection of a wine-house and the excavation of cellars for
the manufacture and storage of wine on a scale proportionate to the extent of
the vineyard.
Hazelwood, the residence of Mrs. Francis Clark, is situated half-a-mile
north of Beaumont on the banks of a creek which runs through the garden
and vineyard. The vineyard comprises about three acres, and is chiefly
planted with Muscatel. The oldest vines were planted in 1855, at 4 feet by
4 apart, and the others were planted in 1858 at 5 feet by 6. The former are
now yielding well, and they present at the present time* a dense mass of
foliage, and arc heavily hung with fruit. A few Tokays were planted in 1858,
but these have not proved successful, the situation being unsuitable to them.
There are also a few plants of the Zante currant and some of the Cape sorts
thriving luxuriantly. In the lower part of the vineyard the vines appear
absolutely to revel in luxuriance, and we have rarely seen more wood and
* January, 1862.


foliage upon so small a space. These vines were not pruned in the summer.
At one place we noticed four vines trained together by means of a centre
stake, the branches being so completely intertwined as to be self-supporting
and to form a perfect arbour, from the interior of which the grapes may be
plucked with ease. The plan appears well adapted to the Black Prince and other
sorts that require long pruning. There are a number of fruit trees,
comprising, amongst the more ordinary kinds, oranges, lemons, and Bengal
citrons, growing luxuriantly on the borders of the creek. Adjacent to the
house the singular spectacle is presented of a vine and an almond tree
flourishing together in as close an embrace as that in which the ivy enfolds
the elm. Each has attained a height of something like 20 feet, and both are
bearing abundantly their respective fruits. In the wet season the grounds
are easily irrigated by means of races leading from the creek, from which
there is a fall amply sufficient for the purpose. The soil is a good sandy
loam.
Dr. Wyatt has an excellent orchard and garden adjoining his residence
on one of the hills above Beaumont. There is a large variety of fruit trees,
and shrubs of a merely ornamental appearance adorn the pleasure-grounds.
Twelve or thirteen years ago Dr. Wyatt imported from Sydney a large
assortment of vines for the purpose of ascertaining by practical experience
what sorts were best adapted for the soil and climate of the hills in the
immediate neighbourhood of Adelaide, with the intention of subsequently
planting a large vineyard in the vicinity of his residence. The worthy
doctor’s time has been, however, so much occupied with other matters that
the project has remained unrealised, and many of the imported vines have
been uprooted or otherwise destroyed. Dr. Wyatt has, however, derived
from his experience the opinion that the Madeira varieties will be especially
valuable in South Austrialia.
(Ktmnklc,
THE RESIDENCE OE MB. HENRY EVANS, J.P.
There is probably no vineyard in South Australia possessing a better or
more widely extended reputation than Evandale. The* time that has’ elapsed
since its formation, the proved superiority of the wines produced there, the
extent and completeness of the arrangements for the manufacture and
storage of the wines, and the known experience and good judgment of
its proprietor, have long since caused it to be regarded as an
establishment presenting a most satisfactory test of the wine producing
capabilities of the colony, and we are sure that many vignerons who in this
or the adjoining colonies are earnestly engaged in the extension of their


vineyards will freelv acknowledge Evandale to be an excellent example for
them to copy as far as circumstances will permit. The estate is about eight
miles north-east of Angaston, and is situate in the centre of what Mr. Evans
believes to be a volcanic formation of about three miles in diameter—an opinion
endorsed by Mr. Babbage and upheld by the nature of the soil —in some
places an alluvial deposit—and by the ironstone which crops up everywhere
around, mixed with burnt clay and decomposed stone. The vineyard
comprises 20 acres, the orchard 40 acres, and the nursery 10 acres. Mr.
Evans’s residence stands on gently undulating ground, trending to the
North Khine ranges. The vineyard is chiefly east and south of the house
and on the north is one portion of the orchard, bounded by a deep border of
vines on the east, south, and north, the remainder being on the eastward,
beyond the vineyard. The vine border, which is 150 feet wide, is planted
with Frontignac, Tokay, and Early Portugal, but principally the former
variety. The vines were put in in 1853, at 4 feet by 5 apart. For several years
they made comparatively little progress, and in 1860 every alternate row was
uprooted, leaving the survivors at 8 feet by 5, and since that time the latter
have thriven well and yielded larger quantities of better fruit than the whole
did previously. It is Mr. Evans’s determination in future to plant at not less
than 8 feet by 8. The northern orchard is protected on the north by a
substantial white thorn fence, which in only five years has attained a height
exceeding 10 feet. The larger portion of the trees were planted eight years
ago, and the remainder in 1856. The extent is about 10 acres, and there is
not one gap in the almost interminable rows of flourishing trees. The large
majority of them in this, as well as in the other and younger portion of the
orchard, to which we shall have presently to refer, are apples, and there are
upwards of 100 varieties of them. The trees are heavily laden with fruit,*
many of them drooping beneath the weight, until their branches resemble in
form those of the graceful willow, while others have fairly broken down
under their burden. The fruit is of the most perfect character in shape and
appearance. The trees stand now at distances of 30 feet by 35 apart, but in
some places they were originally planted with only half that space from tree
to tree in order to bring on the fruit sooner. They have since been thinned
out, and notwithstanding the increased cost entailed by this system for extra
labor and trees, it has been repaid over and over again in the first two or
three years. It would be too long a task to recapitulate even the principal
of the 100 varieties, and it might perhaps be invidious to do so, if we may
judge by the circumstance that one fine-looking sort known as the “Yellow
Wesleyan” has been locally corrupted into the “ Bilious Methodist.” It has
hitherto been Mr. Evans’s practice to keep down all weeds in this portion of
the orchard by machine and manual labor, but he has now resolved to
discontinue this, and only to plough a few furrows in the centres of the
intervening spaces to ventilate the soil, because when the land under the trees
is bare in the summer months the numerous windfalls are quite destroyed by
the sun before it is possible to gather them.
Immediately fronting the house is a broad gravel walk of considerable
* January i 862.


length dividing the vineyard, and leading to the largest and younger portion
of the orchard, the extent of which is 30 acres. This and other walks in the
grounds are bordered with thickly studded rows of evergreen privet, which
present a very pretty appearance. The trees on the 30 acres are five years
old, and are bearing excellently. Apples predominate, but almost every
variety of ordinary fruits is represented. Here the grass has been allowed
to grow uninterruptedly for about six feet round all the trees, only a few
furrows being ploughed, in accordance with the opinion already stated. We
should think the grass in such a large orchard might be advantageously fed
off with sheep in the winter months, as the droppings of the animals would
more than compensate for the vegetable matter they would consume. At the
first thought it would appear almost problematical whether at such a distance
from Adelaide Mr. Evans could ensure a market for the produce of his large
orchards. Evandale is, however, less than 20 miles from the Eapunda railway
station, and nearly the whole of its fruit is sent thither en route to the Burra,
where there is an ample demand.
It is about ten years since Mr. Evans commenced planting on his estate,
and we were forcibly reminded of the magnitude of the alterations he has
effected on what was previously an almost untrodden waste, by examining
a water-color drawing of the spot taken by Mr. George French Angas before
a sod had been turned upon it. The sketch represents the residence and
one or two outbuildings, which are still standing, with a flock of sheep
grazing where the orchard and vineyard flourish now. But in laying out his
estate Mr. Evans has had an eye to the ornamental as well as the useful. In
plantations so large it was of course necessary to have roads broad enough to
permit the passage of one-horse carts. Such paths have been formed with
gravel and, edged with the evergreen borders we have already mentioned,
they increase materially the beauty of the place. Beds of rare plants and
flowers are laid out in front of and around the house, and on either side of it
pines and cypresses are springing up in almost endless variety. Amongst the
choicest plants is a specimen of the Aricaria Bidwilli, a native of Queensland.
The tree has been known to attain a direct height of 100 feet before putting
out its branches. It bears a fruit resembling an immense pineapple in
appearance, and when ripe the shell breaks and yields a quantity of delicious
kernels, about the size of dates. Aboriginals are in the habit of assembling
at places where the tree grows, and of gathering its fruit when ripe, and they
feast themselves upon the kernels until the supply is exhausted. Mr. Evans’s
specimen is growing rapidly.
The nursery at Evandale contains young plants and trees almost sufficient
to supply the requirements of a colony. Four years ago it was a stubble-
field—now it is difficult to imagine how prolific is its'vegetation. For this
department of his business Mr. Evans is fortunate in having secured the
superintending services of Mr. John Frederic Wood, a gentleman of great
horticultural experience and knowledge, and who with remarkable intelligence
combines a large amount of enthusiasm for the study of the science he
professes. Last year Mr. Wood budded upwards of 100,000 plants with his
own hands, and his devotion to his work recognises no sacrifice that will
enhance its success. We cannot enumerate the names or the numbers of the


plants which flourish in his nursery, but to convey an idea of its resources
we may state that it contains 80,000 young vines, not one of which has
suffered from the incursions of that dire enemy of their kind—the grub.
The nursery must not however be understood as being confined to the
propagation of vines or fruit trees, for Mr. Wood’s enthusiasm embraces
floriculture within its liberal range, and rose trees appear to multiply a
hundredfold under his artist touch. We understand that at Evandale in
future the price of these trees of all varieties will be reduced to Is each.
Nearly all the two-year old fruit trees are already bearing fruit, and no
inconsiderable quantity might be gathered from them although they stand at
only a few inches apart. Amongst the rarer plants are the purple-leaved
sycamore, the new Siberian elm (which in two years has grown six feet high),
and a new evergreen shrub called the Escalonia Flora Bunda resembling the
white lilac in appearance.
The hothouse is 40 feet by 8 feet, and is chiefly used for raising seedlings.
Several of Stuart’s seeds brought by the explorer from the interior have been
reared there, amongst them several specimens of “ Stuart’s grape seed.”
Adjoining the hothouse there are several of the Zantc currant vines growing
splendidly and bearing fruit in large quantities.
The varieties of the vine planted by Mr. Evans in the years 1852 to 1859
inclusive, in the north section of the vineyard (taking the broad gravel walk
stretching due east from the house as the dividing mark) are the Shiraz,
Espanoir (or Mataro), Muscat of Alexandria, Pineau, Black Portugal,
Frontignac, Eiesling, Tokay, and Morillou. On the south the varieties,
planted principally in 1857, are the Eiesling, Shiraz, Yerdeilho, Black
Portugal, and Morillon. Every vine in the vineyard is staked, except a few
with which Mr. Wood is testing the new method of trellising recommended
by M. Jules Guyot, which he thinks will excel for neatness, and promote
larger yields than any other system.
Mr. Evans has already trenched 25 acres which he intends adding to his
vineyard. This land lies due west from the homestead and its soil and
position are good. The varieties to be planted on it are chiefly the Grenache,
Shiraz, Carignan, Black Portugal, Malbec, and Espanoir.
We visited Evandale two days after an unfortunate accident by which the
principal cellar was destroyed, and are therefore unable to describe what
were the arrangements of that building, but we are informed they were as
nearly perfect as possible. It was, we believe, the largest cellar in the
colony, being 154 feet long by 44 feet wide. The walls were of stone and
the roof was of double thatch. The catastrophe occurred on the afternoon
of the 21st January, 1862. One of Mr. Evans’s cellarmen, who was engaged
in purifying an empty cask, had lighted a sulphur match and put it in the
cask in the usual manner, but had only held it there one or two minutes,
when it w r as impelled into the roof with the force of a sky-rocket and
instantaneously ignited the thatch. Before the fire could be extinguished
the roof had fallen in, and the whole range of casks and valuable utensils
were entirely destroyed. Fortunately the stock of wine in the cellar at the
time was not large, but two store casks, full of liquor, standing in the N.E.
corner, became so hot that the wine in them boiled for several hours. The


cause of the explosion which occasioned the mischief must have been either
the presence of some spirit in the cask, or that the bunghole was stopped up
so tightly as to prevent the escape of the foul air.
In the smaller cellar, which was not at all injured by the fire, everything
evinces the exercise of care, judgment, and cleanliness. A quantity of lime
is spread under every cask to absorb any droppings or spilt liquor, and
correct every possible tendency to acidity in the cellar. This practice is so
useful and cheap withal that we wonder it is not more generally adopted.
The choicest wine (to our taste) in Mr. Evan’s cellar at the time of our visit
was a pure Riesling of the vintage of 1857, and this is equal if not superior
to any Hock that can be obtained in English or colonial markets. As an
instance of the propriety of giving something like age to our wines we may
mention that side by side with it was a hogshead of wine made from the
same grape with the same treatment, but of the vintage of 1858, but this,
although an excellent sample and possessing more body, is not to be compared
with the first-named for delicacy or purity of flavor. Of the other wines we
sampled we may especially notice a Frontignac, which is rapidly acquiring a
Riesling character, although it retains the Muscat flavor, a circumstance
for which Mr. Evans is at a loss to account; another Frontignac made from
dried grapes, and which has a deep color like burnished gold, and a rich
luscious flavor; a Muscat of Alexandria, also made with dried grapes —it has
a powerful aroma, but is a young wine, and rich and sweet; a Crystal grape
wine, made with boiled wine and Muscats, very much resembling sherry;
and some excellent samples of Shiraz and Espanoir of various vintages.
Mr. Evans adopts a simple process in the manufacture of his wine, and its
chief characteristics appear to be care and* cleanliness. To the absence of
cleanliness with regard to casks and utensils, and of care in keeping the casks
full during fermentation, he attributes in a great measure the disappointments
which overtake many wine producers. Rum, whisky, gin, beer, or porter
casks, in his opinion, ought on no account to be used, because they invariably
deteriorate the quality of the wine. He regards the grape as a perfect fruit,
containing within itself all the elements that are essential to the manufacture
of first-class wine. The addition of brandy, coloring matter, or finings of
any kind, he regards as altogether unnecessary except in wet or unfavorable
vintages. He uses a mill for crushing red grapes for dark wines, but in
treating white grapes for white wines, he adheres to the primitive system of
pressing with bare feet. He believes that the best constructed mill crushes
some of the seeds, and gives thereby a harsh and unpleasant flavor to the
wine. He removes the rough stem from both red and white grapes by
rubbing them through a box with a grating at the bottom, and until this has
been done he thinks that the grapes should on no account be passed through
the crushing-mill or pressed. The skins of white grapes should not be
fermented with the juice if the fruit is at all bruised, as in that case the skin
will impart a bad color to the wine. Mr. Evans does not prolong the
fermentation in vats in accordance with the ordinary custom, but draws the
wine off into store casks before the sweetness is quite gone. To save
the trouble of filling up the casks several times a day, which would
otherwise be necessary, he inserts in each cask a tin tube made in the shape of


a syphon, the longer leg in the cask and the shorter one in a vessel of water,
and by this means the carbonic acid gas is allowed to escape, but the
atmospheric air is excluded. The secondary fermentation is continued thus
in the store casks for a considerable time, and the result is found to be that
the wine acquires clearness and maturity of taste more quickly than when
the fermentation is more fully completed in the vats. Mr. Evans informed
us that he regarded the works of Mr. Macarthur and Dr. Kelly as invaluable
guides, which should be in the hands of every winegrower.
We ought not to omit to mention that the range of buildings at Evandale
comprises a convenient chapel, which affords accommodation for about 100
people. Mr. Coward, an Independent minister stationed at North Ehine,
attends at Evandale and conducts a service there every Sunday, at Mr, Evans’s
cost. Mr. Evans has also given three acres of ground, lying about a quarter
of a mile from his homestead, on which a German chapel has been erected,
and a cemetry formed. It his intention shortly to build a new and larger
chapel at Evandale.
fiiibsajt pause,
THE RESIDENCE OF THE HON. G. F. ANGAS.
Lindsay House, the country residence of the Hon. G. E. Angas, is situated
about four miles south-west of Evandale, on the road thence to Angaston.
The grounds, which were, we believe, originally planned by Mr. Evans,
evince great taste in their design, and in their support and present appearance.
The house itself is a most complete and elegant residence, and a splendid
view of the surrounding country is obtained from the verandah, which stands
at a more than ordinary elevation, surmounting a suite of rooms on the
ground floor. The garden and pleasure grounds abound with choice plants,
flourishing fruit trees, and prolifically bearing vines, but owing to the absence
of the hon. proprietor from home at the period of our visit to Angaston and
its vicinity, we are unable to state the precise character of the purposes to
which the estate is devoted. We believe we are correct in stating that the
garden is under the immediate superintendence of Mrs. Angas, who is an
accomplished botanist, and under whose direction it is cultivated on the most
scientific principles. A large extent of the surrounding country is the
purchased property of Mr. Angas, and two of his sons have large estates in
the neighbourhood.
Mr. Samuel Smith has a vineyard situate about one mile north-east of
Angaston, which rejoices in the euphonious name of “Yealumba.” Its
extent is about 14 acres, of which seven acres are in bearing, the oldest of
the vines having been planted in 1852. Mr. Smith informed us that during
the winter of 1861 about two acres of his vines suffered severely from frost.


His principal variety is the Shiraz, and in the manufacture of his red wine
he mixes a large proportion of that grape with Mataro, Black Hamburg, and
Morillon. Altogether he has nine acres of Shiraz planted. In his earliest
planting he adopted distances of 4 feet by 4 apart, but he has since gradually
extended the intervening spaces to 10 feet by 8, and he regards the latter as
by far the better distance, its advantages being the increased facilities
for cultivation and gathering. He is at present busily engaged in thinning
his more thickly planted vines, and in trellising. In addition to the vineyard
he has about four acres of orchard.
There are several small vineyards in the immediate vicinity of Angaston,
and one of larger extent belonging to Mr. Green, which we regret we were
unable to visit, Mr. Short has two acres of vines from two to four years
old within a stone’s throw of the township. One of these acres is planted
with Shiraz, and the other with mixed varieties. There are also some
excellent orchards near the township.
®m«mk 'bintprk
There are a large number of small vineyards in and about the township of
Tanunda, about seven miles nearer Adelaide than Angaston, varying in extent
from one rood to six or eight acres, and comprising in the aggregate from 90
to 100 acres. We give this estimate on the authority of an old resident of
Tanunda. Almost all these vineyards are owned and cultivated by our
German fellow-colonists, and M. Sobels, of Tanunda, purchases the grapes
from most of them aud manufactures the wine himself. We are informed
that M. Sobels has established an export trade for his wines chiefly with
Yictoria.
THE RESIDENCE OF MB. JOSEPH GILBERT, J.P.
Mr. Gilbert’s vineyard at Pewsey Yale is by no means the only remarkable
feature of his establishment there. Indeed it would be difficult to discover
any division either of the estate itself or of the homestead which has not
been made almost unfailing in its resources, perfect in its conveniences, and
beautiful in its appearance, by the exercise of good taste and liberal
expenditure. It is not common even with gentlemen of colossal fortunes
and refined ideas to concentrate their undivided attention upon the thorough


development of the resources of one locality, but it is upon the principle
that it is better to know everything of something than something of
everything that Mr. Gilbert has succeeded in raising upon a spot which
little more than 20 years ago was destitute of even the rudest artificial
appliance or improvement, an establishment which we honestly believe, in the
essential attributes of a gentleman’s country residence, and in the capabilities
of securing an annual profit to its owner, yields the palm to no other either in
this or the adjoining colony. It may be a comparatively easy matter for a
wealthy merchant, or gentleman of ample private fortune, to found, by the
mere outlay of capital, a magnificent mansion and elegant pleasure grounds
in the vicinity of a centre of population, but it is a very different thing to
establish all the useful and ornamental qualifications experience and taste can
suggest upon no more convenient foundation than a rugged site in a mountain
fastness of a comparatively young colony, 40 miles distant from its metropolis.
Yet Mr. Gilbert has accomplished even more than this, for he has besides
extended the influence of his enterprise and judgment to the remotest
corner of an estate comprising something like 11,000 acres of land.
Mr. Gilbert’s residence at Pewsey Yale is situated upon the eminence of
one of the smallest of a long line of hills lying several miles to the south of
the Barossa range, in which they terminate. The view on all sides is enclosed
by hills, some of which are from 1,400 to 1,600 feet above the level of the
sea. On what we may term the residence hill, huge rock formations crop
out in every direction, but even these have been made to enhance the
prevailing beauty of the scene, and in almost every fissure where the presence
of soil can be detected, flowers and ornamental shrubs have been fostered
with watchful care. The lower apartments of the house itself have been
excavated out of rock, and afford not only substantiality, but welcome
coolness. The stone used in the erection of the building was all obtained
from the neighbourhood, but although it is found there in great abundance,
and appears to be of excellent quality and very durable, we are not aware
that quarries have hitherto been opened for general purposes. An elegant
verandah surrounds the house, and it derives a beautiful appearance from the
vines—principally of the Sweetwater variety—which have been trained
upon it.
Of the vineyard there is now about 16 acres in full bearing, Mr. Gilbert
commenced planting it to the north of the house in 1847, when about one
acre was put in with Yerdeilho, Gouais, and Riesling for white wines, and
Shiraz and Carbonet for red. In 1855, the bearing-wood of all the
vines was destroyed by frost on the 12th November, and the heads had
afterwards to be taken off with saws. Since 1847, Mr. Gilbert has almost
every year increased the extent of his vineyard, planting Yerdeilho and
Riesling for the white wines, and Shiraz and Carbonet for the red. Although
in the first instance many of the vines were planted at a less distance apart,
they stand now throughout the vineyard at 8 feet by 4, The plough, horse-
hoe, and scarifier, are freely used between the rows to keep down the weeds,
hand labor being largely employed for the same purpose between the vines.
When Mr. Gilbert commenced planting he staked his vines, and pruned
them short. Finding that system unsatisfactory in its results, he reared


standards, but equally dissatisfied with that practice, be discarded it for
trellising and long pruning. Now the whole of the vines are trellised upon
wires, with the exception of about three acres which will be trained in that
way after the present vintage. The vineyard, being situated on the crown
and highest slopes of what we have called the residence hill, is open to all
aspects. On the north-west side an orchard has been planted to protect the
vines from the influence of the rough winds which prevail from that
quarter. On the south and east the vineyard is enclosed by a splendid
whitethorn fence, about 12 feet high.
About four years ago an orchard was flourishing on four acres of the
present vineyard. The trees were from eight to ten years old and good
bearers, but finding fruit at that time comparatively valueless, Mr. Gilbert
grubbed them up, and supplied their place with vines. He had previously
adopted the same course with respect to a lucerne plantation, or rather with
respect to lucerne planted between the rows of trees. This he sacrificed
first, and planted the space with vines, and the removal of the fruit-trees
followed. It is worthy of remark that although the separate rows of vines
may be distinguished on account of tbeir different ages, there is no perceptible
difference in the vigor of the plants, either where planted after fruit-trees,
lucerne, or in virgin soil. In a direct line with the principal entrance to the
house there is a kind of ornamental arcade, cleverly designed, and with vines
trained upon it like creepers. Its length is about 300 feet, and, the pathway
being gravelled, it affords a delightful promenade.
About the latter end of 1847 Mr. Gilbert received from England a
consignment of English varieties of the vine, from Dr. Lindly, of Chiswick.
Amongst them were the Malaga, Muscatel, Chasselas Musque, Black
Lombardy, White Malvosia, Black Prince, and the Black Morocco, or—as it
is, we presume, erroneously called in this colony—the Black Prince. The
Black Morocco, or, locally the Black Prince, is a large oval-shaped grape,
whereas the variety sent out from England with the appellation of Black
Prince yields a much smaller but also oval-shaped fruit. The vines thus
consigned were all carefully numbered and labelled, and Mr. Gilbert inclines
to the opinion that the European growers are most likely to be correct in
their nomenclature. There are several other well-known instances in which
either a number of names have been attached to the same variety or an
altogether wrong one given to it, and although it is objectionable to name
colonial wines after their European prototypes, it would be highly beneficial
if some reliable system of classification of vines could be introduced and
perpetuated in the Australias. M. Jules Guyot in his recently published
work upon the vine, asserts that there are only 40 .known varieties worth
cultivating, but these are called by no less than 300 different names. There
were several other varieties in the consignment from Chiswick besides those
we have named above, and Mr. Gilbert has given cuttings of most of them to
different vignerons in the colony, but some of them he destroyed at Pewsey
Yale because the fruit did not ripen there.
Next year Mr. Gilbert purposes adding four acres to his vineyard, making
it altogether 20 acres, but there his ideas of extension cease. From the
four acres we allude to, stones for building purposes—which abound there—


are being grubbed, and this work will answer the purpose of trenching the
ground. The soil of the vineyard generally is light and somewhat sandy,
with a solid rock formation beneath it in many places. It appears, however,
admirably adapted for the growth of the vine, for without either manure or
irrigation the vines are full of health and growth.
The orchard is not large, but unusual care is bestowed upon it. Mr.
Gilbert has provided a set of strong nets for the purpose of protecting the
ripe fruit from the ravages of birds. These are first of all used for the cherry
trees, afterwards for the apricots, and lastly for the plums and peaches.
Hitherto, Mr. Gilbert has been unable to cultivate oranges with success on
account of the frosts, but he hopes to be more fortunate with them by
planting under the shelter of walls. There are a considerable number of
Zante currant vines in the garden, and Mr. Gilbert dries the fruit upon his
own premises. In the plantation at the back of the house there are a number
of English oaks, elms, horse-chesnuts, and scyamores, all thriving well. The
arrangements of the two hothouses and of the greenhouse are excellent. In
the latter there is a fine specimen of the egg-plant, producing an edible fruit
about the size of a cucumber and of a deep purple color. It is surrounded
by a splendid collection of exotics and choice plants.
The wine cellars are situated on the northern side of the vineyard. Like
the lower apartments of the house the lower floors of the cellars are excavated
in rock, and thus the desirable degree of coolness has been ensured. The
inner cellar on the lower story is 67 feet long by 27 feet wide, and eleven feet
high, but on the upper storey an additional foot of space is gained by reason
of the decreased thickness of the upper walls. The wine is chiefly stored in
the lower cellar, the upper apartment being used as the manufactory, if we
may apply the term. The casks range from 100 to 550 gallons in size, the
latter being the largest Mr. Gilbert uses. Mr. Gilbert prefers vessels of
from 200 to 500 gallons for fermenting, as the weather is generally cool in
the hills at vintage time, but if the weather was hot he would use smaller
vats, because large bodies of must are apt to ferment too quickly and too
violently, and it is then difficult to lower the temperature. He also objects
to large vats on account of the difficulty of filling them in one day, and he
objects to large store casks because he thinks the wine is not so likely to be
properly attended to as it would be in smaller vessels. All the casks in the
cellar are furnished with tin labels, on which the age, quality, and quantity
of the contents are distinctly painted. There is a good deal of comparatively
old wine in the cellar, and the three last vintages are largely represented.
Indeed, it is Mr. Gilbert’s custom not to sell his wines until they have
attained three or four years’ age, and we cannot help remarking that it would
be extremely fortunate for the reputation of South Australian wines if the
majority of our vignerons were in a position to follow such a judicious
course. Here, as at Evandale, we considered the choicest wine to be the
Eiesling, thoroughly matured, fragrant, delicate, and pure. Mr. Gilbert has
some of this of the vintage of 1852, and some of every vintage since. There
are some persons, however, who would probably prefer Mr. Gilbert’s red
wines, made from the Shiraz and Carbonet, especially that of bis earlier
vintages, a wine that would fairly rival if not outvie the finest Burgundy.


To return to the Riesling for a moment, we may mention that a short time
since a number of gentlemen—all experienced connoisseurs—met together in
Adelaide, for the purpose of testing the relative merits of this same Riesling
(of the vintage of 1854, we think), and some choice Hock, considered to be
the best wine of its class ever imported to this colony. The decision was in
favor of the colonial product.
Mr. Gilbert uses a crushing mill in the manufacture of his wines, and
presses the “ murk” in horsehair bags. In racking off the must he
invariably uses canvass hose in preference to the guttapercha article, which
he considers imparts an objectionable flavor to the wine. He is now building
a new wing to the cellar on the east side. This will be 60 feet long by 27,
and will be chiefly used as a storeroom and cooperage, &c.
We cannot conclude this article without devoting a few lines to some of
the other features of Mr. Gilbert’s establishment, although they are not
associated with “ Vineyards and Orchards” proper.
The stables and the blood stock in them are alone worth a visit. We saw
there Muscovado, located in quarters many a wealthy settler in the Far North
might envy, and Moonraker, and Witton, the sire of Riddle the winner of
the year’s Derby. Amongst the yearling stock at the homestead we noticed
a very racing-like filly by Muscovado out of Bessy Bell, entered for the
Derby of 1864, and a promising lot of Muscovados and Wittons. The best
of the two-year olds we saw was an entire colt, own brother to the filly
mentioned above, already showing great strength, with plenty of bone, and a
compact frame. He is entered for the Leger of 1863, and looks good
enough to come to very short odds for the event. The nag stable is a gem in its
way. The stall furniture and partitions are of polished gum, the composite
floor is as clean as a new pin, and a neat straw fringe—an appendage rarely
seen in colonial stables—borders the fodder of each stall. Arrangements
like this are however only in keeping with the general character of the
Pewsey Yale establishment. We saw also the Suffolk entire recently
imported by Captain Lawrence of the Orient, and purchased by Mr. Gilbert
for his run on Yorke’s Peninsula. A creek flows through the estate behind
the stables and other outbuildings towards the Para. On its opposite bank a
flower garden surrounds an elegant little church recently erected by Mr.
Gilbert, at his sole cost, and dedicated to St. Thomas. It is built with white
stone, and will seat about 150 persons comfortably. The fittings are simple,
but designed in perfect taste. The Rev. Mr, Murray, of Lyndoch Valley,
officiates every alternate Sunday, and the congregation averages from 50 to
100 persons, chiefly families in Mr. Gilbert's service. The Church was
opened on the Ist January, 1861, and there have already been 15 christenings
and one marriage there. A neat footbridge has been erected over the creek
to give easy access to the Church.
We have reserved for the last the mention of one of Mr. Gilbert’s most
important undertakings. He has already several springs of good pu re water
at the homestead, but in order that he may irrigate some adjacent land for
the purpose of growing root crops for his horse and cattle stock, and supply
a number of fountains shortly (we believe) to be erected in the pleasure
grounds, he has determined to construct a monster reservoir in the Barossa


ranges, at a distance of two miles from the house. The works connected
therewith are already* far advanced, and a large gang of laborers are busily-
employed upon the excavations. The reservoir will cover an area of nearly
six acres, and be 45 feet deep, the depth being attained by raising embank-
ments 30 feet above the level, and excavating 15 feet. The water will be
conveyed to the homestead by 2-inch galvanized welded iron pipes, and will
be also available for the supply of smaller reservoirs for the accommodation
of the stock in the paddocks. Eeally we may say with reason that ere long
the Pewsey Vale establishment will rival even
“ The stately homes of England.”
dint
sy THE EESIDEKCJ3 OE MB. DAVI'D EAyiDJgCTr, J.P.
hyr fClrt'C' ~
Mb. Eandalx/s vineyard, known as Glen Para, is situate in the vicinity of
Mount Crawford, about three miles from Pewsey Yale, on the road thence to
Gumeracha. The vines are planted on gently undulating ground commanding
all aspects, except one division of eight acres planted in 1861 upon a hill to
the north of the older vineyard, having a south-east aspect. The soil of Glen
Para is light, except in some of the hollows, and the subsoil varies from clay
to micaceous sandstone mixed with gravel and ironstone. The vineyard is
bounded on the west by the Barossa range, which affords good shelter from
the prevailing westerly winds. A border of trees of various kinds which had
been planted on the east of the vineyard were grubbed up two years ago,
because they afforded a shelter to the “ Silver-eye,” a bird very destructive to
vines. The space was planted with vines, which are now thriving well.
Mr. Eandall commenced planting in 1855, when about 5| acres were put in
with Shiraz, Eiesling, and Carbonet, the former variety in the largest
proportion. In the year following (1856) 10 acres were planted with the
same varieties, and in 1860 two acres were put in with Shiraz only. On
these divisions the vines were all planted at 5 feet by 10 apart, but in the 8
acres planted in 1861 4 feet by 12 was the distance adopted. Mr. Eandall
uses a one-horse plough, scarifier, and harrows for weeding between the rows,
and prunes long leaving fewer spurs in proportion. His plough was in
operation when we visited the vineyardf and a gang of laborers were busily
employed in tying up the vines to clear a path for the implement. We
noticed in one of the hollows or rillways, where the soil was blacker and
stiffer than on the higher ground, that the vines were growing with remarkable
luxuriance and making wood and foliage abundantly, but on an adjoining
rise, where the soil was light and somewhat sandy, the vines although less
vigorous in their growth bore heavier bunches of fruit, apparently better and
• January, 1862.
t January, 26, 1862.


more delicate than in the stronger soil. It is often found in com cultivation
that with a very heavy crop of straw the produce of grain is less in bulk and
coarser in quality than with a moderate crop of straw. The analogy
doubtless holds good with vines, and, if so, it is a weighty argument for close
pruning in strong soils.
The whole of the vineyard was originally plough-trenched to a depth of 21
inches, and now all the vines are staked. There are 20 acres of land fenced
in on the northern side, and four acres on the eastern side, which Mr. Randall
intends to plant next year chiefly with Pedro Ximenes. The orchard
comprises about 18 acres, planted with all varieties of fruit trees, but
principally with apples. *
The wine cellar now in use is a stone building with a thatched roof. It is
of comparatively limited dimensions, but Mr. Randall has a new two-storied
cellar in course of erection. Each storey will be 12 feet high, and 40 feet by
32 in the clear. The walls will be of stone, with a limeash and compo. roof.
Mr. Randall has recently secured a partner in the wine-making department
of his business—Mr. Charlesworth—who we understand has had considerable
experience in the manufacture and manipulation of wine, and to whose
superintendence the cellar work is entrusted. The oldest wines now on hand
are of the vintage of 1860. The best of these in our judgment is a pure
Riesling, which, when it attains maturity, will be an excellent wine. A pure
Shiraz of the same vintage is a fruity full-bodied wine, and has ripened fast,
but still requires age to perfect it. Mr. Randall has also a pure Carbonet
wine, and some other sorts, but it would be hardly fair to criticise them now,
as they are necessarily still in an immature condition. Unquestionably,
Messrs. Randall and Charlesworth’s cellars contain what we may term the
nucleus of some very excellent wines.
Mr. Randall has another vineyard on the South Rhine, planted in the
years 1858, ’59, and ’6O. It is situated about 10 miles due east from Glen
Para, near the Onetree Hill Creek. Upwards of 30 acres are planted with
Shiraz, Mataro, Black Portugal, and Carbonet for red wines, and Tokay and
Yerdeilho for white wines. All these stand at six feet by six apart. The
soil is light and rather sandy on the surface, with a clay subsoil mixed with
quartz and gravel. The vineyard commands all aspects. Nearly all of the
vines will be in bearing next year, and it is Mr. Randall’s intention to
construct cellars and other necessary buildings on the premises. Including
this and the Glen Para Vineyard Mr. Randall has already about 56 acres of
vines planted, and. as we have stated, he intends planting 24 acres more at
Glen Para. This will make an aggregate extent of 80 acres of vineyard, no
mean enterprise for any man to undertake single-handed.
During our visit to Glen Para we had an opportunity of seeing some
excellent Southdown sheep, recently imported by Mr. Randall, and some of
which were exhibited as extra stock at the last show (1861) of the South
Australian Agricultural Society. Mr. Randall is devoting considerable
attention to the increase of his fold, and some of the lambs, as well as the
older sheep, are excellent specimens of this useful and valuable breed.


SSlattleWle,
/ yt^n^ r u sh/^/.
Wattleville is situated on the right of the Mitkham-road, a little below
its junction with the Glen Osmond-road, and about two and a-half miles
from Adelaide. The place derives its name from the simple circumstance
that in the year after the orchard upon it was originally planted the ground
was densely covered with young wattles. W e presume it is scarcely necessary
we should state that the branch of industry to which Mr. Reynolds makes
Wattleville chiefly subservient is jam-making. His establishment has other
equally profitable adjuncts, but none other so extensive. When we state
that in 1861 Mr. Reynolds made 22 tons of jam, that this year* he will make
from 25 to 30 tons, and that next year he anticipates making from 50 to 60
tons, it will be seen at once that the scale on which the manufacture of the
article is carried on at Wattleville is unequalled in the colony, and merits
especial notice.
The orchard and vineyard at Wattleville was planted by Mr. Reynolds in
1850. The varieties of fruit from which jam is made are gooseberry, damson,
apricot, raspberry, peach, greengage, and magnum bonum, dauphin gage, blue
gage, Orleans, mussel, golden drop, and black plums, &c. Jam is also made
from grapes, a fruit for which Mr. Reynolds finds no less than four distinct
appliances, viz.—the manufacture of fermented wine, grape juice or
unfermented wine, raisins, and jam. It is needless for us to descant upon
the qualities of the Wattleville jams further than to say we tasted some of
several kinds, and found them all exceedingly good. A more valuable and
practical illustration of their quality is afforded by the fact that the 22 tons
Mr. Reynolds made last year were purchased by the proprietors of three
grocery establishments in Adelaide.
The premises in which the jam is manufactured and packed are of barely
sufficient extent, and Mr. Reynolds intends enlarging them considerably
before next year. There are three furnaces, which are sufficient for the
manufacture of two or three tons of jam per day. With only one copper
3,000 lbs. have been made in one day. The jams are all packed in tin cases
of various sizes, Mr. Reynolds having for several years past abandoned the
use of earthenware jars
Closely adjacent to the “jamming” house is an embankment 100 feet long
by 18 feet wide, inclining from a height of four feet on one side to the
natural level on the other, the purpose of which could hardly fail to puzzle
the uninitiated. It is the drying-ground whereon grapes are converted into
raisins and currants, of which Mr. Reynolds makes from 8 to 10 cwt. annually,
although at present merely experimenting preparatory to larger operations.
On one occasion he took a prize at a show in Adelaide with raisins which six
days previously were hanging on the vines as grapes. By a very simple process
which he adopts, and which we will endeavor to describe, Mr. Reynolds can in
very hot weather depend upon drying grapes perfectly in six days. A strong
• 1862.


lye is made from vine ashes, steamed and boiled. When this is at boiling
heat the grapes are dipped in it in bunches for a few seconds, until they are
almost parboiled and ready to burst. They are then spread on boards, zinc,
or matting, laid out on the drying-ground, and, if the weather remains fine,
they only require turning once or twice before the process of drying is
completed. Care should be taken to prevent rain or dews falling on them, as
wet destroys the bloom, and renders the fruit comparatively unsaleable.
When the grapes are not dipped in the lye, about double the time will bo
required for drying even in the hottest weather. The raisins are better as a
table fruit when not steeped, and retain a bloom on them, but Mr. Reynolds
informs us he has always obtained as high prices for those subjected to that
process as have been given for the best Cape raisins. With regard to other
kinds of fruit, such as apples, pears, plums, figs, &c., Mr. Reynolds considers
it somewhat surprising that, when these fruits are as plentiful and as cheap
as they are this year, the drying system should not be more generally
adopted. It is a simple and inexpensive method of preserving the fruit, and
of converting an article of produce now superabundant and almost valueless
into a useful and readily saleable commodity. A better instance of the
readiness with which it may be adopted by every one who possesses a fruit
tree can hardly be given than the fact that a plum fallen from a tree, if left
upon the ground exposed to the sun, but protected from the attacks of birds
or insects, will ripen into a prune as naturally as the chrysalis changes to the
butterfly. We think the Treasurer’s* hint is well worthy the consideration of
all who are now sacrificing the produce of their orchards for absurdly
inadequate remuneration, or who, in default of a more profitable means of
consumption, are giving peaches to pigs ! We may quote one other argument
why, for the benefit of the general community, the fruit grown in the colony
should be turned to a more useful and profitable account than much of it is
at present. By the statistics of South Australia for 1860 we find that the
value of imported fruits—comprising, we presume, preserves, jams, and dried
fruits—entered at Port Adelaide during that year for home consumption, was
no less than £19,825. Now, why should not this money find its way into the
pockets of our producers, instead of being sent out of the colony to compete
with South Australian industry ? There can be no doubt about the ability of
our fruit growers to produce a supply of preserved and dried fruits and jams,
very much in excess of any possible demand for home consumption, and
Mr. Reynolds’s manufactures have already sustained a reputation for first-class
quality in the markets of Victoria, Calcutta, the Mauritius, and England.
Why is it then that instead of being large importers, we are not large
exporters of preserved fruits and jams ?
Mr. Reynolds has about 12 acres of vineyard and orchard in full bearing.
A considerable portion of this extent is laid out upon a somewhat novel but
very excellent plan. A block of land, 510 feet square, is intersected in its
centre by a trellised avenue 14 feet wide, roofed with iron and wire, its extreme
height being also 14 feet. In the middle of this avenue a vestibule is formed
30 feet in diameter, and from this four other trellised avenues, each 9 feet wide
• At the time this article was written Mr. Reynolds was Treasurer of the Province.


strike off in acute angles. Upon all this trellising vines are carefully trained,
and in the centre avenue they have already almost overlapped on the roof. The
narrower avenues are not yet roofed, hut are destined to receive this addition
to their usefulness and beauty in a very short time. The vines in all
these avenues comprise about 50 different varieties, but the show of fruit
upon them could scarcely be excelled. There is one variety particularly
which Mr. Reynolds calls the Red Spanish, on which the bunches of fruit
must average at least sor 6 lbs.* There are also several vines of a somewhat
rare variety called the Ciotat. It bears an early sweet white grape, and its
leaves very much resemble those of the parsley plant. Mr. Reynolds
informed us that last year he gathered 84 lbs. weight of grapes off one chry stal
vine. The triangular pieces of land divided by the avenues are planted
with fruit trees, and constitute the principal extent of the Wattleville
orchard. There is, however, another portion of the grounds planted with
fruit trees, and on the eastern side a small vineyard, on which the vines
(chiefly Muscat) are all staked. Altogether the proportion in which the
12 acres is divided between orchard and vineyard is about eight acres to the
former and four acres to the latter. Adjoining the small Muscat vineyard on
the eastern side is a very good shrubbery, and opposite the Muscats we saw
a row of wild lemon trees, on which oranges have been grafted. Some of the
shoots of the latter, only six months old, are already six feet long. A few
orange trees were planted several years ago, but they have not done very well
because they have lacked sufficient moisture. It is Mr. Reynolds’s intention
to commence irrigating his orchard next year, as from the south-east corner
of the grounds there is a fall of several feet over the whole, and water
can be obtained in abundance at a depth of 25 feet. A few years ago
Mr. Reynolds had a reservoir on his grounds which was supplied by a spring
just beyond his boundary fence. The reservoir formed a capital plunge bath,
but it was all at once laid dry by a dyke cut by a neighbor, which carried off
all the water from the spring, but which at the same time had the beneficial
effect upon Mr. Reynolds’s ground of draining it below the surface. Mr.
Reynolds asserts that 10 years ago water could be obtained at Wattleville 12
feet nearer the surface than it can now.
In 1861 he planted two more acres of vines in cuttings, from 75 to 80 per
cent, of which have taken, and one more acre of fruit trees. The soil varies
from a red to a black loam of good depth, with a clay and decomposed
limestone subsoil.
Of the fermented wines made by Mr. Reynolds we can speak most
favorably of his Madeira (nearly pure) of last year’s vintage, which, with
more age, will be an excellent wine. His unfermented wine grapejuice has a
most fragrant bouquet, and retains the full flavor of the grapes, but is as sweet
as syrup. In making it, we believe the practice is to bottle the juice
immediately it is strained off from the husks. The bottles are not corked,
but are at once submerged up to their necks and are allowed to remain for
about an hour in boiling water. They are then removed and the scum
which will have risen to the surface of the bottled liquor is carefully taken
• Februaty, 1862.


off, the bottles are corked np, and replaced in the boiling water, where they
are kept one hour longer, and are then taken out and put away for use. Of
the value of this article when produced we will refrain from pronouncing an
opinion, although we can easily understand that it may be a favorite with some
palates, but we think very highly of the success Mr. Reynolds has acheived
in the manufacture of jam upon a very large scale. By shutting out
corresponding quantities of the foreign manufactured article from South
Australian markets, he has laid the foundation of a new resource for our
own fruit producers, of which we trust they will not be slow to avail
themselves.
(6 b (ftoin,
THE RESIDENCE OF MB GEORGE McEWIN, J.P.
Upon a large gum-tree, about 14 miles from Adelaide, on the high road
thence to Gumeracha, is placed a sign-board indicating the direction in
which the Glen Ewin Vineyard, Orchard, and Nursery Grounds are
situated. Following the track thus pointed out for about a quarter of a
mile, the traveller is all at once startled by the view suddenly obtained of a
picturesque homestead and luxuriant vegetation, the imprints of industry
and art upon the primaeval wildness of Nature. The scenery around is as
rugged now as when only the eye of the savage gazed upon it, but the adja-
cent hills—over whose “ steep frowning glories” Byron would have roved
with ecstacy —afford welcome protection to the reclaimed valley they enclose.
The situation of Glen Ewin is on the western spur of the Mount Lofty
Range, and about 1,000 feet above the level of the sea. A gully runs
through the enclosed grounds due east and west, and on its flat and on the
elopes of the hills rising from it Mr. McEwin has planted his vineyard and
orchard. The house stands at the eastern extremity of the gully, and from
it a good view can be obtained of Mount Gawler, where a trigonometrical
station has been established.
The present extent of the vineyard and orchard is about 12 acres, but
Mr. McEwin is preparing to add three acres to his vineyard this year.
There are now about two acres of vines in full bearing, the remaining ten
acres being occupied with fruit-trees and nursery plants. The vines are
planted on the lower slopes on the south of the gully, thus having a full
northern aspect. The three acres to be planted this year comprise the
higher slopes of the same hill. This ground was ploughed last year, and has
been fallowed since, preparatory to trenching as soon as the winter rains set
in. A green crop has been taken off it, so that nothing has been lost by the
fallow, while the soil has been thoroughly pulverized and subjected to the
beneficial influences of the atmosphere, and is thus in far better condition for
being reversed in trenching than it would be if it was to be trenched imme-
diately after being ploughed. The surface soil is light and porous, and


absorbs all the water that falls upon it. The subsoil is a stiffish red clay,
with a limestone crust beneath it, about 2 feet 6 inches from the surface.
Mr. McEwin trenches with a spade to a depth of 2 teet, and is thus enabled
to mix the retentive clay with the lighter soil on the surface. The varieties
of the vine now in bearing are chiefly the Frontignac and Black Hambro’,
from each of which Mr. McEwin makes a pure wine The varieties he
intends to plant in the new vineyard are Frontignac and the Kousillon
sorts. The vines are all staked, and it is Mr. McEwin’s practice to prune
short in the early part of the season, and at this period of the year* to allow
the foliage to interlace, and, by forming a species of canopy over each row,
to protect the fruit and shade the ground. When we visited Glen Ewin we
found the vines growing so luxuriantly as to be almost impenetrable ; but>
although heavily laden with fruit, we could not detect one bunch, except on
the ends of the rows, which had been withered by the sun, as is now too
generally the case in vineyards where there is less protection from the
scorching heat. The vines are, however, planted too closely, the distances
apart being only 5 feet by 4. This Mr. McEwin admits, and in the new
vineyard he will adopt greater distances.
Last year, from his two acres of vines, Mr. McEwin manufactured about
1,000 gallons of wine of the kinds already mentioned. Of the Black Hambro
he has none on hand, and we can, therefore, say nothing of its quality
beyond what may be inferred from its ready sale. The Frontignac of the
1861 vintage is a delicate wine, with a fragrant aroma and pleasant flavor-
For so young a wine it has ripened fast; but it has body enough to work
upon for another year, and with increased age will be a first-class article.
The cellar accommodation at Glen Ewin is rather limited at present, but
Mr. McEwin purposes erecting a two-storied cellar in the gully. It will bo
built with freestone of excellent quality obtained from a quarry on the
estate, and the lower storey will be partially excavated in the hill. The
house was built with the same kind of stone.
The orchard and nursery occupy the gully, flat, and hill slopes on the
northern side. Most of the apple-trees were planted in 1846, being thus
nearly 16 years old. They have already attained magnificent dimensions,
and the weight of fruit upon many of them has rendered it necessary to prop
up their branches with strong poles. There are almost innumerable varie-
ties, but we specially noticed several trees of the old English russet and the
scarlet nonpareil. The apples on a few of the trees which are in a very
exposed situation have been burnt up by the heat of the sun, but most of
them are too well protected to incur this injury. The trees are planted at
20 feet by 20 apart, but the branches already overlap, and Mr. McEwin
declares that in future he will plant none at less than 30 feet by 30. It is
his practice generally to stir the ground between the fruit-trees every year,
but in one portion of the orchard (where the trees are younger) he has been
precluded from doing so this season in consequence of the scarcity of labor.
As an instance of the rapid growth of the trees, we may mention that we
measured the trunk of one apple-tree, and found it 3 feet in the girth. Mr.
McEwin added two or three acres to his orchard in 1861.
* February, 1862.


In the nursery ground, on the northern slope, which rises one foot in four,
we noticed several prime plum-trees, only three years old from the graft,
bearing in some instances two or three gallons of fruit each. There are
about 50 orange-trees in the grounds, which were grafted on seedling stocks,
and are thriving remarkably well. None of them have suffered from frosts,
from which Mr. McEwin enjoys thorough immunity, except at the very
bottom of the gully. A stream runs through one portion of the grounds iu
the winter season, and this Mr. McEwin purposes damming up, in order to
enable him to irrigate his orchard, which he conceives to be essentially neces-
sary to its perfect development. At present he uses a portable water-engine
for the purpose.
Mr. McEwin was the President of the South Australian Agricultural and
Horticultural Society for 1861, and is well known for his extensive practical
and theoretical knowledge of horticulture, agriculture, and floriculture; and
under his enlightened management Glen Ewin is certain to become one of
the most important of the vineyards and orchards of the colony.
Mr. William Duncan has a small vineyard called “ Constantia,” about
half a mile beyond Glen Ewin, on the Little Para, near where the river has
its source. The extent of the vineyard is about two acres, and it derives its
name from the grape which it yields in the largest proportion. Mr. Duncan
has planted an additional three acres with Shiraz, Pedro Ximenes, and the
Housillon varieties. We believe Mr. Duncan purchased the place only a
year ago; but as the soil and situation are extremely favorable for the
growth of the vine, it is quite likely he will succeed in forming a valuable
vineyard.
Houghton, a village on the old road to Gumeracha, and about a mile and
a half from Glen Ewin, can boast of several vineyards and orchards in its
immediate vicinity. Of these the most considerable are Mr. Needham’s and
Mr. Heed’s. Mr. Needham has about six acres of excellent orchard and
about two acres of vines on the right of the road from Houghton to Higher-
combe. Mr. Heed has one acre of vines in full bearing, two acres recently
planted, and one acre of orchard within a stone’s throw of the village. His
vines and fruit-trees are very productive, and their situation is prominently
marked by a beautiful willow which stands in the fence by the roadside.
|ara-|itp,
THE RESIDENCE OE MB. WALTER DUEEIELD, M.P.
On the west side of the Northern Hail way, and about one mile from Gawler
Town, is situated Mr. Walter DuiHeld’s Vineyard and Orchard. The
planting of the orchard was commenced nine years ago, and of the vineyard
two years later. Up to the present time the extent of both has been steadily


increased, and now Mr. Duffield is busily engaged with the erection of a
magnificent mansion upon his grounds.
The present extent of the vineyard and orchard is about 14 acres. The
natural formation of the land is somewhat peculiar. Formerly the course
of the Gawler Eiver wound through it in the form of a horseshoe. The
land rises in a gentle slope from the bed of the old channel until it forms a flat,
and, again rising at the north end, it forms a second plateau of about half an
acre 10 to 15 feet above the table-land outside the horseshoe. The bed of the
channel remains still, but the water has found for itself another and more
direct course. The slopes have three aspects —north-east, east, and west—
and are planted with vines seven years old, comprising in the aggregate
three acres. On the flat there is another acre of vines, also seven years old ;
and the principal portion of the remainder of the flat, and some of the rising
ground, is planted with fruit-trees, chiefly apples—these are nine years old.
The soil of the flat and the slopes is a sandy loam, with a clay subsoil. The
vines on the slopes have been very much injured by the continued drought
of the last six months*, and by the extreme heat which has occasionally pre-
vailed. On some of the plants which are more exposed than others almost
every buncb of fruit has been literally scorched up, while, if it were worth
the trouble, we are sure a considerable quantity of very tolerable raisins
might be gathered. A good deal of this is probably owing to the fact that
any moisture which falls upon the slopes drains from them speedily, in conse-
quence of their peculiar position and the non-retentive nature of the soil.
As an instance of the mischief done, we may mention that Mr. Lane, to
whom the management of Mr. Duffield’s vineyard and cellar is entrusted,
informed us that a few weeks ago he calculated upon making 20 hogsheads of
wine from the four acres ; but now the probability is he will only make about
two hogsheads therefrom. Irrigation seems the only safeguard, and to this
Mr. Duffield is preparing to resort. He has already commenced to sink a
well on the flat near the house; and when a supply of water is obtained
pipes will be laid all round the slopes, and the whole of the ground irrigated
at pleasure by means of leading hose. On the flats and in the more
sheltered portions of the vineyard the vines are flourishing luxuriantly, and
bear splendid bunches of fruit, with some of which, by-the-bye, Mr. Duffield
gained a prize at the recent Show of the Gawler Agricultural and Horticul-
tural Society.
On the four acres of vineyard planted seven years ago the varieties are
Frontignac, with which Mr, Duffield makes a pure wine ; Mataro and Shiraz,
from which he makes a red wine, with two-thirds of the former and one-third
of the latter variety; and Yerdeilho and Muscat, with which, with two-
thirds of the former and one-third of the latter, he makes a white wine.
Two acres of vines were planted last year on the table-land on the east of
the grounds, the varieties selected being Black Portugal, Mataro, Shiraz,
and Yerdeilho. Next year about three acres more will be planted with
Black Portugal, Shiraz, and Mataro for red wine, and Yerdeilho and
Madeira for white. About one acre of the vines are treliised, and the
remainder are staked.
* February. 1862.


Most of the wine Mr. Duffield has now on hand is too new to permit a fai ’
estimate of its quality being arrived at at present, being chiefly of lasi
year’s vintage. We tasted however in the cellar a sample of the vintage c
1859, made from about equal proportions of Shiraz, Mataro, and Blac
Hambro’, with a small proportion of red Frontignac, and a pleasanter or
more grateful wine no one need wish to drink. It was perhaps a shade too
sweet, but another year’s age will rectify that. Another cask of the same
vintage, and from the same varieties, with the exception of the red Frontignac,
was broached, and with reference to it we will (on Mr. Lane’s authority)
relate a singular circumstance. During that gentleman’s recent absence from
Gawler the cask was entirely unattended to, and, although not full when left
by Mr. Lane, was not filled up for eighteen months. When he returned a
short time ago and heard this, he naturally expected to find the wine
thoroughly spoilt, but strange to say, although when broached the cask was
only half full, the wine was sound and in excellent condition, excepting only
a peculiar but by no means unpleasant flavor. How can this be accounted
for, opposed as it is to the universally received theory of winemakers ?
About 500 orange trees were planted last year on the north-east portion
of the grounds, comprising 30 new varieties imported from Sydney and
Melbourne. They stand 16 by 18 feet apart, are thriving well, and have
never suffered in any degree from frosts. There is a capital greenhouse in
the garden, and an apiary containing six hives. Small glass cases are
provided, in which the bees deposit the honey, which is by that means enabled
to be brought to table in its primitive state. The ornamental portion of the
grounds, which have been laid out under Mr. Lane’s superintendence, comprise
a large variety of pine and fir trees, about 180 varieties of roses, and numerous
choice shrubs and flowers. There are a few olive trees thriving well, and of
these Mr. Duffield contemplates planting a large number.
De. Schombebg’s Yineyaed at Euchfielde.— On the banks of the
Gawler Eiver, about four miles west of Gawler Town, Dr. Schomberg lias a
vineyard of about five acres. The vines are planted on the river slopes and
in the adjoining gullies, embracing all aspects. The soil is light, and in dry
seasons a great deal of injury is experienced, the quantity of wine made
being very small, although perhaps in such seasons the quality is superior.
Dr. Schomberg makes a white wine from Madeira and Verdeilho, and a red
wine from Mataro. He has besides a large variety of table grapes. The
wine produced by Dr. Schomberg has an excellent reputation in Gawler
Town.
Me. Winckel’s Yineyaed at Euchfielde.— Closely adjacent to Dr.
Schomberg’s vineyard, and in a very similar position", Mr. Winckel has
about three acres of vines. He makes principally a red wine, using
three-fourths of Mataro and one-fourth Shiraz, or two-thirds of the former
and one-third of the latter. The soil is a red sandy clay, with yellow clay at
places, and the subsoil limestone mixed with gravel. The vineyard commands
all aspects. Mr. Winckel has also a largo number of fruit trees, and has
commenced a system of irrigation for these and the vines, which has been
attended with very beneficial results.


THE RESIDENCE OE THE HON. C, G. EYEEABD, AND WM. EYEBAED, ESQ.
But few of our readers will require a description of the locality of
Dr. Everard’s residence, for who is there amongst us who has not
journeyed upon the Bay-road P and who that has has failed to notice and
admire the luxuriant trees and verdant shrubs which adorn the grounds at
Ashford P The estate is situated about two miles from Adelaide, in a pecu-
liarly favored position. The present extent of the orchard and vine yard is
only about three acres, but an additional space of two acres has been pre-
pared for planting with vines next year. Planting was commenced 18 years
ago, and the orchard is, consequently, one of the oldest in the colony. For-
merly the Brownhill Creek ran through the cultivated ground, but its
course has since been diverted for the purposes of irrigation, the appliances
for which Mr. Everard has now rendered very complete.
One of the first objects which arrested our attention was a gigantic gum-
tree which stands on the bank of the creek to the eastward of Mr. Everard’s
residence. Some idea of its immense and probably unparalleled proportions
may be formed from the fact that 5 feet above the ground its trunk measures
40 feet in circumference. The tree has plenty of vigor still, and, although
it has probably stood for ages, it would be too venturesome to predict the
period of its decay. The lower portion of its trunk is hollow, and the vacuity
is almost large enough to be used as a cart-shed. It has not escaped, but it
has well withstood, the ravages of time, and—like a veteran who has survived
the storms and battles of his earlier days—it bears numberless scars and
charred wounds to attest the severity of the perils it has lived to triumph
over. We could not pass by such an almost monumental specimen of the
ancient monarchs of Australian forests without momentarily digressing from
our more legitimate subject.
Finding it was impossible otherwise to direct as he wished the waters of
the creek, several years ago Mr. Everard cut a straight channel through his
estate nearly a mile long, commencing on the northern boundary of the
orchard. The course of the creek was thus successfully diverted, but it was
still found impossible to use the water at pleasure for irrigating the grounds,
and in 1861 Mr. Everard constructed a brick culvert in the bed of the
channel for a length of about 100 feet, terminating at the north-eastern corner
of the orchard, which is its highest point. The culvert is 6 feet wide and 4 feet
deep, and at the point mentioned a sluice was made to carry the water to
the garden, where it can be directed as required by dam-boards fitting in the
culvert to the head of the sluice, and forming impervious floodgates. When the
water is not required in the orchard the boards are removed, and it is allowed
to flow onwards on its course. Communicating with the sluice-drain are surface
races, which convey the water to the root of eveijy tree or plant it is desired
to irrigate. The creek flows for several months in the year, and during that
time Mr. Everard can easily throw water, to about ten times the amount of
the ordinary rainfall, on to the orchard, and this he finds amply sufficient to


keep all his trees growing luxuriantly throughout the year. But their mag-
nificent growth may be partly accounted for by the extraordinary richness of
the soil, which is an alluvial deposit formed by the accumulation of silt
from the overflows of the creek in past time. Even still the depth of soil is
increasing, for after almost every heavy rain, when the water is turned on
from the creek, a crust of rich deposit is found on the surface when the
moisture has been absorbed ; indeed, the peculiar situation of Mr. Everard’s
orchard and his system of irrigation combine apparently all the advantages
of “ warping” periodically practised with so much success on lands adjacent
to some of the rivers in Yorkshire, Oxfordshire, and other counties of
England. Another great advantage is the almost perfect shelter from
rough winds, blow from what quarter they will. On the north side, parallel
with the artificial channel of the creek, is a row of mulberry-trees 14 years
old, most of which are nearly 4 feet in the circumference of the trunk, and
have already attained a great height. On the west side there is an outer
fence of pomegranates, with a paling fence inside it, and inside that again a
double row of wild olives, and, beyond them, a row of locust pseudo
acacias, and on the south a row of wild olives, the branches of which interlace
at the top, forming a perfect covered avenue within. Parallel with the Bay-
road, besides a high paling fence on which Muscatel vines are trellised,
there is a row of Jordan almonds, and on the east the garden is protected
by the house and adjoining outbuildings. So complete is the shelter thus
secured that when the roughest winds have been expending their fury
scarcely any effect could be observed upon the trees planted within these
walls of foliage.
The older portion of the orchard is situated upon the south side of the
ground. It contains, besides a large variety of ordinary fruits, about 60
orange trees of various kinds, planted 15 years ago. It is impossible to
conceive a more luxuriant vegetation than the trees present. They are
planted at 20 feet by 20 apart, but their branches already meet, and Mr.
Everard declares that in future he will plant none at less than 30 feet by 30.
Some of the trees cannot have less than 100 dozen of oranges upon them
now, and on nearly all new shoots may be discerned, which have sprung
since the late heavy rains about a month ago, and have already attained a
length of 18 or 20 inches. Next to these oldest orange trees is about half an
acre of vines planted 5 feet by 5 apart, and trellised upon wooden posts and
battens. The vines are never irrigated, the water from the creek being
carefully conveyed past them to the orange trees beyond. The sorts are
principally the Grizzly, Bed, Black, and White Erontignac, the Tokay, Black
Ilatnbro', and Black Prince. The half acre yields on an average about 400
gallons of wine annually. There are also- about 2,00 P cuttings of Pedro
Ximenes, and Palo-mino-blanco, obtained from the Clarendon Vineyard, and
intended for planting in the two acres of prepared ground already alluded to,
Mr. Everard having hitherto been prevented from extending his vineyard as
he has desired by the scarcity of labor, and its high price. Beyond the vines
and between them and the creek channel is another lot of about 150 orange
trees planted seven years ago, and already bearing abundantly. The varieties
are the Navel, St. Michael, Common, Paramatta, Sabina, Seville, Maltese,


Oval, China, &c., &c., and there are also a number of Curaquats, Lisbon
Lemon, and Citron trees. Almost in the centre of the orchard is a
magnificent mulberry tree, which deserves special mention. Its trunk measures
5 feet 6 inches in circumference, and its spreading branches shelter a large
piece of ground. The tree is eighteen years old, and is, we imagine, the
largest of its species in the colony. Two years ago its trunk was split by a
hurricane, but the breach has been strongly bound up by an iron chain, and
the noble tree appears none the worse for the casualty. We also noticed in
the garden a few young walnut trees, one of which had shot from the ground
to a height of 10 feet in two seasons, and three fine date palms, about 15
years old.
In a small enclosure near the house we saw a few head of deer, and we
ascertained that Mr. William Everard brought the founders of the herd
from England about four years ago. There were three does and one buck.
One of the does died on the voyage out, but the others have thriven well
ever since, and have bred regularly every year. The herd now numbers
eight head in all. Mr. Everard intends to turn them loose in his paddocks
very shortly, and the pretty animals will no doubt enjoy their extended
liberty. Mr. Everard has also imported some purely white turkeys,
which are considered by connoisseurs a very superior kind, and we are sure
the public of South Australia will appreciate his efforts to introduce new
species of useful animals, or new varieties of species already amongst us.
dim dDsraonb Dilla,
jj THE RESIDENCE OSMOKB-QTXLES.
frtJuf cjL' X f
We have already described “ Sunnyside,” the residence of the Hon. William
Milne, and we have now to notice Mr. Gilles’s vineyard, between which
and Sunnyside only one section intervenes. There is little difference
between the altitude of these two vineyards, and the view from each is
equally beautiful, except, perhaps, that from Glen Osmond Villa there is a
more extensive prospect to the south. From the verandah of Mr. Gilles’s
residence the spectator gains an uninterrupted birdseye view of the plains
around Adelaide from beyond Brighton on the one side to Salisbury on the
other, while stretching to the horizon on the westward are the blue waters of
the Gulf. The towering hills overlooking the village of Glen Osmond on the
eastward form a noble background to a picture which, if it may be equalled,
cannot be surpassed by any scenery in the Australias.
The Glen Osmond Villa Vineyard has been since its formation and is still
under the sole management of Mr. J. W. Bull, and to this gentleman we are
indebted for some minute details of the system he has adopted in the pre-
paration of the soil and the subsequent treatment of the vines. Planting


was commenced in 1858, in which year seven acres were put in with
cuttings. The land selected is on the lower slope of the hill on which the
Glen Osmond Silver-lead Mine was worked some time ago, and has a
western aspect, with a sufficient gradient to the south to protect the vines
from the hot north winds. The soil is a deep red loam, with a small propor-
tion of limestone intermixed, resting upon a subsoil of loose shaly slatestone.
In the first instance the land was ploughed (with four horses) to a depth of
8 inches, then double open furrows were struck 12 feet apart, and in these
furrows a top was laid back, as in ordinary stetch-ploughing. A sufficient
number of men to keep pace with the plough followed on the bottom of the
furrow with “ Kent spuds,” or hop-garden forks, with which they thoroughly
stirred the subsoil to the full depth of the 9or 10 inch tines. In this way a
width of 3 feet was ploughed off on either side of the “ tops,” and the forking
process (equal to spade trenching) repeated, leaving a width of 6 feet of
ploughed land untrenched between each “ top.” Then on every 6 feet of
trenched land two rows of vines were planted 4 feet apart in furrows struck
with the plough, and with 4 feet between each vine in the rows ; thus every
row has an outer margin of 1 foot of trenched land, besides the intervening
space of 6 feet untrenched. When the vines have grown up Mr. Bull adopts
an inexpensive system by which he ensures them support, and the grapes
shelter from the scorching rays of the sun, without the necessity of either
trellising or staking. It is simply this : —ln the ordinary season the vines
are pruned as usual, and when the shoots have attained a sufficient length
the tops of three vines—two in one row and one in another, forming a
triangle—are tied together ; thus sufficient protection is afforded to the
fruit, and the interwoven foliage of the vines renders them mutually sup-
porting. A few weeks before the grapes are to be gathered the knot by
which the heads of the vines are secured is severed, and thus no difficulty is
experienced in picking the fruit. Mr. Bull’s plan appears to be not only
readily executed, but economic and efficacious.
The varieties planted in 1858 were Tokay, Kiesling, Mourastie, Carignan,
Gouais, Yerdeilho, Malbec, Shiraz, Grenache, and Mataro— the six latter in
the largest proportion. Altogether there were about 7,200 cuttings planted
on the seven acres, but some of the ground on the headlands was not planted.
1858 was not a favorable year for vines, and some of the cuttings failed. In
1859 it was necessary to plant nearly 2,200 cuttings to fill up the gaps on the
seven acres, and, as another extremely unfavorable season ensued, these also
were a failure, and in 1860 the blanks were again renewed; again they
failed, and last year the gaps were supplied with rooted vines, which up to
he present time are thriving admirably. There are about 5,000 vines in
<earing on the seven acres. Mr. Bull thinks very highly of the Grenache
as an excellent bearer and a useful grape, and would have planted more
if that variety if he could have procured the cuttings. There can be no
loubt that the Grenache is particularly well adapted to this locality, for both
Mr. Hay and Mr. Milne give an equally favorable account of its growth and
ield in their vineyards.
In 1861 four acres were planted on the same system as that recorded
above, and the cuttings have struck and are doing very well. Nearly eight


anres more have been ploughed ready for planting this year, and when this has
been done Mr. Grilles’s vineyard will comprise in the aggregate about 19
acres. There are two acres of orchard immediately adjacent to the house on
the slopes above the vineyard, and 80 orange-trees planted irregularly upon
about two acres of ground. These trees are six years old, and most of them
are bearing fruit. They are irrigated at pleasure in a very inexpensive
manner from an underground tank near the house capable of containing
15,000 gallons. This is fed from channels cut on the hills above, and sup-
plies in its turn two fountains erected in the ornamental portion of the
grounds. The waste water from the fountains is conveyed to the orangery
and orchard by means of galvanized iron piping, and carried to the trees by
surface races.
About three hogsheads of wine were made last year —two of red, and one
of white. These wines were made from an admixture of the varieties on the
seven acres planted in 1858, and consequently have no distinctive character.
This was done because there were then comparatively so few vines of each
sort in bearing. In future it is Mr. Bull s intention to make a red wine
from Malbec and Shiraz, and a white from Yerdeilho and Gouais. Another
class of white and red wine will be made from the remaining varieties
of each.
A new cellar is now in course of erection on the southern side of the
vineyard. The lower storey is excavated into the hill on the mouth of one
of the old levels of the silver lead mine. The drive leads into the hill to an
old air shaft on the 40-faihom level, and this will afford a continual draught
through the cellar. The lower storey, in which the wine will be fermented
and stored, is 7 feet 6 inches high and 34 feet by 12 in the clear. The upper
storey has a slanting roof of palings and felt, which is to be covered with
corrugated iron. Here we had an opportunity of inspecting some new wine-
making machinery invented by Mr. Bull. There is a strong wooden trough
18 feet long by 22 inches in the clear. [These proportions are not absolute,
and the trough may be made to any required size.] Fitting into the trough
is a solid wooden roller, 14J inches in diameter, with a spindle in the centre,
to which two crank handles are attached, one on either side. A layer of
grapes, say 6 inches deep, is placed in the trough, and the roller, worked
by a man at each handle, is passed over the fruit as often as maybe necessary,
commencing at the bottom of the incline. We saw about 6 cwt. of grapes
put into the trough and this quantity was crushed in fifteen minutes. The
grapes were put in without being stalked, and Mr. Bull considers the presence
of the stalks in some measure protects the pips from being broken. However
this may be, we could not see any pips that were, nor any berries that were
not crushed by the process. Mr. Bull considers that a further advantage
of his machinery is that by the grapes being spread out in the trough, any
leaves or unripe or injured fruit can be readily seen, and easily removed.
Allowing for a few minutes interval to clear the trough of the murk when
required, we should suppose Mr. Bull can by his plan crush about one
ton of grapes per hour, as effectually as a good grape miff will perform the
same operation. The trough is placed upon tresscls on an inclined plane,
so that it can be run backwards or forwards at pleasure, and the incline can


also be altered as required. When white wine is to be made the must and
murk are passed through a f-inch sieve, to remove the stalks, into a receiving
vat from which the must is strained from the murk and carried on to the
fermenting vats in the lower storey, by guttapercha hose, and the murk is
afterwards put in the wine press. In making red wine the must and murk
pass together into the fermenting vat, and for wines of the first quality no
more pressure than that of the roller is used, the after pressings being
appropriated as a second-class article. The wine-press is about 2 feet 6 inches
deep and is worked by screws and leverage, the screws working horizontally
instead of perpendicularly.
I&bptc,
THE BESIDENCE OE MB. ABTHXJE HABBT.
The Birksgate Vineyard is situated on the south of the Glen Osmond-road,
on the slope of the first hill approached from Adelaide. Planting was
commenced in 1857 and continued in 1858, in which seasons seven acres in
all were put in. The whole of the ground was spade-trenched, and the vines
were planted 6 feet by 5 apart. Those on the lowest portion of the slope
have since been trellised, and those at a higher elevation are staked.
]VIr. Hardy, however, prefers trellising to any other system, the only objection
he entertains to it being that where it is adopted it is only possible to plough
between the vines in one direction, whereas he considers it advisable, where
practicable, to plough transversely and diagonally. The whole of the
vineyard is on rising ground, and Mr. Hardy has availed himself of the
natural facilities the situation affords for irrigation. Water is conveyed by
channels cut at a higher elevation on the hill, and is disseminated by levels
struck with the plough. The supply is obtained from springs in the hills,
from the Glen Osmond Creek, and from the rainfall, so that it may be relied
on all the year round. The vines are irrigated at intervals until December,
when the water is shut off—at all events, from those vines which are in
bearing. There is a much larger extent of younger vineyard (to which we
shall presently allude), which is irrigated throughout the year. The seven
acres to which we are now referring have a north-western aspect; and the
soil is a rich brown loam, resting upon a 'subsoil of decomposed limestone
and slatestone. The varieties planted thereon are Bed and White Madeira
(both used for a white wine), Gouais, Pedro Ximenes, Yerdeilho, Frontignac,
and Palo-mino-blanco. In 1861, Mr. Hardy made a few hogsheads of white
wine from the produce of all these varieties mixed, but this year he has sold
all his grapes. From the varieties named, most of which were imported
direct from Xeres by the Hon. John Morphett, it will be seen that it is
Mr. Hardy’s intention to reserve this vineyard solely for the production
of white wines. He is not, however, yet prepared to commence the


manufacture of wine on a large scale, but it his intention to erect suitable
wine-houses and cellars so soon as the whole extent of vineyard he has
planted (altogether abont 40 acres) is in bearing. At present he is devoting
his attention more exclusively to the maturing of his younger vines.
On the same hill, but at an elevation of about 150 feet higher than the
older vineyard, and 450 feet above the level of Adelaide, Mr. Hardy planted
about eight acres in 1859 and 1860. A somewhat precipitous gully runs
through the centre of this piece from east to west, and the vines, being
planted on the slopes, command a south-western aspect on the one
side, and a north-western on the other, but a higher rise to the west-
ward protects both situations from the influence of the destructive
westerly winds. One piece of ground on the crown of the slope north-
ward of the gully Mr. Hardy has not planted, simply because it is exposed
to these winds. About five acres of the gully slopes are terraced, partly as
a means of breaking the rush of storm water down the gully, and partly to
use up the superabundance of stone turned up in trenching, and which was
quite unfit for any useful purpose, and would have entailed a heavy expense
to cart it away. Mr. Hardy informed us, however, that besides this he
obtained sufficient metal stone from the land to repay the cost of trenching.
The terraces vary from about 12 to 20 feet in width, and have two, three,
and in some instances four rows of vines upon them. The stone walls are
built to a height of 2 or 3 feet, and the soil is thrown up to a level with
them. It will, of course, be understood that these terraces are constructed
across the gully, and we might, not inaptly, compare their appearance at a
little distance to a flight of broad stairs. The varieties planted on the
terraces are Shiraz, Mataro, Malbec, and Tinta, all fof red wine. These
vines are staked, but Mr. Hardy intends to trellis them. On the remaining
portion of this vineyard the varieties are almost identical with those in the
older vineyards already mentioned, and are also intended for white wines
solely. On the bottom of the gully, but at the highest elevation, about 60
orange-trees were planted eighteen months ago. They have been constantly
and regularly irrigated, and have already attained a surprising size for theii
age. In order to ensure a supply of water to irrigate these trees in the
driest season, Mr. Hardy has placed two galvanized iron tanks, capable of
holding 1,500 gallons each, in the gully, and they arc easily filled after a
shower by piping leading to them from the channels cut in the hill, or, in the
absence of rain, from the springs. One of the tanks leaks sufficiently to
empty itself in a week, and by this means gentle but continual irrigation is
maintained. An experiment has been made by Mr. Hardy with some of
these orange-trees which is worth recording as indicating something of the
properties and effect of that powerful stimulant, Peruvian guano. Having a
bag of this article to spare about four months ago, Mr. Hardy determined to
try its effect upon the orange-trees. He therefore dissolved it in water, and
applied the solution to the trees in trenches cut round each at about 3 feet
from the stems. The result was satisfactory enough, and the trees have
grown surprisingly, but that it is possible to have too much even of a good
thing was clearly demonstrated by the effect of the guano upon two unfor-
tunate trees whose roots it was allowed to approach too closely. In this


instance the solution was applied close to the stems, instead of at the
respectful distance of 3 feet, and the trees are completely withered. This is
doubtless owing to the high percentage of ammonia in Peruvian, guano,
which becomes positively destructive in a warm dry soil in hot seasons, its
influence being almost exclusively valuable to cold, damp land. We may
mention, however, that guano has been discovered on some islands on the
Australian coast, the properties of which are really appropriate to Australian
soils and climate, because, while it possesses but a small percentage of
ammonia, it has a large percentage of phosphates, and is thus, unlike
Peruvian guano, calculated to operate as a fertilizer rather than as a stimu-
lant to the soil. In recording the dangerous effect of Peruvian guano when
incautiously applied, it is important that the essential difference between it
and the article which our own coasts or adjacent islands supply should be
clearly understood.
At the foot of the same hill, to the westward, Mr. Hardy planted another
vineyard in 1861. The extent is about 10 acres ; and the varieties planted
are Shiraz, Tokay, Carbonet, and Tinta, solely for red wines. The soil is a
deep marly loam, and, being sufficiently loose, it was only plough-trenched
before planting. The cuttings have nearly all struck, and look healthy and
vigorous. They are planted at 8 feet by 6 apart.
MOUNT LOFTY VINEY'ARD, THE SUMMER RESIDENCE OF MR. HARDY.
We believe no one in South Australia is qualified to dispute with Mr. Hardy
the distinction of having planted a vineyard at the highest elevation above the
level of the sea. 'Who has not remarked, when gazing at towering Mount
Lofty, the white patch, visible even beyond the shores of the mainland, which
marks its western side within a very short distance of its highest point ?
But will not some be surprised to learn that on that same white patch vines
have been planted, and have thriven well enough to warrant the anticipation
that they will prove the nucleus of a luxuriant vineyard. There is the
mountain side—too nearly perpendicular to be called a slope and on the
surface is an admixture of disintegrated rock, black sand, and stone reduced
apparently by the action of fire, and it is 2,200 feet above the level of the sea.
From the “look out” on the hill-top we see on the northward the
Hummock Ranges very clearly with the naked eye. To the southward, like
a murky irregular line upon the horizon, we discern the distant shores of
Kangaroo Island, and we distinguish Point Marsden, while on the westward
we overlook Yorke’s Peninsula. Cape Jervis, the entrance to Backstairs ’
Passage, Rapid Head, and Aldinga Bay are discernible on the southward,
and the Gulf itself is stretched before us, looking like a lake, except at the
opening we know to be Investigator Straits. Then, on the eastward we
have a bird’s-eye view of the Onkaparinga country, with Mount Barker for a
background, and beyond it the blue waters and distant shores of Lake
Alexandria or Victoria as it is sometimes called. We look down again on
the steep descent below us —on the rock, and stone, and sand, and we see
distinct rows of young vines, green, and strong of growth.
G


About seven acres have been planted here. The soil—that is the stone,
sand, and rock—was broken up with picks, and the scrub upon it was rooted
and burnt. This was done in the seasons of 1859 and ’6O, and cuttings were
planted in rows 6 feet by 5 apart. With them walnut trees were planted
in rows 1 chain (66 feet) apart, and half a chain apart in the rows. Thus
vines and walnuts are to have an equal chance, and whichever proves the
least remunerative will be rooted up, or rather as the vines will prove their
failure or success before the walnut trees will be large enough to be trouble-
some to them, it will depend upon the issue whether they will remain or not.
If they fail they will be rooted up, and the walnuts will have it to themselves,
but if they succeed the walnuts will be transplanted or destroyed. Mr. Hardy
has planted only the Red Madeira here. The walnuts were raised from the
seed, and replanted. The situation is almost entirely free trom frosts.
Mr. Hardy’s residence stands on the eastern slope of the hill, and is
thoroughly shaded at an early hour on summer afternoons. In the flower-
garden adjoining it are some very choice rhododendrons and azalias, which
must present a splendid appearance when in blossom. On the south-east of
the house there is a plantation of English oaks and walnut and chesnut
trees. Amongst all these trees lucerne has been planted. On the westward
of this plantation there is half an acre of vines (Red Madeiras), planted in
1857 for the purpose of ascertaining whether grapes would ripen at so great
an elevation; they are all staked, and planted at 6 feet by 5. Mr. Hardy
selected Madeira as the earliest ripener, and the fruit has ripened well.
Somewhat lower on the hill another vineyard was planted in 1861, with an
eastern aspect. It comprises nine acres ; and there are three acres of Ries-
ling, three acres of Carbonet, and three acres of Shiraz, The soil is more
loamy than on the western side of the hill, but is mixed with sandstone.
None of it was trenched, but it was broken up with picks; and the stone,
which was abundant, has been worked into walls, which Mr. Hardy con-
siders the cheapest as well as the most substantial fencing he can obtain.
He purposes mixing the Shiraz and Carbonet of this vineyard for a red
wine, and making a white wine from the Riesling alone. When the vines
were planted some mangold wurtzels were put in between the rows, which
are 8 feet apart, the vines being 6 feet apart in the rows. The mangolds
have not done very well, but this is, we think, owing in some measure to the
fact that they were transplanted from the seed. The writer’s experience of
the cultivation of this root in England leads him to believe that a good crop
is seldom raised from transplants.
On the eastern side of the hill there is another plantation of walnut-trees
of 16 acres. The trees were planted in 1858 and 1859 amongst the indi-
genous scrub in holes dug 3 feet deep, and they are protected from the
attacks of cattle pastured in the plantation by timber stacked round them.
The trees are thriving remarkably well, and already vary from 5 to 7 feet in
height. Mr. Hardy has also a capital fruit-garden, where currants, goose-
berries, and other similar fruits flourish as luxuriantly as in Old England.


f Ije |tetu ®jers.
About a mile eastward of Mr. Hardy’s estate, and almost in the centre of
the Mount Lofty Ranges, is the valley known as the New Tiers. Cox’s
Creek takes its rise at the head of the valley, and the soil on the flat is rich
black alluvial earth for a great depth. There are a number of settlers in the
valley and its vicinity, and farming and gardening are prosecuted on a large
scale. It is not long since a local show (honorary) of farm, garden, and
dairy produce was held, for the benefit o£ the funds of the Institute of this
secluded community, and we can testify from personal observation to the
general excellence of the articles exhibited.
His Honor the Chief Justice, who is the Patron of the Institute, and who
manifests a deep interest in the development of the district, has an estate
and summer residence on the creek, about half a mile from the Tiers. We
are informed that His Honor’s gardens and pleasure-grounds are the very
models of similar adjuncts to an English country establishment, but we
regret we have not yet had an opportunity of visiting and describing them.
Amongst the gardens in the Tiers, the most important are those of which
we subjoin the following brief remarks.
Springfield Gardens, the Residence of Mr. J. Cobbledick. —Here
there are five acres of orchard, most of the trees being planted on the lower
slopes rising from the flat. The trees on one acre are 18 years old, and the
other four acres were planted in 1858. Mr. Cobbledick generally digs all the
ground in his orchard, but did not do so last year owing to the scarcity and
high price of labour. Some years ago his apple trees were much injured by
the blight, but he washed them thoroughly with a solution made from
sheepwash tobacco and some other ingredients in a small proportion, and they
have not suffered since. Mr. Cobbledick is preparing to plant another four
acres with fruit trees during the ensuing season. He has a few vines, but
the grapes do not generally ripen sufficiently to make wine from them.
Mr. A. M. Campbell has four and a-half acres of orchard and garden
adjoining Mr. Cobbledick’s. He has a large number of ordinary fruit trees,
most of them about 12 or 13 years old, and they are all full of health and
growth. He has irrigated the whole of his garden and potato paddocks by
means of channels cut to them from the springs at the sources of the creek.
He has some splendid apple trees raised from the pips, and the potato crop
(which is largely cultivated in the Tiers) is making rapid progress under the
influence of rich soil and plentiful irrigation.
Mr. James Brooks has about an acre and a half of garden on the north
side of the Creek. Most of the fruit trees are ten years old, but Mr. Brooks
apparently devotes his principal efforts to market-gardening. Almost every
inch of his cultivated laud is irrigated by various methods, according to the
lay of the ground. Mr. Brooks has also laid a number of underground
drains, to carry away the surplus water in wet weather.


Du % llkgill |Uair
The residence of Mr. T. G. Williams is situated in North Kensington, on
the north of the Magill-road, and on the west of the cross road which leads
direct from Beaumont to Paradise. The house stands on a slight eminence,
which, however, commands a good view of the surrounding country. The
orchard and vineyard is on the west and north of the house, which on the
south and east is surrounded by tastefully-arranged pleasure-grounds and
garden. Altogether there are about four acres of vines, and from five to six
acres of orchard and garden. The grounds are enclosed with substantial
prickly acacia fences and rows of almond-trees, planted expressly for the
purposes of shelter. The orchard and vineyard is intersected at right
angles with broad walks, and, in addition to the row of almond-trees on the
west side, the centre walk running north and south is bordered on either
side in the same manner. The vines are planted in the section of the
grounds lying eastward of these rows of almond-trees, and are thus perfectly
sheltered from the westerly winds. Mr. Williams has no very easily avail-
able facilities, for irrigating his ground but we noticed a simple but excel-
lent plan which he adopts, and which in some measure answers that pur-
pose. A ridge of earth 7or 8 inches high is thrown up round the four sides
of each block of land separated by the walks we have alluded to, and by this
means all the rainwater which falls upon the ground is retained upon it, and
is easily carried to the roots of the trees by shallow trenches. Sometimes a
depth of several inches of water is held upon the ground in this way, and a
good soakage for the soil can be always secured in rainy seasons. Mr. Wil-
liams has secured some of the best varieties of apples and pears. Most of
the trees are planted at 20 feet by 20 apart; but in some instances the rows
are 30 feet apart, with a row of vines between them. These distances are,
however, too close, and in the latter case the vines are already interlacing
with the branches of the trees. Of the vines the principal varieties are the
Grand Turk, Muscat of Alexandria, and Lachryma Christi. We noticed
that on the cast of the vineyard the vines were looking more full of growth
than in other places, and we ascertained the reason to be that a good deal of
water comes on to that portion of the ground from the adjoining road. The
soil is a light loam on the surface to the depth of 10 or 12 inches, with a red
clay subsoil. The whole of the ground was spade-trenched when the vines
and fruit-trees were planted (seven or eight years ago), and the red clay was
brought to the surface Mr. Williams, however, considers that this is objec-
tionable on such soils, except where plenty of water is obtainable. Where
that is not the case he prefers plough-trenching or double-digging, so that
the clay subsoil may be pulverized but left below, and the better soil
retained on the surface. He admits, however, the value of the Hon.
William Milne’s theory as to subsoiling (which we stated in our article
upon “ Suunyside”) where, as at Sunnyside, an abundance of water for irriga-
tion can be obtained. We think this is a question which must be decided
according to the nature of the subsoil, because it must be obviously unwise
to bury a rich friable loam beneath a stiff retentive clay through which no
rainfall could permeate.


The wine Mr. Williams makes in the largest proportion is from the
Muscat of Alexandria and Lachryma Christi. We tasted some of this year a
must, and found it extremely rich and luscious. Mr. Williams, however,
geeks rather a source of amusement and recreation than profit from his
garden, and ho appropriates the whole produce of his vineyard to supplying
his own and some of his friends’ requirements. In the manufacture of his
wine he uses a grape-mill made in the colony, and fitted with a “stripper,
which separates the berries from the stalks very effectually. The stripper
consists merely of a board fitted to the top of the hopper, perforated with
holes about three-quarters of an inch square, and crossed with sharp iron
bars, which are raised about the 16th of an inch above the wooden surface.
The bunches of fruit are rubbed on the stopper, and the raised bars very
soon denude them of the berries, which fall at once between the rollers.
The Westley Nursery and Vineyard, belonging to Mr. John Holmes,
is situated on the north of the Magill-road, by the roadside, about a quarter
of a mile nearer Adelaide than Mr, Williams’s. Here there are two acres of
vines in full bearing, and three acres planted with cuttings last winter. The
older vines were planted eight years ago, and the principal varieties are
Black Hambro’, Muscat of Alexandria, Grand Turk, Sweetwater, Wortley
Hall, &c. Mr. Holmes makes a red wine from the Black Hambro’ and
Grand Turk, and a white wine from the Sweetwater and Muscat, mixed with
other sorts in smaller proportions. He has recently built a very convenient
cellar, and he anticipates that he will make this season about 1,000 gallons of
wine from the two acres, besides having sold a considerable quantity of
grapes. He has also about four acres of orchard and nursery, containing
fruit-trees of almost every variety. The soil is similar to Mr. Williams’s,
and was also spade-trenched, the red clay subsoil being brought to the
surface.
Mr. Edward Cartwright’s residence and vineyard is on the south side
of the Magill-road, by the roadside, at the north-eastern extremity of Nor-
wood. Here there is about one acre of vines (principally table sorts) and
fruit-trees, from five to seven years old, and there are besides three acres of
vines planted with cuttings in the winter of 1860, and one and a half acres
planted in the same way in the winter of 1861. This young vineyard (a
familiar object to travellers on the Magill-road) is really remarkable for the
amazing rapidity with which the cuttings have grown. Some of those
planted in 1860 have attained surprising dimensions, and are already bearing
fruit, although not more than 20 or 21 months old. The soil in which they
are planted is a black loam, mixed on the surface with decomposed stone.
It was spade-trenched to a depth of 2 feet, and the red clay subsoil brought
to the surface. The varieties are Grenache, Black Portugal, Malbec, and
Shiraz, which Mr. Cartwright intends to mix for a red wine. This year he
is making wine from the table varieties near the hou.e, consisting princi-
pally of Sweetwater and Muscat. Underneath the house he has built a
capital cellar, with an arched roof, which will be amply sufficient for the


storage of all his wine when the whole of his vineyard is in full bearing.
Mr. Cartwright is enabled to irrigate the whole of his ground by checking
the fall of water from Magill and carrying it amongst his vines and trees by
surface races. The trees in the orchard have grown remarkably well, and
have yielded surprising quantities of fruit during the past summer. Mr.
Cartwright uses a grape-mill in making wine, and as he has not much work
for it at present he sometimes lets it out on hire to his neighbors. We
allude to this circumstance because there is such an immense advantage in
the use of a mill as compared with the primeval but sometimes still-prac-
tised system of treading with feet, cleanliness and expedition especially
considered. We think where there are a number of small winegrowers in the
same vicinity it would be an excellent plan for one of them to purchase a
mill and hire it to his neighbors, as Mr, Cartwright does.
Mr. August H. W. Me iter has a capital little vineyard adjoining Mr.
Cartwright’s. It comprises about two and a half acres, and is chiefly
planted with the Grenache. On some other vines of mixed varieties Mr.
Meyer has grafted the Grenache, which appear to thrive on his soil with
great luxuriance. Some of the grafts only one and a half years old have
borne considerable quantities of fruit this season. Mr. Meyer has sold all
his grapes at £TI per ton.
MoobMr Pom,
THE RESIDENCE OF MB. JOSEPH SKELTON,
Once more we must ask our readers to imagine themselves ascending that
magnificent belt of hills encircling Adelaide, and to look down with us upon
the vast panoramic landscape we have had so frequently to allude to in
this series of articles. It is on one of the hills of this splendid range that
Mr. Skelton has selected the site of his vineyard and residence. Pursuing
the Magill-road almost to the “ World’s End” hostelrie, then turning sharp
to the left and ascending the first hill on the right, his residence is encoun-
tered on the highest point of a clear belt of turf on one of the lesser acclivi-
ties of the hill. On the eastward the higher hills of the range tower far
above the homestead, and from it to the west, north, and south a view is
presented equally magnificent with those to be seen from Highercombe,
Auldana, and other vineyards we have already described.
Mr. Skelton commenced planting at Woodford in 1855. He has about
three acres of vines, nearly all of which are six years old. A gully runs
through the vineyard north and south at the back of the house, and the
vines are planted on the slopes trending to it. The soil is a red gravelly
.clay, with abundance of gravel-stone and decomposed slate intermixed on
the surface, and with a clay subsoil. The vines appear to thrive best where


the stone is most plentiful, but everywhere they are looking well. The Black
Portugals are particularly luxuriant, and have completely withstood the
hot weather of the last few weeks,* the fruit being protected from the
scorching rays of the sun by the abundant foliage of the vines, which have
not been “ summer pruned.” The vines are planted at 6 feet by 6 apart,
and are all staked, except a few table varieties near the house, which are
trellised. In order to carry off the storm water from the hills, Mr. Skelton
has culverted the gully bottom throughout nearly the whole extent of the
vineyard, and it is his intention to complete this work immediately ; he will
then put a trellising over the culvert, and plant some Shiraz vines especially
to train upon it. The varieties he has at present are chiefly Black Portugal,
Frontignac, Biesling, and Yerdeilho. There is a considerable number o
vines of indiscriminately mixed varieties, but he intends grafting Black Por-
tugals upon the whole of them. The vineyard was originally hand-trenched
to a depth of 2 feet 6 inches —a work which Mr. Skelton assures us cost him
upwards of £lOO per acre, but this was when labor was at from 7s. to Bs. per
day. He has five additional acres on the crown of the eastern gully slope
ready ploughed, which he intends to trench and plant immediately he can
procure the necessary labor at cheaper rates than at present. The varieties
he has selected for this new vineyard are Black Portugal and Shiraz, which
he contemplates mixing for a red wine, the Black Portugals in the largest
proportion.
On either side of the gully bottom there is a strip of rich black soil, in
which have been planted a number of orange-trees. Altogether there are
about 120 trees, and some are already in bearing. The bulk were raised
from the pips and grafted. On the north of the vineyard an orchard has
been laid out, the trees in which are about three years old, and comprise the
ordinary varieties of fruits. South of the vineyard the trees are older, and
amongst the apples are some splendid sorts, foremost amongst them for
excellence being the Lord Nelson. Nearly all the varieties have been im-
ported, and were certainly selected with good judgment. In front of the
house there are two acres of ornamental pleasure-ground, on which are
planted a large number of pines and rare shrubs. In the centres of most of
the beds orange-trees are planted, with pines and almond-trees around to
shelter them. We have rarely met with a more tastefully-designed or a
prettier shrubbery. We should mention, also, that the vineyard is in a
great measure protected from the gully winds by double rows of almond-
trees, which have been planted expressly for the purposes of shelter. The
wines made at Woodford are a white Frontignac with a small proportion of
Biesling, and a red wine from the Black Portugal,
The residence is a very substantially-built and well-designed house. It
has one feature which deserves mention, and which is worth the attention of
gentlemen who are building residences. The whole of the flooring of the
hall, passages, and verandah is composed of encaustic tiles, imported by
Mr. Skelton direct from the factory at Broseley, in Shropshire. These tiles
form a very pretty pavement, and certainly excel any other description of
• March, 1862.


flooring for comfort, cleanliness, appearance, and durability. For his own
house Mr. Skelton imported the tiles in very minute pieces, forming a small
and intricate pattern; and, although the prime cost of the tiles is compara-
tively small, the expense of laying such a vast number of small pieces was
considerable. This expense may, however, be avoided to a great extent by
using larger tiles, which are now made with the pattern ready formed upon
them, instead of every variation of color being on a separate tile. These
may be laid very inexpensively, and cheapness will then be added to the other
advantages of this description of flooring.
THE EESIDEKCE OF ME. J. G. COULLS.
Athelston is within the district of Highercombe, about a mile west of the
Torrens Gorge. It is approached either by the bush road leading to the
Waterworks Eeservoir, at the (so called) source of the Torrens, or by a private
road made by Mr. Coulls, from opposite the Highbury Hotel, on the direct
road to Highercombe from Adelaide. The house and premises stand in a
valley bordered by the Torrens on the south, and enclosed on the east and
north by a semicircle of low hills, whose crowns and southern slopes, in
common with the alluvial flat below them, attest the success that has
rewarded their cultivation. South of the house the well-known Black Hill
stands forth prominent for its shaggy barrenness and dreary gloom, but much
of its bleakness is redeemed by the picturesque “ Sugarloaf,” a few points to
the eastward. Viewed from the Highercombe road the Athelston homestead
almost suggests the presence of a thriving township, for besides the large
and substantial mansion there is the tall chimney-stack of what was erstwhile
a flour mill driven by water-power, and a long range of buildings, comprising
workmen’s cottages, blacksmiths’ shop, carpenters’ shop, and many other
premises. The mill is not now in operation, and the adjoining granary is
converted to various domestic uses.
The orchard and vineyard comprises 18 acres on the river flat and
adjoining slopes. The soil is a rich light loam mixed with alluvial deposit
and with a red clay subsoil at a depth of, in some places, three feet, although
in other places the top soil is of much greater depth. There are from six to
seven acres of vines planted on the slopes and on different parts of the flat.
Between four and five acres were planted from 10 to 12 years ago, and the
remainder were put in as cuttings last winter. In addition to this Mr. Coulls
has already trenched seven acres on the south of the river, which will be
planted during the ensuing season with Black Portugal, Shiraz, Dolcetto, and
Grenache, for red wines, most of the older vines being white wine varieties.
These seven acres lie at a considerable elevation above the Torrens, and the
soil is a black loam with a red clay subsoil, largely intermixed with lime-


stone. Some of the old vines intersect a plot of plum trees almost in the
centre of the grounds, but Mr. Coulls contemplates, uprooting the latter as
being the least valuable. Most of the vines on the slopes are trellised, and
those on the flats are staked, except a few that have no supports. Mr. Coulls
considers either trellising or staking absolutely necessary, but very much
prefers the former system. The varieties amongst the old vines are principally
Shiraz, Black Portugal,Dolcetto, Bed, White, Black, and Grizzly Frontignac,
Sweetwater, Golden Chasselas, and Muscat of Alexandria, Ihe Shiraz and
Dolcetto are planted on the flat, the soil of which is certainly better adapted
to their habits than the drier slopes would be. Mr. Coulls uses F rontignac
and Black Hambro’ for a red wine, and mixes his other varieties for red or
white wines as the case may be.
The orchard at Athelston is of almost equal importance with the vineyard,
and we have rarely seen one kept in better order, or where the trees are finer
or cleaner. Mr. Coulls rigidly adheres to the principle that if an orchard
won’t pay for digging it won’t pay at all. Thus every square inch of ground
between and about the trees is dug, and there are barely enough weeds to be
seen to prove exception to the rule of extermination. Owing to the friable
texture of the soil, Mr. Coulls can let his digging at rates scarcely exceeding
3d. per rod, and the work can be done in almost any season without pressure
of the foot upon the spade. In one portion of the orchard where the ground
was not dug last year, the trees have died, a result Mr. Coulls of course
attributes to the soil not having been stirred.
We have already recorded the opinions of other practical men who have
had great experience in orchard management, and while several of them
maintain that, at the present prices of labor, digging the ground between the
trees cannot possibly be remunerative, some of them have roundly asserted
that it is a positive benefit to leave the wild grasses and weeds to luxuriate as
they will, for the sake of the shelter they afford to the wind-fallen fruit, which
may then, they say, be gathered in a fit state for market. We have now stated
Mr. Coulls’ contra opinion, which, coming from a man of practice and
experience, is fully entitled to consideration. He is also opposed to the
common practice of allowing apple and pear trees to grow to whatever size
they will attain unchecked. He argues that when fruit trees become very
large, the sap does not reach the top branches, and therefore the fruit upon
them does not mature. His own practice is to prune his fruit trees periodically,
a system from which he declares he has experienced great advantages, and
it will also admit of the trees being planted as near together as 18 feet by 18.
Mr. Coulls has some of the best varieties of apples to be obtained, and
throughout the orchard we particularly admired the straightness and evenness
of the” stems of the trees. There is also an entire absence of blight upon
them, and Mr. Coulls informed us that he considers he has the cleanest lot of
trees in the colony. Next year he intends to commence the manufacture of
cider.
There are no natural facilities for irrigation at Athelston, inasmuch as, even
on the flat, there is a slight rise from the river, and all the ground of the
vineyard and orchard is above the water level. A wind-pump and guttering
would hardly overcome the difficulty expeditiously, and if ever Mr. Coulls
n


resorts to irrigation, he intends to cut a level from the river through the hill
to a point on the eastward of the grounds, where a reservoir could be easily
formed, and from whence water could be disseminated over the whole of the
orchard. There are a few orange trees about 12 years old in the centre of the
garden, which always bear remarkably well when irrigated, but only then;
and in another part of the grounds there are a number of orange, lemon, and
citron trees, which can be irrigated from the river, and which, under that
treatment, do very well. Besides these, on a strip of suitable soil on the
river’s bank, about 150 orange trees were planted last year, and are easily
irrigated by means of a hand-pump.
Mr. Coulls has a capital cellar and wine-house. He uses a grape-mill and
wine-press, and the latter is operated upon by a powerful leverage contrived
and rigged by himself. We have already mentioned the kinds of wine he
makes. This year his produce will average about 500 gallons to the acre.
We were shown some plum wine mnde during the past season by Mr. Coulls.
It was, however, in too premature a state to afford a test of its ulti-
mate quality, but he is sanguine that it will make a very refreshing
beverage when three months old. The modus operandi of its manufacture
is very simple. One system pursued by Mr. Coulls is to add Iflbs. of sugar
mixed with one gallon of boiling water to every gallon of plums, leave the
compound to itself for a time, and eventually rack off the liquour from the
stones and pulp. Another method is to stone the plums, and press the fruit
in the wine-press, adding the same proportions of sugar and water to the
juice extracted. When fruit is as cheap and plentiful as it was during the
past season, it is highly necessary to devise some means of profitable con-
sumption, and if Mr. Coulls’ experiment succeeds, and plum wine becomes a
standard beverage with thirsty souls, fruit-growers will have one more welcome
market at their command.
Jfmjrfatir,
THE EESIDEKCE OE MB. A. E. BOOED,
Is situated on the section adjoining Athelston on the eastward, the vineyard
and orchard being on the north bank of the Torrens, about half-a-mile
nearer the Gorge. There are about six acres planted with vines and fruit
trees, on a rich alluvial flat, where the soil is light and deep. The appearance
of this combined orchard and vineyard (for fruit trees and vines are planted
apparently without the remotest idea of classification) is certainly somewhat
remarkable, and hitherto we have met with nothing else like it. As if to afford
the strongest contrast to the opinions entertained and the practice pursued by
Mr. Coulls, at Freshford all the ground between the trees and vines alike is
left unstirred, and neither spade, fork, nor plough, has been allowed to come
into contact with it for years past. In one or two spots where there are no


fruit trees amongst the vines, the latter are planted at 8 feet by 8 apart, but
by being pruned to about 2| feet from the ground, and trained on tall stakes,
they have spread over the ground, and present a network of wood, foliage,
and fruit * In other places where trees are planted the vines are less
luxuriant, and rushes and wild grasses are abundant. Mr. Boord mows
these weeds several times during the spring, using the produce for hay, and
after that all vegetation is left to take its chance. We were, of course,
curious to learn upon what theory Mr. Boord founded this unusual practice,
and we ascertained it to be this he thinks that as the fibrous roots of vines
and trees spread about in the soil near the surface in search of nourishment,
it must be impossible to dig, plough, or even fork the soil, without cutting off
some of these roots or suckers, and thereby injuring the plant in a greater
degree than it would be benefitted by breaking up the soil. We leave our
readers to form their own estimate of the value of this opinion. The
luxuriance of all vegetation at Fresh ford is accounted for by the richness of
the alluvial soil, a circumstance to which possibly may also be partly traced
the blight, of which there are indications on some of the fruit trees.
The principal varieties of vines, of which altogether there areaboutfouracres,
are Red Madeira, Constantia, Black Portugal, Muscat, Sweetwater, Riesling,
Yerdeilho, and Dolcetto. About one acre was planted as many as 16 years
ago, but the age of the bulk of the remainder varies from 10 to 12 years
Mr. Boord has, however, been periodically increasing his vineyard on a small
scale until the present time. The wines he makes are a pure Dolcetto, pure
Constantia, and pure Madeira, mixing all the other red varieties for a second-
class wine. He has also made a white wine from Muscats alone, and another
from Sweetwater, but he has not a sufficient quantity of Riesling to make a
pure wine from that grape, and is therefore compelled to mix it with the other
white varieties. He informed us that he considered it highly beneficial to
expose the grapes to the sun for a couple of days after they are picked
before pressing them, or, at all events, until the skins begin to shrivel. In
the manufacture ot his wine he smashes the grapes upon a wooden grating,
which acts as a stripper, and as he ferments the husks with the juice for both
white and red wines, he uses neither a wine-press nor a grape-mill.
Me. John Stead has a vineyard of several acres, adjoining Athelston on
the westward, and he makes, we believe, a considerable quantity of wine.
The vines are planted on an alluvial flat on the north bank of the river.
We have not had an opportunity of personally visiting Mr. Stead’s vineyard,
but we are informed that it is his practice to boil a portion of his must in
making wine.
» March, 1862,


Utonalta,
THE RESIDENCE OE ME. R. B. ANDREWS,
The road to Monalta lies over the hills rising above Mitcham on the south-
ward. It is a steep incline to the “ Devil’s Elbow” of the locality, and the
hostelrie which stands above it on a plateau on the summit of the hill is
well-named “ The Traveller’s Eest.” The house is within the township of
Belair (although there is little but the inn itself to indicate the existence of a
town), and from the situation may be seen Mr. Andrews’s residence and
vineyard at Monalta on the south and south-east, as well as the magnificent
landscape on the north and west we have so'frequently attempted to describe.
It is about half a mile from this point to Monalta.
Mr. Andrews’s house (a newly-built and substantial freestone edifice)
stands at the south end of the vineyard, overlooking Coromandel Valley, and
due east of Government Farm. The site of the vineyard has been chosen
with excellent judgment on the north-eastern slopes of the Monalta Hill,
and is thoroughly sheltered on the north, north-west, south-west, south,
and south-east. It is open on the north-east and east, and the whole of the
vineyard has a north-eastern aspect. The soil on the surface is a good
brown loam, and the subsoil (now brought to the surface by trenching)
varies from a red to a yellow clay, mixed with ironstone, rotten slate, and
limestone. The highest point of the vineyard is about 1,100 feet above the
level of the sea, and was planted four years ago with Verdeilho and Tinta.
The Verdeilho were obtained from cuttings brought by Mr. Andrews from
a small vineyard at his former residence at the foot of the hills on the
Mitcham-road. We tasted some pure Verdeilho wine (now four years old)
made by Mr. Andrews at that place, and if he succeeds as well at Monalta
his “ Madeira” will certainly be at a premium. Next to the Tinta (descend-
ing the hill) there are a few rows of Grenache, the fruit of which ripens a
week later than the Shiraz, and yields a large quantity of wine. Adjoining
these are Carbonet, Shiraz, and Malbec. The vines of the last-named
variety have in several places been attacked by grubs, but the other sorts
have escaped. We noted a similar circumstance at Mr. Peake’s vineyard at
Clarendon (somewhat similarly situated to Monalta), where, of all the kinds
attacked by grubs, the Malbecs were the chief and invariable sufferers.
Althgether there are about six acres of vines, ranging from three to four
years old, comprising those we have already mentioned and others of the
same varieties planted in 1859. A strip of table grapes, mixed with a few
fruit-trees and strawberries, runs through the centre of the vineyard from
north to south, and below it, trending almost to the foot of the hill, there
are nine acres of cuttings, planted in the winter of 1861. At this point
the vineyard is also intersected by a pathway, embanked on either side by
a low wall, which, in the wet seasons, affords an outlet for the storm water,
and prevents the younger vineyard beyig injured by washing. In the
older portion of the vineyard all the vines except the Shiraz were originally
planted by 6 feet by B apart; the distance has, however, been increased
since by taking out every other vine, thus leaving the standard 6 feet by 6,


and in the younger vineyard the cuttings have been planted at 7 feet by 7.
The varieties are Black Portugal (chiefly), with Carignan and Mataro, for
red wine, and Gouais and Yerdeilho for white. We have rarely seen cut-
tings so young thriving better than these, and not more than 3 per cent,
of them have missed. Their growth has been infinitely more luxuriant
than some others of the same varieties planted close in the rows for pro-
pagation. Hitherto Mr. Andrews has staked none of his vines, and he
affirms that where one has been blown down a thousand have withstood the
weather. He hopes to be able to train them until the stems will be suffi-
ciently strong to render them altogether independent of artificial supports,
his opinion being that the temporary loss of produce attendant upon the
closer pruning necessary to effect this will be more than counterbalanced by
the heavy outlay it will obviate. It is his practice to plough between the
vines and to fork the ground in the rows. On the north of the vineyard
there are two acres of ground already prepared, which Mr. Andrews intends
to plant with Palo-mino-blanco. This will make a total of 17 acres of vines,
besides which there is one acre of orchard. The present is the first season
that Mr. Andrews has made wine at Monalta, but as his vineyard is care-
fully classified, the varieties well selected, the soil and situation very favor-
able, and his good judgment in winemaking already proved, there is every
reason to anticipate for the Monalta wines an enviable position in our own
and neighboring markets.
The stones picked off the vineyard Mr. Andrews has found sufficient to
build his cellars and make an embankment round his residence, which has
been constructed on an eastern slope to ensure protection from the midday
and evening sun.
Craijjptnt,
THE RESIDENCE OE MB. PETER GUMMING.
Pubsuing the road southward of Monalta for about three miles, the
traveller will find a white gate on the right of the track, which will afford
him egress to the Craigburn Estate. Here Mr. Cumming has a large extent
of purchased land, and he has selected for the site of his vineyard and
residence the basin of an amphitheatre about half a mile from the road on
the westward of Coromandel Valley. There is a considerable fall from
Monalta to this point, Craigburn being about 700 feet above the level of the
sea. The present extent of the vineyard is about four acres, of which one
acre was planted in 1857 with Gouais, Tokay, and Yerdeilho for white wine,
and Malbec, Shiraz, and Grenache for red ; and the remainder with cuttings
of the same varieties in the winter of 1861. There is an additional extent of
several acres already prepared, some of which will be planted during the
ensuing season. The whole of the old vines are staked, but some of the
stakes have been destroyed by the white ant. They are all wattles, and were


cut, prepared, and put in at a cost of three-farthings per state. In the
centre of the vineyard there is a slight fall to a rillway running north and
south. The soil is a friable red clay, mixed with decomposed slatestone, and
was trenched to a depth of 24 inches. The vines have a northern aspect,
and the old ones are planted at 5 feet by 4 apart. The young cuttings,
planted at 5 feet by 5, are growing vigorously, but we think the older vines
might be advantageously thinned, although it cannot be denied they have
hitherto borne remarkably well.
There is a capital cellar at the lower end of the vineyard. We found
there 10 hogsheads of wine made this season from the one acre of old vines—
certainly a large yield for the hills. We tasted one sample of Mr. Cum-
ming’s red wine, made last year, which is abundantly rich in strength and
sweetness, but needs several years’ additional age to mature it, and then we
have no doubt it will be a very superior wine. Another sample, also made
last year, but which was attenuated to a greater degree before being racked
off, has an excellent flavor, and is much better adapted for immediate con-
sumption.
Mr. Gumming has built a commodious and very substantial stone house on
a point of the hill overlooking the vineyard. The river Sturt runs at the
foot of the hill, on the south, but the vineyard is at a considerable elevation
above it, and altogether beyond the reach of frost.
|Upellit Jfarm,
The Township of Eeynella is about 13 miles from Adelaide, on the Great
South-road. The section on which the Crown hostelrie, the Reynella mills,
stores, &c., now stand was originally taken up by Mr. Keynell in 1838, and
he has resided in the locality ever since. His present residence is situate
barely a quarter of a mile south-east of the township, on a slight eminence
rising from Peel’s Creek. He has now about 450 acres of land in his pos-
session, and in its management he aims at a combination of vinegrowing,
grazing, and farming. He has 15 acres of vines, 2of orchard and garden,
about 100 under crop, and the remainder of the estate is fenced off for
grazing.
Mr. Heynell commenced planting 21 years ago, when a considerable por-
tion of the present orchard was formed. A few vine-cuttings obtained from
Tasmania were planted at the same time, and three years afterwards wine
was made from them. The vineyard proper dates from 1844, when half an
acre was planted with cuttings from Mr. Anstey’s. In the following season
four and a half acres were planted with cuttings obtained from the Mac-
arthurs, of Hew South Wales, of the sorts recommended in “Maro’s”
letters —viz., the Yerdeilho, Carbonet, Malbec, Pineau Gris, and Gouais.


The situation, however, was too dry, and the soil too light, for most of these
varieties to bear largely there, and a number of them have been already
superseded. One acre of Pineau Gris has been grubbed up, the Eousillon
varieties having been previously planted alternately with the rows of
Pineau, and the Eousillon have also been grafted on the Carbonet. In
1847 and 1848 Mr. Eeynell obtained cuttings of the white sorts from the
Clarendon Vineyard—viz., Pedro Ximcnes, Doradilla, Temprana, Palo-
mino-bianco, &c.; and since then he has planted a considerable extent with
the Eousillons. Thus his vineyard on the hilly land is cliiefly confined to
the Clarendon sorts, the Eousillon, and the Verdeilho. The Carbonet —a
variety which, for the quality of its produce, cannot be too highly valued—
Mr. Eeynell has planted in another vineyard which he formed in 1848 on
the flat bordering the creek, and where the soil is a black alluvial deposit on
the surface, with a red loam subsoil. In this vineyard there are also
Malbec and Shiraz to mix with the Carbonet, the Eousillon sorts, and
(planted in 1861) Frontignac, Verdeilho, and Eiesling. None of Mr.
Eeynell’s vines are either staked or trellised, and the Eousillon sorts appear
very well able to support themselves. The Verdeilho have a more strag-
gling growth, but Mr. Eeynell thinks the cost of staking is greatly in excess
of the advantage to be gained. Throughout the vineyard the rows are 6 feet
apart, and the vines stand at from 4 to 5 feet in the rows. The vineyard
has a northern to north-eastern aspect, and is well sheltered on the south
and west. The ground between the rows is stirred with horse-hoe or plough
two or three times every season, and is flanked with rows of almond-trees
planted for shelter. On the highest point of the hill the soil is very sandy ;
but on the lower slopes it is a good red loam on the surface, with a sprink-
ling of ironstone intermixed, and the subsoil is chiefly composed of friable
limestone. Mr. Eeynell has about 40 acres of this kind of land at a suffi-
cient elevation above the creek to be secure from frosts, but he is unwilling
to increase his vineyard very largely until there is a prospect of our wines
being admitted to the Melbourne markets without an import duty. We
certainly hope the day is not far distant when our friends across the border
will be wise and magnanimous enough to reduce very much, or altogether
remove, the present impost. The apple and pear trees in the orchard are
some of the largest we have seen in the colony. We noticed there a tree of
the indiarubber variety, which was obtained from Sydney 20 years ago, and has
grown to a great size. It is an evergreen, and the foliage has an elegant
appearance. A few orange-trees have been planted near the creek. Several
years ago Mr, Eeynell made a pure wine from the Pineau Gris. It is now
perfectly matured, and has been highly spoken of by connoisseurs. His
Verdeilho is also remarkably good, but we thought a wine made from an
admixture of Malbec and Carbonet best of all.


- // ( /^2^
CrmrtjT,
IXY•
De. Kelly’s vineyard is two miles westward of Morphett Yale, about one
mile from the shores of the Gulf in a stright line, and two miles north of
Port Noarlunga and the mouth of the Onkaparinga. Altogether there are
12 acres of vines, and planting was commenced in 1845. Like Mr. Keynell,
Dr. Kelly commenced with the kinds recommended by Macarthur in
“ Maro’s” letters, but they have almost all proved unsuited to the climate,
and have for the most part been rooted up and replaced with the Kousillon
varieties, which will not ripen in New South Wales. [The Mataro is grown
there in some places, but Dr. Kelly says it never ripens well.] At Trinity
crops ripen almost as early as on the plains, the vineyard being about 100 feet
above the sea. The vintage generally extends from sth of February to 15th
March, and the sorts recommended in “ Maro” failed, because they ripened
too early.
The vineyard is enclosed with stone walls, the material having been picked
off the land. The soil is chiefly a reddish loam, intermixed with limestone,
but in some places the subsoil is a stiff clay. Originally Dr. Kelly planted
his vines at 6 feet by 4 to 6 feet by 6, but now he prefers and adopts distances
of 9 feet by 4 to 9 feet by 5, because greater facilities are thereby afforded
for ploughing the ground between the rows, and the vines support each other
better in the rows. The vines are planted on two hill slopes divided by a
slight fall in the centre, with an east to east by north aspect, and the land is
always ploughed across the slopes, better to retain the rain fall. The hill
slope rising above the vineyard on the west has been intersected with furrows,
which drain the surface water from it to the vineyard, and the same hill
shelters the vineyard from westerly winds. Dr. Kelly has grafted a good
many old vines with the Kousillon varieties, and we noticed some Mataro
grafted last year on Muscat, which had borne this year. He is always careful
to graft six or eight inches below the surface. A few Yerdeilho have been
preserved of the old sorts originally planted, but they have all been trellised,
and Dr. Kelly considers they will not pay for cultivation without that
support, whereas the Kousillon stand admirably in gooseberry-bush fashion.
He thinks also that white grapes will not withstand the heat of the sun as
well as the red sorts.
Dr. Kelly makes a capital wine from the Kousillon varieties, and on one
occasion he mixed a small quantity of Shiraz and Malbec with them, but the
latter ripened earlier than the Kousillon, and had to be fermented separately.


dafilanbs,
. xffHE, PROPERTY MESSRIj. a. J. it. kEiilNEy' /!
// /U Akryv.J. fr'Ji'L'
The Oatlands estate is situate on tlie banks ofuhe Sturt, about six miles
from Adelaide, and nearly one mile from the shores of the Gulf, llie
property comprises about 500 acres of land, and with the exception of the
vineyard and orchard, and one small paddock held by Mr. Kelsey (who
manages the vineyard and acts as steward for the Messrs. Kearne), is
leased by the Hon. J. H. Barrow, Mr. J?. H. Burden, and Mr. E. Jones.
The river Sturt intersects the estate and runs immediately behind the
residence, a large and substantial mansion erected some years since by the
late Mr. Kearne. The place has an extremely English-like appearance, and
although the magnificent peppermints and gum-trees which stud the parklike
grounds are natives of Australia, yet an enthusiast about Home might mistake
them for elms and oaks, in presence of the green hedgerows and well-tilled
fields, so carefully “ combed and brushed,” as Mrs. Beecher Stow once said
the lands of England were. Indeed, a large number of fine oaks are growing
on the estate, and from these its name is derived. The pasturage includes
upwards of 130 acres of lucerne.
There are two acres of vineyard and two acres of an orangery on the north
bank of the Sturt. The soil is for the most part an alluvial deposit for a
great depth, with red clay and limestone below it. The vines were planted
twelve or thirteen years ago, and the oldest of the oranges six years ago,
except a few in the immediate vicinity of the house, which are several
years older. Mr. Kearne originally planted cuttings obtained from New
South Wales, and which were represented to be very choice varieties.
When they were received at Oaklands they were very nicely bound up
in separate parcels, and carefully labelled. Great care was observed in
planting them to preserve every cutting of each variety in its proper
quarter of the vineyard, but when the vines came into bearing, instead of
the valuable sorts that had been anticipated, nearly the whole proved
to be Sweetwater. The misfortune, which at the time we are writing of uas
we fear the reverse of uncommon, has since been rectified by the grafting
of other sorts upon the Sweetwater. This work has been done gradually
year by year, the principal sorts thus introduced being the Eousillon varieties,
Verdeilho, Muscatel, and a very fine red grape which has been called Gros
Eubico. Mr. Kelsey is always careful to graft below the soil, and many of
the vines have borne fruit when only one year old from the graft. He
is also careful in first prunings to cut off all the shoots within six inches of
the ground, and by this means secures an erect and strong stem, which
becomes self-supporting and enables him to dispense with either stakes or
trellising. The vines are planted very closely together, most of them at
5 feet by 4. The orangery and vineyard are both surrounded with
fruit-trees, planted for shelter. There is one acre of orange trees in
bearing, and one acre is being planted this season with trees reared on the
estate. The varieties are principally the Navel and the Sydney sorts.
Mr. Kelsey has reared a very large number of young trees. The old trees
I


are planted at only 15 by 15 feet apart, and will have to be thinned out as
they advance in years and size. There is an abundance of water on the
estate supplied from wells, but Mr. Kelsey has never resorted to irrigation.
We have now to state a circumstance to which we invite the consideration
of our readers. There are, as we have said, only two acres of vines at
Oaklands (that is, independently of the garden attached to the residence,)
but they are strong and full of growth, of mature age, in a well sheltered
situation and luxuriant soil. Mr. Kelsey assures us that from the grapes
picked from these vines alone he made last season five thousand one
hundred and thirty (5,130) gallons of wine, the pure juice of the grape ! and
that the produce of the vintage of 1861 was 4,000 gallons! This will
appear almost incredible, but as Mr. Kelsey affirms it to be a literal fact we
have no alternative but to record it as an instance of the astonishing prolific-
ness of the vine under special circumstances. In the manufacture of his
wine Mr. Kelsey uses a screw and lever press and some patent hair cloths
recently imported by Messrs. Goode Brothers. Mr. Kelsey speaks in the
highest terms of the value and usefulness of these cloths, especially in
expediting the labor of the vintage. There is a large extent of cellarage at
Oaklands, and not without reason, remembering the fact which we have just
recorded. There are at present about 15,000 gallons of wine in stock from
the vintages of 1858, ’59, ’6O, ’6l, and ’62. Mr. Kelsey makes four
kinds of wine, viz.:—A pure Yerdeilho, a pure Eousillon, a pure Gros
Rubico, and a mixed white wine. We tasted some Eousillon and Yerdeilho
of the vintages of 1859 and ’6O of excellent quality, and which fully proved
that its abundant yield is not as might almost be supposed, the only recom-
mendation of the Oaklands vineyard.
Jf.mfoik,
THE RESIDENCE OE MB. W. H. TEIMMEE.
Faiefoed is on the Eiver Sturt, about eight miles from Adelaide, at the foot
of the hill on which stands the Flagstaff Inn. The only portion of the
vineyard which is now in bearing is intersected by the river, and was planted
in 1861. The soil is an alluvial deposit of considerable depth and richness.
There are three acres of vines, principally Yerdeilho, but with about one-
sixth Gouais, and Mr. Trimmer mixes the two grapes in this proportion for a
white wine. The vines stand at 6 feet by 6 apart, and were trained on stakes
to standards, the stems being carried 18 inches from the ground. On the
brow of the hill rising from the eastern bank of the Sturt five acres were
planted in 1859 with Yerdeilho and Gouais, the latter in the proportion of
one-sixth, but it is Mr. Trimmer’s practice never to allow his vines to bear
until five years old. The soil here is a stiffish loam, resting on a clayslate
formation. The vines are planted at 8 feet by 4 apart, but eventually every


alternate vine in the rows will be removed to leave the survivors at 8 feet
by 8. The land between the rows is worked with horse implements. To the
southward of this piece another five acres was planted in 1861 with Black
Portugal and Grenache, the latter in the proportion of one-fifth for mixing.
These vines were planted at 8 feet by 8. Mr. Trimmer intends to increase
his vineyard even further, and for this purpose has already plough-trenched
three acres on the bank of the river, and will fallow five acres more for
trenching next year, and the whole of this he intends to plant with Yerdeilho
and Gouais. Gums, acacias, and other trees have been planted round the
extent of the vineyard for the purpose of shelter.
Prom the three acres in bearing he has this year made 1,000 gallons of
wine, of which about 800 gallons is Yerdeilho, with the one-sixth Gouais
added, to assist the fermentation. He uses a grape-mill, with cylinders
covered with prepared leather, and never presses the murk, nor ferments the
husks or stalks with the must. In fermenting the must he leaves the cask
only two-thirds full, and puts in the bung-hole a stopper wrapped round with
linen, leaving it just sufficiently loose to permit the escape of the carbonic
gas, and thus the atmospheric air is thoroughly excluded. This system he
has adopted upon the authority of Mr. J. S. Kercht, whose very useful work
on the culture of the vine was reprinted and published in Sydney in 1845,
edited by one of the Macarthurs. Kercht strongly recommends the plan in
preference to the more commonly-received practice of leaving the bung-hole
open during the first fermentation, Mr. Trimmer has no old wines on hand,
but the must of this year’s vintage has already fined, and is remarkable for
richness and delicacy.
(Tomns Ipart,
ToEßEire Paek is in the immediate vicinity oithe prettily-situated suburban
township of Mitcham, and its natural and artificially-supplied advantages
are of sufficient importance to claim more than a passing comment. There
are two approaches through the park to Mr. Torrens’s residence—one from
the Unley-road, and the other from Mitcham. The house stands on an
eminence commanding almost the entire extent of the grounds, with exten-
sive views over sea and land by vistas cut through‘the indigenous forest
trees, and is built of excellent freestone obtained from a quarry on the
estate. To the northward, in a gully abutting on the Brownhill Creek, is
the beautiful banana grove upon which Mr. Torrens has lavished both
trouble and expense. Its form is semicircular, and its length is nearly 250
feet. The bananas are completely sheltered from all winds, principally by a
bank formed almost like a horseshoe, and nearly 50 feet high, open only to
the south-east. Shelter of this kind is a sine qua non in the cultivation of


this delicate plant, and there are but few other places in this colony, at all
events, where nature has rendered this essential so readily obtainable.
Another equally indispensable requisite in the cultivation of the banana is
constant moisture, and Mr. Torrens has supplied this by one of the most
perfectly developed systems of irrigation we have witnessed in this colony.
It must be understood that Mr. Torrens is dependant upon springs and the
Brownhill creek for his supply of water. Some years ago the fall from the
Brownhill creek, a perennial stream, flowed his grounds but now the settlers
in the hills, at a higher elevation than Torrens Park monopolise this supply
for their own purposes, and ncessarily very much of it is wasted. Although
it is not to be wondered at that this should be the case, there is no doubt
that a comparatively small outlay for a reservoir in the hills would afford the
means for a constant supply during the year to all persons owning land in
the vicinity. In Spain, Portugal, and Italy, it is enacted that every land-
owner whose property has a water frontage or a stream running through it
shall be entitled to use that water for a certain number of hours every day
in proportion to the extent of his estate, and Mr. Torrens thinks a similar
measure might be advantageously adopted here. However, to derive the
full advantages of the water he can obtain from the creek and springs, he has
erected a large pump at the head of the creek in his grounds, which, worked
by a one-horse whim, suffices to irrigate an acre each day, and the water is
disseminated over the ground by stone drains and surface races leading to
every tree it is intended to irrigate, and cut about three feet from the stem,
and little more than six inches deep. A race is also cut round the stem of
every tree, and these are kept filled with straw, thus the water can be taken
to or kept from any tree, as may be desired. It is Mr. Torren’s practice to
irrigate his bananas every alternate day, and his oranges only once a week.
The bananas are now* most of them more than 20 feet high, and present a
most graceful and imposing appearance. When their fruit has ripened the
stems are cut down and given to cattle, who eat them with great avidity.
The quantity of fodder thus afforded would certainly yield a most astounding
return per acre if it could be obtained on such a scale, and it is, besides, full
of saccharine matter, and very fattening. The plant attains its gigantic
dimensions in one season. There is something excessively tropical about the
appearance of the grove, and so completely is it sheltered from the rude
onslaughts of Boreas that when storms are most violent scarcely a breath
of air stirs the broad delicate foliage of the bananas.
Mr. Torrens’s orangery is of considerable extent. There are altogether
about 600 trees, some of them in full bearing, and others still in their infancy.
The varieties Mr. Torrens has collected have been gathered from China, from
Spain, the Mauritius, and other countries where the orange excels for quality.
Some of them, the “ Havel” variety particularly, are most prolific bearers
and produce an excellent fruit. The greatest pest in the orangery, and one
for which no other remedy than hand-picking has been devised, is experienced
from the attacks of an insect which constantly ejects a poisonous juice
which appears actually to wither whatever it touches, for wherever the fluid
* February, 1862.


is discharged the shoot or stalk loses all symptoms of vitality. The trees
are all irrigated on the plan we have already described, and as the soil on
which they stand is a rich black soil to a depth of about five feet, it is no
wonder they present a most flourishing appearance. Mr. Torrens has also
an excellent orchard of about 4 acres, but he does not cultivate vines, except
a few table varieties for domestic purposes.
Illoralta,
, THE EESIPENCE MB. -JOIIE MTO.
If in the selection of tne site of his residence at Morialta it was Mr. Baker’s
intention to be monarch of all he could survey therefrom he has almost
literally accomplished his object. He has built his house within a mountain
fastness, and we believe we are correct in stating that the towering hills which
surround his homestead—the unflinching sentinels of nature —are his pur-
chased property. There is just one open ravine on the north-westward, through
which, from the roof of the Morialta mansion, a distant glimpse of the gulf
may be obtained, but so great is the elevation of the hills which afford this soli-
tary outlet for the vision that but little of the intervening country can be seen.
To a stranger standing in the centre of this mountain glade, the scenery—•
magnificent in its native wildness, but bearing the impress of civilization in
the substantial modern mansion, the well-trained vines, and the golden fruit
loading the branches of the trees —must bring powerful impressions of
grandeur, solemnity, and gloom. We might almost suspect Mr. Baker of
participating in the Sentiment which prompted Byron in his early days to
write—
“ Away ye gay landscapes, ye gardens of roses,
In you let the minions of luxury rove ;
Restore me the heights where the snow-flake reposes,
Tho’ still they are sacred to freedom and love.”
Or perhaps he would go even further with the poet, and exclaim (with local
adaptations)— ,
“ England, thy beauties are tame and domestic.
To one who has roved over mountains afar;
I sigh for the crags that are stern and majestic,
The steep frowning glories of dark Loch-na-Garr.”
Owing to Mr. Baker’s absence from the colony we have been unable to
obtain full particulars of the original planting of his vineyard, or of his ulti-
mate designs respecting it. Our guide and informant on the occasion of our
visit to Morialta was the gentleman left in charge of the estate by Mr.
Baker, and whose experience of it commenced about nine years ago, whereas
the larger portion of the vineyard has, we believe, been planted fifteen or
sixteen years.


The residence fronts the ravine we have already alluded to as opening on
the north-westward of the valley. About five acres of vines are planted on
the lower slopes of the hill south-westward of the valley, and on the left of
the house, thus having a north-eastern aspect. They are planted at 4 feet
by 4—certainly much too close—and, although they are all staked, it is
found necessary to close-prune them in the summer. An experienced
vigneron who accompanied us to Morialta declared that if the vineyard was
subject to his management he would uproot one-half the vines, but from the
reason we have already stated we are precluded from giving Mr. Baker’s
opinion on the point. The varieties in this part of the vineyard are chiefly
Madeira and Sweetwater. The crop this year is particularly light, and Mr.
Baker’s steward estimates he will only be able to make about half the usual
quantity of wine. The vineyard is surrounded by a double row of apple-
trees, planted chiefly to afford shelter to the vines, and is intersected by a
splendid trellised avenue about 15 feet wide, of nearly the same height, and
350 feet long. The vines trained upon it comprise some choice table varie-
ties, but, as with the staked vines, the crop is light. The vintage at Morialta
commences generally about the second week in April, but when we were
there* many of the grapes were ripe enough for eating. The soil on the hill-
slopes is a light loam, mixed with sand and quartz, and with a clay subsoil.
Above the vineyard there is a plantation of pear-trees, comprising about an
acre. The varieties have all been imported, and the trees are planted 16
feet by 16 apart, but, as in the case of the vines, we apprehend this distance
will be found much too close. Opposite the house there is a clump of
orange-trees 14 or 15 years old. There is no readier means of irrigation
available than to carry water to them from the Fourth Creek, which runs
through the grounds. The trees frequently suffer from frost in the winter
season, and many of them have perished through the absence of sufficient
moisture and the hot winds of last month. The orange-trees are surrounded
by a number of pines and Scotch firs, which abound in the ornamental por-
tion of the grounds. On the east of the house there is an olive plantation,
and about two acres of orchard and vineyard intermixed, laid out in square
beds, with apple-trees planted on the four sides of each, and vines in the
centres. The crop of grapes here is also small, but the yield of apples is
surprisingly abundant. Beyond these two acres there are four acres and a
half of orchard, three acres of which are on the west bank of the Fourth
Creek, and one and a half on the east of it, on the gully flat. There is ample
cellar accommodation at Morialta, as, in addition to a very large cellar con-
structed after the old fashion with a shingle roof, there are two others under
the house. The oldest wines stored there now are of the vintage of 1860, of
which there are about 1,500 gallons. Last year 3,000 gallons were made of
red wine and white wines, both partaking of the Madeira character. The
enclosed grounds are surrounded by a luxuriant whitethorn fence, which
measures several miles in its total length.
• March, 1862.
[end oe eiest seeies.]


ADVERTISEMENTS.
E. S. WIGG,
mWltr, Stationer, Utanufathrtr, ft,,
12 iEtTJISriDLIB-STIR-miBT,
ADELAIDE.
E. S. W. has always on hand a large assortment of Books, Stationery,
&c., which he offers at moderate rates. Of Books he has a carefully
selected Stock for Family Use, comprising the best Literature of the
day of English and American authors. The attention of Heads of
Families is specially called to the department of “ BOOKS FOE.
YOUTH” on which much care has been bestowed to ensure a class of
Good Reading for the Children and Youth of the Colony. The
Publications of the Religious Tract Society and of the Sunday School
Union of London are kept in large quantities, and are Sold at London
Prices. Magazines, Newspapers, and Books of General Literature,
come to order, and are specially selected by his London Agent, and
forwarded by each Overland Mail. Orders for Magazines, Newspapers,
and Books forwarded by each Mail to England.
Stationery and Account-Books, of every variety; and Account-
Books Ruled and Made-up to order on the shortest notice.
Fancy Stationery, Wedding Stationery, Albums, Scrap Books,
Blotters, &c.
Drawing Papers, Water and Oil Colors, Sketch Books, Drawing
Copies : of these E. S. W. has always kept the most Complete Stock in
Adelaide.
E. S. Wmo is Sole Agent in Adelaide for the Sale of Homoeopathic
Medicines, prepared by Messrs. W. Turner & Co., Homoeopathic
Chemists, of Manchester and London, of which he keeps a Large Stock
of Globules, Pilules, Triturations, and Tinctures o*f all Dilutions; also,
Domestic Medicine Cases, &c., for Families; also, Pharmacopoeias,
Original Tinctures, &c., for Medical Men.
18. S. WIGG,
12, RUNDLE-STREET, ADELAIDE.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE NUMBER FOUR!
qxthistioilts.
WHERE IS IT? WHAT IS IT? WHAT IS IT LIKE?
WHO OWNS IT? WILL IT SUCCEED?
ANSWERS.
WHERE IS IT?—lt is at the West End of Randle Street, Next
Door to the Beehive, Second Door from King William Street, Adelaide.
WHAT IS IT ? —lt is an extensive Book and Stationery Establish-
ment, and the Stock is replenished with the Latest Productions of the
British and American Press, by every Overland Mail.
WHAT IS IT LIKE ? —The Premises are very unique in appearance,
and have been expressly built and fitted-up for the Stationery Business.
The largest Stock of English-made Account Books always on hand; and
the Proprietor, being a Practical Bookbinder, can undertake the
Manufacture of Account Books for Bankers, Merchants, Mining
Companies, &c., &c., &c., under his own immediate superintendence.
WHO IS THE PROPRIETOR, or Who Owns it? —JOHN
HOWELL, who thanks his Eellow-Colonists for the kind and liberal
support given him ever since his commencement in Business.
WILL IT SUCCEED ?—lt will; if attention, perseverance, and
keeping up a good Supply of Choice Articles, at moderate prices, will
do, it is certain to succeed. The Proprietor having just completed his
Tenth Year in Adelaide, gratefully acknowledges the confidence
and support of his numerous Eriends and the Public.
REMEMBER THE ADDRESS?— Number Eour, Rundle Street,
Second Door from King William Street.
JOHN HOWELL,
MANUFACTURING STATIONER AND IMPORTER OF BOOKS,
AND EVERY REQUISITE FOR THE TRADE.
ALEXANDRE HARMONIUMS & PIANOFORTES ON HAND.
Country Institutes , Storekeepers, and the Trade Supplied on Liberal Terms.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Wyt Australian |Ukrtiser,
A Daily Newspaper, sent Dree by Post, or may be had of Agents in all
the Principal Townships of the Colony. Price 4d. per single copy, or
17s. 6d. per Quarter. An allowance of 2s. 6d. is made, each Quarter,
for Prepayment.
Agents. —London : P, Algar, 11, Clements Lane, Lombard Street;
G. Street, 30, Cornbill, E. C.; Dawson & Sons, 11, Cannon Street,
City. Melbourne: Gordon & Gotch, 99, Collins Street, West;
H. & J. Taylor, 101, Collins Street, West. Sydney: A. Cubitt, Pitt
Street.
Jloutl) Australian Mcckln Cjn’cmide,
A Weekly Newspaper of the largest size published. Price 6d. each
copy, or 6s. 6d. per Quarter; if paid in advance 6s. per Quarter.
Delivered Free by Post; or may be had of Agents in all parts of the
Colony.
Agents. —London : E. Algar, 11, Clements Lane, Lombard Street;
G. Street, 40, Cornbill, E. C.; Dawson & Sons, 11, Canon Street,
City. Melbourne : Gordon & Gotch, 99, Collins Street, West ;
H. &. J. Taylor, 101, Collins Street, West. Sydney: A. Cubitt,
Pitt Street.
THE “ADVERTISER” SIMMS FOR EUROPE.
These Papers are Published Monthly, immediately before the making
up of Ihe Homeward Mail. They usually consist of a double sheet,
without any extra charge, and contain the CREAM of the MONTH’S
PAPERS. Price 4s. per Tear, prepaid. Orders taken for any
part of the world, and all papers carefully addressed according to
instructions.
Agents. —London : E. Algar, 11, Clements Lane, Lombard Street;
G. Street, 30, Cornbill, E. C.; Dawson & Sons, 11, Cannon Street,
City. Melbourne; Gordon & Gotch, 99, Collins Street, West;
H. &J. Taylor, 101, Collins Street, West. Sydney: A. Cubitt,
Pitt Street.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
mu mm i m.
AUCTIONEERS, APPRAISEES,
ISonse, & Cammbsioit
ADELAIDE.
Auction Mart—King William-street.
SALES ATTENDED TO IN ALL PARTS OF THE COLONY.
VICTORIA
fainiln k €nmmml Hotel,
HINDLEY-STREET, ADELAIDE,
WITHIN TWO MINUTES’ WALK OF THE RAILWAY STATION.
HENRY FOOTE,
PBOPBIETOB.
IgUT Good Stabling. Horses and Gigs to Let on Hire.
“TPiE ACPB.”


ADVERTISEMENTS.
MESSRS. TUX FOR I),
North Terrace, Fronting the Railway Stations,
GKROTE 55 G-OUGEE; STREETS,
ADELAIDE,
Beg to acquaint their Farming Friends that all the PRIZE MACHINERY
now arriving at their Establishments is Duty Free, and the Prices may
always be known as the Cheapest in South Australia for the very best
Manufactures.
M E SSIR,S. TTJXFOBD,
IMPORTERS,
Have the distinguished and gratifying honor to announce to the Farming
Interest of Australia, that every Prize awarded at a recent highly important
trial was for Implements and, Machinery Exhibited at Work and, Imported
by Messrs. Tuxford. Eight First Class Prizes, including Improved Ploughs,
Scarifiers, Harrows, Subsoil Ploughs, Drills, Clod Crushers, and the Special
Prize of the Agricultural and Horticultural Society for the best Improved,
Efficient, and Economical Implements for Inverting the Soil, Tuxford’s
Double-Furrow Plough, received this high and marked distinction of the
Society.
The most extensive and best-selected Stock of Implements, manufactured
expressly for Australia, may always be obtained, at reasonable prices, from
MESSRS. TUXFORD’S ESTABLISHMENTS,
GROTE AND GOUGER STREETS, AND NORTH TERRACE,
FRONTING THE RAILWAY STATIONS, ADELAIDE.


ADVERTISE XTEXXS*
HURT mnn,
GILBERT PLACE,
ADELAIDE.
(The Store lately occupied by Messrs. Lightfoot,
Blundell & Co., and P. Auld & Co.)
SOUTH AUSTtiAUAH
WINE DEPOT.
H. N. is always a Purchaser of
mm m©im, wraii.
And will receive the same
FOR STORAGE, OR FOR SALE ON (MISSION,
Or will undertake the Management of
WINES FOE HOME CONSUMPTION
FOE EXPORTATION.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
HENEI NOLTENIUS,
Begs to intimate that he has always
A, VSSA-BXftl€TX» STOCK
FOREIGN WINES, SPIRITS, ALE, AND PORTER
ON HAND.
HENRY NOLTENIUS,
GILBERT PLACE, ADELAIDE,
Importer of the German
BREMER LAGER ALE
nut) minim.
GILBERT PLACE, ADELAIDE,
faerat Commission Ipmjmni


viii.]
ADVERTISEMENTS'.
ME. E. L. GEUNDT,
guu[tio«wiiHml (gutfral Agent,
CHURCH HILL, GAWLER.
GOODE BROTHERS,
i vMEraEB,
STEPHEN’S PLACE, ADELAIDE,
SOUTH
WILLIAM HUGHES,
BRIDGE-STREET,
KENSINGTON.
ME. SAMUEL PEAECE,
y©BN@ii§) APPtBADSBiR,
Xuntl, A (Gunural Aggnt,
ISQe HEKBU£ Y » S T & £ gT 0 &BEL&IBE*
HEUTS -AJSTD U) TESTS COLLECTED.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
J. M. WENDT,
Malcb & Clad HI a her, jjlctodhr, &c. t
84, Bundle-street, Adelaide.
Wedding Rings, every description of Watches, Clocks,
Musical Boxes, Sold and Repaired.
GRENTFELL-STBEET
CARRIAGE REPOSITORY,
NEARLY OPPOSITE THE “ STURT HOTEL.”
BMIIMM fOIWIBBIIB & 8T 111 MOTm
DOG-CARTS, SPRING-CARTS, GIGS, AND SADDLE-HORSES,
To be Let on Hire to any part of Town or Country, by the Day
or Hour, on the most Reasonable Terms.
EDWIN DEACON
Proprietor.
H. H. BICKFOED,
Mjwksalt aair Retail Safcbkr aitb.|)antess-ma(icr,
HINDLEY-STEEET, ADELAIDE.
A LARGE ASSORTMENT OF BITS, SPURS, WHIPS, &o.
ISiT SADDLES. KASI TO DBBE&.


ADVERTISED ENTS.
GOUGE & SIMS’S,
WEST-END BREWERY,
HINDLEY-STREET, ADELAIDE.
Messrs. GOUGE & SIMS Brew, from English Malt and
Hops, the Celebrated
BEOADCLOTH ALB
GENUINE PORTER.
HOTELKEEPERS IN TOWN AND COUNTRY
supplied with
AXES & PORTER
Second to none in the Colony.
Note—
“ (L®CSk'tlil ItetaOT ”
HINDLEY-STREET, ADELAIDE,
SOUTH


ADVEETISEMEKTS.
vimim inimniß.
Capital, £12,500, in 500 Shares of £25 each,
Payable, £2 10s. per Share on application; £2 10s. per Share on allotment ; £lO a
Share by Monthly Calls of £1 a Share ; and the remaining £lO per Share to be
called up as the Shareholders may determine j but such Calls shall not exceed £1
per Share per month.
PROMOTERS:
Hon. Geo. Tinline.
Hon. A. Scott.
Jno. Hodgkiss, Esq.
Eeancis Dueeield, Esq., of Cobden
E. C. Bayeb, Esq., M.D,
Orange.
1. It is universally admitted that South Australia is pre-eminently adapted
for the culture of the Vine, possessing, as it does, all the advantages of
the necessary warmth of climate without the drawbacks caused by severe
weather, which often blights the hopes of the Yinador of Continental Europe.
2. Hitherto the supply has been greatly inadequate to the demand even
for fair average Wines, arising not only from the limited extent of Vineyards
under cultivation, but from the variety of Grapes promiscuously planted by
many proprietors, and from want of sufficient information as to soil, aspect,
and the sort of Grapes most suited to different localities. Capital and
experience alone can overcome these difficulties. The former is required not
only to meet the expenditure of forming a Vineyard and bringing it into .full
bearing, but to erect good Cellarage, with the necessary Plant, and to Store
the Wine until property matured for consumption—a course which is
absolutely necessary to obtain entire Wines of the higher class. After the
first yield the Vinador’s return is annual, certain, and increasing.
3. These considerations have suggested the desirability of organising a
Company, with a view to the encouragement of one of the most interesting
and undoubted sources of wealth, which the cultivation of the Vine must
necessarily prove to the colony, as well as to individuals immediately con-
nected with the enterprise. The operations of the Company will embrace the
cultivation of their own Vineyards, and the purchase of the produce of other
Vineyards.
4. The Promoters of the above Association have arranged for the purchase
of a portion of the Auldana Vineyards, comprising 140 acres of land; 35


advektisementb.
acres are already planted with the choicest sorts of Vines, and classified with
the utmost skill and care ; including a few choice Fruit Trees, with sufficient
space between to afford ample room for cultivating a very large number of
Rooted Vines from the cuttings each year. The following are the sorts of
Vines planted, viz., Shiraz, Black Portugal, Mataro, Grenache, Verdeilho,
Pedro Ximenes, Carignan, Gouais, Palo-mino-blanco, Tokay, and Muscat of
Alexandria: —
3 Acres (including 158 choice fruit trees) were planted in the year 1856
5 i « v s “ 1857
6 « « « 1858
gi “ ** “ 1859
7J « « “ 1860
4,1 « “ with cuttings 1860
5. The situation of the Auldana Vineyards is one of the finest imaginable.
It is on an elevated slope, and is entirely free from the influence of frosts.
The soil is peculiarly suited for Vines, being formed of decomposed clay-
slate and limestone, mix© 1 with a rich loam. The wines that have been made
by Mr. Auld are an evidence of the knowledge of the Proprietor of the
requisites for producing a first-class wine, and of the correctness of his
judgment in the selection of the site of his Vineyard, and of the varieties of
Vines cultivated.
6. The property above described has been valued by competent persons, as
per annexed certificate, at £7,825 165.; but Mr. Auld actuated by his
determination, expressed many months since, to throw this Vineyard into a
Public Company, has agreed to sell the property on the terms approved by
the Promoters, viz., £6,300, to be paid—£4,ooo in cash, and the Balance in
92 paid-up Shares. An early return will be realised from the investment, as
in 1862, 8| acres will be in full bearing ; in 1863, 141 acres ; in 1864, 23 acres;
in 1865, 31 acres; and in 1866, 35 acres. 105 acres remain to be planted, or
used for the requirements of the Company.
7. The Company shall be considered formed when four-fifths of the Shares
are sold ; and a meeting shall the be called to elect Directors and approve
Deed of Settlement. In the event of the Company not being formed, the
deposits will be returned, less the preliminary expenses, which shall not
exceed 10s. per Share.
8. Annexed are letters, explanatory of the valuation of the property
offered in this Prospectus, and also extracts from published letters or
docments referring to Vineyards.
Applications for Shares to be made to
E. W. WEIGHT,
Imperial Fire Office, King William-street.
“ Bth March, 1861.
,c Gentlemen —We have the honor to inform you that we have made a personal
inspection of the property known as the Auldana Vineyard, and have come to an
unanimous conclusion on the value of the same.
“The situation is, probably without exception, the finest in this or the
neighbouring Colonies —the soil, also, being all that can possibly be desired for the
production of first-class Wines ; added to this, the lower slopes of the Mount Lofty


[xixi.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Ranges, in the vicinity of Magill, are well-known to be free from the influence of late
Spring frosts, so detrimental to Vine cultivation in many parts of the colony.
« We estimate the produce of a Vineyard of the first-class, when in full bearing,
at 450 gallons per acre per annum, which, at five shillings per gallon, when twelve
months old, would yield £ll2 10s. per acre. The quality of the Wines which have
been made by Mr. Auld is an evidence of the knowledge of the proprietor in the
essentials for the production of really fine Wine, as well as the correctness of hi B
judgment in the seleetion of a site for a Vineyard, and the requisite varieties for its
formation. We have gone carefully into figures, as to the cost of clearing, trenching!
levelling, fencing, and planting, as well as subsequent management.
“We have not given the very lowest cost at which a similar Vineyard might be
managed, neither the most expensive system that might be adopted, but have
endeavored to strike a medium Estimate :
60 Acres of Vineyard Land at £4O per acre ... ... ... ... £2,400 0 0
Clearing, trenching, and levelling 35 acres of Vineyard, at £6O per acre 2,100 0 0
Value of Rooted Vines, and planting, at £l2 per acre ... ... 420 0 0
Fencing Vineyards with posts and two rail ... ... ... ... 140 16 0
Two and a half years’ management, pruning, &c., &c., at £l6 per acre
per annum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,400 0 0
£6,460 16 0
Interest on £5,460 at 10 per cent, for 2£ years’, being £l,OOO less, for
cost of unoccupied land ... ... ... ... ... 1,365 0 0
£7,825 16 0
“We subjoin also an Estimate of the probable yield and profit which may
reasonably be expected from 35 acres of Vineyard when in full bearing, and seasons
favorable :
35 acres of Vines, yielding on the average 450 gallons per acre per
annum, at ss. per gallon ... ... ... £3,937 15 0
Probable value of Vine Cuttings, £lO per acre ... ... ... 350 0 0
Probable cost of Management, as well as Wine-making, per annum 1,000 0 0
Thus leaving a nett receipt of £3,287 15s.
“ This estimate of 450 gallons of wine per acre is what any first-class Vineyard
may be expected to produce, when situated like that of Auldana; but would be above
the average of those situated on the Plains, except on the alluvial flats near the banks
of the Torrens, or similar situations.
“We also beg to observe, that the price estimated for the Land—£4o per acre—
is an extremely low figurej being, as it is, so eligible in every point of view for
Vineyard purposes. There are also several matters not taken into consideration;
for instance, the Gardener's House, &c., which in some degree enhance the value of
the property over and above the gross estimate.
“ JOHN EREDK. WOOD, E.H.S.
“ GEO. McEWIN.
“ MAX WEIDENBACH.
“WM.: MURRAY.
“AUGUSTINE STOW.
«To the Promoters of the South Auldana Vineyard Association.”
DIRECTORS’ REPORT.
The following Report of the Directors was read at the first General
Meeting of the Shareholders of the Association :
Your Directors, in laying before you their first Report, have much pleasure
in stating that the number of Shares taken up is 408 out of 500, and that it is


ADVEKTISEMEITrg,
expected, when the result of the last Vintage shall become known, that the
remaining 92 Shares will find a ready sale ; that the payment of calls has
been as prompt as could have been expected.
Your Directors regret to have to announce that great inconvenience, some
loss, and risk to the Wine, in addition to the expense of rent, have been
experienced from the want of a proper Wine-house, in which to work and
store the Wines; that they look forward with some anxiety to the next
vintage, and hope that the favorable report of the Manager will create such a
demand for the unsold Shares that they will be enabled to erect suitable
premises in time to avoid, in future, those inconveniences to which they have
been subjected this season.
Two Directors, Messrs. Auld and Wadham, retire by rotation, but are
elegible for re-election.
MANAGER’S REPORT.
The following report of the Manager was read at the first General Meeting
of the Shareholders of the Association: —
Your Manager, in laying before you his report of the first vintage, has
much pleasure in staling that the result is quite equal to his anticipations.
The crop has been taken from one acre of vines planted in 1856—(the other
two acres planted in that year being fruit trees) —and from four acres planted
in 1857, the other 1| acre planted in that year having been grafted last
September; these five acres, together with an equal extent of another
Vineyard, the fruit of which was added to make up the deficiency occasioned
by grafting vines which would otherwise have borne fruit, have produced
2,400 gallons of first-class red wine, and about 150 gallons of first-class white
wine, also about 450 gallons second-class wines, making in all about 3,000
gallons.
Every possible care has been observed in the manufacture of these
wines, which I am happy to state shew much character, and promise to be of
fine flavor and of rich aroma; and with due care will no doubt mature in
quality and condition to rank with the best wine of the colony.
The grub has been exceedingly troublesome during a portion of the
summer months, requiring much care to prevent the destruction of the young
plants. The weeds have also grown more abundantly during the last
summer than usual, requiring constant labor to keep them under.
I have the pleasure, in conclusion, to remark that the Vineyard is in
excellent condition for the season of the year, the plants are vigorous-, and are
looking remarkably well.
PARICK AULD')
GEO. TINLINE f Directors.
W. WADHAM )
Adelaide, June 10, 1862.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
40, KING WILLIAM-STREET, ADELAIDE, 40,
HOTER, (BLOFEIEj ©LOTMUM,
GENERAL OUTFITTER.
«©»« WHITE,
TAILOB, &0..
KING WILLIAM-STREET,
AMILAHBIo
+5 >»
*3 Ej
<v g
M r-=i
rt ©
2°
O <X>
£h + 3
O <4h
fc> o .
5-e a
m 53 ®
c3
g
§ >*■£
• H rj ®
& S«
Pn O O
*****
H
!>
Q **3 CQ
o £ p
I 3
I
2. o
C” 8
. bO
O' oi
P L__,
t-j XJ
M CD
Zi**
S o
o g
a*
S 5*
MARTIN & SACK,
mffiMMMims,
XXIXTEXjE’Z'-STIREET, _AXDEIj.A.IEE
The above complete COOKING STOYE is suitable for Club-houses,
Hotels, and Private Families, at Prices from £7 to £35, For Testi-
monials, enquire of Martin & Sach.


ATI.}
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE
PA TENT HAIE CLOTHS
MESSRS. GOODE BROTHERS,
lIE/IIPOIR/riEIR/S,
mffIHMUO ABIMIIBE,
Are prepared to Supply the Trade with the Patent Hair-
Cloths for Wine- Making, of which they have a Stock
on hand, just imported.
TZESTin^onsri^ii..
The following Testimonial to the Value and Efficacy of
these Cloths has been received from Mr. Kelsey of the
Oaklands Vineyard, who has some of them in use: —
“ Oakland, May 29th, 1862.
“ Messrs. Goode Brothers,
“ Dear Sirs — I am glad to be able to inform you that the Hair-
Cloths used in the Screw and Lever Wine-Press answer most satis-
factorily, We have made from the Oakland Yineyard, the property of
S. and J. H. Kearne, Esqrs., this season, upwards of 5,000 gallons, and
were not delayed one minute on account of the Press, whereas in former
years, by the old process, we have had to wait whole days from the
accumulation of skins. By using the Hair-Cloths there is a large
saving of both time and labor, the new process accomplishing three
times as much work per day as the old.
“ I believe from the appearance of the Cloths they will answer for
many years.
“ I am, dear Sirs.
“ Yours truly,
“ JOHN KELSEY.’*
APpy©Airii®Ki


[xviL
ADVERTISEMENTS.
JOHN HODGKISS & CO.,
IKPORTBBS,
DRAPERS AUD CLOTHIERS,
26 & 28, BUNDLE-STREET,
(Four Doors West of the Globe Inn)
mgr Settlers Supplied at Wholesale Prices. Jggj|
G. T. THOMPSON,
WHOLESALE AND EETAIL
IDMJPII, (HOTII, MGEECMs,
&Ca.
51, HINDLEY-STK.EET, ADELAIDE.
Ladies’ Under-clothing, Millinery, Baby-linen, &c.
N.B. —Country Orders carefully and promptly attended to.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
bi. rum. iii lift
Auctioneers aiib Commission Agents,
noma mmm mmx
IKZirUTGi- WILLIAM-STIIBET,
ABtIAISS.
GEEEN & WADHAM
Jdmfr Agents Auctioneers.
Landed Properties Valued-Landed Properties Surveyed.
£LANS Furnished, and TOWNSHIPS LAID OUT. Plans of
Townships, Hundreds, &c., &c., throughout the Colony, always open
for inspection.
HOUSES, STORES, LANDS, SECTIONS, &o„ LET OB LEASED.
EXCHANGE LAND MART AND LAND OFFICES,
KING WILLIAM-STREET.
ADELAIDE: LAND. LOAN, AMD C MELBOURNE:
GREEN & WADHAM, \ gCMCDiii nQuuieeinu \ WILLIAM GREEN,
King William-street, 3 U offices. I Great Collins-strect.
GOVERNMENT 7 Purchased in accordance with the instructions of parties
SECTION S ) absent from Adelaide.
GOVERNMENT 7x> , , , T . T ,
SECTIONS ) urenased and .Let on .Lease, with right of Purchase.
Messrs. GREEN & WADHAM desire to intimate to Stockholders,
Sheepfarmers, and others, that they have complete PLANS showing all the
SHEEP and CATTLE RUNS in the Province of South Australia : also, of
the RECENTLY DISCOVERED COUNTRY.
Sheep and Cattle RUNS Sold or Purchased, with or without Stock.
RUN S Surveyed, and Government Sections Purchased on Commission.—
Sales effected either by auction or Private Contract.
Plans of Runs and of Government Sections forwarded on application.
GREEN & WADHAM, Land Agents.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
[xis.
ADELAIDE CONCERT » ASSEMBLY ROOMS,
KING WILLIAM-STREET, ADELAIDE.
MB. GEO. ALDRIDOB
Begs to announce that he has taken upon lease the whole of the
extensive Premises hitherto known as “WHITE’S ROOMS.”
Silrt Adelaide OjoiuTrh't Jisscmbtg |jhr.om
Mr. Aldridge is prepared TO LET, for public purposes, on liberal
terms, either
THE GRAND HALL,
Splendidly Decorated and Lighted with the magnificent Gas Chandelier,
with adjoining Offices, or
THE MASONIC HALL,
which, in contemplated improvements, will be preserved intact.
The magnificent GRAND PIANO, Music and Reading Stands, and
all necessary Furniture for Concerts, &c., always available.
There is also a suite of smaller rooms supplied with every convenience,
to be let separately as Arbitration Offices, or for other Private purposes.
Provided on the scale of magnificence, and in the recherche style, for
which Mr. Aldridge is so well known.
11l lilMlil iSisJIS,
Br GEORGE ALDRIDGE.
IglT Luncheons Every Day from 12 to 3. Jgg
WEDDING BREAKFASTS, LUNCHEONS, DINNERS, or
SUPPERS, for any number of Guests, supplied in First-class Style and
on Liberal Terms.
“THUS SHADESr


ADVERTISEMENTS.
VINE CUTTINGS.
Vine Cuttings of the Pure Eousillon kind always to be bad at the
proper season, such as
GRENACHE, MATARO, AND PORTUGAL,
Warranted True.
D. FISHER, Eousillon Vineyard,
Osmond Terrace, Norwood.
E. & W. HACKETT,
lljmlmk anti petail
73, RUNDLE-STREET, 73,
ADELAIDE.
PROFESSOR HALL,
HINDLEY-STREET,
ADELAIDE.
Money Lent in sums of £5, £lO, £l5, & £2O,
On Personal Security or Deposit of Title Deeds, at
THE ADELAIDE LOAN OFFICE,
198. BCXTTIDXjE'V-STE/EET.
OPEN JfEOM 10 TO 4.
SAMUEL PEARCE, Manager.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
W. C. BTJIK,
IZMiZPOIRYriBIR, &c DEALER IN
(fuller!}, djomK t'cc.,
WEMMUESMJB AM© ESfUL
Moderator and Patent Camphine Lamps, English’s Camphine, Colza
and Rape Oil.
47, UXT NDLE-STREET, ADELAIDE.
MOSELEY’S
PIER HOTEL,
GLBKELG.
|g|f BOATING PARTIES ACCOMMODATED.
wsmm ©mmm aim Am m m&m
LIYBRT S T .A. B Hi IB S .
EVERY ACCOMMODATION FOR VISITORS TO THE BAY.
EARTHENWARE, CHINA, GLASS, &c.,
FLOWER POTS, EARTHENWARE DRAIN PIPES, (ALL SIZES),
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL.
A Large and Well Assorted Stock of the above always on hand,
suitable to the requirements of every class of the community.
N.B.—Country Orders executed with Care and Dispatch. Goods
Packed by experienced Packers for any part of the world.
Observe the Address :
THOMAS FUTCHER,
STAFFORDSHIRE HOUSE,
S 3, 22
ADELAIDE.
ESTABLISHED 1340.


xifi.J
ADTEETISEHESTS.
W. G. RIGBY,
SOUTH AUSTEALIAN ACCOUNT-BOOK MANUFACTURER,
otimki mid mm mm%
53, HI NDLE Y- STREET, ADELAIDE,
Magazines, Newspapers, Reviews, Fashion Books, &c., &c., and a variety
of the New Books of the day, arrive per every Overland Mail,
HOME- NE WS, 12s. per annum, Town,
13s. per annum, Posted to the Country.
Many cf the Magazines and Quarterly Reviews are supplied by
W. C, E. at the English Prices, not wit!) standing the heavy
additional cost of Overland Carriage.
Publications of the Religious Tract Society, and many others, at
English Published Prices.
taisa SAmKASi scaeoii-sooss.
At Board Prices.
RIGBY’S Priced Catalogue of Books, price Is, 6d., Town; Posted, Is. 6d
Magazine. Review, and Newspaper list, Free; Posted, 2s, 6d.
per annum.
Railway Time Card, monthly, Free; Posted, 2s. per annum.
Monthly Book Circular, Town, Free; Posted, 2s. per annum.
, Address—s 3, HINDLEY-STREET.
The Largest and Best Selected Stock in every departm>°«t of Standard
Literature, Stationery of every description, Maps, (Mooes, &c., &c. r
in the Colony, and which being imported direct hy the Proprietor,
without the expenses of a Middleman, are ottered at such Prices a»
Challenge Competition with any other House in the Colony.
Note the Address—
W. C. RIGBY,
»M)KSmWt£ s SmTOpME®, AH® HEWS AfirEHW,
53, Hindley-street, Adelaide.


m t i f f
OORIsrER SHOP
HINDLEY AND KING WILLIAM STEEETS,
gaoli, Iflusuf, ami ptatioiicni Mlai'cjtou.'ic,
THE NEWEST AND MOST POPULAR BOOKS RECEIVED PER EVERY
OVERLAND MAIL.
The Largest Selection of Cheap Literature in the Colony Selling at
English Prices.
“LEISUEE HOKE” and “SUNDAY AT HOME,” Six Shillings.
ST^A-TIOItTrEIIR/Y*.
Account-Books all sizes, bindings, and prices ; also, manufactured to order,
and ruled to any pattern ; Writing Papers of every description and quality ;
Envelopes, Pens, Ink, Wafers, Wax. Black, Blue, Bed, and Marking Ink
Pencils; Penholders, Indiarubber, Slates, and Slate Pencils, Bookslates,
Copying Presses, Tissue-paper, Blotting-paper, Drawing-papers, Tracing
Cloth and Paper, Playing Cards, Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s Address Cards ;
Memorandum, Pocket, and Betting-books, Copy-books, without and with set
copies. Cyphering-books, &c., &c., &c.
SCHOOL BOOKS.
Various Authors and Publishers; also those Published by the leish National
Boaed or Education. Atlases, Maps, Globes.
WHAPPIHG PAPERS.
Always a very Large Stock for Grocers, Drapers, Ironmongers.
IMITJSIG.
Songs, Duets, Glees, Dances, Pieces, Marches, and Sacred Music, Manuscript
Music-Paper and Books.
PIANOFORTES AND HARMONIUMS.
By the most Approved Makers.
MISCELLANTEOTJS.
Papier Writing Desks, Work-boxes, and Inkstands, Silver Bouquet
Holders, Card Cases, Pencil Cases, Communion Services, Gold Pens, &c. &c.,
Beading Easels, Paper Knives, Seals, Chess and Draught Boards, Cribbage
Boards, Concertinas, Flutinas.
AECHEEY, CEICKETEY
Agent for the “ Home News,” Lett’s Diaries, Homoeopathic Medicines,
Moflatt’s Life Pills and Phoenix Bitters.
ESTABLISHED 1839.


FIRST PRIZE
AGRIMRAL&IIORTICILTIIUL IMPLEMENTS,
MESSES. TUXFOED,
.A-IDEXj-^IIXEL
Invite special attention to the success of their justly celebrated
PRIZE GRAPE-MILL
AND
PRIZE WINE-PRESS,
For which Messrs, Tuxford have this year received the First Prize from
the South Australian Agricultural and Horticultural Society, and many
valuable Testimonials from Vineyard Proprietors throughout the
Province. Messrs, Tuxford would also notice the fact of receiving
First-class Prizes for their
Garden and Vineyard Ploughs and Horse-Hoes;
. ALSO,
TRENCHING and SUB-SOIL PLOUGHS,
CIRCULAR HARROWS FOE VINEYARD PURPOSES,
PLOUGHS FOR HILL-SIDE
And a very great variety of Implements requisite for the Farm and Garden.
MESSRS. TUXFORDS
Agricultural $ podicMttral |impUnrtni
ESTABLISHMENTS,
NORTH TERRACE, and GROTE & QOUOEE STREETS,
