

CORPULENCE.
A LETTER
ADDRESSED
TO THE PUBLIC,
WILLIAM BANTING.
ONE SHILLING.
MELBOURNE:
W. B. STEPHENS, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
15 COLLINS STREET WEST.




CORPULENCE.
A LETTER
ADDRESSED
TO THE PUBLIC
WILLIAM B^ISTTINQ.
ONE SHILLING.
MELBOURNE:
W. B. STEPHENS, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
15 COLLINS STREET WEST.
1864.




NOTICE TO THE AUSTRALIAN PUBLIC,
The publisher, in re-producing these Letters on Corpulence,
by William Banting, Esq., of London, has done so from the
fact, that a very few copies of the English Edition had
reached the Colonies—while the demand for same was
great —some hundred copies could readily have been dis-
posed of in a few days. Several gentlemen of this city are
now adopting the plan recommended by the Author, deriving
great benefit thereby j and from a strong desire expressed by
many here to possess a copy of the Pamphlet, the publisher
has lost no time in issuing this Australian Edition, which
he trusts will meet the approbation of the Public.
W. B. S.
15 CoLLINS-STREET WEST,
Melbourne,
September 20, 1864.


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.
The second edition of this pamphlet (consisting of 1,500
copies) being exhausted, and the result being very gratifying
to my mind, in the large amount of satisfaction and benefit
which I am able to report from evidence of others (beyond
my most sanguine expectations), considering the hitherto
limited circulation, I have felt impelled to publish, adver-
tise, and sell this third edition, at cost price, which I am
informed must be sixpence a copy. If this small charge,
however, should yield any profit, I shall devote it to the
Printers’ Pension Society, or some other benevolent institu-
tion • but I have no such expectation, or would very gladly
reduce the charge at starting
The first and second editions were no very serious
expense to me, scarcely three pence a copy, but the circula-
tion of them, and the correspondence involved, have cost
me far more; yet, I saw no way of securing my motives
from misconception except by gratuitously presenting the
pamphlet to the public.
The truthful tale has, however, made its way into a large
circle of sufferers with marvellous effect; and I can now
believe the public will rather prefer to purchase the third
edition at a reasonable charge than be under obligation to
me for a gratuitous supply. I therefore humbly trust, and
fully believe, that by this means the useful knowledge will
be distributed twenty-fold to the benefit of suffering
humanity, which, indeed, is my sole object
Kensington,
December, 1863.


This letter is respectfully dedicated to the public simply
and entirely from an earnest desire to confer a benefit on
my fellow creatures.
W. B.




CORPULENCE.
Of all the parasites that affect humanity I do not know
of, nor can I imagine, any more distressing than that of
Obesity, and, having just emerged from a very long proba-
tion in this affliction, I am desirous of circulating my humble
knowledge and experience for the benefit of my fellow man,
with an earnest hope it may lead to the same comfort and
happiness I now feel under the extraordinary change, which
might almost be termed miraculous, had it not been accom-
plished by the most simple common-sense means.
Obesity seems to me very little understood or properly
appreciated by the faculty and the public generally, or the
former would long ere this have hit upon the cause for so
lamentable a disease, and applied effective remedies, whilst
the latter would have spared their injudicious indulgence
in remarks and sneers, frequently painful in society, and
which, even on the strongest mind, have an unhappy ten-
dency ; but I sincerely trust this humble effort at exposition
may lead to a more perfect ventilation of the subject and a
better feeling for the afflicted.
It would afford me infinite pleasure and satisfaction to
name the author of my redemption from the calamity, as
he is the only one that I have been able to find (and my
search has not been sparing) who seems thoroughly up in
the question; but such publicity might be construed im-
properly, and I have, therefore, only to offer my personal
experience as the stepping-stone to public investigation, and
to proceed with my narrative of facts, earnestly hoping the
reader will patiently peruse and thoughtfully consider it,
with forbearance for any fault of style or diction, and for
any seeming presumption in publishing it.
I have felt some difficulty in deciding on the proper and
best course of action. At one time I thought the Editor of
the Lancet would kindly publish a letter from me on the
subject, but further reflection led me to doubt whether an
insignificant individual would be noticed without some
special introduction. In the April number of the Cornhill
Magazine I read with much interest an article on the subject
—defining tolerably well the effects, but offering no tangible
remedy, or even positive solution of the problem—“ What
is the Cause of Obesity ?” I was pleased with the article
as a whole, but objected to some portions, and had prepared
a letter to the Editor of that Magazine offering my expe-


rlence on the subject, but again it struck me that an un-
known individual like myself would have but little prospect
of notice; so I finally resolved to publish and circulate this
Pamphlet, with no other reason, motive, or expectation than
an earnest desire to help those who happen to be afflicted
as I was, for that corpulence is remediable I am well con-
vinced, and shall be delighted if I can induce others to
think so. The object I have in view impels me to enter
into minute particulars as well as general observations, and
to revert to bygone years, in order to show that I have
spared no pains nor expense to accomplish the great end of
stopping and curing Obesity.
I am now nearly 66 years of age, about 6 feet 5 inches in
stature, and, in August last (1862), weighed 202 lbs., Avhich
I think it right to name, because the article in the Cornhill
Magazine presumes that a certain stature and age should
bear ordinarily a certain weight, and I am quite of that
opinion. I now weigh 167 lbs., showing a diminution of
something like 1 lb. per w r eek since August; and having
now very nearly attained the happy medium, I have perfect
confidence that a few more weeks will fully accomplish the
object for which I have laboured for the last thirty years,
in vain, until it pleased Almighty Providence to direct me
into the right and proper channel—the “ tramway” so to
speak—of happy, comfortable existence.
Pew men have led a more active life—bodily or mentally
—from a constitutional anxiety for regularity, precision,
and order, during fifty years’ business career, from which I
have now retired, so that my corpulence and subsequent
obesity was not through neglect of necessary bodily activity,
nor from excessive eating, drinking, or self-indulgence of
any kind, except that I partook of the simple aliments of
bread, milk, buttei-, beer, sugar and potatoes more freely
than my aged nature required, and hence, as I believe, the
generation of the parasite, detrimental to comfort if not
really to health.
I will not presume to descant on the bodily structural
tissues, so fully canvassed in the Cornhill Magazine, nor
how they are supported and renovated, having no mind or
power to enter into those questions, which properly belong
to the wiseheads of the faculty. None of my family on the
side of either parent had any tendency to corpulence, and
from my earliest years I had an inexpressible dread of such
a calamity, so, when I was between thirty and forty years of
age, finding a tendency to it creeping upon me, I consulted


an eminent surgeon, now long deceased—a kind personal
friend, who recommended increased bodily exertion before
my ordinary daily labours began, and thought rowing an
excellent plan. I had the command of a good heavy, safe
boat, lived near the river, and adopted it for a couple of
hours in the early morning. It is true I gained muscular
vigour, but with it a prodigious appetite, which I was
compelled to indulge, and consequently increased in
weight, until my kind old friend advised me to forsake the
exercise.
He soon afterwards died, and as the tendency to cor-
pulence remained, I consulted other high orthodox
authorities [never any inferior adviser), but all in vain. I
have tried sea air and bathing in various localities, with
much walking exercise; taken gallons of physic and liquor
potassae, advisedly and abundantly; riding on horseback;
the waters and climate of Leamington many times, as well
as those of Cheltenham and Harrogate frequently ; have
lived upon sixpence a-day, so to speak, and earned it, if
bodily labour may be so construed; and have spared no
trouble nor expense in consultations with the best authorities
in the land, giving each and all a fair time for experiment,
without any permanent remedy, as the evil still gradually
increased.
I am under obligations to most of those advisers for the
pains and interest they took in my case ; but only to one for
an effectual remedy.
When a corpulent man eats, drinks, and sleeps well, has
no pain to complain of, and no particular organic disease,
the judgment of able men seems paralyzed,—for I have been
generally informed that corpulence is one of the natural
results of increasing years ; indeed, one of the ablest
authorities as a physician in the land told me he had gained
1 lb. in weight every year since he attained manhood, and
was not surprised at my condition, but advised more bodily
exercise—vapour-baths and shampooing, in addition to the
medicine given. Yet the evil still increased, and like the
parasite of barnacles on a ship, if it did not destroy the
structure, it obstructed its fair, comfortable progress in the
path of life.
I have been in dock, perhaps twenty times in as many
years, for the reduction of this disease, and with little good
effect—none lasting. Any one so afflicted is often subject
to public remark, and though in conscience he may care
little about it, I am confident no man labouring under


obesity can be quite insensible to the sneers and remarks
of the cruel and injudicious in public assemblies, public
vehicles, or the ordinary street traffic • nor to the annoyance
of finding no adequate space in a public assembly if he
should seek amusement or need refreshment, and therefore
he naturally keeps away as much as possible from places
where he is likely to be made the object of the taunts and
remarks of others. I am as regardless of public remark as
most men, but I have felt these difficulties and therefore
avoided such circumscribed accommodation and notice, and
by that means have been deprived of many advantages
to health and comfort.
Although no very great size or weight, still I could not
stoop to tie my shoe, so to speak, nor attend to the little
offices humanity requires without considerable pain and
difficulty, which only the corpulent can understand; I have
been compelled to go down stairs slowly backwards, to save
the jarr of increased weight upon the ancle and knee joints,
and been obliged to puff and blow with every slight exertion,
particularly that of going up stairs. I have spared no pains
to remedy this by low living (moderation and light food was
generally prescribed, but I had no direct bill of fare to know
what was really intended), and that, consequently, brought
the system into a low impoverished state, without decreasing
corpulence, caused many obnoxious boils to appear, and
two rather formidable carbuncles, for which I was ably
operated upon and fed into increased obesity.
At this juncture (about three years back) Turkish baths
became the fashion, and I was advised to adopt them
as a remedy. With the first few I found immense benefit
in power and elasticity for walking exercise; so, believing
I had found the u philosopher’s stone,” pursued them three
times a-week till I had taken fifty, then less frequently (as
I began to fancy, with some reason, that so many weakened
my constitution) till I had taken ninety, but never succeeded
in losing more than 61bs. weight during the whole course,
and I gave up the plan as worthless; though I have full
belief in their cleansing properties, and their value in colds,
rheumatism, and many other ailments,
I then fancied increasing obesity materially affected a
slight umbilical rupture, if it did not cause it, and that
another bodily ailment to which I had been subject was
also augmented. This led me to other medical advisers, to
whom I am also indebted for much kind consideration,
hough, unfortunately, they failed in relieving me. At last


finding my sight failing and my hearing greatly impaired,
I consulted in August last an eminent aural surgeon, who
made light of the case, looked into my ears, sponged them
internally, and blistered the outside, without the slightest
benefit, neither inquiring into any of my bodily ailments,
which he probably thought unecessary, nor affording me
even time to name them.
1 was not at all satisfied, but on the contrary was in a
worse plight than when I went to him; however he soon
after left town for his annual holiday, which proved the
greatest possible blessing to me, because it compelled me to
seek other assistance, and, happily, I found the right man,
who unhesitatingly said he believed my ailments were
caused principally by corpulence, and prescribed a certain
diet, —no medicine, beyond a morning cordial as a corrective,
—with immense effect and advantage both to my hearing
and the decrease of my corpulency.
For the sake of argument and illustration I will presume
that certain articles of ordinary diet, however beneficial in
youth, are prejudicial in advanced life, like beans to a horse,
whose common ordinary food is hay and com. It may be
useful food occasionally, under peculiar circumstances, but
detrimental as a constancy. I will, therefore, adopt the
analogy, and call such food human beans. The items from
which I was advised to abstain as much as possible were;—
Bread, butter, milk, sugar, beer, and potatoes, which had
been the main (and, I thought, innocent) elements of my
existence, or at all events they had for many years been
adopted freely.
These, said my excellent adviser, contain starch and
saccharine matter, tending to create fat, and should be
avoided altogether. At the first blush it seemed to me that
I had little left to live upon, but my kind friend soon
showed me there was ample, and I was only too happy to
give the plan a fair trial, and, within a very few days, found
immense benefit from it. It may better elucidate the
dietary plan if I describe generally what I have sanction
to take, and that man must be an extraordinary person
who would desire a better table;—
For breakfast, I take four or five ounces of beef, mutton,
kidneys, broiled fish, bacon, or cold meat of any kind
except pork; a large cup of tea (without milk or sugar),
a little biscuit, or one ounce of dry toast.
Fov dinner, Five or six ounces of any fish except salmon,
any meat except pork, any vegetable except potato,


one ounce of dry toast, fruit out of a pudding, any kind
of poultry or game, and two or three glasses of good
claret, sherry, or Madeira—Champagne, Port, and
Beer forbidden.
For tea, Two or three ounces of fruit, a rusk or two, and
a cup of tea without milk or sugar.
For supper, Three or four ounces of meat or fish, similar
to dinner, with a glass or two of claret.
For nightcap, if required, A tumbler of grog—(gin,
whisky, or brandy, without sugar)—or a glass or two of
claret or sherry.
This plan leads to an excellent night’s rest, with from six
to eight hours’ sound sleep. The dry toast or rusk may
have a table spoonful of spirit to soften it, which will prove
acceptable. Perhaps I did not wholly escape starchy or
saccharine matter, hut scrupulously avoided those beans,
such as milk, sugar, beer, butter, &c., which were known to
contain them.
On rising in the morning I take a table spoonful of a
special corrective cordial, which may be called the Balm of
life, in a wine-glass of water, a most grateful draught, as it
seems to carry away all the dregs left in the stomach after
digestion, but is not aperient; then I take about 5 or 6
ounces solid and 8 of liquid for breakfast; 8 ounces of solid
and 8 of liquid for dinner ; 3 ounces of solid and 8 of liquid
for tea; 4 ounces of solid and 6 of liquid for supper; and
the grog afterwards if I please. lam not, however, strictly
limited to any quantity at either meal, so that the nature of
the food is rigidly adhered to.
Experience has taught me to believe that these human
beans are the most insidious enemies man, with a tendency
to corpulence in advanced life, can possess, though eminently
friendly to youth. He may very prudently mount guard
against such an enemy if he is not a fool to himself, and I
fervently hope this truthful unvarnished tale may lead him
to make a trial of my plan, which I sincerely recommend to
public notice, —not with any ambitious motive, but in
sincere good faith to help my fellow creatures to obtain the
marvellous blessings I have found within the short period
of a few months.
I do not recommend every corpulent man to rush head-
long into such a change of diet (certainly not), but to eat
advisedly, and. after full consultation with a physician.
My former dietary table was bread and milk for breakfast,
or a pint of tea with plenty of milk and sugar, and buttered


toast; meat, beer, much bread (of which I was always very
fond) and pastry for dinner, the meal of tea similar to that
of breakfast, and generally a fruit tart or bread and milk for
supper, I had little comfort and far less sound sleep.
It certainly appears to me that my present dietary table
is far superior to the former—more luxurious and liberal,
independent of its blessed effect—but when it is proved to
be more healthful, comparisons are simply ridiculous, and
I can hardly imagine any man, even in sound health,
would choose the former, even if it were not an enemy $
but, when it is shown to be, as in my case, inimical both to
health and comfort, I can hardly conceive there is any man
who would not willingly avoid it. I can conscientiously
assert I never lived so well as under the new plan of
dietary, which I should have formerly thought a dangerous
extravagant trespass upon health ; I am very much better,
bodily and mentally, and pleased to believe that I hold
the reins of health and comfort in my own hands, and
though at sixty-five years of age, I cannot expect to remain
free from some coming natural infirmity that all flesh is
heir to, I cannot at the present time complain of one. It
is simply miraculous, and I am thankful to Almighty
Providence for directing me, through an extraordinary
chance, to the care of a man who could work such a
change in so short a time.
Oh! that the faculty would look deeper into and
make themselves better acquainted with the crying evil of
obesity—that dreadful tormenting parasite on health and
comfort. Their fellow men might not descend into early
premature graves, as I believe many do, from what is
termed apoplexy, and certainly would not, during their
sojourn on earth, endure so much bodily and consequently
mental infirmity.
Corpulence, though giving no actual pain, as it appears
to me, must naturally press with undue violence upon the
bodily viscera, driving one part upon another, and stopping
the free action of all. I am sure it did in my particular
case, and the result of my experience is briefly as follows :
I have not felt so well as now for the last twenty years.
Have suffered no inconvenience whatever in the proba-
tional remedy.
Am reduced many inches in bulk, and 35lbs. in weight
in thirty-eight weeks.
Come down stairs forward naturally, with perfect ease.
Go up stairs and take ordinary exercise freely, without
the slightest inconvenience.


Can perform every necessary office for myself.
The umbilical rupture is greatly ameliorated, and gives
me no anxiety.
My sight is restored—my hearing improved.
My other bodily ailments are ameliorated; indeed,
almost past into matter of history.
I have placed a thank-offering of £5O in the hands of my
kind medical adviser for distribution amongst his favourite
hospitals, after gladly paying his usual fees, and still remain
under overwhelming obligations for his care and attention,
which I can never hope to repay. Most thankful to Al-
mighty Providence for mercies received, and determined to
press the case into public notice as a token of gratitude.
I have the pleasure to afford, in conclusion, a satisfactory
confirmation of my report, in stating that a corpulent friend
of mine, who, like myself, is possessed of a generally sound
constitution, was labouring under frequent palpitations of
the heart and sensations of fainting, was, at my instigation,
induced to place himself in the hands of my medical adviser,
with the same gradual beneficial results. He is at present
under the same ordeal, and in eight weeks has profited even
more largely than I did in that short period; he has lost
the palpitations, and is becoming, so to speak, a new made
man—thankful to me for advising, and grateful to the emi-
nent counsellor to whom I referred him—and he looks
forward with good hope to a perfect cure.
I am fully persuaded that hundreds, if not thousands, of
our fellow men might profit equally by a similar course ;
but, constitutions not being all alike, a different course of
treatment may be advisable for the removal of so tormenting
an affliction.
My kind and valued medical adviser is not a doctor for
obesity, but stands on the pinnacle of fame in the treatment
of another malady, which, as he well knows, is frequently
induced by the disease of which I am speaking, and I most
sincerely trust most of my corpulent friends (and there are
thousands of corpulent people whom I dare not so rank)
may be led into my tramroad. To any such lam prepared
to offer the further key of knowledge by naming the man.
It might seem invidious to do so now,’ but I shall only be
too happy, if applied to by letter in good faith, or if any
doubt should exist as to the correctness of this statement.
WILLIAM BANTING, Sen.,
Late of No. 27 St. James's Street, Piccadilly.
Now of No. 4 The Terrace, Kensington.
May, 1863.


ADDENDA.
Having exhausted the first Edition (1,000 copies) of the
foregoing Pamphlet; and a period of one year having
elapsed since commencing the admirable course of diet
which has led to such inestimably beneficial results, and,
“ as I expected, and desired,” having quite succeeded in
attaining the happy medium of weight and bulk I had so long
ineffectually sought, which appears necessary to health at my
age and stature —l feel impelled by a sense of public duty,
to offer the result of my experience in a second Edition.
It has been suggested that I should have sold the Pamphlet,
devoting any profit to Charity as more agreeable and useful;
and I had intended to adopt such a course, but on reflec-
tion feared my motives might be mistaken ; I, therefore,
respectfully present this (like the first Edition) to the
Public gratuitously, earnestly hoping the subject may be
taken up by medical men and thoroughly ventilated.
It may (and I hope will) be, as satisfactory to the public
to hear, as it is for me to state, that the first Edition
has been attended with very comforting results to other
sufferers from Corpulence, as the remedial system therein
described was to me under that terrible disease, which was
my main object in publishing my convictions on the
subject. It has, moreover, attained a success, produced
flattering compliments, and an amount of attention I could
hardly have imagined possible. The pleasure and satis-
faction this has afforded me, is ample compensation for the
trouble and expense I have incurred, and I most sincerely
trust, “ as I verily believe,” this second Edition will be
accompanied by similar satisfactory results from a more
extensive circulation. If so it will inspirit me to circulate
further Editions, whilst a corpulent person exists, requiring.


27th „
99
197
99
3
more.
19th October
193
4
9 th November
190
3
3rd December
99
187
3
24th „
J)
184
3
14tb Jan,, 1863
99
182
2
4th February
99
180
V
2
25th „
99
178
99
2
18th March
99
176
2
8th April
>7
173
99
3
yy
29 th „
99
170
yy
3
y9
20 th May
167
yy
3
yy
10th June
yy
164
3
1st July
99
161
y>
99
3
22nd „
99
159
2
>>
12th August
V
157
99
2
26th
yy
156
99
1
99
12th September
yy
156
99
0
V
Total loss
of
weight.
..46
lbs.
as I think, this system of diet, or so long as my motives
cannot be mistaken, and are thankfully appreciated.
My weight is reduced 46 lbs., and as the very gradual
reductions which I am able to show may be interesting to
many, I have great pleasure in stating them, believing they
serve to demonstrate further the merit of the system
pursued.
My weight on 26th August, 1862, was 202 lbs.
lbs. lbs.
On 7th September, it was 200, having lost 2
My girth is reduced round the waist, in tailor phraseology,
12| inches, which extent was hardly conceivable even by
my own friends, or my respected medical adviser, until I
put on my former clothing over what I now wear, which
was a thoroughly convincing proof of the remarkable
change. These important desiderata have been attained by
the most easy and comfortable means, with but little
medicine, and almost entirely by a system of diet that for-
merly I should have thought dangerously generous. lam
told by all who know me that my personal appearance is
greatly improved, and that I seem to bear the stamp of good
16


health ; this may he a matter of opinion or friendly remark,
but I can honestly assert that I feel restored in health,
“ bodily and mentally/’ appear to have more muscular
power and vigour, eat and drink with a good appetite, and
sleep well. All symptoms of acidity, indigestion, and heart-
burn (with which I was frequently tormented) have
vanished. I have left off using boot hooks, and other such
aids which were indispensable, but being now able to stoop
with ease and freedom, are unnecessary. I have lost the
feeling of occasional faintness, and what I think a remarkable
blessing and comfort is that I have been able safely to leave
off knee bandages, which I had worn necessarily for 20 past
years, and given up a truss almost entirely ; indeed, I
believe I might wholly discard it with safety, but am ad-
vised to wear it at least occasionally for the present.
Since publishing my Pamphlet, I have felt constrained
to send a copy of it to my former medical advisers, and to
ascertain their opinions on the subject. They did not dis-
pute or question the propriety of the system, but either
dared not venture its practice upon a man of my age, or
thought it too great a sacrifice of personal comfort to be
generally advised or adopted, and I fancy none of them
appeared to feel the fact of the misery of corpulence. One
eminent physician, as I before stated, assured me that in-
creasing weight was a necessary result of advancing years;
another equally eminent to whom I had been directed by a
very friendly third, who had most kindly but ineffectually
failed in a remedy, added to my weight in a few weeks in-
stead of abating the evil. These facts lead me to believe
the question is not sufficiently observed or even regarded.
The great charm and comfort of the system is, that its
effects are palpable within a week of trial, which creates a
natural stimulus to persevere for a few weeks more, when
the fact becomes established beyond question.
I only intreat all persons suffering from corpulence to
make a fair trial for just one clear month, as I am well con-
vinced they will afterwards pursue a course which yields
such extraordinary benefit, till entirely and effectually
relieved, and be it remembered, by the sacrifice merely of
simple, for the advantage of more generous and comforting
food. The simple dietary evidently adds fuel to fire, whereas
the superior and liberal seems to extinguish it.


I am delighted to be able to assert that I have proved the
great merit and advantage of the system by its result in
several other cases, similar to my own, and have full con-
fidence that within the next twelve months I shall know of
many more cases restored from the disease of corpulence,
for I have received the kindest possible letters from many
afflicted strangers and friends, as well as similar personal
observations from others whom I have conversed with, and
assurances from most of them that they will kindly inform
me the result for my own private satisfaction. Many are
practising the diet after consultation with their own medical
advisers; some few have gone to mine, and others are
practising upon their own convictions of the advantages de-
tailed in the Pamphlet, though I recommend all to act
advisedly, in case their constitutions should differ. I am,
however, so perfectly satisfied of the great unerring benefits
of this system of diet, that I shall spare no trouble to
circulate my humble experience. The amount and character
of my correspondence on the subject has been strange and
singular, but most satisfactory to my mind and feelings.
I am now in that happy comfortable state that I should
not hesitate to indulge in any fancy in regard to diet, but if
I did so should watch the consequences, and not continue
any course which might add to weight or bulk and conse-
quent discomfort.
Is not the system suggestive to artists and men of seden-
tary employment who cannot spare time for exercise, conse-
quently become corpulent, and clog the little muscular
action with a superabundance of fat, thus easily avoided ?
Pure genuine bread may be the staff of life as it is termed.
It is so, particularly in youth, but I feel certain it is more
wholesome in advanced life if thoroughly toasted, as I take
it. My impression is, that any starchy or saccharine matter
tends to the disease of corpulence in advanced life, and
whether it be swallowed in that form or generated in the
stomach, that all things tending to these elements should be
avoided, of course always under sound medical authority.
WILLIAM BANTING.


STATURE. WEIGHT.
6 feet 1 should be 8 stone 8 or 120 lbs,
6
2
yy
9
0
a
126
jt
6
« 3
>>
9
a
7
yy
133
yy
5
» 4
»
9
it
10
yy
136
it
6
„ 5
>>
10
yy
2
y>
142
jf
5
„ 6
yy
10
>y
5
yy
145
yy
5
» 7
yy
10
yy
8
yy
148
yy
5
yy 8
yy
11
yy
1
yy
155
yy
5
» 9
>y
11
yy
8
V
163
yy
6
„ 10
yy
13
a
1
yy
169
yy
6
» H
yy
12
yy
6
ty
174
it
6
» 0
yy
13
V
10
yy
178
yy
CONCLUDING ADDENDA.
If Is very satisfactory to me to be able to state, that I
remained at the same standard of bulk and weight for
several weeks after the 26 th August, when I attained the
happy natural medium, since which time I have varied in
weight from two to three pounds, more or less. I have
seldom taken the morning draught since that time, and
have frequently indulged my fancy, experimentally, in using
milk, sugar, butter, and potatoes—indeed, I may say all
the forbidden articles except leer , in moderation, with
impunity, but always as an exception, not as a rule. This
deviation, however, convinces me that I hold the power of
maintaining the happy medium in my own hands.
A kind friend has lately furnished me with a tabular
statement in regard to weight as proportioned to stature,
which, under present circumstances and the new move-
ment, may be interesting and useful to corpulent readers :


This tabular statement, taken from a mean average of
9,648 healthy men, was formed and arranged for an
Insurance Company by the late Dr, John Hutchinson. It
answered as a pretty good standard, and insurances were
regulated upon it. His calculations were made upon the
volume of air passing in and out of the and this was
his guide as to how far the various organs of the body were
in health, and the lungs in particular. It may be viewed
as some sort of probable rule, yet only as an average,—
some in health weighing more by many pounds than
others. It must not be looked upon as infallible, but only
as a sort of general reasonable guide to Nature’s great and
mighty work.
On a general view of the question I think it may be con-
ceded that a frame of low stature was hardly intended to
bear very heavy weight. Judging from this tabular state-
ment I ought to be considerably lighter than I am at
present: I shall not, however, covet or aim at such a result,
nor, on the other hand, feel alarmed if I decrease a little
more in weight and bulk,
I am certainly more sensitive to cold since I have lost the
superabundant fat, but this is remediable by another
garment, far more agreeable and satisfactory. Many of my
friends have said, “Oh ! you have done well so far, but
take care you don’t go too far.” I fancy such a circum-
stance, with such a dietary, very unlikely, if not impossible ;
but feeling that I have now nearly attained the right
standard of bulk and weight proportional to my stature and
age (between 10 and 11 stone), I should not hesitate to par-
take of a fattening dietary occasionally, to preserve that
happy standard, if necessary ; indeed, I am allowed to do
so by my medical adviser, but I shall always observe a
careful watch upon myself to discover the effect, and act
accordingly, so that, if I choose to spend a day or two with
Dives, so to speak, I must not forget to devote the next to
Lazarus.
The remedy may be as old as the hills, as I have since
been told, hut its application is of very recent date ; and it
astonishes me that such a light should have remained so
long unnoticed and hidden, as not to afford a glimmer to
my anxious mind in a search for it during the last twenty
years, even in directions where it might have been expected


to be known, I would rather presume it is a new light,
than that it was purposely hidden merely because the disease
of obesity was not immediately dangerous to existence, nor
thought to be worthy of serious consideration. Little do
the faculty imagine the misery and bitterness to life through
the parasite of corpulence or obesity.
I can now confidently say that quantity of diet may be
safely left to the natural appetite ; and that it is the quality
only, which essential to abate and cure corpulence. I stated
the quantities of my own dietary, because it was part of a
truthful report, but some correspondents have doubted
whether it should be more or less in their own cases, a doubt
which would be better solved by their own appetite, or medi-
cal adviser. I have heard a graphic remark by a corpulent
man, which may not be inappropriately stated here, that
hig houses were not formed with scanty materials. This, how-
ever, is a poor excuse for self-indulgence in improper food,
or for not consulting medical authority.
The approach of corpulence is so gradual that, until it is
far advanced, persons rarely become objects of attention.
Many may have even congratulated themselves in their
comely appeai'ance, and have not sought advice or a remedy
for what they did not consider an evil, for an evil I can say
most truly it is, when in much excess, to which point it
must, in my opinion arrive, unless obviated by proper
means.
Many have wished to know (as future readers may) the
nature of the morning draught, or where it could be ob-
tained, but believing it would have been highly imprudent
on my part to have presumed that what was proper for my
constitution was applicable to all indiscriminately, I could
only refer them to a medical adviser for any aid beyond the
dietary; assuring them, however, it was not a dram but of
an alkaline character.
Some, I believe, would willingly submit to even a violent
remedy, so that an immediate benefit could be produced;
this is not the object of the treatment, as it cannot but be
dangerous, in my humble opinion, to reduce a disease of
this nature suddenly ; they are probably then too prone to
despair of success, and consider it as unalterably connected
with their constitution. Many under this feeling doubtless
return to their former habits, encouraged so to act by the


ill-judged advice of friends who, I am persuaded (from the
correspondence I have had on this most interesting subject)
become unthinking accomplices in the destruction of those
whom they regard and esteem.
The question of four meals a-day, and the night cap, has
been abundantly and amusingly criticised. I ought perhaps
to have stated as an excuse for such liberality of diet, that I
breakfast between eight and nine o’clock, dine between one
and two, take my slight tea meal between five and six, sup
at nine, and only take the night cap when inclination
directs. My object in naming it at all was, that, as a part
of a whole system, it should be known, and to show it is
not forbidden to those who are advised that they need such
a luxury; nor was it injurious in my case. Some have
inquired whether smoking was prohibited. It was not.
It has also been remarked that such a dietary as mine was
too good and expensive for a poor man, and that I had
wholly lost sight of that class; but a very poor corpulent
man is not so frequently met with, inasmuch as the poor
cannot afford the simple inexpensive means for creating fat ;
but when the tendency does exist in that class, I have no
doubt it can be remedied by abstinence from the forbidden
articles, and a moderate indulgence in such cheap stimulants
as may be recommended by a medical adviser, whom they
have ample chances of consulting gratuitously.
I have a very strong feeling that gout (another terrible
parasite upon humanity) might be greatly relieved, if not
cured entirely, by this proper natural dietary, and sincerely
hope some person, so afflicted may be induced to practise the
harmless plan for three months (as I certainly would if the
case were my own) to prove it; but not without advice.
My impression from the experiments I have tried on my-
self of late is, that saccharine matter is the great moving
cause of fatty corpulence. I know that it produces in my
individual case increased weight and a large amount of
flatulence, and believe, that not only sugar, but all elements
tending to create saccharine matter in the process of
digestion, should be avoided. I apprehend it will be found
in bread, butter, milk, beer, Port wine, and champagne; I
have not found starchy matter so troublesome as the
saccharine, which, I think, largely increases acidity as well
as fat, but, with ordinary care and observation, people will


soon find what food rests easiest in the stomach, and avoid
that which does not, during- the probationary trial of the
proposed dietary. Vegetables and ripe or stewed fruit I
have found ample aperients. Failing this, medical advice
should be sought.
The word “ parasite ” nas been much commented upon, as
inappropriate to any but a living creeping thing (of course I
use the word in a figurative sense, as a burden to the flesh),
but if fat is not an insidious creeping enemy, I do not know
what is. I should have equally applied the word to gout,
rheumatism, dropsy, and many other diseases.
Whereas hitherto the appeals to me to know the name of
my medical adviser have been very numerous, I may say
hundreds, which I have gladly answered, though forming no
small item of the expense incurred, and whereas the very
extensive circulation expected of the third edition is likely to
lead to some thousands of similar applications, I feel bound,
in self-defence, to state that the medical gentleman to whom
I am so deeply indebted is Mr Harvey, Soho Square,
London, whom I consulted for deafness. In the first and
second editions, I thought that to give his name would
appear like a puff, which I know he abhors; indeed, I
should prefer not to do so now, but cannot, in justice to
myself, incur further probable expense (which* I fancy
inevitable) besides the personal trouble, for which I cannot
afford time, and, therefore, feel no hesitation to refer to him
as my guarantee for the truth of the pamphlet.
One material point I should be glad to impress on my
corpulent readers—it is, to get accurately weighed at
starting upon the fresh system, and continue to do so
weekly or monthly, for the change will be so truly palpable
by this course of examination, that it will arm them with
perfect confidence in the merit and ultimate success of the
plan. I deeply regret not having secured a photographic
portrait of my original figure in 1862, to place in juxta
position with one of my present form. It might have
amused some, but certainly would have been very convincing
to others, and astonishing to all that such an effect should have
been so readily and speedily produced by the simple natural
cause of exchanging a meagre for a generous dietary under
proper advice.
I shall ever esteem it a great favour if persons relieved


■sJ Ar p
r* .n \ ***.
OUbLtO
24
... „ * • I T I
and cured, as I have been, will kindly let me know of it,
the information will be truly gratifying- to my mind. That
the system is a great success, I have not a shadow of doubt
from the numerous reports sent with thanks by strangers as
well as friends from all parts of the kingdom; and lam
truly thankful to have been the humble instrument of dis-
seminating the blessing and experience I have attained
through able counsel and natural causes by proper perse-
verance.
I have now finished my task, and trust my humble efforts
may prove to be good seed well sown, that will fructify and
produce a large harvest of benefit to my fellow creatures. I
also hope the faculty generally may be led more extensively
to ventilate this question of corpulence or obesity, so that,
instead of one, two, or three able practitioners, there may be
as many hundreds distributed in the various parts of the
United Kingdom, In such case, lam persuaded, that those
diseases, like Reverence and Golden Pippins, will be very
rare.
W. B. STEPHENS, PRINTER, &C., 15 COLLINS STREET WEST.


-
■
*
5 ~


BOOK AND STATIONERY DEPOT,
MELBOUENE.
