





<Sgbnc2 :
JOHN FERGUSON. PRINTER, 387 GEORGE STREET
MDCCCLXXVI.
THE
HERESY AND SHAM
Of ALL THE LEADING SO-CALLED CHRISTIAN SECTS.
A CHRISTMAS CHANT,
DAVID BUCHANAN, Esq.,
OP THE MIDDLE TEMPLE, BARRISTER-AT-LIW, AND MEMBER OP THE
PARLIAMENT OP NEW SOUTH WALES FOR
THE WESTERN GOLD FIELDS.


SYDNEY:


DEDICATION.
I dedicate this small pamphlet to the clergy of all denominations—
considering them all on about a par so far as a knowledge of Christ’s
truth is concerned. J believe there is a tacit understanding among the
clergy, that their different systems are at variance with the Word of
God ; and that it is their duty to overlook this, in consideration of
being allowed to handle the loaves and fishes without molestation.
I dedicate this trifle to them with a complete and perfect assurance
that its truthfulness will be admitted by them, but with not the
slightest hope that any knowledge of the truth will prompt them to
endanger their present very easy and comfortable mode of existence.
DAVID BUCHANAN,
Sydney, November 7th, 1874.
Chambers, 96 Elizabeth-street.
m m
cz i ' .1 J
mg* y


■ j


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.
The following few pages of print I have tried to make as concise as
possible, consistent with a clear exposition of the subject in its mam
features. I could have easily swelled this little work into a formidable
volume, without in any way detracting from its interest, but I have
rather aimed at inducing a study of the subject, by avoiding the danger
of burdening the reading public with too serious a task. Intelligent us
the public of New South Wales is, I am aware that, in this busy
country, there is little time for reading, and I think my purpose will
be as completely gained by sounding the simple air in a few clear
notes, as by running into all manner of intricate variations.
DAVID BUCHANAN
Sydney, November 7th, 1874.
Chambers, 95 Elizabeth-street.




PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
The first edition of this little book, of one thousand copies,
having sold with considerable rapidity, I have tried to make
this second edition more acceptable to the public by adding to
it considerably. It will therefore appear more complete, and, I
trust, more worthy of public acceptance. It is a favourable sign
of the times that a book like this, so free and outspoken on the
subject of religion, should have had so large and rapid a sale.
As I anticipated, the clergy have not attempted to answer it.
They, I apprehend, think that any answer they could give might
only make matters worse ; and I believe they are right. Their
silence, however, will not prevent the most searching criticism
and enquiry into a subject which has too long been considered
above the comprehension of the masses.
DAVID BUCHANAN.
Sydney, March Ist, 1875.
Chambers, 95 Elizabeth-street




CONTENTS
Tun Rkalfty
Th» Sham




HERESY AND SHAM.
THE REALITY.
“Let every man be fully convinced in his own mind.’’
Some eighteen hundred years ago there appeared upon the
earth a Man of great virtue, with the astounding statement in
His mouth that He was the Son of God. He makes this state-
ment with great meekness and modesty; He never swerves from
it a hair’s breadth, but clings to it with uniform and startling
tenacity to the last. He predicts His own cruel death, and
announces Himself as the Saviour of the World. He never
hesitates to claim a direct commission from Heaven. He is
bom into the world by miraculous agency; He recognises no
ties of human relationship, but speaks of a universal brother-
hood founded upon the love and worship of God. He attacks,
with unrivalled vigour, the prevailing religious systems, and
founds a Church, so simple and so pure in its constitution and
principles, that a child might understand and love it. During
His short life He promulgates the most exalted and purest
system of morals the world has seen. In all His dealings with
human nature He rises infinitely above it. All that mankind
strive and struggle after is looked upon with absolute in-
difference by Him. He is born poor, and poverty accompanies
Him through life; He associates with the poorest of the poor,
and selects His most trusted friends from that class ; He never


cringes to the rich or the most powerful in authority, but, to
their faces, assails them with truths of the most unpalatable
character. He raises all in authority against Him; drives to
madness the priesthood of the time; stings them to the soul
with a relentless plainness of speech and a caustic severity
which, in all literature, stands unequalled for its crushing and
consuming power. All human objects, struggles, purposes, and
efforts are ignored by Him, so far as He is Himself con-
cerned. He has come to found a system by which humanity
may be comforted, guided, made happy here, and inspired
by the certainty of everlasting happiness with Himself in
Heaven hereafter.
His life is spent amidst continual persecution and danger;
it is entirely occupied in relieving human distress. His pure
heart overflows with exhaustless and universal love, and the
simple, though grand, religion which He promulgates is all
summed up in the words —“ Do unto others as you would that
they should do unto you.” He flatters no man with the hope
of any human prosperity or worldly advantage in espousing
his cause; on the contrary, He tells them that His own fate
would be theirs—that he who would save his life in the next
world must lose it in this. If they are rich men, He tells them
to go and sell what they have and give to the poor, and take up
their cross and follow Him.- He exhorts them to an implicit,
unwavering faith in God, who clothes the lily in all its simple
beauty, and feeds the birds of the air, who neither toil nor spin;
and asserts that the same care and attention would be devoted
to them if they threw themselves upon His mercy and benefi-
cence with a single-minded, all-absorbing, earnest faith.
In the preaching of His grand and elevated system of
charity, forbearance, and love, He is frequently brought in
collision with the powers that be, and this at the instance
of the arrogant, intolerant priesthood of the day. On these
occasions His calm, dignified bearing, His superhuman wisdom.


and divine aspect, strike His judges with awe and terror. He
breaks the charge in pieces by one or two laconic sentences,
pregnant with meaning, and walks away, leaving’ judges and
audience silent and thoughtful; and only able to mutter, with
an indefinable apprehension of fear— 1 “ What manner of man is
this?” When attacked by His priestly and self-righteous
assailants in the course of His wanderings, He sometimes breaks
upon them with the power of a thunderbolt—strikes in to the
veiy inmost soul of them, laying bare the blackness of their
hearts; ruthlessly tears the mask from their faces, and, with a
sharp, incisive, murderous invective, strikes them dumb and
prostrate. ' On these occasions His assailants scon find they are
in the presence of a power that never before dwelt in human
nature; His keen, searching eye penetrates every refuge of
falsehood; His intuitive knowledge of every movement of the
human heart, and every expression of the human face, enables
Him to hold up before His opponents their true pictures; and
the graphic power by which they are painted covers them
with self-convicted confusion and admitted defeat.
His conduct in dealing with the outcasts and lost ones of
humanity, with whom He constantly associates, contrasts in the
most striking manner with the same conduct of the professedly
religious of that day, and of all days up to the present hour ; and
Ho esteems them much more fit objects for the reception of His
truth than the rigidly righteous, who outwardly display a
flaming zeal for the worship of God, but inwardly are full of
all manner of unrighteousness and deceit.
In His life of suffering and dejection, He is often without
the means of assauging the pangs of hunger, and His home is
frequently on the cold ground ; in His own words, “ Having no
place to lay His head.” As His beautiful and consolatory
system gained ground, enemies thickened around Him. The
priests of that day, jealous of the large-hearted liberality of
His doctrine, and fearing the subversion of their own hollow


superstitions, dragged Him before the tribunals on charges of
blasphemy and sedition; but His spotless life and immaculate
character, combined with the calm, dignified intrepidity by
which He met them, paralysed His judges, and sufficed, for the
moment, to avert injustice and wrong. The hatred of the
priests, however, succeeded in inflaming the passions of the
mob against Him, and their narrow hearts were often gratified
by the spectacle of His ill-usage and insult. He bore all this
with never-failing patience and equanimity, and, in His deepest
humilitation, offered an example of resignation and fortitude
which was more Divine than human.
His life was now in constant peril; nevertheless, with
splendid courage, and unwavering zeal, He preached and taught
His grand doctrines of love and forgiveness. He called his
few followers around Him, and told them of the cruel death
which He knew would shortly overtake Him. He exhorted
them to fidelity and constancy in the cause when He was gone,
and exhibited before them infallible proofs of His Divine
connection, cheering and animating them to the highest pitch of
fidelity and devotion, and arming them with a superhuman
courage to meet the trials and miseries which, He well knew,
they would all soon have to grapple with. He is at length
arrested without a shadow of foundation in justice, and dragged
before a judge who has gained an immortality of infamy by his
conduct on the occasion. The judge, Pilate by name —let us
name him in order to execrate him—finds no fault with the pure-
minded Divine Being before him; and yet the dastard hands Him
over to the tender mercies of an ignorant, intolerant, Jewish
rabble, to be murdered in cold blood, with every accompaniment
of cruelty and brutality. He meets His fate with a calm,
unostentatious courage, and a dignity and exalted piety which
drew forth the admiration and sympathy of His persecutors.
His death, painful and horrible at best, was aggravated and
embittered by filthy and brutal insult, and every circumstance


that could deepen its ignominy and degradation; and yet,
amidst all this injustice and cruel wrong, and while writhing
under the tortures of a fearful death, He turns his mild, benign-
ant face to Heaven, and breathes an earnest prayer to God to
forgive His persecutors, on the ground that they knew not what
they did.
Thus perished the man Christ Jesus, and “ if ever God was
man, or man God, He indeed was both.” Could His murderers
have known that from that time, and to the end of time, their
illustrious victim would be worshipped by all grades and classes
of people as the God and Saviour of the world, how they would
have shrank from the perpetration of their crime! We are now
eighteen hundred years distant from the consummation of that
foul deed, and in all countries millions of human beings are
moved to tears and deepest worship at the bare mention of the
Name of Jesus. His beautiful life and touching story can never
die; and, so long as the world lasts, humanity will lean upon
Him and cling to Him, under all circumstances of prosperity or
adversity, as its hope and consolation, and as the shining light
that will dispel the terror and the darkness of futurity.
In pausing, for a moment, to contemplate the character of
Jesus, we are struck by its amazing singularity. Since the crea-
tion of the world, nothing resembling it has appeared ; not only
is this so, but, ranging through the realms of fiction, we find no
conception that bears the remotest likeness to the poor, dejected,
broken-hearted Wanderer of Judea. Men like Shakespeare,
Dante, and Milton, with all the strength and splendour of their
far-reaching powers, while portraying every conceivable phase of
human character, have “ sent their imaginations out upon the
wing,” soaring into regions beyond death and the grave, depict-
ing the character and actions of angels, and the very purposes
of God; yet, with all their splendid faculties, especially in their
portraiture of human nature, they have thought of nothing
approaching the faintest likeness to the character of Jesus of


Nazareth. Let us search all history, ancient or modern, investi-
gate the literature of all countries, in all ages, and, curious
enough, the same fact will be elicited. If lam asked for proofs
of the divine character of Jesus, where shall I find them if not
in His life and actions ? Show me such another life since the
beginning of the world ? Where shall we find His all-embracing
love—His sympathetic zeal in relieving human distress—His
patient endurance of suffering—His steadfastness and calm intre-
pidity in the face of danger—His sublime courage in the presence
of death ? All this is remarkable enough, as exemplified in the
life of Jesus; but when we come to reflect upon the object of His
life, and the consistent and persistent devotion to that object,
through all manner of trials and sufferings, then we begin to be
struck with His superhuman character. In looking at this
character, we find, from first to last, a rigid and unbending integ-
rity, maintained and practised at the expense of every worldly
comfort and every worldly advantage. We notice a calm,
deliberate intention to pursue a course antagonistic to the
prevailing systems of His time, and in defiance of all
consequent danger. We observe a gentleness of character,
and a uniform humility, associated with a stern and enduring
courage which never for a moment shrinks or quails before
any danger, however formidable. We see this poor, forlorn,
friendless Being inspired with the sublime thought of rescuing
mankind from all manner of debasing superstitions, and
planting in their hearts a true knowledge of the nature and
character of the Creator of all things, and pointing out to
them a means which, not only secures their peace and
happiness here, but assures them of a happy destiny beyond
the grave. In the performance of this grand duty, never
before did humanity witness such singleness of purpose—
such unselfish devotion as was seen in the daily life of this
great moral Teacher—privations, cruel hardships, toil unceasing
mro the daily accompaniments of His short, sad history.


He is frowned upon by all in authority, and continually
menaced by danger, yet with what determined purpose Ho
advances on His course. Is their nothing divine in all this? Is
there nothing remarkable in His systematic contempt for the
things of this world, so dear to humanity? We don’t find Him
cultivating the society of the rich and powerful, and living a life of
luxury under their protection, which He might easily have done;
but, on the contrary, grinding poverty is His lot, and it is His
pride to take almost in His arms the victims of loathsome disease,
with a view to their relief. What a noble trait in His character
is this sympathy with these suffering from the pangs of disease!
What boundless solicitude for their restoration to health and
happiness is displayed in His every act, and what an inflexible
purpose He shows in treating the poorest of. the poor with as
much consideration as the most powerful and wealthy!
The best argument for the divinity of lesus is to compare
His life with the best specimens of humanity that have ever
appeared in this world. It is curious to notice how afraid most
men are of the adverse opinion of their fellow men, and how
often they are cowed by this fear into silence on matters, as to
which honest speech is urgently demanded. The very constitu-
tion of society forces men into an attitude of deceit, double-
dealing, and hypocrisy; they are compelled to make a show of
acquiescence as to things which they inwardly condemn, but
silence is imposed upon them through fear of imperilling their
worldly position and prospects. There is, consequently, a pre-
vailing tone of falsehood in almost all that is done and said in
the world, and the man who dares to set his face against this,
does so at the cost of utter ruin to himself and family. Whole
nations profess to worship Jesus Christ and to be guided by
His principles and doctrines, but let any man attempt to put
those principles into practice, and he would be scouted and
buffeted out of existence —the very penalty Jesus Christ Himself


paid for the transcendent blessings He conferred upon humanity
The principles enforced with such matchless zeal and enthusiasm
hy Jesus, while the world professes the utmost devotion to them,
are at war, and deadly war, with the whole system and constitu-
tion of society; and the reason of this is obvious enough, and may
be found in the grovelling selfishness of humanity, which never
can or will understand the unexampled purity, the self-sacrificing
virtue, and the high moral grandeur of the character of Jesus.
Although this is the case, a large portion of the world have
agreed, with a singular unanimity of opinion, to regard the
doctrines and principles of Jesus Christ as the highest and most
valued moral teaching known to humanity, however far their
practice may be removed from such an opinion—a cheap way,
and a way dear to mankind, of gaining a reputation for sanctity.
There are, however, occasionally some men who make an attempt
to realise in practice the religious principles they pretend to
hold. These men are generally very rich men, who have reached
that period of life when the shadow of death rises ominously
before them, and they begin to see how impotent and useless are
their hoarded treasures; and now, in a fit of panic, aim at
smoothing their course to the next world by dedicating immense
sums to public charity, amidst the plaudits and worship of the
multitude. The whole proceeding is dictated by the most con-
temptible fear, and is often a cruel wrong to surviving relatives.
There are some, even in the prime of life, who give of theri vast
wealth £IOOO to the hospital, amidst all manner of eulogistic
newspaper paragraphs and clouds of human incense ; yet the act
puts them to not the slightest inconvenience, and is not to he
estimated, in point of moral value, with the act of the poor
mechanic who gives his threepenny piece. The mechanic’s gift
is, of course, considered beneath notice, but the £IOOO donor is
raised to a pedestal of saintship, and so extravagantly lauded,
publicly and privately, that in due time another £IOOO is given,


eliciting another barbarous roar of human applause about
nothing, and filling the air with the “ hallelujahs of flunkeys ”
and the newspapers with fulsome plaudits of an act not worthy of
being associated with so sacred a word as charity. A man
might very easily give £IOOO occasionally to the hospital or
•other public institution, and have not one particle of genuine
•charity in his whole composition. There can be no true charity
without a sacrifice, and the mere giving of £IOOO, while thou-
sands are still held in possession, is not the charity of Jesus
■Christ, nor does it bear the remotest resemblance to it. It may
pass current with the world as charity, and be applauded to the
echo as such, but when put to the test of Christ’s demands, it
will be found to be mere vanity, or more likely a cunning policy
adopted for the purpose of purchasing a reputation, so that a
readier admittance may be obtained to public confidence, with a
view to ulterior objects. In tracing the lives of the very best of
men, how frequently does the cloven foot of their human nature
appear to mar and distort their very best actions! How little
difference, in reality, is there between the best and the worst,
and when tried by the test which Jesus Christ applied, how com-
pletely both are reduced to the same level! The prevailing
atmosphere of the world is falsehood, and falsehood is the very
essence of human nature. Truth is a principle to be acquired,
and no man does acquire it but after a frightful struggle against
the falsehood of his nature —that falsehood is never eradicated
from the nature of man, but hirks there, ever ready with its
suggestions, its temptations, and insidious efforts to obtain
mastery, and more or less tincturing the thoughts, actions, and
conduct of all men. Let any observant man look around him,
and he will soon find ample corroboration of the truth of what is
here said. There is scarcely a trade or occupation to which man
turns his attention but is based upon falsehood and deceit. From
morning till night men labour To overreach each other, all arrayed


in the disguise of honesty, and all propelled by selfishness,
avarice, and overruling, imperious necessity. From this sicken-
ing scene of fraud, hypocrisy, and double-dealing, how refreshing
it is to turn to the simple purity and genuineness of the life and
character of Jesus ! What a sovereign contempt do we see here
for all that interests and animates mankind to effort! What
nobility of purpose is revealed in His every act and deed ! No
taint of sin or selfishness or human weakness of any kind mars,
for one moment, the dignity and moral beauty of His devoted
life. He has no two faces, one for the rich and powerful, another
for the poor and helpless. He does not recognise the distinction
between them, so visible to humanity; and is equally in earnest,
whether administering a rebuke to the highest functionary in
the land, or tending and nurturing, with the most loving solici-
tude, some poor, diseased, helpless outcast. It is certainly a
remarkable fact that no human being has appeared on the earth,
before or since the appearance of Jesus, that bears the remotest
resemblance to Him. He stands out so conspicuously from
humanity—is so infinitely superior to, and so different from,
even the very best specimens of human nature, that the conclu-
sion is irresistibly forced upon us that He had a divine nature as
well as a human one. But whether God or man, or both, the
dignity and majesty of His sublime figure will for ever move
before our imaginations ; the purity and unselfish devotion of His
simple life will ever attract a spontaneous worship 5 and the cruel
injustice of His tragic end will, to the end of time, thrill the
souls of men as they mourn over the fate of so much goodness
and so much glory. Say what we will—argue and philosophise
as we may reason with all power, human or superhuman, wo
shall never erase, in the slightest degree, the indelible mark
which the life and death of J esus has left on every age of the
world since His birth. We shall never be able to deduct one
iota from the divine power of that life and death to soothe the


trials and brighten the hopes of the poor, comfort the oppressed
inspire the hopeless, cheer the dejected, and enable them all to
issue from their last struggle with their last enemy irradiated
with the consciousness and crowned with the glory of conquest.
During the lifetime of Jesus He founded a Church, and
after His death His followers and disciples spread that Church
over a large portion of the earth. The doctrines of the Church
were very simple, and consisted merely of faith in Christ—that
He was the Son of God, and died for all. His Apostles
preached nothing else but this —one of them saying, “ I
resolve to know nothing but Christ’s death and crucifixion.”
The ministers of those Churches, whom they called elders, were
appointed to that office from the possession of no worldly learn-
ing or accomplishments, but from an earnest faith in Christ’s
life and death. On appointment to this office they did not deem
it necessary to give up their secular labours by which they
maintained themselves, nor was there any instance of one elder
being appointed to any Church, but always a plurality. The
idea of being educated, in the worldly schools, to this priest-
hood, and following it as a means of living, never crossed the
mind of Jesus or one of His followers, and would have been
looked upon by them as a monstrous prostitution and open
blasphemy. The crafty priesthood of modern times quote one
or two isolated texts, such as “The labourer is worthy of his
hire,” to justify their wholesale extortion and plunder of the
people. The example and direction of the Apostle Paul on this
vital subject are entirely thrown away upon them. While it
was notorious that every preacher in the Church of those days
laboui’ed with his own hands at his secular occupation to sup-
port himself, the Apostle Paul directs them in their travels to
take, in the shape of meat or drink, whatever was voluntarily
given, and adds, “ For the labourer is worthy of his hire but
from his birth till his death he never dreamt of, or imagined,
. state of things as prevails now. Let us hear the great
such a


Apostle himself on the subject. lam sure no language could
he more emphatic or conclusive:—“Nevertheless,” he says,
“ we have not used this power, hut suffer all things lest we-
should hinder the Gospel of Christ.” Again he says —“ But I
have used none of those things, neither have I written these
things that it should be so done unto me ; for it would he better
for me to die than that an}' man should make my glorifying
void.” In the same place he says—“ What is my reward then ?
Yerily, that when I preach the Gospel, I may make the
Gospel of Christ without charge.” In the same strain he
writes to the Thessalonians —“ For ye remember, brethren,
our labour and travail, for labouring night and day, because we
would not be chargeable unto any of you, we preached unto you
the Gospel of God.” In the second epistle to the same Church
he writes —“Neither did we eat any man’s bread for nought,
but wrought with labour and travail night and day, that we
might not be chargeable to any of you.” “Not because we
have not the power, but to make ourselves an example unto you
to follow us.” Besides the trials and sore persecutions which
befel Paul in the exercise of his ministry, and which he terms
“ The things that were without,” he found a serious occupation
for his mind and attention in that which he says ‘ ‘ cometh upon
me daily—the care of all the Churches.” Yet we see that, not-
withstanding that serious charge of the oversight, not of one
Church, but of all the Churches, he did not deem it in any way
incompatible with that duty, that he should labour and work
with his hands that he might be burdensome to none. Accord-
ingly, when he came to Corinth, and met v ith A (pi ila and his
wife Priscilla, he abode with them, and wrought, because he was
of the same craft, for by their occupation they were tent-makers ;
and there, although he resided with them, and was maintained
by them, he wrought with his hands at their business of tent-
making, that he might not be chargeable to them. He refers
particularly to his conduct in this important point in his


remarkable address to the Elders of Ephesus, whom he sent for
to Miletus, and, after declaring that he was pure from the blood
of all men, as he had not shunned to declare to them the
whole counsel of God, and exhorting them to take heed to
themselves and to all the flock, he says —“ I have coveted no
man’s silver, or gold, or apparel. Yea, ye yourselves know that
these hands have ministered to my necessities, and to them that
were with me. I have showed you all things, how that so
labouring ye ought to support the weak, and to remember the
words of the Lord Jesus, how he said —“It is more blessed to
give than to receive.”
To a candid mind, could there be anything more satisfying
or convincing than this? And yet, our modern clergy throw
all this to the winds as an idle tale, and clutch at the lucre, and,
in many instances, to an extent which stamps them as the
veriest impostors and charlatans the world has seen. We sfee,
then, how simple 1 was the constitution and doctrine of the
Church founded by Jesus—a body of earnest men brought
together by the power of God’s truth over their consciences.
Their grand doctrine was belief in His life and death; they
were all earnest believers, and this was the only qualification
for appointment to the ministry. No educational qualifications
availed anything here. A man might have been the most
accomplished scholar of the age, and it would have in no way
recommended him for admission to the Church, far less to the
ministry. Whatever his accomplishments, if he lacked the faith
by which mountains are moved, he was but a sounding brass.
The Apostle Paul, in the language I have already quoted, shows
clearly with what indignation he repudiated the idea of a
minister of Christ receiving payment for the performance of his
duty. He performed that duty without charge, and, in his own
touching language, here is the payment he received for it—“ Of
the Jews, five times I received forty stripes save one. Thrice
was I beaten with rods; once was I stoned; thrice I suffered


shipwreck —a night and a day have I been in the deep. In
joumeyings, often in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in
perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils
in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in
perils among false brethren; in weariness and painfulness, in
watchings, often in hunger and thirst, in fastings, often in cold
and nakedness.” When we reflect upon this, and listen to
the modern pretenders prating about performing the work of
their Master, many of them drawing thousands of pounds yearly
in consideration of the pretence, how the soul of every true
believer and genuine reader of the New Testament is tilled with
scorn and contempt! And what a contrast, when we look at the
various religious organisations of our own day, and compare
them with the Church of the immediate followers of Christ I
That Church, with no paid ministry, with every member an
earnest, devoted believer, ready at any moment to lay down his
life in the cause, and exposing it in spite of the knowledge that
the bare profession was certain to result in loss of comfort,
property, liberty, and life. When we reflect that this Church,
and every one of its adherents, were, from the first, marked out
for the most relentless and bitter persecution, at the instance of
all the powers of the earth; that the Apostles, to a man, met a
cruel and violent death; that all who took any part in it must
have first made up their minds to certain ruin and sore destruc-
tion ; to be hunted from place to place, imprisoned, spat upon,
flogged, insulted in every vile manner, and ultimately tortured to
death, under such circumstances, what a guarantee had we for
the sincerity of those devoted men ! What a pure and genuine
worship must have ascended to Heaven on the assembling of
this band of heroes ! What a Divine inspiration that must have
been that armed them with the sublime courage to brave the
bitterest hatred of the mightiest monarchs of the earth; to
laugh to scorn dungeons and racks, and to hold aloft the banner
of Christ with rare constancy and firmness, amidst poverty and


h anger, torture and insult, desolation and death! Estimate, if
jou can, the power of that principle of worship inspired by the
life and death of Jesus, which had laid hold of these men, and
prompted them to consider all things, life itself, as lost for His
sate. In all history there is nothing so grand and so thrilling.
And, curious enough, notwithstanding the persistent, continuous,
and frightful persecution to which the Church of Christ was
exposed —notwithstanding the formidable character of the
powers arrayed against it, and the wholesale murder of its
adherents wherever they could be found—in spite of all this we
see it burning, only with a clearer and a steadier lustre, as the
efforts to obscure and extinguish it were redoubled.
This, then, was a Church worthy of the pure and divine
founder. It was a Church which left every man to act upon his
own conviction :—“ Let every man be fully convinced in his own
mind.” There were no priests here arrogating to themselves a
monopoly of the knowledge of Christ. Each man was respon-
sible for his own belief, and was taught and exhorted to search,
study, and investigate for himself. Their one dogma was
Christ’s death and resurrection, and they never tired expatiating
on this glorious theme. Their doctrines were simple and beau-
tiful, consisting of brotherly love and mutual aid, bearing each
other’s burdens. No treasures were laid up on earth, but the
poor were the recipients of each one’s surplus. No thought was
expended on the future ; and, having food and raiment, they
were all required to be content.
The Church struggled on nobly, making many converts, in
the fat e of the most appalling persecutions, and under the
most grinding tyranny. Persecution and the sword were in full
cry after it, when an event took place which altered everything,
and laid the foundations of that vast fabric of corruption
which took the place of the pure Christianity of the persecuted
Church, and prostrated the whole human mind under a priestly
thraldom, which is visible, in a mitigated form, at the present


liour. The event referred to was the conversion to Christianity
of the Roman Emperor Constantine. This was the event that
raised Antichrist to his throne. After it, all persecutions of the
Church ceased; and just in proportion as it had been hunted
and oppressed by the Kings of the earth, in the same proportion
was it now by them nurtured and fondled, and in every way
supported, protected, and patronised, with results which I shall
attempt to portray in the next chapter.
I have tried to sketch the Reality in as truthful and con-
densed a manner as possible by merely reflecting the facts of
the New Testament. Let me now try to paint the Sham which
superseded the Reality from the moment of Constantine’s con-
version, or so-called conversion, and which Sham has been, more
or less, the curse of humanity from that day to this. Under
this incubus mankind has groaned for ages; kings and priests
have used it for their own aggrandisement, and, through it,
man’s intelligence has been struck with paralysis, his body
enslaved, his spirit broken, and his whole character degraded
almost to the level of the beasts that perish; while priests have
rolled in luxury and licentiousness, and amused themselves by
inventing new devices for the further degradation of humanity,
and to rivet the universal thraldom.
In these days there are signs abroad that the reign of the
priest is at an end. May God, in his mercy, open the eyes of
poor, blind humanity to see the depth of their apostacy and
treachery, and to awake to a clear vision of the happiness and
emancipation to be found in a correct conception of the character
and doctrine of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ.


THE SHAM.
“ Help us to save free conscience from the paw
Of hireling wolves, whose gospel is their maw.”
Milton.
We have seen what a noble struggle the Church of Christ made
against the powers of the world, and what a splendid and
dauntless courage animated its followers. The handful of poor
men who threw all that men hold dear to the winds for the
sake of the grand truths they upheld ; their unswerving fidelity
to those truths ; their indexible firmness and constancy under
cruel punishment; the devotion with which they offered up
their lives to the cause; the fearless intrepidity with which
they ignored all earthly considerations —stamps them as the
noblest characters, and the grandest heroes of history. Their
Church was integrity itself—as well it might have been as
every member of it was there at the cost of his life. IN o money
rewarded their- ministry, but the loss of everything was cheer-
fully endured for the sake of their belief. It was a Church to
glory in. The preachers poured forth their souls in burning
earnestness, and struck conviction to the hearts of all listeners,
'pfie intense zeal and boundless devotion of every man of them
bore down every obstacle, and kept the flame of Christ s
lighteousness alive when every earthly power was bent upon
its eclipse.
When the Eoman Emperor, Constantine, ceased to per-
cnute this Church, and became a member of it, and upheld it,


the effect was to corrupt it to the very core. The Emperor’s
example was everywhere followed; in fact, there was no road
to place or power but through membership of the Church.
Every knave took his cue from the Emperor, and joined the
Church, deeming it the most politic course ho could adopt. Crowds
of scheming libertines, unprincipled impostors, and adventurous
politicians entered it, without a thought of anything but their
own worldly advantage in so doing. In one word, the floodgates
were at once opened for a full stream of corruption to roll in,
and the pure Church of Christ and his Apostles became an
implement of government—a machine—through which the
priesthood became the hirelings of Kings, and both united for
the simultaneous plunder and oppression of the people. This
has continued to this very hour, and has stimulated the deepest
hatred of priests and their craft in the hearts of all enlightened,
true men. The Church of Christ was thus entirely obliterated ;
its doctrines, constitution, and practice trampled under foot,
and a most appalling spiritual tyranny set up in its place.
The new priests soon let it be known that it was no part of
their programme to live in poverty, or to depend upon the
voluntary contributions of the people for support. They
became the paid officers of the State, and began by exacting
the tenth of every man’s earnings to keep them in luxury and
affluence. They enforced this atrocious plunder by legal
process, and, if necessary, by military force. This provision
was soon found inadequate to satisfy the rapacity of these
priestly vultures, and, in due time, with the aid of the
temporal power, they laid claim to, and obtained, large tracks
of the finest lands, which afforded them princely revenues
for all time coming.
In the meantime their numbers were increased immensely
with every variety of rank and grade—from the mere novice up
to him they called the head of their Church, whom they also
created a temporal King. Their whole proceedings were
without a shadow of foundation in the Word of God, and this


was so well known to them that the Scriptures were soon shut
up in dead languages, and became a sealed book to the people.
Every monstrous fable and blasphemous dogma were then
taught as the Word of God, the priests telling the poor unfor-
tunate people that no one was competent to understand the
Scriptures without a priest being present to interpret. The
whole substance of Christ’s beautiful and simple doctrine was
lost in this terrible apostacy. The thing at last became so
rotten and corrupt that the priests did not care to conceal their
profligacy and licentiousness. For some reason—unknown to
God’s Word—the priests were prohibited from marriage ; and it
requires no vivid imagination to picture the frightful grossness
and profligacy that this detestable rule induced. Open and
undisguised immorality among the priesthood was the rule, and
it was followed by a train of consequences too horrible to
mention. Religious houses were established for the reception
of men and women, who thus retired from the world. The
women saw no human beings but the priests, and in all
countries this infernal system produced results from which the
soul of man shrinks with horror.*
Every device that human invention could think of was put
in practice by the priests for the purpose of raising money.
Not content with the splendid provision already made for them,
they pretended to forgive sins, and sold this forgiveness to their
poor dupes for money. They, also granted indulgences for
money—that is, on payment, any one got liberty to do as he or
she liked for a specified period. Even the dead were turned
into coin, and large exactions made from the deluded survivors
* An old Catholic priest in Switzerland is about to follow Father Hyaointhe’s
example, abandoning celibacy. St. Ange Lievre, of Biel, in announcing his bethrothal
to a Protestant lady, says : “I marry because I wish to remain an honour ible man.
In the sixteenth century it was a proverbial expression to say ‘as corrupt as a
priest,’ and this might be said to day. I marry, therefore, because I wish to get
out of the Ultramontane slough.” During the last two years sixty-seven Roman
Catholic priests have been convicted of immorality in Switzerland. In view of
such facts, it is time to restore, by marriage, the good name of the Romish priest -
hood, which the misconduct of too many of its members has long covered with
infamy.— Home News, of October 2nd.


in order that the priests might secure the repose of the souls of
the departed. The revenues from these sources were
enormous, and enabled the priests to live lives of rare luxury
and enjoyment. An embargo was laid upon education, and
the discoveries of science were silenced on pain of death. A
system of confession of sins to the priest was introduced, by
which the secrets and private affairs of all families were dis-
closed, and used for various atrocious purposes.
Under this frightful system the entire body of mankind—
where it prevailed—were sunk and lost. The human mind was
hopelessly enslaved: all right of free thought gone. The
priesthood hung over the people, stupifying them with a deadly
malaria, from which there was apparently no recovery; all
independence annihilated; no one ever dreamt of thinking for
himself, far less attempting to throw off the stigma and torture
of this infernal blighting, soul-destroying tyranny.
This state of things continued for centuries, and well nigh
succeeded in entirely extinguishing human intelligence. The
priests reigned supreme, and saw with delight the mass of the
people prostrated at their feet in hopeless thraldom. Such was
the state of the world when what is called the “ Reformation 9t
burst upon it with a terrible explosion. A priest of unrivalled
ability and rare courage—Martin Luther by name—had long
looked upon all he saw with feelings of profound disgust. Tho
abuses of the so-called Church, and the libertinism and glaring
immorality of the clergy, had filled his soul with loathing ; and,
being an earnest, true man, he assailed the monstrous fabric
of superstition and corruption with all his splendid ability, an 1
never ceased until he had split it in two, and shook it to its
very foundations. Luther was, in every way, fitted for this
gigantic task, and played his part with the courage and
devotion of the early martyrs. Priestcraft received a deadly
blow at his hands, and at tjiis day we owe to him the right of
free thought and emancipation from the shackles of a galling
priestly oppression, unendurable by enlightened men.


* Archbishop of Canterbury . ..
.. . £56,650 a year.
Ditto York
. . . 32,200
do.
Bishop of Durham
. . . 36,420
do.
Ditto London
70,000
do.
Ditto Winchester
, .. . 57,479
do.
Ditto Ely
42,698
do.
Ditto Salisbury
. .. . 27,700
do.
The rest on an average of . . ,
. . . . 10,000
do.
The new opinions spread in all directions, and were
espoused hy the intelligence of every land, and reformed
Churches set up in all countries. However little we may value
the character of these reformed Churches, as compared with the
simplicity and purity of the Church of Christ, we cannot fail to
glory in the event that struck down the colossal spiritual
tyranny that had so long degraded and oppressed mankind.
The reformed Churches did not dream of going back to the
Scriptures—which were now opened for the perusal of the
people —for their model in founding a Church. Had they done
so, we would have something very different from what now
prevails. They took for their model the system they had left,
and retained all the leading abuses of the original apostacy.
Let us take the Church of England, as by law established, as
an example. It seems to me to be the sheerest mockery to talk
of it as a reformed Church. Its connection with the State, to
begin with, gives the lie to the dying declaration of Jesus
Christ —“ That His kingdom was not of this world.” Where
is the authority in Scripture for such offices as their Arch-
bishops and Bishops, with their enormous revenues ? Let
every thinking man study the following table, which I take
from a return laid upon the table of the House of Commons,
moved for by Mr. Baring :
* Those salaries have been altered since the date of the above return. The Arch-
bishop of Canterbury receives £15,000 a year, and the others in proportion; but various
■charges and perqoisites swell the fixed salaries considerably.


Are not these a remarkable set of followers of the meek and
lowly Jesus, who had not, on this earth, where to lay his head?
Consider that those magnificent revenues are wrung from the
people, in many instances, in spite of their repudiation and
dissent from the church on behalf of which they are drawn ; and
yet we find those Bishops and Archbishops—those unblushing
hypocrites—have the effrontery to take the name of Jesus in
their mouths! As a means of extortion and plunder, the Church
of England, at this moment, stands unrivalled—the Church of
Rome scarcely surpasses it in rapacity. The Reformed Church
lays hold of the tithes, and has property in all towns, besides
splendid revenues from the best lands in the country. This
cormorant Church preys upon mankind from their birth till
their death. Take the following from William Howitt: “For
burying a poor man this is the common scale of charge the
church imposes—for the burial of a pauper, 7s. 6d. ; for a child
six months old, the same. If a child is not baptised, Is; for in
that state it is, by clerical logic, deemed not a human being
until their mummery has ennobled it—a thing beneath God’s
notice—it is therefore thrust into any hole by the sexton. In
the principal churchyard, a man who wishes to choose the place
of burial must pay £lO for the size of a grave, and for opening
such a grave, £2 15s. 6d. For permission to lay down a flat
stone, £3 35.; for an upright stone, 10s. 6d. For liberty to
< lean his fathers gravestone, the Vicar of Newark charged a
man ss. There is nothing connected with the Church but must
be paid for.”
The livings of this church are mostly in the hands of the
aristocracy; they are very rich, and are often sold in London,
by auction, to the highest bidder. As the result of this system,
the most worthless and profligate men are frequently appointed
to very rich livings. Let me quote again from William Howitt’s
most able work on Priestcraft, the authority of which will not


be gainsayed : “ But what is tlxe actual pictur.' presented to us
now under the operation of this detestable system ? Look where
we will, we behold the most gross instances of simony, plurali-
ties, non-residence, and penurious remuneration of the lower
■order of clergy. If every man were to declare his individual
experience, such tilings would make part of his knowledge.
In towns, where the clergy are more under the influence of
public opinion, we see too many instances of lukewarmness,
arrogance, and unfitness. I have seen gamblers, jockeys, and
characterless adventurers, put into livings by the vilest influence,
to the horror and loathing of the helpless congregations —and
that in populous cities ; but in obscure rural villages the fruits
of the system are tenfold more atrociously shameful. There,
the ignorant, the brutal, the utterly debauched, live without
shame, and tyrannise without mercy over the poor, uncultivated
flocks whom they render ten times more stupid and sordid.
Within my own knowledge, I can go almost over innumerable
parishes and find matter of astonishment at the endurance of
Englishmen. I once was passing along the street of a country
town in the evening, and my attention was arrested by the most
violent ravings and oaths of a man in a shop. I inquired the
occasion. ‘Oh ! ’ said one of the crowd, who stood seemingly
enjoying the spectacle, ‘Oh, it is only Parson ; he has
got drunk, and followed a girl into her father’s house, who,
meeting him at the top of the stairs in pursuit of his affrighted
daughter, hurled him to the bottom, and the worthy man of
Ood is now evaporating his wrath in vows of vengeance.’ From
these spectators, I found it was one of the commonest sights of
the town to see this clergyman thus drunk, and thus employed.
< But why,’ said I, ‘do not the parishioners get him dismissed ? ’
A smile of astonishment at the simplicity of my query went
through the crowd. ‘ Get him dismissed! who shall get him
dismissed ? Why he is the Squire s brother; he is, in fact.
THE SHAM.


born to the living. There is not a man in the parish who is not
a tenant, or dependent in some way on the family ; consequently,
not a man who dare open his mouth. They have him, such as
he is, and must make their best of him; and he or his brother
will be sure to rear a similar prophet for the next generation.’ ”
Mr. Ilowitt, in his able book —which I recommend to all
readers —again gives his experience of this truly Reformed
Church. He says : “I entered a village, not five miles off.
This I found a lonely, retired place, with a particularly hand-
some church, a noble parsonage, a neglected school, and an
absent clergyman. The living was £IBO0 —the incumbent a
desperate gambler. ‘ Why,’ again I said, ‘ don’t you get this
man dismissed ? ’ I saw the same smile arise at my simplicity.
1 La, sir, why he is his lordship’s cousin!’ It was a decisive
answer to the principle of private patronage. This village
also owed the irremediable curse of a gambling parson. I
went on. In a few miles I entered a fine, open parish, where
the church showed afar off over its surrounding level meadows
of extreme fertility. There the living was added to that of the
adjoining parish. One man held them. Together, they brought
£2400 a year. A Curate did the duty at two churches and a
chapel of ease for £BO. The Rector was never seen, except
when he came and pocketed his £2320 and departed. But, in
the parish which I know, perhaps better than any other —a
large and populous parish in Derbyshire —no one could re-
collect having heard of it possessing a decent clergyman. The
last but one was a vulgar and confirmed sot. The last came —
a respectable youth, well married—but soon fell into dissipated
habits : seduced a young woman of fine person and some
property, who, in consequence, was abandoned by her con-
nections —married a low wretch, who squandered her money,
and finally died of absolute starvation. The clergyman’s wife
—hitherto a respectable woman—wounded beyond endurance
by this circumstance, took to drinking; all domestic harmony


was destroyed. The Yicar began to drink, too. A young
family of children grew up amid all these evil and unfortunate
influences. The parents finally separated, and, as the pastor
fell into years, he fell into deeper vice and degradation. I well
remember him. I remember seeing him upheld, in a state of
utter intoxication, over a grave by two men, while he vainly
strove to repeat the burial service, saying— ‘ There is one
glory of the sun, and another glory of the sun,’ till they led
him away, and closed the grave. Such is the ecclesiastical
history of this one parish ; such would be that of thousands—
were they related.”
This, then, is what is called the “ Reformed Church of
England.” Is it not monstrous that the people who have access
to the New Testament should tolerate a system of this descrip-
tion ? Do men pretend to exercise their judgments upon
religious matters at all ? Or do they accept, without inquiry
or investigation of any kind, whatever is placed before them
for their belief ? The Bible might never have been written
for aught there is in the constitution and practice of the Church
of England to be found there. And what are all intelligent
men forced to pronounce it to be but a mere political machine—
set in motion by men who are bribed by the State to use it
as a means of upholding kingcraft and aristocracy, and for the
purpose of keeping the people in ignorance and awe. There
are no men so ready to call out Atheist as the bishops and
clergy of this Church when any one raises his voice against
it. The true Atheist and practical opponent of Christ’s
religion is the man who dares to open his mouth in defence of
the- multiplied abuses of the Church of England. We have
seen the enormous revenues drawn by her bishops—in open
defiance of almost every word that fell from the lips of Christ.
I wonder if any of those bishops ever thought of the passage—
“Go and sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and take up
your cross and follow me.” To be sure they did—only to laugh
THE SHAM


at it. Take up their cross ! The cross they take up is
generally a carriage and pair, in which they roll along the
flowery paths of life, ending in the soft and downy repose of
some snug and comfortable bishop’s palace. One of their
number—l saw by the Times some short time ago—died,
leaving behind him the enormous sum of three hundred thousand
pounds ! Of course, this bishop had a beautiful conception of
the text—“ Lay not up treasures upon earth;” or, “Having
food and raiment, let us therewith be content.” Three hundred
thousand pounds! What a sum to be imprisoned at the
instance of a bishop ! Had that bishop’s faith been as strong
in Christ as it was in his money, what a happy man he would
have been! I wonder how he felt when he passed, in rags
and wretchedness, the beggars on the street! If he ever
prayed, I wonder if his prayers were only limited to the pre-
servation of his treasure ! And now, that he is dead and before
his God, may we not rely upon the fact that his soul is in the
company of other rich men, where cold water—for cooling
purposes—is in considerable demand ?
Just let us suppose, for a moment, that this bishop had
been a Christian man. What a world of tears he might have
diied up with a tithe of that sum ! liVTiat an infinity of
distress he might have alleviated had Christianity lived in his
heart! And what a consolation, when the inevitable stroke
of death came upon him, to reflect that the bulk of his fortune
had been expended in carrying joy and comfort to many a
desolate hearth, and pouring balm into many a wounded spirit!
Under such circumstances, how smooth the pillow of his death
bed! With what calm placidity could he have faced the last
enemy, his dying couch surrounded by visions of faces, beaming
with smiles of the most ineffable gratitude, and whispering in
his ear the hopeful words—“ Fear not, inasmuch as you did it
unto us, you did it unto our blessed Saviour;” the dying man’s


greatest anxiety, if lie had. any, being a pardonable impatience
to be ushered into the presence of the God he had so faithfully
served, and whose teachings he had so practically followed.
But let us look at the picture as we may suppose it to have
actually existed. Behold his Grace, lying on the bed of death,
his whole soul torn to pieces, in an agony of despair, at the
thought of leaving his vast treasure, which, I have no doubt,
had occupied him every moment of his life in accumulating.
See him, frantic with anguish, with nothing but his money to
console him, and the searing fact entering like red-hot iron
into his soul, and telling him, in the most unmistakeable
manner, that it was futile and powerless for such a purpose,
and that a few hours, perhaps, must tear it for ever from his
cramped, narrow, polluted, miserable heart. See what a vivid
expression of fear and alarm overspreads his dying face at the
bare idea of looking to such a source for consolation ! Mark
the agony that is depicted in his every muscle as he thinks he
already hears the words ringing in his ears —“ Depart from me,
ye cursed!” And see him, at last, sink paralysed into death,
with the apparent consciousness that his brief heaven was now
over, and that his eternal hell was about to begin ! And so will
it be with every pretender to Christianity who luxuriates on the
spoils of the people and preaches the Gospel as a mere pro-
fession, and makes it a means of amassing wealth.
It seems to me a subject for the profoundest wonder how
the Church of England is allowed to exist. “Out of 10,000
livings in England,” says Howitt, “ nearly 8000 are in the hands
of private people—that is, in the hands each of a man who,
whatever be his life or his qualifications for judging, can and
does put in a clergyman over the heads of his neighbours, to
serve his own views, which are commonly to establish some rake
or blockhead of a son or nephew, or to make what money he can
out of a stranger, if he has no children: that is, not to seek


the most pious, but the highest bidder. And, consequently, the
next assertion is, that a very considerable number have pur-
chased these livings. Thus, not the pious man, but the highest
bidder, the boldest dealer in simony, has had the living, Oh !
poor people, who are doomed to sit under such pastors, and
vainly hope to grow in heavenly knowledge. The remainder
have been brought up with a view to some particular piece of
preferment from their friends and relations ; yes, younger sons,
no matter what their heads or hearts are made of, doomed to
deal out God’s threats and promises to the people; desperate
handlers of God’s sacred things, who rush fearlessly into His
temple, not because He has called them, but because their
relations have the keys of the doors. By these means the
Church has been filled with pride and apathy, and it is notorious
that, of all Christian ministers, the ministers of the Established
Church of England are the least interested in their flocks,
cultivate and enjoy the least sympathy with them. Sir Arthur
Brooke Faulkner says, ‘ Nowhere else in Europe are clergymen
—and no wonder—less respected among the multitude than in
the British dominions. This is accounted for by their apathy,
their pluralities, their exorbitant revenues, maintenance by
tithes, and acting as legislators. The clergy of the Church of
England are paid more than the clergy of all the rest of
Christendom besides by a million sterling and upwards—the
full amount of their annual revenue being £8,852,000 ! In
primitive times, and in the different countries at the present
time which I have visited, the remuneration of their labours is,
as we have seen, in many cases, chiefly voluntary, although
the early Christians supported themselves, and received nothing
for preaching the Gospel. But in England, it seems, it needs a
prelacy, strutting in lawn sleeves, and raising their mitred fronts
in Courts and Parliaments, to clothe it with respect.’ ”
This, then, is what is called the Reformed Church; and,
although there is in it a departure from many of the grosser


errors of the Popish superstition, still we see what manifold
abuses leaven it from top to bottom. e see the Scriptures
entirely discarded, as a means of guidance, by its founders ; we
see doctrines and practices pervading it unknown to the Word
of God ; we see its clergy of all grades hired and paid by the
State, and acting collectively more as an engine of Government
than as a Church far less then as a Church of Christ. Against
this scandalous system the Scriptures are continually witnessing
and protesting, but their voice is drowned by the clamour of an
army of priests, who share the gigantic wealth of this human
invention, created for the purpose of giving stability to the poli-
tical system of England, and for aiding kingcraft and aristocracy
in the compassing of their nefarious ends. So we have always
seen the priests of this Church acting on the side of wealth and
power, and arrayed against the people on all political questions
of vital concern to them. On all questions of reform, originated
for the purpose of extending the people’s influence, the clergy
of the Church of England were always their bitterest opponents.
Even when the question was the transcendent one of cheapening
the bread of starving millions, the clergy of whom I am speak-
ing fought to the last against the beneficent reform. What
cared they for the struggles, the trials, the privations of the
poor in comparison with the smile of the lord to whom they
owed their livings? What was it to them if fathers and
mothers cried for bread to save their dying children, and cried
in vain, so long as they by their action laid the foundation for
another and a higher step in the ecclesiastical ladder ? The
Church exists by the power of the State ; take away that power,
and it falls to the ground a lifeless mass. Its influence on the
people is insignificant, and its very rottenness and enormity
has created a wider-spread infidelity than all other causes put
together.
In Scotland we have another branch of the kingdom of
Antichrist established by law; and although there is a depar-


ture here from many of the worst errors of the sister Church
of England, still the Scriptures has been a closed book to the
founders of it, so far as it contains anything in common with
the Church of Christ. Their very State connection proves that
it was never intended that it should be constituted in accordance
with the principles of the Church of Christ, whose kingdom
He so repeatedly said was not of this world. The advocates of
this State alliance with the Church have constantly and most
falsely asserted that religion would go down but for this alliance.
Granted that the spurious thing which passes with them for
religion would vanish on the withdrawal of this money support.
Surely they cannot shut their eyes to the glorious struggle
maintained by the early Christians, not only without any such
support, but in the face of an organised system of the most
virulent persecution rained down upon them with all its deso-
lating fury, sweeping away their liberties, their homes, and
their lives. The few poor men who upheld Christ’s pure system
under circumstances so terrible were true believers in Christ
and His Word, and this is the only secret of their devotion.
The modern pretenders are true believers in pounds, shillings,
and pence, and hence the lukewarmness and utter absence of all
response to their ministrations on the part of the great mass of
the people. Large masses of people, indignant at the palpable
prostitution of Christ’s Gospel, as seen in the practice and hum-
drum action of the various denominations, have turned away
from them, and may be seen in hordes on any fine Sunday
enjoying the beauties of God’s creation, at all times calculated
to inspire a higher worship than that which is generally induced
by listening to some poor creature narrowing down the large-
hearted maxims of Jesus Christ to the pitiful dimensions
of his own insignificant, paltry soul—the consolation to this
picture being that the congregation are for the most part
oblivious of all that is going on, they having come under the


mesmeric influence from the moment of the preacher opening
his lips.
It seems to me wonderful how this conspiracy against
Christ’s truth is not seen through, even by the most ignorant;
and, above all, it seems to me wonderful how the clergy can
maintain their ground in the face of all that can be said against
them. Even in quiet, sedate Scotland the Established Church
clergy obtain their livings by the most questionable means.
In the towns they tax the people of all sects for their support,
and if any one refuses to pay, which is frequently the case, he
is sent to gaol, or his goods are sold off at a ruinous loss. In
Edinburgh the spectacle has often been seen of a respectable
citizen dragged off to gaol, handcuffed like a felon, because he
refused to contribute to the support of a Church he did not
belong to, and the doctrines of which he hated and despised.
I, myself, have seen serious riots over this in Edinburgh.
I have seen a man’s furniture dragged into the street, and sold,
under the protection of military force, to pay the clergy of the
town. On those occasions the fiercest hostility to the system was
evoked, and the clergy were talked of in a way that would have
done them good to listen to; while the military were attacked,
and the furniture smashed to atoms before their faces. This,
rather than that the ecclesiastical cormorants should touch a
farthing by the sale. Fancy ministers of Christ living by such
means I Imagine these impostors ascending their pulpits on
Sunday with the knowledge of all this, and that honest citizens
were lingering in gaol, because they refused, most righteously,
to contribute to the support of a Church they had nothing to do
with. If the New Testament had any meaning for them at all,
how it must sting them, how true is the Scriptures—“ They
impose heavy bui'dens upon men, grievous to be borne, but they
themselves will not touch them with the point of one of their
fingers.”


It will be seen that up to this point X have only spoken of
the Church of Christ—the popish superstition, and the political
machines of England and Scotland, to which the name of
Church is erroneously given.
There has, of course, been large disruptions of the three
last-named institutions by dissent; most, if not all, of the
dissenters leaving them on account of their strong belief in the
truth of most of the charges levelled against them in this
pamphlet, This dissent has spread over all Europe and America,
and has become most formidable in its dimensions and power.
The dissenting churches have, again and again, been dissented
from, and there seems to be a continuous effort to fight back to
the pure simplicity and truth of the original system. In all the
large bodies of dissenters they retained much of the error con-
tained in the churches they had left; but some of the later
dissents made effort to organize themselves on the primitive
model with more or less success. The fundamental error of
those large bodies of dissenters, was, their failure to see how
unseriptural it was to make the preaching of the Gospel a pro-
fession by which a living was obtained; and what terrible results
of indifference and rottenness the practical operation of this
principle produced. The knowledge of God is not a thing that
can be taught in schools. The existence of Faith is a miracle,
and exists nowhere but where God implanted it. Every true
believer on the face of the earth at the present moment, and in
all past time, must have undergone identically the same process
by which the Apostle Paul was converted. Paul was one of the
most relentless of Christ’s persecutors, and in a moment, while
thus engaged, his whole thoughts were revolutionised and
changed. He saw, as if by a flash of electricity, the simple
Gospel of Christ, in all its everlasting beauty, and Christ himself
as the God and Saviour of the World; and on this splendid
truth breaking in upon his darkened mind, he says with intense
emphasis—“ Henceforth I conferred not with flesh and blood,


but became a preacher of the Faith which once I destroyed.” It
was no human influence that brought about tftis conversion, and
every human being who is brought to a knowledge of God’s
truth, is so brought by the same power and the operation of the
same process which wrought so mighty a change on the moral
life of Saint Paul.
Is this principle, I would ask, recognised by any of the
many Churches we see around us ? Do we not see, in all cases,
young men asked by their parents to become ministers of the
various Churches, as the most likely means to obtain a living;
and what are the qualifications deemed necessary by men for this
profession ? A University training, consisting of the acquisition
of a knowledge of the wisdom of men, which is foolishness with
God; and, when this is attained, they are generally appointed to
the charge of a Church. They are not brought to this by the
power of God’s truth over their consciences. They may be, and
frequently are, entirely without belief on the subject, and have
taken up the profession as a mere trade, by which a living is to
be obtained for themselves and families. What wonder then,
under such a system, that the pulpits of all the sects are, in
most instances, characterised by sleepy, sluggish, indifference.
The clergy are not in earnest, because most of them are uncon-
verted ; they preach, not as the early Christians did—from un-
dying and devoted love, but for the lucre which remunerates
them. Is the whole thing, as we now see it, not, therefore, a
Sham, and a most disgusting sham, as compared with the sterling
and noble Reality faintly pictured at the beginning of this
pamphlet ?
Looking abroad upon the so-called religious world, what
do we see? Innumerable sects upholding antagonistic systems,
every one of them putting forth their own creeds and confes-
sions as their guide and rule, to the prejudice of the Holy
Scripture: the clergy in many instances receiving princely
revenues, and, in almost every instance, considerable salaries for
33
THE SHAM.


preaching the Gospel of Christ, which Paul said he did without
charge. Let us tafke our own capital, Sydney, and look for the
results of all this paid preaching. Sydney may be looked upon
as the head-quarters of the clerical army, where the generals
and all the rank and file are present, and here, if anywhere, some
result should be visible. Well, then, in this very Sydney we
find our gaols crammed to the door, crime rampant, female
prostitution overloading our thoroughfares to a degree that has
frequently called forth the animadversions of the Press, drun-
kenness in rare glory, and every species of juvenile delinquency,
male and female, flourishing with exuberant fruitfulness. Let
the clergy of all denominations look at this, and acknowledge
their defeat. It is no answer to this state of things to keep up
this continuous psalm-singing and “ assiduous Sunday organ
grinding ” —this is a very poor reply to the demand for some-
thing like work and example. We want a clergy totally the
reverse of what we have, and we shall never get this until there
is a return to the truth as Christ and his Apostles preached it.
What on earth can we expect when we see an overpaid Bishop
applying to the Parliament of any country to pass a Bill to
compel another man to pay his debts ? What on earth can we
expect when we see a Bishop laying a bill before Parliament for
payment to himself involving such items as the following : —Cab
hire, wearing apparel, his degree of D.D., two carriages (one
for town and one for the bush), furniture, passage money from
England for self and servants, &c., the whole amounting to over
£3000? Let the reader remember the list of items enumerated
by the Apostle Paul, as a portion of the reward he received for
preaching, and ponder over this. Sooner or later the thing must
be exploded—the people already see its utter hollowness as
plain as I do, and the clergy know they have neither in-
fluence nor power. They will, no doubt, point me to
the fact of their churches being crowded on Sundays. For my
part, I am never there to see, but, taking it for granted, let me
34
HERESY AND SHAM.


ask them to deduct those who are there in deference to the cant
of a spurious respectability. Let them deduct those who are
there to further their wordly interest —those who are there to
see and he seen; those who are there from sheer vanity, and
those who are there to see their sweethearts, if not to meet
them; and how many do the clergy think would remain as being
there to worship God in spirit and in truth ?
But do the clergy not admit the truth of what I am saying
when, by their spasmodic efforts to bring about what they call
a revival of religion, they confess that religion is dead and faint-
ing. If not, what use for a revival ? The clergy have a sad
task before them in attempting to revive that which never
existed. They know all this as well as I do, but something must
be done for their money; and this is the curse of that money
that it is not legitimately earned, and has brought the clergy of
all denominations into contempt in the eyes of all earnest readers
of, and true believers in, the New Testament. We see the
clergy also busy forming what they call societies for the pro-
motion of morality. Is this not a plain confession that their
various Churches are failures for this purpose ? If their
Churches were any good for the purpose of promoting morality,
surely there would be no occasion to add to their number, but it
is because the clergy find their Churches are total faihires for
that purpose that recourse is had to those new societies. The
day, I hope, will soon come, for the sake of all concerned, that
this making a profession of preaching the Gospel of Christ, as a
means of obtaining a living, may be discarded by all honest
men. It is thoroughly unscriptural and wrong, and has done
more to retard the advance of Christ’s truth than any other
cause known to me. It has demeaned and lowered the clergy
also, and many of them seem conscious of it, and confess
as much by their looks. Let the clergy, therefore, seek to
earn their bread in some more reputable way, and then let them
enter the pulpit, animated by the zeal of those noble one’s of


old, and preacli the glorious Gospel of Christ, as he and his
Apostles preached it, without money, and without price. We
may wait long enough for this and other reforms in the various
Churches, but so long as they remain as they are, they will
be simply tolerated, and that is all. How admirably was
the truth of all that is here said illustrated by the conduct
of the clergy during the agitation for the abolition of State-
aid to religion, which went the length of endowing all
sects, false as well as true, as its opponents alleged; and the
earnest zeal which the clergy displayed for the preservation of
the indiscriminate endowment gives a better insight to their
character and motives than anything else that can be produced.
We observed the same clergymen, who were ever ready to
denounce and expose the Popish superstition, consenting to the
State money being voted to propagate what they denounced as
damnable heresy and lies, for the sake of mess of pottage
they themselves got from the State.
The three sects, besides the Church of Pome, which
received this money, were the Church of England, Presby-
terians, and Wesleyans; and they all upheld the system —the
Wesleyans being the worst of the lot; for, although they
objected to the principle involved in this indiscriminate State
endowment, they yet took it, and applied the money to building
purposes, instead of the support of the clergy; and, by this
shallow trick, they thought they were not amenable to the
charge of profiting by the prevailing State-aid iniquity. The
people rose in earnest against the abomination, and yet we
found it supported and maintained to the last by the clergy of
the various sects. It was amusing to observe those clergymen,
while fighting and grumbling among themselves, and denouncing
Popery in no measured terms, at the same time all feeding
quietly out of the same trough. How beautifully does this
prove that money, and not principle, is the ruling power with
the clergy of New South Wales, as with the modern clergy


elsewhere; or, to put it in this way, what wondrous power has
money in melting down principles of the most sacred character
when they exist in the hearts of worthless men !
The cold-hearted indifference as to religious truth which
prevails so widely among the people has its root in the self-
seeking selfishness of the clergymen of all denominations, and
the palpable insincerity of their entire action and attitude ; and
it is difficult to imagine how it could be otherwise when
religion is degraded into a mere handicraft, and followed as a
profession or trade by which a living is obtained. I have no
objection to all this going on ; but if it is to continue, let them
shut the Bible once and for ever. Don’t let them any longer
pretend that the Bible countenances the “ feigned words ” by
which they make merchandise of it, and falsify it for their own
interested purposes. Although the world, which notoriously
prefers falsehood to truth, may smile and approve, there is a
time, which may yet come, when the clergy will be taken in
their own craftiness. To that time and place let them be
relegated strictly to abide their fate.
I would also here remark upon the unscriptural character of
the titles the clergy arrogate to themselves —the Reverend, the
Very Reverend, the Right Reverend, his Grace the Lord Bishop,
&c., &c. Who that has read the New Testament does not know
that such titles are not only without authority in the Scriptures,
but are unequivocally condemned by the wdiole spirit of Christ’s
word—“he who will be greatest among you shall be least.”
Was the Apostle Paul ever addressed as his Grace the Lord
Bishop, &c. ? And yet we find herds of men who can read, and
apparently have their senses about them, falling on their knees
before a poor sinful worm like themselves, while, “ May it
please your Grace,” falls from their recreant lips. I charge
those men with turning away from the Gospel of Christ, and
accepting the gospel of men. I charge them with allowing poor,
weak, culpable sinners like themselves to come between God
and their consciences, and with allowing upstart, insolent
37
THE SHAM


priests to shove all manner of lying fables into their idiot heads
as the truths of God. These are serious charges, yet how true
are they ! If the poor dupes lam speaking of would only read
their Bibles for themselves —and if they do not do so they will
have to answer to God for the omission—how they would spurn
the impostors who live by deceiving them. As for the clergy, it
is in vain to address argument to them, they are too well paid
—their position is too comfortable —their vestments are too soft
and fleecy—their luxurious, idle life is too enjoyable to be re-
linquished without a death struggle.
I have often imagined the spectacle when final judgment
will be awarded —when all those Archbishops and Bishops are
called upon to give an account of the deeds done in the body.
What a picture to imagine them standing in the presence of
Christ and his Apostles, and to be told, with bitter scorn, “ I
know you not; you rolled in wealth and luxury while on the
earth, and blasphemously drew it all in my name; you prosti-
tuted my Gospel, and falsified it for your own advantage; you
ground princely revenues out of the poor, and applied them all
to your own selfish ends ; you basely betrayed me in your every
act, and now you are here to answer for it.” Imagine the
cowardly terror of the sneaking, selfish crew as those words
fall like forked lightning upon them; but there is no escape
here, they are struck dumb, and vanish out of sight under the
terrible words of the sentence —“Depart from me ye cursed.”
Could the wretched victims of those designing knaves who are
“fooled to the top of their bent” by the schemes and devices
and lying wonders of priestcraft; ctmlcl they, I say, only open
their eyes and look the matter fairly in the face, how monstrous
would their delusions appear ; how they would hate and despise
the charlatans by whom they are deceived and plundered, and
what a relief if they could only succeed in shaking off the
priestly incubus under which they have so long groaned
and weltered.
38
HERESY AND SHAM.


Many causes have contributed to the frightful corruption of
Christianity which we see on all sides of us. At the beginning
of this pamphlet one fruitful cause is noted, that of the Kings
and rulers of the earth making use of it as an implement of
Government. All State subsidised sects may, therefore, be
looked upon as in no way entitled to be considered as Christian
sects at all; but, rather as political organisations, or a higher
order of police, hired and paid to promote the preservation of
the peace and to kee]) down all political restlessness or agitation
on the part of the people. The Scriptures are entirely abandoned
by them as a means of guidance, although they affect to use the
Bible as thefr sole guide to save appearances, yet their prayer-
books and catechisms, and confessions, and creeds are invented
and used for the purpose of superseding it. In what part of the
Scriptures shall we find authority for such an officer of the
Church as the Pope of Rome ? and in what part of the Bible
shall we find his Infallibility promulgated ? This Infallibilty
business is, perhaps, the most impudently, barefaced piece of
clumsy legerdemain the world has ever witnessed —a poor, help-
less, palpably idiotic old man, sets up a claim to the highest
attribute of God, and he is aided and abetted in this by a
number of priestly knaves, who chuckle inwardly over the joke;
but have a prodigious pecuniary interest in persuading the
gaping multitude to swallow it quietly—when bis Infallibility is
proclaimed amidst great pomp and ceremony, he is immediately
after seized with an attack of gout and carried to his, bed, where
he lies sprawling, a picture of human weakness and impotency.
If ever there was a farce performed in this world before surely
this was one —the proclamation of the Infallibility of this poor,
weak, peevish, irritable, old man, full of infirmity, and the very
last man that any one would dream of consulting on the
most ordinary piece of every day business ; surely it must
have been his imbecility and not his Infallibility they
proclaimed. However, the most effective way they could
39
THE SHAM


have proclaimed both their own and his imbecility was
to have acted as they have done. There is nothing
too gross for human belief, and so this vilest of
vile delusions, or rather fraudulent impositions, finds
rascals to proclaim it, and poor idiots to swallow it. An
infallible priest at the head of a pretended religious organisa-
tion, built upon a foundation of monstrous lies and grovelling
delusions that the childish intelligence of a baby, if left to
itself, would langh to scorn, is a notable invention of human
villainy, in every way calculated to subserve the ends of its inven-
tors—those ends being plunder, extortion, the enslavement and
degradation of the people, and their own luxurious comfort and
elevation above all that is called God. How long is man’s
intelligence to remain so besotted and clouded that it allows
itself to be played upon after this fashion? Well may those
priests be alarmed at the prospect of the schoolmaster getting
abroad. Well may they dread the penetrating rays of educa-
tion, and struggle so hard to stifle the efforts of good men to
rescue the people from their brutalising influence. Wherever
those priests have been with their vile teaching, the same
luxuriant crop of ignorance, helplessness, and crime may be
reaped; the same black, benighted superstition springs into
existence ; the same paralysis of human intelligence and human
progress prevails, and we observe a poor, helpless, awe-struck
people believing in miracles and apparitions, and leaving and
expecting all their obvious duties to be performed by such super-
natural agencies. Is it, therefore, an unpatriotic work to labour
to bring this reign of priestcraft to an end ? The intelligence
of mankind, in this very century, is slowly but surely sapping
the foundations of all the strongholds of the priest. A yell of
agony comes from the enemies’ camp as every fresh weapon is
forged for this purpose. Priestcraft may well tremble in these
times, for never before was the artillery of truth more formi-
dable, or served with greater precision, than that which is at


present directed against, and playing upon, its citadel. No
doubt numbers of the different sects will agree with me in
all this, because they themselves have not gone, perhaps, so far
in their abandonment of the Scriptures as their guide and rule.
But surely they have gone far enough in this direction. I have
already pointed out the degrading and unscriptural proceeding
of prostituting the preaching of Christ’s Gospel into a mere
trade, by which a living is obtained; and I charge all the
leading Christian sects with appropriating only so much of the
Scriptures as will suit them, while they attempt to mutilate and
distort the remainder into conformity with their own wordly
and self-seeking views. Take, for instance, that passage of
Scripture beginning with —“Lay not up treasures upon earth.”
The whole chapter is a most earnest exhortation to save no
money over and above our immediate necessities; and in carry-
ing out this rigid procedure those who practice it are cheered
and comforted with the assuranc, from Christ’s own lips,
that they would be tended and cared for by the constant and
watchful love of their heavenly Father, who would never allow
them to want. Do the Churches believe this ? Unquestionably
not; they get away from it by attempting to say it is not to be
taken literally. The whole chapter will bear nothing but a
literal interpretation, and is a necessary and inevitable result of
all Christ’s teaching and example. It is just as monstrous to
suppose Christ, himself, hoarding up money in a bank as to
imagine any one who professes to be a follower of His doing so,
and the man who professes to be a follower of Christ’s, and at
the same time lays up treasures upon earth, is to all intents and
purposes an unbeliever and a hypocrite engaged in the impossible
task of trying to serve both God and Mammon. “It is easier
for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich
man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.” This language is
plain enough, but do the Churches believe it ? No, they do
not, nor any other portion of Scripture which calls upon them to


'take up their cross. The joys of Heaven are offered to the rich
man on condition that he sells what he has and gives to the poor,
&c., and the alternative according to the clergy is the torments
of hell. Now, if this was accepted in the faintest way by
human belief, how quickly would every rich man professing
Christianity rid himself of his superfluous dross, and the reason
he does not do so is, because he is an unbeliever at heart who
would like very well to get to Heaven and to escape from hell,
but hesitates about the price, because he has no assured belief
in the reality of the bargain. Considering the short and fleet-
ing nature of human life ; its precarious tenure at all times, and
the tremendous eternity beyond—what a momentous question
for human decision—-whether that eternity is to be an eternity of
bliss or one of torture ? and if the torture could be avoided and
the bliss attained by laying up no treasure upon earth but ex-
pending the surplus on deeds of charity and goodness, what a
maniac would that man be who retained a shilling beyond that
which would provide him with food and raiment with which he
is bound to be content if he believes the Bible, or is a follower
of Jesus Christ. Are we not then forcibly driven to this con-
clusion, that when we see a rich man professing to believe in
Christianity and still retaining his money, we see an unbeliever
and an impostor who has no faith in Christ’s words but an
abundant faith in the filthy lucre which is the real object of his
worship and affection ? All this the clergy try to explain away
in the usual manner by saying it is not meant to be taken lite-
rally, but as they have in this way explained away almost the
whole Bible, the next best thing they can do is to try to explain
away Christ, who must be a sharp thorn in their sides and a con-
stant reproach to them so long as their whole system is so entirely
opposed to His. It is amusing to see the rich men trying to
compromise matters by subscribing largely to build new Churches
and towards all charitable objects ; but Christ has signified in
the clearest language, that such trickery and cunning will not
42
HERESY AND SHAM.


do. There can be no Christianity without a close imitation of -
Christ so far as it is possible for sinful humanity to imitate Him;
and the idea of a professing Christian with thousands of pounds
laid up in banks is a more monstrous anomaly than that of a
teetotal agitator starting a public-house.
-It is surely high time that the clergy came to some agree-
ment among themselves to abandon that malignant and fiendish
doctrine of an eternity of punishment in hell. It is utterly
inconsistent with a belief in an all-wise and preeminently
benevolent and merciful God, and rational men can imagine
no more effective means of libelling the Creator. How easily
■does reason dispose of it; “All punishment, if it proceed
from a moral source, must have the moral regeneration
in view of the person punished. Well, if this is admitted, and
if the punishment last for ever, there can be no moral regenera-
tion —therefore, it can’t proceed from a moral source.” But
the clergy have much use of this atrocious dogma, and
there is, therefore, little fear of their abandoning it. Some of
the Churches would lose immensely by the explosion of this
bugbear. It is the main part of their-stock-in-trade, and the
source of their largest revenue. A personal devil is another
grotesque and outrageous invention got up to play upon the
fears of poor deluded humanity; and so we see the clergy
everywhere pressing hell and the devil into their service, and
caring not a straw for any one thing but the consolidation
of their own power, and the preservation of every delusion,
affording scope for the exercise of their devouring rapacity.
The position of the clergy is becoming every day more and
more untenable, and it is not difficult to predict what their fate
will be during the next fifty years. They must either return to
the simplicity of Christ’s doctrine and practice, or they will be
dismissed by the indignant voice of public opinion. They may
take to the frantic ringing of their church bells as the only
resource left them to silence the earnest remonstrances of the


people, but, so sure as I write, their occupation, as it now
stands, is gone. The public, when once alive to the plain
teaching of Scripture, will suffer no paid emissaries of selfish
worldliness to usurp the position of Christ’s ministers, and to
cloud and obscure His beautiful and simple doctrine by their
own fables and inventions, as embodied in their creeds and
confessions, their decrees, and catechisms. The Scriptures are
open to all men, and so plain that “ he who runs may read.”
But this state of things would not suit the game the clergy had
to play; so they tried to make out that the whole thing was a
deep and almost insoluble mystery ; they called it divinity, and
appointed Professors in Colleges to teach it, and pretended
that no man was competent to preach the Gospel of Christ
unless he had undergone a preparatory training in those
schools —that Gospel, be it remembered, being simply, “Do
unto others as you would that they should do unto you.” The
clergy have laboured most assiduously, both by precept and
example, to teach the people the possibility of serving both God
and Mammon. There is not one of them who dares either
practice himself, or teach the people to practice, the doctrines of
Jesus Christ. Let me see the clergyman who will excom-
municate any one of his members who “lays up treasures
upon earth,” or “who takes any thought of to-morrow,” or
“ who is not content with mere food and raiment.” If
these doctrines are not carried out literally, it is because
they are not believed in, and so, therefore, the clergy
don’t teach them, as it would interfere with the service of
Mammon, so dear to mankind. But if the clergy don’t teach
them Jesus Christ, and all His Apostles taught them, and what
is more, put them in practice to the very letter, and demanded
the same self-denial from all who pretended to follow them.
“ Go and sell what thou hast and give to the poor, &c.,” was a
test that the man with great possessions shrank from; he, it
would appear, thought to serve God and Mammon, but Jesus


Christ undeceived him quickly, and he went away sorrowful.
This test is as applicable now as then, but the clergy don’t think
so, as it would, if put in force by them, probably destroy their
trade entirely; and so they go on cutting down the Scriptures to
suit their own convenience, and making it abundantly clear that
whatever service they give to God, shall in no way interfere
with their more devoted, their more earnest and congenial
service to Mammon.
Well then, what is the aspect of the world we see around us.
The simple and life-giving religion of Jesus Christ is abandoned
by men under the pernicious teaching of their priests, as re-
quiring too many painful sacrifices to be practised; and w©
observe gangs of priests and parsons everywhere living
luxuriously on the substituted imposture. Those priests, as they
walk through life, must often notice an angry expression of in-
terrogation on many a face:—“What are you doing for the
money you draw ? Did the Master you pretend to follow draw
any money for the work that He did ? Would you do a hand’s
turn in His cause minus the money ? Why not betake yourselves
to some useful labour by which your stomachs may be appeased
and your bodies clothed, and not barter away the truths of God
for the dearly loved filthy lucre ? Do you imagine your trans-
parent play-acting is not seen through and laughed to scorn by
every intelligent man living? ” The answer the clergy give,to
these interrogatories is to get up what they call a revival of
religion, by assiduously working their spiritual bellows and
blowing heartily until fanaticism mixed with lunacy flames forth
in ghastly lurid colours, dying out as rapidly as it was kindled,
and leaving our lunatic asylums well stocked with the unhappy
victims. The coarse, vulgar ribaldry they employ on those
occasions is sickening enough ; the disgusting familiarity of
their style in speaking of sacred things would be simply laugh-
able were it not so shocking and revolting. The name of Christ
is bandied about with a levity myriads of miles removed from


genuine piety, and the whole scene is, from first to last, the most
lowering, degrading, and humiliating spectacle the eyes of in-
telligence ever rested upon. And so the clergy are satisfied with
a revival of this description, taking advantage of an extensive
derangement of the human stomach to aggravate and inflame
human fears ; and this is their apology for the money they draw.
This is the “be all and end all” of their functions and the
justification of their idle, worthless lives. If the clergy aspire
to the respect of mankind instead of courting their contempt,
their course is a plain one, although not an easy one. Follow
after the example of Christ and His Apostles, and if this requires
more courage and principle than any of you possess, throw down
once and for ever your cowardly pretence —act the part no longer
of sheer impostors —“ assume a virtue if you have it not,”
and seek in honest work to serve God in spirit and in truth.
Labour is worship, as has been said of old, and the labourer if
he is worthy will get his wages; but to be paid for praying or
even for preaching, and to exact this in the name of Christ is so
flagrant and gross a thing that the being who does it must, as a
condition precedent, have divested himself of all belief in Christ
or His teachings, and recklessly entered the arena oblivious of
everything but the one grovelling and sordid consideration,
which seems to be the Alpha and Omega of all ecclesiastical
organisations under Heaven. And so it will be till men are
roused from their stupor, and open their eyes to see
clearly and measure accurately the worth of the charlatans who
come to them under the preposterous pretence of attempting to
save their souls, while their own well-clothed and well-con-
ditioned bodies and comfortable livings are the only things in
jeopardy. Was there ever, in this world of sham and delusion,
anything imagined so comical and preposterous as the spectacle
of a poor, wretched worm, a miserable, fussy, pragmatical thing
of clay, approaching another with the portentious statement
that he has come to save his soul, or even to assist at the
46
HERESY AHD SHAM.


extraordinary undertaking ? And yet do we not know that
shoals of people believe that poor blockheads like themselves
have this power, and do actually implore their assistance in
emergencies. What can we say to this but call loudly for
education to make men and women of what the clergy, with
their hollow teachings and nefarious trickery, have transformed
into “ dead sea apes.”
How different from all we see was the Church of the New
Testament, where men were appointed to the ministry from no
educational acquirements or successful scholastic examination,
but from an intense and earnest zeal in Christ’s cause—where
no money was offered, or received, for preaching the Gospel,
but each man laboured at his secular occupation, and found the
means of support by so doing! Have we seen anything
approaching to this under the worldly system of a paid hireling
clergy ? Have we seen the faintest resemblance, on the part of
the modern, pretended, upholders of Christ’s cause to the
glorious band of devoted men who upheld His Church amids
all manner of danger and distress, and sealed their devotion to
it with their blood ? Here, in this visible or invisible
at the present time on the face of the earth, I east my anchor,
believing firmly, and most sincerely, that there is neither
comfort, safety, nor satisfaction to be found in any of the
numerous and various shams that prevail.
Time presses, and I must, therefore, conclude. What I
have written I believe to be the truth. My guide has been the
New Testament. If any of the clergy deny what I have
written, let them answer me. They will, however, do no such
thing. This has always been a sore point with them, that their
gospel cannot be reconciled with Christ’s Gospel. If the public
find the clergy silent in the face of an attack of this description,
they may at once conclude that they have nothing to say in
reply. lam well aware that many of them will excuse them-
selves by the expression of an affected contempt for their


assailant, but puerility of this kind will by no means meet the
case. Whatever their contempt may be, I can assure them
it is reciprocal, and I am very much deceived if it does not
animate much larger numbers than they imagine.
Looking around, then, on the various temples that have been
raised in the name of Christ, we shall scarcely find one on
which He would not have turned His back, and despised as an
unreal mockery and a hollow pretence. If, therefore, I, and
those who think with me, can find no church which we can con-
scientiously enter, surely we are no losers thereby. Have we
not got the great world for a Church with sermons in every
breeze that blows and in every flower that springs ? Have we
not got the most immortal oration ever pronounced on the earth
the Sermon on the Mount ?—and, with its splendid morality
animating and sustaining us, let us walk through life humbly,
though firmly, under the shadow of Christ’s righteousness, with
the fear of God ever present to us, but with no fear of man
whatever.
THE END.
48
HERESY AND SHAM.


SCRIPTURAL NOTES.
The following passages from the Scriptures may serve to
illustrate a good deal of what is stated in the text; —
“The son of perdition who opposeth and exalteth himself
above all that is called God, so that he, as God, sitteth in the
temple of God showing himself that he is God; even him
whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders.”
“Woe unto ye, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye
bind heavy burdens grievous to be borne, and lay them on
men’s shoulders, but you yourselves will not touch them with
one of your fingers.”
“ But all their works they do to be seen of men ; they make
broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the border of their
garments, and love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief
seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the market-place and
to be called of men, Eabbi, Pabbi.”
“But woe unto you, hypocrites! for ye shut up the king-
dom of Heaven against men. For ye devour widows’ houses,
and, for a pretence, make long prayers; therefore ye shall
receive the greater damnation.”


“Ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when
he is made ye make him twofold more the child of hell than y©
are yourselves.”
“Woe unto ye ! hypocrites, for you make clean the outside
of the cup, but within it is full of extortion and excess.”
“Ye blind hypocrites, woe unto you ! for you are like
unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward
but are within full of dead men’s bones and all uneleanness.
Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but
within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.”
“Ye serpents! Ye generation of vipers, how shall ye
escape the damnation of hell?”
“ And the devil, taking Jesus up into an high mountain,
showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.
And the devil said unto him, All this power will I give thee, and
the glory of them, if thou wilt worship me, for that is delivered
unlo me, and unto whomsoever I will I give it.”
“ And Jesus answered and said unto him ‘ Get thee behind
me Satan, for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy
God, and Him only shalt thou serve.”
Such was the answer given by Jesus Christen receiving the
the offer of all kingdoms of the earth and the riches thereof-
The devil failing thus with Jesus, made the same offer to the
clergy, which was greedily accepted by them, with the condition
annexed, and hence all we see.
50
SCRIPTURAL NOTES.




JAip
BI6L/O
F 7b2v
EREATA.
Page 3, line 5, for of fear read or fear.
Page 7, line 11, for these read those.
Page 8, line 25, for theri read their.
Page 16, line 3, for persecutions read persecution.
Page 17, line 8, for to the cause read in the cause.
Page 24, line 4, for make their read make the.
Page 35, line 10, for dead and read dead or.
JOHN FERGUSON, PRINTER 387 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY-




