

REMARKS ON LABOUR,
&c.
SHOWING THE DESIRABLENESS OF
RECEIVING EXILES
INTO THE
NORTHERN DISTRICTS OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
By QUIDAM.
[?]
TO THE SETTLERS, AND INHABITANTS GENERALIY,
OF
MORETON BAY,
AND THE
NEIGHBOURING DISTRICTS.
BRISBANE:
PRINTED, FOR THE AUTHOR, BY JAMES SWAN.
1850,


REMARKS OK LABOUR, &c.
TO THE SETTLERS, AND .INHABITANTS GENERALLY, OR
MORETON BAY, AND THE NEIGHBOURING DISTRICTS.
The question “Whether it is desirable to receive convicts
again into the Australian colonies'? " is one which demands
deep consideration, and on which the free expression of opinion
from all men capable of judging is desirable. It is not there-
fore to be wondered at that public attention has been drawn to
this important subject, in all parts of the colony, and from the
raw and unfledged chum to the matured and time-worn deni-
zen of the bush —from the uninitiated clown who, till his trip
to the shipping port prior to embarkation for these far-famed
shores, where he has,just arrived, perhaps had never ad-
ventured beyond the toll-gate of , his .native village, to the
hoary-headed wanderer of a hundred lands—opinions have,
been plentifully poured out, as various in their nature as the
dispositions of their propounders. Nor has the public press
been idle; and the subject has been the cause of a display of
sickly morality, empty, assertions, crude, suggestions, and im-
becile calculations, in many of the public journals of the day,
which loudly calls for a sound flagellation and exposure from
every lover of common sense and justice.On this subject also
has mob oratory been exerted, and interested men (ignorant of
the,true merits of the subject), and itching for popularity, have
propounded opinions which have been often too readily be-
lieved. It is easy for noisy declaimers at public meetings to
secure the opinions of a large body of the people on either
side of any question. A course of conduct, by which the ruin,
of a nation would he rendered inevitable, might, if urged and
defended with an air of patriotism, protestations of desire for,
the public good, denunciations against oppression and tyranny,
and a serious, truthful, bold and determined tone—especially


if fembellished with a moderate-degree of cant, wii'ich is fre-
quently mistaken for religious ardour or conscientious convic-
tion j—we say, a course of conduct which would involve the
ruin of a community or nation, may, by these noisy mob-
orators, in. this manner If® made highly popular:-. The feelings
of the multitude enlisted in its favour, large numbers adopt it
with enthusiasm, and thus may a truth-seeking.yet misguided-
people be made to sign the bond of their own infamy and-
build the walls of their own dungeon. But it is not so easy,
to lead men astray by quiet argument, considered and ex-
amined in,the cool calm of retirement; and.no,one can deny
that, in order for a sensible man to' fOnn a mature -decision of ‘
Judgment on a subject, it is better to sit down, and with the
assistance of a judicious friend, examine its merits in the
quietude of retirement, than to listen to the claptrap declama-
tions of an excited enthusiast at a public meeting,. Convinced
that an opinion arrived at thus- is far more likely to be-safe
and sound than an opinion arrived at by-any other process, we
earnestly invite the attention of all reasonable men to an ex-
amination of the merits of the question- with which we com-
menced this pamphlet, and in order more distinctly to under-
stand it, we will endeavour to enter-on it 1 in the plainest-
manner possible,
The question is, “ Is it desirable to receive convicts or exiles
again- into-the Australian colonies?" or, to-bring the matter
closer within our power, “ Is it-desirable to receive-them into
the northern parts of the colony, those parts of wliich Moreton
Bay is the principal shipping port?’’
We answer, undoubtedly it is desirable. Why?-
Ist. —On account of the scarcity of labour. That the de-
mand for labour has vastly exceeded the supply is so well’
known, that no arguments are needed to prove it. All parties
admit the fact. But the -immense injury to the district which
this involves does-not at first sight strilce-u-s as forcibly as it
would if we could see the extent of the evil.- Not only are
the flocks and herds of the settlers injured for vvanfof persons
to look after them ;■ not only are settlers of wealth frequently
obliged to put on the Guernsey froek and drive their own
teams,-in order to convey their wool, &c., to the shipping
port; not only are some of them necessitated to boil down-
their stock, or tend theii flocks themselves, because of the im-
possibility of procuring the necessary servants*; but every


undertaking of importance is at, once nipped in the bud for'
want of labour. That we are' not asserting more than bare
facts, we would adduce as evidence, that Simon Scott, Esq.,
George Burgoyne, Esq., and other highly respectable squat-
'ters, were last season under the necessity of themselves assist-
ing to load their teams with their wool, and personally drive
them to the shipping'ports, the former to North Brisbane, a
distance of 130 miles, the'latter to Ipswich, a distance of 50
miles. And why were they thus obliged ? Simply because
it was utterly impossible, though wages equal to 10s or 15s.
daily,, per man, were offered, yet it was utterly impossible to
procure men even at these exorbitant prices. While it is thus:
impracticable to procure men- even for the work necessary to
carry on operations already commenced, much more imprac-
ticable is it to get the labour necessary to increase and extend
business. Here are thousands of acres of available land, suit-
able to the production of tropical fruits, spices, and marketable
commodities —there are ready outlets for an immense quantity
of these articles —there is a climate in every way suitable for
their profitable production—the very land cries out for the-
ploughshare, and cash sheds its yellow allurements for the
exercise of our energies and the improvement of our position ;
and yet projects, however profitable, undertakings, however
alluring, are totally and irremediably stopt by the want of
labour. Labour, in the infancy of time, was a part of the:
curse ; but nature seems here upside down, for, in this land, at
least, the curse lays in the lack of labour ! It is through this
lack of labour that the cultivation of sugar, and especially of
cotton, is neglected, in spite of the entreaties of Chambers of
Commerce, and the exciting offers of a threadbare cotton mart,,
whose startling cry of “ Give, Give,” has reached even these
distant shores. It is through this lack of labour, and the
losses thereby entailed on the producer, that itis quite common-
place, and literally true here, to see “ servants on horses, arid
princes walking like servants upon the earth.” This lack of
labour has caused the melancholy enrolment of high names in
the records of the Insolvent Court, and has almost driven some-
men of spirit and energy, in the madness of despair, to turn-,
their flocks of sheep adrift into the wide bush, and themselves
forsake their stations with a curse ! As a natural and certain
consequence, servants in the interior are frequently idle and
insolent, unreasonable in their demands, arrogant in their be- :


haviour, pert and insulting in their replies; and, instead of
the natural order of things, in which the servant should wait
upon the master, honour him and pay him reverence, things
are inverted, the rule of right turned topsyturvy, and the
master is almost obliged to come, hat in hand, cringing to his
servant, to beg as a favour he will please do this or that as soon
as convenient. While this is literally true, as to, the interior
generally, and especially the more remote stations, the towns
are nearly as had, and even here'the employed needs more
attendance, and 'waiting on, and service, than- the employer,
and it is borne out by almost universal testimony, that “ the
servant is above Ms Lord.” This is a lamentable state of
things, and we need not say that, were the land as rich as
Eden’s garden, and the climate as salubrious as Elysium, and
the masters as rich as Croesus, all is of no avail; —without a
sufficiency of labour, ruin, total and irretrievable, to the dis-
trict will erelong be the sure and unavoidable result.
2nd.- I —-Another reason why it is desirable that convicts, or,
as they are now termed, exiles, should he sent* here is, the
need of coerced labour on public works, And here let me say
a word of explanation why the elegant term of exile is so
generally used in the district,ns the soubriquet of these men,.
It is not because the noble lord at the head of this part of
Her Majesty’s government has stood godfather on the occasion,
and had them christened thus; it is rather because so com-
pletely are masters here at the mercy of their men, on account
of the scarcity of labour, that they are even ready to conciliate
them into obedience by abstaining from calling them by the,
opprobrious term “convict,” and substituting in lieu thereof
the milder and more classical title of exile.
But we said the necessity of, coerced labour for public
works makes it desirable that we should receive these men.
How are roads to be made, bridges built, towns improved, and
fresh lands opened t If these improvements had to be effected
at the expense of the settlers and townspeople, in this country
where the population is so scanty and so widely scattered, they
could not be achieved, or at any rate will take,a long time;
but if there is an abundance of convicts, those who are not
wanted in the interior, or who for misconduct may be turned*
in on Government, must be employed, and, as in the penal
clays of the colony, so again will it come to pass, that high-
w;i’'s shall be opened in the desert, substantial buildings raise


their heads in our towns without cost to the inhabitants,
bridges over hitherto impassable creeks will he erected, “ the
wilderness and the solitary place will thus he glad for them,
and the desert rejoice and blossom as a rose.”
3rd.—-Another reason why we should receive them.is, they
will cause a large expenditure of capital in our towns, and
through the whole district, and thus money will be freely cir-
culated, and readily obtained, and the sharp-toothed, soul-
corroding, spirit-shrivelling monster, Poverty, be driven from
our shores. You ask how can it increase the circulation of
money? ’ We answer, these men will need clothes, food, and
lodgings, if they are hired out, and with the good wages they
Will get will he well able to buy all they want. Those who
ate retained in town in the hands of Government will also-
meed these things, and a large Commissariat department will
be certain. If additional military are needed, this expenditure-
will he still further increased, and as Government always pays
for these things with bullion, hard cash will.be in circulation,
and instead of the I 0 U's and orders which at present form
our circulating medium, there will he the jingling of sub-
stantial rhino in the pockets of all. Is it then desirable to
have these men ? A thousand mutilated, almost illegible, rag
orders answer Yes ! We need not enlarge on this point; it is
so plainly for the interests of the district, so satisfying to the-
pounds, shillings, and pence passion of the colony, that was
the argument once properly seen and understood, we imagine
it would be irresistible. What was it first gave Sydney, Par-
ramatta, Windsor, Newcastle, and the other towns in the south
part of the colony their successful start ? We answer, Govern -
ment expenditure 1 What is it, we ask, that will more than
anything else help to give Moreton Bay an impulse? We-
answer, Government expenditure. And while the supply of
labour will render wool-growing profitable to the settler, and
sugar-planting, cotton, indigo, coffee, and maize growing,
practicable! to the farmer, the'townspeople will come in for the
more immediate advantages of cash circulation and Govern-
ment expenditure ; and thus will one blessing rise on another,
and he again returned and increased, reciprocal advantages
will result, and the establishment of Savings' and other banks,
in which sweet little balances will stand to the credit of every
careful and industrious man, will prove that "the rosy days of
the colony ” are not for ever past.


Ith.—'Another powerful argument for receiving these - men
is, they will most likely be the immediate means of rendering
the river Brisbane navigable to large vessels, and instead of
occasional schooners loading and unloading at our wharves,
the merchant ships of all nations will flutter their ensigns oa
the broad waters of the Brisbane, and pour their commodities
at reasonable rates into our homes. If .we have, an abundant
supply of these men,, there will be L almost a certainty that,
with so much labour at their disposal, Government will will-
ingly employ some of their surplus men to deepen the river
and remove, the bar. By what other means can this ever be
effected? By none of which we know, at any rate for some
time to come. Crippled'in our commerce, paralyzed at the
outset of every undertaking, impeded in every movement by
this insurmountable obstacle, the sandbank at the mouth of
the river proves a bah in more senses than one;- —trade lan-
guishes, .and despair makes a dead .set at Cleveland Point.
Are exiles then desirable? The damaged keel of the Eagle ,
the seldom used planks of substantial wharves, the rolling tides
of the majestic river'Brisbane as they fret and groan over the
sandbanks' and bar, respond an unequivocal Yes! On this
subject even dumb nature speaks, and the very stones of the
wharves cry out! As we desire direct communication with
England; our chief export market, and as we wish to see mer-
chant vessels of all nations, not omitting the numerous whalers
cruising in the adjacent seas,’tracking pur river ; and as there
is no hope of this being effected without convicts, we say most
unhesitatingly, let the exiles he received.
sth.—Another reason why we : should receive the men is,
it will most likely procure us; the favourable consideration of
the Home Government, and make us a part of the empire to
which her Majesty’s Government will delight to do honour.
Owing to' the positive refusal of other colonies to receive these
Men, her Majesty’s Government are placed in no trifling
dilemma, and consequently they have heen led to offer peculiar
boons to ahy polony Which may open to their reception. On
this part of the subject we need only quote a paragraph from
a despatch of Earl Grey to Governor Sir C. A. Fitzroy, No.
.110, dated 14th July, 18-19'.
“ I have much satisfaction in acquainting' you, that. Parliament .lias,, on
the recommendation of her Majesty's.,Government, .granted a sum of
money in order to enable the Government to send free emigrants to those


■.colonies wliiuli tiilvviotii from'-this Mitnfcrv. Tito itif.onfciou of h«W
MajGsty'a'Goverrimerit is toseiui, m nearly os'they may liiid’prnoticeble,,
nr number of free persons! equal; to flint of the mala convicts vboeivod in
each .colony . which-00-operotou .with 'this country in carrying’ into cHecb
this inrpoi'tant part iof pallid disoiplmo.” ■
Drum this extract it will be seen that 'her Majesty’s Govern-/
rnent are decidedly inclined to grant considerable advantages
to those 'colonies which co-bpferate with the mother country fin
carrying out its penal-discipline.
, 6th.-_,Ahother reason Why weshould receive these men is,
that their plentiful supply 'will'be the sure means of attracting
men of Capital to the district. The scarcity,and high price of
labour at present make it utter madness to : expend capital on
land,;;ho, commensurate return can he yieidbd.' At the v'eiy
moment when crops are ready to -be gathered, and will be-
mined if neglected, it may be impossible to get men for any
price, and thus the care and expenditure of twelve months be
■entirely dost. In such a state of the labour market,what
capitalist would venture the outlay of money on the cultiva-
tion of land? If is this which prevents attempts at rearing
produce from the soil, There have ‘been within the last
twelve months a large number of highly respectable men
landed, through the influence of the philanthropic and-talented
Dr. Lang j and though it cannot he denied 1 that‘a body Of
more industrious, enterprising, arid respectable' then ndver set
foot bn the Australian shores, yet they all find that, however
■suitable the soil and climate to the production of tropical pro-
duce, yet; in' the present state of the.labour market,' if is;mad-
ness to make ,the attempt, Many of them who I 'imvh; received
the land, as agreed for with the Ilev. Dr,, and afe.conseque’htly
at no expens'e, for its purchase here, leave their land uncared
for and neglected, finding it more' profitable, 1 though possessed
of fine farms of .80 to, HO acres, and a moderate capital, to
take places ms paid labourers thanto 1 enter bn the cultivation
of their own lands. It is ,not therefore to be wondered at that,'
thwarted in this manner in their efforts for advancement,they
lay their little capital aside unuseAp'apd vexed and -annoyed at
this insurinbijutable obstacle, are ready to tar and feather the
Doctor, and then.;,rush away in disgust from these fertile and
salubrious shores'. .'The vast fields of profitable' speculation
which are presented on all sides cannot be entered oh without'
capital.; capitalists will not coUie to enter bn thfiVn, for they


: thus the stream of fertility, which
•mighU rijjpte.'. its refreshing waters over our fields, is dried; at
the foaiSteitr iead. 'We then, that in order to procure'
the accession of men of capital to our district, it is desirable
to receive the exiles, as thereby fields of profitable enterprise
' will betsaafie available.
reason for the reception of these men is, it
our labour demand is not supplied from this source, we shall,
have (Chinese, South Sea Islanders, and such,like Pagans sup-
plied in l their stead, which species of labour is of a far worse
'description, attended with evils’of the most frightful kind,
Let it'he remembered that the Chinese are addicted to the
tfoulest saifid most degrading praclices—not occasionally, but
professedly and habitually—practices tolerated by their reli-
gion, yet of so obscene and "revolting a kind, that we forbear
to defile our pages by a mention of them. The South. Sea.
'lslanders generally are cannibals, devourers of human flesh,
U'AGMrsj and addicted to the'practice of enormities at which the
wery blood of a civilised being runs cold. If savages of these
classes are imported to supply the labour market, their itn-
iportation will speedily lapse into slavery; and as it is, those
■already brought here are dealt with as so many marketable
cattle. They are bought, sold, exchanged—a traffic made
with them, and dealt with literally as so many slaves, Pre-
sently we may reasonably expect, without pretending to more
than an ordinary knowledge of human nature, these abuse*
will increase, and the worst horrors of slavery, with the ex-
ception of the name, will he brought on this wide spread
continent. And meanwhile, what kind of a posterity will be
growing up from this species of labour? The spirit of our
British blood rises with indignation when we think of the de-
gradation which will be sure to come on some of our country-
men; there will be begotten a despicable and vile posterity as
the result of this slavery, a crossbreed of the Coolie and Angli-
can, an.admixture of foul and fair, Pagan and Christian ; and
no wonder if, at a future day, this piggish progeny Will rise
up to be thorns in the sides of those men, whose pure souls
shuddered ,at the horror of receiving convicts, yet could intro-
duce as a more desirable class the Sodomite Chinamen, .or the
cannibal South Sea Islander. Some of these anti-exile,
;(sidlie-loving transcehdentalists may Some day have the grati-


Sfitsation of;Still ftrrth'er blessing theirproteges, by beinghreryetlf
up'as a sidc-dish to these kill-Cm-and-eat-era animals'!
Having presented to my readers some of the morepromineut
(reasons for'deciding that it is desirable that the convicts or
exiles should be received in the northern parts of the'colony,
tvb will, ’in order to deal fairly and openly with those Who
differ from us on the point, next examine the objections which
have been urged against such a Course of conduct.
district uhsdfe as a residence for any person of respectability,
and that consequently free people Will be afraid of coming here."
This is a rather specious objection, hut it is founded ’on a
thorough mistake, No place on earth would be safe for a re-
spectable man without the check of law and the control of
good government as a safeguard. In consequence of these
cheeks, Australia Penal Was a far safer place of residence than
Australia Tree. Never, during the penal days of the colony,
was there a series of such revolting murders perpetrated, in
populous neighbourhoods, as that awful series in Sydney dur-
ing the winter of 1847. There respectable men and decrepid
women were deliberately murdered in crowded neighbourhoods,
and on one occasion, in the light of open day and in the pub-
licity of the open street. Several years after the dread of
convibtism had passed away, rapine and murder stalked boldly
abroad with a reckless fearlessness never known in the days of
penal discipline. Take another instance. When was there
known, in the days of convictism, a wanton, unprovoked
attack bn the properties and lives of unoffending men, like'
that Which was perpetrated by free men in free Sydney on
the eve of last New Year’s Day 1 ? The fact of, the matter is,
that 'the safety and tranquillity of Australia was far greater
When a penal, Colony than it has been since it ceased to be so.
It is true bushrangers were then more Common, but this uiai
the result bf i&s tyranny Wnd-opprission of the old ct'ssitfti-
tnent‘ systim, and not a necessary coheofnitarit of felony.
And, the'u as to people being afraid of coming here. Were
they afraid in the olden times? The statistics of emigration
prbvb’ the contrary. More men of money and influence came
tb the ! cOlohy while under its penal character than have Over
come since.' Afraid of coming! Easily frightened wotil'd
they'bei They ate not afraid to go to CaliforniaTheyarc
hbt deterred by the no -la W condition bf the digging TegibhS!


t'he cut-tliroat.desperadp-Kuled dommwn* of the toernwem#
find emigration by no means damped through,the 00-reigp ot
Lv„ch ald : Lucifer, who administer the law under the might-
is-right principle,! Afraid of coming ! Oh no; men are not
,'asilv scared from a land so wealth-producing, as New South
Wales. 1 “ Where the carcase is, there will the eagles he
An objection' on Which much stress has been laid,
Mneciallv by gentlemen recently arrived in this part of the
colony under the auspices of Dr. Lang, is, that the presence
of these convicts Will be-highly injurious to the morality and
social well-being of the inhabitants. In answer to this, ob-
jection we might quote the Words of Dr. Lang that with
few exceptions the colony only contains two classes—those
who have been transported, and those who should have been,’'
We say we might quote this as their answer,, but as we con-
sider the saying a disgrace, to Dr. Lang, and as we would by
no 1 means subscribe to the correctness of the report, at least
since tbd time when we ourselves became denizens of the land,
we will meet the objection by something more weighty.
appeal to universal experience when we ask whether the
genera] morality of the colony is not far superior to that of
most newly settled countries. Is it not better than California,
settled only by imfiE people ? Is it not better than Prance,
with its Praternity and Universal Brotherhood ? . Is it not
better than Italy or Spain, with their universal religionism
and chivalrous generosity ? Where is the Sabbath kept with
such decency, even in old, and well-governed countries, as in
our colonial towns'? Where will you meet with benevolent
hospitality (which is the, essence of Christianity) more open-
hearted and cheerful, than among the old hands in the hush.
" A fellow-feeling makes us wondrous kind;” and hence it is
that, taking the convict class of the colony, with its descend-
ants and. connexions,, we may safely say that kinder, more
open-handed,generous, and well-behaved people arc not in the
World than many of .the old hands. It is for this reason,
among others, that they are generally preferred as servants by
men who understand them, and their morality is frequently
found of a far superior caste to that of their smoother-tongued,
sleeker-skinned free companions. We allow that there is
inuch profanity'and immorality in the bush, but we contend
that it is as much among the emigrants as with the ticket-of-*


.le»ye < reply, to thisobjecr
tiqrp.that tlie.liistpry' pf,the’ past, and the'.condition at, present,,
of New Spilth Wales, do not indicate such danger to morality
as is asserted.
Whilp.wethus, contend that the objection,is based on error,
and ,show that, experience does'.not warrant, .the apprehension,
of great danger on, this score; yet,, for,the sake, of showing
how peculiarly unsound this argument is, when, adduced as a
reason for rejecting these men, we will grant, for the sake- of
argument, that these, fears .ate well grounded, and that these
convicts are very,immoral and,had men. Now, admitting all
tjua, we .contend that, if,the persons who urge this objection,
are .consistent men, this reason should not be adduced as an,
argument against their reception, but rather the, opposite: ,If
tlie men are, so ,bad, the true Christian should be glad,to have,
them brought within the .range,of- his influence.,. Their sin-
fulness should, he a motive for .the display of his religion, and,
instead of, crying,opt, ,“ Stand by, J am, holier than, thou
instead of dealing damnation put against his fellow-man,.and,
like the Levite, passing his sin-struck, soul-diseased fellow-,
creature on the other side’’—instead of this, .bis 1 language
should be, “ Teach me to 1 feel another’s woehe ought, to.be
glad of the opportunity, of “ healing his hackslidings," and
bringing him hack to, the happy, path. The fact, that a man
is a sinner, and a great sinner, a, convict, and a bad
ought not to remove him beyond our sympathy, nor lead ns
to shun his society, and scandalise his name pit ought rather
to, call forth our charitable and benevolent feelings,, and make
us like the Apostle.qf ,old,.willing to, be.made accursed,for
their sakes, if we can' but save them. Let it ever be:remem-
,ljered that: shunning and reproaching, a,. bad , man is The. very
worst plan for reforming him. With, all deference,' therefore,
to those honest and gpod men who, fro^n. conscientious motive*
on : the ground of their immorality, oppose the reception .of
convicts, we'respectfully submit their fears are either founded
on mistake,: or on ignorance of their duty as .Christians. It
is to he regretted, however, that, this argument has been used
by some who should have been the very last to cry out about
morality, and we hesitate not to say that, with them at: least,
it is T Satan . reproving sin.’,’; Their pure sonls>, shrink with
horror at the idea,of the morality .of the land ,being;endangered
from the presenoedf convicts, yet- tbey overlook;the- danger it.


is in from themselves. They ery out tvith disgust at the ob-
scene expressions of exiles, yet they never blame the debau-
chery and obscenity perpetrated in sec ret by themselves. They
shudder at associating with thieves and cut-throats, and yet
themselves, like snakes In the grass, stab the character of their
neighbours and murder the reputation of their ftllow-creatures
in the dark (which kind of murder is the worst '?). These are
men who cry out against the profanity of the convicts, yet, if
a little excited, will themselves curse and swear like the Devil
himself. These are men who vaunt their morality in public
places, and pull long faces in the streets, and wear a devout,
" heaven-be-praised " caste of countenance when you meet
them abroad. " They fear for the morals of the people if
convicts are again sent here” forsooth! Oh! yes! greatly
afraid are they about it. ■ Follow them to the retirement of
their lives, and see what their fear and their morality is worth ;
watch them in their private dealings, and sec how moral these
Simon Pures are, and you will find they are nothing better
than “ baptised infidels,” and the cool and habitual committers
of crimes from which many of the convicts would shrink with
horror. In making these severe remarks on the morality-
mongers of the colony, we beg most distinctly to state that we
do not in any degree scoff at the good men who conscientiously
urge this objection ; our remarks are intended only for those
hypocritical religionists who, themselves of most immoral
character and degraded reputation, can yet come forward and
say, " Don’t receive the men, they are bad characters, arid will
ruin the morality of the colony,” Prom the morality of pious
impostors like these we say, iri the language of oiir Church,
" Good Lord deliver us ” ; and we beg to remind them, in the
Words of that holy and blessed Book, from which we both
gather their condemnation and standard of conduct, that “ pure
teiigion, and undefiled, before God and the Father,” is to
“ visitthe afflicted, not to shun and despise them; and it
Will be far more pleasing to Heaven if they show their religion
by trying to retrieve the character of the convict, than by
“making broad their phylacteries, and choosing the chief
places at synagogues."
3rd.p—There is another objection to the reception of these
tnen, Viz; :■—“lt would be far better to have’plenty of free
emigrants than be inundated by the sweepings of England's
penitentiaries,” To this We ariOTver, We cannot procrire from


bounty emigration alb the we, want. We-rwill, however,
take all we can get, which;,tve fear, judging from the past,
will be plentiful jn promise,. but few in performance. We
have tried long to obtain free emigration in sufficient quantity
to supply our wants;.we have tried,; and re-tried, and re-re-
tried, and opr wants still, are. unsupplied; and the experience
derived from the few we have had, we are sorry to say, is no
ways encouraging to ns.to ask for more. Instead of proving
so much superior to convicts, they have frequently turned out
very far inferior. "We scruple not to say that there have, been
more lewdness, profanity, idleness, cunning, and impertinence
among the Free Irish Orphans, who have been “ let out " on
questionable leases from Brisbane Barracks, than were ever
found among an equal number, of convict women from the
Parramatta Factory., .Besides, the very nature of the country,
and the occupations for which labour is wanted, are of a kind
to which convict labour is most applicable. There is great
danger from the blacks at some stations; therefore, men who
have offended against the. laws of their country are more proper
to be sent there than free men. Besides, to many of these
places emigrants ,really will not go ; convicts, however, would
rather go there than stay in prison.. We are sorry to say it,
but justice compels us to tell the truth, for these posts of peril
especially, and indeed for important service generally, the em-
ployers of labour, prefer., cqnvicts, and that for the 1 best of
reasons. They are without that conceit, lazy, pride, imperti-!
nence, and extortion which, has been too frequently the,pre-
dominant features of emigrants. Kept in awe by their posi-,
tion, and well aware that their freedom depends in a great
measure on their good conduct, they have strong inducements
to good behaviour, and generally make good servants ;, while,
on the other hand, the free emigrant frequently has come out
with exorbitant expectations, which make him hold, idle, and
unreasonable; and it cannot be denied that a man without
right principles, if is far; worse than he would he if
under restraint. It is well known that the persons generally
sent out as emigrants are those whose idleness or bad conduct
at home, while it has escaped the lash of the law, has yet made
them the burthen of the parish and thedread of the neighbour-
hood in which they dwelt, and hence; the reason of their being
sent out as emigrants; Government at home were often glad
to get rid of them, even at the expense of paying their passage


motley;*l%is is-hpt-kltfaytf'tlfe &*}- but its truth cannot be
denied with reference to a greaVmany of them. We say then,
convicts are more suitable to'diir witife thtin bounty emigrants ;
and even were this not the case, we must'be contented with
them, as'tbey'a , m'the;dhly' , kind ! ‘‘tbat : we-cati' get, or, at lehsti
if we refuse them, we must also manage without emigrants. ■/
Besides the above which have been urged
•against the introduction of convicts' or exiles, there has been
a great dealhf rodomontade opposition in some quarters wfiifch
we cannot foi-bear-ndticing. There have been the rant and
bluster 1 cifipblitical squirtersiii Sydney, and when the question
was first mooted, the people rose; en masse, and headed by
■noisy Tea Dealers and-Plll'Tendbrs, vociferated on ; the Cir-
cular Wharf their detefmiiUition 1 never to receive' convicts!
And'yet will it he believed that 1 some of, these very' men have
been the first to engage the exiles on their arrival, and multi-
tudes are even now making preparation for “ eating their own
vomit.” Similar consistency has been displayed by some of
the gentlemen who have signed‘the petition' against - trans-
portation 'in'-Brisbane'; while they have raised the -no-convict
■cry, they have been the foremost'to hire, : ‘either for themselves
or as agents for others, these ft horrible " exile's ; they have
passed by their old tradesmen (free emigrants)' to encourage
and support the class against hhich they rave. If circum-
stantial proof was needed we could give* it, aye, even te>
names'; we however forbeh', hriddf the belief-that many of
these have been unwittingly beguiled iiltp their opposition by
the clap-trap' of noisy demagogues.#e cannot, however,
but remind such, that the petition against exiles which they
have signed is full of errors and wrong reasoning, and indeed
commences with what, to seme at least, must have been W
known and deliberate misstatement.' We refer to the first
paragraph, where h is stated that the prisoners from the
Moufitsiunrt Elphinstone oh their landing caused scenes of
outrage,-drunkenness, and disorderly conduct, to : which, in
■this quiet town, the memorialists had hitherto been strangers. "
The person who could,swallow this statement must indeed
Tie ignorant of-tbe byegdne days ofi Brisbane. Anyone who
witnessed the landing of the emigrahts per ArtpUtisia will at
■once rememberequally riotous and unbecoming conduct, and,
if not bhhded by prejudice, must allow that the scenes in
connection With both were preffy Similar.; If' somc l of the


exiles indulged, too freely in the intoxicating draught, so did
some of the emigrants; and what was worse, continued for
days in. that beastly condition, while their motherless children
were, perishing in the Barracks for want of attention : the mis-
conduct of the exiles was felt principally, if not only, hy them-
selves ; hut the misconduct of the emigrants almost murdered
one child at least. So much for the truth of the petition’s
preamble. With such a beginning, we are not astonished to
find some who signed it already heartily ashamed of their
colours, and glad if they could to retrace their steps.
We cannot conclude our remarks about objectors and ob-
jections, without noticing some observations contained in a late
number of the Sydney Morning Herald. Unable to meet the
arguments of the transportationists with sound reason; incom-
petent, with all their power, to show satisfactory grounds for
their anti-exile twaddle,; and fretting and foaming with rage
on finding that the squatocracy of the north pay no attention
to their leviathan denunciations, —the editors of the Herald
vent their spleen hy “ calling names and using had words,”
a frailty this to which these worthy wiseacres are remarkably
prone, owing no doubt to the negligence of the old women
from whom they received their education, who forgot that
“Bad names and angry words require
To bo chastised at school.”
The duty which these ancient, worthies neglected, we, how-
ever, must not omit.
In the number referred to above, the sapient editors of
this paper vent their anger against the large number of gentle-
men in the north favourable to the reception of exiles, by
calling them Mammonites, and insinuating that the motive
which leads them to this course is the desire for gain. Surely
they are “measuring our corn hy their own bushel.” A
grievous sin is this desire for gain! a sin of which the editors
and proprietors of the Sydney Morning Herald are by no
means guilty! What was it which, in the days of convictism,
lured their pure souls to this felon land? Had mammon no
share in that ? Did mammon never cause ministers of religion
to leave the pulpit for the press? We are astonished at the
Herald making an attack on motives. It is one of the best
proofs of the weakness of their cause. It brings to our re-
membrance the way David’s brethren served him, when out of


kindness he took supplies to them down to battle; bis brethren
could find no fault with his conduct—tbe loaves, &c., were
highly acceptable —but they hated their brother, and unable'
to blame his conduct they impugned his motives, and said,
“to see the battle ate ye come,’’ So with the immaculate
Herald; they cannot prove the line of conduct pursued by
those favourable to the lesumption of transportation in a modi-
fied shape bad, and so they assail their motives, and say it is
the love of gain which prompts them ; and wind up by calling
them mammon-worshippers. If the religion of the Sydney
Morning Herald gentlemen should be analysed, at what shrine
we wonder would they be found worshipping'? It is to be
hoped, for the sake of consistency, that the “ love of lucre” is
not their sin, though we rather incline to think that the well- -
fledged nests of these gentlemen are proofs that they have not
been wanting in their devotion to the “ root of all evil.” We
could, in our turn, call them names and use bad words ; we shall,
however, he content with leaving them to the vocation unto
which they are by nature called—■
“ to suckle fools and chronicle small beer.”
We think we have now noticed all the objections which
have been, or can be, urged against the reception of exiles, at
anyrate in the northern parts of the colony. Some of the
reasons for the reception of them at Moreton Bay are not ap-
plicable to our neighbours further south; but we ask, why
should we be debarred from their reception because the Syd-
ney people do not want them? , From the, annexed Table of
the Exports of Moreton Say, it will he seen that we are of
sufficient importance to assert our own views and seek pur
own rights. The Sydney people have, long enough stolen the
golden eggs from Moreton Bay, and what return have we had
for them? The immense amount realised in this district by
the sale of land, and from depasturing licences, custom duties,
&c., has been swallowed up by these southern cormorants,
without even an acknowledgment, and we are beginning to
think that, unless treated better than heretofore, we must seek
a remedy in —' —- what? Tn tipping the Morning Herald?
No! (Query. —Does the mammon-hating Herald take tip?)
In huckstering to the 'vitiated morality of popular opinion
down south? No! The remedy we are beginning to think
about is “ Separation." ■ ■ ' <


In conclusion we need say hut little. The reasons for re-
ceiving exiles ate so much mote weighty than the objections
to such a - course, that we think all who have candidly followed
our arguments will have come to the same conclusion as our-
selves, viz., “that it is desirable to receive exiles into the
northern districts.’’ Not to receive them as the .first lot were
sent, to be turned adrift from the ships without any guard or
supervision—this mode would not do, even for bounty emi-
grants —nor yet to be at once granted all the latitude and
liberty of free men, but to be placed in circumstances where
they may by good conduct earn these blessings gradually.
As society has suffered from their sin, so let society be.bene-
fitted by their labour; and let all of them who abuse their
liberty be promptly turned in on Government, and by them
be placed under close supervision, while they are made to
labour hard on public works. There is a road wanting up
the north side of the Brisbane, and the chief street of our
town wants much repair: let these men be employed on these
or such like works ; let them he the pioneers of improvement,
and in this manner they may he made in some measure to
atone for their breaches of their country's laws.
While we indulge a hope that a'portion of our readers may
be convinced hy these Remarks,' rapidly 'thrown together, of
the desirability of receiving. exiles.,,we doubt not some of our
opponents will be still closer wedded to their opinions; for it
cannot be denied that some men are very much like pigs, the
more you try to guide them by fair means the more obstinately
will- they persist in their opposition,. .To. such men every
argument adds to their-prejudice, and every sound reason
against their way of thinking - to the doggedness of their
opinions. Some of these gentlemen, we doubt not, feeling
their inability to invalidate, opr. arguments, will throw thd*
little pamphlet aside, saying;, “ Tush! Bosh! It is written by
somebody afraid to subscribe his name; some anonymous
scribbler, ashamed of the cause, Anticipating
such a remark, we answer, If are good, they
will secure attention for their intrinsic worth independent of
any name; hut if unsound and fallacious, no name, however
high or noble, could give them influence or gain them notice.
We are contented to stand the test of close examination, feel-
ing satisfied that, though we have not had the - advantage of
addressing ■“ hundreds of public meetings," nor yet been bo


Shewing the Exports or Bat, fuosi October 1st, 1848, to
September 30th, 1849.
Compiled from the Shipping Idsts in Moreton Bay Courier, Clearance
and othe>' Documents*
Estimated Value.
5,509 Bales of Wool i....
2,341 Casks, and \ Tiillnw
59 Skins / i£lU0W
226,893 Sheepskins
5,323 Hides
.. 18,560
19 9
10 8
19 7
9 0
15 0
0 0
53,152 Staves
227*150 Eeet Pine (Log)
273,880 “ “ (Sawn)..'.
30,000 “ Cedar
326 Sheep
890 Tons Coals
316 Bushels Maize....
14 6
4 0
18 10
0 0
19 0: -
0 0
16 0
Total Minimum Value of Exports in
twelve months
|£105,377
0 0
favoured in our education as to be enabled to c[ixote Latin
(“novi homines” to wit), yet we are not in the least afraid
but that “ the root of the matter will be found with us.”
I am, Gentlemen,
Your’s, &c.
QUIDAM.
Brisbane, Feb. 28, 1850.
TABLE,
whtted nr juuis swan, ‘‘conputau orngz, bbisham.
