

FIJI
REMARKS ON THE
AGRICULTURAL PROSPECTS
OF FIJI,
BY JOHN HORNE, ESQ., F.L.S.,
DIRECTOR OF THE BOTANICAL GARDENS, AND WOODS AND
FORESTS, MAURITIUS.
October, 1878.
LEVUKA:
PRINTED BY G. L. GRIFFITHS, BEACH-STREET.




FIJI.
REMARKS ON THE
AGRICULTURAL PROSPECTS
OF FIJI,
BY JOHN HORNE, ESQ., F.L.S.,
Dibector of the Botanical Gardens, and Woods and
P crests, Mauritius.
OctaLet, 7"#7S'.
levuka :
MINTED BY G. L. GRIFFITHS, BEXCH-BTRBBT,




THE
AGRICULTURAL PROSPECTS
OF FIJI.
'll MONO tropical products the cultivation of the
O'” sugar cane, for the manufacture of sugar, holds a
prominent place. Every visitor to Fiji (even from
countries in which the sugar cane is the only plant
cultivated to any extent) cannot fail being struck with
the size, the healthy appearance, and the rapidity
of growth of the sugar cane in Fiji. These remarks
do not only extend to the “ pet canes ” of the Fijians,
which are to be found growing near the houses in
every native town, but they are general, and applic-
able to the canes on the settlers’ plantations, as well as
to those planted by the Fijians for thatch; the
neglected state of the latter plantations duly con-
sidered.
The wild canes (vicos) of these islands, are to the
cane grower subjects of admiration. They suggest to
him interesting ideas about the parentage of the
sugar cane, which undoubtedly originated in the
islands of the South Sea; where, from time imme-
morial, it has been cultivated by the inhabitants for
various purposes, and carried to the islands and coun-
tries in the eastern parts of tropical Asia, by their
inhabitants when on migratory or piratical expedi-
tions. An experienced cane grower would at once
pronounce the so-called “ China cane ” an improved
“ vico,” were he equally well acquainted with both
To him the varieties of the latter present all the
various colors and habits of the numerous varieties of
the cultivated sugar cane; but it yet remains for a
careful botanical examination and comparison of the
flowers of both, to pronounce the “ vico” of Fiji a
species of the genus saccharum, or not. From the


foregoing it will be noted that the climate of Fiji is,
by its nature, well adapted for growing the sugar
cane ; and so is the soil. This in most places is rich
alluvium, on the banks of the rivers; loam on gentle
slopes and hillocks ; volcanic soils of the richest des-
criptions ; and at the basis of low hills debris brought
down by innumerable agencies from thesides of the
mountains. The cane lands do not exist in any
one part of Fiji in particular. They are to be
found in all parts of the group. In the far interior of
Yiti Levu, as well as at the mouths and on the banks
of the Rewa, Navua, Sigatoka, and other rivers. In many
different localities of Vanua Levu, Taviuni, Rabi, &c.
Even in Ovalau, and some of the other smaller,
although, in this respect, not less important islands of
the group. The extent and richness of these lands in
conjunction with a climate, extremely favorable for
growing and maturing the sugar cane, ought to make
all well-wishers of Fiji long for the time when sugar
will be made in it and exported by the hundred
thousand tons, and to the value of millions of pounds
sterling.
Before such results are brought about, the
capitalist or sugar maker will see that it will tend to
his advantage to encourage the planter to grow sugar
cane; and the planter to see that it will be to his
profit to have a cane mill near to his property, if not on
it. The steam and common plough will be extensively
used, as well as the grubber, drill, harrow and horse
hoe on rich alluvial flats. The pick, spade, or Indian
hoe will be in request to pit on hilly land, to put
down a cane top where a cane plant will grow. All
mechanical contrivences, as well as hand labor, will be
needed to till the soil, and fertilizing manures to renew
its fertility. The canes will be cut at the proper season of
the year instead of “cutting all the year through,” as at
present. This practice is really a waste of products,
which even expediency can scarcely excuse. About
one half of the canes are crushed when the density of
their juice is at the lowest, and therefore yield a
minimum amount of sugar. The canes are cut at the
end of the warm weather instead of at its commence-
ment. The warm wet season is the natural time of the
year for the canes growing, and the cold one for them
and maturing for the crop in the months of September,


October, November, and perhaps December. When
cut in March, or April, the ratoon canes are made to
grow in cold dry weather, when they will grow
least, and to ripen during the hot moist weather of
December, January, February, and March, when they
will naturally grow most and ripen least. Such prac-
tice is “ contre saison,” and against nature, and the
want of success and small returns are not surprising.
By cutting the canes during the months above
mentioned, namely, September to December, the
ratoons grow in the proper season, i.e., the warm, and
wet one, and the canes ripen during the cold one.
The crop is made when the density of the juice is
at the highest, and the canes yield most sugar.
It may be said that the best kind of cane to grow
is the one which yields a maximum quantity of sugar,
and gives a minimum amount of work, in cutting'
carting, crushing, and in making sugar out of its juice!
At the same time such a cane must be hardy and
healthy, grow rapidly, ratoon freely and often, and be
well suited to the climate of the locality in which the
plantation may be situated. Many of the canes grown
in Fiji possess these latter qualifications, and appear
to be short of the former ones. In a word, they give
a maximum amount of work in cutting, &c., and yield
a minimum quantity of sugar. The ultimate result is
not the greatest weight of cane which an acre of land
will produce ; but the greatest amount of sugar per
acre which the cane will yield, and consequently the
highest money value.
In Fiji there is a large extent of land which, from
a variety of causes, is better adapted for growing
coffee than any other tropical product. The greater
portion of this land lies in the interior of Viti Levu,
’Vanua Levu, Taviuni, some portions of Eabi, Ovalau!
&c. These islands contain large areas of almost incom-
parably fine coffee land, and enjoy a climate which is
at once healthy and well adapted for the growth of the
coffee tree, plant, or bush. Next to cane growingthat
of coffee will in future years claim a large share of
attention. Coffee growing is now in its infancy in Fiji.
It will yearly extend, and become an important pro-
duct of these islands. Coffee will be second to none
except sugar in value. Its export value will ultimately
attain to about a million and a half or to two mi 11 inn*


sterling The plants of coffee seen in the interior of
Viti Levu, Yanua Levu, and Taviuni, were remarkah y
healthy looking. Indeed the healthy appearance of
the plants prove that coffee will suceed in I iji beyond
a d °The Government have sent large supplies of coffee
seed into the interior of Viti Levu, to form Coffee
Gardens for the natives If it were for J?
obiect than to show the sceptic how coffee will
succeed in the interior of Viti Levu, this action
of the Government would be highly commendable.
Coffee has been tried during the last ten or eleven
years in several islands of the group. However, it is
only within the last two or three years that much
attention has been given to its culture. Several plan-
tations have been formed, and land for others is now
being cleared. Although success cannot be doubted,
it would be a wise precaution not to plant coffee m
places which face the trade winds—that receive it,
full force, unbroken, and directly from the sea wit -
out well protecting the plants by dense “ breakwin s
of hardy trees and shrubs.
Everybody knows how well the coco nut tree
grows in nearly all the islands which constitute the
Fiii o'roup. If it had not been for copra, the export
list of Lilian agricultural products, since the cotton
failure, would have been of small value Young
plantations of it, made by natives and settlers, are to
be seen in many places. There is still large room or
extension, in places unsuited by the natuie of the soil,
&c for the culture of a better and quicker paying
product. The coco nut does not succeed in many parts
of Viti Levu, and, where it does grow on that island,
it bears comparatively few nuts. This is °™S 0
the ravages of a small caterpillar, which attaches
itself to the under sides of the leaves and eats their
softer parts. The consequence is, that the leaves are
unable to perform the functions assigned to them and
the tree is thereby weakened and unable to bear fruit,
if it be not killed by the attacks of the insect. e
actions of this insect have been noticed upon e
coco nut trees growing in other islands of the group, u
in these there exists a something (perhaps birds;
which keeps it from increasing to an injurious extent.
This subject is worthy of being enquired into, m ordei


that a means or way of destroying the insect may be
discovered. Even one which would reduce it in number
to a harmless few, and prevent it increasing, would be
of great utility. Either would be beneficial; and the
coco nut tree would be almost indefinitely extended
or planted on Viti Levu.
Many of the coco nut groves or plantations are
much neglected, and allowed to be overgrown by scrub
and climbers. Some of these groves belong to settlers,
but most of them to Fijians. The manner of cleaning
them is a reprehensible one. Climbers are not only
off the young trees, but generally the leaves to
which they cling are taken away with them. When
the weeding (clearing away the climbers, cutting the
scrub, and grass which surround and choke the
growth) is completed, the rubbish is set on fire, among
the trees, where it may be lying. This is at once an
easy, simple and effectual means of getting rid of it,
and, were the trees not injured by the fire to the
extent of stopping their growth for a few years, it
might be recommended.
Ihe trees in many of the groves are suffering
from too thickly planted. This prevents the
air from circulating among the trees and the fruit
bearing flowers from being fertilised. Also, from too
many trees being on the ground a struggle for
existence takes place (the one tree kills—starves—the
the other), during which the strongest suffer, and are
brought to a premature old age. Where the trees are
growing too close, the axe should at once be unspar-
ingiy, but not indiscriminately applied, and the trees
thinned to about from twenty-five to thirty feet apart;
according to the richness or poorness of the soil,
exposure of sites to wind and the rainfall of the'
locality, or until each tree has an area of from
625 to 900 feet superficial to grow upon.
The quality of the cotton grown in Fiji is well
known. From a variety of causes, but chiefly the
the low price given of late years for cotton in
the European markets, it is now grown by only a few
of the settlers, and in various places by the Fijians for
Government taxes.
To some settlers it may be a matter for con-
sideration, if it would not be more profitable to
cultivate the sugar cane and manufacture sugar, than


to grow cotton. Most of the cotton land is well
adapted for growing sugar cane, which would yield
sugar to the value of £6O, and upwards, per acre, for
the yearly crop.
It remains to be proved whether cotton will not
grow on the hill sides in the driest parts of Yiti Levu ;
where, from climatical reasons, coffee is not likely to
succeed, and the mountainous nature ojf the country
precludes the idea of profitably cultivating the sugar
cane. .
The soil and climate of some parts of Fiji are
well fitted for growing cocoa —Theobroma Cocoa.
The places where the most of these lands lie have
been noticed and need not be repeated, here. How-
ever, lands equally as favorable as those alluded to
for growing cocoa, are to be found in large and
small patches in many parts of Fiji.
There are very few plants of the cocoa at present
in Fiji, and none of them have arrived at a fruit bear-
ing age. It will most likely be sometime before any
extensive plantations of it are made in Fiji. This is
not alone owing to a want of knowledge of the treat-
ment required by the plant and the making of
chocolate, but is more especially owing to the
difficulty and expense of procuring number
of young plants to make a fair trial.
This is one of those subjects which would do good
to any Government for taking up, and particularly
that of a country whose wealth lies solely in its
agricultural products. The more varied these are, the
less will be the distress which a season of failure or
low prices, would certainly cause, if the welfare of the
community depended upon one kind of crop. About
fifty plants of each of the best varieties of the Theo-
broma cultivated in South America and the West
Indies, would, in a few years, yield sufficient young
plants to stock Fiji. These young plants, if need be,
might be sold at a low price to pay expense of rearing
and of introduction. Such, in a new colony like Fiji,
would be of the greatest importance. The same
might be said of many other kinds of plants, the
introduction of which would be a benefit to the
community. It is one of many reasons which could
be forcibly brought forward for the establishment of a
Botanical Garden in the Colony. The principle has


been applied in several Colonies, in all of which it has
well answered its purpose, and no reason for its non-
success in Fiji can be brought forward.
Next in importance to a large introduction of
Theobroma plants, would be that of Tea and Cinchona.
The soil and climate of some parts of the interior of
Yiti Levu, more especially of the mountains at the
sources of the principal rivers, are well qualified for
the culture of these. Roughly estimated, the extent
of country in which Tea and Cinchona could be
successfully cultivated, is not less than one hundred
square miles.
Tobacco also grows well in Fiji. But the want
of knowledge in the preparation of its leaves for the
market is the main reason for it not being more
extensively planted than at present. This difficulty
will most likely be overcome, and in Fiji itself.
The above may be termed the principal articles
of tropical produce which wiU succeed in Fiji, and
there remain those which may be styled of secondary
importance, to be alluded to.
They are Rice, Indian Corn, Arrowroot, Tapioca.
The last three are grown, and the former to some
extent. The Arrowroot and Tapioca manufactured
are of excellent quality. It scarcely requires a
prophet to foresee that they will be ousted by the
sugar cane. As regards Rice, there is no doubt that
it could be extensively grown in Fiji. Many places
are as if they were fitted by nature for its cultivation,
and others could be easily laid out for the purpose.
The Clove, Ginger, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Allspice,
Pepper, Camphor, Yanilla, will also grow successfully
in this highly favored country. To cultivate all or
any of these with any degree of successfulness,
the cultivator should possess a considerable
amount of experience. Most of the settlers in Fiji
had little or no knowledge of the culture required by
different sorts of tropical produce. Being the first
in the Colony, they have been groping in the
dark, or with lights picked from books. To
say that all have succeeded in the application of
theories derived from books would be incorrect; never-
theless, it is true that some have done so, and are now
on a fair way to a competency, if not to a fortune.


Among fruits which will likely succeed in the
parts of this Colony which enjoy a temperate climate,
the Peach and the Strawberry may be mentioned.
The Orange tribe thrives magnificently in all parts of
the group, and the oranges at Namosi well deserve
praise for their excellent quality. Bananas and Pine-
apples of good quality abound everywhere. The
former are grown extensively by the Fijians as an
article of sustenance.
To say that the Mango, Sour Sop, Sweet Sop,
Custard Apple, Ghermoyier, Jack, Carambol, Bilimbi,
Wampee, Bambutan, Lichee Tamarind, and perhaps
the Mangosteen and Durian, will grow in Fiji, is
kin to repeating a truism. There is every probability
that the time is not far distant when Fiji will be
extensively exporting tropical fruit to the markets of
Australia and New Zealand. That it will pay to
grow pineapples, bananas, oranges, &c., on a large scale
for those markets there can be no doubt.
Geographically Fiji occupies a most enviable
position. Situated within the tropics, she is about
from six to eight days steaming from Australia and
New Zealand, where the demands for her produce are
extensive and increasing. From the bountiful nature
of the soil, and the favorable climate, she will success-
fully compete in these markets with all rivals, not
excepting the tropical parts of Australia. It is to
Australia and New Zealand she has to look for a
market for the most of her tropical products, and not to
the markets of Europe, from which she is far distant, and
from which a slight fall in prices debars competition.
It will be a long time before her produce overstocks
the markets of Australia and New Zealand. When that
time comes, if it should come, it will be easy for her
to send the surplus sugar, coffee, &c., to the Western
States of America rather than to Europe.
What Fiji at present requires for the development
of her resources is a steady stream of cheap and
efficient labor, capital, and men skilled in tropical
agriculture ; —in the growth of the sugar cane, in the
making of sugar, in growing coffee and tea, &c., and
in the preparation of these for the market.
In what may be termed silvan wealth, Fiji is
also rich. But the quantity of useful timber is not so
abundant as it would at first appear to the inexperi


enced to be. However, there is a sufficient quantity
of home grown timber to meet the home demand for
years to come were the importation of timber to cease.
The Government will need to see that the forests of
the country are not plundered. Pass useful laws for
the protection of trees and forest reserves, in order to
preserve a sufficient supply of timber for future gene-
rations :—to work these forest reserves for the benefit
of the community:—to prevent an indiscriminate des-
truction of the forests throughout the length anp
breadth of the land, so that the country may not be
parched by droughts one season, and desolated by
floods the next:—to preserve the present healthiness
and salubriousness of climate which Fiji is famed for •
' to plant in order to restore to parts (north-western
portion of Viti Levu, Macuata, and in Yanua Levu,)
the climatic causes from a want of which they griev-
ously suffer. Government must do this for the welfare
of the country and the community. The neglect of
this in other colonies, until too late, is a warning to
it to set the house in order without delay, and "be-
fore all the land about the sources of the rivers
are alienated or denuded of timber. A Forest Depart-
ment would be self supporting, by the sale of mature
and dying timber, &c., from the land which it was
necessary to keep trees upon; and the profits from which
should be applied to planting where plantations were
needed. This matter is by far too important to the
community to be left in the hands of private indi-
viduals.- Not that the Government will plant and
preserve timber to compete and exclude private enter-
prise from a market for its produce. But it is neces-
sary, for climatic reasons, that the Government should
plant and preserve trees, and when these reach the
mature stage of their growth, to see that they are not
allowed to waste and rot. On the other hand it is the
interest of the community to see that the mature pro-
ducts of the Government reserves are properly utilized
and not wasted, and the Forest Department self sun-
porting. F
. Foremost in point of value among the silvan
uches of hip is sandal wood,now, owing to indiscrimi-
nate cutting—in a word, destruction—very scarce. So
much so that what remains will only serve as a nucleus
li om which seeds can be obtained for the extension of
this much prized forest product. Among timber trees


of the colony the foremost is Vesi (Afzelia bijuga)
lSi a useful and durable timber: which wd
vie with any other te strength « "£ phy Ln
™luable, not only on account of ite use-
ful timber but also for the gum resin which exudes
from the bark when the tree is wounded and the ol
that can be extracted from its seed. Good timber, t
produce of this tree, is also very scarce. .
Then in order there are Damanu, an
rCalophyllum spectabile, and another species o
iamegeZ ; and Seranthes myriadena, and another
species^of the genus) all of which yield excellent d
a^6 Dakua' Damm^^tiensis,which, besides yieldii^
a good »d useful timber better than = kindsrf
pine and as easily worked, g>» ‘
tocin not inferior to kaune gum. tne timoe _
Skua salusalu, Kau sola. Kail tabua, Lewinmmi, Kau-
sia (all different species of Podocarpus) produce, is
inferior to that of the best pine, and equally useful.
This short list might be easily added to were it need-
of high commercial value and utUity, wh
in greater adundance than indigenous p
g Besides timber-yielding trees of more or
value peculiar to the country Fiji also possesse
several frees which yield Caoutchouc of good quality
and value. These although by no means smce
at nresent, too far apart for profitably nolle ®.
S? 32K Hemp


(Musa textilis). The cultivated bananas of the
country yield a fibre of nearly equal value. Mauritius
Hemp, (Furcroya gigantea), and Jute (Corchonsis
olitorius and C. capsularis).
Materials for making paper are to be found in
the Masi Bronssonettia papyrifera, Bamboos, &c.
The ordinary vegetables and salads are very
scarce in Fiji. This is owing to the indifference of
settlers, and not altogether to the climate. In
Mauritius, which enjoys a climate similar to that of
Fiji, the market is well supplied with all sorts of
vegetables, and the quality and cheapness would
suprise the dealers of Convent Garden. That they
will grow equally well in Fiji there cannot be a doubt.
But they must be sown or planted at the beginning
of the cool season, which will allow them to grow
when the weather is more pleasant than that of an
English summer. Water, during dry weather, they
must, have in abundance, otherwise the vegetables will
be neither good nor succulent.
JOHN HORNE,
Director Gardens and Forests,
Mauritius.
G. L. Griffiths, Printer, l.evuka, Fiji.






