



Sewing Machine & Musical Instrument Depot,
162 QUEEN STREET (opposite Q. National Bank), BRISBANE.
AGENTS FOR THE
Light Running New Home, New National, and all the Best Makes
ot Sewing Machines on our EASY TIME PAYMENTS. 2s Gd. per week.
Liberal Discount for Cash. See Illustrated Price Lists, Posted Free.
Genuine Needles, Shuttles, Oil and Fittings for all well-known Sewing Machines.
Stamps Accepted. Repairs a speciality.
MANGLES & WRINGERS COMBINED, PERAMBULATORS,
CLOCKS, &c., on easy terms.
Your Sight Tested Free : Watch & Protect your Eyes
BY USING OUR
Celebrated Spectacles and Eye Glasses,
From Is., cases free. Real Pebble Spectacles, from -Is. Crystals, from 2r. 6d.
Sun Glasses. Goggles, Eye Protectors, &c., from Is., cases free.
We have always a large and varied Stock to suit all Sights at all Prices.
Opera, Field, and Marine Glasses, Telescopes, &c., sent by Parcels Post.
JT/ID/IJiIK WBieEFg COT PAPER PAWERNg.
Send for Weigel’s New Catalogue of Fashions, 3d. each, by post 4d. Great Re-
duction in price of Weigel’s Monthly Journal of Fashions, Single Copy, 4d., by
post, 5d ; Yearly Subscription, 3s. 6d.; Half-yearly, Is. 9d.; posted free. All the
Patterns in Stock in different Styles and Sizes, from 3d. to 2s. each. Stamps
accepted.
Musical Instruments at prices to suit the times.
CHEAPER * THAN * EVER.
Accordions, from 6s. 6d. to 955.
Concertinas (Anglo-German), from 4s. 6d. to 555.
Lachnaels, London, (Anglo-German), 20 keys, 375. 6d. to 140 s.
Lachnaels, ditto (English), 48 keys, 90s. to £lO 10s.
Violins, from Bs. 6d. to £2O ; Violin Bows, from Is. 6d.
Auto Harps, 3 bars, 17s. 6d., 255., 30s.
Do. do. 4,6, 9, and 12 bars, 355. to 120 s.
Mouth Organs, various keys, from 6d. to 21s.
Flutes, Piccolos, Flageolets, Clarionets, Bvnjos. Guitars, Mandolins,
Zithers, Occarinas, Klutinas, and Musical Instruments of every
description. (All the above sent by Parcels Post.)
Best quality Strings and Fittings of every description for Musical
Instruments ; all kinds of Repairs done.
Latest Song Books, Music Books ; Tutors for Various Instruments,
Nigger Dramas, Dialogues, Jokes, Wigs, Bones, &c.


LETTERS
O N
SOCIALISM,
B Y
*D. 4H[JD ali> y ir ipie,
PRINTED AT THE SUN OFFICE, STANLEY STREET.
MDCCCICI V.


-HI P B E F A C E . *♦
The following series of letters on Socialism were
contributed by Mr. D. H. Dalrymple, M.L.A. for the
Mackay constituency, during a controversy on the
subject which took place in the columns of the Brisbane
Courier during the months of April, May and June,
1894. It has been generally conceded that the ability
displayed by the writer, and the well considered and
effective arguments brought forward by him thoroughly
disposed of his Socialistic opponents. These letters have
been published at the request of many who are deeply
interested in the subject, and who believe that their
circulation in pamphlet form will prove interesting,
instructive, and of considerable benefit to the reading
and thinking public.
The Publisher.


: m\ : kmialtsm
BY D. H. DALRYMPLE , M.L.A.
Letter I.
CHARLES SEYMOUR writing to the Courier from the Worker
/■• office, April 20, 1804, says : “In the future we shall co-operate
more with each other, and seek a closer partnership with nature,” and
“above all we must beware of the private enterprise which is only thinly
disguised public plunder,” Neither of these passages in my judgment has
any necessary application to Socialism, which I take to mean the nationa-
lisation of all sources of wealth, and of all means of producing and exchang -
ing wealth, as defined by the General Council of the Australian Labour
Federation of which Mr, Seymour was a member in the year 1890. Co-
operation in many forms has always existed in human communities. It
' -exists independent of forms of government, in aboriginal tribes, in auto-
cratic Russia, and in chaotic New Australia, differing certainly in degree
and method, but always present; but social action or co-operation is one
thing and Socialism another, and while the Vatican commends the one, it
condemns the other, and thus manifests the gap which separates them.
“ That we must beware of the private enterprise which is only thinly
disguised public plunder ” is true enough, and may be usefully applied to
racing transactions, and possibly to share promoting. But how does this
serve to bolster up the doctrine of appropriating private property in the
means of production and exchange, and confiscating the savings of all
those who have invested in stock, land or houses ? It proves the reverse
if it proves anything, for if it behoves us to beware of private enterprise
which results in public plunder, it behoves us equally to beware of that
which, like Socialism, involves the plunder of the public in their individual
capacity.


Letter 2.
AS Mr. Charles Seymour has publicly pronounced the opinion that we-
are to be saved by Socialism, which will or may come in our time, I
“ believing none of these things ” am not unwilling to discuss the matter.
To do so with profit certain preliminaries musi be complied with.
There must be a definite issue to begin with, and there must also be a
common understanding between the parties concerned as to the meaning of
the terms employed. The word Socialism has more than one meaning, and
is used in several senses, and as Mr. Seymour takes upon himself
to figure as a defender of the doctrine, it is reasonable to ask for a
definition and to enquire whether he will state explicitly the aims and
methods he defends. The information is badly required, for few professing
Socialists are prepared to state what they intend to do when they have to
set about the reconstruction of society, while much of the socialistic litera-
ture current is uqually uncommunicative. When Mr. Seymour, as a
member of the Labour Council, sanctioned the erection of a Trades Hall,,
we may feel assured that a plan was drafted before the erection of the
building commenced. It is equally necessary to execute and publish a plan
for the reconstruction of society before its demolition is set about. Govern-
ment, whoever may discharge its functions, depends on actions, and can-
not be carried on by a series of indefinite phrases which may mean anything
or nothing. If Socialism is coming in our time, or even if the subject is to
be debated, the time is opportune to apprise the community what are the
practical beliefs on which Socialists are agreed.
As Mr, Seymour has been silent on the subject, it is impossible for me
to be positive what form of Socialism he approves of ; but from what I can
gather from the utterances of the Australian Labour Federation and its
votaries, I should conclude that he belonged to the school termed indiffer-
ently Democratic Collectivists, or Communists, who desire to organise all
the industries of the country under Government, and to make every citizen
into a State official. In 1890 the executive of the Australian Labour
Federation published a platforjn, which has not been disavowed since to
my knowledge, which was a virtual reproduction of Karl Marx’s social
theories. These require the collective ownership of capital, the public
organisation of labour, and the distribution of national income amongst all
citizens, and as Mr, Lane, late editor of the official organ of the Labour
party, not only advocated those doctrines in the Worker , but is at present
actively engaged in carrying them into practice in Paraguay, it is reason-
able to conclude, in the absence of specific information to the contrary, that
scientific or Communistic Socialism is the kind of Socialism which will
reign when the Socialists have “ captured the Legislature.” A system in
which the State would control demand, production, exchange, income, and
domestic economy, and which would be incompatible with exchange,
markets, money, and private enterprise, would be absolutely unworkable,
and were it otherwise would make a State slave of every citizen, and entail
the loss of man’s chief blessing, Liberty. On Communism, Proudhon,
who belonged to the Anarchical branch of the Socialist family, had this to
say : “ This unhappy loan from the jog-trot course of the system of private
property is the disgust felt for work, the weariness of life, the suppression


-of thought, the death of the Ego, the introduction of the nothing. Com-
munism is tantamount to Nihilism, to immobility, to night, to eternal
silence.”
Letter 3.
ACCORDING to the dictum of Sir Henry Mayne—see “ Mayne on
Popular Government”—a great part of the circulating medium in
the sphere of party politics consists of base currency, and when this is the
case, whoever applies tests to such spurious manufacture performs a high
service to the community. Be this as it may, it is certain that many of
the popular cries and catch words to which a loose acquiescence is given
are neither more nor less than impostor phrases, that is to say, they have
neither a clear meaning to the man who utters nor the men who hear, and
are taken in widely different senses. True Socialism is such a cry, and I
venture to assert that neither the public nor the Labour leaders who are
responsible for it could come to any common agreement as to its
interpretation. It is about time, I think, that some definite information
was forthcoming, and as those whose plain duty it is to speak prefer to
remain obdurately silent, I reluctantly take upon my own shoulders a duty
which more fitly devolves upon theirs.
The question to determine is simple, What is true Socialism ? and it
may be readily tried in the ordinary manner. The public will discharge the
functions of judge and jury and doubtless do justice, while I summon the
witnesses into court, and the first I call is Hubert Bland, a thoroughly com-
petent expert, and the author of the last of the series of the “ Fabian
Essays on Socialism.” He deposes—see page 212—as follows :—“ It is
not so much to the thing that the State does, as to the end for which it
does it, that we must look before we can decide whether it is a Socialist
State or not. Socialism is the common holding of the means of produc-
tion and exchange, and the holding them for the equal benefit of all,” i.e .,
in such a way that the man who produces most shall have as little as
possible more than the man who produces least, and on another page, no
one is a true Socialist “ who hesitates to clamour his loudest against any
proposal whose adoption would prolong the life of private capital for a
single hour.”
My next witness is Dr, Schaffie, author of the “ Quintessence of
Socialism,” a work which divides with Karl Marx, Gronlund, and others
the honour of a place in the book exchange of the Worker. He deposes
(see pages 20 and 27) :—The Alpha and Omega of Socialism is the trans-
formation of private and competing capitals into a united collective capital.
When instead of the system of private and competing capitals we have a
collective ownership of capital, then and not till then we shall have no
capitalists and no wage-earners.” In another work the same witness says :
—“ The essence of social democracy is not in some degree of collective or
State industry but in an exclusive and universal system of collective pro-
duction entirely superseding the capitalist system, and therefore the wage
system.” Again : “ The kernel of the genuine Socialism now exciting the
world is the levelling down of the whole face of society after the pattern of


a universal Collectivism established in the name of liberty and equality,
especially the latter, and in the supposed interest of the self-styled
proletariat.”
I have other witnesses, but there is no need to call them. I take it
that the case is sufficiently proven, and that the true Socialism of the
Labour Party is the Communism of the Australian! Labour Federation’s
manifesto, which again is the Socialism of the German Socialists, and of
Mr. Lane, of Paraguay. Under a Socialistic regime the workman would
not own his tools of trade, the carter would have no horse and dray, the
seamstress would be deprived of her sewing machine, and the artisan would
lose his house and ground, or perhaps his money in the Savings Bank, for
all these are instruments of production or exchange, while my constituents,
who are to a large extent farmers and freeholders, would lose the ownership
of what they possess, and be unable to leave it to their children after them.
Ali this is a part of true Socialism. Under such a system industry would
languish and production diminish, for no man can be so senseless as to
suppose that men would continue to produce income when they \tnew the
State had entered into an organised conspiracy to rob them of it. To
imagine that men would work as they do at present when the stimulus of
private and family interest was removed is to expect that a steam-engine
would work without steam. The opinion expressed by Leo XIII., in the
encyclical he gave to the world two years since, “ that when a man engages
in remunerative labour, the very reason and motive for his work is to
obtain property, and hold it as his own private possession,” is one which
will commend itself to sensible and. sober-minded men of all creeds.
Not only do the true Socialists propose to deprive us of what little
property we possess, in favour of “ the all-absorbing State ; ” but to form
the community into an industrial army, in which every man would have to
do what his officers bid. Some would lose their property. All would lose
their liberty. The hand of time would be put back a thousand years.
Society would be represented by a pyramid of officials, resting on a
base of serfs, whose lives were ordered for them by their masters, and
no gain could possibly accrue to any one save to the great Panjendrum
on top.
Letter 4
ON looking over the contents of Mr. Wallace Nelson’s letter, I perceive
it may be briefly summed up as consisting in the first place of two little
pieces of personality, of which I shall say no more.
In the next place T am charged with “ some fallacies,” proof being
tendered in one case only. Then I observe a definition of Socialism attri-
buted to Mr. Sydney Webb, no reference, by the way, being vouchsafed ;
afterwards an assurance that Socialism, and presumably all Socialists, are
as innocent and bland as a sucking lamb, a statement hardly borne out by
facts when we recollect the little incidents in connection with the Paris
Commune and the explosion by Socialists “ pure and simple ” of dynamite
bombs at Chicago, and finally a delightful sentence to the effect “ that the
real Socialist is a person who seeks by reform not by revolution, by the


force of reason not by the force of gunpowder, to hasten that ten-
dency which, with ever-increasing momentum, makes for the tnumph of
righteousness and truth.” Like the sound of the blessed word Mesopo-
tamia I should think that this rolling passage has proved a source of
supreme consolation to all those susceptible and high-toned souls who soar
sufficiently high into the blue empyrean, hor myself, I fail to „rasp its
import, and confessing with all humility that it has proved too much for
me P I turn to the dry field of fallacies with a feeling of profound relief.
In regard to alleged errors. Fallacy No. 1. The facts are these :
Mr Seymour, of the Trades Hall, came forward to announce himself as a
defender of Socialistic doctrine. I asked him to explain the nature of the
Socialism he volunteered to champion. Shorn of verbiage his reply was
that Socialism was coming. This, 1 say, was no definition of he
principles of Socialism. It was no reply to my question To utter a
prophecy is one thing, to explain the nature of a phrase or doctrine
lam unable to detect anything wrong in this statement fallacy No. -
i« said co be involved in my denial—not directly, for I only asked a ques-
tion, but I will admit, by implication, and I explicitly repeat the denial
that the holding of land from persons, or from the state or the fixing of
rents between landlord and tenant by a tribunal appointed by the &tat:e, has
anything necessarily to do with Socialism. As an illustration of that tratb.
I again refer Mr. Nelson to Hindostan as a case in point, Whether 1
am right or wrong in expressing such an opinion depends entirety on the
definition which is to be accepted of the meaning of the words true
Socialism. If Schaffle and Bland and the Australian Labour * ederation
and mvself are right, and I believe we are, then the opinion I have given
on the'relation between Socialism and Landlordism is right too. 1 may
say, however, that in any case no one who had the shghtest claim to
considered a reasoner would call a plain and simple denial a fallacy, for the
logical application of the word fallacy is strictly restricted to P roce9 . 9 « s °*
unsoundreasoning, and is entirely misapplied when used to describe an
erroneous belief. So much for the fallacy question. , .
That it is indispensible for the advocates of Socialism to clear up their
own opinions and ascertain what the system is before they l “
adherence to it, and that, it is clearly advisable to apply some test to our
verbal currency, and to our popular shibboleths, has been abundantly shown
byMr. C Wallace Nelson himself, for when he and-Mr Sydney Webb mean
one thing when speaking of Socialism, Schaffle and Karl Marx and e
Australian Labour Federation and myself mean another We mean the
destruction of “ all”—kindly mark the word, Mr. Nelson—ah private
ownership of the means of production, distribution, and exchange,
farm, the factory, and the barndoor fowl would alike belong to the bta .
A laying hen would be distinctly a State fowl, and probably be branded
with a broad arrow as belonging to the people. Possibly Ml - Wa
Nelson may say this is ridiculous. If it be, so much the worse for those
who advocate the system. If a hen as a producer be not nationalised, why
should a calf or a lamb be nationalised ? and if the Australian La
Federation, with Mr. Wallace Nelson and Gronlnnd and Karl Marx and
Bellamy, hesitate at lambs and calves, then, sir, I denounce them as slaves
to the capitalist, and traitors to the sublime principles which they have
been engaged, and very busily engaged, in promulgating for some years
past. Our greatest industry is tbe pastoral. Our chief wealth consists of


flocks and herds ; labour we know makes them. As Mr. Webb and Mr.
Nelson devoutly believe, labour creates everything. It has created the egg,
the skipping lamb, and the too often obstreperous calf, and from these the
greater portion of our public revenue is derived, in the form of course of
cattle and sheep. All the difference between grown cattle and calves,
between lambs and sheep, between the egg and producing fowl, is brought
about by natural agencies—of which time is the most important. Time
must be nationalised as a producing agent, for is it not (see Labour mani-
festo of the Australian Labour Federation, 1890) a fundamental plank in
their platform that all sources of wealth and all means of producing and
distributing wealth are to be nationalised.
Letter 5.
TO resume the consideration of Mr. Wallace Nelson’s letter, and coming
to the definition of Socialism on the authority of Mr. Sydney Webb,
LL.B, This unfortunately is not to the point, for if the debate is to have
any practical issue we want something more than the opinions of Mr,
Webb : we want the opinons of those who propose to bring Socialism
into practice when they have captured the Legislature. All that this
comes to is that when Mr. Webb speaks of Socialism we can understand
what he means. But what the public want to know is what Mr. Reid
means when he talks of true Socialism ? What does Mr. Seymour mean ?
What do the hierarchs of the Trades Hall mean ? What do the Labour
party at large mean when they claim—Mr, Hoolan alone being excepted—
to be Socialists ? When challenged to explain their position, as M. Sey-
mour has been challenged, they decline to do so, either from want of
knowledge or inclination, and the only reasonable conclusion to be drawn
is that they have been enmeshed in the exuberance of their own verbosity,
and have habitually used phrases in virtue of which they have succeeded,
not only in gulling the public, but in confounding themselves.
I firmly believe that neither the Labour party, who prate so glibly of
Socialism, nor the officials of the Australian Labour Federation, who have
taken the true Socialism of Karl Marx for their political platform, have
aught but the dimmest conception of what they really mean and still less
of that which they propose to do. My object being practical, I should like
to know whether Mr. Wallace Nelson has accepted a brief on behalf of the
Labour party and is generally empowered to speak for them. Is he speak-
ing for himself, or as their attorney ? If for himself, his views are, doubt-
less, interesting, but in my opinion not of sufficient importance to justify
me in taking up the space of an important journal in a merely academical
discussion. The opinions of the Labour party are of importance, for they
are held by a large body of electors, and it is a matter of practical
consequence to have set forth plainly and unmistakably whether the party
who threaten to bring about Socialism in our day are consistent in their
purpose to do away with all private capital, for in spite of the moderation
which they assumed for party purposes at recent elections, it is to this and
nothing less that they have definitely committed themselves. The
Socialism they propose to put into practical operation, if any confidence


is to be placed in their own declarations, is not a vague system, not
a mere aspiration, but the worked out Socialism of Karl Marx and
Bellamy, that which necessitates the supression and confiscation of
all private capital—for nationalisation is a mere euphemism to cover
confiscation, —and the sooner all concerned know it the better. The
one essential and fundamental tenet of true Socialism lies in the abolition
of all private capital, and those doctrines alone are truly Socialistic which
Lave this as their immediate or ultimate end. The mere regulation of
individual activity in the interests of the State which has taken place from
time immemorial is a merely social action, and is not Socialistic action.
The distinction Mr. Wallace Nelson has yet to draw. The Romans con-
structed roads and built amphitheatres for public purposes. They had a
highly organised social system, but that did not make them Socialists.
And now to deal with Mr. Webb’s definition, if indeed it can be called
one. I take the liberty of doubting, being not altogether ignorant of Mr.
Webb’s works, whether that writer ever intended the passage as quoted for
a formal definition of true Socialism. In any case it can only be called a
•definition by courtesy, for it lacks the essential qualities of one —see any
•dictionary. It does not bound off or limit, and it does not determine with
precision the meaning of the writer. However, let us examine and try to
find below the surface the meaning which a good definition would explicitly
discover on the surface. Mr. Webb asserts, to begin with, that the whole
product of labour belongs to labour, and that idle owners should not con-
sume or exact a toll from their fellow citizens. Whether this is true or
not depends very much on the significance given to the word labour. Mr.
Webb expressly includes that of hand and brain, but he does not include
that of the past as well as that of the present, and both are equally indis-
pensable to modern production. If he had included the past, as he should
have in a correct analysis, then we should have been brought round to the
old time-honoured formula—wealth is the result of labour, capital, and
natural agency. Then again, it is necessary to know what is meant by
idle owners. If capital is indispensable to the production of wealth, as
indeed it is, then he by whom it is supplied is only in one sense an idle
owner. In one sense the owner of a horse and dray who lends his dray
for hire to cart goods from the wharf is an idle owner ; in another he is
not, for he actively or passively contributes to distribution. The definition
given, then, I claim to be materially false ; but it serves to show on what
confusion of thought true Socialism is based, and it shows also that Mr.
Webb’s Socialism is of the quality of the Trades Hall and of Karl Marx,
for he excludes capital as a factor in wealth production, and speaks of tolls
on production—meaning of course hire, whether it be that of land, chattels,
or money—as bad now, although useful perhaps in earlier times. As the
only way to do away with rent and interest, the hire of land and money
respectively, is to have collective capital, it becomes apparent that Mr.
Sydney Webb, L.L.8., is in reality a Socialist of the Karl Marx type,
that is to say I recognise in him the fundamental characteristics of true
Socialism. Mr. Mallock, who, being a thinker, does not allow himself to
be the victim of phrases, carefully distinguishes between the meaning of
three different phases of Socialistic opinions, and maintains (see Fabian
Economics, Fortnightly Review , March last, page 487) that if the word
Socialism has any distinctive meaning, and if Socialists in any way are a
distinct and a peculiar party, what Socialism means is Fundamental


Socialism, that is to say it involves necessarily the destruction or abolition
of all private capital. As then the Labour party declare themselves
Socialists, and elect to fight under the banner of Karl Marx, the Worker y
and the Trades Hall, this is the policy they are committed to and which
they may be reasonably called upon to defend, for it is only in this sense
that Socialists are a distinct and peculiar party.
Letter 6.
MR. Wallace Nelson supplies an admirable illustration of the ease with
which a clever writer can fill a column of a daily paper, and yet
avoid replying to questions he finds inconvenient.
According to Cicero, “every rational discussion should start with &
definition, so that the object of the discussion may be understood,” and
before we can discuss Socialism or any other “ ism rationally, that is to
say with profit, it is indispensable that the disputants, whoever they may
be, should be able to come to a common understanding. This is precisely
what Charles Seymour, on behalf of the Labour party, will not do, and
what Mr. Nelson, I presume acting, too, on behalf of the Labour party,
will not do either, for the moment he is asked for a definition he either
gives one which is quite inadequate, as in his first communication, or he-
rushes off at a tangent, as he did in his second, and tranquilly drops the
main issue, which is, let me again remind Mr. Wallace Nelson, not so
much what he thinks himself, as what is the meaning of the words
Socialism, when used by the official leaders of the Labour party -by men
for instance like Mr. Charles Seymour, and Mr. M. Reid ; or, in other
words, what facts and consequences are involved to our daily life when this
system, as advocated by politicians, has passed into the law of the land.
This is the question on which I want light, and with a view to gaining
information I have perused many works—those by Karl Marx and Schaffle
especially—as having the seal and endorsement of the Worker , the official
organ of Labour. 1 have besides consulted the manifesto of the executive
of the Australian Labour Federation, and I have been forced to the con-
clusion that the Labour party will be false to all the principles it has put
forward if it does not proceed to demolish existing society as soon as it
possesses the power.
I have summoned witnesses to depose to what they know of true-
Socialism, and what has Mr. Wallace Nelson said in reply ? He has not
impugned the evidence of my witnesses, nor denied their competency. It
seems to me that judgment really must go by default. All that my wit-
nesses have alleged is justified, for even Mr. V\ allace Nelson s witness, SO'
far as his testimony is to be got at, supports the evidence given. Still, as-
a matter of propriety, I must protest against a few sentences from an
unspecified work by Mr. Sydney Webb being tendered as a definition..
How do I know that Sydney Webb ever wrote it? Certainly I doubt
whether he ever thought of calling it a definition. At any rate, if he did,,
the matter is susceptible of proof, and I ask for proof.
Whatever, however, the definition is worth, I dealt with it in my last-
In consequence of its obscurity, I denied that it could rightfully be called.


a definition, and I showed that as an explanation of wealth production, it
was either false as omitting the factor of past or stored labour, or if it did',
include past labour, then it was not new, but simply a restatement of the
old formula that wealth is the result of labour, capital, and natural agency.
I also said that if Mr. Webb held that rent and hire of all kinds was bad,,
he was in favour of doing away with all private capital. But the definition,
was so clumsy that it is very doubtful what Sydney Webb did mean, and
it is also not clear what bearing the passage has on Socialism. But I dealt
with it, and the definition being the vital part of Mr, Wallace Nelson’s ■
letter, my comment called for some reply. Mr. Wallace Nelson knows the
necessity of guarding against the pitfalls of language as well as Ido ; he
knows the necessity of definition ; he knows that a doctrine which the
people are called on to accept should be clearly stated. He knows that in
the mouth of a philanthropic theorist Socialism may be one thing, and in
the heart of a Chicago demagogue another. In one case the system may
stand for the extension of legitimate State activity, in another it may stand
for bomb throwing and anarchy, for anarchy is a true offshoot ofSocialism,.
of which it is, indeed, “ the practically absurd but theoretically logical out-
come ; for the postulate of entire freedom and entire equality necessarily
involves the abolition of all governing authority,”
This, however, is a disgression, and I will not disgress. In the
mouth of officials of the Trades Hall, and this is to the point, Socialism
must mean democrative collectivism, and the abolition of all private capital.
Is this the system which Mr.’Nelson approves of and desires to
If so, well and good ; it is what I understand by State Socialism. It is*
true that of late the meaning of true Socialism is not very vociferously
proclaimed by the Labour party. The phrase itself, with all its ambiguity,,
is useful. It affords room to turn round in, and to be “ all things to all
men.” The inner circle of the Labour party take it in one way, the*
uninitiated in another. To the man who has anything to lose, whether he-
be workman or employer, it represents probably merely sympathy for some
person or persons or a feeling of opposition to the party in power—he does-
not think of confiscation ; while to the loafer or to the man whose most
active feeling is envy of others, it presents itself as a delightful picture of
universal confiscation, and of a divide up of the property of the thrifty or-
fortunate.
Surely in the face of such conflicting opinions entertained on the-
nature of true Socialism, this gentleman out of the fullness of his know-
ledge will be willing to assist me, bad reasoner though I may be, to a
better comprehension of the political problems of the day, and on my part
I can assure him that, after he has told me whether he holds a brief from
the Labour party, after he has supplied the definition of true Socialism,
after he has supplied a reference to Sydney Webb’s quotation, after he has-
assured me of his bona /ides, he will find me ready enough to discuss the
other subjects to which attention has been invited—namely. Socialism at
Chicago, and Individualism as compared with Socialism, and I shall be-
particularly happy to assist him in determining the exact position in the-
field of industrial order occupied by the domestic hen which, as he knows,.
Labour created.
I must, however, say en passant, that just as Mr. Charles Seymour
thought that he could not beau Idealist, holding certain views on govern-
ment, so Mr. Wallace Nelson, from whom better things might have beem


-expected, believes that a man cannot be a Socialist because he is a Com-
munist, and a Communist is one who, according to Mr. Nelson, believes in
a democratic republic and in the corporate independence of Paris. Does
that prevent him holding Socialist views on social economics, or believing
in the dogmas of the Trades Hall ? Not in the least. Two contradictories,
it is true, by the laws of logic cannot be ; but seeing that all classification is
the result of abstraction, of seizing on likenesses, or unlikenesses, I have yet
to learn that no classification can overlap. Mr, Wallace Nelson will pardon
me for saying that his method of reasoning, so far as I can judge by observing
his methods, remind me of the story of the lady who, when reproached for
the marriage she had made, cried, “ I have often said I never would marry
a parson, or a Scotchman, or a Presbyterian, but I never said I would not
marry a Scotch Presbyterian parson,” Quibbles notwithstanding, I still
ask Mr. Wallace Nelson or any one else who is qualified to give an
authoritative reply—What do Mr. Seymour and the Labour party mean in
particular when they orate on true Socialism ? so that the definition being
given “the rational discussion may start.”
Letter 7.
1 consider it my duty to entreat Mr. Wallace Nelson to reconsider, in
justice both to himself and the barndoor fowl, some of the opinions he
has permitted himself to publicly express. He has lamented in a finely
ironical manner “that a system reared by the intellectual labour of such
giants as Marx and Lassalle should be levelled to the dust by a barndoor
fowl ; ” and by way of pointing his satire he has promised “to leave to
me, when the leading industrial activities have been nationalised by the
Socialists, the fee-simple and secure possession of the barndoor fowl afore-
said, as some sort of compensation for depriving me of an illusion as to
the meaning of the word Communist,” which illusion I can assure him
never existed outside the region of his own luxuriant fancy.
And now I have to confess, while fully admitting Mr. Wallace
Nelson’s considerable ability and many acquirements, that I. am somewhat
disappointed with him. He has treated the domestic fowl in the region of
labour production as an insignificant item. It ill becomes a philosopher
to despise small things, and although a fowl in the singular by the side of
Mr. Wallace Nelson’s Socialist giants may seem small to a thoughtless
observer, vet when the collective fowl, personified by Mr. Wallace Nelson s
gift, is considered and appraised at its true value as an element in the
satisfaction of the wants of man, then 1 am sure the Socialist giants will
dwindle into pigmies, while the fowl will expand until it becomes a perfect
Brobdingnagian.
Mr. Wallace Nelson predicts a period when all the leading industries
will be nationalised, and before his mind probably there passes a panorama
in which wheat, wool, iron, silver, and other conspicuous staples are visible,
and amongst which his inattentive eye detects no barndoor fowl. What
the potent wand of the fairy did for Cinderella when she was raised from
the scullery to the throne let the eye of science, lighted by the torch of
knowledge, do for the lowly fowl. I ask Mr. Wallace Aelson, if he will,
7 to kindly turn to the statistics of the United States of America, and


con salt Edward Atkinson’s work on the industrial prosperity of the nation..
published in 1890, and in that classic he will find (see page 37) the follow-
ing passage, which I recommend to his attention :—“ The value of our
hens’ eggs is 91,250,000 dols. a year, or twice the value of our silver
bullion, twenty-five per cent more than the value of our wool crop, and
greater than the entire product of our iron furnaces, even if we increased
the product of pig iron this year to 5,000,000 tons, representing a value
at 17dols. per ton at the furnace of 85,000,000 dols,” I will forbear
quoting further, for the figures as they stand are sufficiently startling,
showing as they do without any reference to the value of the poultry con-
cerned, that the value of the mere eggs laid by the bens of the United
States exceeds the value of commodities produced by the united efforts of
the whole population of this colony, as expressed in exports, aided by land
and probably capital to the extent of £100,000,000. In the face of this
simple fact, how can anyone be expected to accept without hesitation as a
self-evident truth one of the propositions which lies at the root of Socialism, .
that all wealth is produced by human labour alone, excluding all other
factors and causes. The assertion stands badly in need of
demonstration. Having afforded Mr. Wallace Nelson some information
which I hope may be found useful, the only favour I ask in return is this
—to remember these statistics, and under the circumstances to take his hat
off to the first domestic hen he comes across in his travels, and humbly
apologise to her for his disparaging and unjustifiable remarks. Just as
Mr. Wallace Nelson has scorned the barndoor fowl as a wealth producer,
so has he minimised the difficulties of Socialism. Speculative theorists
have a habit of looking with disdain on small matters, which practical men
find to be of supreme importance. It is mainly of manifold trifles that
our individual and social life is built up, and if State Socialism attempted
to take under its control the industries of the country, the small details
incidental in securing a fair division between one man and another, and
one woman and another, and one family and another would cause such
dissatisfaction as to bring about a revolution in a week. Such at any rate
is my opinion, and in order to illustrate the effect that the petty super-
vision of petty details has upon human nature as we find it out of dream
land, I supply the following extract from the columns of the Sydney
Morning Herald , dated 30th March, 1894, from a letter written by a
settler of the Pitt Town Labour Settlement :—“The settlement is under-
going a crisis. We have been up here some of us upwards of seven
months. During the month of August the first committee of advice was
appointed by the board of control. With two exceptions the committee is
composed of Socialists, who at once proceeded to ram their opinions down
the throats of the rest of the settlers. The Socialistic committee industri-
ously propagated the idea that ail fowls, poultry, &c., should become
common property, the committee themselves having none to throw in ; that
all swarms of bees should be held in common, and that no settler should be
allowed to keep more than twelve head of poultry on his allotment. It is
right to state,” says the writer, “ that few of the settler Socialists have any
fowls at all.” The same settler, says the Sydney Morning Herald , dated
sth April, reported that great disorganisation had existed in the com-
munity, but that an election had been held and five settlers elected to form
a new committee who were one and all animated by an eighty-gun antipathy
to anything connected with Socialism.


From the foregoing it is apparent that no thoughtful observer would
- either despise the domestic fowl as a wealth producer or reject the whole-
some lessons which are to be derived from the prosaic facts of daily life,
; and which go to show how entirely opposed the doctrines of true Socialism
are to the realities of things and to the instincts of mankind. The study
of the working of a small community is of infinitely more value as a guide
•to conduct than all the conclusions that can be arrived at by intellectual
giants, who commence their systems by postulating a few highly doubtful
propositions as infallible truths.
And now for my reasons for withdrawing from this controversy.
Firstly, I have an appointment with Mr. Browne, M.L.A., to settle the
question as to whether the Labour party is a Socialist party or not.
Secondly, Mr. Wallace Nelson, who has been bravely championing the
cause of Socialism, has been, alas for man’s ingratitude, solemnly disowned
by the Worker. Lastly, if Mr. Wallace Nelson really desires to find an
. accurate representation of my opinions and to have an ample refutation of
his own on the subject, I cannot do better than refer him to a lecture
delivered by an eloquent gentleman at the Gaiety Theatre, Brisbane, on the
7th June, 1891, and reported in the Courier on the 10th. The lecturer
began as a lecturer should begin, with a definition. “ Socialism, he said,
was a system which sought to institute a state of things under which the
State would possess all capital, carry on all industry, and remunerate all
workers,” and he reprobated it as being unjust, degrading, and destructive
of individual liberty. I entirely agreed with the gentleman who delivered
that lecture, and deeming it of sufficient value, I placed a cutting of the
Press report in my note-book ; from which Mr. Wallace Nelson will see
that I have been for some time familiar with the golden aphorism he has
presented me with—namely, “ The love of knowledge is the beginning of
wisdom,” that I highly prize it, and endeavour to turn it to practical
account.
Letter 8
IN a previous letter I committed myself to the statement “ that it was
impossible to discuss any subject with profit unless a definite issue had
been stated and a common understanding arrived at between the parties
concerned with regard to the meaning of terras.” Although this proposi-
tion appears unassailable, yet up to the time of the appearance of Mr.
Charles Seymour’s letter of the 4th May, my antagonists have refused to
come to close quarters, and, for all the good that has accrued, I might as
well have been employed in hunting a Snark. Now, however, I have got
what purports to be a definition of Socialism, although I think it is a very
lame one, and may, indeed, be fairly styled, not a Snark but a Boojum. I
have got besides what I heartily welcome, a sufficient explanation of what
the principles, methods, and aims of the Australian Labour Federation are
to provide a sufficiently definite issue on which to base a “ rational discus-
sion,” and I have got it upon the authority of a trusted official. So far
then as the voice of. labour can be made known by the chiefs of the
Australian Labour Federation who claim to be elected by the ballot, and


-so far as it has been made known by Socialist members of the Legislature,
we are getting the opinions of the rank and file of the Labour party. For
'this reason then it is a matter of considerable interest to the public gener-
ally to know what is likely to be the nature of the State Socialism with
which we are threatened as soon as the socialistic Labour party has
captured the Legislature, and is able to put its matured designs into
execution. What these are have now been publicly and authoritatively
stated on two occasions. The first manifesto that put forth
in 1890 was comprehensive, and claimed that all means of
production and exchange and all sources of wealth were to be
nationalised. In clause 6, it was provided that a just distri-
bution should be made by the State of all joint wealth production
among all citizens. Clause 4 showed considerable forethought, for it
arranged—that is to say, so far as four lines of print could make provision
—that the State should save from the collective wealth a sufficiency to
institute, maintain, and increase the national collective capital. Clause 3
provided, so far as two lines of print could provide, for pensioning all child
aged, and invalid citizens ; and the last, and certainly not the least,
important clause provided for the reorganisation of society on the foregoing
lines, and also that the said reorganisation should be commenced at once
and be pursued uninterruptedly till social justice was fully secured to every
citizen. That is to say, until the millennium. And now to turn to Mr.
Seymour’s letter and see whether the Socialist Labour party are still
prepared to maintain and adhere to the opinions which were formulated by
them some four years ago.
In his first paragraph he says he will be pleased to reply to me in a
general way. I fear that it will be little satisfaction to the public to be
replied to in a general way. As a rule nothing is easier, and nothing is
more futile. Words, it has been said, serve two purposes—to express
ideas and to cover the want of ideas—and men who on a strictly business
topic of the utmost importance are disposed to talk at large and in a
general way are not usually men who can be trusted as guides.
As a definition, that supplied by Mr. Seymour is a failure, for it does
not define or limit, and it entirely ignores the sharp distinction which
exists between positive social action and Socialism,
It reads thus : “ Socialism means a legitimate and constitutional
action whereby the whole of the natural resources, "ks well as the means of
production and exchange of any country, shall belong to the people of
that country, and that industry should be regulated by duly appointed
representatives for the good of the people generally, with the object of
giving to everyone the opportunity, as well as the right, of exercising
their labours.”
He then continues, “ That the definition of Socialism above given,
which is a fair one, cannot be considered revolutionary the most rabid
individualist will agree.”
In the first place, it is quite impossible for me to admit, as I have
said, that this is a definition at all, but it is a very useful passage, giving
as it does information on four separate and distinct things in connection
with industry and State ownership ; but the description is by no means
clear, and requires examination before it can be allowed to pass. In the
first place, it is desirable to know exactly what is the nature of the con-
stitutional action which will result, in depriving the owners of nine-tenths


of the property in the country, for all will be included except household and
personal chattels, for the benefit of those alone who have little or no pro-
perty. Then, what meaning does he attach to the word legitimate ? Many
actions may be constitutional, for what is constitutional or not is deter-
mined by law. Where a king has absolute power, he may chop his subjects
to pieces, or impale them, and he would be acting constitutionally and
within his right. Parliament can vote its members £IOOO a year to-
morrow ;it would.be constitutional, but it would not be legitimate. Mr.
Seymour is probably under the impression, as many thoughtless men are,,
that the majority can do no wrong, but the obligations of justice and right
and the moral law, whether they be obeyed or not, are just as binding on
the conduct of the many-headed monarch termed “ The People,” as they
are on the conduct of any single king or ruler. When Mr. Seymour
proceeds to disclose by what process this transfer of property is to be
effected, the time will have come to decide whether it be legitimate or not.
In the next sentence it is stated “ that the whole of the natural
resources of the country, &c., shall belong to the people of that country.”
Nothing can be more ambiguous than this, for the resources of almost every
country are owned by the people of that country—whether governed by a
Czar, king or president. Certainly the people of France or Russia may be said
to own the whole of the natural wealth of these countries. The Czar of Russia
or the Emperor of China might cheerfully assent to Mr. Seymour’s proposi-
tion. He probably intends us to understand that all wealth and all instru-
ments of production are to be taken over and held for the common and equal
benefit of all citizens. Why, if this is his meaning, does he not say so ?
But what about the public and private debt ? Is it to be repudiated ; are
we to begin a new and virtuous collective career by robbing in the first
place our own citizens, and in the next all those who have trusted us ?
If we do not do this, but honestly keep faith with our creditors,
then it is evident that all the wealth of the country cannot belong to the
people of the country, Mr. Seymour had much better have signified
his adherence to the manifesto of 1890, which was a very breezy thing in
its way, besides being comparatively clear and intelligent.
Letter 9.
IN my last I endeavoured to gauge the value of the dissertation on
Socialism contributed by Mr. Charles Seymour, who appears for and
on behalf of the Australian Labour Federation, and I pointed out that his
statement, “ That the means of production and exchange shall belong to
the people of the colony,” was obscure, and nothing like as good as that
put forward by the Australian Labour Federation in the year 1890.
To “ nationalise the means of production ” is a phrase which carries
its own meaning, and anyone can understand that everything in connection
with industry is to belong not to the people as individuals but only to the
people collectively, and considered as an organic commune, while the
expression “ shall belong to the people of the colony ” failing to distinguish
between the singular and the collective, leaves us in doubt, or would leave
us in doubt, were there no manifesto to fall back upon, whether Mr.


Seymour might not be disposed to allow the national wealth of the people
to continue to be rested as now in the hands of the people—that is to say,
the individual persons who own it. The change of phraseology may be,
for ought we know, an indication of a desiie on the part of the Socialist
Labour party to make a meal of their own programme, and to do so with-
out detection. Why, indeed, should Mr. Seymour shift his pegs unless he
is dissatisfied with the ground taken up, and thinks it politic, as has been
suggested by Smith of Brisbane, not to go too much into detail, but to
leave the policy advisedly indefinite, so that it can be explained away or
maintained intact to suit the varying phases of party expediency ; and it is
certain that the substitution of a cloudy phrase for one which was clear
will lend strength to the suspicions which have been growing in the public
mind as to the straightforwardness of the game which is being played by
the State Socialists of the Labour party.
I showed also that the word constitutional as used by Mr. Seymour
was meaningless, and I shall add with regard to the word “ legitimate ”
that by its use he begs the whole question, and for this reason, he postulates
from the beginning the very conclusion he must bring proof to establish—
namely, that it is possible to appropriate in a “ legitimate” manner all the
property which has either by toil, frugality, enterprise, or good fortune,
been acquired by squatters, piemen, shopkeepers, artisans, gardeners, miners,
and other citizens. I perceive no way in which these men can be deprived
“ legitimately ” of what is their own except by purchase and compensation ;
and if this is the method to be adopted, I certainly fail to see how the com-
munity as a whole could benefit by buying up all the lands, houses, shops,
and businesses in the colony. It might be a good transaction for the
owners, but would turn out to be a most foolish bargain for the State.
When the Socialists talk of doing away with the private capitalist and
nationalising the means of production, exchange, and distribution, they
must mean forceful seizure and confiscation. If they don’t they are com-
plete dolts, for by buying out the capitalist he will not disappear, but con-
tinue to exist in a still more objectionable form—namely, as a State
pensioner, or receiver of revenue. If we translate the windy phrases of the
Socialist party into the concrete facts of our daily lives, it will be plainly
seen that they cover a mental vacuum, or that if they have a meaning it is
that of general plunder.
The “ legitimate ” acquisition of all private capital by the State is a
logical contradiction in terms, for it necessarily requires the spoliation and
exploitation of all individuals, from the millionaire to the washerwoman
with her tubs and mangle.
As far as the word “ legitimate ” is concerned, I am confident that
the Coxeyite labour party of America consider it quite right and perfectly
“ legitimate ” to march through the country, levying contributions on the
inhabitants as they go, and seizing, or, say, from a Socialist point of view
“ nationalising ” any provisions, vehicles, or trains they may need. Un-
fortunately, however, Uncle Sam’s view of what is legitimate seriously
conflicts with theirs. Hence firehose, Gatlings, and trouble
When the humble burglar during the small hours of the night creeps
into my humble domicile, and annexes, 1 beg pardon, nationalises my
spoons, and the humble Waterbury, which in spite of reconstruction and
retrenchment and bad times, I have managed to retain, then the law, the
brutal and tyrannical law, which has been made we are given to understand


not by labour for labour, but by the base and brutal capitalist in the
interest of his most infamous order, the brutal law I repeat intervenes,
frowns on his humble enterprise, and steps in to deprive him of the hard
won, and from bis point of view doubtless most “ legitimate ” enterprise.
To decide on what is legitimate and what is illegitimate is very necessary
before we use the words, and proceed leisurely to execute a walk round in
“ a general way.” The Socialist Labour party have not yet thought fit to
lay before the world the plan they have doubtless thought out and have in
preparation carefully concealed up their sleeve, and until they let us know
a good deal more about the reconstruction of society than is known at
present, I can assure Mr. Seymour that he will not get over the difficulty
of nationalisation by labelling his scheme with a well-sounding adjective,
or succeed in blinding my eyes to the fact that he is in the most barefaced
way endeavouring if he can to beg the whole question. What Mr.
Seymour and his brother Socialists aim at is plain enough to those who
know the Australian Labour Federation manifesto, and can be read
between the lines in his own letter. What they really mean is this, unless,
indeed, they are prepared to eat their own words—that provided they can
get a majority outside the walls of St, Helena to sanction their most
nefarious scheme, provided they can get power, they will transfer by a
majority vote all private capital to the collective community, which com-
munity will vest it in trustees, whose duty it will be to rule the country,
and run all farms, businesses, &c., in the interest of the State. Plainly
the project is to transfer all the wealth of the country into the hands of
Messrs. Seymour, Hinchcliffe, and Co., Limited, to be managed, we shall
be informed, purely in the interest of the people and of humanity. It is
evident that production and distribution will still need authoritative con-
trol, and that the supreme direction of collective industry must lie in the
hands of some one, and in whose so fitting as those of the Australian
Labour Federation ? with, of course, the inevitable button, and Panjen-
drum on top, whose awful name it would ill become me, a mere nonentity,
to utter. The whole project is one which reflects infinite credit on the
intrepidity of those who father it. The story of the Socialists of the Pitt
Town Labour Settlement, which designed “to nationalise the fowls of
those who possessed fowls ” is good, but for lofty breadth of view and
Napoleonic brilliancy of conception, commend me to the members of the
Australian Labour Federation, and to other representatives of Socialism,
who, having no fowls of their own, solemnly sit in conclave and issue
manifestoes which will put them into possession not only of the fowls, but
of the whole of the other belongings of their fellow-colonists. It is
certainly a useful lesson, and whenever I chance to hear a professor of true
Socialism on the stump, I shall remember it, and instead of trying aa
argument or the force of reason, I shall content myself with asking the
simple but pertinent question, “Do you, sir, happen to have any
fowls of your own ?”
Letter 10.
A CORRESPONDENT who signs himself “Agin, Mr. Dalrymple,” is
desirous that I should explain how the collective ownership and con-


trol of industry is detrimental to the community, and favours me with an ex-
tract from D rage, which I shallaccept withoutcommentas proof that in Berlin
the municipal management of gas and water works discloses highly satis-
factory results. I have not the slightest disposition to question the fact,
which is entirely irrelevent, and serves merely to supply another illustra-
tion of the thesis which I have been engaged for some time, ineffectually
it appears, endeavouring to prove—namely, the necessity for determining
the question at issue before controversy commences.
It is a melancholy truth that by neglecting this precaution Socialists
not only confuse other people but also themselves. It is quite true that
all Socialism involves social action, but it is as untrue that all social action
involves Socialism. Will this simple distinction ever be drawn by any one
of my motley opponents ? Where a pack of dingoes hunt together, and
where cows range themselves together with their horns outwards to defend
their calves against the said dingoes, there is social action, and conse-
quently, I suppose, my antagonist would instantly draw the conclusion that
all dingoes were Socialists—a conclusion I am not myself prepared to
adopt. It is easy to convert a proposition, but the converse of a pro-
position is not always true. We can say that all blackfellows are human
beings, but we cannot say that all human beings are blackfellows. The
term Socialism is used in several senses, and the man who forgets this is
lost. lam using it in one sense—namely, in its full sense where the
individual works not for himself, but for the community considered as a
whole. In this, sense it advocates the abolition of private capital ; it advo-
cates the doctrines put forth by the manifesto of the Australian Labour
Federation. My opponent is setting up a false issue. He instances an
instance of municipal action. I don’t oppose his municipal action, nor
State action, nor did I ever say a word which would lead anyone to
think so.
According to Mallock (consult Fortnightly Review of March, 1894),
the meanings in which the word Socialism is used, may be classified and
distinguished thus : Incidental Socialism ; supplementary Socialism ; and
fundamental Socialism. A street is an example of the first, and the
Berlin experiment does not differ in principle from a street. The income
tax is an illustration of the second. And the programme of the Socialist
Labour party of Queensland, advocating the nationalisation of all capital,
and, as a corollary, the suppression of the motive force supplied by private
interest, is an illustration of the third ; which has been embodied in
practice by Mr. Lane in Paraguay. Now, if the bashful gentleman, who,
concealed behind the paper screen, is firing his crude logic “ Agin Mr.
Halrymple,” will try to distinguish between the different meanings of the
word Socialism, he will exercise his mind to begin with—and it wants it—
and will probably succeed in finding out in the end that he is not “ Agin
Mr. Halrymple,” but merely against certain views which, without any
reasonable ground, he has thought fit to attribute to him ; in which case
he has taken the trouble to set up his own skittles and then successfully
bowl them over. If he will only be good enough to moderate his impati-
ence, and to allow me to continue a controversy which Mr. Seymour
originated, I have the fullest confidence that I shall be able in time to
prove to the satisfaction of any competent judge the thesis that State
Socialism, scientific Socialism, fundamental Socialism, true .Socialism, or
whatever other name may be given to the doctrines of the Australian


Labour Federation, would, is the first place, be unworkable, and in the
next place would be, even if workable, most pernicious.
Letter 11.
TO return to the subject of Mr. Seymour’s letter—which, after the
bold projects we have been discussing in connection with the universal
annexation of capital and the Australian Labour Federation programme,
will seem somewhat tame and commonplace,—Mr. Seymour managed to
define Socialism with great celerity. He told us its character, aims,
methods and beautiful and elevating influences in the short space of nine or
tea lines, and then, having convinced everybody, and probably, in his owr
opinion, entirely exhausted the subject, he found time to talk “ in a general
way.” Quite after the fashion of a brother mariner, the great Ulysses by
name, who could not find it in his heart to rust unburnished at his own
hearthstone, nor ever cease from travel, he sailed beyond the sunset until
he got hull down and lost sight.
I am quite prepared to admit that a disposition to talk in a general way
is frequently tke mark of an amiable and obliging disposition, but it can
hardly be considered business, and I think it would have been better had
Mr. Seymour discharged his cargo according to manifest and got a proper
clearance, before going out for a cruise on the great ocean of knowledge.
For this reason, the most amazing part of Mr. Seymour’s account of
Socialism is to be found, not so much in what he said, as in what he left
unsaid. He fixed up the business of nationalising all wealth in a sur-
prisingly short time, and it could be plainly seen his heart was in the
business. He did not forget to arrange that the government of all
imdustry was to be regulated by representatives appointed by the people.
For this was imperative in order that things might go pleasantly to the
Trades Hall and for the Panjendrum with whom would lie the exercise of
that authority, without which national production could not take place.
But when he came to the problem of distribution! there was a frightful gap.
He seemed to lose confidence, and passed over distribution with an absolute
silence, which to Smith appears very ominous, and which to my mind is
unaccountable. Are we to understand by this that in reconstructed
Queensland there will be production indeed, but no distribution, and that,
like the Grave, or the old Courts of Chancery, the Trades Hall and the
bosses of Socialism will take everything and hand back nothing ? If not,
what other explanation can be given ? To discuss collectivism, and to
have nothing to say about distribution, is equivalent to giving an account
of the origin of the Garden of Eden and our first parents, and forgetting
Adam altogether. The collective organism, making full allowance for the
noble and unselfish character of its founders, will in the main be composed
of men and women who are only poor average mortals, and this being the
case, I fear that the moment it is discovered that Socialism is to be all
preaching and collection, and that there will be no distribution, it will be
too much for the average mortal, who will promptly revolute, depose the
great Panjendrum, and abolish the executive of the lords of Labour.
I really cannot excuse Mr. Seymour. He has taken upon himself to
defend Socialism ; he is an apostle of Socialism ; and if he had no other^


source of information he had at his command, at any rate, the manifesto of
his own executive as put forth to the universe in 1890. That manifesto
did deal with distribution, and when we remember that of the twin functions
which will devolve upon the State when true Socialism arrives, those of
production and distribution, that of coasumption will be the more important,
it is astonishing to find that from whatever cause—for some cause which I
shall leave Mr. Seymour to explain—distribution has been entirely ignored.
If Mr. Seymour, in his hurry to talk in a general way, had to leave out
something fundamental, he could better have spared production than
distribution. For distribution is the necessary precedent to con-
sumption, and the anxiety to consume, in other words demand, is in
truth the final cause of all commodities ; for without demand, without a
desire to use or consume, in short to distribute, no work would ever be done.
It is demand which supplies Labour with its motives. I am extremely
sorry that a thorough Socialist, as he has been called, that an apostle of
true Socialism, as I call him, one who has the whole creed and practice of
Socialism at his fingers’ ends, could pass over in this cavalier fashion one
half of the essential functions of the collectivist state. And I have
grevious apprehensions that so serious an omission will go a long way
towards undermining the faith of some of the weaker brethren and of
damaging the Cause itself—with a capital C. It is incumbent, I think,
on Mr. Seymour to supply this omission, and I hope to see him again in
print, to take another bite, as it were, at the collectivist cherry, and to
discharge the duties he owes to humanity ; in which case I may mention
that he will confer a great favour.
Letter 12.
IT has been said that we live in an age of discussion. Discussion may be
profitable or profitless. At a public meeting it is often profitless, for
there men’s reason is often in abeyance, and their judgment clouded. A
newspaper controversy presents more favourable conditions for discussion.
The existence of Parliament is based on the belief that when free discussion
takes place, and opinions are brought into juxtaposition the true opinion
has an intrinsic superiority over the other and will tend to prevail. It may
not be to the interest of the political phrasemonger or to the promoters of
the Utopia Company, Limited, or to men who commence with a dazzling
prospectus, and end in bankruptcy, but it is to the interest of the general
community that the truth should prevail.
It is for this reason that I cordially welcome Mr. Seymour or anyone
■else who comes forward to authoritatively state what State Socialism really
means as put forward by the executive of the Australian Labour Federation.
If I thought that Socialism would add to the well-being of the community,
or make men happier and wiser, I would give it my hearty support. I
oppose it not in the interests of capitalists, but in the interests of the
ordinary citizen, no matter whether he be an unskilled or a skilled labourer,
no matter whether he has money in the Savings Bank or nothing to fall
back upon but the strength of his own hands. Ido so because I think it
impracticable, because production would seriously diminish and there would
be less to divide, because the difficulty of apportioning a fair distribution


would bring about chaos and civil war ; and because, whatever evils may
exist under our present industrial system would be aggravated and inten-
sified by so radical a change.
Before such a change can be approved of, and before we are prepared
to discard by-gone experience, the least thing to ask of the reformers is a
plain exposition of their plans. Socialism affirms that all or the greater
part of our industrial system is wholly evil. To cure a corn it would cut
o a leg. It refuses to see, says Lavelleye, that existing institutions
nave arisen from the operation of imperative human wants, and from the
experience and wisdom of generations of men, and that a comparatively
sma,ll part is due to force or fraud, sometimes employed by the strong
against the weak. J J &
My contention is that before we take a new departure and attempt to
subvert existing institutions we want something more than vague phrases
and appeals to emotion. On the revolutionists rest the onus of showing
that their plans are feasible, and explaining plainly in detail what these
plans are. This is precisely what the Socialists of the Labour party will
not do, for the very simple reason that, as Mr. Spence said, they do not
know themselves, in which case they are trying to play on their
credulous followers what is generally known as the confidence
trick As Dr. Schaafle says, “there is a great psychological truth and
much economic utility in the liberal principle whereby private interest is-
made a motive to the discharge of the functions of social production.” By
the operation of this principle all the complex phenomena of production
and distribution, and all the co-operation which necessarily attends them,
has been brought about—not in the least as the result of legislation, but
of the natural adaptation of wants to satisfactions by the voluntary action
of man mmself. This principle, which rests upon the solid basis of being
at once a natural growth and a universal practice, Socialism deliberately
rejects, and I say—having no love for humbug—that no man of
intelligence would dream of abolishing a system which rests on so wide a
basis, and which has been proved tolerable by centuries of experience,
without having first a well thought out plan and a clear apprehension of
the organisation which in the new society would supersede the old. If a
man was going farming, or proposed to take up a selection—if a man
intended to ship goods and charter a vessel—he would endeavour first to
adjust his means to the ends he had in view ; and yet, according to Mr.
feeyraour, these precautions, which are necessary in the most simple matters
of business, may be safely discarded when coping with the prodigious pro-
blem of a revolutionised industrial society.
I don t wonder in the least that Mr. Seymour, who is willing enough
to chuck his hat into the arena and announce himself as a defender of
Socialism, backed out the very moment he was asked to supply instead of
vague phrases a little precise information.
And now to return to the Australian Labour Federation. Were its
scheme one that would stand investigation, its promoters would cheerfully
give us details and as gladly welcome discussion, for truth has nothing to
fear from discussion. Nothing is more plain than that Mr. Seymour does
not want intelligent discussion, though he would like to get credit for
being both able and willing to discuss the matter. When ffirst wrote he
showed the most lively activity ; and then when I asked him civilly to
say what he meant by Socialism he found he had not time to write letters,.


a most ridiculous subterfuge. Five lines would have been sufficient for
that space Mr. Walace Nelson gave a very good definition. If Mr. Sey-
mour had not time to write five himself any of his colleagues might have
undertaken the task. I don’t suppose they were all so busy for nine days
as not to be able to write five lines, and, if they had been they had the staff
of the Worker to fall back on, anyone of whom from editor to Ae
“ devil ” could have done the work in three minutes. After a time A •
Seymour gave nine lines, dealing squarely with the subject, although
show how little he had thought over the matter, having mentioned
production he actually left distribution altogether, and what was I s
This, that distribution will be settled when Socialism arrives by
the collective wisdom of the people, a statement which carries with it, and
proclaims from the housetop to those who will listen in the.notable words
of Proudhon, that Communism is the suppression of thought and the
introduction of the Nothing. The omission of distribution .9 an ins ance
of the Nothing, and the reason of the omission is an instanced the
suppression of Thought, for if the reason was good for not referring o
distribution, it was equally good for leav.ng out production also If he
collective wisdom of the people has to deal with one in the futme, t
collective wisdom of the people may be left to deal with the other and
Mr. Seymour might as well have admitted his utter ignorance of the
W h°l'in°Mr! Seymour’s last letter he invites a discussion on rent, profit,
and interest. I cannot quite arrive at his meaning. He is ambiguous as
usual, but I presume he believes with Proudhon, whose opinions on com-
munism I have quoted, that private property is theft, and that rent,
interest, and profit are different forms of robbery. Well, this may be so
I am not concerned at present in controverting such an opinion, any more
than I am called upon to justify the action of the Australian Labour
Federation, who, while apparently sharing Proudhon s opinion, as to re .
and interest being robbery, themselves recognise interest and robb y }
agreeing to pay interest to the private capitalists from whom hey borrowed
money ?o put up their Trades Hall, and have approved of robbery m the
way of rent, for they propose to charge rent to the various trades who will
occupy their building. lam quite prepared when the time comes
the legitimacy or otherwise of rent, profit, and interest, ,
not come. lam engaged in examining into the feasibility of the scheme
for the reconstruction of society put forward by the Australian Labou
Federation, and in spite of the red herrings continually drawn across the
trail, I don’t intend to be led into discussing what I have not set
discuss or to “talk in a general way.” I sympathise deeply with Mr
Seymour, he has abundantly confirmed the truth of the proposition with
which I started—namely, that the apostles of Sociahsm have no notion of
the practical working of the system they advocated, and that their prole -
sions of knowledge seem to have covered an absolute vacuum ; that jeie
there should have been an orderly plan and the outline o a e ni e ?
there has been in reality only a mere mass of words, an ia ® ,
ments made by Spence and Aveling, that Socialists t erase ves
know how their schemes were to be put into practice has been abundantly
gthige more with Mr. Seymour if he had not posed as a
man thoroughly acquainted with the system put forth by the association to


which he belongs, in virtue of which it pro-poses to take possession of all
private capital, run all industries, provide for the continuance of production,
and to make a distribution of what may be produced and if he had not said,
when he was asked on wbat principle division will take place, that this will
be left to the collective wisdom of the public in the future. Could the
force of imbecility farther go ? Why, a man would not put into a total-
isator on such terms. Cannot Mr. Seymour see plainly that to leave the
principle of distribution open before productive enterprise is begun will be
equivalent to leaving the settlement of the principle of distribution in a
totalisator until the result of the raoe was known ? Who would put in, if
they did not know the principle of division ? Who would try to win a
race unless it was known in advance that the first horse would gain the
prize ? In other words, to avoid discord and civil war it is absolutely
necessary to have all these matters settled in advance. Either the
Australian Labour Federation know something of their own plans, and
more than they are willing to publish, or they do not. If they do not
know, how are they going to carry out their system ? Are we to take a
leap into the dark, and embrace chaos on the strength of Mr. Seymour’s
knowledge, which amounts, when he tells us that the people will settle it
themselves in the future, to a confession of blank ignorance ? I say let
the people settle how this wonderful scheme is to be carried out while they
are standing on firm ground. Let the people make their plans first, and
carry them out afterwards.
x\nd for the other alternative—that the Socialists do know, and won’t
tell—they are welcome to it, for then it seems plain that their schemes are
not such as will bear the light of day.
Letter 13.
1 SHALL now take the opportunity to reply to the letter of Mr.
Browne, M.L.A. He takes exception to ray statement that all the
Labour party, save Mr. Hoolan, claim tq be Socialists, and he asks me
the very pertinent question, “ What do I mean when I speak of the Labour
party ?” Knowing full well that a man who seeks to shirk a rational
definition is one who stands self-confessed as a political humbug, 1 at once
hasten to explain my meaning, and to say that when I speak of the
Labour party I propose to indicate those persons who occupy a representa-
tive position, and who have been chosen by a section of those who labour
to advocate opinions the nature of which may be gathered by listening to
the utterances of the executive of the Trades Hall and of its official organ
the Worker. My definition, then, includes all those who have an official
title conferred by election to represent sectional Labour, and embraces
therefore, both the Parliamentary Labour party and the Trades Hall
Executive.
I made the statement that all members of the Labour party, save
Mr. Hoolan, claim to be Socialists in good faith. That the executive of
the Trades Hall claims to be Socialist we know from its communistic
platform ; and that the members of the Parliamentary Labour party
claim also to be Socialists was an inference from various circumstances,


one of which was that I have heard members of that party say on several
occasioms “we are all Socialists,” and in my hearing; one gentleman, and
only one, denied the soft impeachment. But as Mr. Browne states there
are two gentlemen besides himself belonging to the Parliamentary Labour
party, who are not Socialists, I at once accept his statement as being that
of one who is in a position to know, and whose word can be relied upon.
If my statement was not strictly accurate I withdraw it at once, and substi-
tute another in support of which I shall tender evidence, and having
already defined what I mean when I speak of the Labour party, I unhesi-
tatingly assert that the Labour party is a Socialist party.
In the first instance, Mr. Glassey has for years on various occasions
spoken in favour of a redistribution of wealth and of State nationalisation,
and his frequent use of the word “ capitalistic ” as a term of reproach is
an evidence in itself of his belief that the existence of private capital
involved wrong. That the assertion is true is emphasised by tbe proceed-
ings at the public meeting lately held to greet Mr. Glassey on his return
from travel. Mr. Seymour, of the Australian Labour Federation, in the
course of a vigorous Socialist address, in which he denounced capitalism
and advocated national co-operation, explained that Socialism was
co-operation in production and democracy in production, and Mr. Seymour
publicly complimented Mr. Glassey on having propounded these
views, i.e., at the birth of the Labour party. Mr. Glassey accepted the
compliments as being well deserved, and it would have been difficult for
him to have done aught else, considering that only a month or two ago at
a meeting held in Sydney to define the electoral programme of Labour
he advocated the State distribution of the wealth of the colony.
Again, at Mr. Glassey’s meeting, Mr. Hinchcliffe remarked that it
was owing and through the appeal of the executive of the Australian
Labour Federation to the Labour unions that Mr. Glassey had received
and had handed over to him capitalistic wealth to the tune of some £B7B,
and over the Australian Labour Federation floats the banner of the
nationalisation of all private capital.
In the next place, we have before us the fact that the Worker has
always been a vigorous and outspoken advocate of a definite form of State
Socialism, namely—the Socialism which it has been attempted to put into
practice in Paraguay, and the Worker has, from its inception, been owned
by the Labour party and has been accepted by Mr.' Glassey and other
members of the Parliamentary Labour party as the express and official
exponent of their own opinions. In Hew South Wales the Trades Hall
has openly claimed an almost absolute control over the acts and policy of
the Labour members in Parliament, It demanded pledges of them,
it sought to control their consciences and to reduce them to mere
puppets, and in this colony a similar policy has been pursued, and it is
impossible therefore not to consider the executive of the Australian Labour
Federation an important and integral portion of the Labour party. And
now I come to what Mr. Browne has to tell us. He will not take upon
himself to speak for the opinions of all members who compose the
Parliamentary Labour party, but he tells us the opinions of the nine that
he does know, and it appears that of these three are not and six are
Socialists. Invoking the aid of the laws of probability, and reasoning
from the known to the unknown, the odds are that the same
proportion will be maintained, and that of the Parliamentary Labour


party two-thirds of its members will be Socialists and Collectivists, and as
that half of the Labour party which is represented by the Trades Hall is
avowedly Socialist, we have of a whole represented by six-sixths, three
sixths namely, the Trades Hall Socialists, and two-sixths of the Parlia-
mentary Labour party, making five-sixths of the whole Labour party, con-
sist of men holding these views. As the policy of a party is necessarily
dominated by its majority, and the majority of the Labour party is over-
whelmingly Socialist, I consider that I am entirely justified by circum-
stantial evidence in denominating the Labour party as herein defined as
an essentially Socialist party.
Letter 14.
m*R. WALLACE NELSON, under the heading “Ethics and
jit Socialism,” refers to an extract I gave from a Sydney paper reporting
the intense disgust which was felt by the majority of members of the Pitt
Town Labour Settlement at an attempt made by a Socialist committee,
who had no fowls of their own, to nationalise the fowls of their fellow
colonists.
Mr, Wallace Nelson puts on his considering cap, and proceeds to
moralise in this fashion, “ Have you any fowls of your own ? is only
another wav of asking, Is your attitude on the social question inspired by
selfishness or by some higher motive ? The above paragraph raises an
ethical question of profound importance.”
Then he makes the sage reflection that wealth is unequally
distributed, that some men are poor and some are rich, a reflection which
has no practical application unless he is prepared to show how and in what
way the condition of society will be improved by making all men the
slaves of a State despotism, and how production will continue when the
motives which caused production have ceased to be, Ido not in the least
wonder that a gentleman with the dislike to definiteness of outline, and
love of verbal jugglery which Mr. Nelson so conspicuously displays,
should evince so strong a disposition to get away from a concrete
subject like State Socialism, where his reasoning and assertions may be
easily checked, into the subject of ethical problems, where his tendency to
quirks and quibbles is not so easily exposed.
The subject of State Socialism, thanks to the published programme
of tha Australian Labour Federation and to the information supplied by
Mr. Lowry, Socialist, and member of the Labour party, Queensland, has a
fairly definite outline, and I would rather deal with it than run the risk of
being bushed with Mr. Wallace Nelson in the somewhat misty region of
ethics. Than Mr. Wallace Nelson I never met a more disingenuous
reasoner. He carries, indeed, perhaps unconsciously, the ethics he avows
on poultry into the region of controversy, and although perfectly ready
to rush into profound problems that would puzzle a philiosopher,
he seems quite incapable of penetrating the most simple fallacy,
though possibly he is more unfortunate than culpable.
Now, to prove what I have said. Turn to the story of the Pitt
Town Labour Settlement, and to the question which I say it suggests.


All that Mr. Wallace Nelson can see in this is that it illustrates two
of selfishness. First, that of the owners of the fowls in refusing to part
with their property ; next, the selfishness of those who, having ,no fowls
of their own, coveted and tried to take, by means of a majority vote, those
of their neighbours. Mr. Wallace Nelson is simple enough to believe
that, because he chooses to apply the same word to cover the conflicting
actions of these two sets of persons, both actions stand on the same
ground ; and the greater part of his letter is taken up in following up
this grotesque caprice, and in dilating on the results to society which would
follow an appeal to selfishness. To me the question, “ Have you any fowls
of your own ?” when partnership is suggested, appeals chiefly to a "man’s
sense of honesty, right, and justice.
When a man fails to grasp the fundamental distinction between
endeavouring to keep what is one’s own by law and custom, and taking
that which belongs to another, it would be about as profitable to discuss
ethical problems of high importance with Bill Sykes as with him.
Mr. Wallace Nelson has mixed himself up in this pitiful fashion
because he deals with words instead of things, and frequently imagines-
himself reasoning when he is in fact only punning, because, in short—l
regret to make the statement—he is a vastly better talker than thinker.
Words are not his servants, but his master. In this business he had only
to consult a dictionary, and he would have found out that selfishness does
not stand for what he supposes, but for something quite different not for
a regard for self, but for an undue regard for self ; in other words, for a
culpable disregard for the rights or claims of other members of the com-
munity. For example, if 1 send my child to school with its lunch in a
satchel, and a man comes along and tries to rob the child of its lunch*
then the man who tries to rob the child is selfish, and the child which de-
fends its property is not. According to Mr. Wallace Nelson’s logic, when
the humble burglar attempts to burglarise my belongings he is actuated by
selfishness, but if I resist the burglarious nationalisation, I being also
actuated by selfishness, am no better than a burglar ; a ridiculous quibble
unless he is prepared to deny that any man can possess rights of ownership-
m which case he may as well state his definite issue, and be pre-
pared to assert with Proudhon or Bill Sykes that every owner of property
is a thief. I say that Mr. Wallace Nelson has simply begged the
whole question. Surely he can see, now I have pointed it out, that if he
defended himself against a thief who made a grab at his watch, he could
do so without laying himself open to the charge of selfishness, and that
tins being so, he has most improperly charged the fowlowners of the Pitt
Town Settlement with selfishness. His use of the word selfishness shows
clearly enough that his pen has got clean ahead of his thoughts, and to
save him from making similar blunders in future I commend to his notice
the maxim of Lord Bacon, “Words are a wise man’s counters and the
gold of a fool. ’ In order to clear up some of the difficulties which are
crushing Mr. Wallace Nelson down with leaden weight, and assist
bun on to a road where he may have a chance of getting information
with which to successfully attack social problems. and discern
that the opposed principles of egoism and altruism both have their
proper and necessary place in society, I ask him to consult Bastiat “ Har-
monies of Political Economy,” page 341. The writer says “ The-
Socialists, in the teeth of fact and experience, always refuse to admit that


there are two orders of human relations—one dependent on the sympathetic
principle, and which we leave to the domain of morals—another springing
from self-interest, and regulating transactions between men who know
nothing of each other, and owe each other nothing but justice ; transac-
tions regulated by voluntary covenants freely adjusted. Covenants of the
last species are precisely those which come within the domain of political
economy. It is in truth no more possible to base commercial
transactions on the principle of sympathy than it is to base
family and friendly relations on self-interest. To the Socialists I shall
never cease to address this remonstrance : You wish to mix up two things
which cannot be confounded. If you were fools enough to wish to con-
found them you have not the power to do it. The blacksmith, the carpen-
ter and the labourer, who exhaust their strength in rude vocations, may
be excellent fathers, admirable sons ; they may have the moral sense
thoroughly developed and carry in their breasts hearts of large and expan-
sive sympathy ; in spite of all that, you will never persuade them to labor
from morning to night with the sweat of their brow, and impose upon
themselves the hardest privations, upon a mere principle of devotion to
their fellow-men. Your sentimental lectures on this subject are and
always will be powerless. If they could mislead a few operatives they
would just make so many dupes. Let the merchant sot to work to sell his
wares on the principle of fraternity, and in less than a month he will see
himself and his children reduced to beggary. Taking man as we find him,
sensibility and individuality, benevolence and self-love being inseparable,
we cannot desire to see the motive of personal interest eradicated, for if
you break this mainspring of action in certain chosen spirits you create
two classes —scoundrels whom you thus tempt to make victims of their
fellow-men, and the virtuous for whom the part of victims is reserved.
Providence has done well in giving to the social state very different
guarantees.” So much for the ethical question, which leads me to suppose
that the settlers of the Pitt Town Settlement had right and justice on
their side and showed not selfishness but a proper feeling of righteous self-
interest when they deposed the Socialist committee who had no fowls of
their own.
To deal now with Mr. Wallace Nelson’s ethics in the controversial
field. He once referred me to a quotation purporting to have been a defi-
nition by Sydney Webb, the basis of his Socialist faith, and when the
definition came to be run to earth it turned out not to have been taken
from any book of Mr. Sydney Webb’s, but from a pamphlet published by
an obscure Socialist club or association in Sydney. It contained this pas-
sage : —“lt was an admitted fact that the whole produce of labour is
created by labour ; ” in other words, what labour creates labour does
create. If taken this way, the sentence is a mere silly truism. In the
other sense, that the whole produce of what is sometimes called labour is
created by manual labour alone, I laughed at it in'the person of the fowl
which “ labour had created.” Mr, Wallace Nelson in a subsequent letter
proceeded to demonstrate with the assistance of J. S. Mill and Huxley
that labour does not create anything, and that my sarcasm about labour
creating the barndoor fowl was poor wit and bad economics. I was not
responsible for Sydney Webb’s assertion that the whole produce of labour
was created by labour, and the whole of the proof tendered, that labour
-could create nothing, went to show that I was right and that Mr. Webb


was wrong, yet it was put forward by Mr. Wallace Nelson to sliow exactly
the reverse. If Mr. Webb is, or Mr. Wallace Nelson is, disposed to-
maintain that because labour in one sense may be said to produce wealth,
manual labour by itself is the cause of all wealth, such a contention is at
once plausible and absurd. The truth is, as I have said, the whole case of
labour as put forth by the Socialists rests on a fallacy. “ Labour, they
say, is the cause of all commodities. Perfectly true, if you understand
correctly what is here meant by labour—absolutely false if you don’t.” It has
been said by a great philosopher that “ Before anything is made
four cases at least must be operative. Say, for instance, there is a table
to be made. There must be the final cause, that is to say, firstly, the
demand, and capital to back the demand if the table is to be an exchange-
able commodity : secondly, there must be the material cause, the wood or
natural agent ; thirdly, there must be the efficient cause, the man who is-
to make it ; and fourthly, he must have had in his head or must have got
from some one else the idea, form, or design of what he is going to make.
This is the formal cause. The gigantic fallacy of the Socialists is this
They leave out of consideration all causes but one, and analyse labour as
though it consisted of nothing but—the efficient cause —the present
labourer. It is quite true in one sense that all things are made by labour,
and quite false that all thing are made by labourers—working men. If it
were not for n consumer to demand things, energetic and resourceful
people who foresee the demand and know how to supply it, if it were not
for capitalists who supply the means and material, and for men of brains
and inventive genius who design the things to be made, if it were not for
all and each of these men not a single thing would be made. Everyone
of these other factors is included in the labour that makes the thing, and
has a right to be considered in the ultimate result. Render unto Labour
the things that are Labour’s, but first understand what is meant by the
word Labour,”
When some time since I asked Mr. Wallace Nelson for his bona
fides, it was because, having a copy of his own lecture against State
Socialism before me, it seemed evident that he was not in earnest, nor
giving his real opinions, but simply posing to show his dexterity as a
dialectician. I have no desire to debate for the mere sake of debate, and
it seems to me the best means of meeting Mr. Wallace Nelson of May,
1894, is by confronting him with Mr. Wallace Nelson of June, 1891-
One Mr. Wallace Nelson will then refute the other, and I shall be saved
from committing the indiscretion which attaches to interference with a
family quarrel. I now append a portion of the lecture to which I refer.
It was entitled, “ The Dangers of State Socialism ; a Plea for Liberty.”
According to the Courier, “the lecturer defined Socialism as the
system which sought to institute a state of things under which the State
would possess all capital, carry on all industry, and remunerate all workers.
How, he asked, was the State to get the capital from those who now hold
it ? Either by buying it, or by stealing it. He knew no other way. But
they could not buy it, for they had not the money. Some said that an
easy way out of the difficulty would be to pay the value, minus interest,
in yearly instalments. No dqpbt that would be a very easy way, but
would it be honest ? Would it be fair to force those who hold capital to
give it up without giving them as much for it as they would receive in the
open market, and in the ordinary course of events. The lecturer held-


'that such conduct would be unjust, and lie refused to believe that the
workers of Queensland or anywhere else would sanction such an act of
public robbery. The only way left was to take the capital from the
capitalist by force. But could this be done ? Mr. Wallace Nelson con-
tended that it could not be done, for the simple reason that the property-
holders in England and Queensland at any rate were in a majority.
Building societies, assurance societies, friendly societies, and savings banks
proved that to a considerable extent the working man was a property
holder, and he would doubtless resist along with the capitalist any general
act of confiscation. Private property could only be destroyed by a bloody
revolution which would demoralise and degrade the whole people. If the
State became the sole employer of labour individual liberty would be gone.
A system of nationalisation of industry such as Socialists contemplate
implied an enormous system of officialdom to superintend and regulate
lindusirial activities, an official class consuming as much as the capitalist
■class n >w consumes, and exercising a far more despotic authority.”
These are the views which Mr. Wallace Nelson held and advocated a
short time past, and when the hazy and indefinite ideas about Socialism
which are more or less in fashion are exploded, when Socialism as the
latest craze is out, and some other craze is in—these are views I imagine
Mr. Wallace Nelson will hold again. As he was three years since, so I
have been and am still, and when he has completed his revolution his
■course will be probably to return to the point whence he started. I need
not interfere, for a weathercock may be considered a fixture when compared
■to Mr. Wallace Nelson.
Letter 15.
118. BROWNE, M.L.A., has come to the rescue of the Socialistic
/■I party, and complains of having been misrepresented by me in
certain particulars. lam sure Ido not want to misrepresent him, and lam
■ quite ready to make any corrections that may be required, so instead of
saying, as I did say, that two members of the Parliamentary Labour party
besides himself have disclaimed Socialism, I will substitute the phrase
outside himself. But I certainly inferred from his anxiety to tell the
public that Mr. Jackson as well as Mr. Hoolan had repudiated Socialism
that he himself did so also.
In the next place, he says he did not state that there were six
Socialists amongst the party. What he did say was that outside of the
other fifteen members of tbe Labour party, outside Messrs. Hoolan and
Jackson, he could not say whether they were Socialists or not. Having
made these corrections, which do not appear important, I shall take the
opportunity of saying that Mr. Browne, like Canning’s celebrated knife-
grinder, appears to have no tale to tell, though, unlike the knife-grinder,
he appears to be burning with anxiety to tell one.
,wwt* Then it seems that I was mistaken in supposing that when I was
asked to name six members of the Labour party who were Socialists that
there were at least six who might be named. I was wrong, it appears,
but Mr. Browne need not blame me, but rather the ambiguity of his own
language. He will not take upon himself to say definitely either what his


colleagues’ opinions or his own are on the important matter of Socialism ;
I take him to be an exceedingly discreet member, and as mum is at
present the word, both with the Trades Hall and the Parliamentary Labour
party, he intends to keep dark and not disclose his opinion or their opinions
with regard to the justice or the expediency or honesty of the policy of
nationalisation of what we may call the individual fowl. Ido not assert
that he is under any obligation to be outspoken, but if all he has to say is
that he has nothing to say, except that Mr. Jackson is not a Socialist,
then I do not quite grasp the position he desires to take up in this
controversy, nor what he is driving''at at all.
In the beginning of Mr. Browne’s last letter he found fault with me
for claiming a portion of the Labour party as Socialists, but he will not
say even now explicitly whether the fifteen members of the Labour party
outside Messrs. Hoolan and Jackson are Socialists or not, and therefore it
appears, for anything he knows, I may be right after all. He winds up by
saying that there are very few thinking men who are not Socialists in
some degree, and that Mr. Tozer is a Socialist in a degree. Then under
the cover of this most ambiguous declaration, one wide enough to
cover the opinions of Sir Thomas MTlwraith and Mr. Tozer on the one
hand, and those of Mr. Glassey and Mr. M'Donald, of Flinders, on the
other he takes his departure. Permit me to remark that when he
says that only two members of the Labour party in Parliament have
disavowed Socialism and follows this observation by the statement that
all thinking men are Socialists, he is simply juggling with words, and
he affords me additional Jproof of the thesis with which I set out,
on the authority of Sir Henry Mayne, that it was the practice of the
majority of party politicians to pass off on the public in the place of ideas
verbal notes of currency, for which on presentation at the bank of reason
no good coin could be found ; of which my dissertation on Socialism has
been simply a subsidiary thesis, and an illustration. Be it noted that
Mr. Browne, in the first instance, accepts the word Socialism as having a
distinctive meaning, or why should he quarrel with its application ? If it
is a phrase that can be applied to the majority of thinking men he need
take no exception to its employment. Now, what position does Mr.
Browne mean to take up ? Either the word means something or it does
not. To my mind it means State Socialism, according to the programme
put forth by that portion of the Labour party represented by the Trades
Hall. To Mr. Browne it seems to mean something at one time and
nothing at another. When Mr. Brown talks of being a Socialist in some
degree, and does not tell us in what degree, nor what he means by a
Socialist, then he is giving us no information whatever, and he might as
well say, for all the good that the public can get, that he is a firm believer
in Abracadabra in a degree. It is better to be silent, and claim
to say nothing, than to effect to say something, and by the use of mean-
ingless phrases to say nothing after all.
Now, seeing that Mr. Wallace Nelson has, in spite of many
entreaties, consistently refused to explain the nature of the Socialist
position himself, and seeing also that when I gave him his own lecture of
1891 on State Socialism to digest in connection with the present con-
troversy, he thought fit to explain that he was now lecturing not on State
Socialism, but on Socialism, I should like him to be good enough to
explain the difference between the two, and give some assistance in clearing


up the profound mystery in which his real opinions are enshrouded. Most
people I suppose now look upon Socialism rather in the light of a conundrum
which they had better give up than as a subject out of which anything
useful can be extracted. Mr. Wallace Nelson knows full well, and has
been told Repeatedly, that so far as I am concerned, I am dealing with
State Socialism of a definite type—namely, as put forward in the pro-
gramme of the Trades Hall—the Socialism he combated in 1891.
He told his audience that I had not succeeded in defending the
system of society which the greatest political thinkers of modern times
have condemned. \V hether this statement is correct or not depends a
good deal upon whom he considers the greatest political thinkers of
modern times. His assertion is one which leaves plenty of room for
difference of opinion ; but in any case, I have not even attempted to defend
society as it is, for lying outside the scope of the argument I have not been
called upon to do so. What I have tried to do, and what it is clear I
have utterly failed to do, is to obtain information from some of the
re\olutionary spirits who declare their intention of reconstructing society
about the manner in which they propose to set to work. If they have a
good scheme, if they have a plan of operations, if they have anything
provided to carry out industry, when our industrial organisation is super-
seded, I think they will produce it. It would be welcome and eagerly
scanned by thousands of citizens. But as the only instance where such a
scheme has been lately put into practice is that which was tried in Paraguay
and which burst up in three months, I am justified, I think, in looking
upon the whole affair so far as being neither more nor less than anothe*r
political Tarangaba, a dazzling prospectus with bankruptcy at the end. I
entirely deny what Mr. Nelson implies, namely, that there is a wide
distinction between a Socialist and a State Socialist, and I wish it to be
noted that as he did not define either term he left his readers as wise as
they were before. Pretending to give information he gave none. Until
r *. allace Nelson explains the distinction between Socialism and State
Socialism, and tells me what he means by whichever system he defends or
opposes, I shall continue to believe that while he is extolling the beauties
of Socialism he is like Mr. Browne, M.L.A., in truth bowing the knee to
an unknown Abracadabra.
Letter 16.
THERE was many years ago a man of Athens called
* Sockrates, who lived in a boiling-dowa, I believe, and was
constantly up to his neck in Greece or fat or something, but who was
nevertheless very knowledgable kind of an old person. He had a good
many ideas of his own, and one of these it seems was to profess ignorance
on a good many subjects on which his fellow-citizens believed up to the
time they were asked questions that they were fully informed. He called
himself a searcher for truth, and said that those who had leisure and would
search would by inquiry either find what they searched for, or would <r e t
rid of the idea that they knew what they really didn’t know, which was
finding truth in another form.


When the Australian Labour Federation in the plenitude of their
wisdom arranged for a just distribution of the collective fowl they neglected
to enumerate the particulars which, when taken together as a whole, they
viewed with approval and labelled dust (adjective with a capital letter,
please). Having settled all the little difficulties incidental to distribution
in this summary and speedy fashion, doubtless they then proceeded 1o
walk around and talk around, and mutually congratulate one another on
the capacity which they had displayed in doing what to less sanguine
beings might have appeared difficult. Exactly as our friends of the Jacobm
Club settled a good many difficulties, in connection with government, by
bawling in red caps, “Liberty, equality, and fraternity, and keeping the
guillotine going until their difficulties culminated in the military dictator-
ship of the little Corsican and great Emperor ; so by a few dexterous
words have our optimistic friends of the Australian Labour Federation
surmounted all the troubles, strife, and contention which from the defects
of poor human nature will most assuredly surround the distribution of the
collective fowl, when that interesting bird comes to be hanged, drawn, and
quartered. In making a just distribution, the Australian Labour Federa-
tion and the great Panjendrum will, of course, be the judges, and this
being the case it needs very little experience and less foresight to see that
justice with scales evenly balanced will be impelled to award to the Pan-
jendrum, with his lords of labour in attendance, the wings and the breast
and the merrythought, while if Smith and myself get the claws and beak
we may consider ourselves very generously and justly treated.
I have had some little experience of the opinions of the many-headed
monarch who wears the crown in this colony, and I can unhesitatingly
affirm that I never yet saw a constituency, however liberally subsidised at
the public expense out of the loan tund, that did not think that had justice
been done it should have had more. Like Oliver Twist, constituencies
always want more. To do justice to any constituency when dealing with
the public purse would always involve the grant to that constituency of
first its share, and then the full share of another electorate. That’s how
it works out in practice. Now fancy the Trades Hall having to decide
every week how much of a cow, or how much of a ton of potatoes, or how
much of the wool on a sheep’s back Tom and Hick and Harry were each
entitled to on a Saturday night, after all the national bookkeepers and
gangers and bosses had been settled up with, and the geneial expenses of
running everything with the Government stroke and a civil seivice con-
terminous with the population had been first deducted. Fancy, I say, all
these matters, which, the moment the great State business was set in
motion instantly arise, being settled by the assembled in
all their glory—in one minute with a beautiful adjective. Imagine,
dream of it if you will ; and then come to the earth, and see human
nature as it is, with the imperfections which according to theo-
logians we have inherited from the fall of our first and which
according to scientists dwell within us as a bequest of the cosmic man, but
which by the evidence of all competent observers are there, however they
may have arisen. As long as human nature remains as it is, how is a
world full of men, who are not subdued either by secular authority oi by
the influence of religion, to be satisfied by any scheme of distribution that
can possibly be devised ? What the Trades Hall want is an ethical change
in the nature of mankind to begin with. What the fierce enthusiasm o


the French revolution could not effect; what the influence of Christianity
could not effect ; what the self-sacrifice of Gautama could not effect ; what
all the preaching and example of hundreds of thousands of devoted soldiers
of the Cross, and the constant exhortation of tens of thousands of eccle-
siastics, thundering from their pulpits for centuries throughout Christen-
dom could not accomplish, we are asked to believe is to be brought
about by Seymour, Hinchcliffe, and Co., by the Worker , and by the
Trades Hall, with the aid of a few apriori propositions and some
slippery phrases. Misguided but enthusiastic muddlers, see ye
not what to the fishy eyes of a hoodlum would seem plain, that ye
are beginning from the wrong end, that ye are building from the top instead
of beginning at the bottom, and that all true reform must begin by uplifting
the soul and sharpening the intelligence, and shaping anew the conscience
of the individual man ? To alter the structure of society, and to leave
the units as they are, is to shuffle a greasy pack of cards and expect to
get a better pack. If ye want to reform the world ye must begin with
yourselves. Let each man reform himself, and there will be a rogue less
in the world, For what the parsons say, for what the priests say, for
wll , at u Herbert Spencer and the agnostics say, for what Plato and Seneca
and Marcus Aurelius say, and they all say the same thing, there must be
good reason, and in one form or another the burden of their song and the
voice of their lamentation is the same, “ Except ye be born again ye shall
not see the Kingdom of Heaven.” Neither on this earth nor in any other.
Letter 17.
QEI ORE dealing with essentials, I shall take the opportunity of
referring to a few inconsiderable items which nevertheless seem to
have loomed large on the mental horizon of Mr. Wallace Nelson. In
regard to the saying which, speaking from memory, I had attributed to
Lord Bacon, as Mr. Nelson correctly stated it was written bv Thomas
Hobbes ; but as neither of us has been ostensibly engaged in a controversy
on literary topics, it seems to me that the question is quite immaterial for
the maxim as applied was equally true and equally apt whether it had been
written by Bacon, or Shakspeare, or even by King Solomon himself. I
presented its substance with sufficient accuracy, but it is worthy of beino-
presented intact, and I shall now quote verbatim from Bartlett’s book
“ For words are wise men’s counters—they do but reckon by them • but
they are the money of fools.” (Part 1., chap. 4, Leviathan.) If’this
saying be carefully borne in mind in future by all, we may expect less
claptrap, less applause, and more reason at our public meetings.
Next in regard to the bet which Mr. Wallace Nelson offers to lay that
certain words quoted by him were used by Mr. Sydney Webb, he is
unwittingly, I hope, a radically false issue, for the point is not whether Mr
Webb ever used the words, but whether Mr. Webb ever put them forward
in a book as a formal definition or exposition of the principles of
Socialism. r
Then Mr. Wallace Nelson passes over, in what he is pleased to con-
sider a generous manner, what he calls “ my pathetic attempt to wriggle
out of the difficulty I got myself into over the Paris Commune,” I have


no time to hunt up references, but there is no necessity for Mr. Nelson to
be generously silent. I can deal with the matter. He is pleased to
believe that the Socialists had nothing to do with the outrages in Paris
after the evacuation of that city by the German army, which culminated
in the massacre of the Archbishop and many other noble and self-sacrificing
men. He is pleased also to believe that I have never discriminated
between the twofold meaning of the word Communist, between
Communism as a form of fundamental Socialism, and Communism meaning
a theory of municipal government. He says the men who inaugurated the
Commune were not Socialists. True, many of them were not ; but it is
true also that the more violen* spirits ultimately got the upper hand, and
that at that time in Paris the masses in a great measure were Socialists.
I do not expect anybody, certainly not Mr. Wallace Nelson, to take my
word on matters of this kind. I expect others to give proof, and I am
myself prepared to support any assertion that I may make. In this case
I will first supply the antecedent presumption—namely, Socialists as
Socialists favour revolution. I quote now from a book named “ Socialism,
Labour, and Capital,” by Kauffman, Bradlaugh, and others, and from an
article on “ Scientific Socialism,” by Kauffman, and on page 33 anyone
will find the following passage : —“ Marx and Engel’s Communistic
manifesto, published a few weeks before the outbreak of the February
revolution in Belgium, in 1818, was the text-book of the Social Democratic
party, and showed that Communists can reduce their whole theory to one
expression—the abolition of private capital. The first state is the
elevation of the proletariat to be the ruling class, the next to deprive the
middle class of the command of capital. The policy of the organisation is
to assist every revolutionary movement against social and political
conditions.”
The Marx here mentioned is Karl Marx, virtually the author of the
Australian Labour Federation programme of nationalisation, and according
to Dr. Schaffle the Social Democratic party is the Labour party, at any
rate in Europe and America. As Dr. Schaffle is an author who has been
endorsed by the Worker , it appears that his testimony is not biased by
hostility to Socialism.
As a witness to fact, I shall call Edward King, special correspondent
for twenty years. “ Europe in Storm and Sunshine.” „ Page 457 : “In
the early days of the Commune it nationalised all houses and lands
belonging to religious congregations. The churches were closed, seate of
the Commune being placed on the doors. It nationalised rent by decreeing
that no rent should be collected.” Page 435 : “ Rossel, one of the honest
men of the Commune, who was shot as a Communist leader, said,
speaking of his colleagues : ‘ When a burglar means to force a house he
knows where the strong boxes are, and how to get into them, but the
Commune was a novice at the trade of burglary, and was reduced to slay
in order to steal.” Page 513 : “ Napias Piquet, financier to the Commune,
had formed the plan of burning all papers of credit societies and
corporations. He desired to level everything, believing that the iniquities
of societies arose from the unequal distribution of wealth, and the
manipulation of private capital.” Page 506 : “ Proclamation of the 27th
May, by the Commune. All inhabitants of Paris are invited to return to
their homes within forty-eight hours ; after that time their stocks and
■bonds will be burnt,” This was the vindictive menace of the non-property


holding classes against the property holders. It seems by this testimony
from a newspaper correspondent that the Socialists were much in evidence
during the reign of terror, and it is extremely probable that for the
greater part of the brief reign of the Commune either they had the upper
hand or were too powerful to be dealt with. But on this point we may as
well have a competent Frenchman’s opinion up to date to see how the
matter is regarded in I aris itself. Mons. Yves Guyot, Minister for Public
Lands, French Republic, has been good enough to give his views (see
Article, December, 1893, “ Nineteenth Century,” pages 860-865), wherein
he says, “ Proudhon advocated suppression of interest, and that barter
should replace money as a means for the abolition of poverty and the
equalisation of fortunes. (See Australian Labour Federation manifesto,,
and Paraguay.) These conceptions led to the creation of the national
workshops of 1848, and to an insurrection. Under the F<mpire Socialistic
ideas spread, and the International was formed. They came to a head in
the Commune of 1871.” Of course they did ; there can be no reasonable
doubt of it, and when Mr. Wallace Nelson brags of his generosity in not
convicting me of what he imagines to be an erroneous impression, it is
evident he knows or fancies he knows much more than Yves Guyot,
Minister of the French Republic. Ido not know more than Yves Guyot,
and I know that I do not know more.
With regard to my views on the general question of Socialism, with
which Mr. W allace Nelson finds so much fault, I hope he will remember
that I was one of his disciples, and that my fault lies in being a faithful
adherent to the doctrines he preached in 1891. If my too susceptible soul
has been led astray, on him lies the blame, Yves Guyot and Dalrymple
have anentthe Commune fallen a victim to his prowess already, and if he
should happen to slay Dalrymple as an adversary of Socialism, then as
Wallace Nelson of 1891 and Dalrymple happen to hold the same views,
Mr. Wallace Nelson will have the melancholy satisfaction of having after
much labour succeeded in slaying himself.
To revert to the main question. This discussion first took serious
form on the 23rd April, when I invited Air. Charles Seymour, who at the
time had got into the Courier , to provide some information with regard to
the methods and machinery necessary to carry out and bring into
practice the reconstruction of society as arranged by the Trades Hall and
the Socialist Labour party. A request for information was not
unreasonable. The burden of proof undoubtedly rests upon those who
would subvert the existing industrial system, which rests on experience, in
order to erect some new system which, no matter what may be urged
speculatively on its behalf, has no such experience to rest on. We are
told that the Socialists are capturing the Legislature 5 if so the question
is essentially practical and well within the domain of politics. It is of
vital importance to citizens that our possible masters, the Socialists, should
at once proceed to clarify their intelligence so that it may be brought to
bear on the intricate problem of production and distribution, and provision
be made for the necessary nurture and support of the individual fowl when
it has been captured and safely deposited in the collective or State coop.
It is also of equal importance to the individual settler whose fowls are to
be nationalised to know by what piece of legerdemain the public goose
will be plucked of its feather, and whether the operation will be attended
with much squeaking and pain.


It is all very well to expect us to take everything for granted, and to
believe in the iridescent visions and ready promises of our irresponsible
friends, but I have yet to learn that it has been ever held that practical
politics come within the domain of faith, and we are certainly entitled to
know something of the ways and means whereby the bills which will be
drawn upon the public, or perhaps I should say on the collective fowl, will
be met in the end. The conduct of production and distribution is business,
and very big business, too, which it will not do to leave to the last, and
although I have considerable confidence in the collective wisdom of the
community, it does not devolve upon the community but upon the leaders
of the Socialist Labour party, who bring these schemes forward, to arrange
for their being effectively carried into operation. If the blind lead the
blind all will fall into the ditcji. Mr. Seymour knows all about it if he
would only explain, and disregard those colleagues of his who are always
hauling him back by the coat-tail when he is anxious to come out. I
know he wants to explain, because he has been engaged in the business of
putting the facts of Socialism before the public for many years. In
February, 1891, I remember Mr. Seymour delivered an address in Wharf-
street, and explained the doctrine of Socialism as usually put forward by
Labour leaders. The meeting had been convened by the Australian
•Labour Federation and Messrs. Reid and Hardacre, the present members,
were also in attendance. Mr. Seymour has, I understand, been engaged
in the same propaganda ever since, right up to the time when he con-
gratulated Mr. Thomas Glassey on being in attendance, when the
Australian Labour Federation gave birth to a promising but still some-
what featureless Socialistic infant. There are other reasons for applying
to Mr. Seymour, but I trust I have tabulated sufficient. Mr. Seymour
1 am sure will never have a better opportunity for putting forward his
plans for the reconstruction of society, and showing exactly how they are
to be carried out when the legislature has been captured.
Letter 18.
ON the publication of Mr. E. Y. Lowry's letter I thought! had at last
got the plain ana authoritative statement of the' “ true Socialism ”
which was to be carried out by the Socialistic Labour party through the
Legislature, and that therefore my self-imposed labours had come to an end.
But by the appearance of Mr. Higg’s letter of to-day I find my hopes
have been dashed to the ground.
Mr. Higgs it appears does not altogether concur with Mr. Lowry, and
thinks, indeed, that certain portions of the latter gentleman’s letter will do
harm to the prospects of “ Socialism in our time” if permitted to pass un-
challenged. He then challenges some of the opinions avowed by Mr. Lowry,
and gives instead those of which he himself as a pretty straightfoward Socialist
would approve of. But with the exception of perhaps the allusion to national
workshops, I see none which can be called distinctively socialistic. Mr,
Higgs takes exception to Mr. Lowry’s claim to voice the opinions of others
than himself, though I should think that Mr, Lowry, as a Socialist and
old resident of the colony, must be fully conversant with the opinions of
the great number of persons who claim to belong to the advanced wing of


the Socialist Labour party, and is fairly entitled to speak for those whom
he knows, just as Mr. Higgs is entitled to speak for those whom he knows.
At present it seems that Mr. Lowry and Mr. Higgs mutually take exception
to each other’s views, and although like Mr. Wallace Nelson, and Mr. Sey-
mour, and Mr. Browne, M.L.A., each has used the word Socialism as one
which covers a common action or aim, it appears on examination that they
do not in point of fact agree. Both these gentlemen are at variance in
regard to important points of their own doctrines, and for my part lam of
opinion thnt they are both astray, from which it seems that the question of
what true Socialism means, when translated into the domain of law and
fact, remains unsolved, and that therefore the common agreement on an
issue which is necessary before any matter can be rationally discussed has
not yet been arrived at. As the Australian Labour Federation have
declined to give an ex cathedra decision on the matter, as many of the
members of the Parliamentary Labour party will not speak, and as those
who do speak do not agree, but contradict one another, it is necessary in
the interests of the weak-kneed brother, and of truth itself, to enter into
in an earnest and independent inquiry.
Mr. Lowry tell us that while not prepared to take upon himself to
voice the opinions of the Labour party as a whole, yet as a Socialist and
as one who occupies an official position, he is able to voice the opinions of
a large number of his compeers. That he has done so accurately lam
satisfied from my own experience, and I have no doubt that his declarations
of what he knows of the opinions of other Socialists will be read with
interest. That Mr. Lowry should have had thrust upon himself the re-
sponsibility of revealing the truth so far as he understands it, that he
should have had to unveil Socialism and remove her mask, that he should
have had to proclaim the naked necessary truth instead of the executive of
the Australian Labour Federation, is certainly not a little surprising.
Mi. Lowry, very logically, I think, believes in repudiation, for it is
a logical deduction from the principales of true Socialism, as after exami-
iaation and enquiry they present themselves to my mind. I am not at
present concerning myself with the advantages or disadvantages of Social-
ism as a system or offering a judgment thereon, but I am trying to get at
its meaning, which can be gathered from a consideration of circumstances
and the application of the ordinary laws relating to evidence, and in ex-
plaining the opinions of Socialists I shall endeavour to do so in conformity
with what appears to be their real intention.
As Mr. Lowry thinks, it is undoubtedly true that the owning of all
the means of production and distribution by the State, and the
conversion of all citizens into State officials and State servants, is
a fundamental tenet of “ true Socialism.’’ Society would, under
this system, be conducted not under the civil, but under the military type ;
from the base to the summit, it would be regimented by officials. Quoting
Hubert Bland again, “ Socialism is the common holding of the means of
production and exchange, and no one is a true Socialist who hesitates to
clamour his loudest against any proposal whose adoption would prolong
the life of private property a single hour.” Mr. Lowry, as a Socialist
professing the principles of the Australian Labour Federation, very
naturally desires to carry them into effect. In the first place, private
capital is to be done away with. How it can be taken from its present
owners, without injustice, I cannot say, any more than I can tell where


the money is to come from to buy out the present owners, if confiscation
is not resorted to. This is exactly one of the points on which “true
Socialists should supply information. To my mind, nationalisation,
without confiscation, is absolutely imposible. Mr. Lowry is logical and sees
the difficulty as clearly as 1 do. As the gordian knot cannot be untied, he
proceeds to cut it. His first step in the attack of private capital is to con-
fiscate the private capital of those capitalistic persons who have lent us
money, and his next step will probably be—proceeding on the same lines
—to place the State, that is everybody in general, in possession of
all that the present owners happen to have, whether they be farmers, shop-
keepers, or savings bank depositors. By this means, the individual fowl
would be captured and placed under the State coop. Mr. Lowry, I have
said, is logical. He proceeds straight to his goal. The Australian Labour
Federation and even Mr. Higgs appear to be wobbling. The Australian
Labour Federation programme is very plain, and in the past the Worker
was equally explicit. How the executive of the Australian Labour Federa-
tion could come to an apparently unanimous vote to proceed at once to a
reorganisation of society, on the basis of the national ownership of every-
thing, how they could have placed this as the aim to be at once and per-
sistently worked for through the instrumentality of the political machine,
and then decline to make u&e of the only method by which their objects
could be obtained—namely, confiscation, seems quite inexplicable.
If the community as a whole are to be placed in possession of the
capital now held by private individuals, there is only one way in which it
can be done, and that is by taking from those who have. “ Out of nothing
nothing can come.” To make the State the universal capitalist the individual
fowl must be plucked, for there is no other source from which the State can
acquire capital, Mr. Lowry see this, as any sensible man would, and he
proposes as a first step, to repudiate our public debt ; in other words, he
refuses to repay the lenders from whom we got the cash to build our public
works and railways. He proposes to repudiate the public debt, but to
keep the railway which we have built with private capital obtained from
Great Britain. In my opinion, Mr. E. Y. Lowry is, as a true Socialist,
perfectly justified in repudiating all moral and legal obligations,
and is merely following out the principles of true Socialism as
directly or indirectly promulgated and put forth' by the executive
of the Australian Labour Federation, by the Worker in the past, and
by the most prominent leaders and the founders of “ true Socialist doct-
rines. Space will not for the present allow of my offering evidence in
support of this proposition, but to-morrow I propose to return to the
subject and to tender evidence in support of my case, the force of which my
readers will judge. It will be interesting to ascertain from true Socialists
whether Mr. Higgs, or Mr. Seymour, or Mr. Lowry is the most accurate
exponent of their principles.
Letter 19
ALTHOUGH Mr. Higgs has expressly stated that he speaks solely for
himself, it is, I think, almost impossible for the editor of the Worker
to sever himself from the paper which he conducts ; and although formally,


perhaps, he may represent no one but himself, yet his opinions would lose some
of their weight did he not believe them to be shared with other Socialists.
It seems to me that the publication of Mr. Higgs’ opinions is intended to
convey an impression with respect to the opinions of the Labour party. If
we are to believe literally that Mr. Higgs represent no one but himself,
then it appears that Mr. Lowry is entitled to speak as the only mouthpiece
of Labour, and I think that it is a disappointment to the public that
amongst the many exponents of political Socialism, none save Mr. Lowry
are disposed to tell us what true Socialism really means.
Now the question to be decided being who of the two who
have spoken—Mr. Higgs and Mr. Lowry—is the “ true Socialist ; the
best way to begin is to consult Dr. Schaffle, who has two especial claims to
consideration. In the first place, his “ Quintessence of Socialism” vs one
of the text-books recommended by the Worker ; in the next, it has been on
several occasions selected for attack as containing the stiongest and most
business-like account of the Socialist position which has been yet put
forward. Edward Stanley Robinson, writing on the impracticability of
Socialism, says of Dr. Schaffle, that “he evidently sympathises with
Socialism, and is resolved to make the best case he can for its proposal.
By consulting the analysis of Socialism which has been given by Schaffle
and others, and its history as presented by Drage and Kauffman it may
easily be seen whether Mr. Higgs or Mr. Lowry has the greater grasp of
the principles of social democracy, democratic collectivism, or true
Socialism,”—these different names being merely marks for the same thing
—scientific Socialism. „
In Dr. Schaffle’s later work, “The Impossibility of Social Democracy,
he says (page 10), “ The only thinkable conception of the Labour Party is
Democratic Collectivism. Socialism is an entire philosophy. In religion
it means atheism ; in the State a democratic republic; in industry, a
a democratic Collectivism ; in ethics a measureless Optimism ; in
metaphysics a naturalistic Materialism ; in the home an almost entire
loosening of the family ties and of the marriage bond.”
Then we have Mr. Geoffrey Drage, who has just completed a report
to the London Royal Commission on Labour, dealing with the Labour
question in Germany. His work is a standard one and entirely trustworthy,
and of it a sketch was given in the Courier of the 21st May. This report
gives the full history of German Socialism, and entirely confirms Schaffle.
It may be noted that the history of German Socialism is the history of
Socialism elsewhere. The Socialism of Queensland and of the United
States of America is simply German Socialism exported and transplanted.
Marx Aveling, speaking of Socialism in America and of German influence,
says While the Germans will in the future, as in the past, direct the
thoughts of their fellow-workers, and suggest ideas to them, they will have
to be content after a time to stand aside.” The Socialism of the Worker
and of the Australian Labour Federation is entirely consonant with the
doctrines of Karl Marx and Lassalle, which indeed have been disseminated
directly by that journal, and indirectly through the books of its exchange,
as may be seen by a glance at the names of the authors Bax, Gronlund,
Nordau, Schaffle, and Marx. Drage traces the development of the Socialist
labour party or true Socialist movement to its birth in Germany, and
shows its three periods of development. From 1840 to 1802 it was strictly
an International and Communist movement. In its second period, from


1862 to 1878 (that is, up to the passing of the anti-Socialist law), the
party advocated co-operative production at the expense of the State which
would ultimately lead to the State becoming owner of all the means of
production and exchange. (See speeches of Messrs. Glassey, Seymour,
and others.) The third period began with 1878, and continued till the
issue of the Erfurt programme in 1891, and each of the programmes put
forth —namely, those of Eisenach, Gotha, and Erfurt—agreed in asserting
the iniquity of the existing social and economic order, and especially of the
ownership of the means of production. In short, all agreed with the
Worker of the past, and with the Australian Labour Federation, and with
the Socialist settlers of the Pitt Town labour settlement, and held that
those who had no fowls of their own should improve their position by
nationalising the fowls of individual settlers. Whether we consult Schaffle
or Webb or Karl Marx, or the executive of the Australian Labour
Federation, or any other competent authority, we always find at bottom the
same intention —to abolish private capital. There are just two ways of
abolishing private capital. The first is to destroy it, and this was
attempted in Queensland a few years since, when nothing but heavy rain
prevented the destruction by fire of all the Western pasturage, and the
consequent loss of a large part of the cattle and sheep on which so ranch
of our Queensland trade depends. The other way of abolishing private
capital is to take it away from those who have it, or to use a euphemism
which is fashionable in Labour circles, to nationalise the means of produc-
tion and exchange. I know of no way but these two, and it would puzzle
Mr. Higgs or anyone else to discover any other.
Beyond saying that he is a pretty straightout Socialist, a word
which, as has been pointed out in this correspondence, may cover the
opinions of Mr. Tozer and Mr. Lowry, Mr, Higgs has really told us
nothing of Socialism. He has mentioned some things certainly which
Socialists may approve of, but he has given us none of the information
which, coming from the editor of the Worker, on whom falls the
responsibility of voicing the political view of Labour, would have been
particularly valuable, and most thankfully received.
In the absence of any definition from Mr. Higgs, I will refer to one
provided by his predecessor, Mr. William Lane, which will go to show
how little a man who does not define is committed to by the mere statement
that he is a Socialist. I may well compare the meaning of the term to a
snark, for it is one of the things which has been often pursued and never
caught. In the preface to the “ Working Man’s Paradise,” by “ John
Miller,” otherwise William Lane, this passage appears : “To understand
Socialism is to endeavour to lead a better life, to regret the foulness of our
present ways, to seek ill for none, to desire truth and purity and honesty,
to despise this selfish civilisation, and to comprehend what living might
be. It enthrones love above the universe, gives hope to all who are
down-trodden, and restores to us faith in the eternal.” Instead of a
definition of Socialism, Mr. Lane gives us the expression of a Christian
ideal. Nothing is more futile than to set out with an ideal aspiration, for
the regeneration of Society, which might be held by a Christian, or even
by a stoic philosopher, and to call it a definition of what is in the main a
material question of secular government and industrial economics. It
would be as rational to go to the Patents Office to patent the action of a
pump, and then to give for its specification and plan an enumeration of


the aspirations of a good Christian. Mr. William Lane is, I firmly
believe, a good and unselfish man ; but he would have been more at home
had he entered a monastery, in order to spend his life in contemplation,
than in attempting to guide the progress of a new settlement in a strange
land. Mr. Lane rejects Christianity, and expects the effects of Christianity
to go on, when the cause of those effects has been removed, just as he
expected production would continue when the motive of self-interest had
been removed. I defy any man to read Mr. Lane’s book, a “ Working
Man’s Paradise,” without seeing that any attempt on the part of such a
man as Mr, Lane to deal on a large scale with practical administration
must necessarily and in accord with “ the eternal fitness of things,” be
attended with blank failure.
To return to Mr. Higgs. It is impossible to gather anything definite
from his statement that he is a pretty thorough-going Socialist. He tells
us that all Socialists approve of a tax on unimproved land values, of
reform in law administration, and he thinks that the alienation of land
shall cease—meaning, I presume, that there shall be no more land sales,
and that class privileges should be abolished. These statements are about
as much to the point as to say that Socialists approve of the jury system.
Everyone, perhaps, except the members of the legal profession, approves of
cheap law, just as everyone except the piano makers would approve of
cheap pianos ; but none of the modifications of State policy he mentions
are distinctively Socialist, for any of them might be approved of by those
who are not Socialists.
When Mr. Higgs comes to the establishment of national workshops
he is advocating something which may be distinctively Socialist, but again
it may not be. It depends entirely on what is meant by national work-
shops. The phrase certainly smacks of the Commune. The scheme at
the time of the French revolution of 1848 was tried for about two years,
and had to be given up as unworkable. If he means the employment
of all citizens who demand work at trades union rates of wages, irrespec-
tive of demand and supply, then we should have the Commune and the
Socialist State in the true sense of the word ; but it would be a State
which would last probably as long and no longer than previous experi-
ments of a similar kind. But the national workshops of which Mr. Higgs
speaks may mean something quite different. Here light is needed.
National workshops may be no more a mark of true Socialism than the
workhouses of Great Britain or the labour colonies of Victoria or St.
Helena. It all depends on the application of certain principles.
Having compared Mr. Higgs’ opinions with the ordinary standards
of Socialism, with the essentials of Socialism, and with the opinions of
Mr. Seymour and the Australian Labour Federation, I have come to the
conclusion that whatever his opinions may be, he has at any rate afforded
no evidence of being, in the strict sense of the word, a true Socialist. He
may be a Socialist in the same sense that Sir Thomas MTlwraith may be
one. He may believe in an extension of State action, such for instance,
as that which took place in certain directions in the last session of
Parliament. But the statement that he is a thorough-going Socialist in
one sense is not incompatible with the belief that he is opposed to
Socialism in another sense. He may be a Socialist in the sense of the
passage quoted from the “ Workingman’s Paradise but so far, for the
matter of that, may the Pope of Rome and the Archbishop of Canterbury,


though those high dignitaries would both be opposed to the Socialism of
Ivarl Marx and the Worker. If he does not accept with Mr. Lowry the-
essential tenet of true Socialism—that is to say, the abolition of private
capital and the nationalisation of the individual fowl (whether colonial or
British) —then I am afraid he has turned his back on Bax, and the
Worker, and the Australian Labour Federation, and on Mr, Seymour ;
and although he may be, a most capable and estimable gentleman, I fear
he is very far indeed from being a true Socialist.
Letter 20.
If AVIFTG examined Mr. Higgs’ opinions, and confessed my inability to
*• discover anything in them which can be considered as distinctive of the-
true Socialist, with the exception of a doubtful allusion to national work-
shops, it is now my pleasing duty to look into the credentials of Mr. E„
L. Lowry, who voices the advanced wing of the Labour party, to which
is attached, judging by his letter of the 15th May, Messrs. Reid, Duns-
ford, and Dawson, MM.L.A. After careful consideration and consulta-
tion with Smith, of Brisbane, I have come to the concluson that although
Mr. Lowry’s Socialism, judged by the standard set up by Dr. Shaffle, and
also by the Australian Labour Federation, approximates closely to true
Socialism, yet it is of a character which, though professed by a vast
number of men, is strongly tinctured with anarchy.
Socialism, says Shaffle, is an entire philosophy. In religion it
means atheism. Mr, Higgs has not given us his views on religion, but
asserts “ that Mr. E. L , Lowry is no doubt a very earnest Socialist,” and
Mr. E. Y. Lowry has expressed himself as follows (see letter 30th May):
—“ We trust—we being the members of the advanced wing of the Aus-
tralian Labour Party—to thoroughly erradicate all useless church dogmas
with their pretended sanctimonious environments.” Just so. Here is
displayed the same hostility to established forms of religion, and the same
intolerance of the religious feelings of others, which characterised the men
of the French Commune, and generally the Socialist school of Karl Marx,,
and is that which has by far the greatest number of adherents. On the
plank of religion, as stated by Dr. Schaffle, Smith, and myself agree that
Mr. E. Y. Lowry has scored one.
The next distinguishing mark, says Shaffle, of the true Socialist is-
that he desires a democratic republic. In Mr. Lowry’s communication
of the 7th he gives us his views on government. He would abolish
monarchy and royal personages and aristocrats in general, who, he says,
should work and get their share of reward in the coming Commune—
meaning by the word not municipal government, but Democratic Col-
lectivism. Evidently he is in love with the state of affairs which existed
in Paris during the brief reign of the Commune. He regards its memory
with tenderness, as did some of the representatives of the Australian
Labour Federation during the Western strike—a fact which was made
public by the correspondence secured by the police, and read in Rock-
hampton. Socialist clubs even now meet annually in London to celebrate
the day of the Commune. In his feeling for the Commune, and his love
for the red Republic, Mr. E. L. Lowry lias scored another claim to be-
considered a true Socialist.


In industry Mr. Lowry is a Collectivist ; point three to Mr. Lowry.
The Labour party of Queensland was founded by the Australian Labour
Federation for the express purpose of bringing about industrial collec-
tivism and to nationalise the individual fowl of the settler. To show this
T quote from the Worker, its official organ. In 1890 a Communist
programme was issued, and on the 29th November the editor, who,
being appointed by the district councils, voiced the beliefs of all affiliated
unions, made this statement: —“The unionist plan of compaign for
capturing the Government, and giving us a chance of doing what the
German Socialists are doing.” And, again, on the same date : “The
ways of labour, its hopes and fears, are all based on the ownership of the
means of living, both land and machines.” In plain English, on securing
all individual fowls. On the 27th December, 1890, the I Yorker states :
“It was resolved by the General Council sitting at Blackall, and agreed
on as a recommendation by the affiliated unions, that all official Labour
candidates shall accept the political principles agreed on by the Australian
Labour Federation ; ” from which it appears that the final as well as the
first cause of the Labour party is to bring about a universal nationalisation,
and as the greater number of the Labour members of Parliament have
been elected under the auspices of the Australian Labour Federation, and
are under an obligation and have given distinct pledges to resign their
seats under certain conditions, it is evident that the Labour party are
pledged to German Socialism, and to the abolition of private capital as
soon as they can command the necessary voting power.
According to Mr. Gilbert Casey, a gentleman who is engaged in
bossing a portion of the Paraguyan exiles, but who was at the time one of
the Board of Trustees of the Australian Labour Federation (see Worker,
21st March, 1891), “Citizens should look not to the justice of their
claims but to their ability to enforce them, for this,’ he said, “is the
measure of our success.” In this what may be termed “ the straight
tip,” ethical considerations are entirely laid on one side, and if Mr. E. \.
Lowry accepts the gospel as proclaimed by the Australian Labour Tedera-
tion, and proposes to repudiate the national debt, it really seems unbecom-
ing for the editor of the journal which conducted such a propaganda to
turn round and blame gentlemen like Mr. E. \. Lowry who have simply
believed what they were told. According to the doctrines of the II orker,
and of the Labour party in general, so far as any meaning can be attached
to their words, private capital is, in its essence, an evidence of wrong,
profit is usury, and interest is theft. To all intents and purposes this
was implied by Mr. Seymour only a week or two ago, when he put, his
head out of the window for a minute and promptly withdrew it again to
say that profit, rent, and interest appropriated the eggs laid by llm indi-
vidual fowl, which personified Labour. Reasoning from Karl Marxs bold
assumptions it is easy to deduce that capital is a crime and interest is theft.
If this be so, Mr. Lowry is right to refuse to sanction a crime by continu-
ing to pay interest. That the so-called principles of Karl Marx are held
to be fallacious by scientific thinkers, and therefore do not warrant the
conclusions he has drawn, is a circumstance probably too trifling to have
come under Mr. Lowry’s notice, but I defy him, even with the united ability
of the editorial staff of the Worker his back, ever to persuade a cabman or
drayman who is the owner of his cab or dray, to see anything immoral in
accepting hire for that cab or dray, and if there is nothing improper


in paying for the hire of a dray, there can be nothing criminal or wrong in*
paying for the hire of the money which will purchase a cab or a.
dray. But of course the advanced wing of the Labour party do not
think for themselves, and more’s the pity. They get their opinions
steaming hot from the Australian Labour Federation fountain, and these
opinions implicitly justify the capture by the community of all individual
fowls and the repudiation of all debts.
The fourth plank of the Socialist philosophy, Schaffle says, is a
measureless optimism. Mr. Lowry will score here again. He is a
measureless optimist for this reason ; being an Anarchist as well as a
Socialist, he holds that the past and the present are wholly bad, and the
future alone can be good. Freehold tenure must be abolished ; class dis-
tinctions, whatever this may mean, must be abolished ; monarchy must be
abolished ; the industrial organisation of society must be abolished ; the
constitution of Great Britain—which has been the admiration of all free
people—is rotten to the core, and must be abolished ; the Churches with
their pretended dogmas must be abolished ; everything in short must be
abolished, and after these sweeping, and in the mind of Mr. Lowry doubt-
less salutary, changes have been accomplished, then we are “ to arrive at a
common brotherhood, surrounded by justice and humanity.” Does Mr.
Lowry really believe that either churches or kings would have existed from
time immemorial to the present day, unless both kings and churches had
met and satisfied some natural want of humanity. It is because religion
satisfies a craving of the soul which has been universally felt, because
mankind want something to worship outside themselves, that religion is
found in all lands and during all ages. In like manner, kingship
represents the fact that man wants a leader ; and whether he be elected
like a president, or be chosen like Parnell, or born in the purple like the
Czar of Russia, matters little ; for a king—crowned or otherwise—man
will have. In the shearers’ strike there were several kings in the West *.
and for aught I know, Mr. E. Y. Lowry, who as an official of the Labour
party is a melancholy illustration of those very class distinctions his soul
burns to abolish, may be, perhaps is, himself a king, though wearing no
diadem. All these things that Mr. Lowry would abolish, whether they
are evidence of weakness and folly or not, are plainly evidence of men’s
wants and desires. If men have been so foolish or knavish, in Mr...
Lowry’s estimation, as to worship in churches, to acknowledge kings, to
have class distinctions, to set up systems of industries (which indeed have
grown out of men’s wants), to crave ground they can call their own, why
should Mr. Lowry believe man will not be equally foolish in the future;.
These laws and customs have not made men. It is men that have made
these offices and customs and institutions. Grapes will not grow on-
thistles, and before talking of abolishing the churches it will be necessary
for reformers first to create a new and binding morality. To have a world
much different from the present there must be a new creation.
Socialists like Mr, Lowry denounce capitalists, landowners, lawyers,,
ecclesiastics of every degree, and whole classes of men lumped together.
lam not concerned to defend them ; but what Ido say is this : In one
breath you denounce all men as knaves, and abolish religion and authority
and in the next you proclaim a state of things that would only work for a
week on the assumption that all men were noble and unselfish and honour-
able. According to Lacordaire, if you would found durable institutions


write above the word Liberty, Obedience ; above Equality, Hierarchy ;
above Fraternity, Veneration ; above the august symbol of Rights, the
divine symbol of Duty. But Mr. Lowry would do away with authority
and religion, and is optimist enough to believe that the social fabric will
continue after its foundations have been destroyed. Here he proves himself
a “measureless optimist,” and scores his fourth point as a Socialist, as
being strictly in accord with Schafile’s specification.
Letter 21.
THANKS to the interposition of Mr. Lowry, who has drawn the editor
of the Worker, it is apparent that the object of affiliated labour is the
same to-day as it was in 1890, Mr. Higgs has a good deal to say about Mr.
Sydney Webb ; but not to the point. We are dealing with the policy of
the Labour Party, and not with the opinions of an English theorist, and
my opponent has simply adopted Mr. Seymour’s tactics and talked round
the question. He explains that while advocating the nationalisation of all
sources of wealth and of all means of producing and exchanging wealth, he
would not repudiate any legal or moral obligation, but would buy out the
private owners with loan money. In the lamentable absence of all infor-
mation in detail, it becomes necessary to examine into the practicability of
the scheme, and it appears that we can only get rid of the local capitalist
by calling in the aid of the foreign capitalist, with this result: We shall
have exchanged the local for the absentee proprietor and have trebled the
million and a quarter interest which we at present pay annually to our
British creditors. The proposal is absurd. Does anyone suppose that the
foreign capitalist would lend scores of millions of pounds to a Communistic
state in the South Pacific ? And still more absurd when we remember
that in order to borrow money there must be somebody with money to lend,
so that the first step in collectivism is only possible on the
supposition that all private capital is not abolished, but that some
continues to exist outside the colony. But waiving these difficulties, let
us suppose that the State had borrowed the necessary millions, and had paid
over the money to the sellers, then one of the first essentials of the socialistic
scheme would be wanting, for the State would not own all the means of ex-
change. Those to whom the loan money— i.e., the means of exchange—
had been handed over, would have no means of investing it in the colony—
private ownership having been abolished—and they would therefore be
compelled to go to some other land where Socialism had not become an
accomplished fact. The first result then of Collectivism on Mr. Higgs’
pattern, would be to drive all property owners away, and the next would
be to leave the colony entirely in the grasp of the absentee mortgagee.
The debt of the colony at the present time amounts to over thirty
millions, and it is no easy matter to find the interest. To buy up all the
farms and shops and mines and stations, now held by private owners,
would necessitate a gigantic loan, on which Mr. Higgs says he will find the
interest and provide for repayments by surplus production. Waiving an
objection which will be taken by anyone with business experience, that pro-
duction often results in a deficit, the proposal involves handing over the
first fruits of labour to the public creditor, so that after all, even in the


Communistic State, labour, alas, will still toil for the capitalist. Wherein
then will labour be advantaged ?
The loan, we are told, is to be paid by the proceeds of land and income
taxes. But the land will belong to the whole people—to the State—and
the land tax as land tax will yield nothing, and as there is no private
capital, neither will the income tax yield anything, so that the proposal
amounts to this—that the State shall pay off its debt by imposing taxes
on itself. lam afraid that Mr. Higgs has got into a sad tangle, and the
reluctance of the Socialists to supply particulars of their plan is easily
accounted for. A Socialist differs, it has been said, from an Anarchist,
chiefly in one respect. Both are prepared to destroy, but .the Socialist is
credited with a plan for reconstruction. Here we have no such plan, and
it is evident we are face to face with men who have nothing to fall back
upon but the Nihilist principle : “ Let us destroy everything and clear
the ground. As to the reconstruction, that we shall see later on.”
There are three classes of difficulties which the Socialist Labour party
have to deal with, and being curious to know how they could be surmounted,
I applied for information to the officials of the Australian Labour Federa-
tion, But these gentlemen it is evident never having perceived the
difficulties of their own scheme, have no information whatever to offer.
Their phrases, like the box of the conjuror, are perfectly empty, ladies
and gentleman—perfectly empty. First, the difficulty of transferring to
the State all private capital without gross injustice to individuals ; next,
the difficulty of continued production when all ordinary motives cease to
operate ; and lastly, the equally formidable difficulty of making a distribu-
tion which will satisfy all citizens. No less than three plans of distribution
have been advanced at different periods by various schools of German
thinkers, the first, that each should receive according to his labour. As
individual strength and skill are unequal this would lead to uneqal distribu-
tion. And how is a farmer or miner to ascertain how much of present and
past labour is embodied in the result of his toil, representing as it does, the
joint product of the co-operation of tools, labour, skill, and natural agents.
The problem would be insoluable. Next, it has been proposed to distribute
to each according to his needs, but needs vary, and who is to determine
each man’s needs. Smith of Brisbane tells me that if he is allowed to
determine his own needs in the matter of distribution he may become a
Socialist, but certainly on no other terms. Lastly, an equal distribu-
tion to all. This would involve, as Proudhon has pointed out, the
exploitation of the strong for the benefit of the weak, and would be fatal
to industry. It involves more than this, for as Schaffle has taught, it
involves the appropriation by society of the results of unequally productive
labour for a uniformly equal distribution, which would be a universal and
monstrous appropriation by one set of persons of the surplus value belong-
ing to another, so that Collectivism would be in its way deliberately and
universally doing just that very thing which it reproaches Capitalism for
doing, far more thoroughly and universally than capital really does.
And now to consider some difficulties of Socialistic production. As-
long as there are inequalities in the fertility and position of land, and in
seasons and climate ; as long as there are inequalities in nature, there will
be inequalities in production. The ratio of supply and demand is always
varying, so exchangeable values will vary in spite of the adoption of labour
time for the Unit of Exchange. To adjust the supply to the demand, it


■will be indispensable to organise all industry under one supreme control.
“There must be an absolute directive authority. If all do not work at the
lowest possible cost, to secure the greatest possible result, production will
fall off. And, how is supreme authority to secure from one central point
the fulfilment of these conditions, and how ensure that there shall not be
exploitation or value absorbed by trade officials ? If Socialism does not
by raising or lowering wages, succeed in adjusting supply and demand
and to do either is inconsistent with its principles, it will be compelled to
order all workmen to their several posts of labour. Will such units of
labour force consent to be transplanted by state officials. How is this
mass of collective labour to be managed, and how can the Socialist
Commonwealth cope with the enormous book-keeping necessary to estim-
ate correctly, and in the absence of money, the exact position occupied by
each labourer to every other labourer ? And how much of the fruits of
his labour would each man be likely to get back, after the collective expenses
were defrayed ; —the total sura available for distribution being in any case
strictly limited by the industry of the collective Units. As each man’s
share would depend in Queensland, not upon himself, except to an infinite-
simar extent but upon the industry and aptitude of the 390,999 other per-
sons, who taken together, make up the 400,000 units comprising the
population, there would be no inducement to hard work, and it is probable,
therefore, that the average man would get for his his share of production
very much less than he receives now. How could it be otherwise? For
after all is said, the Socialist system is merely the universal
extension of the public service, and of public departments. It would be-
the apotheosis of the Government stroke, and under Socialism the well-
known defects of public departments would be universal. The disadvan-
tages of Socialism are beyond our power to forecast ; we can see only
some of them, and they are formidable enough. But it can only succeed
by the establishment of a firm and masterful control, that is to say, by
abandoning its essential principle of equality. Social Democracy as a
system would either fail, or succeed only by sawing off the branch on
which as a party it sits.” So that the whole scheme is in truth nothing
but a nostrum that will not bear examination, and a delusive bait for the
masses.
Mr. Lowry would consficate foreign capital, while Mr. Borchers
denies the right of private individuals to any property, and laughs to
scorn all claims of compensation, which indeed he considers nonsensical.
While the editor of the Worker rebukes these gentlemen, they are
undoubtedly true disciples of Socialism as put forth by his paper,
with the assistance of the books it has recommended to its readers.
For example, Karl Marx—whose book on capital has been called the
Socialist Bible—in his manifesto of 1847, advocates the suppression of
the family because family life reposes on Capital and the principle of
private property. According to Bax’s, see “ Ethics,” “ indidividual
possession of property is an injustice, and confiscation right, from a
Socialist’s stand-point. He says also that the social revolution proclaims
war to the knife with existing society, and again Page 51, that
confessedly to be a Christian is to be not only alien but hostile to
real Socialism, and he challenges anyone to show the corapatability of
Christian principles with Socialism.” Engle tells us the proletariat
is to seize the public power, and by this means to transform the means


of production into public property; and according to Karl Marx, the
aims of Socialism can only be obtained by a violent over-throw of society.
“ Kordau,” another of the authors commended by the official organ
of Labour opposes marriage and denies God, the soul, and judgment to
come. From the above, it may readily be seen that the Worker propa-
ganda embraces a war against secular and religious authority and
undermines family life. It denies the principle of private
property, and advocates the subversion of all existing order, the only
complaint against Messrs. Lowry and Borchers which the Socialist Labour
Party have a right to make is that they may have avowed the doctrines
and aims of the party too prematurely, and with a somewhat inconvenient
and embarrassing frankness.
Conclusion.
IK his last letter, Mr. Lowry made the statement that Karl Marx was
behind the times, and that modern thought was advancing, implying
probably thereby a compliment to himself as one ok the advanced wing of
the Labour party. But he has not condescended to particulars or to clear
up the ambiguity lurking in the phrase, “ advanced opinion.” If by
this phrase Collectivism is indicated, it is no new doctrine, and it would be
quite as competent for any dead beat who has sought refuge in a black’s
camp to swagger of bis communal life and advanced opinions, or for a few
Kebuchadnezzars browsing in the bush to dub themselves “ the people” and
flaunt before the world a red banner emblazoned “ progress.”
However this may be, it is startling to find men, who protest against the
Acts of George IY. on account of their antiquity, so inconsistent as to fall
in love with a system which is itself hoary with the snows of ages ; and
which, if it appears new to Mr. Lowry can be so only for the same reason
that the Bible would appear new to a Salomon Islander —from want of
knowledge.
The truth is that the bacillus of Socialism has been lately introduced
into Mr, Lowry and colleagues from that great source of infection, the
Worker , which caught it from the Fabian essayists; and from Mr. Lane, who
caught it from Karl Marx and Lassalle, who were the disciples of Louis
Blanc and Proudhon, and these in their turn from Baboeuf, a crank who
came to the front in the fevered riot of the French revolution, and who
started the Tribune of the People —the first Socialist journal on record •
which, like Mr. Lowry, professed to advocate “advanced opinions,” so much
so indeed, that Monsieur Robespierre, the leader of the then Labour party,
clapped Monsieur Baboeuf in gaol. Here he continued to conspire in the
interest of the communistic republic, until the “ people,” in the name of
public safety, nationalised his head with a guillotine ; or perhaps it would
be more strictly accurate to say, that they would have done so, had he not
recanted his theories in gaol, and entered his last individual protest against
nationalisation by committing self-destruction.
If Mr. E. Y. Lowry will only turn to the pages of history and discard
for a while paper theories and phrases, for the more solid facts of experience,
he will learn that Socialism of the Australian Labour Federation type was


not only advocated, but thought out and put into practice on a gigantic
scale many centuries ago. He will discover also that his prototype,
Monsieur Gracchus Baboeuf, was a mere plagiarist of the system carried
out by the Jesuits of Paraguay in the sixteenth century, which system was ob-
obtained almost intact from that of the semi-divine Incas of Peru, who had
governed their stolid and docile subjects in an autocratic and i iade& Hall
like fashion for many centuries before they were invaded and conquered by
the Spaniards under Pizarro. But the Incas themselves were copyists, for
historians say Collectivism was undoubtedly an exotic in America, and was
introduced either directly or indirectly from China, the same source from
which we have got our tea, and oranges, our labour colonies and silk-
worms. . . , . . , ,
It is open to anyone who takes an interest in the subject, and who
desires to trace the origin and history of the so-called advanced opinions
of Mr. E. Y. Lowry and the official organ of Labour, and the
consequences which follow their being put into practical operation, to
enquire, not so much of Mr. Lane and of the Australian Labour
Federation, though that object lesson need not be undervalued, but rather
of the Abbe Hue, in his standard work on China. This celebrated
traveller and missionary apostolic, lived in that Empire from a.d. 1838 to
1852, when he returned to France. From his work, published in 1855,
and from Vol. 11., pages 58 to 09, for the especial information and
benefit of Mr. E. Y. Lowry and other distinguished Socialist chiefs, I
summarise the following matter :
In the 11th century of our era, under the Song dynasty, there arose
in China a Socialist chief, Wang-ngan-che by name—a man of great talent
who kept all classes excited during the reign of several emperors. He
had studied with ardour, spoke with eloquence and grace, and could give
an air of importance to the most trifling things. His private life was
regular, and his external conduct respectable.
On the other hand he was ambitious, and thought all means lawful
to gain his own ends. He was obstinate and haughty, and filled with the
most exalted idea of his own merits. He esteemed only those things
which agreed with his own opinions, and was desirous of uprooting and
utterly destroying the old institutions of his country to replace them with
new ones of his own invention. His popularity fluctuated greatly at
various periods, but his power was almost unbounded under the emperor
Chen-t-soung. Sse-ma-koung, an enlightened man and a religious
observer of old customs, opposed him.
The scheme of Wang-ngan-che was one to procure Infallible happiness
for the people. It was he said the most essential duty of Government to
love the people, and to procure them the real advantages of life which are
plenty and pleasure. ,
To do this the State should inspire everyone with the principles of
rectitude and ensure obedience by force. The State should take possession
of all the resources of the Empire, and become the sole employer. It
should take the entire command of management of commerce, industry,
and agriculture. Tribunals should be established throughout the Empire to
fix the prices of provisions and merchandise. For some years taxes were to
be imposed, to be paid only by the rich. The tribunals were to decide who
were rich and who were poor. The sums so received were to be distributed
to the aged, to paupers, and to workmen out of employ. The State was


to become the sole proprietor of the soil. Tribunals were to assign the
land annually, and to provide all necessary seed on condition that the loan
would be repaid after harvest. The kind of crop was to be fixed by the
officers of the tribunals.
By this means, said the Socialist leader, Wang-ngan-che, abundance
and happiness would reign. The only persons who would suffer would be the
usurers and monopolists, and justice required that these people .should make
restitution of their ill-gotten gains. The State in future should be the only
creditor and charge no interest, and as the State would watch over agricul-
ture and fix supply and the price of provisions, there would always be a
sufficiency. In case of a famine arising in any one province, the great
agricultural college at Pekin would at once restore an equilibrium from the
national storehouses.
thus the necessaries of life would always be at a moderate price and
there would be no classes in want, and as the State would be the only specu-
lator it would realise enormous profits which would be available for the
construction of public works on a large scale. These reforms involved the
reduction of all classes to a uniform condition, but the Emperor
Chen-t-soung placed entire authority in the hands of Wang-ngan-che and
the social revolution began.
All land was to be divided, the State was to manage everything,
people were to have seed at spring-time gratuitously, and after the harvest
the same quantity was to be handed back. Then all lands were to be
cultivated and abundance reign.
Like the Australian Labour Federation programme and Hew Australia,
in theory nothing could be more attractive, and in practice nothing was found
to be more injurious. Did the people make use of the grain for the purposes
for which it was supplied ? No, for the interest of the moment is what
chiefly concerns the common order of men. Few trouble their heads about
the future. The people sold or exchanged their seed for something they
wanted more. Then they became idle. But suppose they did sow the
grain, and after some months the crop arrived, then they regarded it as
their own. How many reasons would they not assign for not yielding it
up. When the Tribunals despatched satellites to enforce payment to the
State, a resistance arose, and innumerable complaints of extortion and
fraud. The cost of the State establishments, and officials was enormous.
The people of China suffered great miseries which they attributed to the
reforms of the Socialist party.
On the side of the opposition led by Sse-ma-koung gathered the most
distinguished men of the realm. But Wang-ngan-che the Socialist
reformer stood calm and immutable, being possessed of the confidence of
the Emperor, and said to him, when he was on the point of yielding to
opposition and to popular clamour, why should you be hasty ? Wait until
experience shows results. To these innovations men will get used, and
will applaud in the end what they now decry. Throughout the whole reign
of the Emperor, Chen-t-soung, Wang-ngan-che maintained his ascendancy,
and put his pians into execution. The Social revolution plunged the
people into greater misery than ever, and his reforms caused implacable
hatred.
On the Emperor’s death, Wang-ngan-che was immediately deposed
and Sse-ma-koung sent for. He effaced every trace of Wang-ngan-che,
who shortly after died as did Sse-ma-koung, to the great grief of the public.


But agitation revived, and the leaders of the Socialist party renewed their
promises of the fine things the people would get in the end if more time
were given, and another trial permitted. The people were again credulous
and after a time the partisans of Wang-ngan-che once more stepped ioto
power. His memory was restored to honour, and his system pursued with
redoubled vigor. But three years had scarcely elapsed when the memory of
Sse-ma-koung was again once more adored with honours, and the name
of the Socialist leader loaded with execration. Finally, in a.d. 1129
the Socialist party were persecuted and forced to fly the country, and it
is believed that the exiled Socislists formed a great part of the army which
under Gengis Khan shortly afterwards devastated the greater part of
Asia. State Socialism has been tried in China under the most favourable
circumstances, and found wanting. The Emperor was the acknowledged
head of the Government, and an absolute autocrat. He had power,
prestige and “ the divine right of kings ” at his back, but he failed.
He had “ the people ” with him, stolid and docile subjects for the experi-
ment, and in th£ end they rebelled.
History gives no countenance to State Sacialism, but shows that the
opinions fondly hugged to the hearts of the Labour party of Queensland
and called advanced and progressive were actually in operation on a
gigantic scale, and proved utterly unworkable in China, 800 years ago, at a
time when the Saxons and Kormans were contending for the Kingdom of
England, and that the progress we are promised, and the Earthly Paradise
hymned by the multitudinous voices of the Trades Hall, tarns out to be
in sober earnest nothing but a resurrection of the twice exploded utopias of
a dead Chinaman. Such is the Trades’ Mall interpretation of Advance
Australia.
D. H. DALRYMPLE.
Brisbane, June 8, 1894.




Graziers' Butchering, Freezing & Meat Export
Company,
BRISBANE, QUEENSLAND.
CONTRACTORS to the Netherlands Indian Government for the whole of theij
supply of Preserved Meat until the end of 1893, also the Queensland and New
Guinea Governments for all supplies of Fresh and Preserved Meats.
First Prize and Gold Medals
Preserved Meats, Salt Beef, &c.,
AT THE
QUEENSLAND EXHIBITION of 1894.
ANTWERP INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION of 1894.
■0
Beef & Mutton in cases containing 12 Gib.,
Boiled Beef—llb., 21b., Roast Mutton— 11b. & 5
18 41b., 86 21b., 72 lib. tins.
!lb. Stewed Ox Kidneys—llb
and 21b. tins,
md Ox Palates—lib. and 21b.
Roast Mutton— 11b. k 21b.
41b , and 61b. tins. tins.
Roast Beef—llb. and 21b. Spiced Mutton —11b. and
tins. 21b. tins.
Spiced Beef —11b. and 21b. Corned Mutton—lib. and
tins. 21b. tins.
Corned Beef—llb. and 21b. Ox Cheek —11b. and 21b.
tins. tins.
Boiled Mutton—llb., 21b., Stewed Ox Tail—lib. and
41b. and 61b. tins. 21b. tins.
Rissoles —11b.and 21b. tins Tripe—llb. and 21b. tins.
Beef Sausages, Pork Sausages, Sheep’s Trotters, Pigs’
various other Preserved Meats,
SALT BEEF in kegs and tierces—solbs., lOOlbs
ROLLED SPICED BEEF,
Ox Head Brawn—lib. and
21b. tins.
Ox Marrow—lib. and 21b
Curried Mutton—lib. and
21b. tins.
Feet, Cow Heels, and
i., 2001b5., SOOlbs.,
LUNCHEON TONGUES, in cases containing 24 21b., 12 41b., 3G lib,
tins. Corned or Smoked—llb., 21b., Sib., and 41b. tins. Sheep Tongues—llb.
net, round tins. N.B.—Tongues are supplied in the proportion of 10 per cent
to other meats.
SOUPS, in cases containing 12 61b,, 3G lib., 72 lib, tins. Price List
per lb. Ox Tail Soup—lib. and 21b tins. Ox Cheek Soup—llb., 2lb. and 61b.
tins. Ox Kidney Soup—lib. and 21b. tins. Gravy Soup—llb. and 21b. tins.
Mulligatawny—lib., and 21b, tins. Pea Soup—lib. and 21b. tins. Soup and
Bouilli—llb., 21b. and 61b. tins. Mutton Broth — 11b. and 21b tins. Assorted
cases of the foregoing in lib. and 21b. tins
These Soups are made in concentrated form to reduce cost of freight, and will
bear three times their bulk of water added. Pure Neatsfoot Oil, in five gallon
drums. All delivered f.0.b., Brisbane.
CfT'fl 71 ** ave Eetail Bu tcher’s Shops in all parts of Brisbane and Suburbs,
W 1 CVuiwi w and wait on Families, Hotels, Ac., for orders, which are delivered
with Greatest Despatch.


A. MCLEAN & CO.,
AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENT MAKERS,
Elizabeth Street, Brisbane.
ESTABLISHED
Dam-making and Cleaning Scoops.
Double Furrow Ploughs.
American and Colonial Ploughs.
Farming Implements of all kinds.
SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE—POST FREE.
THE CHEAPEST ESTABLISHMENT IN THE COLONY.


Xj-AJCsTGr CO.,
IMPORTERS OF WINDOW GLASS,
VARNISHES, OILS, COLOURS, and PAPBRHANGIN&S.
SAMPLES and QUOTATIONS ON APPLICATION.
Glaziers, Painters, & House Decorators*
JOBBING PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.
Estimates Furnished for All Kinds of Work in the Trade.
195 QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE
BRISBANE : PICTURE-FRAME : WORKS.
C. ZKUNTXGKHITS,
Carver and Gilder, Print Seller,
—AND—
Picture-Frame Maker.
Importer of Patent Washable Gilt Mouldings, Oleographs, Photos, and Engravings.
148 QTJIEIEISr STREET,
BRISBANE,
Near the General Post Office.
\n£j 6| mm m
i tunfHis.f
NlSrllllS | r
eif r f s ? ?


Self-Measurement Chart.
c ll i i
gilii ll
C O A. T.
1 ’to 2 (collar seam to waist )
2 to 3 (length required )
4 (centre of bade) to elbow 5.
On to wrist 6, or length of sleeve required.
A to B (round chest under arm pits)
C to D (waist measurement).
T IB
1 to S (opening as required)
On to 3 (length required)
A to B (round chest under arm pits)
C to D (waist measurement)
TROU
S T.
SBBS.
Side seam from waist hand to length required.
Leg seam 3 to 4
Bound waist A to B ••••
Bound Hip G to D .•».
Bound Thigh E to F.
Bound knee G to H.
Bound bottom I to J.
State cross or side pockets.
State square or round shoulders.
Total height of figure
Fill in measurements on lines and forward to
GLOBE TAILORING Co.,
EDWARD STREET, BRISBANE.
Orders punctually attended to. Cutting Department under the able personal
supervision of
C. PAUL,
Instructor in Scientific Cutting, Fitting and Designing to the Technical College,
School of Arts, Brisbane.


STEAM FURNITURE and WOVE WIRE MATTRESS
MANUFACTURERS.
Inventors and Patentees of the Celebrated Non-Sagging Convex Wove Wire
Mattress and the Simplex Stave Maker, the only Complete Machine up to date
for the production of finished Staves.
hjotiG.— The above are of Queensland Invention and Manufacture.
WORKS; TOOWONG
(Adjoining Railway Station).
T. H. DUTTON N GO.,
O-ZELtrErR/A-L ZPIRIITTEZR/S,
BOOKBINDERS,
AND PAPER BAG MERCHANTS,
Ann Street, Brisbane.
SOUTH + BRISBANE + COOPERAGE,
C - IE?/ HI 3T STREET
(Between Russell and Glenelg Streets).
First Order of Merit for Tallow and Beef Tierces,
Brisbane Exhibition, 1892—’03 —’94.
QUEENSLAND STEAM CONFECTIONERY WORKS, m
ESTABLISHED 1875,
THE ONLY NOVELTY CONFECTIONERS IN QUEENSLAND !
Sc MOBROW,
WHOLESALE MANUFACTU BEDS OF
CONFECTIONERY, JAMS, JELLIES & CANDIED PEELS.
Importers of English, French and American Confectionery ; Wedding Cake
Ornaments, Chocolate in Fancy Boxes, etc.
GEORGE AND TANK STREETS, BRISBANE.


FENWICK cfe CO.
ESTABLISHED 1864.
qattle mLEmm.
WOOL, : SKINS, : HIDES : AND : STATION : PRODUCE.
Weekly Auctions,
BBISBAITE.
‘WEBSTER,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL LEATHER TRUNK. TRAVELLING BAG,
PORTMANTEAU AND LEGGING MANUFACTURER,
EDWARDS : BUILDINGS, : GEORGE : STREET,
(Near Roma Street Railway Station), BRISBANE.
OUR Famed Gladstone Bags, Dressing Cases and Solid Leather Trunks and
Portmanteau s are handsome and suitable presents for wedding and all
other occasions.
Two First Prizes, 1893 ; 1 First and 2 Secend Prizes, 1894, Brisbane ; 1 First
Prize, 1894, Wide Bay.
BURNS, PHILP $ CO., Limited.,
IMPORTERS,
SHIPPING, INSURANCE, AND GENERAL AGENTS.
WOOLPACKS, SHEEP SHEARS, and all STATION REQUISITES on Hand.
Agents for North Queensland Insurance Co., Ltd. (Fire and Marine.)
Branches at Townsville, Charters Towers, Cairns, Cooktown, Thursday Island;
Normanton, Port Moresby, and
Mary Street, Brisbane.
i. CRASS A CO..
IRONFOUNDER3,
COOKING STOVE MANUFACTURERS,
WARREN STREET, FORTITUDE VALLEY,
Brisbane.
S.SMITH&CO.
RUBBER STAMP MAKERS,
A M.P. Buildings (Basement),
Edward : Street, : Brisbane.


UNION MORTGAGE & AGENCY COMPANY of AUSTRALIA
Limited
Incorporated under the Imperial Companies Act 1862 to 1883.
HEAD OFFICE, LONDON : 123 Bishopsgatc-street Within, E.C.
HEAD OFFICE IN AUSTRALIA, MELBOURNE: 111 and 116, William-street.
AUSTRALIAN BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
Andrew George Anderson, Esq. (Chairman) I Frederick William Armytage, Esq.
f G. W. Chapman, Esq. | Archibald Menzies, Esq.
General Manager for Australia : WILLIAM DRYSDALE, Esq.
WILLIAM A. SMITH, Secretary.
BRANCHES: SYDNEY, BRISBANE, and ROCKHAMPTON.
WOOL AND PRODUCE BROKERS,
STOCK, STATION, AND GENERAL COMMISSION AGENTS.
LIBERAL ADVANCES MADE on WOOL and other Produce consigned for sale
in the Colonies or London.
Brisbane Branch s 160 ELIZABETH STREET.
The Company holds WEEKLY SALES of fat STOCK and PRODUCE in Brisbane.
JOHN DONALDSON, Manager.
WONDERFUL WERTHEIM
ITEW
HIGH-ARM : SEWING : MACHINE.
Most Silent. Most Durable. Most Fast. Most Handsome.
Most Moderate in Price. Most Complete in Variety of Work.
Most Successful in the Whole World.
HAND OR TREADLE, OR BOTH IN ONE.
To be had for Cash or on Easy Time-Payment Terms.
(Next Chapman’s, and Next Grimes and Petty’s),
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE
Agencies Throughout Queensland.


RE EARLY AND SEE THE VALUES IN
WOOD, COAL & GAS STOVES,
now being cleared at realisation prices.
Three-fourths of our large stocks disposed
of in seven weeks.
Mantle-pieces, Fenders and Registered Grates
are our next line of GENUINE BARGAINS.
WJ£& PAPERS
in beautiful designs now being cleared retail at half our
usual
WHOLESALE FIGURES.
Our forty years’ Business Record in Brisbane is ample
to satisfy the Public that our statements are
sterling facts and not mere puff.
DELAYS ARE DANGEROUS!
BE EARLY!!
Jas. Gaxijpbell & Sops,
CREEK STREET, BRISBANE.


BREAKFAST CREEK HOTEL ,
BREAKFAST CREEK,
BRISBANE.
GRAND ACCOMMODATION FOR BOARDERS.
«T FINEST : BRANDS : OF : LIQUORS ; KEPT. <£*
PLUNGE AND SHOWER BATHS.
TRAMS AND ’BUSSES EVERY FIVE MINUTES.
W. M. GAIiIiOWAY, Proprietor
ADELAIDE MILLING COMPANY, Limited,
Street, Brisbane,
W. DUFFIELD & CO. PATENT ROLLER FLOUR.
HAWKER PATENT ROLLER FLOUR.
PATENT ROLLER FLOUR.
MOONTA PATENT ROLLER FLOUR.
BRILLIANT PATENT ROLLER FLOUR.
EMU PATENT ROLLER FLOUR.
GOLD HVCIEID^VIL
CALCUTTA EXHIBITION 1883-4. COLONIAL & INDIAN EXHIBITION 1886.
5 FIRST AWARDS AT THE ADELAIDE JUBILEE & MELBOURNE
EXHIBITIONS.
A. J. CARTER, Local Manager.
DOWRIDGE’S
2s. 6di Bona Fide 2s a Gci.
COISTSULT^TIOItTS
ON ALL LOCAL AND SOUTHERN EVENTS,
George : Street. ; Rrtsra
Street, : Brisbane.
SEE DAILY PAPERS


A. OVEREND & CO.,
Eisro-iisrEiE^s,
Machinery and Hardware and Metal Merchants-
COMPLETE ESTIMATES FURNISHED ON APPLICATION FOR
Boiling Down Plants,
Meat Preserving, Refrigerating and Cold Storage Machinery.
Butter Factory and Creamery Supplies.
Wool Scouring Plants.
Station Requisites.
Water Supply and Irrigation Machinery.
Mining Requisites of All Kinds.
Flour Mill, Saw Mill & Sugar Mill Plants
Builders’ and Contractors’ Plants.
Electric Lighting Installations.
Sole Agents in Queensland for —
Marshall Sons & Co., Portable and Fixed Engines, Threshing Machines.
Blacks tone and Co., Vertical Engines and Boilers.
Worthington Celebrated Duplex Pumps, all sizes for every duty.
Otis (patent) Quartz Crushers and Amalgamators.
“ Devil” Disintegrators, Bark Mills.
H. Pooley and Sons Weighbridges and Weighing Machinery.
Halliday Windmills, etc., etc.
Large stocks always on hand of the following:
Shafting, Pulleys, Plummer Blocks, Brass Fittings.
Belting, Oils, White Lead and Paints.
Wire Ropes, Blocks, Piping, Tubes, &c.
Fencing Wire, Barb Wire.
Sybry Searles & Co.’s Mining & Quarry Steel.
WE HOLE THE LARGEST STOCK OF AGRICULTURAL
IMPLEMENTS IN THE COLONY.
Hunt’s celebrated Chaffcutters. Horse Gears, Maize Mills, Horse Rakes, etc.
Skandia and Imperial Prairie Ploughs.
Reid and Gray, and Hudson Bros., Single Double, 3,4, o and 6, Furrow
Ploughs.
Alexandra Cream Separators —undoubtedly the best and cheapest.
“ 0.K.” Dairy Appliances, Churns, Butter Workers, &c.
Lactic Acid Ferment —“ Lister-Babcock ” Milk Testers.
Wool Presses. Dumping Machinery, Hay Presses, etc.
Deering All Steel Reapers and Binders, Mowers, etc.
Please write or call upon us for your requirements. Enquiries promptly
attended to and all orders receive careful and prompt dispatch.
ALICE & ALBERT STREETS,
BBISBAHE,
AND AT TOOWOOMBA AND EOMA.


T. EC-A.ItTZN'-A.H
Surgeon Dentist
(Late of Edinburgh Dental Hospital and College),
61A Q.TJEEIsr STREET,
and “ BELGRAVIA,” TANK STREET,
Brisbane.
?iaiigEßßooK § C 0„
MANUFACTURERS OF
Plain & Fancy Paper Boses of Every Description.
■o
Tank Street, Brisbane
(Between George Street and North Quay.)
Fire Works I
Fire Works! I
■w. cr. moss,
JUNCTION PARK,
Ipswich Road, Brisbane,
Manufacturer of all kinds of
FIRE : WORKS, : ROCKETS, : AND : SHIP’S : LIGHTS.
PYROTECHNICAL EXHIBITIONS arranged for any part of Queensland.
TRY MY £1 ASSORTED CHRISTMAS BOX OF FIRE WORKS
The Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance
Company, Ltd
FIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE )
FIDELITY GUARANTEE / AT LOWEST RATES
PLATE GLASS BREAKAGE V OF
GENERAL ACCIDENT AND I PREMIUM
EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY
J. C. HASSALL
Resident Secretary,
Creek Street, Brisbane*


Sold by all Merchants and Storekeepers.
USE ** FITZRCT
PRESERVED MEATS
BEST IN THE WORLD.
PRIME v MEAT * QiOtLT * IN. * THIS * PACK:.
Brisbane Office —177 Queen Street.
TRADE ONLY SUPPLIED,
WRITE FOR PRICE LIST.


rr*g
BRISBANE,
PRESENTS FOR BIRTHDAY PRESENTS FOR THE
XMAS. GIFTS. NEW YEAR.
In view of the approaching Season, our large Show-rooms are
crowded with New Goods of every description.
Our Motto is—
USEFULNESS. QUALITY. GOOD VALUE.
SILVERWARE and ELECTROPLATE,
CUTLERY and POCKET KNIVES,
AFTERNOON TEA SPOONS in cases,
Plain
BREAKFAST and OTHER CRUETS
IN GREAT VARIETY.
In the China and Glass Department are to be found Goods of every
conceivable Style and Price, the whole forming without doubt, the
Finest Show in the City.
Fire
DINNER SETS,
TEA SETS,
AFTERNOON TEA SETS,
DOULTON WARE.
LIMOGES CHINA.
Be sure and see our Special Stock Patterns before purchasing
elsewhere.
A Choice Present—
A Piece of the New Chrysoprase Glass.
ICE CHESTS,
FILTERS,
ICE CREAM FREEZERS,
WATER BAG FILTERS
A New Shipment of the above just unpacked, and marked at such
Low Brices as should ensure an entire clearance before the Summer is
full upon us.
CRICKET AND OTHER SPORTING GOODS
A Special Feature.
FAVOURABLE TERMS TO CLUBS
NOVEMBER MEMO,
PEOM ALFRED SHAW & CO., LTD.,
Price List & every information on application. j||p
