

A
NATURE-LOVER’S
NOTEBOOK
BY
T. P. BELLCHAMBERS
Edited, with a Foreword , by
HERBERT BASEDOW, M.A., M.D., B.Sc., etc.
The Author is alone responsible for the statements
published in this work.
PRICE:
Two Shillings and Sixpence
Published under the auspices of the
NATURE LOVERS' LEACUE, ADELAIDE.


A NATURE-LOVER’S
NOTEBOOK
BY
T. P. BELLCHAMBERS
Edited, ivith a Foreword, by
HERBERT BASEDOW, M.A., M.D., B.Sc., etc.
The Author is alone responsible for the statements published
in this work.
Published under the auspices of the Nature Lovers 7 League, Adelaide.
The Objects of the League are:
(a) The encouragement of a love of Nature.
(b) The education of the public to the desirability of the preservation of all native Aus-
tralian fauna and flora.
(c) To inculcate in young people who represent the coming generation a love for all native
life forma and particularly to try and reach children through the medium of the
schools.
(d) To further any movements for the proclamation of sanctuaries as needed in our various
districts and to support any legislation or public bodies with similar objects in view.
(e) To assist financially or otherwise »ny movement directed to the attainment of any of
the above objects.
President:
SIR FRANK B. MOULDEN, K,B.
V ice-Presidents:
T. B. BELLCHAMBERS and NORMAN H. TAYLOR.
Executive:
MISS E. S. ABBOTT, MISS H. VAN SENDEN, MISS L. RUDKIN,
MR. H. HUDSON, MR. E. ANTHONY, M.P.
Hon. Secretary:
E. G. HEAL.




Foreword
THE work of Tom Paine Bellchambers needs no introduction to
naturalists in South Australia. The reputation of the Wild Life
Sanctuary at Humbug Scrub has spread much farther afield, and
has attracted hundreds of visitors from all parts of the Commonwealth,
as well as from the Old World and America. Mr. Bellchambers’ idea
was to make the Sanctuary “a living museum of the ancient and wonder-
ful fauna peculiar to Australia”; and well did he succeed. He lived for
the work he so dearly loved; and he worked for the lives of the “quaint
and beautiful” forms of creation which in other countries became extinct
ages ago.
Mr. Bellchambers first went to Humbug Scrub in the year 1905,
and, by a determined fight against disappointment and interference,
established himself as one of the most successful breeders and protectors
of the indigenous fauna in Australia. By many of his associates he
was on this account known as “The Wizard of Humbug Scrub.”
The outstanding accomplishment of T. P, Bellchambers, which
spread his fame far beyond the shores of Australia, was the study of
the Mallee Fowl (Leipoa ocellata, Gould), and its mysterious “incubator-
mound,” whereby it was possible for him to successfully breed and
propagate these timid denizens of the waterless mallee-scrub at the
Sanctuary. Many of the broods were distributed among avionlturists,
including a pair which was graciously accepted by His Majesty, King
George V., in 1924.
Love of Nature was a sentiment which was horn in the flesh and
blood of Bellchambers. He was not an Australian by birth, yet he
taught many Australians to appreciate the natural treasures and beauties
of their Island Continent.
He arrived at the Semaphore Anchorage, South Australia, on July
9th, 1876, aboard the emigrant ship “Lightning,” as one of 406 passen-
gers. The vessel, after making the land on July 6th, had run ashore
on Troubridge Shoal. Fortunately, the weather was fine, and allowed
women and children to be taken to the lighthouse. Subsequently all
emigrants were safely landed in ketches and steamings.


Sir Arthur Conan Doyle referred to Bellchambers as a “kind-eyed,
unkempt man.” Indeed, those who had the pleasure and privilege of
claiming his friendship, admired the honest simplicity of this man. The
worst his enemies could gay of him was that he was candid and outspoken
in his condemnation of the wanton destruction of native animals, birds,
and plants, which had become all too apparent in Australia. His conver-
sations, letters, and writings were enveloped in a single and constant
atmosphere of Nature-love.
Although he had not had the advantage of a higher education, he in
his later years developed an insatiable desire to write upon the subject
which lay so near to his heart. As a regular correspondent of The
Register, hia contributions in that journal were prolific, many of which
were subsequently published, in 1918, as a booklet, under the title of
“Nature: Our Mother.” A thousand copies of this work were acquired
by the Education Department for distribution among school children.
He also wrote several articles for the South Australian Ornithologist
(1916-17).
Bellchambers worked assiduously at his Wild Life Reserve until,
at a comparatively old age, he fell ill while on duty. His medical
advisers could premise him neither help nor hope; upon which he
returned in sorrow to his beloved Sanctuary, “in a double sense to await
the mysterious workings of Nature.” He died on July 18, 1929.
On his deathbed Mr. Bellchambers communicated a desire to me
that he longed to be interred in the peaceful surroundings of the Humbug
Scrub Fauna Reserve. As a representative of the district, it was possible
to approach a sympathetic Government, and obtain the necessary per-
mission.
The memory of T. P. Bellchamlers will be cherished by all fellow-
citizens who take interest and pride in the preservation of Australia’s
unique fauna and flora.
H. BASEDOW.
Kent Town, South Australia,
July 10th, 1931.


Hindmarsh Island Long Ago.
MEMORIES OF MANY YEARS.
“ This is the place, stand still, my steed,
Let rac review the scene,
And summon from the shadowy past
The forms that once have been.”
JULY, 1876, found my mate and me in Adelaide looking for a job. We
were straight from a stranded vessel in the Gulf. We had had a
drunken captain, and lively and exciting had been the experiences of
the last few days. However, as these matters antedate the matter in
hand, I will leave them out of this article. We were both from the
village of Keymer, in Sussex. We separated, to meet later in the day;
and my mate secured a job. An old dame from the country engaged
him for work on a road contract. We were strangers in a strange land,
and when he told rue of his job we decided to hang together. I was
introduced to the lady in question, and it was agreed that I should slay
with my mate. Two days later saw us on top of a coach bound tor
Strathalbyn, all agog to study the scenery >of our new country. Being
dressed in the old-country style, we were picked out as new chums all
along the route, and in gome places we were greeted with most uncom-
plimentary language. However, these “pleasantries” were soon forgotten
in studying the bird life and the flora. As we passed through the stringy-
bark, hundreds of black cockatoos (Calyptorhynchus funereus) were seen,
and the noise they made was deafening. Their numbers were remark-
able. The scenes by the way —the impotent gesticulating rage of an old
boozer at one of the “pubs” at sight of the new chums, and the chase
of a run-away coach—provided plenty of interest for the earlier part of
the journey. From Strathalbyn to Goolwa we continued by tramway,
reaching the latter place fairly late in the day. I was up early next
morning, and got my first sight of the grand old Murray, on whose banks
and bywaters so many of my after years were to be spent. After I had
been some time awaiting a job, a rider came along who was looking for
volunteers to help to raise the s.s. “Mundoo.” She had been burnt and
sunk at her moorings off Mcßeath’s place. The man was the skipper,
and he was anxious to tackle the job on the morrow. My mate and I
went on as bucket men, filling and emptying- the barges by means of
which the “Mundoo” was to be raised. A cold, wet job it was, but
to my mate and me a welcome change. We got her up, and I think she
is still running. Captain Mcßeath shortly afterwards gave £9OO for the
“Amphibious,” which he ran for many years to Mannum. The captain
and his son Shanney were well-known and highly respected river men


in the early days of the wheat-carrying trade. On the opening of the
Murray Bridge he took a large party of the islanders up for a trip. I
remember I felt some disappointment at not being included.
“ EAT-A-PENNY.”
Soon after my arrival I met one of Mr. Price’s daughters. Llama,
and she was the first person to show a sympathetic interest in me, a
stranger among strangers, and her personality naturally impressed itself
on my memory. The first kindly word of sympathy amid sordid and
uncongenial surroundings, it was like dew from heaven. Later on I
became acquainted with Mr. Price (of Shorthorn fame), and found him
a pleasant and kindly man. He it was who introduced hares to the
island. Later I was engaged as sheperd by an old gentleman whom the
neighbors designated “Eat-a-Penny.” Getting across to the place on the
Monday, I w r as set to work ploughing, in company with one of the
Tremaines, a very decent fellow. When Sunday came around I had a
tiff with the boss, as our ideas of a fair thing were at variance, I
reckoned that if I ploughed on week-days, Sunday was for rest; but
his idea was to plough six days, and shepherd on Sundays. He also had
an idea that the working day ended at 10 p.m., but my idea was that
sundown was the limit for the wages (from 10/' to 15/- a week).
Sunday was the only day on which I had any chance of studying the
fauna and flora of the island. Game was very plentiful. Large numbers
of curlews, or stone plovers, found shelter among the sheaoak. Early
one morning I came face to face with the last surviving kangaroo. We
were both surprised, and stood staring at one another for a time. This
poor lonely beast was protected by the islanders, but on the arrival of
a new manager for Grundy’s estate, was shot. One day my mate and
I, going further afield than usual, came across a heavy belt of ti-tree
fringed by a narrow swamp. This we crossed, and found ourselves in
the midst of a Nankeen heronry (Nycticorax Caledonicus) , the croaking
birds circling up into the blue in hundreds, and many of the trees con-
taining four or five nests. Further in were native platforms of the dead,
where the mummified bodies of the blacks were laid to rest under the
leafy canopy of the ti-tree, with the herons for neighbors, and the
murmur of the ocean for a requiem.
“ SPORT.”
Swans (Chenopis atrata) were there in thousands, on the rivers and
lakes, and large numbers used to cross over the island to their feeding
grounds. This flight took place at night, and when there was moonlight
parties of young fellows would cross from Goodwa and take their stand
on the sandhills. Windy nights were favored, because the birds then
flew low. I have heard on good authority that bags amounting to fifty
birds were often obtained. This seemed to me a very shameful thing,
as very few of the birds were used. They were shot chiefly for “sport.”


Worse things happened around the lake shores, where, for the purpose
of procuring swandown, the unfortunate birds were penned up and
starved to eliminate the fat from the skins—starved almost to skeletons
before they were killed. On our first visit to the island chapel the
attention of the young folk seemed to centre on us, the new chums, which
I found rather embarrassing. My boss, a son of “Eat-a-Penny,” said to
me one day: “Look here, Tom, if you care for riding you can on
Sundays run that mob of horses in, and take your choice.” I thanked
him, and for several Sundays did so, but as often as not returned home
leading the horse. I was not a colt-breaker, and he did not tell me
that these horses had scarcely been handled. I know I thought them
rough customers!
SNAKE PIE.
One day the boss, in talking about snakes (these reptiles were
plentiful on the island), mentioned that they were good to eat. I asked
him if he would be game to eat them, and he said yes, he would. When,
therefore, on one occasion, we ran short of mutton, I brought him a
big, fine snake, from which I had cut the head. This he skinned, quar-
tered, and put into a dish with a few slices of bacon. Dinner time came,
and we each had a helping of pie, which I must say was a very passable
dish, and if we had had the bliss of ignorance we could really have
enjoyed it. As it was, there was a fair amount-left. Says the boss:
“What are we going to do with it?” Now, it happened that there was
in the island an old couple, a former schoolmaster and his wife, to whom
the neighbors were in the habit of sending food and other little gifts.
So I suggested that, as we would be passing there with the team that
afternoon, we might present them with the pie, and get, at the same time,
an unbiassed opinion as to its merits. This was done, and the pie was
much enjoyed. So, you see, it is just prejudice that leaves the snake
out of the everyday menu. The old folks never would believe it was
snake pie they ate with such relish!
One of the island families was noted for length of stature, (Perry
was the name), the boys standing well over six feet, and the girls, I think
about that height also. The Perry boys wore tanned sheepskin coats
—good wear, but a little stiff and uncomfortable when new. Plucky
Maria Perry, when about 13 or 14 years old, used one of these coats with
good effect on a grass fire that Rolley, her brother, had caused through
playing with gunpowder. One day, while working on the road, Mr.
Perry passed along riding; and, at his side, trudged an awkward, shy-
looking, barefooted girl. Said my master when I reached home, “Did
you sec Mr. Perry and Rolley to-day? Ho brought him here dressed
as a girl as punishment for letting the sheep get into my paddocks, and
made him apologise. Poor chap, he did look uncomfortable.” Though
the older boys were inclined to play tricks on the “green new chum,”
I liked the family well. One of the harvests of the island folk—such
as had lagoons—was salt for the up-river stations. I have seen these


fine girls hard at work scraping salt on the lagoons, their bare, shapely
toes gleaming pink on the white crystals. Altogether they were an
industrious and peaceful people. I do not remember a single instance
of a row between neighbors during my stay of nearly two years. There
were occasional picnics for the gathering of “muntries,” a peculiar native
fruit that grows in sandy country. The flavor is strong, but not
unpleasant. Occasionally, too, there were dances in the barns, at which
the young folk gathered in their “war paint.” Among the old names
that I can recall are the Hornsbys, Newells, Tremaines, Perrys, Wheelers,
Mcßealhs, and Winters.
THE MIND’S STOREHOUSE.
Memory can still picture them, but, like last year’s leaves, they axe
scattered to the four winds. In some cases not a trace is left of the old
homes; they are buried in the drift sands and forgotten.
“A jolly place,” he said, “in times of old;
But something ails it now; the spot is cursed.”
Memory does not allow for changing years. Those faces and
forms of long ago are still pictured as they were, many in the bloom of
youth. I can still perceive the continuous murmur of the sea, picture
the gathering of the native companions for quadrilles—the hundreds of
them, a most interesting and amusing sight,—and see the turkey-bustards
preferring the wheat from the seedbox at the end of a long furrow. My
boss was a careless, happy-go-lucky sort of man, and when he went to
the mainland would sometimes forget to come back for a day or two.
But he always remembered to leave a good week’s work mapped out for
me.
Coming in one evening, I found him away. Hungry and tired,
I went to my hut, hut as time passed I became impatient and angry.
The house was locked, but if means of access could Le found, I deter-
mined to get my hard-earned supper. The door was out of the question,
so was the window; looking up at the chimney, I decided on that. So
climbing on to the roof, I dropped down it into the fireplace, and had
my tea. The first words of the boss on his return were not for public-
ation, but I gave him to understand there were limits to my patience.
THE TALE OF A CAT.
A lot of hay was cut with a scythe. The weather warming up, and
becoming hot and hotter, I started to discard some of my clothing, even-
tually coming down to hat, trousers, and boots. When stripped I had
a very piebald appearance, tanned to the waist, the rest of me white.
One day the boss set me to work in the garden and build a fountain. I
wondered why he desired this, but my curiosity was satisfied when,


TOM PAINE BELLCHAMBERS
(1857-1929)
Fouder of the Wild Life Sanctuary at Humbug Scrub, South Australia


THE EMIGRANT SHIP "LIGHTNING,” STRANDED ON TROUBRIDGE SHOAL, JULY 6th, 1876
[From a sketch by T. P. Bellchambers.


shortly afterwards, a wife arrived. Later came a servant girl, who
proved to be of such a vindictive disposition that she got “the sack” soon
after. Before leaving, this girl coolly lifted the trapdoor of the tank and
dropped the boss's favourite cat in. Very soon the water became so foul
that I could not drink it, and then bo bad that I refused to wash in it.
As the boss pooh-poohed the idea of anything being wrong, I did not
trouble to investigate, but just left them to enjoy it on their own account,
falling back myself on a brackish well for liquid requirements. So
things went on, until one day the mistress and her sister, Bessie, and
myself were having dinner. While sipping their tea, the subject of the
missing cat cropped up. This conversation made me think of a possible
connection between the bad water and the lost cat. On my suggestion
we left the table and adjourned to the tank, which was built under the
house. Lifting the trapdoor, and sending a light into the gloom, we
discovered the rotten carcase of the long-lost cat! Phew! The ladies’
stomachs could stand no more, and for a period there were sounds of
distress. As I had no wish to follow suit, I discreetly retired. The first
words of the boss on his return were; “Did you fish it out?” I said:
“No. As you were so sure that nothing was wrong with the water, I
left that job for you, as proof that there was!”
INCIDENTS OF THE HARBOR.
On one occasion I gave much annoyance to Anderson, the ferryman.
Coming down late one evening with a letter to catch the English mail
(postage was 6d. then), I had found him absent, so I took the boat and
crossed myself. A storm coming up prevented my return. After several
attempts to cross, I resigned myself to the inevitable, and spent the rest
of the night walking about to keep warm. When the frosty dawn arrived
I got across, and met Anderson on the jetty, looking for his boat. You
may be certain that he cursed and swore at me as never before. Wood-
hard succeeded Anderson later as ferryman.
1 did not come much in contact with the natives there, but I re-
member Felix, whose other name I have forgotten. One notable event
during my stay on the island was the arrival from Scotland of the “Queen
of the South,” commanded by Captain Johnson. This boat was subsi-
dised by the Government for trading through the river mouth. She was
running in April. 1878, when I went through the mouth on her, after
leaving the island. 1 don’t remember Mr. Price falling off the punt,
but I do remember Mr. Perry, with John and Grace Perry, getting cap-
sized in the river, and Mr. Perry and Grace clinging to the overturned
boat while John swam across and rowed another boat to their rescue.
No mention has been made of the old flourmill on the island. It stood
near the river hy Tremaine. I have among my drawings a sketch of
it; also one of the island chapel, with Miss Price’s horse tied near by,
for service of some sort w as on when I sketched it.


The Mundalleo Strike.
AND A DINGO HUNT.
AS the sun rose over the ranges some 38 years ago, lighting up the
quarry, and sending the rock wallaby scudding up to their rocky
haunts, it might have been noticed that the camp was unusually
quiet. The reason for this was that for several days there had been a
strike on. Wages were overdue, and had not hoen forthcoming; there
had been sharp words with the working partner, and the men had abso-
lutely refused to work until their pay came along. Quarrymen, carters,
sawyers (I was a stone sawyer at the time, and a recent arrival), were
all “out.” Trouble had been brewing for some time, but came to a head
when I innocently asked “when was pay day?” I had worked over a
fortnight at that monotonous back-aching work, and wanted some cash
badly. Of course, “poor me” was blamed for the strike by the working
partner, who said some nasty things about it. Well, the days passed, as
usual under the circumstances, in card playing, with occasional heated
arguments, varied with shooting excursions into the back country.
ROUGHING IT.
But see! The men are stirring, the door of the hut is thrown open,
and big Amos comes forth into the sunlight. A veritable giant, good-
tempered and honest, he yawns and stretches his great limbs, then goes
for an armful of wood, for it is time that the “billy” is boiled. Coming
to the door he yells; “Hi, Tom, rouse up; you’re cook to-day!” “Ay,
ay,” says I. “Rut what am Ito practise on, for the larder is pretty low?
There’s some flour, wallaby meat, tea, sugar, salt, spice, and condensed
milk, so I guess we’ll manage. I might make a stew. And what say you
to some jam tart?” Breakfast consisted of bread, tea, and bad language,
and, as it was my turn to cook, I had to wash up the “crockery,” which
was represented by tin plates and pannikins. The furniture of the hut
was the usual tier of hunks, rough benches, and a table. After washing
up, 1 took a bag and went across to an old sheep yard, where I gathered
a lot of nettle and mallow shoots. These I gave a good wash in the
creek, and took to the hut. Some of the men had, in the meantime, left
for Port Augusta, while Amos, Randy, and another chap had gone
shooting. The rest of the men were card playing. I next cut up the
wallaby meat, and placed it in the camp oven, adding pepper, salt, and
water. As a substitute for jam, dark sugar, spice, condensed milk, and
flour were mixed into a thin paste, and stirred over the fire for about
twenty minutes. Placing the mixture aside, I had a spell and a smoke.


Occasionally the sound of a distant shot came from the hills, filling
the gully with echoes, while now and again the excited voices of the
card players reached me.
Hearing the shooting reminded me of a project I had formed for
a night hunt of the dingo, these animals being fairly plentiful at that
time. Up in the pound, about two miles above the camp, was an old
shepherd’s hut, with a spring of water in the creek near by. Half a mile
further on, in a gully, near Mount Arden, was another spring; and,
judging by the tracks around, this was a favorite watering place of the
dingoes. As there happened to be a good moon that night, I decided
to go as soon as I was ready. Looking at the clock, I saw it was time
to get on with the cooking. I added the greens to the stew, and then
mixed some flour and baking powder for the tarts, using tin plates to
bake them in. By twelve o’clock everything was ready. Through the
door I could see the shooters in the distance, across the creek, and as
they drew nearer I observed them dragging something behind them,
which later proved to be a 10-ft. carpet snake. The serpent's glistening
skin shortly after adorned the butt of a gum tree, against which it was
nailed to dry. “Come on,” says I, “dinner’s ready.” It was evident
that all hands were hungry, for they were soon in their places. “What
yer got?” asks Jack, sniffing the air. “Venison and turtle soup? Smells
all right. Anyhow, guess if it eats the same you’re some cook.” Need-
less to say, the stew was a success, and when the tarts came on there
was some good-natured badinage as to where I got the jam. “Hi, cook,
send along the cream!” “Righto! Here you are.” And along went
the condensed milk, which made a passable substitute for cream. “I
guess,” says Jack, “you’ve clean missed your vocation, Tumas. I reckon,
lads, he ought not ter waste them ther talents, hut just go on cooking
and improving them.” I replied: “No fear, Jack. Turn and turn about’s
fair. Besides, who knows, I might serve you like the Chinaman. I am
going dingo shooting to-night. Puppy welly good, you know. All
samey chicken.” “Garn, now!” says Jack. “Lucky for you we know
this is wallaby,” pointing to the bones.
THE HUNT.
After clearing the table, I made my preparations for the night, baked
some damper, got the lea early, and started for the spring, taking my
dog Nero for company. Arriving at the old hut just before sundown,
I brought in wood and water in readiness for the morning, and leaving
everything but my gun and ammunition, went on to the far spring. I
took note of the direction of the wind, found cover in some high rushes
about 25 yards from the hole, and settled down for a long wait. Gradu-
ally the night shadows crept over the scene, then the moon, almost full,
rose above the mount. Euros and wallabies came thumping down to the
water to drink, while from away in the far gullies was heard the first
long-drawn, quivering howl of a dingo, which was at once answ'ered


by others from different points. Presently I saw moving shadows up
the gully, which, as they entered the moonlight, proved to be four dingoes.
They came on at a jog trot, frequently stopping to sniff the air for
danger, or maybe food. A euro sits up with trembling ears, moving
this way and that, and sensing danger near. With a frightened bound
it is off up the steep bank, followed by the rest of the startled animals.
A couple of curlews rise and sweep down the gully, giving vent to their
fears in weird and uncanny sounds. A shiver ran down my spine, but
I cowered lower in the rushes, and kept the dog quiet by my side. At
last my quarry is on the brink, full in the moonlight, suspiciously sniffing
in my direction. Slowly I bring the gun to sight on the foremost dog —
a report, and I quickly put in another charge. When the smoke clears
there is no sign of the dogs, but by the yelp I heard I know one has got
it. For some time silence reigns all around; then I hear the snuffing
of some small animal, nosing around the outside of the rushes, and an
owl wings its soft flight just by my face. I squat patiently in my cover
through long hours, cramped and stiff with the chilly night air.
At last dawn breaks, but no more dogs have appeared, so I start
back for the hut. I place away my gun, and go down to the creek for
a wash, and while so engaged hear the thump, thump of an approaching
euro. As I rise the animal comes into view', with a dingo in full chase,
and passes close to me, without a gun at hand. Up over the rise by the
hut they go, and then they are lost to view. Returned to the hut, I
enjoyed a meal of damper and a cup of hot tea, and slept for an hour
or two. When I awakened I was much refreshed, and decided to look
for my dingo. By this time the sun was warm, and upon nearing the
far spring I sighted a dingo in the shade of some mallee on the far side
of the gully. Quietly retracing my steps, I slipped into a branch gully,
and approached the spot. Climbing the bank, I find the dingo in range,
and pull the trigger. He tumbles over, but jumps up again and runs
around in circles. I step on to the bank and hurriedly reload. The
powder is home, and I am ramming the shot when the wounded dog
comes straight at me, snapping its jaws. Bounding aside to avoid the
attack, I was gratified to see the dog go headlong into the creek below.
Quickly I place a cap on the nipple, and, taking a quick aim, tumble
him over again. It was a black dog, with tan points. Taking the skin
and scalp, I made up the gully, and found the other dingo laid out stiff
—a fine big yellow brute.
I returned to the camp about noon. I remained a little while longer,
hut then became “full up” and moved on. Subsequently I heard that
big Amos came to a tragic end by a gun accident. Of the others I never
heard any more. It is a common belief that the black variety of dingo
is a crossbreed, but I asked an old blackfellow one day concerning this,
and be replied; “That pheller him black one, bin longa this way all
time, for white pheller sit down longa this way, all time bin that one.”
So I reckon that “pheller” is a true dingo.


Fire Making
HOW THE ART AROSE.
A LEGENDARY FABLE.
AWAY in the dim past, some few thousands of years ago, when the
“dipro,” the giant kangaroo, and emu roamed the central plains,
a group of natives took refuge in a cave that faced a creek which
came from a high range. The group consisted of about thirty individuals,
including women and children. They were one of the wandering clans
that inhabited this region, and had hastened to the cave for shelter from
a rising storm. There they crouched, listening to the deep roll of the
thunder, and watching the lightning flashes with awe, if not terror.
A BOLT FROM THE BLUE.
A vivid flash and a booming roar that shook the roof above them
made the frightened children cling closer to their mothers. A big tree
that had stood in front of the cave was shattered, its branches hurled in
all directions, and its rotten core set ablaze. Before the eyes of the
astonished natives was the bright, mysterious thing—the light that had
come from the clouds—devouring the tree stump, lighting the dark re-
cesses of the cave, and making grotesque shadows of themselves play
upon its wall. The storm passed away, but, fearful of the strange
visitant, they cowered in the back of the cave through the night; but
long ere dawn had lighted the eastern sky they had become sensitive
of the comfortable warmth, and the light that enabled them to see each
other when the world was dark. With the dawn most of their fear had
passed, and they gathered closely around the burning stump to consider
this new marvel, the advantages of which had strongly impressed the
mind of Koora, their chief. There was warmth for the body, light to
keep away the evil spirits of the night and ward off the poisonous snakes
that sometimes troubled their rest, and clouds of smoke to keep away
the troublesome insects. It was good that they should keep this strange
visitant that had come from the clouds. All this Koora told his people:
‘Tf we keep this thing we shall have the warmth and light of summer
in our cave when the sky weeps and the long nights are with us. We see
that this spirit from the cloud cats the trees; we will watch over it and
feed it, that it no more leave us to the cold and dark of the long nights.”
Koora then placed the smouldering branches on the burning stump, a


big flame of light leaped up into the morning sky, the fierce heat driving
the natives back. They saw that the words of Koora were true—that this
thing, that had come of the flashing light, was good. Henceforth, when
they went forth to seek their food in the forest, two men would be left
to attend to the burning stump, where dwelt the spirit of light and
warmth.
At this time the interior of Australia was a fruitful land—a land
of trees and lakes of water —and the natives wandered about in small
bands, living upon fruits, nuts, seeds, and roots. Their few tools and
weapons were fashioned from wood and stone. They had no serious
enemies to contend with, and were of a peaceable, mild disposition. The
art of cooking was unknown, for the simple reason that the use of fire
was then unknown. Some of the older ones had seen the wide, grassy
plains swept bare by the lightning blast, and had fled in terror. They
knew that it had come from the sky, for they had seen it strike, but
terror had prevented them from discovering its use to man.
♦ * * *
Time passed, and Koora and his clan had become familiar with other
uses of fire besides warmth and light. It had become their servant, and
added much to their comfort and pleasure. They piled up stacks of dry
wood in preparation for the long nights after the winter floods had
arrived —but a calamity happened. When the torrents of rain came, a
cascade of water swept over the cave, and extinguished the fire, with
much hissing and clouds of smoke and steam. Koora and his people sat
on the ground, and mourned that the cave was no longer warm and
cheerful.
THE MAGIC OF THE TWIRLING STICK.
While they were bemoaning the loss of the fire, Koora drew towards
him a sheet of bark and a pointed piece of wood, and began listlessly
to twirl the stick between the palms of his hands, with its point upon the
bark. His spirit was troubled; and the more he thought, the crosser he
became —and the faster he twirled the stick upon the bark. When 10,
a curl of smoke rose from the point of the stick, and whisked into the
air, leaving a smell of burning bark in its trail. Seeing this, Koora
promptly lifted the pointed stick, looked at it, smelt it, and felt it. It
was hot to the touch! He looked at the bark. It was slightly charred,
and smelt of fire. W r as it possible that he could make the fire come
again? Turning to his people, he said: “Look at me, your chief, you
who have let the fire go back to the cloud. Watch me, for I will bring
back the fire that warms up the cave, and lets the little ones be glad
in its light.” Then, placing some powdered bark fibre on the hole in
the bark, he replaced the pointed slick, and started twirling with all his


power. The others watched patiently, when presently a faint streak of
smoko came curling up, and gradually increased in volume. Not long
after they noticed the faint glow of a spark. The fibre was alight! Lift-
ing the hot stick from its socket, Koora bent his body forward, and,
feeding the spark with more fibre, he blew a long, soft breath, wdiich
turned it to a little bluish flame. Twigs and leaves were then placed
on top, and once more the dark recesses of the cave were lit by a fire,
and again upon its walls danced the grotesque shadows of the group that
had gathered around it. Thus they recovered their treasure by the magic
of the twirling stick in the hands of Koora, their chief. That day they
gave the chief a new name, which meant “Fire Maker.” The fire became
a valued possession; and, whenever they shifted camp, it was carried
with them on a sheet of bark that had been smeared with clay. Very
soon all the tribes had learnt how to make fire with the twirling stick,
fn due course, too, they used the fire to cook their food, to harden the
points of their tools and weapons of wood, to soften various gums and
resins, to shape their bark canoes, and, in general, to add very consider-
ably to their comfort. They also enlarged their food supplies, for they
found that the art of cooking made many things palatable that otherwise
could not have been eaten. Thus Koora, the lire maker, became a chief
of renown.
HOW WE GOT IT.
A cold wind was Mowing, and heavy banks of clouds were coming
up from the west, as I crossed the plains between the two ranges. I had
used my last match at noon, when I needed a fire to cook some dried
kangaroo meat, and make a cup of tea. Knowing there would be no
wood at the camp ahead, I was watching my chance, as I travelled, to
pick up a little wherever possible. I picked it mostly from odd clumps
of sandalwood and acacia, or by kicking up the dead roots of umbrella
bushes. Whatever I could find I packed on the dray, trusting, as it
were, to Providence for a light when I should want it. I knew I should
probably fall in with some teams as I approached the pass. As luck had
it, I overtook a wool team late in the afternoon, and, noticing the night’s
wood packed on the waggon, I decided to jog along behind, and trust
to the teamster for a light. We climbed to the summit of the range,
meeting with cold winds and sleety showers that chilled us to the hone.
Not a word was exchanged between us, though each took comfort in the
other’s company. Down the long, winding grades to the plains beyond
we continued, and as the night shadows fell, we left the hills behind
us. The plain we were on was a scene of bleak desolation, with only
one suitable spot for a camp. Anxiously we watched for the dark out-
line of a patch of bushes on the left, which was the only shelter avail-
able. The rain was pouring as we swung off the track, and darkness
settled around. Having attended to the horses, we hurried to the shelter
of the wool waggon, and for the first time I greeted my travelling com-
panion with: “A bit rough for you. What about a fire? I’ve been


hanging on to you to get a chance of a light.” He replied: “What, no
Matches! Neither have I. I thought when I saw you coming along
behind with your wood on that I was right. A nice picnic we’re in for,
it seems.” We felt as miserable as humanly possible as we stood,
hungry and cold, on the lee side of the load of wool, listening to the
angry swash of the falling rain, and looking into the inky blackness of
the night.
NECESSITY THE MOTHER OF INVENTION.
Scratching my wet head, I pondered the problem; then, like a flash,
came the thought of the gun, the powder and caps stowed away under
cover in the dray. Turning to my companion, I said: “Can you find a
piece of dry rag? If you can, I reckon I can get a fire.” Tearing out a
hit of the lining of his waistcoat, the man gave it to me, while I made
for the dray and secured the gun and ammunition. For a moment my
companion looked pretty blank, or, I thought, a trifle scared, for I had
not told him how I was going to get the fire. However, with a tomahawk
we dug a small hole in the shelter of the waggon, and placed finely
broken twigs and leaves in the bottom. Then I loaded the gun with a
little powder, and portion of the rag on top, and discharged it into the
hole at close quarters. The result was that I blew the lot to the four
winds, and made my companion look more hopeless than ever. Philo-
sophically, I said: “We had too much that time; we will try with less.”
With care, I portioned out a smaller amount of powder, which I placed
in the gun. Then 1 took a piece of rag, which I spread in the palm of
my hand, damped slightly with spittle, and sprinkled a little powder
over it. The rag was then folded into a tight wad, rammed into the
barrel, and fired into the kindling. When the smoke cleared, we had
the pleasure of seeing a glowing bunch of burning rag right in the hole.
Carefully adding more tinder, I fell on to my knees and blew the breath
■of life into it, soon getting a blaze, which, with our double supply of
wood, produced a billy of hot tea in a short time. We much enjoyed
the comfort of sitting in its glow and drying our steaming clothes. We
rigged a tarpaulin to keep the wind from our backs, and had an enjoy-
able supper, sitting for quite a while after, yarning and watching the
spitting embers. Subsequently we sought oblivion in our blankets, and
cared no more that the wind blew and the rain came down. I have tried
the twirling stick of Koora, but never succeeded in getting fire; with me
that magic would never work.
FIRE, THE GERM OF CIVILISATION.
Man stands apart from the rest of the animal world as the one
creature that has acquired the art of making lire, there being no known
race of man that does not include fire as a part of its equipment in the
struggle for existence. Domestic animals can, and do, appreciate its


THE AUTHOR IN SEARCH OF A SUITABLE SITE FOR HIS WILD LIFE SANCTUARY IN 1905


THE NATURE LOVER AMONG THE DUCKS AND SWANS AT THE SANCTUARY DAM


warmth —such is unquestionably the case with the cat, the dog, and even
the horse. I have had horses —out in the bleak gibber lands —that would
spend a good part of the night shepherding the fire for warmth. One old
mare seldom had any tail to boast of in the winter time, as she had a
habit of backing towards the fire until her tail was right over it, and
singed accordingly. Dogs just love the camp fire. Nero, a fine old dog
I had in former days, would help me gather wood without any word
from me, carrying it from chains away right up to the fireplace. But he
never had the sense to put it on the fire. As the cold night hours passed,
Nero would get closer and yet closer to the dying embers, and when they
burnt out, would dig a hole in the warm ashes, and curl up on the fire-
warmed earth. He, too, would sometimes singe his fine, plume-like tail,
jumping up with a look of disgust, but returning shortly after to dig
himself in once more, whining and grumbling at the cold as he did so.
Poor dog! Firewood was too scarce on the northern plains for his
comfort, so sometimes I -would call him, and let him share the blankets
at my feet, which arrangement was of mutual benefit.
BENEFITS AND DRAWBACKS.
What a comfort and what company the lonely bushman finds in his
camp fire. What pictures of the past it conjures up in his brain, as
he sits under the stars and gazes into its flickering flames. And what
wonderful warmth it gives to his tired limbs when the nights are cold,
and he lies dreaming in its glow. And what is it not to the dwellers
in cities, also, when, in the long evenings, the family circle gathers
around the sacred altar fires of the loved home? Or to the bustling
housewife on the outback farm, when the evening log is placed well back
in the large, open hearth, and the children gather round her knees and
listen to the distant call of the mopoke and curlew in the moonlit timbers,
or learn the lessons for the morrow. But, to the dwellers in the bush,
fire has also its terror; it often develops into a tornado of destruction, the
bush fire, that sweeps remorselessly over hill and dale, leaving a black
trail of desolation behind. This is, through the dry summer months,
an ever-present spectre of terror to them. No, fire has not been an
unmixed blessing to man. It was fire that removed man from his original
environment, and set him revolving around himself.


A Passing Race
THE END OF THE LONG TRAIL.
IN ray travels up and down this land, and along the River Murray, I
have frequently heard it remarked, in reference to the blackfellow,
that the sooner he is gone, the better, for he is lazy, dirty, and no
good to anyone. Needless to say, Ido not agree with this opinion. In
the first place, a lazy man would soon starve if placed in similar con-
ditions to those which governed the aborigine’s life—that is, if asked to
win his living direct from Nature, with the sole aid of weapons and tools
fashioned from the simple materials he could find at hand. Again, I
know only too well that natives living within reach of water are too fond
of it to be dirty. A people, peculiarly simple and childlike, with a few
strong instincts and a few plain rules, living in scattered tribes, they
became an easy prey when, the “white wave” broke on the long silent
shores; and like children, they were easily led to adopt the vices of the
strange but clever race appearing so mysteriously among them. They
spon found that the presence of these strangers menaced their own
existence, but this they were powerless to adequately resent; nor were
they able to make satisfactory terms for themselves.
ALIENS IN THEIR OWN LAND.
And so the sad fate was theirs of becoming aliens in their own laud,
despised by those who had taken their birthright. Relic hunters dese-
crated the graves of their people, and removed the sacred symbols of
their grief. The laws and customs of their ancestors were laughed at,
but they were expected to obey the strange orders of the arrogant
strangers they could not understand. Confusion reigned in the councils
of their old men. Their womenfolk were becoming troublesome, pre-
ferring the embraces of the strangers. Everything seemed to have lost
its stability. They were helpless to stem the tide of evil, so they gave
qp the struggle, and with a strong feeling of resentment, drifted to their
doom. Speaking one day of the cruel massacre of the survivors of the
“Maria,” which was wrecked off the Coorong, I was told that it was the
lustful actions of a sailor that precipitated the tragedy. The truth of this
can never he known, for all the actors who took part in the gruesome
affair have passed away. Owing lo their simplicity, the blacks were the
butt for the white man’s practical jokes. I have smiled occasionally at
the way they used to get one back on the whites in their droll mimicry of
their many idiosyncrasies, by which you could pick out the individuals they
were representing.
THE WHITE man’s DRESS,
Used to freedom of movement in the nude, with limbs unhampered,
the white man’s clothes were at first found to be very irksome, and it
was a common thing to see such discarded around the natives’ camps.


Full dress sometimes consisted of an old shirt and belltopper, or a long-
tailed coat, sometimes worn back to front! In the first attempts at keep-
ing the white fellows’ law they made themselves extremely ludicrous. I
remember a shocked white man cutting armholes in a wheat bag and
slipping it over a naked gin. Clothes certainly have their drawbacks.
Who has not admired the graceful, easy movements of the blackfellow?
PRIMITIVE WEAPONS.
The natives were in considerable numbers when I first struck our
great waterway, the Murray, and owing to abundant food supplies, they
were of good physique. Though still well supplied with their own
primitive weapons —the light reed spear, with a point of fire-hardened
wood, the heavy hunting spear, and the double-pronged fishing spear —
the shotgun and the fishhook were already displacing them. The waddy
was the only weapon that the white boys became expert with, and they
took a certain pride in manufacturing these.
THE DECOY DOC.
The only animal that the natives had domesticated was the dog.
This animal followed their fortunes down through the long ages from
the original strain, known as the dingo. Of this species I should say
there were two varieties—the short-haired black variety, and the more
handsome yellow dog. It is claimed by some that the dingo, not being
a marsupial, was introduced from other lands. After the admixture with
other breeds, the natives, either by accident or design, evolved a wonder-
fully clever decoy dog. It was small, rather long in the body, of a
creamy color, with a brushy tail, which was carried erect. By skilfully
working these dogs in the shallows, the ducks were enticed in to the
shore, the yellow wagging plume of the animal attracting the curiosity
of the birds.
WHITE MAN’S VICES.
By the breaking up of tradition and tribal systems of government,
loss of game supplies, and restriction of movement on the one hand,
and the acquisition of the white man’s craving for strong drink on the
other, which opened the door to ail the vices of civilisation, the degrada-
tion of the aborigines was complete and final. By the loss of their
pristine freedom they lost also the easy dignity of Nature’s kings, and
became cringing, abject wrecks of their former selves. Admitting they
had some barbarous and shocking customs, there was still left much to
admire in these simple children of the Stone Age. The fate of aboriginal
peoples is always cruel when the merciless civilisations of might invade
their grounds. That there were some among the River Murray tribes
who were fully cognisant of their people’s degradation, and bore in
their hearts a black nightmare of despairing sorrow until they passed
into the shadows, I know. There are two sides to every question, hut
when civilisation opposes weak, primitive races, the special pleader is
absent from one side; and we cannot cover our sins by the Christianity


that we offer them in return. If the history of the colonisation of
Australia had been written from the aborigines’ point of view, we would
hide our heads in shame; and yet it was never the Government’s policy
or intention to be cruel.
“ Ah, when shall all men’s good
Be each man's rule, and universal peace
Lie like a shaft of light across the land? ”
From the natives’ point of view things were very unsatisfactory the
moment the white man appeared upon the scene. At first the tribes were
unable to grasp the significance of the appearance of a strange race,
who arbitrarily seized their best lands, took possession of their water-
holes and ancient camping sites, and answered their protests with brute
force. Resentment and indignation filled the hearts of the tribesmen—
which, on rare occasions, found vent in the killing of isolated settlers.
The measure of vengeance taken by the whites was generally an over-
flowing one, in which the innocent were frequent sufferers. The hunters
of the tribes occasionally killed the strange animals which their unbidden
guests had brought, and which were displacing their own game on the
wide, grassy plains, A flavor was added to the new diet by their feelings
of resentment towards the interlopers. For this the natives sometimes
suffered the extreme penalty, for they were largely at the mercy of the
stock owners.
RUFUS CREEK KILLING.
The massacre of the blacks at Rufus Creek was remembered and
talked about by even the lower river tribes, who had taken no part in
that sanguinary affair. They told me that the creek ran red with the
blood of their slain on the day of the white man’s vengeance. Yet theirs
had been but futile attempts of a weak people to stem the tide of an
alien encroachment. It appears that on the breaking up of the tribe
some of the Rufus blacks joined the lower Murray tribes, who them-
selves were fast disintegrating. The remnants thus united dropped all
tribal antagonisms, and became bands of outcasts, without any social
organisation; they had lost all foundations of stability, and the safe-
guards of curious, but nevertheless wise laws, wihch until then had stood
the test of ages.
THE WHITE man’s JUSTICE.
In too many cases the execution (by whatever means) of a black-
fellow for the murder of a white has been a gross and barbarous mis-
carriage of justice. It is a sad truth that it is nearly always the baser
elements of a civilisation that first come in contact with primitive races.
The natives soon recognised the cruel and unscrupulous lustfulness of
the whites, and they have told me that in early days the approach of
a white man was the signal for all the young girls to hide in the scrub.
I remember one evening coming upon a native trying to run the trail


of a white fellow whom he had found endeavoring to molest his young
daughter. I shall never forget the blazing anger in that man’s eyes.
There was little doubt that had he caught the miscreant, his vengeance
would have been complete, and there would have been another travesty of
justice in our courts of law. Let those who see the degraded condition
of the scattered remnants remember that we forced it upon them, and that
the blame is ours.
DECORATIVE ART,
The practice of tattooing by introducing pigments under the skin
was not in vogue; and I do not remember seeing any designs marked
on their bodies by cutting the flesh, with the exception of the hole they
bore through the cartilage of the nose. This custom was common among
the males, who wore a small polished bone of a kangaroo in the perfora-
tion, purely, I believe, for ornamental purposes. Pigments were in
common use on festive and ceremonial occasions. The colors were
painted on the face, limbs, and bodies of the males, in various decorative
designs. A rather gruesome touch often seen was the marking out in
white of the bones of the skeleton upon the dark skin. Seen in the
flickering glow of their fires, against a shadowy background of gums,
■the effects were rather startling and unforgettable. At least, I found it
so when, as an uninvited spectator, I watched from the shadows a genuine
(and, I believe, the last) corroboree held on the Lower River Murray.
No other whites were present on this occasion.
FENCING WIRE “PLENTY GOOD SPEAR.”
To the blackfellow on the river and lagoon the advent of Nos. 4
and 6 fencing wire proved a much-appreciated boom. Cut into lengths
of about nine inches, two of these would be taken to the local blacksmith
with a request that he would “make it this one all same sharp.” They
would then be firmly bound, one on each side of a long, straight pine
stick, forming a double-pointed fishing spear, which proved a most
efficient implement in the hands of the native fishermen. Sometimes
travelling blacks would come to my camp for the loan of my swamp
boat. Permission having been granted, the blackfellow, whose only
outfit was one of those fishing spears, would make his way to a weedy
patch, or follow along a bed of reeds. A slight quivering movement
indicated the course of the frightened fish. Instinctively the native
calculated the exact spot in advace of the movement where he must strike
to transfix his unseen quarry. Perhaps he would be away an hour and
a half, or maybe two hours, but he always secured a fair haul of perch,
bream, and catfish. I have never met a whitefellow who could secure
fish in this manner. I have often watched the blacks, and tried my hand,
but never with success, though much to the amusement of the natives.
This was the last of the native weapons to disappear from general use,
although it lingered well into the eighties of last century. About that
time I still saw young fellows training in the use 'of both light and


heavy hunting spears; but, like the longbow of the British, these weapons
were now looked upon more as a means of sport. The manufacture of
weapons is still carried on in a desultory manner by the survivors, more
for the purpose of sale to relic hunters.
MARVELS OF INGENUITY.
Look at some of their wonderful productions in our museums. Some
of the fishing nets and cordage are quite as neatly made as our own
machine-contrived articles. What infinite patience and laborious appli-
cation they represent. From flints they made knives, chisels, spear points,
and tomahawks. With the aid of these they hafted and shafted their
weapons, and proceeded to make other implements of stone, wood, bone,
and shell. With primitive devices such as these, the aboriginal killed,
skinned, and cut up his meat, stripped a sheet of bark from a tree to
make a boat, procured fibres for cords, bags, and nets, and sinews for
thread; he made implements for digging roots, and millstones for grind-
ing flour from edible seeds. And note his art productions for the em-
bellishment of weapons and for personal adornment during ceremonies.
He has always faced and mastered the difficulties of his environment, has
won his place, and even found time for some entry into the gentler
world of art. And yet, like the birds of the forest, he trusted to each
day supplying his needs, did not bother about reserve supplies, and took
no thought for the morrow. These men of the Stone Age, conquerors
of adverse conditions (for Nature was not lavish with her favors) deserve
more than the passing attention of the white man, rather than contempt.
The judgment of the European is often blinded by egotism. I have
heard and read much about the white man’s burden, but how little we
hear of the black man’s! And what are we doing for them? Many of
the natives, both full-blooded and half-caste, became expert shearers,
and in the sheds found the nearest terms of equality with the whites,
but far too often the nearest blacks’ camp took the place of a brothel.
This was also the case along the routes of big railway contracts and
new land settlement areas. During the seventies it was a common prac-
tice for overland teamsters from Port Augusta to the Northern Territory
to carry off gins and boys—bright, intelligent lads, who were useful in
tracking straying bullocks or horses, by which they saved their white
bosses undue exertion. It was not uncommon for these boys to be
traded as merchandise at the end of the trip. Transactions of this sort
were easily managed in the bar of a public house. So far as the gins
were concerned, no comment is necessary, except to say that the intro-
duction of a foul disease among them has of the most serious
causes of their decimation. Something should be done for the helpless
victims —the aborigines—for morally these are what we have made them,
and if for no other reason than that, they should be pitied. Who can gauge
the overwhelming pressure of evil forces brought to bear on these simple,
defenceless people?


NATIVE GRATITUDE.
It has been said that the natives were incapable of feeling gratitude
for favors conferred upon them. Now, the custom among the whites was
to present their old cast-off clothing to the natives. My dear old mother
on one occasion cut up a piece of new cloth, out of which she made a
dress for a black baby boy in an adjacent camp. The natives were de-
lighted. They then disappeared into the south country, and we saw no
more of them for about a year. One day, however, the black mother
came to the door with a parcel of beautiful green necklace shells—a gift
in acknowledgment of my mother’s kindness. The boy, a son of old
Nature, is now a man, with, I believe, a family of his own. About four
months ago I met his sisters on the banks of the River Murray, and they
both recalled my mother’s gift to Yorick, the baby brother, as a pleasant
memory of the past.
FIRE, PINKY, AND COOKERY.
The practice of carrying fire when shifting camp, and on their boats
and canoes, was still in vogue in the early eighties. It was copied, to
some extent, by the fishermen during the winter months, who for this
purpose used an old nail keg instead of the natives’ clay hearth. Burn-
ing accidents frequently occurred in camp. The babies generally suffered
when the natives procured some wine. On one occasion I hauled a
drunken black out of the fire, into which I had seen him fall as I passed.
All his companions, male and female, were rendered hors de combat from
the same cause. I have seen terrible scars on some of the children, due
to burns. Although all intoxicating drink was forbidden the natives
by law, yet “pinky” was continually being smuggled into their camps.
The “pinky” habit has been the curse of the outlying districts for many
years.
To the Murray natives the mud turtle was a delicacy not to be
despised. Breaking its neck, they would place it on its back on the
coals. The shell served as a dish in which the occupier was made to
stew in its own juice. The smell was savoury enough, but I never tried
the dish. Most of their cooking was done on the coals. That game and
fish cooked in this manner are sweet I know by experience. I have
often cooked the eggs of wild fowl in hot ashes, but always took the
precaution to break the top beforehand; if this is not done they explode.
With the Murray tribes the old method of cooking by means of a buried
oven or heated stones seems to have been one of the first to go. At my
advent, in 1876, I saw no signs of this method being in use, nor have I
since that date. All discarded ovens I have examined bear evidence of
considerable antiquity.
CHILDREN OF NATURE.
In the earlier days, gins were much engaged in weaving bags, baskets,
and mats, the material used being a certain rush from the swamps, which
was wilted to make it pliable. These articles were skilfully and artistic-
ally made, and found ready sale among the whites. In rug making the


natives prepared the skins of wallaby and kangaroo by scouring them
with ashes, and drying them in the sun. To make them pliable and soft
they were scored with some sharp instrument in lines that crossed each
other, and they were sewn together with the sinews from the tail of the
kangaroo. The natives did not seem to have any knowledge of tanning.
The rugs were satisfactory so long as they were kept dry, but should the
fleshy side get wet they emitted an unpleasant odour. Upon shifting into
a new camp, their simple shelters of boughs were quickly erected. First
a semicircle of small holes was dug, into which the stouter ends of
slender rods were forced. The free ends of these rods were then bent
over to meet each other, and tied. This formed a framework over which
a rough thatch of green boughs was placed. A space was left open on
the lee side to serve as a door, before which a fire was kept burning.
Should the wind change, this gap was hurriedly blocked with brushwork,
and an opening made on the opposite side, where the fire was re-kindled.
Such dome-structures were once common along the River Murray, but
.for many years old bags and sheets of iron have taken the place of the
green boughs for roofing purposes. Although the material varied in
different districts, the structure was always the same in shape. Life to
these simple children of the wilds was not the humdrum affair that it
is to many civilised peoples. There was always the anticipation of a
pleasant variety in the frequent change of camp to fresh localities. To
the children it must have been an oft-recurring event of joyous excite-
ment. Considering they were nomadic, we see the reason for their
primitive type of dwelling, for what use would anything more substantial
have been to such irresponsible children of Nature? Recent journeys
along the Murray have shown me that they still cling to their primitive
dwellings, and it hurt my feelings to find poor old Jinny Christmas and
her grandchildren with no better shelter than a bag and blanket wurley.
I think the Government should see that some waterproof covering is issued
to them. They do not want houses, but much prefer the old style of
life—of which the wurley was a part. The least we can do is to see
that they (especially the old and the children) have a few comforts of
life. There is room also for a scheme to improve the unhappy lot of the
children —bright, happy little mortals, who are still unconscious of the
hdn under which they are horn. Knowing the depth of parental love,
Ido not favor complete segregation. That would be cruel, and I hope
it will never be adopted in this State. Let us remember that “the same
heart beats in every human breast.”
“ What matters the shade of the outer skin,
If the soul through the eyes shows a man within,
With the same old passions we know for our own,
Expressed in a language of different tone?
He claims the right—if we’re honest, we feel—
To get a straightforward, legitimate deal.”


Hoohow and Hoola
A STORY OF THE MALLEE FOWL.
(Dedicated to Miss E, S. Abbott as a mark of the Author’s appreciation
of a generous and most helpful friendship.)
In the story of Hoohow and Hoola I am making a special plea for
the preservation of the wild life of the Australian bushlands, which
generally speaking, is so little valued, and all too swiftly passing. The
story is founded on facts gathered over a great number of years, and
after the study of many birds, with the idea of presenting a life history
of one of the most wonderful forms of the feathered tribe—one of the
small group of mould-building birds known as the mallee fowl (Leipoa
ocellata). This bird is remarkably intelligent—a born philosopher, an
engineer in its knowledge of construction, and a chemist in its adaptation
of the laws that govern fermentation. As a physicist, too, one would
almost imagine that the bird understands the principles of heat, radiation,
capillarity, evaporation, and meteorology, for it appears to he able to
regulate the temperature and gauge the thermal conditions of its gigantic
mound, which acts the part of an incubator. Mound construction, as it
is practised by this group of birds, is claimed by some authorities to be
a survival of ancient reptilian habits, by which eggs are buried in the
sand to hatch; but in this respect I cannot concur. My idea is that the
art of mound building, peculiar to this type of bird, has evolved out of
a general method adopted by many ground birds of leaving their nest
during the heat of the day, and covering the eggs with leaves and other
vegetable matter. The period of absence from the nest may have been
gradually increased, whilst more material was used to cover the eggs.
Ultimately body heat may have been replaced entirely by that derived
chemically from the decomposition of the vegetable layer above the eggs.
My research among these wonder birds of Australia extends over a
period of more than forty years, seventeen of which were spent in special
studies of their life habits, methods of courting, and means of communi-
cating with each other by a sound language. Altogether, the results
were to me a revelation of Nature’s secrets as never before they had come
to the notice of investigators.
About the year 1907 I was encouraged in my work by Mr. Minchin,
Director of the Adelaide Zoological Gardens, and the late Sir Edward
Stirling, to the latter of whom I handed my original notes upon the
subject; and these, in their turn, were eventually published in the
South Australian Ornithologist (April, 1916, and July, 1917, respective-
ly) . My last discovery was the solution of the problem of “egg reversal,”
which I made on August 28, 1924.


The whole undertaking has been one of absorbing interest, in spite
of the fact that it cost me much labor, hardship, and privation, hunger
and thirst, with one narrow escape from death. But I am more than
satisfied, because out of my original labors grew a larger scheme, which
aimed at the better protection and conservation of Australia’s wild life,
the wanton and wasteful destruction of which had long grieved me
considerably.
The mallee fowl is essentially a bird of the wilderness—it has no-
thing in common with man —the wild, lone mallee lands are its home.
Ever being driven back by the advance of settlement, and harried by
the sportsman and fox, its numbers are fast diminishing; the most fecund
of all feathered fowl, yet rapidly it is approaching its doom. I have
observed that even the laying hen falls a victim to the cruel jaws of a
steel trap which is carefully concealed from view by the hunter in the
sandy cover of the incubating mound.
In Victoria and the south-eastern parts of South Australia the bird
is known as the Lowan, in Western Australia as the Gnowa, while all
along the lower River Murray it is simply called the mallee fowl.
Aboriginal names are frequently derived from the calls of birds. Thus
the mallee fowl, by different tribes, was referred to as Gnowa and
Woohow, the latter being as near as one might represent the notes in
writing.*
The food of the mallee fowl consists largely of the seeds of various
acacia (A. stenophylla, A. regeus , and other species). When it is avail-
able, the bird also takes keenly to green feed, tubers, berries, and insects.
Where the farmer’s wheat fields adjoin its haunts it also shows some
appreciation of the grain as an addition to its regular diet, seldom
venturing further than three or four yards from the edge of its scrubby
refuge.
There is no doubt that the mallee fowl is one of the necessary
guardians of the wild mallee lands—a natural check upon the injurious
insect pests which abound in those regions. During my travels I saw
that the ground below me was leafless, and had the appearance as though
it had been swept by a fire, but when I approached it I found that this
was the work of myriads of looper caterpillars. On these the mallee
fowl were preying in the more secluded areas, the boundary line of their
good work being most apparent. This observation subsequently stood
me in good stead when I kept several pairs of the fowl in captivity at
my sanctuary at Humbug Scrub.
* Cf. John Gould: “Proceedings Zoological Society,” October 13th, 1840,
and “The Birds of Australia,” London, 1848, plate 78; Ngow Aborigines of
the lowland; Ngow-oo of the mountain districts of Western Australia; native
pheasant colonists of Western Australia. —[H.B.]


The habitat of the mallee fowl is practically waterless, but heavy
dews are very frequent, and from its pendant drops the bird supplies
its need. It is a curious fact that the many birds I have captured all
had to learn to drink normally by first pecking at the water placed for
their use. Even then, when the chance offered, they preferred to take the
drops of moisture from the leaves around them. The mallee fowl is of
social habit to the extent of nesting in groups, in which the individual
pairs are separated by distances that may vary from several hundred
yards to half a mile or more. Knowing this, the finding of one pair
has always, with me, led to the locating of others, generally bringing
three pairs, with their mounds, under observation at one time. The
nesting sites chosen were open to the sun, free of shadow during the
better part of the day, by choice, upon a gentle slope, with a northern
aspect, or at the head of a blind gully, hidden by surrounding thickets
of broom bush. The site is usually marked by some tree more con-
spicuous than the rest —a solitary pine, cherry ti-tree, or tall mallee,
The present-day isolation of these nesting places may be due to
the influence of settlement. The carrying capacity of the average mallee
lands is about four pairs of adults and the surviving young birds of
two past seasons to the square mile. Knowing this, any effort made
for the saving of this bird from extinction must include the setting apart
of a very considerable area as sanctuary and breeding grounds, which
at the same time could carry a balanced population of the fauna peculiar
to the district, such as the wombat, native porcupine, kangaroo, wallaby,
and emu.
“ Ah, leave them in the wilderness.
Or in the hush, or in the brake.
Let them in liberty possess
The haunts God fashioned for their sake.”
During the laying season there is a seven-day interval between each
of the first four eggs, then it becomes five days, and presently another
day is dropped. Through the mid-season, and under favorable condi-
tions, we find the time drops to three-day periods, but as the season wanes
it is gradually lengthened, and may be as much as eight days, or become
erratic. I have known mallee fowls to lay as late as the middle of
February. Chicks are hatched early in November, but I have known
them to appear as late as March.
The number of eggs found in a mound varies. When conditions are
favorable, and everything in good working order, nine or ten eggs may
be found; occasionally, in the middle of the season, as many as twelve.
Infertility or failure in temperature may account for the greater numbers
sometimes reported to have been discovered in a single mound.
The eggs of the mallee hen are very thin-shelled, and, when fresh,
of a beautiful pinkish tint. They measure 3J inches in length and 8


inches in circumference, the weight being eight ounces. On account of
their size and delicious flavor the eggs are keenly hunted by the white
and black populations of Australia. The eggs cannot be boiled, as
ordinary fowl’s eggs, for, owing to the fragile shell, they burst in the
water. The correct method is to make a small hole in the top, and place
the egg in a tin just big enough to hold it, and pour water into the
receptacle nearly to the height of the perforation. The tin is then placed
in a saucepan of water, and allowed to boil for ten minutes. They can
also be cooked in the hot ashes of a camp fire, or sucked raw. in the
latter condition they are very nourishing, and have on occasions saved
me much suffering from thirst.
The wonderful incubator-mound of the mallee fowl is usually about
three feet high and some thirty-six feet in circumference. Although of
such large dimensions, the mounds are not easily seen in the dense scrub,
as they are usually “camouflaged” with a covering of small sticks and
twigs. New chums have occasionally mistaken these mounds for abori-
ginal graves. The birds evince great patience in repairing the damage
done to their mounds by foxes or human intruders. The fox, in order
to reach the eggs, makes a terrible mess of the mound.
The construction is, as stated before, designed principally to generate
heat by chemical decomposition of vegetable matter, and to retain it for
hatching purposes. The regulation of the temperature is chiefly the
work of the cock-bird, which spends at least four months in building
the mound. Even when the hatching is proceeding, the bird remains in
charge by alternately attending to the aeration and solar heating of the
eggs. These duties require its constant attention. When not actually at
work on the mound, the bird spends most of its time in the immediate
vicinity, as a sentry. Animal trespassers of any description are strictly
forbidden. Should, by accident, a rabbit place its desecrating paws
into the soil of the structure, it would immediately receive the full force
of a veritable feathered avalanche, for when the mallee-cock puts up his
crest he means business. Meanwhile the hen bird spends most of her
time alone, in the search for food; she needs ample of it during the
laying season.
We shall inspect the mound again—two months later. It may be
about the middle of November. The surface of the structure is so hot
that you cannot bear to hold your hand upon it. In contour, it is flatter,
and not so We observe nine eggs lying in the warm depth of its
central core. On the following day another egg may be laid by the
hen, but the number nevertheless remains nine, for down in the darkness
of the mound a little heart is throbbing life; there is a movement, a shell
breaks, and sturdy little legs force the fragments under foot. Then comes
an upward push, followed by a twist of the shoulders, and the sand
loosens above. The shoulders of the chick remain foremost, and are the
means by which it bores its way up towards the light of day; the strong


legs act as the levers. The little bird’s head hangs over its breast, while
tiny bristles keep the sand from entering its nostrils. The baby-feathers
are all encased in sheaths, which, one by one, are removed during the
upward journey by rubbing against the sand. When freshly hatched,
and while still moist, the chick is as spiney as a young hedgehog—a
puny little chap to be asked by Nature to perform such a Herculean task
during the better part of a whole day. It takes the chick, on an average,
about twenty-two hours to reach the surface. When the crown of the
mound breaks and the young bird tumbles into the glaring light of the
sun, it is just eight weeks and two days since the particular egg was laid.
The chick shuts its eyes, and nestles for a while to rest itself. The male
parent bird stalks across the mound, while the hen’s soft signal of
“gnowa” is heard.
The proud pair strut around the chick, uttering gentle phrases in
low tones, as if fearing to disturb the rest of the new arrival, which
for all the world looks like a soft ball of feathers. The little wings are
perfectly folded, the ear orifices unusually large, and the nostrils well
defined. The beak lacks the hammer or shell-breaking device of other
birds. The markings of the feathers are entirely protective.
Presently the mother bird begins to scratch away the sand over the
egg chamber, and a shower of dirt disturbs the chick. Remarkable as
it seems, the fledgling springs from the mound and flics, with the speed
of a quail, a distance of quite fifty yards! It lands in a patch of low
bushes. At this early stage a young malice fowl is often mistaken for
a quail, and pays the penalty accordingly.
By about the middle of the afternoon the young bird begins to
busy itself by scratching among the fallen acacia leaves, picking out the
small black seeds, or centipedes and other vermin. It seems quite at
home and self-contained in the new world it has entered so strangely,
and only a few hours back.
When I continued my observation I found that, with the approach
of night, the chick became restless, ran hither and thither, and eventually
spread its wings to alight on the top of a scrubby bush. It seemed as
if this act had been prompted by a strong impulse to get away from the
ground, as though sensing something which in later life would be
recognised as danger. For a while the bird fluttered and struggled with
the twigs, to find a comfortable foothold; then it nestled down, and the
thin outer branches closed over its head. Night now set in.
And so this little creature, thrown entirely on its own resources, and
lacking the guiding and protecting love of its unknown parents, meets
life with a sublime confidence in itself, and calmly resigns itself to sleep.
Within a few days the bird found its way to a plain on which
acacias grew in abundance, and it had no difficulty in protecting itself


from hawks. Under the sheltering branches of these bushes it found a
rich harvest of insects and seeds concealed beneath the fallen leaves.
All the time, the old birds remained at the mound, and took no further
interest in their offspring.
When the chick is nearly four weeks old tail feathers begin t)
appear, and during the next few days some also show upon the head,
throat, and rump, and lastly the breast feathers and tail coverts appear.
Of the old dress, only the wing feathers remain visible. Now the bird
no longer resembles a quail. As a matter of fact, at this stage the tail
becomes longer and more slender in proportion to that of an adult,
which gives the bird a strong resemblance to the English pheasant. It
takes three years for the young to reach maturity.
SOUND LANGUAGE.
The sound language of the mallee fowl is complete and decisive.
The call of the male bird is deep and booming, as follows: “Uh, uh, uh,
whoo, whoome, whoo, whoome.” To this the hen replies with a loud
screech, which sounds like “Waugh.” And then the pair complete their
greeting by crying, in apparent contentment, and softly, “Whoohow.”
When danger approaches in the form of a hawk or other bird of
prey, both sexes quickly hut softly give the signal: “Uh, uh, uh!” But
when it means to take rapid flight the note becomes harsh, and sounds
like “Kuck, kuck, kuck.”
The note “Wah,” emitted softly, signifies approval or assent. When
a lien is about to lay, she starts to sing early in the morning: “Hooah,
hoora. hoola, boo, boo, hoo!” The notes are soft, and are used only
by the hen on this particular occasion. The first part of this cackle is
kept up for several hours, and concludes with the single notes the moment
the egg is dropped.
Other calls are used, which I find difficult to put into words. The
note “Wak,” for instance, is frequently used by both birds when testing
the temperature of the mound, or when otherwise busying themselves. It
is also sounded by the male at the conclusion of his love song.
At mating time the male bird stands upon the edge of the mound
and bows his head beneath his breast, sending forth an insistent, loud
booming call. When the hen has responded, he bows again, and calls:
“Lh, uh, uh, who oome, who oome, who oome.” To this the hen re-
sponds; “Uhauagh, uhauagh, uhauagh.” The male again bows to the
ground, repeating the booming note three times. The hen thereupon
lifts her head high in the air, producing three shrill cries. Finally, the
male lifts his crest, opens his wings, and spreads his tail, displaying the
beautiful feathers to perfection. Softly uttered notes of “Hoohow” ex-
press lire mutual pleasure of the pair.
THE MALLEE FOWL IN CAPTIVITY. BREEDING AND FEEDING.
I thought it advisable to include a few directions for the treatment
of the mallee fowl in captivity. It being among the shyest of the


denizens of the big lone lands, the site chosen for the enclosure should
be secluded in a shrubbery that slopes towards the sun. The aviary
should include bushy growths for cover, and a central open space for
the mound, upon which no shadow rests between the hours of, say,
9 a.m. to 4 p.m. The soil should be well drained, and of a sandy nature,
and, if possible, on a limestone formation. The aviary I most favor is
48 feel long by 24 feet wide, 4 feet high on the sides, and 6 feet in
the centre. The mesh of netting should be 1-j inches; this will hold
the chicks, and save damage to fluttering birds, which a smaller mesh
is liable to inflict. Birds will not start mound construction until their
third season; but the mound does not come into use until the following
season. The first preparations are made during the autumn months, at
which time it is well to do something to awaken dormant instincts in
the birds. For this purpose we mark off a circle, not less than 4 feet
6 inches wide, near the centre of the aviary, and strip its surface with
a spade, banking the material around the circle. The entire space within
the embankment is then filled with leafy debris, which is taken from
under eucalyptus (or, if possible, mallee) trees. If the birds refuse to
work, it is advisable to occasionally move a portion of the debris forward
to encourage them.
As previously stated, the natural food of the mallee hen consists of
seeds, wild fruits, insects, and green stuffs. For captive birds an ideal
ration may be prepared of the following proportions: Table currants,
wattle seed, inillett, \- z and wheat, In addition, it is advisable
to give them thistles and lettuce. For a pair of birds, a handful of the
seed mixture should be given morning, noon, and night, and a few 7 peas
are helpful at laying time. When feeding chicks during the first month,
substitute the wheat by millett, and, if possible, give white ants or ant
eggs as well. It is a good practice to loosen patches of the soil here and
there within ike enclosure, in which the birds can scratch and have sand
baths.
It is advisable to use a separate aviary for chick rearing, with plenty
of bush cover. They practically look after themselves, and give little
trouble, but being liable to panic, care must be exercised to preserve
them from any sudden fright. Give plenty of ground area, and use a
low-built aviary, with wire netting never less than Ti in mesh. This will
prevent much damage being done to flying birds. Pair the birds about
April in the third season, and keep every pair in a separate enclosure.
With proper treatment the male bird becomes quite tame; the hen always
remains a little shy of approach.
I have just carried out an interesting experiment by removing a
nesting pair to a new site. The mound was prepared in advance, and
within a little over a week the birds were hard at work on the new
mound. The.old site was too moist, and not very favorable for hatching
eggs.


Tadpoles and Frogs
A MEMORY OF THE SOUTHERN TRACK.
THIS morning a brooding silence holds all Nature in thrall. The birds
arc silent, and the frogs no longer twang the strings of their guitars
along the creek that flows through the orchard. The stately gums
stand silent, and from the west comes the rumble of distant thunder. Nearer
comes the storm; the thunder echoes along the hills, and the patient
mother-birds cover their naked nestlings and shield them with their wings
from the cold, stinging rain. The young wallabies scurry into the safe
and snug shelter of their mothers’ pouches, where, safely and cosily
cradled, they take occasional peeps (with wonder in their little bright
eyes) at the swiftly falling rain, and listen to the fearsome noise in the
sky above. An extra loud clap, and they pop hack, like children with
their heads under the blankets, or in mother’s lap, feeling safer thus
from the unknown terrors of the storm. The storm passes, leaving the
sky still cold and grey and sombre. A wind comes up the gully, splash-
ing the big drops from the swaying branches, A solitary frog twangs
his guitar, but none will answer him. He tries again, but gets only a
feeble response, sometimes from up the creek, sometimes from down
the creek. But the notes are half-hearted—they have not the zest of
yestereve. The cold greyness oppresses them, and they cannot enthuse
with that mad, joyous, frolicsome rattle that belongs to the warm, sunny
days of spring and the balmy summer nights. “Pong, pong, pong —
pong, pong,” with the deeper notes of the bass voice at regular intervals.
I rather like the music of the frogs, it has such a joyous ring, and is
especially welcome to the thirsty traveller.
LOST IV FROG LAND.
Talking of frogs brings to mind an experience of long ago. I had
ridden from Lake Alexandrina, and was bound for the north; and, as
the weather was hot, I was making up for lost time by travelling late
at night. About 10 o’clock, hearing some frogs in the timber on my
right, I unsaddled and hobbled my horse, lit a fire as a guide for return-
ing, the night being a moonless one, and, taking my quart pot, I started
out to find the frogs’ pool. Keeping the music in front, I travelled far
through the shadowy stringybarks, and soon lost sight of my beacon
fire. At length I found the water in the depths of an old saw pit, and
walked around it to find a means of access to the water. Finally I
secured a pot full, and climbing out of the pit, found myself in a
quandary, for I had lost my bearings, and was bushed, like any new


MALLEE FOWL BRED AT THE HUMBUG SCRUB SANCTUARY AND
PRESENTED TO HIS MAJESTY THE KING IN 1924
[Illustrated London News


BLACK SWAN AND CYGNET. SANCTUARY DAM, HUMBUG SCRUB


chum would be. I tried to guess the direction, and, steering by the
stars, I plodded on. In about an hour the course brought me within
sound of a horse-bell, which I remembered to have passed some miles
back on the track. Making for the sound, I eventually struck the track,
and some two or three miles on, found my temporary camp. Relighting
my fire, I soon had the water boiling (that is, what was left of it), and
sat down to the much-needed refreshment. This, it might be imagined,
was greatly enjoyed, especially the hot tea, which, but for a sip or two,
I saved till I had finished eating. When at length I filled up the
pannican I poured the refreshing liquid down with some gusto. Too
late, I noticed a number of slimy objects had gone down with the tea,
and on examining the dregs in the quart-pot by the light of the fire, I
found a layer of jelly-hag tadpoles about an inch in thickness. Judging
by the size of the creatures, they must have been of the bull-frog species.
Anyhow, as no harm came of this impromptu feed, I came to the con-
clusion they must be wholesome as an article of diet, although I must
confess I have never ventured to tackle them since. I brought my stray-
ing horse nearer to camp, and rolled up in my blankets, with saddle for
a pillow, and went to sleep to the tune of the frogs’ “Pong, pong, pong —
pong, pong.”


Our Feathered Friends
IT has been stated, and with good reason, that without the birds man
could not exist on this planet. It is a sad state of affairs when man,
through ignorance, says his best friends. The lavish and indiscrimi-
nate use of poison is depleting large areas of our most useful birds, and
destroying forms of life that are absolutely necessary to man’s continued
existence. I remember on one occasion a heavy downpour of rain left
many pools of water in paddocks that had been poisoned. Flocks of
ibis came to the pools, picked up the poison pellets, and perished by the
hundred. Man is hasty in judgment, and slow to profit by experience,
but the blowfly pest should open his eyes to the dangers ahead. No
invention of man can adequately cope with the insect pests. Nature’s
pendulum swings truly. She has placed the birds where they are needed,
and, for his own protection, man must protect them. I don’t know the
reasons that prompted the introduction of the English starling, but this
bird is certainly filling a gap caused by the destruction of our native
insectivorous birds, and doing a good work for our farmers and graziers.
But to the fruit growers he is anathema, for he does not fit the niche in
Nature’s scheme. His dietary requirements include fruits, which in
England are supplied by the abundance of wild fruits and berries. In
our own country, Nature not having made such provision, the starlings
levy heavy toll on the fruit gardens, and prove themselves a misplaced
link in Nature’s chain. This shows how careful man should be in the
introduction of alien forms of life, and in the protection of our native
birds. Admittedly, some of the latter eat fruit to a certain extent, but
it is not good policy to begrudge one shilling’s worth of fruit to a pair
of birds that have done £lO worth of good. Man’s greed often over-
reaches itself when dealing with the question of the usefulness of birds.
The changing conditions due to human agency, and the ever-increasing
areas of land brought under use, have made the need of, and given the
value to, the work of the English starling; hut as this bird Increases at
such an amazing rate, it must eventually outgrow its food supply. It
would be interesting to know what will then happen. Will it turn a seed
eater, or migrate, at stated times, as do large numbers of this bird in the
Old Land? That the introduction of alien forms is fraught with danger
we know. Whether eventually this useful form will become a menace
time will show. The starling is, by commandeering all available nesting
hollows, making it extremely difficult for some species of our native birds
to breed. Questions of this sort, long neglected, but important to our
future welfare, must be taken in hand in the near future.


The Wood Swallow
DR. BASEDOW’S interesting account* of the clustering wood swal-
lows recalls similar doings in the box trees along the Murray.
Choosing the junction of a thick limb with the trunk on the
sheltered side of the tree, they would cluster in the angle like a swarm
of bees, the first birds clinging to the rough bark, the others holding by
the wing elbows of their fellows, layer upon layer, forming conspicuous
masses when they camped for the night. I am not sure of the species,
hut I think it was Tenebrosus. The cluster is formed for the purpose of
mutual warmth, and it enables these birds to pass the coldest night in
comfort, so long as they were not seen by gunners, who were only too
ready to send a charge of shot into these masses of sleeping birds, killing
and maiming them by the score.
THE TEST.
These birds are accused of being destructive to bees. I have kept
bees since 1886, and have often noticed them working over the apiary,
but, comparing their actions with the bee-eater, I came to the conclusion
that they were not harmful. That beautiful little creature, the bee-eater,
watches along the route of the flying bees from the vantage of a promi-
nent dead branch, and, darting at the passing bee, returns to the branch
and proceeds to get the sting from the bee by rubbing it on the branch
before attempting to swallow its victim. I had noticed that the wood
swallow did not follow this procedure, but swallowed its prey without
any preparation. My bee-keeping neighbors keep up a deadly feud
against this bird, and last summer saw big execution. I secured one of
the victims that had a broken wing, which I attended to. I gave it into
my son’s charge, telling him to place before it every day equal numbers
of drone and worker bees. We kept the bird a week under observation,
and it fed freely from the heap of drones, but was never found to accept
a worker bee as food.
FAIR PLAY WANTED.
This confirmed previous observations, and led me to the correct
conclusion that they were not harmful from a bee-keeper’s point of view.
My son, who, prior to this test, had advocated drastic measures, is now
satisfied that it was a mistake to destroy the wood swallow, as, by prey-
ing upon the drones, it is positively doing the bee-keeper a good turn —
for drones are always in excess of requirements. I trust that any apiarist
who tests this question as we have done will see fair play for the birds,
and give a fair choice of drones with the workers. Otherwise starvation
might unfairly affect the question. Error dies hard. I am sorry to say
that the wood swallow is on the black list in our district. Blind, un-
grateful men, who cannot see the beauty and eternal fitness of Nature’s
laws, “and live like bastards, not her sons.”
“ ’Tis education forms the common mind;
, Just as the twig is bent, the tree’s inclined.”
*Register, July 16, 1918. [H.B.]


Man at War with Nature
ATTACK UNDER COVER OF SMOKE CLOUDS.
IT is ever the same old question that crops up, and all pivots on man’s
selfish greed. Man is ever ready to pass his own evil deeds on to
innocent scapegoats that cannot plead—and then make this an excuse
for their destruction. Thank God wc have some men who recognise that
the Creator knew what He was about when He gave to each creature
its place and its work.
Given the power with no restraint, man would soon not only have
the world in ruin, but the solar system in rags. Some little time ago I
called attention to the need of being on our guard against the ugly
commercial spirit that, under the cloak of the war and the world short-
age, would probably want to exploit our native animals for profit. I
pointed out that America had already been fighting hard to save her
wild life from extinction,
PRODUCTION AND CONSERVATION.
Penguins and seals are the coveted victims, and, in the one case,
destruction goes on with the most diabolical cruelty. The excuse? War
needs, and the damage done to useful fish. Those interested in the
slaughter blame the birds for depleting the river of fish—birds that, in
far larger numbers, co-existod for thousands of years with a heavily-
stocked river. A writer claims, under a noni de plume, that production
should be encouraged (production should here read destruction). Be-
fore you have production you must have conservation. Without conser-
vation it is depletion when man enters the arena; otherwise Nature is
capable of looking after herself. Unrestrained, man uses up the capital
instead of the surplus, and this must, by natural law, end in disaster.
Nature always provides a surplus for legitimate use, far in excess of
needs, to ensure continuance of species. Take, in connection with plants
producing seed that is in much demand for food—she produces an enor-
mous surplus to supply that need, beyond the requirements of species
continuity. And Nature’s children, following her laws, live upon these
surplus stores, and thus, under natural conditions, there is no depletion.
Man, finding new needs that are legitimate, must work along Nature’s
lines, and provide a surplus to supply such needs. With regard to partial
protection, what earthly good is six months’ sanctuary to animals whose
period of gestation and lactation far exceeds that lime. This I have
pointed out before in regard to marsupials. Is it not the right of all
to glory in and enjoy the works of the Creator?
SAFEGUARD THOSE WHO SAFEGUARD US.
I am sorry to note that correspondents still wage war on the wood
swallow. Some years ago the mallee farmers were killing the white-
winged choughs. Seeing these birds busy around the scrubby edge of


their wheat paddocks, they at once blamed them for eating the wheat.
Strange how prone man is to treat his bird friends as enemies. Strange
that, out of 500 or 1,000 bags of wheat, he should begrudge a grain to
a bird. In this I do not include imported birds, such as the sparrow,
for admittedly they do serious harm. Poor birds! If they settle in a
wheat field they are after wheat; if on a fruit tree they are after fruit;
if they fly over the bees they are robbing the apiarist, and so on! They
are nowhere safe from man’s suspicion. Now, I think, with regard to
most of our native birds, that we can all afford to give a little in return
for the benefit received. Many of our species are entirely Insectivorous.
Hence, to begrudge a few pence loss for work to the value of many
pounds is, to say the least, foolish. My thirty-two years’ experience of
wood swallows in connection with bees has quite satisfied me that the
loss would be by their destruction. I had for many years the one and
only apiary in a large district, where these birds were very plentiful, so
I naturally got all the undivided attention they were giving to bees,
and did not lack opportunity to study them. The birds are with us now,
clustering over a neighboring ridge, and, so far as we are concerned,
unmolested they will remain—and for strength I think my hives of bees
will compare favorably with any around. That large numbers of this
useful bird are annually destroyed I know. This in a country subject
to plagues of grasshoppers and other pests is, as Captain White suggests,
a very unwise policy. More accurate knowledge of Nature’s law of
balance, in which the birds play so important a part, should be widely
disseminated, and included in the education of the young.
“ To the solid ground
Of Nature trusts the mind that builds for aye.”
Pearls and Swine
A SHORT time since, when I was seeding (we plough our seed in).
Joker (the horse) wanted frequent spells, because it was hill work,
and during one of these spells I took stock of the birds that were
following our trail. Looking along the furrow, I counted eight different
species, all intent in the search of the dainty morsels that the plough
was turning out. JNow, all these different species of birds were working
in perfect harmony. The robin did not say to the tree-creeper: “You
get out of this, your Chinaman!” Nor did the blue wren turn on the
willywag and order him across the creek, as the blue wrens had decided
on a policy of a “blue Australia” for this side, which barred Dagoes from
entering. Not a bit! Peace and harmony reigned, and even that alien,
the English starling, was allowed to take his share of the spoils without
paying any poll tax. Strange, isn’t it, what wasted opportunities there
were! There could have been a “ring” in worms, a white-ant “trust,” or
a grub “combine.” Awfully foolish of them not to have seen that!


Look at the keen happiness they could have enjoyed in besting their
fellows, if their education had been on the commercial lines of our highly
favored selves. Just look at that redbreast! Stuffed, and with a bit of
wire twisted through him, he would be worth 15/- to any lady for her
hat. And look at that lovely blue wren; he would surely fetch a guinea
—such a little duck of a dicky bird, you know! Why, even plain Jacky
Winter would fetch five shillings from any self-respecting drudge. But,
you see, commercial training is man’s privilege, and with it he can trans-
mute everything into gold—even the finer feelings of his own heart! I
have been pleased to note that our lady friends very seldom err in the
direction of wearing bird ornaments nowadays. Let us hope they will
never again be seen wearing the scalps of their innocent victims.
Fauna Propagation
FOG covers the landscape as with a mantle. Crystal drops hang from
the leaves as I walk up to the top block for a bag of native grass
for the animals I have in captivity. I am stooping over my work
when from overhead comes the sound of wings. Looking up, I see a
pair of large duck that swiftly pass, the drake giving warning of my
presence. With a graceful sweep in their flight, they alight in a pool
down the creek. Looking around, I see another pair emerge from the
fog, and over the tree tops just beyond some two pairs flying together.
Then follow a single pair, then eight more loom in sight. Others are
stopping down the gully in the big dam. The sound of their wings as
they pass recalls a day 28 years ago when, from among my bag of duck,
I reserved two that were winged for decoy birds. They were a pair, and
maybe the many-times-removed great-grand-parents of the ducks that have
just passed. Although so many years have elapsed, each season sees
their descendants flying up and down the gully, or spirally mounting to
the upper air, where they move round and round in widening circles
and increasing velocity. I feel proud of those ducks, for through them
I learnt that though man has the power to mar, he has also the power
to make good. I learnt that it was possible to bring back the beautiful
living pictures of the past, that the man-made desolate places of the
earth could be made to again throb with life if the threads of the woof
were picked up before it was too late. Those ducks were my first experi-
ment on the lines of fauna propagation, to which question I have in the
intervening years given considerable experimental study, with marked
success. It is wonderful how quickly the wildest creatures will lose
their fear of man. The wild birds of the garden come into the house
for bread, where they are sure of welcome. The bronzewing pigeon I
have liberated will hardly get out of the road of our feet when we meet
them in the scrub or paddock. The worst of this is, they become an easy
prey to the pot-hunter, and that blot on creation, the kill-everything-on-
sight sportsman, who is still too frequently met with.


The Birth of Spring
NATURE’S CALL TO LOVE AND SACRIFICE.
WITH Nature the future is always the care of the present. God’s
world is a beautiful place, and if man would only lift his eyes
from the dross, and look around and listen to the voice of God,
his heart would be filled with songs of praise—praise that there should
still linger about us something of the old, sweet music of the Garden of
Eden, something of the sublime anthem of creation. “When Spring
unlocks the flowers to paint the laughing soil” might be the prelude.
With returning spring comes the voice of God in the garden, the voice
of a trumpet to the sinless creatures of the seas and plains, of field,
mountain, and forest. But to sinful man comes the faintest of whispers.
When the almond puts on its vestal raiment, and the hills are bathed
in a golden glory of wattle bloom, the children of man look to the
distant line of hills. They are vaguely troubled and dissatisfied. ’Tis
God’s voice in the garden, faint like a distant echo, or the voice of some
forgotten dream. Dimly they are conscious of something they have
missed. Not so with the sinless creatures of the wild, for, with a joyous
bound, they respond to the voice of God in the garden, and each drops
into its allotted place, like well-fitting mosaics.
THE CALL AND RESPONSE.
The great throbbing heart of Nature is awake, the sublime drama of
love, service, and sacrifice, upon which rest the foundations of life, is
to be re-enacted. And, looking out from the sad habitation of man, we
get faint glimpses of the still beautiful Eden that encompasses us all
around, and we behold the flaming sword that keeps us out —the flaming
sword of lust and avarice. “For what shall it profit a man if he gain
the whole world and lose his own soul?” From the swamp comes a
babel of sound. ’Tis the frogs’ annual concert —the tune a joyous,
rollicking one, with a strong flavor of the banjo—a banjo with three
strings. Swallows and dragon flies skim the placid surface of the water.
Each, as it passes, is mirrored in its bosom. With the glint of silver
scales a grey snake uncoils its sinuous length, and emerges from its
winter cave. Swift wings pass to and fro where the golden sunlight
pierces the shadow of the scrub; festoons of beautiful lilac hang from
the branches, and the bloom of the scarlet runner is seen among the
grey lichens of the rocks, while spider and butterfly orchids lift their
quaint blooms above the green of the mosses. From the scrub comes the
happy trill of nesting birds. Already many of their snug little cradle
homes are occupied by the scrub babies —myriads of helpless little crea-
tures, with an army of willing workers to attend to their wants. The
voice of God in the garden has called into activity an ocean of devotion
and love—love, the central law of the Universe.


FAMILY LOVE.
Peep into this creeper! You are met by the bright pleading eyes
of a bearded honeyeater, patiently brooding over her eggs. A few yards
away the hooded robins have just completed a nest so like the branch
upon which it rests that you have to look closely and carefully to
recognise it. To the left, placed well out of sight in the dense foliage
of an orange tree, is the rough, bulky nest of some bablers. They have
reared their brood, and are now teaching them bush lore, that they shall
be fitted to get their living. Up the gully is another hooded robin’s nest,
built in a dead wattle, quite exposed, but so closely resembling the dead
wood of the tree that it is safe from detection. In another bush we
have the nest of the tawny-crowned honeyeater, and two little mouths
open wide as we peep in. They fancy it must be mother coming with
some more dinner. Now we come to the nest of the large wattle bird,
built in a wattle tree. One of the young birds has disappeared; the
one left is obviously doing well on double rations! Turning back, we
look at the nest of a pair of scarlet-breasted robins. The hen is sitting,
and is well used to being visited, so she lets us come very close. The
nest is built in the fork of a gum tree, and quite low down. Several
chains further on we visit another pair of scarlet-breasted robins, and
this pair we count as our special friends. They have just completed their
nest. We have only to call, “Robbie! Robbie!!” and be it in the
garden or out in the bush, there comes a flash of wings, then, like a red
flower, Robbie is sitting on the nearest twig. Hold out your hand and
call “Come, Robbie,” and he accepts your invitation, looking for the
dainty morsels you conceal in your hands.
THE JOY OF LIFE.
Another little feathered gem in scarlet flashes past. It is the mistle-
toe bird, carrying a mouthful of soft, downy material for its hammock-
nest. In quiet lagoons and back waters, by rushy island and sedgy
shore, where the yellow water buttons grow, the swans will be proudly
escorting their dusky broods to places where the softest weeds and grasses
grow. And in the quiet seclusions of the bush, still untouched by man,
or but lightly under his sway, the stately emus will be proudly leading
their two months’ old chick to forage, seeking ripe berries, lizards, and
green herbage. In the quiet depths of the mallee the mound birds will
be working industriously throughout the day. And with the marsupials,
from the quaint little opossum mouse to the big scrub kangaroo, all will
be busy with their funny little furry babies, that skip around, or peep
with enquiring eyes from their mothers’ pouches. Wherever you look,
love is the great compelling motive, the law of all laws, holding supreme
sway. For Spring is with us, and around us is the joy of life—which is
the good will of God to all His creatures.
“ Slayer of the winter, art thou here again?
0 welcome, thou that bring’st the summer nigh!
The bitter wind makes not thy victory vain,
Nor will we mock thee for thy faint blue sky.”


The Grey Kangaroo
THE sex habit of all the large species of kangaroo seems to be mono-
gamic, and in this they differ from the wallaby. Under normal
conditions the kangaroo has one young each year, and the pairing
takes place about the end of November nr during December, the young
animal leaving the pouch about or during the following September. It
takes several years to reach maturity, and during that lime remains in
the company of its parents. The animals thus form family groups, from
which they pass, on securing mates, to form other groups. Mutual pro-
tection is one of the benefits that accrue from the grouping system. The
young is allowed access to the doe’s milk for a certain period after the
arrival of the next in the pouch, then for a time the pouch is closed,
and the older “joey” kept away. Of the grey kangaroo a few still linger
in the hills, a short distance from Adelaide. They are refugees, driven
to their last strongholds in the rugged, scrubby ranges, where they lead
a precarious existence, ever closing in on smaller areas. Their numbers,
in spite of protection, continue to be depleted. As no penalty has ever
been inflicted for their destruction, the law is not respected by vandals
who take delight in tearing down game notices, and defying the conse-
quences. The time is now here when strenuous action is needed that we
may save to posterity and the world the remnants of our once rich
possession of rare and ancient forms of life. There are men among us
willing to spend, and spending, their lives on the work, rewarded by the
abuse of those with whom they are in conflict, and hampered by the
stolid apathy of past Governments, yet still fighting and hoping for
better things, though so much of their labor seems to have been in vain.
Where is the Australians’ love of country, that they destroy their own
heritage of wonder and beauty? Shame! Are we goths and vandals
that we should barter the last of our priceless gems for a few shillings’
worth of fur or feather, or for the lust of ruthless sport? Time after
time has the note of warning come to us. All too swiftly ebbs the tide
of life, all too swiftly closes a valuable page in the world’s history. Are
we going to fold our hands and look on with indifference, or are we
going to save what is left from a similar fate? There is work to do —
urgent and immediate.


Pages from the Past
LIVING FOSSILS.
“ The course of Nature is the art of God,
And march of that eternal harmony
Whereto the world beats time.”
WE hold in our keeping wonderful treasures out of the past —life
forms that carry us back over the long eons of time to the dark
ages of geological antiquity. The strange denizens of the ancient
rock strata are with us as living, sentient creatures of flesh and blood,
and still before our eyes they move in paths ordained by God before man
was yet upon the earth. In other lands came vast and complex changes,
higher forms of life evolving from lower, others disappearing until the
rocks alone held the clue of the mighty past. But, locked away in one
obscure corner of the earth’s surface, and guarded by wide seas, living
types of the past were preserved. Here the sands of Time’s hourglass
ceased to run. Nature had outwitted Time down through the long ages.
Man came upon the earth, and in all other lands he followed the order
of change, from the naked savage of the age of stone, down through the
ages of bronze and iron, to the finely clothed gentleman of the age of
gold.
MIRACLES OF NATURE.
How strangely wonderful is the privilege we have in Australia that
we can go right back to that far-off time, that we can sit down and con-
verse with, and study the lives of, these men of the Stone Age. How
strange and wonderful also that we can go ages further back, and walk
amid the living representatives of a fauna and flora of a world in which
man was originally unknown. God, I sometimes think, has saved these
wonderful privileges in vain for a people that know Him not —for they
cannot grasp the wonderful story that lies before them—a story that
makes plain the hidden secrets of the rocks, and illumines the mysteries
of knowledge. Alas, it is wasted on the dumb ears and blind eyes of
men who have prematurely stumbled on Nature’s long-hidden treasures
with senses not yet tuned to catch the notes of the grand anthem, nor
open to the light of perfect day. Like errant schoolboys, they mar and
destroy, because they do not understand, and while our men of science
set the highest value on the bones of the fast dwindling aboriginal race,
what hope is there for the all-important work of saving what can still
be saved from the wreck which man has wrought among these priceless
treasures of the ages?
“ Brest in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what he is most assured,
His glassy essence, like an angry ape,
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
As makes the angels weep.”


Visitors
THE NEED FOR SANCTUARY.
“ Out of the night shadows they come,
And with the night shadows they go.”
THE Fauna Reserve in the Humbug Forest is proving a sanctuary in-
deed to the birds that travel far afield. Out of the night they
come, these visitors of ours, which include swans, black-throated
grebe, wood duck, mountain duck, white-eyed duck, teal, and ducks that
are strange to these parts, and which I have failed to identify. There are
egrets, herons, plovers, ibis, dotterels, native hens, and rail. They come,
stay perhaps for one day, and then they go. Some have stayed to nest —
and rear their young —such as the grebe (for two seasons), and the
dotterel always nest here. Every morning we scan the w y ater surface for
new arrivals. Some time back came a black duck; she is still with us.
I think she has come from the Botanic Garden. But I will give you her
own story.
THE STORY OF THIS “BACHELOR” DUCK.
She was a “bachelor” duck. It was night, and she was swimming
on the lake, neat and trim, every feather fitting like a shield. She had
been reared in these peaceful surroundings, the home nest being well
hidden in a clump of reeds. Cats or rats had accounted for most of her
brothers and sisters, while quite small; and she was feeling lonely, for
her parents had abandoned her, and were about to resume domestic
duties. Spring was calling for new life and beauty on land and water.
There was a stirring at the heart of things —a musical twanging of the
chords of Nature’s harp —a tuning up for the prelude to the grand har-
mony. And the bachelor duck found herself strangely affected by this,
to her, new mystery of life. She preened her feathers, and sent call
after call into the night, her eyes watching the sky, her ears intent for
an answering note. For a week past she had been calling and watching
the night sky, and meanwhile the hunger had grown more and more
insistent in her soul. She had noticed other birds passing high up
among the stars, mostly making east or north-east. Ones an answer
came, and a mated pair planed down and settled on the water beside
her with a splash that set her rocking on the miniature waves. But the
jealous duck quickly drove her from the vicinity. Then she heard the
tender love-making in the shadows of the reeds, and her heart hungered
the more for the mate so long in coming. Disconsolately she watched
them when they rose as the first stray beams of light struck across the
eastern sky—watched them circling high and higher, to finally streak
off eastwards, where, in the far distance, a silver meandering thread
had shown them their goal. They flew straight to last year’s nursery,


the hollow tree on the reed-lined shores of a lagoon. Day dawned, and
the city’s voices awoke. Later, children came and threw biscuits and
bread to the waiting duck. How very drab and monotonous it all seemed.
She watched with envy the swans, with their dusky broods, the toory and
water hens that had already found their mates. When the night shadows
fell again, and the reed warbler sang to its mate of undying love in the
whispering reeds, she resumed her vigil. Once more her call went forth
into the night: “Kwark! kwark! kwark!” Often repeated, and rising
far into the upper air, it reaches the ears of a “bachelor” flock that had
come from the south. They were travelling in a solid wedge formation.
Behold, three birds wheel out from the rear, and start to circle downward.
But, before long, two changed their minds, and resumed their flight after
the flock. The third bird, however, splashes into the lake beside the
waiting female, which joyously greets him. Swimming around and bob-
bing to him, she leads the way to a more secluded part of the lake.
Vainly he looks for a feeding ground—the usual patch of succulent
waterweed, with shrimps, caddis, worms, and water snails. But her little
kingdom is a barren, one, and save for a crayfish or two, and a few
drowning night insects, his search is in vain.
THE HUMAN PUZZLE.
As morning approached he wanted to rise and fly north-east in the
track of his companions of the evening before; but the mating instinct
held him back. As day dawned, the noise of the city disturbed him,
and the appearance of children and people along the water’s edge made
him timid, for in them he recognised the forms of his lifelong enemies.
He could not understand why ducks and other birds followed people
along the shore, and were being fed from their hands. Once he was
greatly alarmed when a man pointed at him with his walking stick.
Taking it for a “thunder stick,” he at once made for the shelter of the
reeds, expecting every moment the blasting sweep of the shot. These
were the very creatures that his past experience had taught him to shun.
Had he not, down at the lakes, seen his companions fall dead at his
side, with others beating the water in their death agony, when human
creatures had pointed the “thunder stick” at them? Was not the cry of
agony, mingled with the shrill whistle of the cutting shot, still in his
ears? He therefore remained for the day in the seclusion of the reeds;
but when the shadows of night again covered the earth, he rose, driven
by fear and by hunger, with a call to his new-found mate, and began
to circle around. After a moment’s hesitation the duck rose and circled
with him, higher and yet higher. He had persuaded his mate to answer
the call of the wild, and on swift, exulting pinions, he turned to the
north-east. The lights of the city swiftly moved from under them.
Then, rising to a still higher level, they found the mighty, tree-clad,
silent hills below them, and in the far distance shone the faint meander-
ing thread of light. It would have been well for him to have kept on
for that goal; but, alas, he was weak from his long fast, and seeing a


fine sheet of water to the left of his course, he planed downwards, and,
after circling its length and breadth, scouting for danger signs, alighted
off a scrubby point. Hardly had the splash of the water subsided when
there came a blinding flash and a report that woke the echoes. The drake
lay gasping on the blood-stained waters. Rising in affright, the duck
flew once over her dying mate, then settled far beyond range of the
murderous gun, and called insistently. She saw the bushes part, and a
man wade in to take her new-found mate from the water. She felt that
she was alone in a great silent world. Her cry went forth again and
again; but he came not. Ere the morning broke she rose and headed
back to the south-west. Flying low, she presently noticed below her a
small sheet of water from which rose a clamorous greeting. She imme-
diately directed her course to this, and found herself among friends.
Luckily, she had found the sanctuary in the Humbug Scrub.
A STRANGER.
That morning my little curly-headed son went down to feed the
ducks. When he returned he said: “Father, there is a strange duck
at the dam, that is so tame she feeds right at my feet.” “All right,
sonny,” I replied, “I will come and see; but I expect it is one of ours
that you have mistaken for a stranger.” But I found it was as he said,
and she is still there. Sometimes she even flies up the creek and pays
us a visit at the homestead. I think she will no more heed the call of
the wild, but settle down amid the reeds and rushes of the sanctuary.
Twice the lure of the wild has come in the night in the shape of migrating
drakes, but the lure will not work now, for she has thrown in her lot with
the semi-domesticated flock of the reserve.
How Drought Affects Wild Life
THE BLACK-TAILED NATIVE HEN.
OF late there has been frequent reference in the press to the damage
done by the black-tailed native hen. It is admitted that when these
birds appear in large numbers they are capable of doing some
damage; but under normal conditions the bird does useful work. When
periodic invasions are made by the birds they are due to drought in the
natural haunts far up north. In dealing with this question, I would not
advise taking them off the list of protected birds, but would suggest some
relaxation in those districts where the damage done warrants taking
remedial measures. In many places the birds appear only in small
numbers, and do no harm at all. The native hen does not breed here,
and it will not stay one moment longer than the drought makes needful.


A GRAVE WARNING.
Before the occupation of Australia by civilised man, drought had
little terror for the creatures of the wilds, and those people who retain
memories of unstocked bushlands in pre-rabbit days will agree with me
when I say that Nature provided certain reserves to tide these creatures
over the bad times. Since the country has been stocked these reserves
(dry feed, bush growth, seeds, etc.) have been exhausted. The same
remark applies to hundreds of waterholes that could not stand the extra
draw on their supplies by the imported stock. Under those conditions a
drought means fast depletion of supplies, and loss of every edible thing,
root and branch, tree and bush, in the region affected. The latter are
never replaced, while many are chopped down to keep the settlers’ stock
alive as long as possible. This has been going on for years. If Nature
in the past was able to produce trees sufficient for her immediate needs,
why has not man taken this hint, and planted more grounds to serve as
reserves in times of need? As it is, however, vast tracts of country are
steadily deteriorating, and will be lost for all time. Is it any wonder
that all native life capable of doing so migrates to other districts? Is
it any wonder that we hear of ducks being plentiful in the south-east
and other places where food supplies and water are to be found? That
native hens are in thousands along the River Murray, and that kangaroo
and emu are becoming plentiful out from Broken Hill and other parts?
In effect, it means that over very large areas of country the original
animal life has disappeared entirely; terrific numbers have perished,
and breeding is practically at a standstill.
MORE PRACTICAL SYMPATHY NEEDED.
It is an erroneous idea to imagine that the sudden appearance in
any district of numbers of migratory birds or animals is proof that
their numbers are increasing generally. Under such circumstances it is
difficult to visualise the dead silence of the wide outback lands that are
in the grip of the drought. If this could be explained, perhaps the people
would have a little more sympathy for the fauna of Australia, and also
more patience. The native hen is purely Australian, not being found in
any other part of the world. It is a sby bird, and can be kept out of
small gardens by a simple scarecrow. On their last appearance here we
found them destructive to young lettuce plants, but we had no more
trouble after taking the above precaution. We usually give our scare-
crows a stuffed white rag head, and find that the fiercer we paint the
facial features upon it, the greater the success.


The Laughing Demon
IN DEFENCE OF HIM.
THE indictment against our friend the Micawber of the timber lands
by Donald McDonald (in the Melbourne Argus ) is far too sweep-
ing, and shows bias. As counsel for the defence, I would suggest
that—
“ He has shot his arrow over the house,
And hurt his brother.”
That our Jack is a rogue we all know, for, like the lawyers, he lives
by his wits. There is a strong Micawber flavor about his actions as he
sits on a dead limb playing “silly boy,” while watching all the time for
something to turn up. That he is a pretty wide-awake fellow, ever ready
to take advantage of the simplicity of his fellow creatures, the following
goes to prove:
A pair of laughing jackasses nested for many years adjacent to our
old home on the Murray River. The young, leaving the nest before they
could fly properly, were on several occasions placed in the garden, while
the old birds continued to feed them in their new quarters. Their menu
was closely watched, and its range was a fairly wide one, for it included
lizards, frogs, grubs, moths, sparrows, mice, snakes, crayfish, and fish.
Now, though Jack is called the giant kingfisher, he cannot catch fish.
This was for some time a mystery to me; but walking under the gums
that fringed the lagoon, I was one day let into the secret. A white-
fronted heron was fishing in the shallows, using her foot, as is their
wont, to drive the fish from the covering weeds. Overhead, on a dead
branch. Jack was keeping an eye on the heron. From behind a tree trunk
I kept an eye on both. There came a quick, spear-like thrust of the
heron’s beak, the gleam of a fish lifted into the sunlight, the swift move-
ment of a falling body, and a squawk from the heron, caused by a blow
from Jack’s wing. Then Jack returned to his perch with the fish in his
strong bill. Alighting, he proceeds to kill it by knocking it on the limb,
then flies straight away to the young, the recipient repeating the killing
process before swallowing the much-appreciated dainty. Jack returns to
keep a further watch on the heron’s movements, which has quietly re-
sumed the pursuit of her finny game.
THE LAST LAUGH.
Is it any wonder that Jack chuckles and sniggers to himself? I
have frequently joined in the merriment myself. That Jack secures the


weaklings from the duck brood is known. That he also secured the
whole of a brood of five newly-hatched black duck I had turned out into
the swamp was due to want of cover, and a maimed parent duck, that
was unable to beat off the robber owing to a crippled wing. But, by
taking the weaklings, Jack is doing his duty—and a very necessary duty,
too. True, he occasionally snaps up stray fondlings from other nests
that are left exposed, but he is not a real sneak, who spends his time
looking for other birds’ nests to rob them. No! Jack is an honest
rogue; his deeds are all open to the light of day. While at the old
homestead on the Murray we had abundant proof of their prowess among
young tiger snakes, on which they gorged themselves. The young Jacks,
on receiving a snake, gave it a preliminary bashing on a stone, and then
proceeded to swallow it, head first, getting so much down at a time as
their stomachs could accommodate, the remainder following by degrees
until the whole length disappeared. In this way they often disposed of
snakes up to 18 inches in length. Each one of these snakes would have
become a prospective enemy of small bird life. Jack, Nature’s comedian,
is just where Nature placed him, and though he is a rogue, he tries to
make good.
INSPECTOR OF NATURE’S POLICE FORCE.
He is also an expert mouser. During a recent mouse plague they
kept our haystack under constant surveillance, and gave splendid service.
I wonder if Donald MacDonald and his friend (Mr. Fisher) know that
the very bird they speak of so highly, the grey thrush, is a robber of
birds’ nests —and that it has a weakness for other birds’ eggs? I quite
believe that the full share of blame they have put upon Jack belongs to
this bird, yet not for the world would I advocate its destruction. It is a
charming denizen of both the gardens and the wild—and my advice, as
counsel for the defence, is—
“ Let us a little permit Nature to take her own ways;
She better understands her own affairs than we.”
Among Jack’s numerous duties, he takes upon himself the guardian-
ship of the gums; and, having an especial weakness for the goat moth,
this duty he shares with the wyla. Many people, dealing with Nature
subjects, are liable to jump at hasty conclusions. Jack, with all his
wickedness, is too firmly established in the average Australian’s affection
to be condemned to the pillory. The evidence at times is faulty, and
shows strong bias. Gentlemen of the Jury, my readers, I leave it for
you to say: Is Micawber guilty or not guilty of the crimes laid to his
charge? I maintain that the charges made are not sustained by the
evidence. Micawber has not exceeded his duty.


TWO KANGAROO ISLAND KANGAROOS RECEIVING SPECIAL MORSELS
FROM THEIR MASTER


WILD MAGPIES WAITING FOR THEIR MORNING’S RATIONS AT THE COTTAGE DOOR, HUMBUG SCRUB
WILD LIFE SANCTUARY


Nature’s Consideration
IT is early morning. I, with two of my boys, am taking the feed for
the ducks down to the big dam; the track runs parallel to the creek,
which we strike near the one small permanent water hole. As we
pass, a wet and bedraggled laughing jackass rises clumsily, and settles
on a log, his wet plumage giving him a most ludicrous appearance. We
have disturbed him from his morning bath. This hole is a favorite haunt
of the birds; and here they splash and flutter, to the annoyance of the
myriad bees that are sucking the water from its sandy shore. It is but
a puddle, but a constant source of interest to the children, and many
struggling bees they rescue from drowning. True, there is plenty of
water down at the big dam, but this is nearer and more secluded, and
here the blue wrens, the firetails, and blackbirds congregate; and here,
also, the rosellas come to drink, with the shell parrots and doves. As
we pass down the gully we hear around us the morning hymns of the
birds—songs full of the joy of life, the rollicking laugh of the Jacks,
the full-throated warble of the magpies, the soft, sweet boo-la-boo of
the doves. There are sweet ripples and trills of music from many
feathered fairies. The whole wood world is one peal of praise.
GAINING CONFIDENCE.
Then comes the glint of water between high reeds and the hillside,
and the vociferous calls of ducks, that have noticed our approach. Two
birds rise from the reeds and settle out on the deep water. I recognise
them as water or moorhens. These native hens are keeping the ducks
company, no doubt anticipating to share breakfast with them. Four grey
objects are seen on the further shore. They are grey teal, and, as usual,
have chosen a camp from which they can see the approach of any danger.
As we draw near they rise and circle high above the dam, but noticing
our large following of ducks, with the native hens bringing up the rear,
they, each time they wheel, sweep in closer to us. At length, satisfied
that no immediate danger threatens, they plane down, and settle upon
the calm surface of the dam. Black-throated grebe also swim in closer,
and watch the feeding ducks. The native hens move quickly among the
ducks, picking up the grains while nervously watching our movements.
Now and again they scurry away, but they soon walk sedately back, with
jerking tail and watchful mein. Tivo blue cranes arrive on leisurely
wing, and start fishing in the shallows, and then, like bolls from the
blue, two shags drop to the water's surface. These two birds are regular
visitors, coming every morning, and leaving at night. They camp, I
believe, on the Para River. On occasions wc have had as many as forty
here; but we do not welcome so many, since we have introduced the
mud fish for feeding purposes. So far, I might add, these small fish
seem to hold their own against all enemies, and we have noticed many


small fry at breeding time. As we gaze upon the scene a Kangaroo
Island wallaby leaves the reeds and joins the feeding ducks. It, too,
has learnt to recognise the call to breakfast; but having to chew each
grain, it is handicapped in the competition. This little animal is fond
of both seed and the gum of wattles. We often see them busily engaged
at work among the wattles. At times the native hens come within nine
or ten feet of us, but they are always alert to any suspicious movement
on our part. These birds appear in large numbers some seasons, then
for long periods they disappear. It is said, and with good reason, that
the drying up of inland waters by reason of drought is the cause of their
appearance in these parts. It is strange, but by some intuition they
know when rain falls in the interior, and though they might be present
in thousands at night, the morning light sees them all gone. Probably a
day or two later we hear that the drought has broken, and heavy rains
have fallen in the north. Their visits being so erratic suggests that
climatic conditions are the cause of these migrations.
A SACRED TRUST.
What an advantage is the power of flight to a bird in a country
subject to drought! Picture the heart-breaking conditions for the other
creatures of the wilds, such as the emu, kangaroo, wallaby, and many
smaller creatures that inhabit these regions. It was not so bad in the
old days, before the advent of the squatter with his sheep and rabbits,
for Nature had reserve stores that would carry them through. Now, alas,
there are no food reserves, and available waters are all too quickly ex-
hausted. But for creatures with the power of flight there are means of
escape, as with the native hens that gather in groups from the scattered
creeks and waterholes, and rise in the cool night air, steering their course
unerringly through the silence of the starry vault, joining other groups
in their course, and covering long leagues of space in a few hours. No
one sees them come. Night holds the secret of their long flight, but with
the morning light they are here. They arc welcome with us, but to many
who hold land adjacent to water-courses or swamps they are, I fear,
unwelcome guests. But let us remember that they come by God’s guid-
ance from lands stricken with hunger and thirst, and that so soon as the
drought breaks they will return whither they came, and the way they
came, in the shadows of the night. The native water hens are only found
in Australia. They feed largely on growing herbage, also seed and small
life forms, and though doing some damage to gardens and growing
crops, they do some good by the destruction of vermin. Being very
timid, a scarecrow will prevent damage to gardens. They do but follow
the guidance of Nature, our mother, as they have done through the long
past ages. Let us cultivate a more tolerant spirit towards our fellow
creatures.


Mother Love in Nature’s Kingdom
“ I send thee a shell from the ocean beach;
But listen thou well, for my shell hath speech.”
LIFE’S journey finds for me many puzzling questions, and lately my
thoughts have turned again to that God-given instinct of mother
love that we find permeating Nature from one end to the other.
The love of God, though always referred to in the masculine sense (as
the love of a father), must include in itself the beautiful feminine phase
of that love, which goes out for the helpless young of all species. From
where I sit writing I look up at a rather neat structure of clay that has
been recently built in the corner of a picture frame. It is 2| inches in
length, not quite so wide, and inches deep, and consists of three tiers
of cells, each having three in a row, with one odd cell, making ten in all.
It is the work of a female wasp, which, having decided that the location
was suitable, came through the open door one day with a load of wet
clay, and laid the foundation. Including a break through wet weather,
the work occupied three weeks, and the builder preferred to come and go
by the open door; but should this be closed, it negotiated the more
difficult passage behind the curtain and through the open window.
SIMPLE TRUSTFULNESS.
At first the material was brought from the bed of the adjacent creek,
but when I, in resinking an old well, had struck water, she speedily found
it a new and better source of supply, and so for many days we worked
amicably together, both excavating; but I cannot say that her help was
very noticeable! Bad weather intervening, she was not seen for several
days; but when the sunny days returned we saw her again hard at work.
One day my little chap, Curley, called out to me: “Father, she has drop-
ped her spider.” Leaving my writing desk, I picked the spider up on
a knife blade, and held it to the wasp as she clung to the sides of her
babies’ castle. She took it without demur, and pushed it into the open
cell. Spiders are the food provided by this species of wasp for their
young. They are stored away alive, but in a state of coma caused by
the injection of poison in some nerve centre, thus providing fresh meat
for the young, and a painless death for the spider. Well, she has finished
her work and gone; but there, in the corner of the picture frame, remains
a rather unsightly daub of mud, but at the same time, a monument to
her industry and self-sacrificing mother love. She trusted us, and there
it shall remain. Only a wasp; but she was obeying the will of the all-
wise Creator.
THE SAME SPIRIT.
I turn a log by the waterside, and find an earwig brooding over her
eggs; and a spider runs away along the log with a silken bag of
treasures —namely, eggs. See how tenaciously she clings to her precious


burden! I peep under a rock, and find a carpet snake wrapped in coils
around her pyramidal cluster of parchment-covered eggs. Patiently she
keeps guard, and if she does hot warm them with her body, she warms
them with her love. Even the butterflies, those emblems of joy and
gladness, the beautiful moths, and the beetles (Nature’s jewels), frivolous
creatures in their seeming, are all imbued with an instinct resembling
mother love in that the eggs are laid where a proper food supply is
assured to the young.
Look at the birds! What a labor of love they make of the art of
nest building! What wonderful care for the comfort of the young, frail
charges that they know will soon be in their keeping; and with what
joy they welcome them, poured forth in gladsome song, and “they bend
on them their tender eyes, as stars look on the sea.” God, who sent it
forth, alone can fathom the depth and height of mother love.
Nature and Civilised Man
THE POISON MENACE.
“ With what authority and show of truth
Can cunning sin cover itself withal?”
A HUNT.
IT was early summer, and a place called Claypan was gay with flowers.
The air was sweet with the scent of the myall and a species of flower-
ing rush grass. Scattered over the plain were kangaroo, native turkey,
and a few emu; a couple of cranes zealously worked around the shore
of the nearest claypan. To the east was a low line of scrubby hills,
fronted by a gum-lined creek, into which their many gullies emptied.
The rock holes were never dry. The hills afforded shelter for innumer-
able birds of many species, and were the home of the dingo and the hill
kangaroo, the euro, besides being a favorite nesting place for the emu.
The dusky lord of the soil, the kangaroo, had his favorite camps along
these gullies, and found ample supply for all his simple needs. One
wide valley, that narrowed at the entrance, was frequently the scene of
kangaroo hunts, thirty or forty natives working their way unseen into
positions along its margin. Leaving their best spearmen in ambush at


the narrow entrance, a number would sneak on the animals at the far
end, throw their spears, and so start the ’roos down the valley, and,
as they passed, more men would leave their cover and come on behind
them. Spears were thrown whenever they approached a hidden native,
but the final coup was always made in the narrow entrance, because there
the animals had to pass within easy range of the spears. The natives
generally returned laden with the spoils of the chase. Sometimes they
hunted the emu and the turkey, besides making use of the eggs of these
birds, and much small game found its way into their larders. The gins
spent much time digging yams and gathering seeds to grind in their
primitive mills. Here was a simple and hardy folk, practically free
from disease, leading the happy, care-free life that their forefathers had
led for thousands of years, and living up to a moral code that would
put civilised man to shame. Our natives were so simple and childlike
that it was an easy matter to rob them of their birthright, and punish
them for acts of retaliation, by taking, as was done recently, seven lives
for one {vide press notice of recent murder by natives in Queensland).
It is said that they make good servants. Poor wretches! You take their
country, take their labor, and some of you become millionaires, build
your fair cities on their one-time hunting grounds, while the remnant of
these people, like the thousands already gone beyond human aid, are
debauched, degraded, and destroyed. From a humanitarian standpoint
our treatment of these people has been a blot that nothing can erase,
and, from a scientific standpoint, a lasting disgrace. When the eternal
God shall ask: “Where are these, thy brothers?” shall we reply: “Are
we our brothers’ keepers?” Or what?
SIXTY YEARS LATER.
About sixty years have passed away. The summer is a dry one,
and wherever you look across the wide gibber plain, the shimmering haze
rises tremulously, like the hot vapors from a furnace. Here and there in
the distance appear the tall, slender, seemingly stationary whirls of red
dust towering high into the blue of the sky. Fiercely the hot sun rays
beat upon the parched earth, the last rock hole has long become dry,
while the scant foliage of mulga and umbrella bush offers little shelter
to the patient, thirst-tortured creatures of the wide inland plains that
are ever trekking south seeking the more permanent waters they instinc-
tively know to lie in that direction. The big lone land of the north is
almost empty of life, for there is no water now out that way; the plains
are practically bare. The sheep had licked up even the dust of perished
plant life—a few of these were still kept in the scrubby hills, and watered
at troughs on the flat. The blacks were gone. A few survivors still
lingered around the station, wrecks of their former selves. Though no
life was visible to the eye, yet, with the evening, stragglers of wild life
were still coming in to join the other refugees of the scrubby trees that
nightly visited the squatters’ troughs for the precious fluid. During the
heat of day these wanderers from far out lay under such poor shelter as


they could find, the kangaroos, as is their custom during great heat,
trying to moisten their limbs with tongues that were all too dry. This
is a curious custom; but I find kangaroos of all kinds, and even the
wallabies, do so when overheated. Even the emus feel the heat badly,
and stand panting with open bills under the half-dead sandalwood trees,
awaiting the slow setting of the fiery orb before resuming their quest. The
dingoes and the crows, preying on the weak that fall by the way, have not
done so badly.
THE LURE OF THE WATER.
By some strange intuition, all the wild creatures seem to know in
what direction to make for the nearest water. This is well illustrated by
an event that happened on one of our desert lines. Two railwaymen saw
an emu leave the scrub and march straight up to an iron tank that stood
beside the line. It knew water was there, although it could not see it.
Noticing it hanging round, the man in charge humanely drew some of
the fluid, and left it within reach of the thirsty creature. It was through
this peculiar sense or instinct that the wild creatures from a wide area
had gathered on to the Claypan Run, and nightly at the troughs they
quenched their thirst, no doubt causing a little extra pumping to be
done, to Scotty’s disgust. True, they came in fear and trembling, because
their delicate sense of smell felt the presence of man—and worse, it was
man of the white skin, the arch-destroyer, the merciless. Many birds
came to the troughs in the late afternoon, and each waning day saw the
sun’s rays flash from the bronze gold pinions of myriads of pigeons that
flew from the hilly retreat. They crowded the troughs until the gloam-
ing, then gave place to other creatures in their turn. Those night hours
were always full of strange sounds —the call of a kangaroo buck to its
mate, and ever and anon the softer call of a doe to its wandering joey—
with occasional stampedes at the approach of dingoes. So each night
passed, the morning finding the troughs deserted, with the exception of
small birds and parrots that always hovered around them, with cheerful
voice and gay plumage, making the best of the hardships of a bad season
as the patient creatures of Nature are wont to do. A lizard creeps out
from under the trough, snaps at a fly, and leisurely climbs a stone, where
it squats, facing the sun, without a wink of its bright little eyes. Just for
the moment it is lord of all it surveys. A shadow passes, the lizard glides
silently back to its shelter, and a crow dominates the scene, like a prophet
of evil to come.
AT THE CLAYPAN.
The Government House is fifty miles south of the Claypans hut. The
boss is part owner. Work is done, for the day is waning—a few station
hands are “sprucing up” by the men’s hut, preparatory for tea. They
look towards the bend in the track as a rattle of hoofs and chains
reaches their ears. A horse, then a cart, emerges from a cloud of dust.
It is driven by -one of two hard-faced, evil-looking men. They draw off


to the bank of the creek, take the horse out, and while one fixes camp the
other comes along for meat and flour, which he secures from the cook.
Scotty, in from the claypans, recognises him. “Hullo Bully, that you?”
“That’s me, Scotty, old man.” “Coming to the hut?” “After sup.
Guess I want a pitch with you particular.” “Righto.” After supper
Bully and Swipes sauntered over to the men’s hut, and Swipes joined the
other men at cards; but Bully and Scotty squatted by the door, talking
in low tones. Says Scotty: “What brings yer erlong? Thot yer wus
over in Bananaland. What’s doing, and where bound?” “Oh, just a
little biz in skins. ’Erd yer was along ’ere—and putting it in at the
claypans, struck it lucky finding you ’ere. ’Ow’s things out your way?
Any ’roos at the troughs this spell?” “My blanky oath. They just
come in thicker ’n ever, drinking more nor all the blasted jumbocks that’s
still left in the scrub paddock—and it’s me as ’ad to tend the blanky
engine now to keep that tank full. Came in ter tell ther boss better
bring there jumbucks in, the place is bare. Guess yer on a good thing
this time.” “Yes so, Scotty. Them ’ere jumbucks has got to come in.
Tell yer why.” Here the conversation was carried on in lower tones,
and at last Bully arose, saying: “Righto, Scotty. I’ll go up and put
ther proposition ter the old man.” On reaching “Government House”
Bully found the squatter smoking on the verandah. “Even’, Boss!”
“Good evening. Looking for a job?” “Not ’zackly. Just a little
scheme o’ mine. Sort-a one-good-tum-deserves-another affair!” “Speak
to the point. What the devil do you mean? Come, spit it out. How
are you proposing to help me? I help every d loafing sundowner
along this track. You are the first to propose helping me, and—er—yes,
I must say you don’t look too promising a customer, either. What is
your proposition? A new sheep dip of your own discovery, or what?”
THE COMPACT.
“Look here, Boss, I’m in earnest, and don’t take no notice of yer
d funny talk. Yer have thousands av kangaroos a-heating yer profits
on this run, and yer pumping water fer the brutes as well. Yer just take
the sheep out er the scrub paddock, give me and my mate a week at the
troughs, cart our stuff back here, and I’ll guarantee to clear yer run, so
as yer can carry double stock, same as I did for other places.” “Well,
there is something in that. Let me see. Scotty is in charge out at the
claypans. I can send a man back with him, and move those sheep into
the Tanks Paddock. This is Thursday. Yes, we can let you in on
Monday, providing you take all precautions, and properly secure our
troughs.” “Righto. We’ll see ter that, Boss. So long.” “Humph!
Rum customer that,” muses the Boss. Walking over to the hut. Bully
tells Scotty everything is O.K. The morning sees Scotty giving Bully
final directions. “Better take a keg of water for the horse—there’s none
between. And stick to the ration track —due north all the time. Yer’ll
hit it second day. Yer won’t meet us with the sheep, ’cos they have ter


go the other track. So long, old man.” “So long.” The turn of events
pleased Scotty, who was sick of the claypans. It pleased Bully and
Swipes, because of the easy chance to make another cheque. It pleased
the “Governor,” because of the increased carrying capacity of the run.
And so came about the massacre of the sweet wild life of a large inland
district.
On Sunday evening Bully and Swipes arrived at the claypans hut,
and put up a tent by the dry creek hed. On Monday they went to
work, and fenced oil the troughs with wire netting, fixed their own troughs
out, and filled them with good water, and Scotty paid them a visit. They
arranged with him to send out several of the station blacks to be there
by Friday night, for that night they would put out the poisoned water,
and they wanted help for the skinning in the morning. They filled up
the troughs each afternoon, the rest of the day being spent in card play-
ing. On Friday afternoon each trough was filled with the fatal draught.
THE SLAUGHTER.
Slowly the sun sinks in the west. A thirsty finch flies on to the
trough, stoops and drinks, then flies a few yards, and drops struggling
to the ground. A rushing sound, and four bronzewings alight, stay
perfectly still for about three seconds, then, alighting on the troughs,
bow their heads and drink. The next moment they stagger and flap
their beautiful wings in their death agony. Others follow in great
numbers, hurtling through the air like meteors. Quickly, like drifting
snow, the dead pile up along the line of troughs. Then three emus circle
the troughs, craning their long necks in suspicion; but being thirsty,
they at last wade in among the fluttering mass of dead and dying birds,
and drink. Off they rush, with a staggering run, like a drunken man,
until one after another they collapse on the plain. And now night
shadows mercifully begin to hide the horror of the scene, for —
“ Behind the western bars
The shrouded day retreats,
And, unperceived, the stars
Steal to their sovran seats.”
The beautiful rich metallic lustre of fluttering wings no longer reflects
the light of the dying day. We can no longer see, but the night is full
of sound. The plain now resounds to the moans of kangaroos that come
through the darkness. They linger on the outskirts, suspicious and fear-
ful, hut thirst drives them in. They wade through the dead and dying,
and meet a like fate. Mournful, long-drawn sighs, and occasional groans,
or the last pitiful call of a dying doe for its joey, that gambols around,
unconscious of the tragedy of it all. These are the only sounds that
break the stillness of the night.


THE HARVEST.
When the sun rises it shows the dead upon the plain. It shows, along
the line of troughs, a solid bank -of birds, mostly bronzewing pigeons.
It shows, also, the fiends already at work on such of their victims as
pay for the trouble of skinning, anxious to secure their spoil before the
sweltering heat shall turn it to a mass of corruption. They curse the
birds that have smatlered everything with feathers. Feathers stick to
their gory boots, hands, and knives—and they even draw them in with
their breath. They kick the birds aside, cursing them as so much useless
truck. Bully and Swipes made £7O for that night’s work, and it went
in booze and a gay old time at Brentworth. And still the same old game
goes on. Truly, Australia is a great country —a country of wide liberties.
The Claypans Run, under another name, is still on the map, but it is
a place accursed. The rabbits now see that it shall carry less and still
less stock as the years go by. They race over the old native hunting
grounds, oyer the long, dry rock holes and the wide gibber plains, and
burrow in the sandy rise among the bones of past generations of black-
fellows, the one-time happy owners of the claypans country. And from
the kitchen middens that long ago resounded with the happy voices of
the campers, through the overhanging trees they had many times topped
for shelter boughs, and echoing weirdly along the silent gullies, full of
tragedy and sad memories, comes in the silence of night the howl of a
solitary dingo. ’Tis like a voice of Nature’s lamentation for the past!
“ I trust in God. The right shall be the right,
And other than the wrong, while He endures.
I trust in my own soul, that can perceive
The -outward and the inward—Nature’s good,
And God’s.”
Instinct-What is it
NEST EVOLUTION.
KNOWLEDGE —PLASTIC AND CRYSTALLISED.
I was walking along the bank when I saw her. She was in the act
of leaving her nest with a newly-hatched brood. For four weeks she had
sat among the leafy debris at the foot of a peppermint tree. When any-
one approached, or danger loomed, she would lie flat among the leaves,
and so perfectly lose her identity in the blend of coloring that strangers
would pass without suspecting a duck’s nest. Yesterday her patience had
been rewarded. Seven loveable little ducklings, like balls of down,


had snuggled all through the night against her almost naked breast, that
she had plucked to make a downy quilt for covering the eggs when
occasionally she left them.
THE FIRST OUTING.
Now she calls her little charges, and they hurry after her. Scramb-
ling and tumbling over all obstacles, they reach the top of a steep bank,
where the mother, in duck language, calls upon them to halt., marshals
them all together on the edge of the bank, spreads her wings, and flies
down to the water. Again she calls, when, without any sign of fear,
the young birds just drop off the edge and find themselves in the water.
For a while there is a spatter of kicking, tumbling ducklings; then they
right themselves, and string away in the wake of their mother, the waiting
and expectant male taking up a position in the rear. They are happy
birds —happy in the fulfilment of Nature’s law, and in its accompanying
responsibilities. Among many birds, what a wonderful amount of art
and energy is expended on nest construction! First the location has to
be chosen, then the special materials to be gathered from all points of
the compass; and with what amity and joyousness they labor, prompted
by that wonderful recurrent love for the young which is but the reflection
of the great and loving forethought of an all-wise Creator. In all
reverend studies of Nature man can but be impressed by this all-pervad-
ing love.
CAMOUFLAGE.
In the various problems of the animal kingdom man is prone to
cover his ignorance of the processes manifested by the use of the word
“instinct.” The eggs of the curlew are not conspicuous by reason that
their markings blend with the leaf-strewn ground of the forest glade.
Trusting to this, the bird can leave her eggs for the necessary intervals,
apparently knowing that they will not attract the attention of marauders.
But the grebe or black duck, fully aware that their eggs, by reason of
their light-colored shells, would be noticed by prowling or soaring
enemies, take the wise precaution of covering them. The grebe makes
use of a “blanket” of weeds which is always kept ready for the purpose
beside the nest. In the case of the black duck the “blanket” is composed
of down mixed with local material. It is interesting to watch with what
care this is done. Do we find sufficient explanation of these actions in
the word “instinct”? The nest of a willy wagtail is a wonderfully neat
structure, always built to one pattern, and with the same materials. It
is moulded and fashioned around the living body of the female, as
many nests are. This, again, is a good illustration of what is called
“instinct.” But what is it that is actually conveyed to the mind by
that term? My idea is that it represents the crystallised product of the
slowly gathered wisdom of past ages; it is the best for an intended
purpose, and, as such, has been impressed on the sub-conscious or inner
life of the creature, and will remain unchanged so long as it suits the
creature’s environment.


The Winter Butterfly
“Awakened by the sunny weather,
For a brief dance among the heather,
From the deep shadows of dreamland’s sleep,
To die in the blast when dark skies weep.
“ Jewel of the bright, bright hours of spring,
When gladsome birds make the welkin ring;
Thou shouldst have list for the boobook’s call,
From the tree-clad hills and the gum trees tall.
“ Sad is thy fate in the angry blast,
When the drifting leaves go whirling past;
Thou brightest jewel of the summer sky,
Sad, sad is thy fate, that thus thou die.”
T. P. Bellchambers.
JUNE this year provided some unusually mild weather, with summer
skies. But this has passed, and now a wintry blast sweeps up the
gully, with frequent showers. The butterflies are down among the
ferns, the rocks, and grasses; with wings demurely closed they patiently
await the end. Chilled, they have lost the power of flight, and frequently
the blast sweeps them before it like autumn leaves. Their wings, veined
and ribbed and splashed with color, each in design the image of the other
—what fairy artist was responsible for the perfectly geometrical pat-
terns? What magic can explain to us the secret of beauty that’s born
for an hour? Emblems of the joy and gladness of life, emblems of
the resurrection, coming, as they do, out of the coffined pupas of the
homely caterpillar—there is comfort in the thought of the Wisdom that
planned the universe, and traced its beauties, even to the vein and spot
upon each butterfly wing. One of these graceful creatures sits on my
desk as I write. Boy Curly brought it in, and it has revived sufficiently
to suck at some sugar and water. Born of the warm days, it is before
its time, when Nature holds her annual festival of the rebirth or renewal
of life. Soon will the sorrows of winter pass, and the watching eye and
the listening ear will get the first faint glimpses and whispers of the
coming carnival of spring.
“ Hark, below the many-voiced earth,
The chanting of the old religious trees,
Rustle of far-off waters, woven sounds
Of small and multitudinous lives awake,
Peopling the grasses and pools with joy.
Uttering their meaning to the mystic light,
The glamorous light of evening tide in spring.”


Spiders
HUMANITY as a rule is not friendly towards spiders; but to this
rule there have been historical exceptions, and there are present-
day exceptions also. The attitude of the spider seems to be:
“You mind your own business, and I’ll mind mine.” Ah, well, they have
some curious customs, that will hardly bear close enquiry, which may
account for their stand-offishness! For instance, the way some of them
are said to dispose of “hubby” after the honeymoon is over! To a bee-
keeper there are two classes of spiders —the good and the bad. The latter
puts up its citadel in unused portions of hives, and preys upon the other
tenants; it is a “bloated profiteer,” and is killed on sight. The former
is quite a decent sort, preying on the hee-moth, flies, and other insects. It
builds its entanglements among the stored empty combs, and at the
entrance of disused hives, thus ensuring freedom from moth attacks and
cockroach depredations. It is good also to encourage them to domicile
themselves under the stools and tables in the honey shed, especially
about the legs, as a first-class preventive measure to keep the vermin in
check.
A PET TARANTULA.
Spiders are known to be wise and clever; but as to looks, they
are not generally admired, for they have a rather formidable appearance,
and are easily angered. Of house spiders the tarantula is, I think, the
least objectionable, as it makes no web, and is not poisonous. The
tarantula dance arose from a superstition connected with this spider,
or perhaps I should say its namesake in Italy. Music was considered an
antidote for its supposedly poisonous bite. Tarantulas are good fly-
catchers, and, if unmolested, become quite tame. Some of the gentler
sex even tolerate a lucky spider about their house. Talking of house
spiders, we in our home have become quite accustomed to one, a taran-
tula, which, when in repose, has a stretch of 44 inches. By day it retires
behind a picture; evening sees it busy with the flies. It has been with
us several months now. It is very quick to seize its prey; and it is
amusing when one of our young folk offers it a fly on the end of a
match. But even seasoned bushmen object to too close an acquaintance,
especially when it comes to a hairy-legged creature of 44 inches crawling
around their neck just when they have made themselves comfortable for
the night! The spider that is my beta noir is the one which builds the
entanglements in the mallee during late summer, necessitating a wanderer
to carry a stick in an upright position to break the cordage spread from
tree to tree.
A STRONG SPINNER.
In travelling through the mallee when these creatures are about it
is advisable to keep the mouth shut, for it is not uncommon to be
brought to a sudden stop with a big fat spider at the end of your nose —
that is, if you happen to forget to keep a stick in advance of that organ
as you walk.


Frog’s Annual Concert
IT was September 18. A faint scent of the last lingering wattle blossom
Sonny and I were feeding the water fowl down at the big dam when
was still in the air, and there was just a suspicion of summer warmth,
we noticed the frogs were getting ready for their annual concert. “Pong,”
from the rushes near us. “Pong, pong,” from the reedy island. This is
answered from up the creek, and then again from the reedy island. Yes,
they were preparing at last; but they were nine days later than last
season. On September 19 we had breakfast before going down to the
big dam, but we knew the concert had started, for from the gully came
a volume of sound like the rattle of hundreds of kettle drums, only the
noise had a suspicion of a twang of banjo strings. Reaching the dam,
we found the orchestra in full swing. With graceful, easy flight three
white-headed stilts were circling round the water, their long pink legs
straight out behind them. These quaint birds, which had suddenly
appeared on the scene over-night, were joining in the concert with cries
resembling somewhat the barking of dogs—Waugh-waugh-waugh. What
was their message to the frogs? Wc could not say. Or had the frogs
postponed the concert pending their arrival? Anyhow, here they were,
and the grand yearly performance was in full progress. The crickets
helped materially to swell the volume of sound.
It is evening, and the kookaburra’s laugh greets the lengthening
shadows. A cold wind is blowing up the gully, but it has not cooled
the ardour of the performers, for the sound of their exuberant rejoicing
is plainly audible while I write. This evening I noticed the three stilts
standing motionlessly in the shallows, while to-night they will climb in
long spirals to the upper air, and send out their peculiar barking call
in search of their mates. Perhaps they will find them away up among
the travelling flocks of the night, or the response may come from the
silvery surface of a swamp that shines far below them. Then they will
descend the great spiral stairway to join their fellows of the long pink
legs, and their greetings of pleasure will echo along the shores. Sonny,
who has a brother recently back from the war, suggests that the frogs
are holding a “welcome home” festival. Whatever one likes to call it,
it is an annual demonstration that is held in the spring of every year.


The Ends of the Rainbow
NATURE’S WONDERFUL STORY.
“Awake, my St. John! Leave all mean things
To low ambition and the pride of kings;
Let us (since life can little more supply
Than just to look about us, and to die).
Expatiate free o’er all this scene of man;
A mighty maze! But not without a plan.”
IN bridging the assumed impassable gap between man and the lesser
orders of beings, the above title was suggested by the fact that at
the points of contact of the bow is found the best that is in both
creations —love, pity, and fidelity.
THE LONG, LONG TRAIL.
I look across a far-reaching vista of hills, which gradually recedes
into the hazy distance. The near view shows green, mottled with patches
of yellow flowers and isolated, spreading gums, which further afield close
their ranks and appear in groups. Still further out they become an
unbroken mass, which looms indistinctly and shadowy above the un-
dulating range. In this nearer view, showing but faintly, is a winding
track which loses itself in the dark line of forests, while above it is the
outline of a broken bow, connecting the forest with the far shadowy hills.
While I watch, the broken bow slowly knits to become a perfect arch.
The picture suggests to my mind the long, long trail of human evolution,
through silent ages, from the far-off dawn of life. Landmarks arc few
along the trail, and some of them are almost undecipherable; beyond
this the trail itself is lost. I have asked the names of different points
along this course, including the far-off shadowy range, hut none can tell
me. Some people say that the idea of man being an animal is absurd.
Look at the wide gap that separates him from the apes. We don’t believe
it. Man is vastly their superior—in fact, quite a different being. But
the poet was wise who proclaimed: “In pride, in reasoning pride, our
every error lies.” Let us travel back over the long trail, and see how
much and wherein this difference lies. The structure of the human body
points to the fact that early man was of arboreal habit—a dweller of
the forests, and of peaceful disposition. His feet, hands, teeth, and
jaws, his lack of natural weapons of offence or defence, prove these
points, as does his naked and defenceless condition presuppose a warm
climate and freedom from dangerous enemies.


THE CHASM OF THE AGES.
I nolice that many writers love to picture the far-off days of the
morning of life as a continuous battle with savage beasts, and a Kilkenny
cat condition of society, with natural phenomena making conditions still
worse, and frequently resulting in cataclysms. That this view is errone-
ous is evident from the fact that man, the most helpless of creatures,
survived, to eventually emerge from that shadowy past, and conquer a
new environment, which required of him to assist Nature in providing
his needs.
Playtime is past, and schooldays have arrived as man enters the
long Stone Age, and tools are the rungs of the ladder by which he climbs
to the high position of mastery of earth, sea, and air. Hands that were
used to pluck the fruits of the earth were driven by dire need to make
tools to grow them. So we see that the motive power was “need.” Alas,
that it should have ever become “greed”! The secret and source of
man’s power, and the ever-widening gap between man and all other forms
of animal life, lies in his clever, supple hands, and the need that
drove him to use them. It is a long step from the sharpened stick
of the aboriginal to the trenching engine of to-day; the shelter of
bark or boughs to the palace; the pack to the railway, and the bark
canoe to the ocean liner. With his hands man has girdled the earth as
with steel bands, bridled the lightning, and thrown his voice through the
silent ether above. The earth has become as wax in the hands of man,
and yet we can say; “Of nothing comes nothing; springs rise not above
their source in the far hidden heart of the mountains.”
PROGRESS OR RETROGRESSION?
“Oh,” you say, “that is civilisation—a still further proof of man’s
superiority.” Let us see. To civilise is to refine, to refine is to purify.
All races of man have left the natural order, and have more or less
become what we call civilised. The scalplock of the Red Indian, the
gruesome trophy of the head hunter of the South Seas, the poison gas,
long-distance gun, or liquid fire of the Europeans—these are the fruits.
Yet the pitting spear of the head hunter, with its two guiding prongs,
shows quite as much refinement as the poison gas of the European. It
is claimed that man is progressing towards perfection; but statistics are
very disquieting in their reference to crime, disease, and lunacy. For all
the weary way that man has travelled towards civilisation, can it be said
that the world is really the better—that he has increased the amount of
human happiness? Is unparalleled savagery, then, the road we have to
travel? Poor, foolish humanity! Not before it can grasp the meaning
of the words, “The Kingdom of God is within you” may we hope for
a good civilisation. That man will retain some God-like attributes of
love, pity, and sacrifice may be hopeful as a foundation for a civilisation
that will refine and purify mankind; and then the lesson shall have been
learnt: “Never to blend our pleasure or our pride with sorrow of the
meanest thing that feels.”


THE OTHER END OF THE BOW.
The points of contact between man and his lesser relatives in Nature
lie chiefly in the emotions common to both—love, pity, fear, anger, and
sorrow. These are easily recognised. We also find they have reason
and memory. Man, in his egotism, claims a moral code, which he too
often honors in the breach. Nature’s moral code, with its numerous
adaptations to fit varying life forms, is strictly adhered to. If we turn
the pages of a novel or a book of poems, or visit our theatres, we find
the chief interest in all plots centres in “the grand passion.” Come with
me along that winding track that leads into the heart of the everlasting
hills, and see the interpretation of the grand passion on Nature’s stage.
It is spring, and the way is strewn with flowers—here a blaze of African
marigold, there the more modest hue of the wild geranium. Butterflies
arrayed in beauty sip the nectar and scatter the magic life-giving pollen.
We enter the sun-dappled aisles of the forest, where the wattle blossom
scents the air, and reveals the hills in golden outlines. We wander down
to the creek where the bracken uncoils its feathery fronds, and the rich
red of the fuchsias peeps between the lilac on the rocky bank. Here,
within sound of the tinkling water, where the mosses and lichens grow,
and the leaves lie thick upon the ground—here we will wait and watch.
Here is a stage most fitting for the dainty lords and ladies of the bush.
Here they bow and bend, coax and flatter, and vow eternal fidelity.
cupid’s hour.
The orchestra is in full swing, accompanied by the happy trlls and
full-throated songs of the cicadas. Watch that sunny patch of sward
by the hushes. There she is, the little Lady Dun! Now enters little
Lord Bluecap, singing, “I’ll never love any but you!” Intensely in
earnest, and strictly according to etiquette, he bows and gesticulates,
shows his paces and his plumage, offers his heart and his all to the
little Lady Dun, with just as much vim and eloquence as if he were a
dude of last season’s hatching; but in reality he has paid the same
compliment to the same little lady for four seasons past. The little
Lady Dun shows very little emotion, taking this annual renewal of vows
quite sedately. Just as the little Lord Bluecap has completed his court-
ship, and, as a matter of form, is accepted, there comes a happy gurgle
from a branch overhead. We look up, and behold Queen Nature’s jester
sitting demurely by his bride, and his look plainly saying, “It wasn’t
I.” Above the pair is the hollow in which they have reared five
families, and are soon to rear another; and they don’t seem tired of
each other yet. His funny old countenance just beams on her with love;
one can almost see him wink as he flirts his comic tail, and turns his
head to watch the neighboring courting couple. From a bush near by
comes a sort of “Hi, hi, hi! I’ve caught a beetle!” as Brown Thrush,
Esq., hops to a lower branch, and offers his catch to his good mate. His
protestations and pleadings having found favor, she accepts his offer.


ROCK-SHELTER ON THE RIVER MURRAY DECORATED WITH NUMEROUS ABORIGINAL CARVINGS


THE PUNYELROO CAVE, RIVER MURRAY


Courting days are the days of presentations to the lady loves of the
feathered folk. Among the rubbish at the foot of a tree a robin is busy
getting titbits for his little sober-colored mate, and demurely she follows
him around. Small chafer grubs are his quest; but he takes small
beetles, white ants, and caterpillars as well. He, too, has passed the
demonstrative stage; he, too, displayed his finery, his manners, and his
paces, and renewed his vows. Now he is her happy slave for the
periodical honeymoon. “Quok —what’s o’clock —what’s o’clock?” says
the hoarse voice of a wattle bird; but we fail to take notice, for a flash
of bright light has drawn our attention to a mossy patch where Sir
Bronzewing is flapping his golden wings before the eyes of his most
sedate lady. “Oomph!” he says, as he repeatedly leaps with outspread
wings in front of her. At last she consents, and inserts her bill in his
to allow him the honor of feeding her. “What’s o’clock?” says the
wattle bird a second time. We take the hint, and as we walk away, note
again the sly chuckle of the jester, “Kuk, kuk, kuk, kook, oohh!” “Ooh,
ha. ha, ha!” With many birds this annual renewal of courtship is a
regular event, by which they establish a lifelong bond to “love on through
all ills, and love on till they die.”
RIGHTEOUS ANGER AND LOVE OF ORDER.
Now we will go down among the whispering reeds, where the butter-
cups are blooming. Two black swans are beating the water into foam.
One is forcing the other away from the reeds. When a certain imaginary
boundary is reached, the victor leaves his antagonist and swims proudly
back. The explanation of this exhibition of anger is that the other
bird has broken the law of nesting swans by trespassing too closely to
a nest hidden in the reeds. The sitting female listens in silence to the
sounds of the strife, and the proud trumpeting of her masterful lord
as he returns to her side. Life among the creatures of Nature is a
simple matter of just “a few strong instincts and a few plain rules.”
The rules vary among different species to some extent, but “swan law”
holds good with many of our ducks and most of our small birds. Some
varieties, however, allow birds of a different species to enter the saCred
area without protest. In this case there is mutual aid without clashing
interests.
MEMORY.
With the noise of many wings, a flock of black duck alight. They
have come from a place some 800 miles distant, and, if we had time
to watch, we would find most of them sorting in pairs, and with much
“chooketing,” bobbing, and bowing, renewing their vows of constancy.
Then they scatter, and pick out their home spots, such as hollow tree
stumps, clumps of rushes, or sheltering bushes. Now, strange to say, I
have found that, if undisturbed, the same pair of birds occupy the
same nesting site they occupied the previous year, proving fairly definite


ly that these birds have a retentive memory. Apropos of this, I was
recently digging in the garden when I noticed a robin settle in a tree
near by. Thinking it might be our old friend that last season used to
feed from the hand, I held out a grub and called: “Robbie! Come,
Robbie!” Instantly he flew and settled on my hand, proving that he
remembered, and retained his faith in his benefactor. From evidence
gathered, I believe that bird migrations are more largely governed by
memory than is generally supposed.
PITY AND FEAR.
Pity has its finest expression through the parental instincts, especi-
ally in the adoption and care of the young of other birds. There are
authenticated instances of this, and some have come under my own
observation. Pity is also manifested toward trapped or wounded com-
rades. A touching exhibition of filial love, pity, and fear I once met
with when photographing a curlew’s nest. One of the eggs was cracked,
and the cry of the little one was plainly to be heard. It took me some
time to adjust the camera, during which I saw the old bird watching
me from a little distance. Presently she ran to the front of me, with
outspread wings and pitiful, beseeching cries. Looking up at me, she
very plainly begged that I would spare her young. This expression of
fear in wild creatures is, alas, too well known to need much comment.
For has not man made all things fear him? Fear for the safety of their
young will prompt many birds to simulate lameness, so that they can
lead man or dog away from the spot where the fledgelings are concealed.
It will also prompt nesting birds to remove their eggs to a fresh position.
Fear prompts the emu to carefully avoid making direct tracks to its
nest. Fear is teaching many of our birds to more carefully screen their
nests from view.
SORROW.
Man has greatly increased the sorrow of the feathered denizens of
the bush. They are, as a rule, far more patient under suffering than is
man. Frequently the only expression is a brooding silence, though
sorrow at the loss of a loved mate or young is often expressed by dis-
tressful cries. That they do suffer, and suffer acutely, we who have
studied them know. Many callous sportsmen (so-called) shoot at any
living thing, in season or out of season. To illustrate this, I quote from
an article appearing in the Register in 1914; “A steamer is passing up
the river—man in the bows with a rifle. A blue crane rises from the
shallows, where she was seeking food for her young, that are watching
from a nest in the branches of a big gum. ‘Crack!’ goes the rifle, and
she falls helpless into the stream, and slowly drifts away from her
hungry, helpless brood. Who can gauge the agony of that mother’s
feelings as vainly she struggles, but slowly drifts further and further
from her little ones? Though her life blood stains the water, her last
thoughts are with them. We who know the self-sacrificing love of God’s
wild creatures can be sure of this.”


THE MUSK DUCK.
Down by the whispering reeds the black swan is still on guard. But
come to the next patch, for I have something to show you there. “Phew!”
you say, “what a smell of musk!” Out there by the reeds you will see
a musk drake whistling and throwing up the water, and showing off
generally to the female, a much smaller bird. Strange, but in Nature’s
realm not only all the finery, but even the scents, are given to the male.
The bird only makes use of scent at courting time, when it is so strong
that you can smell it quite half a mile away. The source of the scent
is the gland just above the tail, the oil of which is used for waterproofing
the plumage. All swimming and diving birds use the oil for this
purpose. The centre of this reed patch has long since disappeared,
leaving a sheet of water of about the fourth of an acre in size, making
a splendid sanctuary for its present tenants. With some labor we force
the boat through, and, punting around the circling wall of reeds, we
search for a clue. Here it is—a bit of down clinging to a reed stem.
Thrusting the nose of the boat in, we part the reeds, and there is the
nest, built on matted stalks just at water level, and lined with beautiful
soft down. The spot is admirably chosen for peaceful seclusion. Here
the birds are safe from passing sportsmen, but in times of flood they may
be forced to make shift in the partly-submerged lignum bushes. For
neighbors they have a pair of reed warblers, and on the water-dock just
outside is being built the floating raft nest of a pair of coots. This will
have its advantage for the inner circle in that, from this point, they will
receive timely warning of approaching danger—for the danger code of
any member of the bird world is understood by all the rest. The egg of
the musk duck is of large size; a nest usually contains four, though I
have noted five on one occasion. I have frequently seen the female with
the young, which she carries on her back. It is an interesting bird, and
should be protected.
REAL CIVILISATION.
In the two portions of this article I have endeavored to show the
intimate connection that exists between man and his fellow creatures of
the wilds, and at the same time to enlist the reader’s sympathy on behalf
of the birds I have chosen for illustrating the points of my arguments,
knowing that man comes more directly in contact with these quick-witted,
useful, and beautiful tenants of field and bush. Much of what I have
claimed for the birds can be equally well claimed for the furry creations.
If to civilise is to refine, and to refine is to purify, then Nature has us
in a quandary, for in the lives of many more lowly developed beings
we find the purity we ourselves have missed. When man shall seek and
find the lost chords, then shall harmony be restored, and the two ends
of the bow shall knit and become the perfect arch, the Bow of Promise.
“Light seeking light doth light of light beguile.”


Punyelroo Cave
ABORIGINAL LEGEND.
EXPLANATORY EXPERIENCES.
THIS legend relates to the Punyelroo Cave at Swan Reach, River
Murray, The native who told the story declared that, long before
the coming of the white man, a crow and a go anna had a big fight,
and the crow, by means of “ngooree” (magic), won. It chased the
goanna into a hole in the cliffs, and blocked it with plenty of stones,
because that country belonged to the crow, and not the goanna. After
a long time the goanna came back, while the crow, making a search,
found a “big feller” hole through which the goanna had escaped. That
is the blackfellows’ theory of the cave.
EXPLORATION PARTY.
My first visit to Punyelroo Cave was through the kindness of the
late Mr. J. Brown, of Silver Lea, near Swan Reach. I have visited it
on several occasions since then. The entrance of the cave is picturesque
and imposing. The walls and roof are thickly studded with fossil shells,
and the cliff, which bounds a vast area of the malic lands on both sides
of the Murray, is a sedimentary deposit lying upon an ancient sea floor—
a dead page of a wonderful past.
The leader of our party lighted a candle, and we followed the gleam.
A turn to the left and then to the right deprived us of the last glimmer
of daylight. Just here the courage of one of the party failed, and he
remained behind.
Advancing, we found hundreds of names and dates scratched upon
the side walls. Sometimes the going was easy; sometimes we proceeded
on all fours, crawling over masses of fallen roof. Two fair-sized gum-
tree logs were passed, both well preserved. The cave was dry, and no
stalactites were seen. Testing for air currents with the candle flame,
we found no movement, yet the air was pure and sweet.
We had the most eerie experience when the candle was put out.
Enveloped in a Stygian darkness, and in a silence equal to that of a grave,
the world, with all its vivid sensations and contrasts, had ceased to be.
Mind only existed; we were disembodied spirits in the tomb of the ages.
Never had any of us sensed such darkness before.
My three companions, tiring of our quadrupedal mode of progress
through tortuous ways, determined to wait while I went on, which I did
until the passage became so small that there was danger of getting hope-
lessly stuck.. At that point I coo-eed several times, but no answer came.
I found later that no sound had reached the ears of my waiting friends.
Returning, we picked a roomy space, and set up the camera. My
companions were grouped on a mass of fallen roof. The picture was a
success, but the impress of the party’s weird experience was apparent
from the solemn faces of all who composed the group.


Chums
NATURE’S CHILDREN AT PLAY.
DID you ever notice how easily children make friends with animals?
From a nearby paddock, where the children are minding the cows,
come sounds of happy laughter, and the joyous screeching of a
white cockatoo. Cocky is fond of frolic. The more noise and excite-
ment the children can crowd into their games, the better he likes it. In
the wild state, the white cockatoo is not only the funniest of contor-
tionists, but he is also one of the noisiest and most jolly of the feathered
family. Our cocky is delighted whenever the children fall in with his
whimsical mood, and enjoys himself to the fullest.
THE SPIRIT OF COMRADESHIP.
The study of marsh or fen life, as it is called in the Old Land, is
wonderfully fascinating to the Nature lover.
“Ye marshes, how candid and simple and nothing-withholding, and free,
Ye publish yourselves to the sky, and offer yourselves to the sea.”
Simply marvellous is this spirit of comradeship found among the myriad
denizens of the moor, prompting mutual aid in times of danger, and
a zealous watchfulness for the benefit of all. This inter-dependence
covers many different species, and is even seen in the flight formations
of migrating birds. It was in former days a common sight to note our
two species of ibis migrating in a common formation. The solid wedge
flight of our wild duck often contains several species, and the same has
also been noticed among our smaller wading birds. Breeding time, of
course, brings with it some modifications, as many birds then demand
a certain privacy and rights over nesting areas, which have to be re-
spected. Apart from this, however, there is much friendship and
tolerance among the flocks of the swamp lands.
STRANGE MATES.
It is among the imprisoned wild creatures and domestic animals,
though, that we often see the strangest friendships. Barred, as they are,
from all true expression of themselves through natural channels, they
expend their affections on strange chums. With cage birds I have noticed
an affection in the sweet reasonableness of adoption—the adoption of
the helpless young of any other birds. The horse, dog, and even that
treacherous feline, the cat, will at times choose most unlikely chums.
Most animals are capable of strong feelings of affection. Look into the
eyes of a faithful dog, whose love for his master is akin to worship.


What a depth of love and sacrifice is there! With what intuition it
reads the master’s thoughts—so far, at any rate, as it is possible for
an animal to comprehend matters human. At his behest it toils in the
heat, driving sheep or cattle across the parched inland plains, choking
with the red dust, and suffering thirst. How patiently he toils, foot-
sore though he may be, this four-footed friend of man! And when we
come to horses! How, of their own intuition, they will “head off” an
outlaw bullock, watching every move of it as they wheel, prop, and turn,
not even requiring the master’s guiding hand. But how bare and often
grudging is the recompense compared with the service rendered by
thousands of these humble servants and friends of man.
Diggers of the Old Sea Bed
HAIRY-NOSED WOMBAT.
OF the wombat, a quaint animal living in communities, their dwell-
ings scooped out from beneath the limestone crust of the old sea
deposit, little seems to be known. It is said to claim relationship
with the diprotodon, and to be the only living representative of that earth-
shaking monster of ancient times; but, according to the distribution of
its fossil remains, that animal must have still been in existence after
the drying up of the primal lakes. The wombat, like the mallee fowl
and some other life forms, seems to have followed the receding waves
of the sea, for wherever I have seen it, it was on soils covering a marine
deposit. Speaking of its relationship, I am inclined to the belief that
the wombat is some sort of a cousin to the native bear, with which it
has some points of resemblance; but this is a question for our scientific
friends to decide. From bushmen’s yams some may have gathered an
idea that wombats will sometimes attack man; but my experience is that
they are the most harmless and innocent of Nature’s creatures. Their
one deadly fear is the two-legged being that walks abroad in the sunlight,
for they are creatures of the night, and come forth in the shadows to
gambol under the stars. And something of night’s mystery has entered
their being, for they are quaintly solemn in their appearance and
demeanour.
AS PETS.
Especially so have I found that with pet wombats, which, at a laugh,
would turn their large, questioning eyes on mine until their very solemnity
made me laugh the more. As pets they run the little native bear pretty


closely, and, like that little creature, they cry pitifully when captured.
They respond to friendly advances, and recognise those who are kind
to them. On one occasion one of my pet wombats escaped, and was
wandering into the scrub. I raced after it, but the harder I ran the
faster it went. It was just entering a hopelessly thick belt, and gaining
on me, when, as a last effort, I called it by name: “Womby, Womby!
Come, Womby!” It immediately stopped, and I walked up and took
it in my arms and back to its cavern. It had run from an unrecognised
pursuer, but it halted at the sound of the voice it knew.
DESCRIPTIVE PARTICULARS.
Although I have never tested it, I believe they occasionally attain a
weight of about 80 lbs. They are small eaters, yet keep in wonderful
condition, even when the country is apparently bare. They are of mus-
cular build—indeed, very strong —and their hind feet leave tracks like
those of (say) a club-footed person. This animal provided a much-
relished flesh food for the native tribes. By some of the earliest pioneers
it was likened to pork, but though many strange foods have passed my
lips, their flesh has not been on the menu. Many of their old haunts
know them no more, and where they yet linger, their numbers are much
below what they are supposed to be. My experience has been with the
two species of the mainland. Some smaller species are natives of the
coastal islands. Owing to the difficulty of removing their skin, they
have not been much exploited for their fur; but under the name of
“wombat” large numbers of native bear skins have gone on to the
world’s skin markets. The blackfellow and the dingo were their natural
enemies, but owing to their strength, they seem able to defy the fox.
Landholders resent their presence, blaming them for loss of feed; their
enormous warrens, after losing their natural tenants, become a refuge
for rabbits.
PROTECTION OF FAUNA.
Now, it had long been my ambition to establish a wombat warren
at “The Sanctuary,” for the purpose of ensuring their continuance and
the study of their life habits. Laws are made for the protection of
our native fauna, but no practical work has been done in this State (and
little elsewhere)) worthy of the cause. No trouble or expense is spared
in their exploitation for dead specimens, even though it hastens the
passing of the living forms. Why is it that we are neglecting the more
important work of preserving and establishing on suitable areas the
waning types of our unique wild life? Why is it that those in whose
hands the power lies do so little? Is it not that other interests intervene,
that self interest, and even scientific interests, block the way? There are
those who will travel a thousand miles to kill for the last-named causes,
but who could not go ten miles to save; their hands are bound. Some
there are whose hearts are in the work, but whose brains are claimed
by science. They will admit, with regret, that such is the case. Possibly
this is owing to man’s limitations. It is for us to cultivate


“A sense sublime
Of something far more deeply interfused,
Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
And the round ocean, and the living air,
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man,
A motion and a spirit that impels
All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
And rolls through all things.”
Wordsworth.
THE CLAIM OF PITY.
God has given to every living thing its place in the scheme of being;
and man, the crowning glory of physical life, views, as from a mountain
peak, the wide-spreading grandeur of creation around him. He sees a
myriad of the humbler creatures of God’s care, that are fed and clothed
by His hand, and that, by their service, bring honor and glory to His
name. They are fellow creatures, towards which it is man’s privilege
to extend something of the love and mercy that he himself lays claim to
at the hands of a Higher Power. What, to man, are the keys of oppor-
tunity, might, to them, be the bars of a narrow confinement, across which
they look with ever-questioning eyes reaching outward and upward to
that which is higher, even as we look outward and upward to a power
that is higher than ourselves. From my readers I would beg a pity for
the dumb world around us, even as we beg the pity of God as the source
«f all life. Herein lies the great secret of the Universe, peace and the
true fellowship of man, and the true interpretation of a God of love.
SOME ELOQUENT COMPARISONS.
Man is the crown of the tree of life, of which all other forms are
the branches. There is an intimate relationship between man and the
animal fold that we cannot afford to ignore. There is much that the eye
of science misses through the far-reaching shadow cast by its own egotism.
The heart of wise old Mother Nature is open to her children. As Shake-
speare says: “Take but degree away, untune that string; and hark, what
discord follows. Each thing meets in mere oppugnancy.” To man, a
wide liberty; to them, the prison of limitations, but over all the loving
kindness of God.
“ Sweet mercy is nobility’s true badge,” so says the bard.
“ I will have mercy and not sacrifice,” says the living God.
And in the merciful provision made for the comfort and well-being
of all creatures we meet the same truth.
WHEN TIME WAS YOUNG.
In former days the spot that I had chosen for my camp would have
been some twelve or thirteen miles seaward. The well-preserved shells
of an oyster bed, in mass some three feet thick, and of considerable extent,
as disclosed by wombat holes, were eloquent evidence of that old-time
sea’s existence. Downward, through some two hundred feet of marine
deposit, you would meet the black ooze of its most ancient floor. The


mind of man marvels at the vastness of the period between the laying
of the primal ooze and the more recent, yet far distant, deposition of
these oyster shells, lying, as they do, upon the last deposit of that old-
time sea. It is beneath the surface crust of travertine that the wombat
communities make their homes. I have sometimes noticed that their
engineering seems to be at fault in not leaving sufficient support for
the roof, which then caves in. In a populous wombat area, well-defined
roads or tracks connect the different “villages,” but these often lose their
definition on the outskirts; they are not taken right into the settlements.
MYSTERY OF WATER SUPPLY.
The species with which I have had most to do inhabit the dry areas.
How they manage to exist without water has long been a puzzle. On one
trip I sought its solution in every possible way. Sap, roots, and tubers
I found were all out of the question. But at the largest “village,” or
possibly the “capital city” of the group, I found two well-defined water
tunnels entering the subterranean town. Now, it is within the bounds
of possibility that there may be underground rock-hole catchments; or
again, there may be condensation of water vapor on the rocky roofs of
their dwellings from the strata below. The same puzzle confronted me
in regard to the mallee fowl until I found its solution in the frequent
heavy dews. It is possible that condensation may be the solution of the
wombat problem. For the first few days prior to my discovery of the
“capital city,” my attention had been given to the small outlying “ham-
lets,” but later I struck a well-used road showing the recent, almost
human (in appearance) tracks of several wombats.
WATCHING THE DIGGERS.
It was by following this that I found their “city.” But let me add
that at both “city” and “villages” I found the population at a low ebb,
plenty of “houses” to let, in which rabbits had installed themselves. I
had made this place my headquarters. When everything was in order,
I built a screen in a thick clump of ti-tree, from which I could bring
most of the wombat “village” under observation. In this bower I made
my camp, and patiently awaited events. But, with the wisdom of their
kind, they had sensed my presence, and it was not until I had removed
my camp to a further distance that I had any view of the diggers, that
naturally treated me with some suspicion. A week’s observation gave the
visible population of two villages as five individuals; this did not include
that of the larger warren before mentioned, which, so far as my observa-
tions went, appeared to shelter but few animals.
THE PATHOS OF DEPARTED DAYS.
I spent some time exploring the scrub around. The mallee and
titree were in full bloom; the early mornings were enlivened with the
songs of birds. I saw no trace of the mallee fowl, or any sign of the
replacement of this country’s original forms as they were known to
settlers in the early eighties. This might have been expected, seeing that
the country has now reverted to pastoral conditions. Occasional clear


ings and odd settlers’ huts mark an era that has passed—an era that was
fatal to all larger forms except the wombat, which now gambols about
the crumbling dwellings recently occupied by its foes —the settlers. But,
from signs observed, I should say there have been attempts to destroy
the animals by poisoning; scalp money has been paid for their destruc-
tion. We can hardly expect the landholder to protect creatures which
he looks on as inimical to his interests. Hence, to place such on the
protected list is in itself quite inefficient, and the only way to preserve
them from extinction is to remove some of them to a sanctuary.
The days were passing by, and I had tried three of the wombat
villages without success. After a fourth night, I moved to the big
warren. This gave me about half a day’s work; but do not think my
time was spent in idleness. A nature lover adrift in the scrub is not
usually an idle person. I walked many miles over that old sea bed,
finding much of interest in its bird and plant life; and to wander along
the last shoreline left by that slowly dying sea was an inspiration. To
lose oneself in visions of the past, to rebuild the mystery land of the
long silence, and to wander with awe down the aisles of time, was to
imbibe something of the grandeur of God’s thoughts in the glorious
scheme of creation. Careful search along this ancient shore revealed the
presence of the aborigine, for at a spot where the light soil had been
blown away by the wind I found two pavements of burnt stone, which
were evidently the remains of ancient ovens of the same pattern as those
found on the Coorong. The usual accompanying shell heaps were absent.
Evidently they belong to an earlier period than those found along the
River Murray, whose builders made great use of the fresh water mussel,
and, to a lesser degree, of the winkle.
“ NATURE WRITES HER OWN HISTORY.”
To picture that long-distant past, we take our stand on the hills of
the old peninsula. A glorious scene is spread before our eyes. In the
distance glitter the waters of the ever-shrinking gulf. In the wide pano-
rama below, the sunlight is reflected from the surface of long rihbons
of shallow mangrove swamps. The higher and drier land which lies
between is already clothed with the overflow of the mainland’s flora,
which is adapting itself to new conditions, but shows some change of
structure and growth habit. In the distance, too, are shallow lakes and
inlets, that are still fed by the tidal waters of the gulf. It is probable
that at this period Kangaroo Island would form part of the peninsula,
and that the natives and the dingoes had not yet reached the southern
shores of the continent, which they eventually did by following the
courses of old river systems. It is also probable that their first advent
was by way of the rivers feeding this old Murray gulf; others, no doubt,
followed by way of Lakes Eyre and Torrens, which then formed part of
Spencer’s Gulf. We will now shift our point of view to the last shore-
line of the shrinking gulf, and observe on the horizon the hazy outline
of its other shore. Here a broken coastline is shown by its prominent


and recessive features. The period of which we have been speaking was
just before that to which the human relics found on this shore line belong.
It is noticeable that all permanent camping sites are closely adjacent to
the old shorelines.
A RETROSPECT AND A MORAL.
No argosy had sailed this ancient silent sea. No proud navy had
ever disturbed its peace. Man was here, submissive to Nature; and here
Nature, untrammelled by the blighting hand of man, the rebel, held
undisputed sway, brooding over her myriads of creatures in peace. She
completed the plans of the Great Architect of all, and wrote her history
in the rocks and gravels of the earth’s crust —a history which pre-dated
man’s advent, yet predicted that he would come as the interpreter of that
history. To Nature’s true interpreter, “self” will be lost in humility and
reverence. The myriad forms of life on the old land surface followed
the receding sea, and they slowly became adapted to the new conditions,
and were capable of supporting themselves. To-day, what have we left
of the terrestrial life that flowed across the old sea floor, which is, in
many places, approaching desert conditions? A lonely emu may be
wandering around, and its rumbling call penetrate the silent scrub. It
may be calling, calling for its fellows that will come no more; and so
it will wander and call until shot, or a dog ends its lonely life. Tragedy
is abroad in the world of creation. Primitive man is gone; and of the
marsupials the wombat is practically the last survivor; its remains are
found on the eastern side of the river, but to-day the species is confined
to a small area on the western side. It still lingers in small numbers on
Yorke’s Peninsula. Elsewhere Ido not know the conditions, except that
different groups of wombats occupy the south-eastern comer of our
State. But as I have not been in contact with these since early in the
eighties, I cannot speak as to their present position in the scale of our
waning wild life.
THE CAPTURE.
The dawn of the fifth morning was lighting the eastern sky as I took
my carrying bags and started on my round. So far I had only seen six
wombats, and had caught none. My walk lay through the blossoming
scrub, which was soon filled with music by the awakening birds. Every-
where fluttering moths were hastily seeking cover before the advancing
light. Already countless insects hummed amid the blossoms overhead.
To a healthy body, on such a morning, how sweet was the breath of life!
Lonely? Not to one in touch with Nature. Not to one who drinks the
joy of life from Nature’s chalice.
I arrive in good time at the “wombats’ city,” cast a glance around,
then proceed to a closer inspection. A fine male wombat gives me a
strenuous time getting it into the bag, the frightened creature crying
pitifully for mercy all the time the struggle lasted. It was with a sigh
of relief that I at last had it secured. The weight of this animal I
judged to be about 80 lb. On my return, I barricaded the creature in
a room of an old settler’s hut, and after breakfast made tracks for the


river-front in search of suitable boxes for packing my capture for the
journey. I obtained these from my friends, who kindly drove me back
to camp. Meanwhile, “Womby” had not been idle, for we found it busy
tunnelling under the foundation of the house. Late as it was, I fitted
up a box, and had it securely imprisoned before darkness set in. I must
say it was one of the finest specimens of its kind I had yet handled. My
time was getting short, but I still had hopes of securing the desired pair
for the Sanctuary.
In regard to wombat remains found on the eastern side of the
Murray, I could find no sign of their recent existence there; and enquiry
from the natives lent color to the view that they had been early exter-
minated in that strip of country. The wombat of this group once ex-
tended in a southerly direction to the country adjacent to Murray Bridge.
The area of its distribution is now much restricted in the district under
review.
With the shortening of my stay I increased my efforts to secure a
mate for the animal I had captured. The latter was now becoming quite
tame, and was some company for me in the camp. I had become foot-
sore through much walking and the wearing of woollen socks—a thing
that I should not have done, as I had long declared them taboo for bush
work. Not seeing me in at the station, my friends, with kindly fore-
thought, sent the young folk out with a waterbag and a few welcome
luxuries. On several occasions I had these surprise visits, and it was
due to them that I was enabled to hold out, water being the chief diffi-
culty. Seeing many domestic bees working the scrub blossom, and know-
ing that these insects must have water available, I had searched for a
settler’s tank, having been advised as to direction by a fisherman who
was hunting for “pialleter” (the grub of a large beetle) for cod bait;
but my search was in vain. My young friends were great riders, but
on one occasion much merriment was caused when both horses shied at
my camp. The lad came off and gracefully landed in a sitting position,
a look of surprise on his face, but quite unhurt. Typical Australian
children, these, giving healthy promise for the future man and woman
of the open spaces, and with that strong sympathetic contact with Nature
which lends a zest to life.
“ To him who, in the love of Nature, holds
Communion with her visible forms, she speaks
A various language; for his gayer hours
She has a voice of gladness, and a smile
And eloquence of beauty; and she glides
Into his darker musings with a mild
And healing sympathy, that steals away
Their sharpness ere he is aware.”
A CAPTURE IN THE DARK.
When the nights were cool, I camped in the old settler’s hut, the
floor of which was covered with a thick layer of lime-dust from its


decaying walls. On this I would spread sheets of newspaper, then my
sleeping bag and blankets. There came a flicker of firelight from the
long, cold hearth, a glimmer of stars through the paneless window, a
whisper of wind in the pines that fringed this scene of a pioneer’s toil,
wherein lay a tale of heroic struggle with an adverse fate.
“ Oh, reader - , had you in your mind
Such stories as silent thought can bring;
Oh, gentle reader, you would find
A tale in everything.”
A life in which the finer ideals found little room. One little circle
of stones showed where a geranium or other hardy plant had been cared
for.
The nights were moonless, and for my later round I took my
guidance from the stars. With the first streak of dawn, the bronzewing
pigeons came pattering on the roof to see if, perchance, I had left any
water about, as it would save them a long journey if I had. Quite regular
visitors were two pairs of these birds.
The seventh and eighth days came and went. On my last evening
special care was taken; and the dawn saw the capture of a fine young
doe. I had succeeded at last! My work now was to get this animal
caged, then collect my outfit, and have the waggon packed before the
horses arrived; but as they did not appear until about midday, I had
plenty of time. Three of us sat down to dinner in the old hut, for my
friend the fisherman came along looking for more “pialleter.”
A PATHETIC MEETING.
On our return journey we stopped at the old shore line to photo-
graph a native oven, and to obtain a view across the site of that pre-
historic gulf. On arriving at Punyelroo, the wombats held a levee,
creating quite a sensation, for but few had had a close acquaintance with
the living animals, which by this time permitted their visitors the liberty
of stroking their noses. On the following evening I boarded the steamer
“Tyro,” and found that I had “Irvine,” a well-known writer, as pleasant
company.
On the voyage downstream we were joined at Mannum by one of
the oldest inhabitants, whose playmates had been the children of the
aborigines, and naturally our talk was reminiscent of those old and
simple days that lay at the parting of the ways —the ending of an age
of peace and beauty by the marring hand of civilisation.
The pity of it is that for the thing we call progress we sacrifice so
much of the beauty of this old earth by turning it into a penal establish-
ment, and sentencing ourselves to hard labor for life. At one of the
river ports two toil-worn men and their aged mother had come aboard,
looking worried and jaded as they conversed near me. The men had
walked in from away back in the mallee lands; a neighbor had driven


in with the old mother. “Did you shut the cat out?” asked the old
mother. “I did,” said one of the men. Sensing something tragic, I got
into conversation with him, and found that in shutting out the cat he
had shut the door of their old home for the last time. Their years of
labor had been for naught. If they had not shut the cat out, the wolves
of want would have soon got in. They had held a sale on the previous
day, when things had not realised a third of their value. The faithful
horses that had rolled the mallee, and ploughed the land, had gone for
a mere song; so had the well-loved riding pony. It was “pull up the
old roots, smash all the home ties, let all go with the unfulfilled dreams
of the past.” Their sixteen original neighbors had dwindled to two;
sales were the order of the day. No, they had not sold the land—no
one wanted that. They had had enough of mallee farming, and were
going back to work for wages in the future. The past was done with,
and could well be buried under the drifting sands of the outback mallee
lands; but the bitterness of the wasted years remained.
THE WOMBATS CAUSE INTEREST.
When we see sterility following the white man’s steps, and when we
see the plague spots of drift gradually but surely becoming coherent,
would it not be wise to recognise that our policy of land settlement has
been at fault?
Arrived at Murray Bridge, the wombats again aroused considerable
interest. I was indebted to the railway officials for some assistance, one
of my captives having broken his cage; this had to be repaired. At
Adelaide the interest was well sustained. At Smithfield I was kindly met
by my friend, Mr. Thomas, who drove me and my pets to the Sanciitary.
The animals were placed in their new quarters, which, owing to lack of
fencing material, were only fenced around the burrow’s entrance, thus
leaving their subterranean dwelling on the outside, from which they
eventually tunnelled upwards, and escaped. Given a suitable enclosure,
lam sure I could establish wombats on the Sanctuary. For this purpose
I intend to make another raid on the “diggers of the old sea bed.”
Much could be done for the purpose of saving Australia’s quaint and
valuable wild life along these lines. Our sanctuaries should become
museums of the beautiful living forms that, having lost the fear of man,
could provide unique opportunities of study and research among natural
surroundings. They should be places where overseas visitors could come
at once into touch with our strange and beautiful, ancient types, and
where our children could study Nature in Nature’s school, and come into
contact sympathetically with the humble creatures of the wilds. The
whole world would deplore their passing. Why let them pass? The
task is beyond one man’s strength. Many strands go to the making of
a rope. The strands are here, from all parts of the country; and from
beyond the seas come words of sympathy and encouragement. Here are
the strands; here lies dormant the power we need. It but awaits the
necessary organisation—the weaver’s hand.


Past and Present
WILD LIFE OF THE HUMBUG SCRUB.
YEARS ago, when the sprub came up to the door, it was a hard fight
to grow anything at the Sanctuary because of the wallabies and,
yes, the rabbits, too; but the wallabies were the worst, and moon-
light nights saw us trying to save the bit of crop by hunting them away.
We were refused the “wire-netting loan” on the ground that it was not
available for small holders. It was a hard fight; but we lost, for not
a blade did we cut. The intruders came in from Mac’s Creek, from
Wallaby Flat, from Wild Dog Creek, and the Devil’s Nose. If at any
time we opened the door after dark, we would hear them scuttling away
from around the house. Then the foxes began to increase, and the
wallabies to decrease; after 1907 the latter animal rapidly declined in
numbers, until now it is practically extinct in our district. Although the
track of a single animal was seen last summer on the Barossa water
reserve, it was different from the one that used to inhabit the Murray
flats, and the one found on Kangaroo Island—both of which, I believe,
are known under the same name.
UNDESERVED PERSECUTION.
Sheltering during the day in the dense thickets of dwarf ti-tree or
red-bush, the wallaby came forth at night to the open grassy glades, and
it was interesting to watch them in the moonlight, with their mimic battles
and the wild play of their young. How sad the fate of the last few
lingering animals, as, solitary and alone, they feed in the deserted glens,
with nerves all quivering to the yapping of their terror of the night, the
fox!
It is strange that, though so many intermediate types are gone, we
still have the smallest and the largest marsupials wtih us—the opossum
mouse and the great grey kangaroo—the latter represented by several
family groups. As these animals are now found in a much smaller area
of the scrublands than was the case years ago, I think it is good evidence
that they are not holding their own, but are putting up an almost hope-
less fight against fate; in spite of protection, the hand of man is still
against them, and all protection notices are torn down within the forest
precincts. The animals avoid the settlers, except in times of stress, such
as drought, or when there are many sheep in the scrub. They have been
regular visitors at the Sanctuary in search of the native grasses growing
in the orchard —this has kept up all the winter past —and my experience
was similar during the 1913-14 drought. They have never touched my
growing crop, preferring the native grasses every time. They come in
the night, but leave again at dawn, and camp by day in the quiet recesses


of the forest, by choice, under a good breakwind. In summer their camp
is frequently made under native cherry trees. Fine days find them lying
on the sunny slopes, taking a sun bath in all sorts of quaint attitudes,
probably dreaming of the past, and the strange vicissitudes that have
overtaken them in the present life of terror. They are always on the
alert; for ever and anon there are disquieting sounds—the barking of
a dog, the sound of an axe, or the report of a gun. These their quickly-
moving, sensitive ears catch and interpret; and measuring the distance,
they act accordingly, for their lives depend on their ceaseless vigilance.
As the young kangaroo does not leave the pouch permanently until
the ninth month, and is then still incapable of looking after itself, it
is very evident that the six months’ protection given in other districts
is, and always has been, a farce. Protection should be given in periods
of years for marsupials.
THE ORDEAL OF BATTLE.
While travelling through a scrubby belt on one of our northern
plains many years ago, some peculiar guttural sounds reached my ears,
followed by those of repeated blows. Thinking they were due to natives
quarrelling, I made careful investigation, and at length, peeping through
the bushes, found myself in close proximity to two fine grey bucks that
were endeavoring to settle their differences by ordeal of battle. Prancing
on their toes, with heads well back, and each gripping the other by the
shoulders, they pushed and strove for the advantage; then one would,
with lightning speed, prop itself on its tail, and deliver with its feet a
resounding blow on the adversary’s belly. It was an interesting scene
in an ideal setting of bluebush plain, with a background of distant ranges
in an atmosphere of blue. By some intuition they became aware of my
presence, turned their heads in my direction, and bounded away.
The opossum-mouse is a pretty little creature, rather smaller than
the common mouse, which carries its tail curled like a watch spring. It
is still occasionally met with in hollow stumps or logs. It is nocturnal,
and preys on beetles and other insects. A larger species, that burrows
in the ground, sometimes called the bush-rat, was noticed to be preying
on the common mouse during the recent plague. They are both active
climbers, and are confined chiefly to scrub and forest lands. A pair of
barred anteaters were caught on the bank of the Para in 1905. Of the
squirrel and native cat nothing has been seen since about 1906. The
squirrel constructed a nest, but the native cat made its home in hollow
logs or rock holes. They were both wasteful killers, just taking the blood
and brains of their victims, which were sometimes taken from the hen
roosts of the settlers.
WANING NATIVES.
The bandicoot still lingers with us, though much reduced in numbers.
Roots and grubs seem to be its food, and, judging from its tracks, it
would appear to have a liking for the lame and eggs of certain ants. Its


THE AUTHOR INSPECTING THE EMU-RESERVE


THE AUTHOR FEEDING SOOTY KANGAROOS, HUMBUG SCRUB SANCTUARY


refuge is usually in hollow logs or trees, standing at an angle, and having
an entrance at the ground level. A near relative, the pinky, or native
hare, has long since disappeared; a few lingered into the early nineties.
They seem to have fed largely on grubs of the cockchafer beetle, judging
by the tracks I always found adjacent to their burrows; they rooted up
the surface of the ground around all dead trees and stumps. The pretty
little kangaroo-rat disappeared about 1907, its last stand being at Black-
top and -at the Duck Ponds. Rabbit destruction accounted largely for
its disappearance, for it was a burrowing animal, and was frequently
caught in the rabbit traps; and a great many were poisoned.
A similar type of animal which, I am sorry to say, I never had
identified, but which we knew as the "sharp-nosed wallaby,” had the
same habit as the paddy-melon of the south-east, of building a domed
shelter; these were mostly found in grass-tree clumps. This type was
larger than the kangaroo-rat, and did not have the white tail tip. It was
generally found among the thick undergrowth of the higher ridges, and
was noted for its sharp-pointed nose and its agility. It was never very
plentiful, and was new to me.
The ringtail and common opossum are still with us, but few in
numbers, the foxes and rabbit poison, and the all-too-frequent bush fires
holding them in check.
ELOQUENT TRACES.
Of primitive man there is very little trace —just a few barely dis-
cernible cooking places, with mill-stones and fragments of a broken
grinding dish near the waters, traces of their ’possum hunts on some
of the ancient gums, and their red and white ochre drawings in the caves
of the Para River.
From remains found in gravel beds, and similar deposits, it is
evident that in past ages the earth of the adjacent plains shook to the
ponderous tread of the diprotodon; in more recent times its smaller
prototype, the wombat, was found on both sides of these ranges. They
have long gone from the western side, but on the east there may still be
some left high up in the Murray valley.
Of the wild creatures in the Humbug Forest it may be said that they
have lost their ancient enemies, such as the aborigine, the dingo, and
lesser carnivora. The destruction of native fauna was, to a certain
extent, also constructive—constructive in so far that the least perfect
of the breeding stock were removed, and the feeble eliminated. But
Nature’s laws have been superceded by the tricks of civilised man —the
introduction of poisons and alien forms of life, such as the rabbit and
fox. Thus comes a far more cruel and relentless enemy; for civilised
man is lawless in so far as he is opposed to natural law.
“Ah, what a warning for a thoughtless man,
Could field or grove, could any spot of earth,
Show to his eye an image of the pangs
Which it hath witnessed —render back an echo
Of the sad steps by which it hath been trod! ”


“ Oh, the little birds sang east, and the little birds sang west,
And I smiled to think God’s greatness flowed around in our incomplete
ness;
Round our restlessness, His rest.”
Can anyone picture what the world would be like without the birds?
Those cheery optimists of the wilds, bearing alike the heat of summer
and the frosts of winter with a patient bravery we might well imitate,
with hearts ever ready to burst into song at the slightest provocation.
It is the month of July, and the nights have been cold, with heavy
rain in the early part. Just as the first grey streaks of dawn show in
the east, and the big drops of water are drop-drop-dropping from the
moisture-laden boughs of the silent forest, the hilarious laugh of a
kookaburra breaks the silence; then a pair of kangaroos appear. The
latter are making for the lonely recesses of the upper ridges, and as they
dash past the dew falls in showers from the bushes—two fleeting grey,
ghostly shadows. Twas the laugh of the kookaburra that had warned
them that it was time to leave the haunts of man. Then from the distance
came the sweet carol of a magpie. The rich cadence passes along the
range, from one roost to another, and dies in the distance, to reawaken
in a fresh wave of heavenly music. It is followed by the trills and calls
of the awakening choir. The forest is now full of a glorious melody,
that echoes from the rocky cliffs, while each swelling throat adds its
modicum of joy to the one grand morning anthem of praise that always
greets the returning day. It links with music the fading starlight of
the west to the golden dawn of the east. It is a wave of ecstasy that
surrounds the world.
AMONG THE BIRDS.
The destruction of so much of our scrubland by axe and by fire
has, I fear, made the lives of the birds far harder in that it has deprived
them of much-needed shelter, food, and nesting hollows. To this must
be added the deadly competition of the alien sparrow and starling, and
the destructiveness of the fox and cat. The latter animal is in consider-
able numbers throughout our scrublands, and, judging by the heaps of
feathers one frequently observes, is doing a great amount of mischief
among the birds. The beautiful bronzewing pigeon is a common victim.
Of the birds of this district, naturally the honeyeaters predominate,
their work being the fertilisation of the flowers of the forest flora, and
the suppression of insect pests. Their species are many, and noted for
the beauty of their plumage, rivalling the blossoms among which they
work. Civilised man brings many changes; among other things, the
advent of the hive bee, in its countless millions, has proved a serious
problem to these servants that Nature had ordained for the work. For
every tree that blooms there are thousands of those indefatigable workers,
each of which is armed with a most unpleasant little bayonet, prone to
be used on the slightest provocation.


This change in the birds’ environment has caused much distress,
especially among the lorikeets; and it is not an uncommon matter to
pick up starved birds, even when there is a fair amount of bloom on
the trees. From this cause the lorikeets have learned to attack the hard
fruits grown by the settlers, while the honeyeaters, in times of distress,
eat of the soft fruits.
We admit the importance of the bee industry; but knowing its effect
on important bird life (for the honeyeaters destroy many harmful insects),
we should be more tolerant of their acquired faults. We have a tree or
garden fuchsia growing just in front of our door, and consequently have
good opportunity of watching these birds. Many varieties visit that tree,
but a pair of white-bearded honeyeaters selected to nest close by, and so
moved other birds on.
BIRD DETECTIVES.
Our visitors include the white-naped, white-plumed spine bill, tawny-
crowned crescent, noisy miner, wattlebird, and regent. The last-named is
a handsome bird, and is only seen in the dry seasons, when it comes here
to nest.
The noisy miner is one of Nature’s sharpest detectives, sharing honors
with the spurwing plovers as conscientious watchmen over the general
safety of wild life. Let him “spot” a prowling gunner sneaking from
cover to cover, when promptly his warning goes forth, and every living
being within the sound’s radius is on the qui vive. At the next repetition
all are off as fast as legs or wings can take them, while he, the noisy
miner, receives a volume of curses, and, perhaps, a charge of small shot.
Though in years past he often served me this trick, I always recognised
his disinterested services to his wild brethren, and would never think of
retaliating.
The wattle bird is a favorite with many. Our children call it the
“tree-hollorer” or “kecackle.” It and the smaller form living in the
mallee are most amusing, inquisitive, and useful birds.
The honeyeaters are among the earliest of nesting birds; before the
storms of winter are past, when fierce hailstorms thrash the scrub, we
find them with spread wings, hovering patiently over their helpless young,
keeping watch and ward through many weary hours, not daring to leave
them for an instant, or they would perish. How the young are fed at
these times is a puzzle. On sunny days it is a beautiful sight to watch
these many-colored acrobats hanging, head downwards, on the slenderest
sprays of flowers, quickly robbing the heart of each bloom of its gift
of nectar.
FEATHERED FRIENDS.
Some of our birds have long been pensioners on our bounty; they
seem to have a good knowledge of meal times, and gather around the
door, even venturing into the house and on to the table. At present our
morning gathering includes a harmonious thrush, which sometimes takes
bread from the children’s hands, four blue wrens, which wander over


the floor, two tree creepers, which also venture inside, and a Willy-
Wag. In the winter we had also three white-backed magpies—regular
attendants at the morning meal. Later in the season the thrushes expect
our help with their young, for they always bring them along and intro-
duce them to our notice. We have also a contingent that follows the
spade or plough; it includes four species that do not come to the house.
Then there are the pipit and the hooded robin, the red-capped and the
scarlet-breasted robin; one of the last-named feeds from the hand.
The full, rich voice of the harmonious thrush lends itself to word-
interpretation. For instance: “Hi, hi, hi! I’ve caught a beetle!” or
“Hi, hi, hi! I’m going to beat you!” On a recent occasion a piece of
bread was thrown to our pet thrush: six hungry sparrows immediately
flew dowh and worried the thrush, which returned the attack, and drove
them away. But the bread was seized by one of the sparrows, which
immediately decamped, followed by the rest. They had outwitted the
thrush, much to its disgust.
Of the pardalotes we have several species, which spend their labor
in the care of tree foliage, swaying high in the treetops, and searching
for their little prey. At times we find them tunnelling in a bank of
sand, to prepare a place for their nest.
Of the finches, we note the “spotted-sided” and the “red-browed”;
they come about the time the seed of the wireweed and sorrel ripen.
Of the flycatchers, besides our black-and-white friend, “Willy Wag,”
we note the restless or “dish-washer” (the “white-shafted”), and the brown
flycatcher (Peter, or little grey bird), sometimes called Jacky Winter—
a fine little chap for the garden, and good company for the digger.
WONDERFUL LIFE.
Another splendid little fellow is the grey-crowned babbler—a sociable
bird, that works in companies, turning over fallen leaves and prying
under loose bark for the pupas of the codlin moth. A pair of these birds
have just completed their nest in a quince tree; they were busy for some
days shredding up a newspaper, with which they lined it. These birds
have the habit of building spare nests that are not used for the incubation
of eggs, but as soon as the young are old enough to leave, they are taken
at night to the new, clean home which is waiting for them, sometimes
a considerable distance away.
The spotted ground-thrush is occasionally seen; it is sometimes called
the ground-pigeon. The beautiful litle hee-eater arrives in autumn,
bringing its young from the dry areas, where this bird breeds. The
graucalus, or blue jay, is sometimes noted, and also the white-shouldered
caterpillar eater. The “tree-bottle” and welcome swallows come with
the warmer weather. Wood swallows have the curious habit of cluster-
ing as a swarm on the sheltered side of a tree trunk at the junction of
a branch, presumably for mutual warmth. The wood swallow, hawking
over an apiary, is a check on the-drones and the wax moth; it is a friend


of the bee-keeper, and leaves the working bee alone. The nest of the
“white-browed” is often placed in the rough bark of a tree trunk; that
of the “sordid” I have found in well-hidden forks of peppermint trees.
It is a beautiful sight to watch them manreuvring among and over the
treetops; well are they called “summer birds.” The beautiful cradle
nest of the mistletoe-bird, or flower pecker, generally swung from a
wattle bough, is frequently met with when the first ripe mistletoe berries
are ready; it is on these that the young are fed.
PRIZED CHAMPIONS OF SOLITUDE.
Of the whistlers, we have the “rufus” and the “golden-breasted,”
both accomplished musicians, and useful forest birds, that do not, how-
ever, court man’s company.
That king of Australian songsters, the “reed warbler,” is sometimes
noted in the reeds of the Para River. Its song always reminds me of
moonlight nights spent along the course of Australia’s Nile (the Murray).
Infinitely sweet and soul-searching is its melody, and it sports no gay
colors, being just a little drab bird, that loves the waterside, and has
the heart of a poet. Carried back over the years by its exquisite music,
scene after scene of long ago passes before my mind, bringing, as old
memories ever must, a certain sadness in their train. Of kingfishers, we
have the sacred, that nests in hollow trees away from the water, and the
beautiful little blue one that flashes like a living jewel along the silent
pools, and nests in the banks. And there is Nature’s jester, the laughing
jackass, which is not the Simple Simon it looks. It is a droll customer,
and a favorite with most bush folk. This bird often falls a victim to
fox baits. It is sometimes called the bushman’s clock, from the regu-
larity of its morning calls. It is a jolly old wag, whose gurgling laugh
cheers many a lonely bushman in the big lone lands.
That civilised man becomes very much of a stranger to wonderful
old Mother Nature is sadly true. He has been given great powers for
good; but, misapplied, these become great powers for evil.
Petty, quarrelsome, unhappy humanity! What lessons there are for
us in Nature’s open book. It is not sufficient to bring science alone to
bear on Nature, for she is too coldly calculating. When she places her
wonders before the minds of men, the soul of things is lacking.
THE WAVE OF LIFE.
There have been mild spring days, with sunshine and showers. The
glory of the wattle is nearly past, and with us are the quaint orchids, the
lilac, and innumerable bush blossoms. Here, in the tree-clad hills, Nature
is awakening like a giant refreshed from the long sleep of the winter
months. Her call has gone forth that her table is spread, and that work
awaits her wandering, feathered children. It is heard and answered from
across the seas. Even the far, lonely tundra of Siberia has been reached
by Nature’s ethereal messages, and the sky echoes by night and by day
to the answering shouts of her returning legions.


A week yesterday (August 27) the sky resounded to the joyous
twittering of a host of white-browed wood-swallows, when merrily they
scattered over the landscape. Yesterday I heard the soft, sweet notes
of the diamond dove, and noticed dotterels on the water side, where they
frequently nest. On the water-surface the ever-circling, welcome swal-
lows were making fairy rings.
The pallid cuckoos came in mid-July: while the long-drawn, mourn-
ful whistle of the bronze cuckoo was also frequently heard; a good mimic
can always bring this bird close up. We have noticed that birds chosen
as foster parents by cuckoos frequently decline the honor, sometimes
forsaking the nest. In one instance it was noticed that the cuckoo’s eggs
were thrown out. It is a curious fact that when a young cuckoo leaves
the nest, other strange birds will join in the task of “filling up” the
hungry youngsters.
The yellow-breasted shrike-tit, a handsome little chap known to
children as the “crest bird,” is frequently noticed among the gum boughs.
The “white-eye,” familiar as “goggles,” has been a frequent visitor
to the garden, sometimes rearing a brood in the hollow of a stump in
the fence.
Last Sunday we decided on a round of visits —just Curly (alas, he
is “Curly” no longer, for his locks have been shorn!) and I. Along by
the well in the long dry grass we found Mr. Blue Cap and his missus
busy furnishing their nursery home with feathers, which now and again
a cheeky swallow would purloin in their absence. Near them were two
young babblers, that had just left the old home in the orange tree, and
three old babblers, which were kept busy feeding them with moths, grubs,
and worms. The birds had little trouble to find an abundance of food
among the fallen leaves, scolding us while they worked, with their mouths,
full of squirming grubs.
MORE BIRD LIFE.
Retracing our steps, we went down to the creek and called on Mrs.
White-bearded Honey Eater. Her home was built in some quince suckers,
among the blue “periwinkle flowers.” Becoming nervous, she flew off,
exposing her treasures, two pretty spotted eggs, to our view. Her sharp
eyes watched us from an adjacent fruit tree, and, as we passed on, she
resumed her patient duty. Nestling down contentedly ’mid the greens
and browns of bark and foliage, she at once became invisible to our
watching eyes.
A few yards further on was a greenie’s nest —a change from the
usual pattern of a swinging hammock, for it was built in the bushy end
of a pine bough. She flew off at our approach, but speedily came back
and resumed her task. We left her in peace, and, getting through the
fence, Sonny led me to a hollow sprout that branched from an old log,
telling me it belonged to the “tree creepers,” and that they had two eggs.
But, on looking in, I saw two helpless, newly-hatched birds; then, as one
of the parent birds approached with food, we moved away from the spot.


Iji the paddock beyond we visited the home of the “yellow-tails.”
This was built within the protecting branches of a mistletoe. I believe
this tit is the species I have noticed dwelling in harmony with the lordly
eagle. Building their nest in the rough exterior of the eagle’s nest, they
come and go in perfect safety, their lesser foes not daring to approach
the citadel of that monarch of the air. These tits have the peculiar habit
of building an open nest on the roof of the proper nest. The reason for
this is not known.
Turning back, we enter the growing crop, when Mrs. Pipit went
stumbling and fluttering away, trying her best to take our gaze from the
spot where her nest was. Sonny’s report of three eggs was wrong, for
they had turned into small, palpitating forms, that looked very helpless,
huddled together in the bottom of the nest.
A BUSH TRAGEDY.
We next went over the rise, where the wattle still bloomed among
the trees, and in a tussocky grass among the heath we came upon the
scene of a tragedy. A nest of a “rufus whistler” had been destroyed,
while the feathers of the faithful mother had been scattered around.
With her two young, she had evidently fallen a victim to that scourge
of the bush, the cat.
It was noticed that the changing environment was bringing new birds
on the scene; we observed a brown song-lark, which first made its appear-
ance last summer. This season it is here in increased numbers. The
white-fronted chat (‘tintac”) is along the fringe, and has just arrived
in the scrub clearings. The painted quail has not yet started his mono-
syllabic love song, “Oom-oom-oom! ” which is repeated time after time.
The white-winged chough is a lover of bush solitudes, with the desire
to avoid man as much as possible; its shrill whistling calls are music
to the bushman. These birds, when travelling in company, are always
like a jolly troupe of Christy minstrels; they are great favorites of mine,
for their call is to me like the voice of the wilds, and the key to many
bush memories. It is peculiar that, although the birds always go in
a company, all the nests I have found have been solitary. They are
built of clay, and are of large size, usually the shape of a basin.
PESTS AND SONGSTERS.
The black or bell-magpie is an interesting bird, and its powerful,
varied notes are, to my mind, pleasing. Owing to its liking for fruit, it
has fallen into ill favor with the orchardist—a fact to be regretted, since
it holds a high place in the bird world. Its numbers are fast diminish-
ing. Though myself a fruit-grower, I never destroy this bird. The most
destructive bird in the orchard is (with us) the rosella parrot; while,
with the English starling and sparrow, we feel justified in taking drastic
measures to suppress them.


A few black-breasted plover have also put in an appearance; a nest
with four eggs was reported to-day. These useful birds have much de-
creased in numbers in late years.
The peewee, or Murray magpie, pays us occasional visits, but it
prefers the more open country, with running creeks. This bird is much
admired for its clean and neat appearance, and for its work in checking
the pond-snail, which acts as the host of fluke. It also builds a clay nest,
generally placed on a horizontal limb overhanging the water. Its note
is pleasing, though with little variation. Hear it, as I have heard it in
the old days along the shores of “Australia’s Nile,” mingling with the
soft flute-notes of the swan, the song of our nightingale, and the voices
of myriad waterfowl, and its few notes blend perfectly in Nature’s
symphony.
The black cockatoos (wyla), once in thousands, are now only occa-
sionally seen; from three to six birds sometimes visit our district. It
is noticed that these guardians of the trees always attack the larvae of
the goat moth, which, since the almost complete extinction of this class
of bird, has increased enormously, and is yearly killing thousands of
wattle trees. Of the sulphur-crested variety an occasional pair passes
overhead, while odd pairs still nest in the old gums around Mount Craw-
ford, generally losing their young as soon as they are fit to be taken.
Like the native companion, thousands of these birds have been deliber-
ately poisoned.
MARTYRS TO " SPORT."
Old pairs of galahs have at times been located nesting in trees on
the more open country, twice to be robbed of their young. Recently the
male bird was shot by that conscienceless individual, so common in this
country, who calls himself a “sportsman.” The female is still seen
around, a very lonely bird, now consorting with magpies for company.
1 saw her quite recently, though it is two years since she lost her mate.
No other bird of the species has been seen.
Of the parrots, our visitors, during a honey-flow, are Blue Mountains
and various other lorikeets. In dry seasons we get the pretty little
cockatoo and shell parrots. The rosella is always with us, and proves
a mischievous bird in the orchard. The fine little grass parrot has
increased in numbers of late years.
The beautiful bronzewing pigeon, the thirsty bushman’s harbinger
of hope, is having a bad time with the semi-domestic cat. It is note-
worthy that we had a visitor from the eastern States, the little green
pigeon. The diamond doves are here through the summer months, nest-
ing on the lower horizontal branches of the peppermint and other gums.
Their note is soothing and pleasant, suggestive of the poet’s thought that
“Time has fallen asleep in the afternoon sunshine.”


ALIEN BIRDS INTRODUCED.
The goldfinch, too, visits our district in large numbers during the
summer months; it is useful as a check on weeds. Its beautifully built
nest is found generally in fruit trees, where its young frequently fall
victim to the attacks of ants. Its sweet song is well known in the southern
districts.
The blackbird is always with us; but its numbers are few, and, so
far, it is no menace to the fruit industry. The English starling, on the
other hand, comes in large numbers when the fruit is ripe, and proves
very destructive; yet it is a useful bird to the fanner and grazier. That
cheeky freebooter, the English sparrow, quick and cunning as a London
street Arab, is becoming a serious menace to the country, doing so large
an amount of damage that it is impossible for isolated scrub sections
to grow seed at all, unless it is ploughed in well. Acres are stripped
bare before the grain is ripe.
Of game birds, the ringneck-pheasant, introduced by the late Captain
Randle, of Gumeracha, did well for some years, spreading over the scrub
lands for many miles. Probably owing to the fox, it has now dis-
appeared.
Twice this morning I have stood under the peppermint boughs
watching and listening to that beautiful creature, the regent. This bird,
as it runs its varied and pleasing scale of notes, goes through a series
of rhythmic movements that even make the spray upon which it sits dance
to its song. “The Dancer” would be a fitting name for this bird.
The more I study the lives of these creatures of the bush the more
I wonder that the hand of man should so frequently be lifted against
them. It lies with mothers and teachers to impress upon the young the
need of a tender regard for these useful workers in God’s garden of
Nature. lam happy in the belief that the cruel practice of nest-robbirig
is not so prevalent as it used to be; neither is the “shanghai” so much
in evidence as in the past.
INTERESTING HABITS.
Apart from the carnivora, there is among bush creatures a wide
spirit of comradeship which is beautiful to behold; man, by his treach-
ery, has forfeited his place in this, but it could be regained. Domestic
creatures have become depraved in habits, yet man is prone to take them
as Nature’s standard, and so despise the clean-living, law-abiding deni-
zens of the bush.
We have a certain honeyeater here which, I think, is the black-
chinned species. This bird at nesting time makes regular calls on the
sooty kangaroos for contributions towards its structure. I have frequent-
ly watched them fluttering about their big friends’ bodies, even clinging
occasionally to an animal’s body, busily pulling out fur from the loose
winter coat. The kangaroos never raise the least objection. It is strange,
but this bird has never been seen to approach the grey kangaroo for like
favors, although that species was close at hand.


The quail has the habit of ending its short flight in a bush. When
travelling in the backblocks many years ago, I had with me a dog
which found its living along the trail by watching their flight, and leap-
ing upon the bush with spread feet, crushing the branches down on the
birds. He thus secured an abundance of food of good quality.
Old residents here speak of the finding of the mound of a pair
of mallee-fowl which contained eggs; these birds would probably be
refugees from the scrubby plains, as I can find no indication of this
scrub having been a regular habitat of birds which always prefer the
dry, light soils of the mallee lands. A considerable number of these
birds have at different times escaped from my keeping, but as no reports
have been received of their having been seen, it is highly probable that
the foxes have secured them all. The curlew (stone plover), once so
plentiful, is becoming very scarce, and is now seldom seen or heard.
The native turkey, formerly plentiful along the foothills, has long been
a thing of the past; and of the emu, which in olden times feasted on the
abundance of native currants in their season, no sign is left but fragments
of the shells of their eggs (remnants of former native feasts), found in the
ashes of camp fires.
A PLEA.
I cannot understand why our people should be so indifferent to the
fate that is befalling so much of Australia’s wonderful wild life. We still
have a chance of saving the emu on the far end of Yorke’s Peninsula.
Why is it not done? We have frequently urged that a sanctuary should
be declared for this remnant of bird life that lingers so near to Ade-
laide. Of course, it is possible it may even now be too late. Awake,
you Nature lovers and true Australians! Let us keep something of “Old
Australia” about us; and, for the enjoyment of posterity, let us foster
an Australian sentiment and conscience, which have been lacking so long.
It is poor patriotism that destroys its own country.
EAGLES, CROWS, AND HAWKS.
We still have a few examples of that noble bird, the wedge-tailed
eagle. The mallee-fowl quickly informs us of its presence, when we
might find it as a speck among the clouds. Suddenly it sweeps overhead,
with a broken branch in its talons, to add to the massive structure it is
building in a tall gum not far away. Always dignified and courtly, these
eagles put me in mind of the knights of old. I know from past experi-
ence that they are frequently blamed for the kills made by dingoes, tame
dogs, and foxes, for they are not above feasting on the meat others have
killed. Admitted they sometimes show a weakness for turkey, or take a
stray, weak lamb, they more than make good among the rabbits.
Of hawks, I notice the brown, and, more rarely, the sparrow-hawk;
also, occasionally, the kite. Birds of the crow tribe are not often seen
here, except when the Turkey figs are ripe; then the hazel-eyed crow puts
in an appearance. It seems there are good and bad crows; or were they


ravens? Whatever they were, I shall never forget two of the black rivals
that invited themselves to the funereal march of myself and mate when
in difficulties on an outback track. All day they followed our faltering
steps, ever shepherding us, and stopping when we stopped; always their
black shadows spurred us on, keeping just out of reach in the shade of
a bush, while the evil shadows would flick across our faces.
Their occasional “Gwah! gwah!” sounded like “Die-herah”; but we
turned it into “Die hard, hard, hard!” and disappointed Brother Stiggins
and his mate by making good. But I can never forget those hovering
black pinions that goaded us on. Perhaps the feeling should be one of
gratitude instead of abhorrence.
FEOGMOUTHS AND OWLS.
Among the quaint and very useful birds that Nature employs on
the night shift, that droll-looking customer, the frogmouth, holds a pro-
minent place. Many people erroneously call this bird the “mopoke.” I
have kept it as a pet, uncaged; and a most amusing and affectionate pet
it became. This bird’s call in no way resembles the note of the
“mopoke.” and could be heard only a short distance away. The night
jars and the smaller owls are very largely Nature’s check on the injurious
wood-borers, the moths and beetles of which fly by night, and form the
chief food of these nocturnal guardians of the forests.
Beside the frogmouth, we have the owlet night-jar. It is said that
and spotted night-jar is also here; but, though I know the bird, I have
never seen it here. It is more frequently seen in the dry mallee lands.
The frogmouth is found in both classes of country.
The pretty little boobook owl, the inventor of the mopoke call
familiar to all dwellers in our timber lands, is becoming rare in our
locality. Frequent forest fires, and consequent destruction of hollow
trees, may partly account for this. The bird, in its low hawking over
bushes, frequently comes to grief in the barb-wire fences erected in
recent years. Their far-reaching call, coming across the shadowy timber
lands at night, is soothing and pleasant to the lonely traveller camping
in the bush.
A pair of delicate owls have for some years nested in an adjacent
gully. I have not heard the voice of the powerful owl for some years;
and I think this bird may probably have found the poison baits laid for
foxes. These aerial workers of the night are assisted by that small flying
mammal, the bat (flutter-mouse of the Old Country), a most useful
creature in the suppression of insect pests. Valuable co-operation is
rendered by the ground workers, such as small mammals, birds (e.g., the
curlew), and lizards (gekko, etc.). These take up the labor of the day-
workers, and carry it on through the night; for while the seasons come
and go this work must never cease. “The breezy call of incense breathing


dawn” is the signal for the changing of the guard. Only thus can the
swiftly multiplying forms of insect life be kept within bounds, and the
balance remain true.
In these days we hear a good deal about different light rays that
have been discovered. Now it is possible to hold the handles of a plough,
do good work, and still exercise the brain while turning over the brown
soil which, like Pandora’s box, is full of treasure. Working thus among
the fruit trees, with furrow after furrow falling rhythmically into place,
one thinks of the ever-recurring miracle of spring, which out .of this same
brown soil brings life’s renewal, with all its magic gifts.
Nature peeps over the garden fence, the beautiful fresh colors of
Spring clothe hill and dale, which the sun’s rays turn to a golden yellow,
the touch of which awakens the joy of life. It reaches its zenith in the
later spring—the time of Flora’s carnival; this is what I call “the joy
ray.” It is the smile of kindly Nature, full of hope and promise—hope
with the promise of lavish fulfilment; by her magic working in the brown
earth, “dust to dust” becomes “life to life.” Yes, we who work and walk
under the open sky are given many privileges, for we get glimpses of the
wheels that work within wheels to the measure of the sweet song of God’s
creation; apart from man’s egotism, Nature is a kindly teacher.
THE BIRD VISITORS.
To-day, as the bees object to the near presence of the horse, I take
the spade and dig among the fruit trees, some of which are in the first
flush of bloom. In all is a strong revival and bursting of bonds, for
they have awakened to the touch of “the joy ray,” Nature’s magic wand.
I turn under the rank growth of grass and thistle; these, though they die,
will not have lived in vain, for Nature will, in her laboratory, so change
their substance that it shall enrich other life.
Nature’s tables are now so lavishly spread that I miss my usual
retinue of feathered friends. Occasionally a little grey bird (Peter
Peter) hops in dangerous proximity to the spade, secures a fat grub,
and flies away to its nest; it returns to a point of vantage on a branch
nearby. Our visitors at the house are fewer in number, and their
pathetic eyes no longer watch anxiously for the crumbs from the table.
Many young birds have already left their nests, fluttering or sitting about
on low branches to watch their busy parents. The babblers are getting
ready for a second family, while the tree creepers have laid again in the
same old hollow spout. The blue wrens, however, have met with tragedy,
a sneaking feline having torn their nest to pieces and devoured their
young during the night; the pitiful wreckage of their home hangs in
shreds from the passion vine near the house. Sonny has discovered
where the brown song-lark is building in the long grass, in a portion
of the garden not yet dug; also a honeyeater’s nest in one of the goose


berry bushes, and a grey bird’s nest in a plum tree near the house. We
can see the last-mentioned bird from the window as she patiently sits
upon her eggs.
This morning, as I passed the mound of the mallee-fowl, I watched
two busy birds opening the mound for the reception of another egg.
They were talking to each other in low tones as they carefully removed
the material from around a number of eggs already there. Happily and
contentedly they labored. They have now laid five eggs, and it is their
seventh year of breeding in captivity. Adjoining them, a second pair
are busy constructing a mound. They are young, and, so far, their work
is not so neat as that of their more-experienced neighbors. Both pairs
seem to protest at the proximity as an encroachment on their privacy,
for the law of the mallee lands allows at least two hundred yards clear
between neighbors.
PECTORAL RAILS, HERONS, AND CRANES.
The clear, resonant call of the spurwing plover sometimes awakens
the echoes around the old dam. Among the occasional visitors to this
part is the pectoral rail, a very handsome bird. We have had them
become very tame, though by nature they are shy and retiring. They
frequent the rush-grown, swampy flats, living upon insect life. When
running, they have a peculiar stooping gait.
Of herons, we have the white-fronted blue crane, which nests with
us, though generally choosing the more open country for this purpose.
The white-necked variety has been frequently noted this spring; and
at rare intervals we have heard the voice -of the night heron on the shores
of the big dam. As previously mentioned, a large heronry was in former
years to be seen in the swamp ti-tree of Hindmarsh Island, not far from
the Murray mouth.
The Australian white egret (white crane) has been recorded here
on several occasions. The beautiful snow-white plumage of this bird is
most conspicuous, and all too frequently attracts the gunner’s eye; it is
ruthlessly shot for its plumes. Some time ago word was received that
there was a white crane at the Sanctuary dam. “Why not take the gun
and shoot it?” said the message. “The plumes of this bird are worth
20/—.” This, alas, is the all too common viewpoint from which man
chooses to look at the wonders of creation. Man, who has sold his
birthright, sees not beauty and use, but looks with greedy eyes for cash
value, and for this he will sacrifice, on the altar of Mammon, the glory
of creation.
In Leach’s book of Australian birds it is placed on record that at
one day’s sale in London, on 4th August, 1909, the breeding plumes of
24,000 of these birds were offered for sale, meaning the slow starvation
of at least 40,000 nestlings—in all, the death of 64,000 birds, which
provided the plumes for one day’s sale! This butchery was prompted


solely by the vanity of the fair sex —and the lust of gain. The beautiful
white crane, seen as it silently stalks its prey along a rush-grown shore,
with a background of the blue waters of a lagoon, is a picture-poem to
be remembered. It has much decreased in numbers latterly, and strenu-
ous effort should be made to save it from extinction.
A BLESSED HAVEN.
The white-headed stilt has been recently noted here, which was rest-
ing en route for other parts. The Sanctuary is a blessing much appre-
ciated by birds of passage. Birds of many species come and go; but
one, a black duck, having found a mate among the permanent denizens
of the place, has stayed with us, and is now nesting in the reeds.
Our most frequent visitors are the black duck and teal. White-eyed
duck come occasionally; mountain duck and wood duck are rare visitors
now, though at one time they were not infrequent. We have had ducks
that were strangers to this State, and that we failed to identify. The
black swan visits here at times; water hens and toorie also; a few of
these black-tailed native hens are here at the present time, their advent
being largely due to drought in their far-away haunts, which drives them
to seek pasturage in the more favored districts. Of the grebe, we get
the hoary-headed and the black-throated varieties. The last-named pro-
vided an interesting study when it nested here for two seasons. This led
to the discovery that the young, when first hatched, are carried about
attached to the female parent’s body, and that all are fed by the
male until they are strong enough to swim free. A full account of this
is given in my little book, “Nature—Our Mother.”
“ THE WAY OF THE WIND IS A STRANGE, WILD WAY.”
It is a dull, grey day, with a strong southerly breeze touching the
strings of Flora’s harps; the tall gum saplings and sheoaks have awaken-
ed from their silence and joined in Nature’s chorus. A lighter patch in
the sky shows where the sun lies hidden. A few scattered drops of rain
are falling, and bird songs are more subdued and less sustained. But,
in spite of the cold, grey day, the happy mirth-inspiring laugh of the
kookaburra echoes along the gully. Jack is ever an optimist, and his
voice is in strong contrast to the solemn booming notes of the mallee
cocks, which are vieing with each other in the production of sounds that
are more fitting to Nature’s present mood.
Just by the window a young tree-creeper flies on to the bole of a
tree, and wipes its yellow-fringed bill on the rough bark. Its parents
are busy with a second brood, so this young one spends its time around
the house, where it picks up an easy living, making itself pretty much
BIRD CO-WORKERS.
The brown song lark’s nest in the long grass at the end of the
garden now- contains two eggs, and Sonny reports the hatching of the


bearded honey-eaters in the gooseberry bush, and of the hooded robins
in the plum tree. We sometimes note the little grey female, while some-
times Mr. White Waistcoat (as the children call the male) takes a turn
at sitting on the eggs. Their bright eyes watch us as we pass close by,
but they trust us, and do not mind our presence.
In writing of the bird life of Humbug Scrub, I have omitted the
more unfamiliar forms—the shy, retiring lovers of the dense thickets,
and some of the unidentified honey-eaters. That bird life is usually
plentiful around our homestead is largely due to the protection given
them, there can be no doubt. Moreover, that thirty odd cases of apples,
used in one season by the family, failed to disclose a single codlin
moth, was owing to the presence of these birds, can also hardly be
doubted. They are better than all the poison sprays, and safer for the
consumer of fruit.
It is good to wake from refreshing sleep to the sweet songs of the
birds—“ Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet, with charm of
earliest birds”—and to hearken to their music through the labor of the
day. Cheery company and good neighbors are these quaint little bush
folk, and well do they deserve a place in human affections.
REPTILIA.
The humbler reptilian forms of life are said to be akin to the birds
in structural arrangement; and it is said that birds have descended from
them. In the earth’s strata these forms pre-date those of bird life, while
the intermediate forms are those of flying reptiles. It is noteworthy that
the mound-building birds still retain the reptilian characteristic of bury-
ing their eggs, but with the improvement that they first prepare a hotbed
to ensure the required warmth, and intelligently regulate its temperature.
It is one of the mysteries of nature that these true birds should have
shown such a wide departure from the usual habit of incubation by body
heat. As valuable links with the early history of life on this planet,
these birds are worthy of every effort of perpetuation. Our special State
charge should be the mallee fowl. That this bird can be saved is proved
by experiments carried over a series of years by myself; I have proved
that all the species can be saved.
LIZARDS.
The. goanna, or gohanna, was plentiful at one time, but is now
seldom seen; this is probably due to the fox’s presence. The goanna is
one of the largest of our lizards, quick-witted, active, and sometimes
pugnacious, for I have known them turn and show fight when they were
molested. Our boys have had many a laugh at the doughty fight they
put up with an old hat. It was often with difficulty that the article was
secured again, for when they grip they hold with the tenacity of a
bulldog. In lonely bush camps the advent of a goanna is often welcome


as a break in the monotony of existence. Its first appearance is as a
scavenger, a picker up of trifles; but it soon becomes tame, and knows
when a meal is due. That it is a good rabbiter I first learned when
travelling over a dusty northern track. About a hundred yards in
advance I saw a flash of movement, a whirl of dust; then I heard a
squeal, and, hurrying up, I found “Mr. Go” clearing out with a full-
grown rabbit, which he had already killed. Later I frequently witnessed
their prowess in this line. The goanna, though useful within bounds,
when in large numbers becomes a menace to bird life. This is especially
noticeable on Kangaroo Island, where they are exceedingly numerous,
and have repeatedly been seen climbing trees and robbin" nests. I can
but think that in a place like Flinders Chase some check rn their numbers
will be needed. In size, the goanna rarely exceeds 3 ft. 6 in. in length.
It buries its eggs in tbe soil, where they hatch by the warmth of the sun,
particular care being taken to disguise the spot by remo' *1 of all signs.
The well-known frilled and the harmless stump-ta*. d lizards will
not need much comment. They are useful in their place but too often
fall victims to the cruelty that seems inherent in mankind. “Oh, it is
excellent to have a giant’s strength; but it is tyrannous to use it like a
giant.”
LIZARDS AS PETS.
The barred lizard has been met with but rarely. The water lizard
has been a favorite with our children since a pair took up their quarters
in our roof. They multiplied until there were lizards in all stages of
growth. They held race meetings over the ceiling, sometimes scaring the
womenfolk, sometimes spoiling the cream by drowning in a milk dish in
the dairy. They always kept the house clean of centipedes and scorpions,
which in timber lands are no uncommon visitors. Often they would
climb down the walls and take food from the hand. Then came their
doom by the advent of a rat, which, before it was secured, devoured all
the children’s pet lizards.
Passing over the several small, to us unknown, species, we come to
the gekko, a night feeder, with large eyes, that will boldly face an aggres-
sor. They are useful, and quite harmless, though ignorant people have
given them the name of wood adder, and kill them at sight. In doing
this, they destroy not an enemy, but a good friend.
To recall the stump lizard, I would mention that this was a favorite
with our children. Easily tamed, it soon lost the habit of threatening
to bite, and would eat whatever was offered. The natural food seems to
be largely the flowers of various plants. Our children, hearing that a
neighbor was going to “burn off,” proceeded to remove all the stumpy
tails from his land that they could find, placing all they rescued from
impending fate in my garden, where one day I found a crowd of them
busily pulling the flowers from the marrow plants. The children had
thrown Nature out of balance, and I had to enter a protest.


YELLOW-FOOTED POUCHED MICE, HUMBUG SCRUB


A FLOCK OF CAPE BARREN GEESE GRAZING IN A PADDOCK-RESERVE, HUMBUG SCRUB


Two peculiar lizards remain, that are worthy of mention, both of
which are frequently taken to be snakes. These are the flapper snake,
so called from its having a pair of well-concealed embryonic legs, and
the subterranean or ground snake, found in the debris of rotten logs.
“ When I was one and twenty,
I heard a wise man say:
Give crowns and pounds and guineas,
But not your heart away.”
It has been said that snakes have legs which they put out when
thrown on to a fire. This superstition has its origin in a snake-like lizard
which our children call the flapper snake. It is perfectly harmless, and
reaches a length of about sixteen inches; it has a pair of flapper-tike
appendages, not easily seen when at rest, which occupy the place of a
lizard’s hind legs.
Another curious reptile is the subterranean snake-lizard, which spends
its life underground, and is generally found under decaying logs and
stumps. Like the former species, it is quite harmless. I am sorry to
say that both these little creatures fall victims to man’s ignorance, who,
by slaying them, kills his good friends.
SNAKES.
Of true snakes our numbers seem to be confined to two varieties—
the brown and the black. The death adder, said at one time to have
been common, seems now to have disappeared. Needless to say, its dis-
appearance is not regretted. Of our two snakes, I believe the brown is
decidedly dangerous; but my experience of the black snake is that,
though venomous, it is not usually fatal. The danger from snakes in
Australia is not great, as, with the exception of the tiger and copperhead
varieties, they will endeavor to get out of the road of their arch enemy,
man. If we compare the number of deaths from snakebite in Australia
with those from the same cause in India, we have reason to congratulate
ourselves. The black snake brings forth its young alive, and is quite
at home in the water, where it is an expert fisher among the small fry.
It delights in rocky pools, where the mud fish and scalys abound; but
the brown snake hunts further afield. Both prey upon small birds, mice,
frogs, and other small life forms, and they no doubt serve some useful
purpose in Nature’s scheme. I do not molest them unless near human
habitations. I have known both species to reach a length of eight feet,
but this is not usual; normally they run from 4 ft. 6 in. to 5 ft. 6 in.
in length.
ABOUT FROGS.
Several species of frogs inhabit the forest lands. Of these the tree
frog is especially interesting, its toes having a particular sucker-like


adaptation, which enables it to hunt its prey among the branches and
loose bark. Hopping from branch to branch, it hunts its food at night,
choosing for its habitat trees that border water courses and swamps. The
strange transitions or metamorphoses, through which the young of the
frog, toad, and newt pass ere they reach the perfect form, is one of the
wonders of Nature. With the higher life forms, such as placental
mammals, somewhat similar evolutionary processes predate birth. It is
maintained by some authorities that each stage of this evolutionary pro-
cess represents its total at some earlier period; that thus, step by step,
life advances from the simple to the complex.
It is said that a certain newt-like creature, inhabiting South America,
after passing through certain fish-like stages of existence, in its final
and perfect stage becomes a land dweller; but the last and perfect stage
is only evolved where the land conditions are favorable. Should desert
surround its watery home the evolutionary process is checked, and the
newt retains the form best adapted for continuing its life in that element.
So different is the structural appearance of these two phases of evolution
that they were long regarded as separate and distinct species. Strange to
say, though so different in form and haunt, each is perfect, and carries
out its life’s cycle, the higher form returning to the water to deposit its
eggs, which will develop according to environment.
MORE PROTECTION NEEDED.
In concluding this paper upon the wild life of Humbug Scrub, I
would like to point out that it is just written from a Nature Lover’s point
of view, and does not pretend to be an exhaustive treatise on the matters
dealt with. That many forms of our fauna are all too quickly disap-
pearing is very evident, the causes being man’s destructiveness, the intro-
duction of alien pests, and curtailment of scrub areas. The most valuable
asset of any country is its native, insectivorous bird life, and much could
be done by providing shelters and shrubberies. Trees alone are not
sufficient cover. We Australians are likely to regret the reliance we
place in poisons to do the work that birds are best fitted to do. Every
orchard and field should have its army of feathered workers enjoying
the protection of land owners and humanity at large. They give us their
work, and they cheer our lives with their joyous songs. These cheery
little optimists teach us many useful and beautiful lessons.


The Age of toe E
QUAINT NATIVE CUSTOMS.
IT was early October, and the reasons of my going were various—cer-
tain questions having to do with the early history of the River Murray
tribes, Nature study, the call or lure of the wide lagoons, and a sort
of home sickness. Super-civilised man loves the comfortable furnishings
of his little home, which is circumscribed by the boundary of his allot-
ment, but each room of the Nature man’s house extends to the skyline.
It was 5 a.m. when I left, with just the absolute necessaries of the road,
not forgetting a small camera. The hills were still green, and the morn-
ing cool and pleasant; the scrub was sweet with blossom, and resounding
to the voices of its feathered denizens; and, as I w'alked through the
forest, white-winged choughs sent shrill warning calls ahead, making my
presence known far and wide. A grey giant kangaroo left the covering
bushes and bounded away through the timber. The ringing notes of a
bell magpie echoed sweetly down a rocky gully; graucalus, cuckoos, and
regents were seen and heard amid the over-arching branches; sweet
music came from near and far, faint answering echoes from distant
gullies. ■ “Sweetest melodies are those that are by distance made more
sweet.”
ON THE WAY TO EXPLORATION.
Six-thirty saw me at the intersection of the Kersbrook track—a dis-
tance of five miles, where I was to meet a team bound for the coach
line. This track is a little-used byway that crosses the northern slope
of Mount Gawler, giving a fine panoramic view of primeval bushland
that still shelters a few fine specimens of the grey kangaroo. ’Tis a
favorite spot with me —mile on mile of wooded hill and dale, with not
a roof in sight.
Later I hear a human voice that blends with the rattle of wheels; the
song stops, and there comes a coo-ee, for the driver expects to find me
hereabouts. Getting down from the high range rve twice have to tie a
wheel. Chain of Ponds is reached, and we are soon speeding by coach
through the long sweeps of hill and dale. It wms like meeting old friends
to pass under the friendly shade of oak, elm, and hawthorn that form
such a fine avenue along the frontage of the late Captain Randell’s estate.
Ruins of old homesteads are passed, some just a heap of stones, and
the remains of a garden fence. Memory rebuilds them, and brings back
the faces I knew of yore. In one spot even the spring that ran through
the garden has dried up.
Passing through a rock-ribbed and boulder-strewn land, where the
melancholy sheoak harps weird songs of tragedy to every passing breeze,


we behold the flats, a portion of the Murray cliffs, a long, white ribbon
of limestone road, and a few patches of dark color, the last of the exten-
sive mallee scrub. Here and there are patches of light color—the coming
Sahara.
We race down a long gully between bare hills, where once the grass
trees drew their fairy circles and held their honeyed plumes stiffly to the
breeze, and the sweet smell of the silver wattle scented the summer air.
Passing an old-time camp, to which these memories belong, we rattle into
the township of Palmer. Retrospection reclothes these flats in the solid,
sombre green of the mallee and the red of ripening peaches (quondongs),
also the mound of the mallee fowl, innumerable wallaby, fleet kangaroo,
and stately emu. We pass the place where rest the bones of Sara, the old
grey horse, that dragged us out of the drought-stricken north to land us
in the drought-stricken south.
NATURE’S SUBMARINE.
Yonder sandy rise hides the site of an old camp near which I found
my first mound of the mallee fowl. I left the coach at the edge of the
River valley. Hine’s Swamp, now Cowirra, on the opposite side of
the valley, was dry, with the exception of a narrow silver streak just
under the cliff. The channel is about three hundred yards in width at
this point. Later I rowed across the river, climbed the cliff and the
rising ground to the ridge, wading through drift where once the silver
bush and sandalwood clothed the soil. The ridge was now bare of pines,
as was the slope beyond. I followed a track that led down to a dry
lake bed, and, turning to the left past an old native camp, I crossed
the dry lagoon near the lignum point of my duck-shooting days.
As the day waned, I entered the camp of some reclamation -workers.
It was tea time. Lined up against the tent was a regiment of seagulls
patiently awaiting the scraps from the tables. This spoke w’ell for the
humanity of the men.
I crossed the river by the store boat, and spent the night with friends.
Here a small swamp, still in its natural state, was the rendezvous for
many of the -water fowl that had been driven by man from their originally
wide domain; to them it was a veritable oasis.
With the coming day, my kindly host put his time and boat at my
disposal, and we pulled several miles down stream. I was told there
was a strange bird at this locality. After some search, we caught sight
of our quest by some willows; it was, as I had suspected, a darter.
Never plentiful, it has now become quite a rarity. It is one of Nature’s
submarines, for it has the power to swim with body submerged; its head
and long neck then strongly remind one of a periscope. According to
“Leach’s Book of Birds,” the species is widely distributed, and is known
in America as the “water turkey.” It is said to use its beak as a stiletto
in spearing fish.


KITCHEN MIDDENS.
Crossing this river, we retraced our steps under the cliffs, landed,
and examined skeletons of two aborigines, which had been recently ex-
posed by flood waters in the rough cliff debris. It is probable that at
the time of their burial the surface extended a considerable distance out-
ward from these broken cliff masses. Here I left my friend, and
followed the cliff until I reached what, in the old days, was known as
Baker’s Lagoon. Then, climbing the cliff, I struck an old camp, at
which two of us arrived in the dusk of evening, tired and travel-worn,
just thirty-five years ago. We had then walked nearly three hundred
miles. Floods and desert lands had lain in our course, and that night
the old shepherd’s hut had been our camp. This afternoon, as a grey-
headed man, I travel the same way, lamenting the loss of its former
beauty, its growing sordidness, and its dead and dying gums.
Presently I reach the scene of the first big sand-drift, where an early
settler had cleared the pine forest, and liberated the demon which Nature
had chained. The light soil, exposed to the wind, fretted away until the
whole of the holding became a howling waste; the secret the forest had
hidden for ages came to light. The site was an old native encampment;
it had scores of ovens, with accompanying heaps of mussel shells. Inter-
spersed among them were many skeletons of the dead. No information
could be gained from the oldest natives in reference to the encampment;
but Nature, a genuine philosopher, said it was not known to the tribe
“until white fellow made the ground go away.”
Several features pointed to the fact that this encampment was very
ancient —that, in fact, it belonged to a period when the river bed occupied
a much higher level than at the present day. Ovens which belonged to
the more recent periods were visible on the surface; they are erroneously
spoken of as “tumuli,” when actually they are “kitchen middens.”
EVIDENTLY TWO PERIODS REPRESENTED.
Then, again, all the visible recent middens are within easy reach
of the present river level; while the height and distance of this encamp-
ment from the present level preclude the possibility of shell-fish and
water having been carried this unnecessary distance. One noticeable
difference between the older and the more recent middens is that, whereas
the mussel-shells of the recent are mingled with the mass, those of the
older era are lying in a separate heap, quite apart from the oven. Judg-
ing from the great accumulation of shells, the mussel must have been
a staple article of diet during the early period.
The extreme rarity of stone implements at these sites would suggest
that other materials, such as bone and shell, were used by these river
tribes. A close search yielded one flint knife; a previous examination
of the ground gave similar result. In considering the question of the


numerous aboriginal remains found scattered among these middens, and
the known burial customs of the natives, who, so far as I knew them,
never buried their dead within the precincts of a camp, all go to prove
that these skeletons belong to a more recent period than that of the
middens. The skeletons, when first exposed, seem to have been remark-
ably well preserved; it is possible, too, that the dead of the earlier period
lie still further -out, or that they were disposed of in a similar manner
to that carried out by the Lake natives. The last mentioned method was
to place the mummified bodies on platforms built in low trees. Drifts
of sand regularly expose native skeletons and skulls. A few straggling
plants of rye show that futile attempts have at times been made to hold
the sand of these drifts.
Of the -old settler’s hut little remained; but memory recalled that
it was the furthest point reached on our two days’ honeymoon. Here the
wife and I cooked and enjoyed a supper of the game then so abundant
in the lagoon below. The evening was full of the music of the swans
and myriad water fowl. Near the crumbling ruin I counted, within half
a chain, eleven native graves, each well defined by its cluster of bones.
In the undisturbed graves that I have examined, the skeleton was
always in a squatting position; and there have generally been traces of
charcoal above the bones. The bodies being placed in this position, the
disintegration of the soil by wind naturally exposes the skull first, and
this would account for the fragmentary condition noticeable.
I do not know if it is widely understood, but away up on the higher
ground, at varying distances from the river, there are to be found
evidences of a very ancient river bank, that held back the waters prior
to the cutting of the present deep valley bed. Assuming that Australia
was then inhabited, it is along this strip that search should be made for
signs of man’s presence.
With reference to the large numbers of aboriginal remains that on
occasions have been unearthed in the sandy soils of the Murray valley,
I have been amused at the frequency of the remark that a plague must
have accounted for such numbers. Even some of our scientists have lent
an ear to this theory. People forget that this vast burial ground of the
river tribes had been in use for thousands of years; they forget that, as
the camps of the living kept to the river side, it was only natural that
they should there bury their dead, and be lying in their thousands. They
also forget that those dry, saline, sandy soils keep such remains in good
preservation for a long period of time. We cannot doubt that the river
carried a large population; old Natune told me that when he was a
young man “so many blackfellows live alonga Murray that no grass
grows” on their many tracks, which followed the shores of lagoon and
river.
PICTURES OF THE PAST.
Parts of the big drifts show curious lime formations that have much
the appearance of petrified tree stumps. The whole of this desolate scene


was eloquent of the past, and one could picture the periodical visits of
the tribe to the great camping ground, a fleet of bark canoes coming
through the reedy swamp, bringing home fires, smouldering on the clay
hearth that was plastered on the floor of the frail craft. One could fur-
ther imagine the re-thatching with boughs or reeds of the skeleton frames:
of their old wurlies, the unloading of supplies of fish, game, and mussels,
the preparation of ovens to cook the evening meals, the ever-ready laugh,
the voices of the children, and the noisy screeching of the flock of
cockatoos which watched the landing from cliff and gum, and wheeled
in white battalions above the camp. As ages slip by, the river cuts a
deeper bed, and the wurlies follow the receding shore on to a lower level;
the old camp becomes deserted, and is overgrown with pine and bushes,
and slowly but surely is buried out of sight. Then, from the camps
below, come the mourners with their dead, which they bury in the quiet
recesses amid the pines. And so, unwittingly, the dead lie buried by the
hearths of their ancestors. The fires of the natives now bum in the lower
river valleys.
Somewhere during this period, or just preceding it, with the weather-
ing of the soft cliff-sandstone, rock shelters or cave dwellings came into
use, probably for protection from the rigors of winter. As no caves are
found in this locality, the more recent ovens found here would belong
to summer camps, winter quarters being where they were available. The
depth of ashes found in some of these rock shelters point to very con-
siderable use.
“ LONG NIGHT WATCHES FULL OF VOICES.”
Standing on the site of that ancient camp, saddened at heart, I looked
around. Desolation, yes, but a desolation sadly eloquent of the past,
and a sad reflection on the intelligence of our race. The pine forests
were gone, the long slope laid bare to the wind, even the noble gums
were dead and dying. The tribal owners had vanished into the land
of shadows; the smoke of their fires will never again curl up through
the swaying boughs of the gums by the old lagoon. A few short years
and we have turned an age-long paradise into a desert!
The day was waning as I left the drift and passed the remains of
the old stockyard. Here was the old charcoal camp; here it was that
Jim and I took turns at night watching when the kilns were fired. And
sometimes the gnarled old gums were lit by the ruddy glow from the
bursting kilns. Those long night-watches were full of melody, the soft
purring note of the big nightjar, boobook, curlew', and bittern—night’s
solemn sounds.
I searched for King Jerry’s canoe tree, and found it dead and lying
on the ground, but still showing the handiivork of that swarthy son of
Nature. Then I pass by the houses and weatherboard huts of a soldiers’
settlement, feeling much like a modern Rip Van Winkle as I contrast
the present with the past —the solemn wdiite faces among the smiling


black that used to haunt the shore of this dead lagoon, which, taking its
name from the bend, is called Neeta. The proper sound is Neetha. I
asked a native the meaning of this word, and he, after giving me the
correct pronunciation, said: “My word, plenty growl alonga lagoon.”
To this I replied with the call of the bittern: “Ut boom!” “My word,
yes, that one him; him plenty growl, when sun go way, that black feller
name longa here.” You will remember that the bittern, sometimes called
“mire drum,” or “bull bird,” has a deep booming note, like a ven-
triloquist.
Just beyond the group of dwellings was the site of Old Natune’s
camp. Here I had often sat and listened to the sorrows of a doomed
race, to quaint legends and words of wisdom from one of Nature’s
philosophers.
I look around the wreck of a former fair scene that greed and ignor-
ance of Nature’s laws have made; and I wonder what this new era of
swamp reclamation portends. Would it not have been wiser to have
left these, our richest grazing areas, alone, and to have spent our wealth
in lifting the flood waters on to the light soils of the higher levels? By
so doing we might to some extent have stayed the mischief of the drifting
sand, gained a new and rich territory for closer settlement, and retained
the beauty of the river and the breeding and feeding grounds of our fish
and game.
THE LEGEND OF NOOREELA, THE BLIND RIVER MAKER.
Crossing the now dry inlet to the lake where the black duck used to
feed among the water lilies, I came to the neck, where the bridge of
piles used to be, the crossing having to be made by stepping from the
top of one to the top of another. Not a vestige of these remained; and,
with the exception of fences and ditches, the old lagoon was bare and
brown.
I passed the reclamation camp, and was ferried across the river—
the crooked river of the blind goddess Nooreela, who was the heroine
of an interesting fairy story of these river tribes. The legend was told
at the camp fires, and handed down in the corroboree chants of these
dusky children of Nature:
“ Near the river, with its rushes,
Camping by an old lagoon,
In a wurlie made with gum-boughs,
There I met with Old Natune;
Heard his story of the ages,
Handed down by tribal sages,
Heard the tale of Wurranderra,
And the tale of Noo-ree-la;
How the blind gin, Nooreela,
Two, the piccaninnies with her,
By her magic made the river.


Made the river to the sea;
Made it crooked, very crooked,
All the same like big one snake —
With a lagoon in each elbow;
Made it for her people’s sake;
Plenty “walk about” Noorie.
Make the river big one grow.
River follow crooked track.
All about where Noorie go.
Piccaninnie lead her this way,
Nooreela, she cannot see,
Piccaninnie lead her that way,
That make track like drunken bee.
Some time big one lose ’em track,
This been often, as you see,
Then she walk ’em round and back,
Make ’em track like drunken bee.
Sea go back and river follow
In the steps of Nooreela.
All along there plenty shell
Stick ’em in the sandstone cliff,
Find ’em in the native well.
This make true for you and me.
What was done by Nooreela.”
Note. —With two piccaninnies to lead her, the blind Nooreela, start-
ing out from near Lake Victoria, made, by her magic, a new territory
for her people. The erratic course she followed much increased the
length of the river, to the great benefit of her people in the matter of
their hunting grounds. At a later time came Wurranderra (the abo-
riginal Moses), who, leading forth so many tribes from the north, gave
each of them an inheritance in the new territory, providing instruction
for their guidance. He disappeared when he reached the sea, but pro-
mised he would return at a later period.
THE LEGEND OF WURRANDERRA, THE ABORIGINAL MOSES.
Then this wise man of the tribe,
Having told of Nooreela,
With the wisdom of the sages,
Told them of Wurranderra,
He it was who led them forth,
They, the favored of our ancestors,
From the dry lands of the north,
Into land of running waters,
Beast, and fish, and waterfowl,
Where the river to the sea
Showed the love of Nooreela,


Traced the steps of Nooreela,
Wurranderra set the boundary.
Set the boundaries of each tribe,
Of the man of Yacunka,
Living by the river side,
Yooyoo, Ecrow, and Nauwhich,
Set their boundaries, taught them wisdom,
What to eat, and how to take,
Showed them how their nets to make,
Waddies, boomerangs, and spears.
Gave them bush lore and their laws,
Much cunning, too, to eyes and ears,
And to Nanarooka gave
Sign and symbol full of magic.
Each tribe keeps them in a cave,
Carved or painted on the stone,
Wisdom for the wise alone.
Wisdom passed along the ages,
’Graved on Nature’s stony pages.
UNFORGETTABLE DAYS.
It was Sunday morning, and before making for the road, I spent
some time watching the bird life gathered on this small oasis. The
thought came to me, how much better it would be, in so dry a country
as Australia, if we added to our water areas, instead of diminishing them.
After breakfast, wishing to visit Baker’s Rock, I landed at a spot where
once a flood had caught me encamped with bees. Higher and still higher
it had crept up, until every hive was surrounded with water, until at last
I had all my movables packed on lignum bushes. Making my camp op
the top of a fairly solid bush, for the tent w T as in the water, I anxiously
watched the water level as it rose up the hive legs and passed some of
the entrances. A gale of wind was blowing, and there was no higher
ground within reach: From the opposite cliff back to the far shore of
the lagoon was one sheet of water! My relief was great when the wind
dropped, and the rvater ceased to rise. Further relief came when one
of my boys w'aded along the submerged island with supplies, from ten
miles up stream. We had an al fresco meal on top of the lignums, and
then waded up to the old station to spend the night there.
Near the old station the boat pulls in, and I crossed to the hill and
climbed the cliff, in which the long ridge from the old native camp enos.
As I look toward the old camping ground, a flight of pelican, in orderly
array, with wide-stretched, motionless wings, sails majestically over the
ridge, white and black, a vivid contrast against the blue of the summer
sky. I watched their flight toward a jutting headland at the wide
bedouchure of Sandy Creek. There it w r as that a young girl had been
drowned during a storm; two days passed, but the body was not found.


That night I dreamed that I found it among the clinging water weeds.
In the morning I took up the quest, picking up the local trooper from
the shore en route. For a while we searched in vain, but as we were on
the point of giving up the search, the body rose in the boat’s wake.
GHOSTS OP THE PAST.
On these cliffs, too, drift sand and ovens are plentiful, as are native
skeletons. Here, it is said, the last big battle of contending tribes took
place, the Murrundi blacks and the local tribe meeting in an open space
at the edge of the cliff. Fighting on the brink, some of the wounded
met their death on the rocks below. Before me as I write I have a skull
which came from this spot. It is a well-shaped head of a young
aborigine, showing two holes, which may have been caused by the thrust
of a spear; but they look suspiciously like the passage of a bullet. The
skull is well preserved, and has the appearance of belonging to the
gentler sex.
Looking at the havoc wrought by drifting sand, memory pictures the
time when all this side of the ridge was clothed with silver bush, catseye
bush, and sandalwood. The whole of the silver bush was sacrificed to
man’s greed for the sake of its tannic acid; the sandalwood was destroyed
by the fisherman for the sake of the grubs it contained.
“All was destroyed, and a demon broke free,
For sand overwhelms as the waves of the sea.”
Strange that civilised man takes so long to grasp the importance of
these natural wind-breaks, when such object lessons are continually
before his eyes. As I walked along the cliff, I obesrved that the mountain
duck no longer wheel out from their nests belowp and not a bird was
left of that joyous, screeching battalion of white cockatoos, once-loved
companions of my solitude. The white eagles that had their eerie in
yonder tall gum are but a memory. A last look around, and I retrace
my steps to the boat; a flock of black-tailed native hens are feeding
alone by the rotting remnants of the old pine log fence of the former
horse paddock.
Smoke is curling up among the leafy branches against a background
of willows; lunch is spread under the sentinel gums that have seen the
passing of a race. Truly pleasant was that meal in the open. Then
followed a landing on the other shore, a farew’ell wave of the hand, and
my journey was resumed.
Passing the cliffs, I noticed that the site of my first fishing and
bee camp was occupied by reclamation workers, and on this shore lay
the remains of four pelicans and two cormorants —probably victims of
rifle practice and so-called “sport.” Here it w~as I made the record catch
of a fish that weighed 115 lbs. Quiet days were those pre-railway days
alone by the rotting remnants of the old pine log fence of the former
then in their thousands, filling the days and the nights with sweet wild
music.


A COREOBOEEE.
I pass a dotterel’s nest, with the three camouflaged eggs, on the
bare brown earth; the warning cry of the spurwing plover is heard; a
flock of teal rise at my approach, and settle out among some black duck
and swan. At the head of the lagoon was a patch of nardoo, which
had survived because it was growing within the fence of a lucerne pad-
dock. This recalled the natives, and on memory’s screen was thrown the
weird scene of a corroboree. I had heard it was coming, and knew that
many up-river blacks had been rehearsing the programme. Approaching
unseen in the shelter of the overhanging gums, I caught the gleam of
their fires, near which the squatting lubras were beating time and were
chanting. From the shadows advanced two opposing lines of skeleton-
painted warriors. With spears poised as javelins, they met in mimic
battle, each rhythmic thrust accompanied by a deep throaty sound re-
sembling the challenge of a fighting kangaroo. Hunts were enacted, and
white fellows parodied, to the great amusement of all. Then, in a semi-
cicle, with feet slightly apart, they shook their painted legs like aspens,
the garters of gum sprays tied round their knees emitting quite a volume
of sound from the quick vibration of the leaves.
Those dusky stalwarts, Long Jim and King Jerry, were conspicuous
as masters of ceremony. Unseen, I watched from the shadowed river
the coming and going of their weird forms. Excitement ran high, and
their enjoyment was evidently keen. The old folk, women, and children,
squatting by the fires, joined heartily in the merriment. As I drifted
silently away with the current, their voices followed in chant and laugh-
ter; and overhead, “in full orbid glory, yonder moon divine rolls
through the dark blue depths.”
A START AND A MISHAP.
The scene passes; and where the lucerne now grows there appears
a clump of box gum whose tops, from frequent cutting by the blacks,
have grown thick and bushy. Several wurlies, built with these boughs,
cluster around an old midden. It is at the heat of the day, and the
natives squat about in the shade. Some are carving quaint devices on
their weapons, while the women are busy making rush baskets. Mongrel
yellow dogs lie around panting with the heat, and piccaninnies cool
their plump little brown bodies by frolicking in the water.
Again the scene fades. I wander by the old home, that overlooked
the flat where the emus were wont to water, past the little cottage I
had built, the willows I had planted, and the grave of a little one.
With the setting sun I rested with friends, on the outskirts of the
river town. Here was seen a flock of about two hundred white-eyed duck
peacefully resting on the river. Locally, these were known as widgeon
or hard-heads.
On the Monday, owing to rain, I made a late start, crossed the river,
and found the native hens very numerous. The first flock seen must have


numbered fully two hundred birds, smaller flocks being met with at
regular intervals. I heard no complaints, but fear was expressed that
damage would be done when the hay was stocked.
Tuesday was spent exploring a swamp and a drift on the high
ground. This drift yielded no traces of the natives. The adjacent mallee
was alive with blue birds (masked wood swallow), a nest of the frog-
mouth was seen, also that of the pardalote, containing five eggs. On the
swamp two beautiful egrets were seen; also herons, swan, teal, and a few
spurwings. All indications pointed to a poor breeding season for water
fowl in the locality visited.
Returning to Mannum, I obtained some interesting information from
Mr. F. Cudmore concerning native art in rock shelters, which he had
found during his recent exploration of the Murray cliffs. Known
examples of native art or picture writing being exceedingly rare in
this State, I at once decided to return as soon as possible and inves-
tigate. But with rough roads, furious driving, one wheel in a rut, the
other on an anthill, a few lively impressions, confused sounds, and then
oblivion! I had landed on the bridge of my nose, and damaged my
leg by striking the skid bar. We found the horse and cart about a chain
away in a reversed position, and had to cut the harness to get the tangle
unravelled. Owing to this little episode, further investigation was for
a time delayed.
October 28 saw me again travelling along the scrub track for the
coach line, and not having properly recovered from the effects of the
capsize, I found this twelve-mile journey rather trying, for my outfit was
weighty. Otherwise the bush track was pleasant and interesting. The
coach journey was extremely unpleasant by reason of the dust and heat.
October 30, 6 p.m., the “Nellie” swings out from the wharf, the sun
sinking in a dust-laden sky, and heat almost unbearable. As we head
upstream I sit and watch the banks glide by—here the scene of old
Queen Monarto’s passing, there King Jerry died in the camp by the
willows, there also a white fellow was murdered by one of the blacks,
and the deed related in boastful song to the listening natives ere the body
was cold. As this man had been secretly supplying the natives with
wine, public sympathy was largely influenced in their direction. Now
the site of the old mission camp comes into view, and the graveyard of-
many well-known natives. It was at this mission camp I met that fine
old aboriginal Pantoni, who had come up from the lakes to convert the
Murray blacks. I know he found some pretty hard cases to deal with.
On the left bank a fine row of young gums draw my attention; these
had come up in consequence of seeds having been left there by the
floods of 1890.
IN NATURE’S TEMPLE.
Above the throb of our engine come from some willows the sweet
notes of the reed warblers, and from among the gums the shrill cry of
the whistling eagle. Ducks rise from the steamer’s course, and leisurely


pelicans fish in the shallows, or sit in quiet dignity along the banks.
Herons pass in labored flight en route for their camps; the branches of
a tree are thickly laden with black-and-white cormorants, which merely
stretch their necks to watch the steamer pass.
As the sun sets the tall cliffs stand out in a glory of yellow light
that contrasts with the light greens of willows and swamp, and the
darker shades of sentinel gums that follow the river’s devious course. A
moving panorama that with each bend opens new vistas of loveliness.
Day passes, and the curtains of night softly lower to the trillings of
reed birds that gain resonance in the tall, grey cliffs. With the lengthen-
ing shadows the charm of the river seems to grip more and more. But
to me there always comes a sadness with the peace that belongs to night
on the river. For me each bay and bend is peopled with shadowy forms.
I, who have watched the swift fading away of a race, cannot view these
scenes without regret —a regret that is coupled with shame for the callous
indifference and guilt that belong to our race, that even now begrudges
the granting of their tribal lands to the last of these most interesting
people. Musing thus, I watch the passing scene through a curtain of
falling sparks that comes from the funnel.
The glamor of the moonlight now hides the ugliness of the drifts
and wastes. The hour was late when I curled up on a seat on deck,
and was lulled to sleep by the rhythmic beat of the engine. “Time to get
up! Wongulla just ahead!” I open my eyes to the early dawn. The
boat swings in to a wood pile, where I land. Mails are exchanged, and
the boat chugs her way up stream, while I am left alone on the bank.
Wongulla is still wrapped in slumber, and will be for two or three
hours, so, with chips from the wood pile, I make a fire and get a steam-
ing pot of tea. Half a mile down stream there were some of the age-long
dwellings of the cave men, silent now, the ashes of their fires turned
cold. Already they are monuments of a dead past.
Later I made my way to the post office, where, on making my wants
known to the postmaster, he very kindly sent his lad to pull me down
to the cliff. A fair-sized flock of white cockatoos watched our advent,
giving us vociferous greeting from the higher crags and topmost gum
boughs, the surviving remnants of a former host. A price upon their
heads at seeding time, what chance have these white dwellers of the
rugged cliffs more than had their neighbors of the caves below? Unless
some steps are taken to save this remnant, we shall lose the beauty of
the white battalion.
NATIVE CARVINGS.
After landing, I followed a narrow track at the top of the cliff
debris, and soon found myself among the strange signs and symbols
peculiar to the aborigine. These were visible on the cliff face, and on
the massive broken fragments that had fallen from above. Carved deeply
into the stone, they had withstood the wear of ages. Making a brush of
twigs, I brought into view many strange devices that had lain hidden


under a coating of dust and cobweb. I found two rock shelters, elabor-
ately carved. Much of the work was done in lines of drilled holes, and
others were in continuous carved lines. One peculiarity of these two
caves was the scarcity of animal or reptile representations. This place
was known to the blacks under the name of “Linkilunkli,” and the tribe
as “Nanarooka.” Somewhere along this cliff there is said to be the
image of a six-legged dog, mention of which is made in a legend. That
the native artists of the Murray had chosen the chisel instead of the
brush was, I think, due to the fact that the cliff stone is an unsuitable
medium for the reception of paint. With the exception of a few recent
imitations, the work appears to be of great age.
I think it is reasonable to conclude that these rock shelters have been
eroded by the waters of the Murray at a time when the stream ran at
this level. The caves are picturesquely situated, and command a view
of river and lagoon. Standing at the entrance and viewing the enormous
mass of fallen material, I thought of the tragedy of buried caves —the
thunderous roar of an avalanche, and then eternal darkness. Such a fate
must have befallen some of them in the long past. The floor of the
larger cave was buried under an accumulation of ashes—ashes of the
home fires of the stone age, the home fires of so-called prehistoric man.
How blind we have been to the wonder of it all, and how lightly held
the responsibility that was ours! Standing there in the silence—alas,
the eternal silence—l thought how quickly Australia’s wonderful living
page of the past was becoming a dead page.
THE CAVE DWELLERS' LAST PERIOD.
Before my mind’s eye rises a vision of the past. Smoke wreaths
curl upward, and drift along the roof. Squatting on skins near the fire
are two old men of the tribe, whose hunting days are pretty well over.
They are twisting twine from a heap of chewed fibre placed conveniently
by the gins. In a recess at one end of the cave a yellow dog lies slob-
bering over a litter of sprawling puppies. About the site are strewn a
few simple utensils, rush and fibre bags and baskets, skin sleeping mats,
implements,' and weapons of the chase. The distribution of these articles
along the back wall is suggestive of their varied ownership. The water
vessels were made of bark or human skulls. Several bright-eyed children
play about the cave; one squatting by the fire alternately toasts and
sueks at a bone, her dark eyes following the antics of the others. Lithe,
happy little mortals, with limbs unfettered by clothes, they race toward
a whining puppy that has tumbled off the ledge. One little chap reaches
out for it, the mother rises with a quick snarl and a show of white teeth,
the frightened piccaninnie collides with the next, and both go sprawling
on the floor. A merry laugh echoes through the cave, a gin speaks
sharply to the dog and scolds the children, who now mimic a kangaroo
hunt among the boulders that front the cave. The “quarry” jumps along
with a stick held between the legs for the tail, and mimics the actions


of a real kangaroo. Then, catching sight of an approaching canoe, the
children race down to the lagoon shore. Its occupant, standing erect,
spear poised, follows a line of reeds. Intently he watches. There comes
a swiftly passing shiver of reed stems, a quick thrust in advance of it,
a flash of light from silver scales as a fish is jerked smartly into the
canoe. There are gleeful shouts and clapping of hands from the watch-
ing children; a gin calls from the caves, and points up the lagoon track,
along which four gins come, their rush-bags bulging with roots, berries,
and some early swan eggs, besides which they are bringing in bundles
of rushes. Scarcely have the children reached them when there is more
excitement, for along the narrow cliff track come the hunters from the
uplands, each pair of the four leading men carrying a kangaroo that
is swung from a light pole borne on their shoulders. Behind come others
with smaller game. Others come from the uplands and the swamps, each
party bringing supplies of some kind, for there are many mouths to
feed. All converge on the caves, and, care free, they joke and laugh
over the incidents of the day. They lay their burdens on the rocks that
fringe the long caves, just as the setting sun shines under the brow, and
brings into strong relief the mystic writings on roof and wall.
The scene fades. The cave is empty, the ashes cold, and as I turn
to leave, the shadows fall again around. But the white battalion, on the
crags above, still bask in the light of the setting sun. A few spread their
white pinions and launch forth and wheel in noisy flight, only again
to settle among the yellow sandstone crags.
A RELIC OF NOOREELA.
The lad now arrived with the boat, and kindly rowed me along the
cliff in search of a large fossil bone mentioned by Mr. Cudmore. This
we did not find until the following day. About thirty feet up the cliff
face a portion of this remarkable fossil is exposed to view. Apparently,
nearly two feet are exposed, and from its white appearance I should say
it was a very large shell. The natives call it “Nooree,” and say it is
the remains of a large fish killed and eaten by Nooreela, the river maker,
and her piccaninnies, and that it marks the line of the former water
level. Some attempt should be made to secure this interesting relic
for the Museum. It is quite a conspicuous object, seen from the decks
of passing steamers. This day I also spent some time at the caves, taking
tracings and photographs. A half-caste visted the place and cut out a
swarm of bees; but the only information I could get from him con-
cerned a giddy track by which the natives used to pass up and down
the cliff, which has since been destroyed by a landslip.
At Wongulla I fell in with an old acquaintance, a former keeper
at the Zoo, who kindly placed an old cottage at my service, while he
and his brother were helpful to me in my work. There being no store,
I had to waylay the steamer “Nellie” on her downward trip, and secure
some provisions. On November 31, I took a walk up the old Rhine Creek;


BRONZEWING PIGEON ON NEST, HUMBUG SCRUB


HAIRY NOSED WOMBAT AT THE ENTRANCE OF ITS BURROW, RIVER MURRAY


my last visit there was in 1881. Having no skid, we had to negotiate
the steep bank by dragging a tree behind our caravan. Bird life noticed
along the creek comprised the small crested pigeon, ringneck parrot,
rock pebhler, and a flock of white-winged choughs. While trying to snap
an eagle’s nest, a gust of wind blew the camera over, and smashed it
on the rocks. During the late afternoon, having hound up the broken
camera with string, and travelling light, I left Wongulla for Sunny Dale,
reaching the drift at Devon Downs just before dark. Search in the wind-
scooped hollows revealed a unique upper millstone and the scattered
remains of an aboriginal skeleton. The stone being heavy, I let it
lie, as I intended to return by the same route. I came upon Thomson’s
old homestead in a wilderness of drift; he was a bluff old pioneer, long
since departed.
PELICAN PROFITEERS.
“When the sun’s last rays were fading into twilight soft and dim”
I found myself again ploughing my way through the sand, but soon
struck firmer ground under the cliff. There was no track, but it was
a beautiful moonlight night, so I was able to pick my way among the
boulders and logs. I thought of the tiger snakes when walking in the
frequent shadows of the tall gums, but saw none of these prowlers of
the night. Softly on the listening ear fell the contented notes of feeding
teal and whistling duck; and ever and anon came the sound of wings
as they rose at the sight of me. Sometimes I caught sight of shadowy
forms moving on the quiet waters, and could dimly see the quaint out-
lines of pelicans. Later, I left the water behind, and walked on the
brown cracked mud of the dry swamp, clear of the boulders and the tree
shadows.
At 10.15 I reached Sunny Dale. The place was in darkness, so,
choosing a level place in the sand, sheltered from the moon’s rays by
overhanging limbs of box trees, I spread my sleeping bag. Sand is much
more comfortable than gibbers to lie upon; and I was in just the
right degree of tiredness to “let go” the minute my head was on the
pillow, which was made by folding my coat over my boots. Softly the
night slips by.
I was awakened by a commotion in the waters of a channel close
by, and, raising my head, a most interesting sight met my gaze. Half a
dozen pelicans are shepherding a like number of shags; a shag dives,
and its movements are watched by the nearest pelican, which swims to
the place at which it expects the shag to rise; then, with a rush, it is
upon the shag. It is a question of whether the shag can swallow the
fish before the pelican arrives; if not, the shag delivers its finny prey,
and dives again. The curious part of the whole business was the docility
of the shags, which went on fishing in the vicinity of the pelicans until
disturbed by the yapping of a small terrier upon my approach. I spoke
to the little beggar, and the next moment he was dancing all over me,


as pleased as if he had met an old friend. By this time the pelicans and
shags were sailing down the channel. “Well,” thought I, “this beats all,
and shows how careful man ought to be in not setting bad examples,
for here are even the birds going in for a bit of profiteering.”
AT THE NATIVE CAMP.
Calling at Sunny Dale, I met with a most cordial reception. Break-
fast over, with instructions from my friends as to route, I loaned a boat
and started up the channel. Entering the river, I followed the left bank,
and had a good view of the long cliff on the right. No “white battalions”
bf surphur crests were seen here. The low river banks are badly fretting
away by the wash from the steamers, and through the disappearance of
the protective cover of the original flora. I landed at the junction of
swamp and cliff, found the track, and scaled the giddy height After
striking the telephone line, I eventually found myself in the pretty little
township of Swan Reach.
Here, too, I noticed a transformation, for on my last visit the place
was merely a sheep station. I made enquiry for the old homestead, and
was informed that it had lost its identity in the present hotel. I obtained
the location of the natives’ camp.
Said Ito a pleasant-faced gin: “Where is Old Jinny’s camp?” She
pointed out a wurlie on the river bank, where, indeed, I could see her.
Calling out: “Good day, Jinny; bet you don’t know who’s coming,”
I was surprised at her quick, laughing reply: “My word, Bellchambers;
I know you by your walk.” I found that she had aged considerably, and
was troubled with a nasty cough. She was in charge of her son’s
children, as the men were all away shearing. Many of my old acquaint-
ances had passed into the shadow land. We had much to talk about—
old times and old friends. I had heard at Sunny Dale of more caves
with native art tracings, and Jinny gave me directions where they were
to be found.
As one of her charges, a pretty little girl, was crying, I asked: “Why
piccaninny cry so much?” The reply was: “She bin cry all the time
for new dress.” “What for piccaninny wear clothes? One time picca-
ninny no wear clothes at all.” “They bin get too particular; make um
wear clothes all time now. Shut up, naughty gal! What for make that
row?” With Jinny’s permission I set up the camera, but it took some
coaxing to bring a smile on the little one’s face.
Back at the township, I bought some refreshments, and was speedily
on the road over the uplands, reaching Sunny Dale about 5 p.m. Another
moonlight walk brought me at 10 o’clock to Thomson’s old homestead,
where I made for the river flat, and camped under some box trees.
SECOND SERIES OP ROCK SHELTERS.
The cold turns me out early, and I am glad to get a fire and warm
myself. After breakfast I borrow a boat and cross to the cliffs, where


I speedily become interested in the native art of the second series of
rock shelters. Among the most conspicuous -objects carved on the rocks
here were three representations of the river or mud turtle, the largest
being about 15 inches. There was also a reproduction of what I took
to be the sun. This was a carved circle with twenty-six radii about 15
inches long. On the left of this central figure was a deeply cut disc
about three inches in diameter; about the same distance on the right,
but slightly higher level, were the remains of another disc; while above,
sloping down from right to left, was a row of drilled holes. This group
seemed to have some astronomic significance. There were similar mark-
ings to those of the Linkilunkli caves, including what could be taken for
emu tracks.
The w ork here seemed to belong to the same period. In both series
of caves the carving appears to have been done by a gouging or cutting
process. There is no evidence of the use of a mallet for chipping work;
probably a pointed fragment of quartz crystal was used for gouging and
cutting purposes. Like the caves near Wongulla, this series is situated
at a junction of swamp, river, and cliff. Had time and means permitted,
I should have explored further afield. I returned the hoat, and turned
my attention to the drift visited two days before. I secured the grinding
stone, and while preparing to photograph the skeleton, an elderly man
rode up, whose acquaintance I had made in 1881; the chat that followed
was full of reminiscences.
Somewhat embarrassed by the extra w r eight, I resumed my journey,
striking the cliff not far from the old Rhine Creek. Wongulla was
reached that afternoon.
On the sth, the postmaster gave me the opportunity of viewing a
few tracings on the cliff face by rowing me down before the arrival of
the steamer, by which I was that day leaving a locality full of interest to
the Nature student.
BY REED AND RIVER.
There is no lack of interest in a trip along the Murray —the rugged
grandeur of the beetling cliffs, the beauty of the bends and long reaches,
with their drooping willows and waving reeds, the poetry and pathos of
the reed-bird’s song, the life and movement given by the water-fowl, the
pelicans soaring high in the blue or sitting with dignified mien along the
banks. The new and better regime that is fast replacing the past era
of cruel and wanton massacre is already bearing fruit in the noticeable
tameness of the Murray birds.
Our boat stops frequently while fishermen (whose camps we pass)
pull alongside in midstream with their consignments of fish. Then come
the lengthening shadows, with the beauty of the sunset, and at length we
draw into the wharf.
With the morning comes the rattle of the coach over the long white
limestone road, then we climb into “the everlasting hills,” and behold the
bracken, green grass, and golden gorse.


When I leave the coach and tread the long green aisles of the forest
it is hot, and I often rest by the way. From the stringybarks comes the
sweet, full song of the rufus whistler, with the occasional ringing notes
of the bell-magpie, and Nature’s incense of sweet sounds ascends as a
thanks offering to the Creator and Giver of all good.
Again I move on, and enter the blackened zone of a recent bush
fire. I pass a small oasis that the sea of fire has left untouched, on
which three grey kangaroos are feeding. They sit erect, and question
my presence with innocent eyes, then leap away among the charred tree
trunks. One mile, two miles, and then I break clear of the fire-blackened
trees.
The evening comes cool and pleasant, and the miles slip more quickly
from under my feet. A kookaburra laughs, and the blue wrens twitter
in the bushes; again the laugh of the kookaburra in a last good-night.
A solitary kangaroo bounds from the path, then there is silence save
for the rustle of the wind in the treetops. As I walk in that peacefulness
my thoughts turn back to the caves of the river cliffs, to the people who
had never left the age of stone, the people of a forgotten land, a back-
water in the ocean of time, where strange prehistoric life forms lingered
on. Overlooked, they had drifted down the ages, until we, the destroyers,
had broken in on the peace of the aeons past. No match for the rival
of the twentieth century, they wither and fade from view. Why should
we not save the remnant? Can we not stay the destroying hand of the
superman, that so foolishly sets the higher value on bones and dead
relics of the past, instead of the valuable living types of the bygone ages?
A PLEA FOR RESTITUTION.
We have yet the opportunity to proclaim a wide area in Central
Australia that includes, besides our unique fauna, several tribes of these
people of the Stone Age. We have seized their heritage, debauched their
women, destroyed their laws, and taking their living from them by
destroying their game. Then, to finish the catalogue, we made these,
the genuine lords of the soil, into “wood and water joeys,” slaves to
help us extract the wealth from the land that was theirs. In return we
gave a little tobacco and flour, perhaps a few coins in some cases. Lei
us return something from our stolen wealth. Let us at least be so
generous to those remaining tribes as to give them the land that has
always been theirs, with all that is contained within their natural tribal
boundaries, and surround the reserve by a neutral zone barred to the
white race. If the experiment should fail, the land will still be there,
for they cannot take it with them, and there will be no deterioration.
Perchance the men of the present age of gold will yet reach forth their
hands to save these their brethren of the age of stone from their threatened
doom.
“ The play is done; the curtain drops.
Slow falling to the prompter’s bell,
A moment yet the actor stops.
And looks around to say farewell.”


EXPLANATORY.
It has been claimed by some authorities that evidence has been found
among the aboriginal cave drawings that points to phallic worship. I
have not yet met with drawings of this description, but while admitting it
to be a natural sequence that simple untutored races of mankind will,
when faced by the mystery of creation, turn to the organs of generation
for a solution—hence phallicism—yet, with a people having no written
language, and relying largely on signs and symbols, these pictures may
have quite other significance. In conjunction with other drawings, they
may refer to the birth or parentage of persons, or to the beginning of
something; they may even be the innocent figures of a sign language.
It is not generally known, but the “horseshoe” symbol for luck among
civilised people is a lingering relic of phallic worship. While in all my
writings I endeavor to awaken and keep a living interest in things per-
taining to Nature, I cannot but regret a certain aloofness on the part of
some who have the power to materially forward a valuable movement
which aims at the saving of all surviving ancient life forms found on this
Island Continent.
Nature is looked at and dealt with from two different viewpoints.
On the one side we have the coldly disconnected view of the scientist, on
the other the intense yet searching regard of the true Nature Lover. The
truth does not lie with one, but between the two. Antagonism is a
mistake; by it many truths are lost, and the sense of values distorted;
hence the anomaly of setting a higher value on bones and relics of the
past, while we yet have the far more valuable living types present, that
nevertheless are fast slipping away through culpable neglect.
In reference to the sulphur-crested cockatoo, there will be some
difficulty in saving their beauty, owing to a certain amount of mischief
done by these birds to the farmers. Still, I do not think we are wise
to allow them to be completely exterminated.
ANOTHER VISIT.
The interest attaching to the rock-shelters and drifts of the River
Murray being by no means exhausted, I again set out for those parts on
February 9th, and arrived at Manuka, the station at which, years ago, the
Matthews’ Mission was active. I found only big Bob McKinley still
carrying on, with tidily-kept cottage and irrigated garden, growing toma-
toes, melons, potatoes, grapes, etc.; the place was a credit to him.
I borrowed McKinley’s boat, and put in some hours examining this
end of the cliff. The search revealed many traces of native rock carvings
along its face, but yielded nothing worthy of reproduction. I arrived at
a point under the Nooree fossil, and took a photograph of this interesting
object, but fear the distance from the camera was too great for it to
show plainly. A considerable portion has been chipped away by the
rifle bullets of vandals—an easy matter when one notices from below
that apparently there is a space between the outer white surface and the
inner substance. Considering the question of its removal, I found that
it was impossible to do this from above, by reason of the overhanging


cliff; from below it could be approached by bracing two ladders together
and spiking them to the cliff. Before leaving, I searched the ground
below for the missing parts, but in vain.
I returned to Bob McKinley’s cottage, and spent some time chatting
about old times, for Bob’s wife was a daughter of Old Natune. Crossing
the river, I walked along its bank to Wongulla. Next morning I crossed
the Marne, ascended to the higher ground, and followed the cliff edge.
At two places I noticed tracks of wombat. That animal at one time was
very numerous on this big plain, but evidently is now becoming scarce.
The tracks observed appeared to be those of single individuals. The
species was the hairy-nosed wombat.
Presently a familiar call struck my ear, and, looking below, I saw
three maned geese, or wood duck, in flight down-stream. This bird is
fast following its fellow, the magpie goose, into oblivion, and some effort
should be made to save it from that fate.
A WANING COMMUNITY.
While scanning the plain, my thoughts went back to 1881; it was
then suffering the effects of drought and a rabbit plague. Its surface
was broken by patches of bush land, now only represented by a few
dry sticks and stumps. In these it was that the uncouth wombats had
gambolled in the moonlight; but now, in face of the bare earth, one
wondered what the few survivors were living on; nothing edible was
in sight. I passed numerous, old subterranean “wombat-villages,” but
they had all been filled in, and not one was in use. The two or three
survivors noted had taken to the cliffs.
Not even a rabbit was seen; what life existed was away below in
the river valley. There were ducks of several species in considerable
numbers, driven from inland districts by the drought, and from the lower
river districts by the reclamation of the swamp lands. They were crowd-
ing the fast-evaporating waters of the more secluded places—teal, whist-
ling, black and white-eyed duck. I did not notice any of the handsome
shoveler duck, which in earlier days were plentiful; nor pelicans, so
numerous before.
When near Devon Downs I scrambled down the cliff and entered
the fringe of a drift, visited on my last trip. Here I picked up, from
among the graves, a small stone implement, circular in form, which was
three inches in diameter, and more than an inch in thickness. It seemed
to have done duty as a hammer, and also as a crushing or grinding
implement, probably for the pounding of ochres so commonly used by
the natives. It showed signs of having been used on both the edge and
flat surface. It was noticeable that many of the graves were supported
by five or six large limestone boulders, which, I am inclined to think,
points to the use of a side excavation in which the body was placed,
the stones being used to “wall” up its entrance before filling in the grave.
This I have not yet had time to verify.


THE SMOKE SMUDGE.
I made my way to the cottages on the river flats, and borrowed a
boat to pull down to the rock shelters. Long ages of use by the natives
have left an unmistakable clue to these places in the smoke smudge on
the cliff face. Where smoke welled upward from the full width of the
cave, it would make its presence known to friends and enemies alike,
even though the cave-entrances were covered by fallen boulders and
wild tobacco bushes.
One does not wonder that savage races were inclined to become fire
worshippers; the wonder is that our aborigines, with the care they gave
to their fires, did not become votaries of a Fire God. But, with all their
strange rites and ceremonies, the idea of a god or gods does not seem
to have found a place.
There are three rock shelters at this place, the most important being
the central one. The outer caves are covered with tracings; they face
the river, while the third lies about eighty yards around the cliff. The
last mentioned shows all the signs of long use as a dwelling place, hut
reveals not a trace of the sculptor’s chisel, nor a scratch on its face or
roof. The reason for this Ido not know, but probably it was the camp
of the single women of the tribe, where they would lodge in charge of
some of the older gins. The situation was more private, and overlooked
the swamp-land.
RELICS OF THE PAST.
“ Given an axe, a gun, and a bottle of poison,
The Australian will subdue a continent.
But what is left? Sands and ashes.”
Going back to the central cave, I took notice that this alone carried
•on its face the few elaborate totem signs. Probably it was here that the
wise men of the tribe held their councils; and it was here, also,, that
I, by brushing the accumulated spider-web and dust from the rock,
brought to light another curious emblem, of which I took a tracing. In
this cave some trace of chipping was noticed, as if a mallet had been
used for striking the chisel.
All these caves seem to he formed by the erosion of a soft sandstone
lying beneath a layer of harder material. There is no evidence of any
attempt having been made by the natives to enlarge or otherwise improve
these natural shelters.
I next struck across the low-lying swamp-lands; a few long, shallow
pools showed how limited were the feeding grounds of the ducks, which
rose in large numbers as a couple of shots broke the silence. They
wheeled in confusion; then, in quick succession, came several more
shots. Thereupon the ducks assumed some method in their movements,
and moved off in solid wedge-like masses.
One such phalanx wheeled and settled with a splash on my right.
It consisted of teal; they watched me for a while, then rose in a body


and swept into close formation, to seek a sanctuary elsewhere. Again
Came the echoing shots, as the last moving squadrons of frightened birds
passed high overhead, seeking pastures new.
Soon after came the screech of “the white battalions” (sulphur-
crested cockatoo); and a small flock appeared in the cliffs on each side
pf Hermann’s Landing. In itself, the cry of this bird is harsh and dis-
cordant, but taken in conjunction with its surroundings—the beetling
cliffs, flowing river, blue sky, and the towering gums —it becomes har-
monious, and is rather pleasing to the senses.
FURTHER NATIVE TOUCHES.
Reaching Sunny Dale, I met with a most hearty welcome, but de-
clined the comforts of civilisation, and camped on tbe shore of a billa-
bong in order to study Nature early in the morning.
After breakfast I borrowed a boat from ray friends, and was soon
pulling up the long reach in search of native drawings and dwellings
in the cliffs. At the junction with the next swamp I landed, and searched
for rock shelters, but found no trace. Then I climbed the cliff and
faced the long, hot walk to Swan Reach. Here I crossed the river to
the native camping ground, but was disappointed to again find the men
absent.
At this site, however, I found another step-daughter of Old Natune,
and our talk sped back to the days when that natural philosopher was
living. Her pleasant face lit with smiles at the recalling of old
memories. Upon my arrival a small crowd of happy children, models
of health and stature, were disporting themselves in the water. I regret
that, owing to the unexpected super-sensitive nature of one of the women,
I was not allowed to photograph the group. I find that the health of
these people is in the hands of a doctor living some twenty-five miles
away inland. In cases of sudden, dangerous illness this arrangement
would be anything but satisfactory. I also hear that the natives suffer
certain hardships from having no fishing facilities reserved for them.
This seems strange, in view of the fact that the encampment is practically
permanent.
As the day was hot, I did not leave until the cool of late afternoon,
and when the sun was setting, I struck the steep cliff path leading back
to the boat. The jagged cliffs, the sweeping bend, and timbered
islands were bathed in golden rays as I descended among the broken
crags. I called at the native camp en route, then darkness set in, and
I had difficulty to find the entrance to the billabong.
I found my kindly hostess a little worried at my long absence. I
had a late supper, changed photographic plates, and camped again by
the billabong. In the morning I bade my friends farewell. Alas, in
one case it was a long farewell, for with the coming day he passed to
the great unknown, and we shall see his kindly face no more. He had
given me directions to the steamer landing, and to save delay I took the
mailbag on with me.


THE RIVER’S MENACE.
The arrival of the steamer was announced by a shrill whistle. I
stepped aboard, and we swung downstream. Soon Sunny Dale, with its
pleasant memories, faded from view, but not from mind. Passing a
certain point, I noticed the beautiful effects of a cascade of sand that
poured in a continuous stream of drift from the cliff. Further down
stream we passed a place where the sand had ceased to mimic the beauty
of falling water, and filled up the cliff face to the top; it was flowing
in a wide stream down the slope it had formed. What does this portend
but the eventual silting up of the river bed? That the denudation of
the river lands has been a grievous blunder future generations will learn
to their sorrow.
In a previous paper I referred to the river cutting its valley out
of the old sea bed, and wending its way through more than a hundred
feet of the cliff sandstone, until it meets the vast black clay bed of an
earlier deposit. The latter underlies much of the outback mallee land —
a fact which proves that it cannot be claimed as the result of a silting
up of the present river bed. On account of the deposit underlying the
river, it had been deduced that it was silt belonging to the present river
system; but this is quite wrong and misleading, for there is abundant
proof of a changing river course, and of considerable silting processes.
The different movements lie on or near the surface of the old clay deposit.
HOMEWARD BOUND THROUGH FIRE.
The faces of a number of old friends were seen at some of the land-
ing places; the greetings were hearty. At length we reach Mannum,
where I leave the boat. Sunday is spent with friends. On Monday the
coach leaves Mannum in a raging dust storm, that blots out this land-
scape en route, and fills one’s eyes and nose with grit; it added consider-
ably to the discomfort of travelling by coach.
At Birdwood we had the experience of hearing the alarm whistle of
the mill keeping up a never-ending blast; we knew that the fire demon
was abroad. We looked in vain for smoke, and sniffed the air; then
came the word that the road was in flames just past Gumeracha, where two
tornadoes of flame had met. Could we get through? was the question.
As we near Gumeracha the flames are seen converging on the road,
and on pulling up at the hotel, the question is answered by a much-singed
individual with an aroma of burnt feathers. Pointing to his shrivelled
beard, he said: “Well, yer might; but my horse has his mane singed
off. Still, you might get through, yer know.” However, we had a three-
mile run through a furnace of burning trees and logs, past homesteads
where men were putting out the spouting flames with boughs and buckets
of water. Evidently there had been some lucky “saves.”
The worst time we had was in passing an old sawmill, where a
heap of logs was sending tongues of flame across the road. The heat
was intense, and blistered the coach paint. We had cleared the enemy’s


lines ere we found that he had boarded our coach! Our attention was
attracted by the smell of burning rag. A search revealed a passenger’s
handkerchief smouldering on the seat.
I left the coach at Chain of Ponds, but soon ran into the fire zone
again. The front line had passed, however, and the firing was desultory.
The smoke barrage was at times trying, as was the heat. “Tea and cake
contingents” were met with, but so far I was a non-combatant, and did
not indulge. Away to the left the roar and crackle of the flames were
awe inspiring, and I felt some anxiety because it was racing towards
that part of the scrub where my home was situated. However, a break
caused by a previous fire held it in check, and I was able to outflank it.
Home was reached at 10.30 p.m. I was tired, for I had the weight
of some aboriginal stone implements to carry in addition to my usual
outfit; but I was thankful, indeed, that our homestead had escaped the
dreaded scourge of the bushlands.
GROPING IN A DARKENED PAST.
Though I am back in the old home, and have all the worries of the
twentieth century, my thoughts fly back to my lonely wanderings among
those cave dwellings of men of the stone age. The happy, peaceful
simplicity of their lives always appeals to the imagination; and here
was the absorbing interest of having brought to the light of day the
mysterious dust-laden signs and symbols traced by hands long since
dead, that crumble among the drifting sands of their one-time fail
heritage. Is it any wonder that the heart feels a sorrowful regret at
the passing of this peaceful oasis of the backwaters of time? A regret
that is mingled with a sense of shame, not only for the destruction of
a people, but for the havoc wrought in a short half-century by the
foolish greed of our race, along the fair valley of the Murray and
elsewhere.
“ How full and rich a world
Theirs to inhabit is—
Sweet scent of grass and bloom,
Playmates’ glad symphony,
Cool touch of western wind.
Sunshine’s divine caress.
How should they know or feel
They are in darkness?”
Scattered along the banks of the lower River Murray are the few
scattered remnants of the once numerous and powerful Narrinyeri nation,
which occupied territory, according to their legends, won by supernatural
agency from the ocean, and allotted to the various tribal subdivisions by
Wurranderra, an aboriginal type of Moses of the Children of Israel.
Of the pure members of the tribe few remain. After contact with
Europeans they faded away like the mists of morning; the story of
their going has been a sad and tragic one. They were a primitive people,


holding much of the finer instincts of humanity—a happy, care-free race,
that took their meat direct from the hand of God. A people, too, of
simple instincts, generous impulses, and plain rules of life, totally unable
to protect themselves from the sharp-witted, and, I think I may say with
some truth, unscrupulous alien invaders of their territory. They fell
easy victims to the cupidity and the lusts of the whites.
“IN SUFFERING AND WANT."
My recent expedition has been one of research among the pathetic
relics of the past, and I have solved a few problems that have long
puzzled me. These, lam sure, will be of interest to others.
The most important question, however, is that of our duty to the
living, for I have found the representatives of this wronged and ancient
race in suffering and want. I went among these descendants of men and
women I had known in the past as one of them, and listened to their
troubles, which should be remedied. Ido not so much blame individuals.
The fault lies largely with the administrative machinery, and the thought-
lessness of our people. We have honored Captain Sturt’s memory with
a fine statue; he it was who discovered the Murray, and knew its people.
But, alas, we have not honored his words of wisdom.
CAPTAIN STURT’S CONDEMNATION.
Of the blacks, Sturt said that they would not be the first aggressors
in a quarrel; but when they found their territories seized, their forests
levelled, their hunting grounds—their very means of existence—de-
stroyed, for the protection of which they themselves were obliged to
make laws (which were rigidly enforced), when they were forcibly and
relentlessly hunted from the lands of their fathers, can we wonder, when
they experience such injustice at our hands, and are treated with violence
and contempt, can we wonder at any act of vengeance on their part?
Further, Sturt says that the hand of friendship has never been
extended to these poor people, nor any measures taken to protect them
from the insolence and outrage so frequently received at the hands of
the settlers. Again, he says: “Having so often received protection and
succour from them, and knowing, as I do, the strength of their reasoning
powers, I consider myself guilty of base ingratitude if I do not thus
come forward on their behalf, and happy shall I be if, by doing so,
I shall save one unfortunate being, whether civilised or savage, from
misery.” Such were the noble utterances of a truly great man, whom
we have honored, but whose words we have ignored or conveniently
forgotten.
TWO NEW GRAVES.
In my wanderings I passed by the humble and unfenced resting place
of the natives, and noticed that there were two new graves. Suffering,
sorrow, and death had visited my faithful friends of the river camps.
Later I was able to obtain particulars of the sad circumstances. That
scourge of the White Races, the “White Plague,” had struck down Maud,


the daughter of my old friend, Sam Disher, and also the wife of Stanley
Giles, nephew of Jimmy Giles. Maud was taken to the hospital, but,
pining for her children and the home of her people, she returned to
Spend her last days with them, and to face a new trouble in the death
df her eldest boy, which anteceded her own by only a short interval. To
make matters worse, the Government supply of rations ran out, and Maud
had to make an appeal from her death-bed to her white friends for help.
I have her last letter before me, given to me by Mrs. Priess, of Sunny
Dale, in whose employ she had been as a girl. Mrs. Priess speaks highly
of her qualities, and deplores her loss. Maud wrote to her in her dire
need, asking, not in vain, for the assistance which, had we done our duty
to these people, should have been anticipated.
Can we, who enjoy all the comforts and conveniences of civilised
life, picture that scene? The dead boy, the dying mother, the distracted
father, with the young, helpless children, not knowing what to do or
whence to turn for help and comfort! lam glad to say that these, the
despised and injured remnants of a once fine race, still find a few friends
among the whites, to whom they can appeal in times of trouble. But,
alas, the ground they cover is altogether insufficient, and they are won-
dering at, and blaming, the Government for the neglect of their duty.
A PATHETIC DECLINE OF RACE.
I had been making enquiries as to the whereabouts of my old friend,
Jinny Christmas, but it took a week to locate her camp, many miles
down the river. The poor old soul, 85 years of age, was pleased to
see me, and grieved much at the news I brought of the death of Maud;
the tears coursed down her withered cheeks as she wailed and sobbed:
“Poor thing! Poor, poor Maud!” Her home was the same old bag
and blanket wurlie, its form that of the primitive beehive fashion. Her
bright and pretty grandchildren were still her care, for their mother
was yet in the asylum. I found the poor old lady was sorely in need
of warm clothes, especially as she suffered badly from asthma, and found
the wintry weather very trying. I promised to call attention to her need
in the right quarter. We talked of old times and friends, the elimination
of old landmarks, the passing of old customs and the native language,
of which the new generation are ignorant. Jinny informed me, to her
regret, that they were proficient in the bad language of the whites, and
the art of gambling.
I chatted with the pretty, roguish imps, whose hearts I had won with
some lollies, and was pleased to find that one little chap had been named
after his grandfather, King Jerry—a stalwart of the old days. Poor old
Jinny! Those young imps were almost too much for her; but she would
not part with them on any account, for Granny looks after them while
Daddy hunts, fishes, and works for the white man.
With a last promise to get her urgent needs supplied, and a promise
to see in person the great Mr. South, I bade her farewell. Dora, the
pretty ten-year-old malooloo (young girl), accompanied by the peparao


(boy), “Jerry’s juvenile representative,” pulled me back across the river.
Watching their return, I saw five-year-old Jerry manfully pulling an
oar, and doing good work, too.
“As in the eye of Nature he has lived.
So in the eye of Nature let him die! ”
You can bend Nature to a certain limit, beyond which it breaks. In
dealing with the half-caste question we must take into consideration the
effects of heredity, and the age-long instincts handed down on the
mother’s side, which are powerful factors in the lives of those of mixed
blood. These factors should be recognised and allowed for in all
attempts made for the improvement of their condition. By nature they
are nomads and hunters, who find the responsibilities of civilised life
galling and irksome.
The people with whom we are in closest touch are found along the
valley of the Murray, and on various mission stations. The groups,
including only a few full bloods, belong to the great Narrinyeri tribe,
whose territory not only comprised that which Noorella (according to
legends dealing with the distribution of the river tribes, previously men-
tioned by me), the blind gin, miraculously won from the ocean, but
comprised lands outside of that range.
“ OUR BLOOD RELATIONS."
These people, outcast and alien in their own country, without a
square foot of land to call their own, have seen the hunting grounds of
their tribes divided among a race whose law was that of might rather
than justice; they have felt the contempt, the insolence, the injustice
of the white man, who has grown rich at the expense of their downfall,
and whose lusts have borne such evil fruit. To him they are still a
prey.
Without hope in the future, they sink lower (as one of their wise
men has said) than the beasts. Shall we begrudge them a helping hand?
Are they not heirs to our unpaid debt? And, further, have they not,
through the white man’s lust, become our blood relations? Although
this aspect of the question is generally politely and discreetly ignored,
still, I think it adds to our responsibility. Admitting our liability for
the peculiar and debasing environment which we have forced upon a
once clean race, the question is not so much what we shall do with them
as what we can do for them. Out of the vast wealth produced from their
ancient hunting grounds the helping hand should be lavish enough to
cover all needs for the betterment of their conditions, which, as they are
at present, are a disgrace to us as a nation.
Powerless to help themselves, shall we deny them the help they
need? Let something be done apart from Government efforts, which
usually fail from lack of human sympathy. Cannot our wealthy
colonists establish a fund for the help of these social outcasts, to work
in conjunction with the Government?


SOME SUGGESTIONS.
Set apart a goodly reserve of considerable area, embracing lagoon
and river frontage, retaining all hunting and fishing rights for the
natives, and stock it with sheep or cattle as an aid to their support.
Upon this area establish a depot, and make all provision for winter
encampment, with provision for instruction, amusement, and general
improvement. Appoint as wardens of aborigines a married couple of
wide sympathies, broad views, and some knowledge of medicine, having
a grip of the peculiar conditions of the natives’ environment, and armed
with power to combat the conditions, the young people being their
especial charge. Allowing for the wandering instincts of the natives,
the wardens should be prepared for a somewhat nomadic existence.
Owing to the acuteness of his senses and natural instincts, the native
is peculiarly adapted for a post as game warden or forester. Many
could be trained with this end in view. The curriculum should include
game conservation, propagation, and protection of wild life; also
forestry. Education should be largely carried out on scout lines. Other
things, such as camp sanitation, would follow automatically; to some
extent pastoral and agricultural interests could also be included.
While the men are away at work, the women and children should
remain on the reserve under the warden’s charge, with the pure bloods.
The wardens should endeavor to preserve the best of the old traditions,
the language and legends, and to restore a certain pride of race.
The half-caste should be encouraged to take a pride in, and emulate,
the best in both races. Some provision should also be made in the shape
of a boarding home for aborigines who visit the city, which should be
under the supervision of a guide or guardian. This is a rough outline
of my idea of a workable scheme for the amelioration of the mixed
elements of outcast humanity that come under the half-caste problem.
That there is good material among them is recognised by all who come
in contact with them.
“ Neither locks had they to their doors, nor bars to their windows;
But their dwellings were open as day and the hearts of the owners.
There the richest was poor, and the poorest lived in abundance.”
THE CALL OF THE RIVER.
Believing always that living interests should take advantage over
the dead, I have somewhat anticipated myself in dealing with the half-
caste problem first. To follow up other points of interest I must take
my readers back to the starting point at this, to me, most interesting
ramble.
The river was calling—the river of the golden cliff that flows
through the mystic valley of the Stone Age man, where the caves and
the drifts unfold the secrets of the ages, where bones of men of gigantic
stature litter the ground, where forests of pine and mallee had stood,
and where recent compeers had hunted without the knowledge of the


silent sleepers below. There were the storm washes to explore, ravines
up to ten and twelve feet deep, which exposed to the light of day some
of Timers long-hidden secrets of both the higher and the lower plateau —
representing the older and the more recent periods of occupation. There
seem to be three fairly well-defined eras, the last period being represented
by the visible middens of the river banks, which are fast disappearing
through the action of flood waters and other denuding causes.
A PLEA FOE BEAUTY.
Larger and grander rivers there may be, but none of such varied
and intense interest to the student of Nature as the Murray; none with
such a blend of mystery and beauty. Right at our doors it flows, yet
how neglected it is! Some day the Murray River will come to its own,
when passenger boats will steam beneath its golden cliffs, crowded with
world tourists. Let us, therefore, save some of its primeval beauty, its
wild life and flora, and some of its mystic treasures of the past. Let us
lift our eyes from the muck rake before we lose, beyond recall, the higher
Values and ideals that make life worth while.
Yes, the River was calling, and the last day of May saw me on the
road to the station with camera and bluey—which consisted of sleeping
bag, blanket, change of clothing, emergency rations, and sundries; but,
alas, I could not take a “billy” or quart pot, for I was loaded to the limit.
June I—Murray Bridge, just too late for the “Murundie,” which
left the wharf after the arrival of the second morning train. June 2
Got away at midday, steamer “Nellie,” mailboat, carrying passengers and
cargo —two other passengers. We introduce ourselves, also make our-
selves at home, and watch the ever-changing panorama of scenic river
beauty.
“ The soft blue sky did never melt
Into his ear; he never felt
The witchery of the soft blue sky.”
Life on a ship, whether on an ocean liner or a humble river steamer,
tends naturally to break down that reserve said to be characteristic of
the English-speaking race. By the time dinner was served we were all
good friends; then, seeking the most sheltered part of the deck (for the
wind was keen), we enjoyed the passing glories of river scenes.
As we passed the bridge over the river I recollected that some of
the ironwork crossed the ocean in the hold of the vessel by which I
came out. I remember my disappointment when the bridge was opened
and I was not included in the party taken by Captain Mcßeth on the
old “Amphibious” from Hindmarsh Island; this was, I think, in 1877.
My first sight of the bridge was, I think, in 1881—a very different place
then to what it is now. I was then on a journey per shanks’ pony, that
ultimately spun out to 500 miles in length.


Other familiar landmarks that sped by recalled road-making and
clearing camps, fishing, bee-keeping, trapping, and hunting camps; but,
with the passing of time and the disappearance of the swamp-lands, some
were very hard to identify again.
A VANISHED GREATNESS.
Changes everywhere! Some of the long flats we pass are where
I used to punt the dinghy after ducks, and to find nesting swans. There,
under the stars and among the whispering reeds, I had sometimes made
the boat fast, rolled up in my rug, and been lulled to sleep by the “night-
ingales’ ” songs.
Although the reeds and rushes are gone, I can still pick out the
places where I had made my hidden causeways over the black swamp-
mud, following the outer rims of the big maracrow clumps, with just a
fringe of tall flags between myself and the open water.
On occasions like these, though I had come to slay (the necessity of
which I often regretted), I often stayed to worship in Nature’s Temple.
But no more the solemn booming call of the bittern reverberates from
shore to shore—no resting place is left for the swans, the crested grebe,
or any of the old inhabitants of these lower reaches of the River.
Crops are growing and cattle grazing where I had watched the
black man punt or paddle his bark canoe, or spear the scaly denizens
of those lagoons among the water lilies. Alas, even those ancient land-
marks, the grand old gums, have given up the ghost, and point gaunt,
bare limbs to the sky; and of all the old, sweet sounds of the night
the “nightingale” in the willows alone is left.
Where once shone the silver trail of the moon and stars, one hears
the lowing of cattle, while the river flows calmly between man-made
banks. But the spirit of the river is not so easily tamed. Sometimes it
will rise in its might and demand its lost territory; and an angry water-
course will surge in its madness from cliff to cliff. Then the silver trail
and the stars gleam once more from the mirror of the old lagoon.
“AN OLD MASTERPIECE.”
If reason instead of greed had governed our actions, how different
would have been the fate of the Murray lands; the menace of the drifts
would have been unknown, and the giant waterway would have been fed
by the railway, instead of being starved by it. The waters might have
been utilised on the higher levels instead of running to waste; the salt
problem could have been safely left to Nature’s laboratory.
To harness the river is right, but to leave it its safety valves would
only be reasonable. In art we value the work of the old masters, but
here, under our eyes, is passing away one of Nature’s oldest masterpieces,
a living picture of the Stone Age—an age-old drama, with all its won-
derful fascinations and mysteries unfolded before our eyes —a picture
of one of the early creative periods, the golden age of dreams. It is a


BLACK DUCK AND IBIS, SANCTUARY DAM, HUMBUG SCRUB


INCUBATOR-MOUND” OF THE MALLEE FOWL. SIXTY- FIVE FEET IN CIRCUMFERENCE AND THREE FEET
HIGH. MALLEE SCRUB.


picture of Nature’s dreams of perfection which followed aeons of peace-
ful evolution, a picture of long ago, of the golden days when the world
was young. And into its peaceful solitudes we, the colonists, have burst
as worshippers of the Golden Calf. Rude, uncouth, and perhaps lacking
in ideals, we broke into this chamber of Nature’s secrets, to run riot
amid her treasures, using our mighty powers for selfish ends, and sadly
marring her last great masterpiece that is now the charge of our unworthy
selves.
LINGERING SUPERSTITIONS.
Reaching Mannum, we had thirty minutes’ shore leave. On entering
the main street I was surprised to see one of my fellow-travellers, a
prosperous, intelligent-looking man, stoop and pick up a horseshoe, which
he covered with saliva and threw over his left shoulder. I ventured no
remark while awaiting the completion of the ceremony, but marvelled
at this proof of the survival of an old superstition. Later, on one of the
boats, I came upon an active belief in omens, the goat moth being the
bete noir in this case.
Leaving Mannum, we were soon abreast of the Thun-Thun Rocks,
so named from imprints in the granite resembling two human footprints.
Thun-Thun meaning footprint. Still another native name, taken from
a rock, shaped like a quarter moon standing on its points, was Joon-Joont.
Nowadays the word is usually written Jon-Jon, by which name the place
was long known to the river people. This spot had been my home, and,
incidentally, the site of the oldest apiary on the river for many years.
My collection of tame river birds proved attractive to many visitors. I
did not profit by the Government taking over this place for lock con-
struction, for the simple reason that I had to sell my river properties
to meet demands of the bank. The Jon-Jon lease was sold for £6O, and
thus was I barred from a little profiteering that might have been helpful.
A MUTUAL INTEREST.
“The night has a thousand eyes,
And the day but one;
Yet the light of the bright world dies
With the dying sun.”
Night shadows shrouded the river, broken now and again by the
lantern of those who awaited the mail or some parcel from town. Then
a light is seen amid-stream, which comes from a fisherman, with a request
for empty boxes. These are thrown overboard, and, looking back, we
see him gathering them in the wake of the boat.
As the hour grows late, the watchers are few, and our routine amounts
to just a change of mailbags to and from a box on a post or tree.
As a bushman, I have flattered myself that I could sleep anywhere;
but the throb and quiver of the engine drove sleep from my eyes that
night. Nevertheless, I rose ere dawn feeling none the worse that my
rest was broken. The sky was overcast, with a promise of rain.


We arrived at Swan Reach at about 8 p.m., where I was landed at
my destination on the opposite shore. Humping bluey, and carrying
my handbag and camera, I approached the somewhat pretentious resi-
dence of my friend, Mr. J. Brown, with some trepidation; his family was
unprepared for my arrival, but my reception was most hearty and
friendly. I was shown over a wonderful collection of antiques, but my
interest was chiefly taken up with the zoological collection, for, like
myself, Mr. Brown was greatly interested in Australian wild life.
NOOREEL AND NAENOOEOO,
We walked through the natives’ camping ground, but only one
wurley was standing, the rest being scattered along the river. We had
a look at their burial ground, and then paid an interesting visit to the
Punyelroo Cave, which had never been thoroughly explored owing to
the smallness of its passage at a very considerable distance from the
entrance. At one spot a fair-sized gum log was seen, which had pro-
bably been taken in by some exceptionally high flood; the wood was
well preserved, and must have been of considerable age. A few falls
from the roof made the going rough in places. By the compass, the
trend of the passage was apparently towards the river again. This has
been tested by Mr. Brown, whose conclusions agree, to some extent, with
the native legends, which place its entrance near North-West Bend.
It was here, as previously stated, that Nooreel, the crow, fought
Narnooroo, the goanna, which, faring wmrst, took refuge in a hole in
the cliff. Nooreel blocked this with stones, to make Narnooroo a
prisoner, as he thought! But, to his surprise, some months afterwards
he found Narnooroo again running around. Finding the hole still
securely blocked with stones, he searched along the cliffs, following
around all the bends of the river, and finally located the place of egress
at Punyelroo, for the goanna had dug its way right down from Nor’-West
Bend. Such is the aborigines’ account of the formation of this cave.
SECRETS OF THE GREAT RIVER.
A camp-fire yarn in connection with the same cave is to the effect
that a certain white man (possibly a connection of De Rougemont’s)
travelled fifteen miles into the bowels of the earth, discovered a sub-
terranean lake—clear as crystal and smooth as glass—large enough to
float a ship. He wandered on the silent shores like a lost spirit amid
the eternal gloom, for he was the first and only human visitor.
The following day saw me skirting the big plain, which here retains
more of its old characteristics than it does lower down. Bird life was
scarce, but I saw occasional traces of the wombat on the river front. The
notes of the pallid cuckoo were frequently heard, and crested pigeons
were in evidence.
Some evidence of ancient human occupation was met with, which
the floods of February in the previous year had exposed to view. By
keeping near the cliff-edge, I was able to keep a portion of the plain and


the river valley under observation at the same time. On a flat in the
valley a white patch proclaimed the presence of about two hundred
sulphur-crested cockatoos. As I studied them their sentinel gave warn-
ing, and they rose like a whirling drift of white pinions, which presently
settled with much noise in the river gums. A flight of pelicans passes —
a grand and dignified procession, every movement in unison with the
leader —silent, save for the occasional swish, swish, swish of the mighty
pinions. The movements are represented by three strokes, then a long
plane, the very poetry of motion. Next comes the staccato warning of
spurwing plovers from below. They sky is overcast, and I have made
no arrangements for my next camp; but what care I? Am I not free
to hold sweet communion wih Nature?
“ The intellectual power, through words and things,
Went sounding on a dim and perilous way.”
I did not keep to the old bush track; my course was naturally some-
what erratic. Sometimes I went along a patch of scrub, at others ex-
amined stretches of washed ground, or read the signs around some pool
of water. But, alas, everything was evidence of an ebbing tide of life.
Nature’s realm was growing more silent, and there was lack of move-
ment.
The routes I was travelling by had old associations connected with
the big drought of 1879. I pictured the old horse and covered dray,
the faithful dog panting along in its shade, myself and brother walking
to ease the horse, some of whose load we had already jettisoned by the
way. I pictured, too, the bare sun-baked plain, with its myriads of
starving rabbits eking out an existence on roots, bark, and bushes.
THE CALL OF THE RIVER.
To-day there is a show of grass upon the plain, there are shallow
pools of water, and the river flats are green with herbage. The pine-clad
slopes are gone, and in their place is the drifting sand. Of the old wild
life, little is left; not a single spoor is seen of the emu, tmkey, or
kangaroo, and the swamps below are almost tenantless. Much is gone
from the old-world picture of peace, but the long vista of the river that,
winding between its guard of stately gums, with its calm lagoons and
islets, still holds a charm for those who worship at Nature’s shrine.
This cliff top yields a few signs of human occupation, which, as before
stated, would probably long antedate the relics of the lower levels. The
oldest human remains of this area will doubtless be found in the sandy
soils lying at the back, where evidence is found in many places of a
well-defined ancient river bank, which existed before the river cut its
present channel through the underlying sandstone.
Reaching the end of this cliff, I turned down to a flat on which a
sporting party was camped; there was a smell of frying fish, and I
realised that I, too, was hungry; my thoughts went back to that tea


billy which I did not bring on account of my load. I met with kindly
hospitality, and was invited to stay the night. During the afternoon I
made an attempt to explore the vicinity, but my ardour was somewhat
damped by heavy rain. The following morning my new-found friend
kindly drove me to my next stopping place, where a most hospitable
welcome awaited me. The route still lay over the big plain; the only
life seen en route was a solitary fox.
WHAT THE "MIDDENS” TOLD.
At this place I was weatherbound until the third day, but managed
to put in a little work among the drifts and washes. Of bird life, I
noticed a few teal, black duck, and mountain duck; the noisy white
cockatoo was in fair numbers, and the voice of the pallid cuckoo was
frequently heard. A small party of natives was met with at this place,
who gave me information as to Jinny’s whereabouts. A few kitchen
middens were visited. Large accumulations of mussel shells are gene-
lally found in close proximity to the middens, but on this trip the
first group of middens examined revealed large numbers of winkle
shells, showing that even these small shellfish were esteemed as an
article of diet. It was noticeable that the shells of the more ancient
middens on the higher levels were much broken up, whereas those of
more recent date were in a good state of preservation. The shells of the
latest period seemed to show some evidences of deterioration, being
frailer and somewhat smaller, and also more broken up than the others.
The burnt stones of these river middens showed no arrangement in the
form of hearths, as do those of the coastal tribes, but had apparently
been simply heated in the fire and spread out in a rough circle.
When in use, a bed of rushes and weeds was laid over them to receive
the food, which again was covered with rushes and weeds. The whole
was then “earthed” over, and cooked by a steaming process, which is quite
the most wholesome of all forms of cooking. Sometimes these ovens
would be earthed up in the evening, when a warm breakfast could be
taken from them in the morning.
NATIVE FOODS.
This plan was adopted also in cooking vegetable food, such as the
succulent roots of the maracrow, which were the chief green vegetables
of the river tribes. Pilnunka (native spinach), known and utilised by
many bushmen, and still found in places on the Murray, was another of
Nature’s gifts to her dusky children. Of tubers, the yam, I think, held
first place in their estimation; and the cuncharo, known to the white
children as the wild potato, was also relished as an article of diet.
Of grain foods, besides the nardoo, the seeds of some of the acacias
were used; and also that of the pulinunka, a swamp grass bearing
heavy crops of small dark seed of angular form. All such foods were
prepared for use by means of the natives’ primitive stone mills.


FOOTSTEPS OF THE PAST.
Tuesday, June 7, the weather having cleared a little, I again take
to the road. Again I choose the cliff routes, and find further signs of
ancient human habitation. A familiar cry strikes upon my ear, and a
flock of mountain duck come Hying down the lagoon. Also I hear the
call of the maned goose, a bird which is becoming exceedingly scarce;
a few swans swim out from the shore below me. I count eleven; they
are the only swans seen on this trip.
At the end of the cliff, where the land used to fall away in a pine-
clad slope, I find that the drift sand has swept in giant waves right up
to the plain. Passing this, I again come to the travertine represent-
ing the edge of the cliff. Here I found a number of small middens
which had been exposed by the storm waters. I next traversed the
denuded areas on the lower levels, where many middens were exposed
to view'; while at the extreme end, against the lagoon, I came upon the
burial ground of the cave men. Here the exposed area was in places
littered with human bones. After some search, two undisturbed graves
were located, which gave me an opportunity of studying the burial
customs of the period and people. Further afield I located a group of
gravestones, in the shape of large boulders, found in conjunction with
some of the graves of this district.
AMONG THE GRAVESTONES.
In the present case they occupied the position in which they had
been placed, possibly many centuries before. This was interesting,
because in all previous discoveries the boulders had been more or less
disturbed through denudation by wind, which had acted from the side,
undermined the boulders, and caused them to fall from their position.
In this case the denudation had commenced from above and worked
downward, showing the boulders to have been placed on the body itself,
not, as some have claimed, on the grave. The idea was to protect the
body from the dingoes. I took a sketch of the stones, with portions of
rib bones exposed to view. There were four boulders in all. Later I
showed the sketch to the natives, and question them as to the reason
for their use. The reply was that, in certain cases, this was done to
keep them from jumping up again, in which case some harm was feared
for the children, who might be “spirited” away.
As many graves are without boulders, this practice must have been
reserved for special cases only. Owing to the lateness of the hour, I
had to postpone operations, and wended my way to the cottage in the
flat, where I had arranged to stay, my friend generously promising the
use of his boat to examine the cave shelters in the morning.
INTO THE CENTURIES OF THE LONG AGO.
June 8. —It is near noon when I reach the caves or shelters, the
former winter dwelling of the Stone Age men. The floor was covered
with a great deposit of ashes, that might have accumulated during thou


sands of years. Quaint designs decorated the cliff front, the buttresses,
and ceiling—designs that were vehicles of thought to a people without
a written language; but, unfortunately, the key is missing, and none
of the tribe is left to interpret this mysterious language of signs.
I looked across the placid river, where, under the solemn pines,
the natives laid their dead to rest. There lay the hands that carved these
rocky walls, and with them lay the secret of hidden meanings of the
symbols. Strange to say, many of these are a repetition of the peculiar
signs found on the mystery stones of the Darling country, which are said
to be the work of the Barkunji.
On this trip I had the opportunity to compare the work of the two
tribes from one of these stones in the possession of a river captain.
The Narrinyeri are said to be an offshoot of the Barkunji. Native legends
seem to confirm this. The Rivermaker was Nooreela, while the move-
ment of the tribes was affected by Wirranderra. It is not likely that we
shall ever get the true interpretation of these interesting symbols; no
satisfactory explanation can be obtained from natives now living along
the Murray. The only hope lies with the wild natives of the interior,
for it is probable that some of these signs were in general use. This
point could be settled by a comparison with sketches and photographs
of rock carvings from those parts. In the interests of anthropology
steps should be immediately taken to do this, as this seems to be the
only hope of solving the mystery of the cabalistic writings found on
trees, stones, and rocks all over Australia.
“ Oh, why should the spirit of mortals be proud?
Like a fast-flitting meteor, a fast-flitting cloud,
A flash of the lightning, a break of the wave,
He passes from life to his rest in the grave.”
It was late in the afternoon when I recrossed the river, partook of
a hasty meal, borrowed a spade, and set out for the place where genera-
tions of the cave dwellers sleep the long last sleep. The place is full of
sorrowful memories for all races of man —the burial ground, the place
of weeping—for the love of kindred is strong. This last long farewell
is cruelly hard to bear. Having found the place, I set to work removing
the covering of sand from the graves, using a piece of sharpened wood
for the purpose. I carefully lifted the soil until I had laid bare the
skull and shoulder, and could trace the direction of the arm-bone. Then,
opening a trench with the spade in the direction indicated, I was able to
clear the remains without disturbance.
BURIAL CUSTOMS.
It was a slow and somewhat tedious job, but it revealed many points
of interest in the study of the mind and customs of people of the Stone
Age. I found that the knee joints had apparently been dislocated, and
the legs bent upwards to bring the feet to a higher level than the head;
the head had been propped up, as if by a high pillow of sand; the body


was reclining on its back. In the second grave, too, the body had been
placed on its back, the head propped high, and the arms placed along
the sides. The knees had also been treated in the same manner as in the
previous instance, with the lower portion of the legs bent upwards. This
skeleton was smaller than the other, and lay parallel to it; the feet were
toward the river, and the head toward the cliff.
Examination of the exposed remains led me to believe that some
had been placed the reverse way —that is, with the head toward the river.
So far as I could see, all graves had been dug in one direction, apparent-
ly north and south. The skeletons in the graves appeared to be of great
age, for the softer parts of their frame had disappeared entirely.
A REVERIE OF THE PAST.
I stood by the graves I had opened and pondered, while night
shadows fell around me. These men had lived their days many cen-
turies back. Although they had been naked, and lacking all the aids
of civilisation, their simple lives had been full of happiness and con-
tentment, their land one of sunshine, of sparkling waters, of sweet sounds,
and of plenty. How little they dreamed of the cruel fate in store for
their tribes.
Mute evidences are all around me of a life-page with which we
have shown so little sympathy, and which we have so ruthlessly turned
over. Only for our presence, those cliff shelters would be, even now,
sending flickering beams of light across the silent river, smoke wreaths
would be curling up the rugged cliff-face, and the happy voices that had
echoed down the ages would still call across the water. Also, from these
sleeping places of their dead, amid the myrtle and the pine, would echo
the weird cries of the curlews.
I leave the sleepers of the centuries under the cloud-wrapped dome
of night, to wend my way across the silent box-tree flat. All is silent,
for no opossums now frisk among the branches, no curlew rises on noisy
wing at the stranger’s approach, no skurry among the fallen leaves, nor
sound from the wide lagoon.
As I enter the cottage I look across to the darkening cliff, but
no mystic shadows break through the gloom. High on the ledges above
the caves the white cockatoos are sleeping, undisturbed, and the only
tenants of the caves below are the lizards and the bottle martins. A
solitary boobook breaks the silence with its soothing but melancholy
call, which ever and anon meets the listening ear.
WANTON BIRD DESTRUCTION.
I enter the lighted cottage, and assist in the preparation of a meal;
but thought is busy with the problem of the birds, of the beautiful little
feathered denizens of the river flats and gum-lined banks, whose numbers
have been sadly decreased of late.


Lei me give you a picture: A motor car speeds down the cliff road
and stops under the gums. Jim, Jack, Bill, and Harry jump out, with
a couple of lads. They have fishing tackle, but no bait. They throw
their shrimp-nets on to the grass, and each takes a gun and a handful
of cartridges. They scatter along the banks and among the bushes.
What are they after? Why, bait, of course. No bird is safe when they
are about, from a wren to a jackass, a night heron to a pelican. They
want bait for their shrimp-nets and for their cod lines; bird bait is
considered good. Whether protected or not matters not at all; no
inspector or game warden is ever around, so what matter laws that are
not enforced? To anybody who has known the river long the depletion
of bird life is very noticeable.
LAYING THE DEAD TO REST.
June 9. —“Morn, waked by the circling hours, with rosy hand unbars
the gates of light.” The clouds have gone, and a clear sun gives
promise of a fine day. The white cockatoos have held a noisy carnival
above the old cave dwellings, and gone in solid phalanx, a glorious
moving white cloud of joyous life, to their feeding grounds. I pick my
way across the sticky box-flat to the graves I had opened on the burial
ground. I wander around the desolate scene, to make a fruitless search
of the storm washes for stone relics. After photographing the graves, I
re-covered the old warrior and his mate. I could picture that scene
well —-the procession of bark canoes, the soft pad of naked feet, the
eerie, wailing cry of the mourners, so full of hopeless sorrow, which
comes from the lignums, through the “old man saltbush” and myrtle to
enter the grove of pines. The wattle birds peep and chatter from the
branches as the dead are laid to rest. Look around. It is a pretty and
peaceful spot; bower birds play on the open slopes beyond, a flock
of nooka (magpie geese) are feeding in the swamp, while from high
overhead comes the far-reaching call of the joorko (native companion).
When the wailing ceases a kroompel (magpie) warbles a few sweet notes
from the top of a dead pine.
A STRANGE PRACTICE.
A leafy bower is built over the grave of the pookooloo (old man),
then he is left to his last sleep among the pines. The picture fades, and
all I see is scattered bones and a waste of sand
I have frequently noticed that pine country has been chosen for the
site of these burial grounds.
In regard to the dislocated knee-joints, this may possibly have been
done for a similar reason to that which had prompted the placing of
heavy boulders on the bodies, referred to above. From this site to the
Murray mouth the method adopted for disposing of the dead shows
considerable variation. With earth burial we find in one district that
the reclining position has been adopted. Lower down the river the
bodies were placed in a squatting position, while in the lake country


they were placed on platforms built in the ti-tree. This is according to
my own observation.
THE CONTRAST TO-DAY.
It is noon. I take a last look at the desolate, wind-swept scene.
Leg and arm bones and fragments of skulls litter the ground, some of
the latter over three-eights of an inch in thickness. Death and desolation
have replaced the beauty of the past. Death and desolation, the tracks
of ignorance and of greed.
“ Oh, for the simple life,
For tents and the starry sky! ”
To many of us there is a strong fascination in the study of these
old, quiet backwaters of Time; but I regret that the all-too-common form
in which they are presented to us is much overdrawn and misleading.
Both the theories of scientists and the nightmares of fictionists present
primitive man to us as a somewhat bestial savage, whereas the infancy
of the aboriginal race is most remarkable for its innocence, simplicity,
and joyousness. The study of natural law in the animal kingdom points
to this as the right interpretation. The savage is the first product of the
move toward civilisation. Man is the most restless and changeful of
beipgs, and the most primitive types living to-day have passed out of
the infant stage to the extent of the savagery they exhibit in their lives
and in their weapons.
A SEVENTH ROCK SHELTER.
Such studies have interested me from earliest childhood, hence no
time was wasted. I collected my paraphernalia and took to the road
(this is merely a form of speech, as I seldom made use of a road, and
no road ran where I wanted to go).
On this occasion my route lay under the cliff, whose surface, as
viewed from across the river, gave promise of more cave-dwellings.
From the lower end of the burial ground, for the distance of about half
a mile, the lagoon shore was strewn with burnt stone; this was the
stone from innumerable middens washed out by the storm waters. No
human remains were seen here. Further along enormous masses of
fallen cliff blocked the narrow way occasionally, and much time was
lost in climbing the debris while searching for rock shelters—a search
that was at last rewarded.
The cliff face was of a soft, friable nature, and showed no trace
of aboriginal art, but the usual bed of ashes and the smoke stains pro-
claimed its continued use as a shelter. This makes the seventh that
I have visited, and there is every possibility of still more being dis-
covered.
A VISION OF BEAUTY.
Having at length passed through the last barrier of fallen rock
masses, I turned to look at the scene. On my left were the light tints
of the tall rugged cliffs; in front, among the variously colored tree
trunks and green gum foliage, were light-tinted rock masses as large
as cottages, some of which had reached the channel of a billabong. Away


to the right, where the long lines of river gums towered above the lignum
flat that lay between the billabong and the river, sunlight and shadow
were playing their part. Where are our artists, that river scenery is
so seldom seen on canvas?
Presently the river sweeps in towards this side of the broad valley,
where a flowing stream meets the still waters of the billabong, to find
outlet through a gap in the river bank. A little further along, the cliff
ends abruptly in the winding valley of a reedy creek. But before seek-
ing the ford, another long vista of marvellous beauty unfolded itself
before my expectant gaze, just as the last rays of the setting sun were
bursting from under a cloud, and turning the cliff on the opposite side
to a wall of gold. The color effect was unique—blue sky, silvery mirrors
of water, green foliage, sombre shadows of evening and, cutting right
through the picture, the long golden barrier of the sandstone cliff.
MORE INTERESTING RELICS.
The water was running strongly over the ford; but, with the aid
of a stick to sound its depth, I negotiated its icy waters, and soon found
myself among friends who bade me hearty welcome. The morning
found me, in the company of an old friend, exploring storm washes in
which some aboriginal remains had been washed out, and were lying
scattered over the flat. Here, as elsewhere, considerable damage had
been done by flood waters from the higher ground.
After dinner my old friend, who proved an interesting companion,
took me across the river and accompanied me to the top of the cliff.
Here a sharp slope from the higher ground was greatly scored by wash-
outs, the exploration of which occupied much time. The only find
recorded was the skeleton of a wombat. Further along the cliff-top I
met with a few traces of old middens, and saw the first rabbits of the
trip. The present scarcity of these rodents is remarkable, when one
remembers the teeming thousands that overran the country a few years
ago. I cannot think that their suppression was altogether due to human
agency, but probably was the result of disease, for which the river rabbit
was notorious.
THE MEMORY OF THE PAST.
Whirling flights of screaming cockatoos occasionally rose above the
cliff edge, their snow-white plumage glistening in the sun, their vociferous
songs of joy breaking the long silence of the scene. Progress was slow.
Evening shadows were again creeping over the landscape as I made my
way to the lower levels and to the cottage of a friend; the same hearty
welcome awaited me. How different to the journey of over forty years
ago, when human habitations were few and far between, and the river
traffic was confined to wool and stores, when big “scrubs” met at the
river valley, and “brumbies” and wild cattle roamed at will, and when
teeming wild life of every description provided abundant food for the
dark-skinned children of the Stone Age. Then a fair number yet lingered
along the valley of the river, their old men irritable, puzzled, and groping
in the dark, for their universe was tottering and falling about their ears.


The Power of the Totem
A FEW STRONG INSTINCTS.
THE power behind the laws of the Stone Age seems to have been large-
ly that of superstitious fear. That public opinion may have had
something to do with keeping up the standard of tribal morals might
also be admitted. That they were effective we know, for there had been
no fresh enactments for some thousands of years.
I cannot talk learnedly on these matters, but the law of the totem
has always seemed to me a wonderful institution, by which sex instincts
in marriage were controlled by the erection of a barrier of consanguinity.
Every person had his or her totem, its representative existing in the life
around, being a bird, animal, fish, or reptile. No person was allowed
to kill or eat the living representative of his or her totem, nor to marry
another whose emblem or totem was similar to his. The totem descended
on the female side, all children taking the totem of their mother.
A PEW PLAIN RULES.
Supposing that two brothers of the Karrum (blue crane) totem
marry two sisters of the Tilcatcha (teal duck), the children cannot inter-
marry, because they would be all Tilcatcha. But if one of the brothers
had married a Woorangera (swan), or any other totem, the children of
the two families could inter-marry. Fathers’ brothers being of the same
totem, count as fathers in relationship to their nephews and nieces, and
vice versa.
It was said that the law of the totem was given by Wurranderra,
and at the same time there seems to have been a curious belief that the
actual totems were the progenitors of these groups. This fits in with
their belief that many of the creatures in former times were blackfellows.
For instance, I once remarked that anyone could see where the
natives had got the woramera from, seeing that the top blade of a pelican’s
bill was, in form, a perfect wommera.
With a laugh the reply came; “Oh, that phellar, he bin keep his
wommera, that’s all; he bring him along.” This meant to imply that
from the time when the pelican was a blackfellow he had managed to
hang on to his wommera during his transformation. Truly, the mytho-
logy of the aborigine is hard to follow, for as they have in their language
tones for which we can find no expression, so they have shades of thought
we cannot interpret.
HOW THE MIDDENS CAME. COOKERY WITHOUT UTENSILS. ALSO A LEGEND
WHICH GOES TO PROVE THAT THE MURRAY TRIBES WERE NOT CANNIBALS.
Saturday, June 11.—Having now completed the most interesting part
of my trip, I decided to catch the steamer “Pyap.” This meant ah early


morning walk, and breakfast before daylight. Thanks to friends, I
arrived in good time.
Travel by a trader is necessarily slow, but not without interest.
There was a gathering of the clans at the different landings for shopping
or friendly intercourse w'ith neighbors, whilst a sprinkling of bronzed
greybeards recalled the pioneering days of agriculture along this part
of the Murray valley. Sometimes there came a mutual recognition, a
friendly grip, and kindly enquiries. I heard accounts of storm damage
in the backblocks, of the collapse of farm houses, of the demolition of
wells, windmills, and tanks, and of lakes of water out in the dry mallee
lands. Then, as we left, with a toot of the whistle, the landing-stages
speedily became deserted again. For those who are not in a hurry a
trip on a trader is quite enjoyable, for it affords opportunity to study
people, and to go ashore and have a look around at various places en
route.
CHINNY-KINIK, THE CANNIBAL.
Perhaps, while the boat is forging down stream, it will not be amiss
to give my readers one of the legends of the river tribes. At a place
called Pekarra, somewhere east of the Murray, lies the plain of Yenpulla,
on which, at the bottom of a “runaway hole,” was the entrance to the
cave of Chinny-kinik, the dreaded cannibal giant of the Murray tribes.
Repeatedly blackfellows had failed to return from the chase, and gins
out digging yams had disappeared, never to be seen again; always it
was whispered in the camps, “that big fellow bin get um that one.”
Although the blacks avoided the plain of Yenpulla, yet all felt certain
that there lay the solution of the mystery.
The position became at length so serious that no yam-diggers or
hunters would work the country on that side of the river away from
the river valley; and this cut off a large portion of their supplies. But
when, eventually, the terror entered the valley itself, a hasty council of
wise men was summoned to consider what had best be done to save the
tribe. Although they suspected Chinny-kinik, they had no definite proof
of his guilt. Two uncles of Chinny-kinik happened to be members of
the tribe; and the council decided that the onus was upon these to get
the proof and destroy the giant. The two men thereupon took supplies
of food, and walked until they came to the plain. But they could
discover no sign of Chinny-kinik or of his camp, for the latter was below
the level of the plain.
A CUNNING PLOT.
They found fresh tracks, however, leading into the scrub. These
they followed, and, turning down the wind (that is, to leeward),
observed a bushy hollow from which they could watch the track and
the plain. Presently they saw Chinny-kinik and two boys pass over
the plain and disappear from view. They sat long, talking over their
plans, and finally decided to hunt up the means of a feast, to which
they would invite Chinny-kinik. They would invent some pretext to
account for their presence in this part of the tribe’s territory.


They retired a safe distance, and made camp near some wombat
holes, against which they heaped big stones near the burrows. In the
dusk, when the animals came out to feed, the men crept up and blocked
the holes, putting the stones tightly in as far as they could reach. At
dawn they secured two, one of which was stored away for their return;
the other, with some difficulty, was conveyed back to the plain. They
took the precaution to approach the locality against the wind. Here, in
an old watercourse, they watched and waited for the appearance of
Chinny-kinik.
When he appeared from his cave they liberated the wombat, and
heading it for the open, they dashed into full view, and yelled aloud.
The chase was speedily ended by thrusting a spear between the shoulders
of the animal.
COOKING THE FEAST.
Chinny-kinik, now approaching, was greeted with every appearance
of surprise, and having satisfied him that their advent was purely
accidental, they paid him a few subtle compliments. They told him that
they were going to cook the animal, and invited him to the feast.
Now, these men were his relations; they were two in number, and
both well armed. And besides, was not kumperra (wombat) very good
to eat? Yes, he decided, he would accept their invitation, for it would
give him time for further consideration. He did not invite them to the
cave, but pointed out a place in the scrub where they would find cooking
stones and rushes.
The two men, left to themselves, immediately set to work. One dug
a hole, which he lined with large stones, upon which he lit a fire; then,
upon another well-packed fire, more stones were placed. Meanwhile the
other man had found a clay-pan, and, using the last of their water, had
mixed up some of its floor into a pasty mass. Then, laying the wombat
on green boughs, he proceeded to rub the sticky clay into its fur until
the whole of the animal was covered with a fairly thick plaster. A pile
of rush grass was gathered and placed near by.
By this time many of the stones were beginning to glow. The
embers were quickly removed from the grit, the stones from the other
fire placed with them and hastily levelled. A thick layer of green rush
grass was spread over the stones, upon which the prepared wombat was
placed. Another thick layer of grass and green mallee leaves covered
the carcase, and kept the sand away when the whole was “earthed” over.
Such was the simple but effective method of cookery adopted by the
people of the Stone Age.
GRIM HUMAN RELICS.
The sun was sinking low in the western sky when Chinny-kinik was
seen coming across the plain. A few strips of bark were laid upon the
ground, the oven opened, and the steaming cover removed. The kum-
perra was lifted out and placed upon the bark.


When the clay-shell was broken, it took the hair away with it, and
liberated an appetising smell that made the giant’s mouth water. As the
feast progressed, Chinny-kinik became merry, so the uncles asked him to
sing, thinking he might forget his caution and commit himself—for their
songs are mostly of their own brave deeds of war and the chase. But
when he sang, his voice was so loud that it deafened them, and they could
not hear the words. It was like the big voice of the black cloud of the
summer sky, that throws fire on the earth.
When they had picked the bones of the kumperra bare, Chinny-kinik
lay down to sleep by their fire. The two uncles had fear in their hearts
that they could do nothing else; and they had not yet obtained the
proof. But when Chinny-kinik got up in the morning, and stretched his
mighty limbs, they said; “Give us meat. We have a long journey, and
are hungry.” He brought them meat which, when he had turned away
again, they saw was part of two human legs. So they looked at each
other, and hid themselves in the bushes, where they ate of the food they
had brought with them.
THE CLEANSING FURNACE.
Then, making out that they were breaking camp, they came around
by another way and watched. Presently, when they had seen the giant
go into the scrub, they set to work and gathered great heaps of firewood
and dry sticks, which they hid in the bushes. When the sun was setting
there came a cold wind from the south. Colder and colder it grew; but
they would not give in. They cowered over their small fire and watched.
At length the giant cante hurrying out of the scrub, crying: “Eperah!
Eperah!” meaning “I am cold, and want a fire.” They saw him go into
the cave. After a while they quietly carried the dry grass, bushes, and
wood to the entrance of the cave. Having built a big stack, they set
it alight with a fire-stick.
The smoke gained entrance to the cave. The men heard cries of
terror, and immediately after the boys appeared at the entrance, from
which they pulled them through the burning brush into safety. The
entrance was immediately closed with logs, and more wood thrown on
the fire, so that a great sheet of flame rose out of the pit.
The earth shook with the struggles of the giant below, and terrible
sounds came from behind that wall of fire. Turning to the two boys,
one of the men said; “Ain’t you glad we pull you out and kill bad
fellow your father, who kill and eat his people, and your mother, too?”
But the boys answered: “No. We will do the same when we grow big.”
So the uncles of Chinny-kinik caught the two boys and threw them
into the fire. Thus perished the cannibal giant and his sons at the cave
of Yenpulla. The river tribes rejoiced when the men returned and told
them what they had done, for a great fear was lifted from them, and
they could once more go abroad in peace and safety.
Such is the legend of Chinny-kinik, the cannibal giant, the shaker
of the earth.


" NATURE FITS ALL HER CHILDREN WITH SOMETHING TO DO."
In dealing with native legends, which are generally received in bald
outlines, and so worded and colored by peculiar forms of thought, I
have found it necessary to add several connecting links and reclothe some
of the thoughts in more suitable language for my readers, yet leaving
them in substance practically the same as the original. One thing is
evident —the aborigine was not lacking in imagination or in credulity,
though, in the case of Chinny-kinik, there is a possibility of some foun-
dation in fact.
The difficulty of understanding the native mind has always been
an obstacle in the road of justice being done to the native races, for
the same principle is here involved as we find in dealing with all wild
life. The measurement of innumerable skulls is all very well in its
way, but it can never supply the solution. A part of the interesting
science of anthropology shows that the lowest type of skull is still met
with among the highest civilisations. Recently the highest type of skull
has been found among the oldest human remains.
A FALLEN RACE.
The hour was getting late and the sky was overcast when the steamer
pulled into shore at the base of a cliff. A plank was run out to the
bank, when, with a friendly good-night, we went our separate ways, mine
leading up the cliff. Some distance along I negotiated a boulder-strewn
slope with some difficulty, owing to the darkness, but eventually arrived
at the house of my friends.
June 12 (Sunday).—l walked down the lagoon and back along the
river bank to where a tinkling fish-bell had advised me of the presence
of a fisherman, who put me across the river. Following up the far
shore, I came upon the native camp, with poor old Jinny, whose tired
face wreathed in smiles at my approach. “Ha, Bellchambers,” she said
as she extended her hand in welcome. Poor old Jinny, grey and shrivel-
led with age, looked very different from when she was lubra to the
chief man of her people. When I had come upon their hunting-camp
under the shady gums of Neithora Lagoon, they had fixed their dome-
shaped shelter of boughs, and lazy wreaths of smoke curled upward
from their camp fire. The feathers and bones proclaimed that they had
already feasted on the results of Jerry’s prowess as a hunter. The usual
noisy rush of dogs had heralded my approach, but obedient to Jinny’s
voice, they left me in peace.
I looked around. Two dark-skinned imps were watching me from
the shelter of the wurlie; but, as I heard muffled blows of a tomahawk,
I expected to see Jerry, and found him handing the side of a big gum
which had just the right curve for a canoe. Before resuming work, he
came down for some “tobac,” and, of course, we all (including Jinny)
filled and smoked the pipe of peace.


THE MAKING OF A BARK CANOE.
Then Jerry resumed his position on the tree trunk, and I was privi-
leged to see the process of stripping and constructing a simple river
craft.
Hanging by one hand, and supporting his weight on his big toe,
which found rest in a nick cut into the bark as wanted, he proceeded to
cut the outline of a big canoe. He shifted his hold as occasion re-
quired, and presently the canoe took form, and stood out in the strong
relief of a white sapwood border. Then Jerry came down and secured
a w r ooden lever with a hardened and curved chisel-point, which permitted
it to follow the outline of the tree trunk, and at the same time bring
the leverage to bear on the inner surface of the bark, away from the
rim, and thus cause the bark to split. The lever was jabbed in with
considerable force, then levered outward from the tree. This part of
the work required considerable patience. The two sides were loosened
the full length. Working upwards, the inner portion was lifted until,
by an outward pull, it broke from the top. The sheet was then lowered
down and placed in a leaning position against the tree, with its base
sufficiently out to allow room for a rousing fire, for which it acted as
a chimney. The heat was required to prevent the sheet from curling
(not, as stated in a recent article, to make it curl). When thoroughly
heated, it was laid down, opened out, and a prepared wooden cross-stay
thrust into its sides near the ends, in order to prevent it from closing
or curling.
Should the ends not be sufficiently high to keep the water out, a
barrier of clay was built across each end. After this came the usual
clay hearth for carrying fire. When the bark was thoroughly dry the
frail vessel was launched.
THE VESSEL AT WORK.
This simple but handy craft of the Stone Age people was propelled
in the shallows by pushing or punting, and in deep water by paddling
or alternately dipping with the same long light pole. The wide-bladed
paddle was not in use.
A big canoe would carry a family with all their worldly goods on
calm water, but was of little use in stormy weather. Many years ago I
passed one of those canoes lodged in the fork of a gum tree quite twenty
feet from the ground. It had been left there by the flood waters. The
launching of this canoe was a period of joyous excitement for the kiddies.
(Robert and Henry, who still survive, would probably remember the
occasion). It no doubt added considerably to their comfort in getting
access to the, then, abundant fish and game of the wide lagoon, not
forgetting the supply of swan and other eggs.
Poor old Jinny, with all the instincts of her nomadic ancestors still
strong in her breast, will not stay in one place, but periodically shifts
camp, up or down “the river of many memories.” Looking at her as
she sits on the sunny side of the wurlie recalls many pictures of the


WOUNDED EAGLE-HAWK. BROUGHT DOWN WHILE ATTACKING DUCKS IN THE SANCTUARY DAM.
THE BIRD WAS NURSED AND, WHEN HEALED, RESTORED TO LIBERTY. HUMBUG SCRUB.


CAPE BARREN GEESE WITH A BROOD OF SIX GOSLINGS, HUMBUG SCRUB


natives with whom I came much in contact, and found possessed of
admirable traits; they were, however, quite unprepared for their quickly-
changing environment.
A PLEA FOR MOTHER NATURE.
It was late afternoon when I returned to my friends, but after some
refreshments, I decided to push on.
“0 twilight! Spirit that does render birth
To dim enchantments; melting heaven with earth,
Leaving on craggy hills and running streams
A softness like the atmosphere of dreams.”
Away I went along the cliff track and over the drifting sands, night
shadows around me and above me, the crescent moon in a clear sky—a
time for reverie. I stood a while and listened for Nature’s voices, but,
breaking the stillness of the night from over the river and beyond the
lagoon, came the strumming of a piano! The spirit of the bush had
fled. I looked at the drifting sands and thought of that Roman Emperor
who fiddled while his city burned. Now no joyous choruses came from
the marshlands below. “The very clouds had wept and died, and only
God was in the sky.” There is no fatigue, but a pleasant exhilaration
in this walk under the starry sky.
June 13.—1 put my bluey aboard a river steamer, and after about
two hours’ work at the wood pile, we get away. Reach Adelaide that
night.
It is early morning when I enter the scrubby hill country of my
home. It is wrapped in a mantle of fog, but from all around comes the
music of invisible feathered songsters. Happy little creatures! May
you long find refuge in these quiet wooded glades—quiet insofar as
concerns human activities, but filled with the myriad voices of Nature.
More sanctuaries for the bird life of the Murray Valley are badly
needed, and such should be put on a workable basis. Certain interesting
spots in connection with the past history of the Murray tribes should
also be made permanent reserves, and fenced off from the stock.
Scientific interest alone should warrant such a step being taken. With
proper handling, those cave shelters could be made to reproduce interest-
ing phases of Stone Age life, and there is no earthly reason why South
Australia should not cater for a share of the stream of world tourists
in this way.


A Trip to Panaramatee
A LADY friend told me of a series of rock carvings at Panaramatee
Station, which, through the kindness of Messrs, and Miss Wade, I
have been enabled to visit. With camera and light camping outfit,
I left home on April 5. A light drizzling rain marred the pleasure of the
twelve-mile track into Gawler, which place I left on the Broken Hill
express at 5.20 p.m. Picking my carriage, I found myself in the pre-
sence of a merry widow (so she described herself), with two children,
another lady, and child, and a much-travelled personage. Down the
train a man lifted his voice and sang.
“There goes that red-ragger,” says the Merry Widow. “I am glad
he did not come in this carriage.” He had a powerful voice and a large
repertoire, which included many old songs, finishing with a selection
of nursery rhymes. He must have had a throat of brass to keep up
such a bellow for so long a time. The most noteworthy things of the
journey were the freque(nt calls for refreshments by the way. If ever
I want to make money, give me a railway buffet and my fortune is made!
And the waitresses —my, couldn’t they move! No time for any nonsense.
At Terowie, the break of gauge, more eating and drinking, and some
hurling about of passengers’ luggage. It seemed highly probable that
something more than the gauge was broken at this place.
Now we have corridor cars, and this is better. Conversation lags,
and drowsy heads nod. I "go outside for a smoke; the rain is left
behind, and stars are shining in a clear sky. At 2.30 a.m., April 6, my
destination is reached; the express steams away into the night. I am
the only arrival here. The hamlet sleeps, and—
“ Heaven’s ebon vault, studded with stars unutterably bright,
Through which the moon’s unclouded grandeur rolls,
Seems like a canopy which love has spread
To curtain her sleeping world.”
I look around across the dim distances of the moonlit plain. The
silence and the distance call, but Nature also calls for rest; the night
air is chill, and I have not the wherewithal to break the morning fast,
so it seems that I needs must stay until the hamlet awakes. I won’t
disturb anyone at this unearthly hour. The railway official directs me
to an empty tent.
NATIVE ART.
A cock crows, and I bestir myself. My word, ’twas chilly, for I
had lain down just as I was, and slept the sleep of the weary. The
scenery consisted of a few pepper trees and half a dozen houses on a


plain that once grew blue bush. What about breakfast? “Not until
eight”—and eight miles to go! Well, breakfast has it; the scenery can
wait. “Track for Panaramatee?” “Yes, cross the line, and make for
the outside of that bit of timber, and you’ll hit it.”
I left a message for the ’phone (which was not yet open), shouldered
my paraphernalia, and trekked across the plain. Half way out a car
looms in sight—a pleasant greeting, with apology for delay, due to
bungled message, and my smiling hostess deftly speeds the car on its
homeward journey. After lunch, the car took me on a five-mile spin
to the Salt Spring; we had a race with some emus en route, which added
to the interest of the trip.
In this vicinity lies the most interesting collection of native art that
I have ever seen —a collection that covered a long period of time. The
smooth rock surfaces, on which the drawing appeared, were stained a
darker hue than the surrounding outcrops. Whether this was due to
Nature or otherwise I cannot say. Here was work for the pencil and
the camera, food for thought, the unsolved riddle of the ages, the signs
and symbols that were the precursors of all written languages, that
lifted man above the other creatures of the wilds and gave to him an
environment wide as the universe, for only thus could the accumulated
knowledge of the ages be tabulated and handed down from generation
to generation.
The following day I made a depot at this site, under the shade of
some mallee, and here I remained alone among these memorials of a
dead tribe. My first job was a cursory survey; then I settled down
to work with the tracing pencil, taking a small selection from the abun-
dant material at hand.
Among other things of interest were lizards (goanna, jew, and
sleepy), and a broken engraving of an emu. There were tracks of several
species of marsupials, continuous and in pairs; there were gigantic tracks
of a species not identified; there were tracks of dingoes, of human beings,
of birds, and of emus, that zig-zagged across the rocks in a perfectly
natural manner, just as though these birds had walked across a soft
surface and left the imprint of each footfall. There were also special
groups of tracks, tracks normal and abnormal; there were, for instance,
human tracks with seven toes, and dingoes with six; there were tracks
of animals at rest, as well as of those in motion; there were various
unknown signs and symbols, the commonest being in the form of circles
(single, double, and triple rings, one within the other). At another
place were seen the criss-cross lines and grooves so frequently met with
in connection with native art, but which have apparently resulted from
the sharpening and polishing of primitive tools and weapons. These, the
first man-made marks on the rocks, are the true germ of all symbolic
writing, which, in its simplest form, is found to consist of various group-
ings of such marks. Collectively, the designs represented the dawn of art.


“THE LAND OF THEIR FATHERS.”
At noon I had a bath in the salt pool, had lunch in the shade of
the mallee, and spent the afternoon exploring the higher part of the glen,
where a red kangaroo (used to seeing men on horseback) showed some
curiosity in my doings, and allowed a very close approach before taking
fright. This exploration revealed further traces of native art, and
probably the hills would contain more still; but, to my regret, I was
not in a position to pursue my research. I reached my depot at dusk.
A star was glimmering in the sky, and a long line of crows was sailing
into the yellow west.
As I lit my fire and prepared for the night, I pondered the fact
of Flora’s diminishing sway over these wide areas. There were still
dotted on the landscape clumps of sandalwood, black oak, and mallee,
and red gum marked the lines of the watercourses; but the fact im-
pressed itself upon me that there were no young trees. It needs no
prophet to see that these wide areas must eventually become bleak and
bare with the passing out of the trees now living. This is ever the effect
of stocking the country. Something should be done to restore that lost
balance, which will not only affect the carrying capacity of the runs,
but will affect the bird life, and, through that, the insect life, of these
districts, to the detriment of man. I found that here, as in other places,
all the smaller marsupials had disappeared, but that the emu and kan-
garoo were enjoying a measure of protection which is to the credit of
Messrs. Wade, seeing that they have to put up with some damage to
the fences at times. There is silence, save for the chirping crickets
and bubbling pot on the fire, which reminds me that the inner man
wants some attention. As I spread my table in the wilderness I am
reminded of the poet’s lines —
“How beautiful is night!
A dewy freshness fills the silent air.
No mist obscures; nor cloud, nor speck, nor stain,
Breaks the serene of heaven.”
Here, where the native camp fires once lit the glade, where their
voices once echoed in laughter and song; here, amid these pathetic
evidences of a dead tribe, I sit by my solitary fire and write. Saddened
in spirit, I look back over the years to the scenes enacted in this amphi-
theatre of the low rounded hills. The bats are flying, and the glade is
bathed in moonlight. The same moon used to light up the wurlies of
those whose home this valley once was —the care-free hunters of the open
bush. It looked down upon the groups around the camp-fires, upon their
sacred rites and joyous corroborees. Little did they anticipate, those
heirs to Nature’s bounty, the doom that hung over their race. They are
gone, and the land of their fathers has passed to an alien race. Sheep
nibble the herbage around the stones where patient hands toiled and
dusky children learned the rudiments of tracking from the pictured rocks.


which are now the sole monuments of a dead tribe. They are gone as
grass before a summer fire.
A REVERIE AND WINGED CALLERS.
My fire dies down; I lie and watch the shadowy plain, and think
of the ancient people who had out-lived the proudest empires of civilised
man. “Having nothing, they had all; having all, our lives are empty.”
For life is not counted by the abundance of things a man hath. A few
red embers are left when I pull the hood of my sleeping-bag up, and give
welcome to “tired Nature’s sweet restorer, balmy sleep.”
Once I waken and listen for a sound. No, ’tis not the wild chant
of the Stone Age men, but the wail of a dog-fox that is sending forth
a defiant challenge to all and sundry. The morning breaks, and I watch
the dawn creep over the eastern horizon. Two ringneck parrots peep at
me from the boughs above. My next visitors—l hear them coming across
the flat—are two rose-breasted cockatoos; they come straight for my
camp, and also alight in the boughs overhead. Small flocks of whistling
wings (crested pigeons) go by, and then, while I am attending to the
fire, my most distinguished visitor arrives—an eagle, that sweeps silently
into a neighboring mallee. I know its bright eyes are watching every
movement, but it is too dignified a bird to show the curiosity it feels.
This visitor made quite a long stay, and permitted my near approach.
I think it had hopes of bones or other scraps, but, as luck would have
it, my larder was bare. Presently it spread those great pinions and
passed silently and majestically away.
“Cah! cah! ca-a-ah!” Hello, other visitors have arrived, that are
not so welcome. A sip of hot tea, after which I light my pipe and
go down to the picture gallery to make a couple of tracings.
As I was packing to return to the station, a motor car arrived,
which my kindly hostess placed at my disposal.
Jock, the Foundling
A DOMESTICATED CHOUGH.
WHILE I write, Jock nestles like an old tabby cat enjoying the
warmth of the fire; and the place of his choice is my knee.
Jock is a white-winged chough, and a derelict of a summer storm
that blew him from his mud home, high on the swaying gum branch.
He was rescued by the ambulance corps, as represented by one of my
boys who happened along. Jock’s parents had nested here for some
years, and have had their trials, even to the total wrecking of their
patiently-built mud home. But “Nil desperandum” is the motto of our


feathered friends, and they just as patiently set to work by laying the
foundation of a second nest of mud, reinforced with grass.
Last season Jock was found hungry and helpless under the nest.
He could not be replaced, for the nest was high, and its position dan-
gerous. This being the case, the bird was brought home and reared by
its rescuer, to the sad disarrangement of flower-pots and borders in the
search for worms, centipedes, and similar dainties. Its two fellow-
foundlings were a young starling and a young Rosella parrot. The
starling went back to the bush, and the Rosella fell a victim to a wild
cat; but Jock, having discretion, camps out of danger’s reach by choosing
a high gum tree for his roost.
ADOPTED THE FAMILY.
Jock has adopted the whole family. He loves to be petted, and at
meal times he is in attendance, sometimes circling the table by going
from shoulder to shoulder taking a titbit from one or another. Play-
fully mischievous, the bird has won its way into all our hearts. It always
has its freedom, and should it come and find all its friends absent, it
wanders around making mournful cries. If one returns, it flies to meet
him, and its welcome is staged by bowing with spread wings. Its eyes
become ringed by a vivid red color, brought about by the production
of a hidden membrane.
Jock has pretty good table manners, having learned that he must
not settle or walk on the table. He will walk down your arm and on
to your hand, which may rest on the table, but no further; but when
he thinks no one is about, he will take the supreme liberty.
Presently, when he is reproved, Jock instantly slips on to the sofa
and lies quietly. He is very affectionate, has many funny little tricks,
and delights in teasing the mallee fowls by going near their mounds,
where trespassers are not allowed. He loves to have them frantically
chasing him up and down the wire-netting fence.
Jock’s own kindred are often to be seen, but he has turned them
down in favor of his human friends. When he gets to work on an ant
nest, he uses his beak as a pick; and there is no Government stroke about
his work. His quick and forceful blows send the earth flying in all
directions. Jock is an early riser, and if my door is open he gives me
a call by jumping on to my pillow and giving a slight tug at my mous-
tache. If I close my eyes again, I get another reminder pretty soon.
MATING TIME.
The time of the singing of birds is here, and we are wondering how-
soon some dusky mate will come whispering of a mud nest that ought
to be built in one of the tall gums, where Jock has gone to his lonely
roost. As a student of animal psychology, I cannot wonder that some
races believe in the doctrine of the transmigration of souls. To such
Jock would embody the spirit, or soul, of a young and happy but mis-
chievous child.


Our Aborigines
“ Like leaves on trees the race of man is found—
Now green in youth, now withering on the ground;
Another race the following spring supplies;
They fall successive, and successive rise.”
THE Australian aborigine is probably the oldest race of man upon
the earth to-day, yet, despite all that has been said to the contrary
for the saving of the white man’s face, this race was, at our advent,
still in the green leaf, and probably good for another aeon of time.
Living near to Nature, and fitting in with her laws of balance, they
marked time to the measured beat of Nature’s own pendulum.
That steady old heart of Nature never fails, and is never flurried.
This was the sure foundation on which the Stone Age man rested in
safety; here was certain establishment for his laws and for the perma-
nence of his race. According to their lights, they are a simple, clean,
honest, and manly race; but not without fault, for all races of mankind
have wandered more or less from the straight path. As a much-wronged
people they have always had my sympathy, tinged, it is true, with regret
that I was powerless to help them.
A recent article by a missionary has turned my thoughts again in
this direction, hence these impressions from one who takes not the
casual outward glance, but the deeper inside view. If God was fit to
walk with naked humanity in the garden; if Christ was fit to work among
the poor and the lowly, why do our missionaries reverse the process
and try to make the natives come up to them? Why do they break up
tribal laws and customs that have stood the test of thousands of years?
The only true missionary that there could be for these simple children
of Nature is the man who would lose his identity in theirs, become one
of them, and see life’s problems through their eyes.
THE ONLY WAY.
The African and Indian may bend to the white man’s will, but the
aborigine must be met and dealt with on his own ground. I once saw
several converts brought in from the interior. Missionaries had evident-
ly tried to make “white fellows” of them; very solemn and stiff and
unnatural they looked. I pity such, and think what a waste of good
energy for so little fruit; meanwhile they are helping in the destruction
of a people—a dozen converts for a thousand slain!


If we would save this people from extinction we must give large
consideration—nay, first consideration —to the physical side of the
question, as well as to the spiritual. Trust Him who notes the sparrows
fall, for He has had their care for ages past. It is useless trying to graft
the aborigines on to Christianity as we know it (in some things they
could be our teachers) ; but we should put a little of its best leaven
into his social system, if the men can be found to do it.
The aborigine cannot be transplanted. In this respect he is like
much of our native flora. Get the idea out of your head that the native
upstanding lord of the soil is a heathen; he is simply a man who doesn’t
know how to sin like we do. True, he is easily taught our vices, but
that is the end. He is not an ass or a camel, to be broken into the
usages of civilised life. Then why try to put his nose to the grind-
stone; his life is sufficiently strenuous in its natural groove.
If the remnant (those still uncontaminated) is to be saved, it must
he on natural lines. The effort is well worth while, even though it cost
a few thousand pounds. Why should there never be a legacy for this
pure purpose, when we remember from whence comes our wealth, and
“the wrongs unredressed, or insults unrevenged”?
LANGUAGE.
In the natural order of things, language cannot be called an inven-
tion, for it is evolved. It is the mind’s conscious effort for contact with
its physical and emotional environment by modulations of sound. It
exists in its most primitive forms in the animal world; it fluctuates with
environment, and if, as stated, the Aranda tribe use a language comprised
of 6,000 words, it is because their environment needs that number. At
the present time the art or inventive power of man comes with the
alphabet; that language is simply a matter of evolution is frequently
illustrated in young children. For instance, with one of ours a watch
was a “Mee-mee,” a crab a “Widley,” and a punting pole a “Hoo-ee.”
Assuming that a group of children could be reared without contact
with adults, it would be found that they had acquired a language of
their own, but it would be one limited to their own environment.
RELIGIONS.
With the river tribes there was a belief in spirits—mythical person-
ages such as Nooree, Wunderra, and others; and there was totemism,
which in itself might be called a religion, and one that played a very
important part in the life history of this people. The undermining of
these fundamental beliefs means their speedy disintegration. Totem
groups were a thing apart from tribal groups; as the various totems
were found scattered throughout the tribes, each was sacred to the
members of its group, for from it they claimed descent.


VETERAN OF A RIVER MURRAY TRIBE


A FEW SURVIVORS OF THE RIVER MURRAY TRIBES (JINNY CHRISTMAS, WIDOW OF KING JERRY,
AND GRANDCHILDREN)


In this respect it is most difficult for a white man to follow their
line of thought, for the totem of a group is represented by a bird,
animal, or reptile, the identity of which, according to their thought,
was one time merged in the human. The totem of a group was not
allowed to be killed or eaten by members of that group; and members
of the same group were not permitted to marry. Children took the totem
of their mothers.
With the river tribes I found no idea of one Supreme Being; but
I do not say that it did not exist in some of their ancient rites. Aus-
tralians must recognise that two opposing lines of thought are in the
field, one following the natural, the other the unnatural and experimental.
With regard to cannibalism, the legend of Chinny-kinik, of the Murray
tribes, proves antagonism to the practice. Records of shipwreck show
instances of its practice among our own people, and we find it in
Biblical history, pangs of famine having been the cause. The same
explanation may apply to its casual occurrence among the aborigines,
the practice probably being associated in some cases with ceremonials
corresponding in our own records with witchcraft.
THE HALF-CASTE PROBLEM.
In dealing with the half-caste problem, one often reads that the
half-caste has the vices of both races. Yes, with a large preponderance
on the side of the whites. The idea of re-marrying them to the black
is scientifically sound; but how is this to he done in districts where the
black is practically extinct? We hear complaints of immorality on
missions, which, through present conditions, is uncontrollable. This is
a natural sequence to the breaking down of tribal law.
The proposed removal of all half-caste children (which, in practice,
will include full-bloods) from all contact with their parents seems cruel
to me, and has little to recommend it, seeing that there is an alternative
scheme. The proposal would remove the last humanising influence from
the natives, and sink them into deeper degradation.
A Wounded Heron
I watched the merry shooters pass,
I heard them shoot and laugh,
And shoot and laugh again.
I watched a wounded heron
Climb up the river bank,
And turn its head to see


What ailed its drooping wing.
So limp, and red, and dank.
With blood that left a ruddy trail
To mark the road it went.
Anon it stopped to lightly peck
The wound it could not understand,
The reason why this thing should be—
This awful punishment.
The poor bird reached the shadow
Of an overhanging bough;
Beyond that first wild scream
Of pain no sound had come
From that poor, tortured breast.
Patient and forlorn it stands,
Then turns its gaze up to its nest,
A rude stick nest, high on
That gum’s wide-spreading branch,
From which the young
Look down, and call and call again.
Each call a knife to pierce
That mother’s stricken heart,
Who knows, alas, that call must be in vain!
The workers leave the harvest field.
And weaker grow the calls for food;
And when night’s mantle falls
No mother’s breast to shield
From night winds chill
That beat about that callow brood,
For she sad vigil keeps
Among the swaying reeds below,
Wounded and suffering,
And a prey to thought
As sad as heart of man can know.
I saw those merry shooters pass,
I heard the shots, and callow laugh;
But more than I saw, and more than I heard,
Was what I felt for the wounded bird,
And the stricken young in the cold night wind.
Twas a thoughtless deed of a thoughtless mind,
And this moral is: “Be kind! Be kind!”
For the road of life you travel but once,
And your thoughts are seeds that grow—
“Be kind.”


Poor Cocky
HIS CHEQUERED CAREER.
“ ’Twould ring the bells of heaven
The wildest peal for years
If parson lost his senses,
And people came to theirs.
And he and they together
Knelt down with angry prayers
For tamed and shabby tigers,
And dancing dogs and bears.
And wretched blind pit ponies,
And little hunted hares.”
Ralph Hodgson.
4 '“I 'WAS in London, just previous to sailing, that I walked into a shop
I to try some fruit. “What’s for you?” said a voice. I looked
around, but could see no one. “What’s for you?” Then, over
the counter, I saw a fine white cockatoo, which immediately called,
“Shop!” The proprietor appeared. From the shop I went to the Zoo
and the British Museum, intent upon sorting out my future bird and
animal acquaintances of the Australian bush. I was young, and had no
letters of introduction to those of my own kind, but this did not worry
me, because I was sure of friends in the bushlands. That was many years
ago, and I have not been disappointed.
Speaking of the value of birds of this group in Nature’s economy,
the loss over wide areas of the service of the black cockatoo (“wy-la”)
has resulted in very evident and serious damage to our forest lands. We
have had opportunity to study the habits of the few survivors at the
Sanctuary, that work through this district at rare intervals, and these
observations have proved beyond doubt their value as guardians of the
forest. These birds are not much in demand as pets, and I have been
much puzzled at their swift depletion.
Leach mentions the white cockatoo favorably as a destroyer of
grasshopper eggs; and recent experiences should impress this fact upon
our minds. At the time of writing, millions of young grasshoppers are
already in evidence, for the suppression of which the English starling is
creating an excellent record, and winning the gratitude of our farmers.


While writing this there falls on my ears the quaint voice of a
white cockatoo which, during my son’s absence from his home, is in
our charge. He is mimicking whining puppies and meowing cats, is
laughing, and calling familiar names. Occasionally he changes his
programme, and dances to the tune of “Cocky, cocky, cocky; cocky want
a drink,” or “Monkey, monkey,” the latter carried out with the assistance
of one of my children (a great favorite with the bird), becomes a most
amusing circus to the rest of us. The bird always gives us a greeting
with the word “Hullo!” and parting with “Good-bye.”
When our “cocky” sees us driving the cows through the panels it
shouts, “Get out!” and barks like a dog. If you call, “Puss! Puss!
Puss!” it meows like a cat, whereas if you mew is calls, “Puss! Puss!
Puss!” This bird evidently senses the meaning and connections of many
words and sounds it uses. It is never on a chain, and it has had abundant
opportunity to join its wild kindred, but prefers to stay with its human
friends. It shows great affection for its owner and for one of the younger
members of our family, whom it joins in the noisy excitement of play,
amusing the household with its pranks, and causing much merriment. It
has won the hearts of all, even of those who have felt its displeasure
through the medium of its formidable beak. When the magpies chase
“Cocky,” it settles in a tree and lectures to them in good English, very
much to their surprise and confusion. Should we call one of the
children’s names, it answers with, “What? What do you say?” This
is how the children used to reply when the bird called them by name.
“Poor Cocky” makes an excellent pet, but please do not keep it
on a chain. Give it a large cage, with a period of liberty each day;
the food should include a few nuts, a little hemp seed, wheat, bread and
butter, but no meat.
“Something of their joy was mine,
As from the camp at early mom
I’d watch their white troops rise,
And wheel against the blue of far-off skies.
Wheel, then with a clamour
That of joy was born,
Settle in the yellow cliffs and trees;
Then, with a shout, they’re off anew,
To pastures far, to “seek their meat of God,”
As well I know.
But with the glamour
Of the gently passing day
Their legions would return
With joyous shouts, and they


Would camp among the spreading gums
And sandstone cliffs, so fair.
Yes, something of their joy was mine
As from my camp at evening time
I heard their shouts and watched their play,
Till, with the darkening river, silence came.
And night held sway.”
HAPLESS PRISONERS.
The white cockatoo is always in demand as a pet, and in the old
days this demand was largely met by the natives; the young birds were
handed over to the care of the gins, who, in their efforts to feed them,
generally succeeded in making them into funny, uncomfortable-looking
objects by plastering their heads with soft bread. The natives were fear-
less climbers, and had little difficulty in keeping up supplies. During
the breeding season every camp became a nursery, and all the gins “wet
nurses,” to the great amusement of the little black imps of those times.
In later years I have seen men and boys firing into the flocks in the
hope of securing wounded birds, or capturing them by the aid of bar-
barous steel traps. It is not a difficult matter to sense a little of the
suffering of wounded birds thus captured, as, chained to a stick, they
watched their late comrades wheeling in the blue. Spreading their wings,
they gave wild, joyous greetings, but were jerked to earth by the chain
they had for the moment forgotten. They were never a success, because
they always pined for their liberty and the comradeship of their wild
mates.
THOUGHTLESS PET KEEPERS.
I think the keeping of pets is right, provided that their comfort
and happiness have due consideration, and that they have never known
the joys of freedom. Birds reared in captivity easily adapt themselves
to their environment, and refuse their liberty when the opportunity is
theirs. But, alas, the demand for pets causes much suffering to the
creatures of the wild in the capture of their young, and large numbers
regularly perish. Then, again, many pets are neglected and die of
hunger, and, worst of all, of thirst. Thousands of our beautiful birds
and animals suffer the misery of long sea voyages, and are landed in
climatic conditions for which they are quite unsuited. Most of these
poor little exiles, such as the pretty little shell parrots, were taken in
nets. One can imagine their suffering, straight from their wild freedom
to those narrow, crowded prison cages. Some of us look for the day
to come when the rights of God’s creatures will be better recognised than
they are now. A friend lately gave me a little poem by Ralph Hodgson,
which prefaces this article.


Twin Birth among the Wallabies
AMONG the little grey mothers of the Sanctuary, the wallabies have
proved of great interest to visitors. This has been accentuated by
the unusual occurrence of the birth of twins to one of the does. I
have known this to happen on one occasion with the common opossum,
but I fancy the present instance will prove the first recorded case of a
twin birth with the wallabies. The young are naturally somewhat smaller
than usual.
My youngest son, who assists me in this work, reported that he had
seen two “joeys” enter the pouch of one mother. A count revealed one
joey in excess of the number of breeding does, and established the fact
beyond dispute.
These wallabies are from Kangaroo Island, and, thanks to the
generosity of Miss Sandison, of New Glenelg, they now enjoy the liberty
of an ideal paddock of scrub and grassland. The scrub provides a safe
refuge from the eagles, which occasionally menace them, and a sub-
stantial fence bars entry from the fox.
The wallaby of Kangaroo Island, of the Adelaide Ranges, and the
Murray Flats (the two latter now extinct) were all known as the Dama
wallaby, but the variation in each was so great that I always looked upon
them as distinct species. The passing of the mainland varieties has been
swift and complete, and seeing that six other interesting species of
marsupial life forms have passed out with them, and through the same
causes, it shows the importance of such work as is carried out here; it
should, however, be undertaken on a much larger scale.
NATIONAL PARKS WANTED.
There have been years of theorising, years of talk, while all the time
the need has been for practical work. Foxes, vandalism, sport, the
advance of settlement and disapeparance of forest and natural cover and
feeding grounds, are all working swiftly to the one end—the loss of our
unique and beautiful native life. We have large land areas that we could
well afford to set apart as national parks, giving to each a nucleus of
our surviving native life. America has seen the wisdom of this, and has
set apart such vast areas as would make Australians gasp. America ha«
worked wonders with an almost hopeless problem—the disappearance of
the fauna of the great land, the bison, the moose, and the elk, and a
myriad of less fauna and avifauna. How was it done?
It was the people’s heritage, and they organised and forced the
hands of Governments. If we would save our heritage, it is for us to


follow that lead. We owe this duty not only to ourselves, but to future
generations. In our case we have the added incentive that our fauna
and avifauna are so largely representative of the long-passed ages, and,
as such, found in no other land. In many places the sun’s rays now
strike fiercely on the drifting sands of deserted farms whose former
tenants fought hundreds of wallabies for their crops. Some readers will
remember the week-end wallaby shoots, when, at the farmers’ invitation,
parties of gunmen stationed themselves along the survey lines, and
shot the driven wallabies as they crossed.
Without doubt, these little animals had a bad time; but it was the
coming of the fox that completed the work of extinction. Incidentally,
we have exchanged wide oceans of mallee for drift-sands and rabbits.
Our native wild life, being slow breeders, once they were brought under
control, could be kept within bounds. Not so the rabbit, which menaces
the prosperity of a continent by its fecundity.
GROWING WORLD CONSCIOUSNESS,
All over the world there is a growing consciousness that man’s
attitude toward the animal kingdom has not been what it should have
been. There is a growing recognition of neglected responsibilities, and
God-given rights too long ignored; an awakening to the fact that earth-
beauty was not given for exploitation, or creation built up for man’s
selfish pleasure alone.
Man’s position should be that of steward and trustee. May Aus-
tralia respond to this classical message of humanity.
I have learned
To look on Nature, not as in the hour
Of thoughtless youth, but hearing oftentimes
The still sad music of humanity,
Nor harsh nor grating, though of ample power
To chasten and subdue, and I have felt
A presence that disturbs me with the joy
Of elevated thoughts; a sense sublime
Of something far more deeply interfused,
Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
And the round ocean, and the living air,
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man;
A motion and a spirit that impels
All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
And rolls through all things.”
Wordsworth.
Can we measure Creation in barrels of oil, bales of fur, and boxes
of plumes? Can we stand calmly by while our earth home is plundered
and its beauty destroyed?


Kangaroos
A SPECIAL ARTICLE FOR MY YOUNG FRIENDS.
DURING the year 1918, in a little book called “Nature, Our Mother,”
I gave my young friends the story of the Sooty-Kangs of Kangaroo
Island, as told by Darby. It is a long time since I was in the
home of the Sooty-Kangs, and of Holey Ear and his family, of the Old
Man of the White Stone Ridge and his folk I can say little; but some
day I hope to look over their old haunts again, and see if any of our
old friends are left. One of them went blind, and met his end, as many
more did, at the hands of an old hunter who had a secret tannery in
a secluded glen, by which he was able to elude the embargo on raw
skins.
At a later date, the flesh of the Sooty-Kangs was sold as butcher’s
meat in one of our markets, so that we can scarcely hope that any of
our old friends of the White Stone Ridge are now left; but it will
interest my young friends to know that Darby is still alive, as is also
the little doe we knew as a daughter of Smutty Nose, that was thrown
from her mother’s pouch when flying from dogs. She has had two male
offsprings, the first of which broke its neck in a fence, through fright
from a barking dog. The next one, wishing to see more of the world,
went off into the bush, but found its relations, the Grey Kangaroos, were
not too friendly, and treated it as an interloper and a foreigner. It was
its sixteenth night out when, down in a moonlit flat, it saw Silver-Breast,
the big grey kang., that, jumping the wire of the home paddock of its
flock, had dwelt there in solitary aloofness, allowing no friendly inter-
course, though it lived with them for nearly three months.
The mistake had been Silver-Breast’s, for he had jumped the wrong
fence; his would-be sweetheart was in the next paddock.
A long grey shadow creeps behind a tussock where a rabbit is
feeding; it bounds forth, and a death squeal awakens the silent night.
Yes, he would return; there were hidden terrors haunting this big, silent
world. Tensely he tested the air for scent or sound; that death cry
had got on his nerves.
Ah this moment, a gruff challenge reached its ears from Silver-
Breast, who, ignoring the presence of the fox, had sensed the stranger’s
proximity in the bordering shadows.


BACK TO SAFETY.
Leaping into the middle of the glade, Silver-Breast angrily repeated
his challenge. But the son of Smutty Nose felt in no mood for tackling
this giant of the forest. It turned, and with long leaps headed for the
Sanctuary paddock.
It was on the following morning that I met the prodigal in the
drive. He came up, showing no fear, and took a crust of bread from
my hand, wanting to know if I had any more in my pocket. The
kangaroos and wallabies here all take an interest in my coat pocket,
and a bit of bread is to them a luxury that will sometimes tempt them
to pick my pocket.
Well, I opened the gate and watched with interest the reception
accorded to the wanderer. It was most cordial and affectionate, even
to the point of caresses, which, after the manner of a dog, are conveyed
by the act of licking the other’s face, ears, and neck. There could be
no doubt that the prodigal’s return had given mutual pleasure, and his
conduct since has warranted the belief that he is cured of the wanderlust,
and is now content with the more prosaic and safer life of the Sanctuary.
But let me tell you that the sedate old Darby once made a burst
for freedom, which caused some excitement and considerable merriment.
Two cows that were peacefully chewing their cud happened to be in the
line of his flight. One look at the kangaroo, and they fled in terror.
Darby, sensing their terror, but not knowing its cause, followed closely
behind them, as full of fright as they. Over hills and gullies they went;
and, reaching the barb-wire fence, one after the other cleared it in
splendid style, and disappeared into the scrub.
The cows took some mustering that night. The morning showed
Darby back at the fence; and it took some time to steer him back to
his quarters.
There is another big sooty kang. here which has constituted itself
chief of the clan. Jealousy has prompted many a battle between Darby
and this fellow, and, fearing they would do one another serious injury,
I one day took a bag and ran between them, slapping the bag in their
faces. I got the big fellow away, and in trying to follow up my advan-
tage, turned my back to the enraged Darby. When I freed myself, the
back of my coat was badly torn. “All right, old boy,” I said, “you
can fight your own battles after this.” So I fetched the camera, and
just followed them around trying for a snap. I now learnt that there
was no need to interfere, as, by their rules, the ripping claw is not used
in fights among themselves; every blow is struck with the flat of the
foot. The claws are reserved for the enemies of their kind. My coat
had been torn by the ripping claws of Darby’s hands; for they first
grip each other by the shoulders, and then deliver the blow by striking
with both hind feet>while balanced on their powerful tail.


DARBY IS SUPERSEDED.
Darby took the “flu” last winter, and came near to dying. Since
then he has done no fighting, and takes a rather pessimistic view of
life. I notice now that he expects a continuance of the human sympathy
that was meted out to him during his sickness. The boss now holds un-
disputed sway in the Sanctuary camp of the Sooty-kangs. These, with
the island wallabies, now enjoy the wider liberty of the Anderson pad-
dock —a boon they much appreciate.
Poor old Joe “went west” some time ago. He died through eating
the shoots of bitter almond. I tended him the three days he lay dying,
and his appreciation was almost human. I felt sorry for the poor old
chap, and he knew it, and in his own language expressed as much. Soon
after Joe’s death Silver-Breast, a wild grey kang., came visiting Joe’s
doe, “Jinny.” Plainly he was inviting her to jump the fence and join
him in the bush; but Jinny never jumped, and when Silver-Breast took
the jump he made a mistake, and landed in the wrong paddock, for there
were two fences between them. He spent nearly three months here, get-
ting very tame, and then went bush again.
Recently he came back, evidently sick. I think he had been shot,
for after the big storm, Silver-Breast was found dead in one of our
huts. Silver-Breast received his name from his white chest. Three of
Joe’s descendants are still here. Jinny had never seen an emu, and when
one of these birds was placed in an adjoining paddock she got such a
fright that she dashed into the fence and killed herself.
Rufus, the red kang. of the saltbush plains, lives by himself down
by the big dam. He is a cheeky beggar, and always invites you to
wrestle with him. He is waiting for someone to send him a mate. Some-
times he joins us in the boat for a pull around the dam. He rather misses
the sunny north country, and reckons there are too many wet days in the
Humbug Scrub. Perhaps he would be more content if he knew that a
thousand of his fellows were said to have lost their skins to one party
of hunters out from Broken Hill before the rain came—kangaroos driven
in by the drought from over a wide area. During the spring months the
Sanctuary will have the added interest of young marsupial and other life,
illustrating the all-pervading tenderness of parental love. The educa-
tional equipment of the young kangaroo includes the science of self-
protection, the teaching of which is the duty of the male.


The Exciting Drama of the Bush
EXPERIENCES OF STUMPY JACK.
THE TRAGEDY OF SPORT.
THE camp was set. The contractor had left the party at dawn, to
follow the freshly-broken trail back to the haunts of civilisation.
Inquisitive birds peered from overhanging boughs, scattering the
dewdrops on the tents below. Thirsty creatures hidden in the bordering
scrub cast longing glances toward the rockhole, waiting for the strange
beings to go. Never had the dark-skinned race they knew served them
so; their old camping ground was among the desert gums just over
the rise. This allowed free access to the rockhole to bird and beast,
upon the welfare of which the natives’ own existence had so largely
depended.
The flat which faced the rockhole was the favorite “jazzing” ground
of the emus in the intervals when the human element was absent. Here
they skipped and ran, and went through their strange contortionist
movements —“just a sort of acting the goat,” as Bill was wont to call
it —and doing the high kick. It is pure joy of life. Do not all the
bush “critters” have their little games? Even the camp dog sometimes
chases his own tail!
Time passed. The sun, which had risen over the mallee-clad eastern
horizon, had sunk in glory behind the mallee-studded western horizon.
Each day was like its fellow; each dawn musical with the songs of birds
and fresh with the dews of heaven.
Bill was the only man of the party in camp. The freedom of the
mallee lands had long been his, the gift of Nature to her children. Bill,
in his spare time, would wander among the blossoming broom, exploring
the country around the camp. Stumpy Jack wanted him to come out
with the gun, but this was not for Bill. It was he who found the lowan’s
mound near the new trail, and in the dusk of evening he had met the
echidna shuffling out of its lair in the porcupine grass.
BILL KNEW THEM ALL.
He knew the feeding grounds and camps of the grey kangaroo and
the scrubber; the scattered parrot feathers had shown him the home of


the tiger cats on the limestone ridge, and the tracks in the entrance of
a wombat hole pointed to him where the dingo earthed.
Stumpy Jack, seeking sport, would follow the new trail of cut lines
which now bisected the scrub, along which the numbered pegs were his
guides. Stumpy was no hushman.
One Saturday afternoon Bill, when approaching camp, came across
some fresh blackfellow tracks. “H’m! One, two, three fellow been
looking what whitefellow do. H’m! Two fellow gone. One fellow
keep on —and, hang it all, there he is looking just like a burnt stump in
the bushes. Am sure it’s old Natunga. Hello, old friend! You bin
watch’em camp longa waterhole?”
“No, Mitter Bill. Me bin plenty longa poolteroo (mallee). Git
um kumperra; git um pooloorkee (kangaroo); no pelcharrie (water)
longa that way. What for you pfellar chop ’em, chop ’em, longa pool-
teroo (mallee) ? You bin make it fence, eh? Poor pfellar black
pfellar. No sit down long white pfellar come. Long pfellar big hole
(cave). My country. White pfellar come. Kill ’em pooloorkee (kan-
garoo). Kill ’em black pfellar. No good, Natunga walk about this way
now.”
ONCE THE PROUD OWNERS.
“I’m sorry, old man, but you’ve hit it. Every cut line means a
white fellow’s fence, and I’m darned well sure it means something more
by the look of this sand. You come longa git um tuckout? No? Well,
I bringum water longa that bush, see?”
Bill did as he promised, but did not mention the presence of the
blacks to his mates. Later he found that Natunga and a few of his
people were camped at a native well some twenty-five miles distant from
the rockhole. Others of his tribe were working for the whitefellows of
the cave country, of which they were once the proud owners. Times
were hard on those who remained true to tribal traditions. Natunga,
being the head of one such clan, had become an outlaw in the land of
his fathers. Embittered by their many acts of injustice, he had no love
for the whitefellow, nor respect for his laws.
Life at the rockhole camp was enlivened by cards and music. Black
Jack, having brought an accordeon, which he could play well, many
familiar old strains went echoing through the silent starlit mallee forest.
To these unusual sounds the unseen audience, the bush folk, were
becoming accustomed.
Bill, sitting by the fire, his thoughts busy, as usual, with many
problems, noticed that certain tunes harmonised well with the surround-
ings. His thoughts were much with its ancient inhabitants, for whom
he had great sympathy. To-night, in the strains of an old Scotch song,
he sensed the wailing of gins for their dead. Again, in a martial tune*


he detected the rhythmic movements of painted stalwarts, who, weapon
in hand, mimicked the wars of rival tribes. The latter, he knew, general-
ly resolved themselves into acts of retaliative justice, resulting in a few
casualties among the contestants. He pictured the half-circle of squat-
ting gins, who beat time on tightly rolled opossum rugs, the intent faces
of an appreciative audience, the flickering firelight, and the shadowy
gums; then he imagined he heard the soft, monotonous cadences which
ended in abrupt, ferocious sounds of well-feigned anger.
FIGHT WITH A BUCK.
The music ceases, and Bill awakes from his reverie with a start, for
the faint report of a gun had reached the ears of the camp. Stumpy,
out with the gun for sport, had not returned for supper.
He had left the trail to follow a wounded buck, and had himself
become the sport of circumstances. Eventually the buck had stood erect,
with back to a bush, and dared its antagonist to come on. Stumpy had
broken off a mallee stick and rushed to his fate.
The buck, with outstretched arms, jumped forward to meet the foe:
a sweeping stroke of clutching paws met on Stumpy’s shoulders. The
counter-attack was well timed, but, unlike his antagonist, Stumpy had
not the support of a muscular tail to withstand so great an impact.
Perhaps it was well for him that this was the case, because it prevented
the kangaroo from getting home with his ripping claws. As it was, both
went down.
When Stumpy, scared somewhat, rose from the ground, one of his
shirt-sleeves was hanging loose, and his right ear and shoulder were
bleeding from scratches inflicted by the kangaroo’s long, claw-like nails
of the fore paws. The kangaroo had waited a full minute for his an-
tagonist to rise, and then had quietly hopped away.
STRANGE, UNCANNY SOUNDS.
Stumpy did not again attempt to follow the kangaroo, and decided
to return to camp; but he soon found that he had lost all sense of
direction. The sun was sinking fast as, with hurried steps, he tried to
regain the track. The longer he travelled, the more erratic became his
movements. Every few hundred yards he would change his course.
Night shadows were settling around him, and strange, uncanny
sounds were in the air—the spotted night-jar’s nerve-racking call, the
low humming note of the frogmouth, and the solemn call of the lowan:
“Uh, uh-whoo-oome-whoo-oome.” The dingo, sitting at its cave entrance,
brought the climax when it lifted its head and produced a long-drawn,
blood-curdling howl. It is an eerie enough sound at any time, but never
so much as to a person lost in the mallee.


It left Stumpy’s knees all of a tremble. Fearfully he looked around
for fiery eyes; and there, away in the deepest gloom, two small buttons
of light met his gaze! With shaking hands, he lifted his gun and fired.
The tiger cat which had been watching and puzzling over this new
and, to it, strange creature, bounded away in a fright, for in the darkness
the shot had gone wide. Stumpy’s progress was now impeded by the
swiftly-increasing darkness.
The lowan, resting on the highest point of its mound, the lightest
sleeper of all the forest denizens, glides silently into the bushes nearby.
Stumpy blunders on to the mound, and sinks on his knees, exhausted.
Several shots he had fired had been drowned by the music of the cook’s
accordeon.
THE SEARCH PARTY IS OUT.
Should he try another shot? He might want those few remaining
cartridges. The question was settled by the dingoes, which again broke
the silence.. Stumpy fired the shot that reached the ears of Bill.
“Coo-ee! Coo-ee!” Stumpy jumps to his feet and listens. Yes,
there it is again.
The search party is out. Placing his hands to his mouth, Stumpy
repeats the old familiar call. Presently the light of a lantern is seen.
Stumpy is found, and, to his surprise and disgust, the new trail is but
fifty yards from the mound.
Talking over these events afterwards, Stumpy did not forget to
elaborate. The kangaroo became an eight-feet giant! The fiery eyes
grew to the size of two-shilling pieces; and it was only by his great
bravery that he had escaped from being mauled to death by the hungry
jaws of a pack of dingoes.
Saltbush Charlie encouraged him in this belief. He said, with a
wink to the others: “I was once in a similar fix. The brutes got after
me just out of revenge for moving all the sheep from the range-paddock,
because of their attentions. I whipped the horse into a gallop, but it
was no good. So, seeing a sandalwood just ahead, I says to the neddy:
‘Here we part, and luck go with you’; for he was a good horse, he was.
Well, I shakes my feet free of the stirrups, gives a spring, and hauls
myself into the branches. The hunt went off in full cry —all but the
tail end. And those brutes spotted me! They just sat down on their
haunches and shepherded me the whole of the night, and, between their
howling and teeth-gnashing, I never slept a wink. I guess you done
well, Stumpy; but ’tis a pity you did not bring the pelts of those you
shot. The horse, eh? Oh, he got home all right; but those cussed
dingoes had the sheep back in the range paddock before I got in. Shows
the intelligence those animals have got, don’t it, Bill?”


The Goanna
was a camp mate of my son, Victor, to whom I am indebted
I j for these episodes. We of the bush know that the goanna does
not lack in intelligence, has abundant self-assertion, and plenty
of go. His cousins and he are at home amid the arid wastes of the
north, or by the running streams of the south, on the land, in the water,
or up a tree; but, in spite of his adaptiveness to all conditions, we
know that on the mainland his numbers are swiftly decreasing. This is
due, we believe, to that red maurauder, the fox. I have had more than
a passing acquaintance with the goanna; but, unlike other bushmen I
have known, I have not puhsed that acquaintance to the extent of
sampling the ‘Go” as a table delicacy. For this I claim no merit, as
there have been times in my experience when I would have placed it
on the menu with the greatest of pleasure—times when each day sees
you taking up the slack in your belt. Under such conditions you become
less fastidious as to your tucker. Three days on grass tree cores and
sheoak apples will, I guarantee, cure the greatest dallier at the table.
Probably the reason of the goanna’s disappearance is to be chiefly
found in the destruction of its eggs by the fox, which is in like manner
destroying the two species of river turtles, that Nature used as scavengers
of our streams.
“ GON ” INTRODUCES HIMSELF.
’Tis noon. The camp is pitched by the Cygnet River. For several
days there have been fresh tracks around the tent door. To-day a long-
drawn hiss attracts our attention. The introduction over, each day sees
a repetition of the visit, and our midday meal is shared by the new-
comer. Then, having received the freedom of the tent, the goanna pro-
ceeded to investigate every nook and cranny.
Puss, who was peacefully sleeping in a box under the bunk, streaked
for the higher levels, every hair on end with fright. Poor puss never
again attempted to sleep under the bunk. Gon never stood on ceremony;
he would just walk straight in, his usual greeting being a long-drawn hiss,
made by blowing air through his nostrils.
One day I had worked a little late. Gon had tired of waiting, and
done some foraging on his own. We met at the tent door. Gon was
brilliantly lustrous, his appearance giving the impression that he had
donned a coat of varnish. Investigation showed that my food box had
been raised. The butter I had left carefully rolled in a damp rag had
disappeared. The rag was on the floor, while butter was splashed all
around the tent, showing that Gon had adopted his usual tactics of
“banging” his larger morsels. Evidently this was done to get at the
contents of the damp cloth. The effect of Gon’s butter bath was appa-
rent for some time, his scaly armor showing an extra gloss.


A GOOD FORAGEK.
Gon would climb the highest tree to rob a bird’s nest, or explore
the deepest holes of the river bed in search of aquatic prey. One day
he was seen rending strips of flesh from the body of a skinned opossum
that had drifted down the river. In his aquatic habits Gon was prac-
tically a miniature alligator. He always knew the dinner hour, and
streaked up from the river or out from the scrub on time. He provided
a pleasant break in the monotony of a lonely bush camp, and I often
recall that uplifted head at the tent door, with the expectant beady eyes
searching for its benefaction. With the disappearance of the goanna
from the mainland it may become necessary to ensure its continuance
on some of the islands while we have the opportunity.
The White-Winged Chough (Jay)
THIS interesting bird is an expert mason. The material used in its
nest construction seems to be a mixture of clay and loam, reinforced
with dry grass stems of the previous season’s growth. The com-
pleted nest takes the form of a basin. So far as our observations have
gone, we have found that building operations are carried out in the
forenoon. The work is then left to set and dry until the following
morning. The inside is moulded by the bird with its wings, shoulders,
and breast. The outside is trimmed and pressed into shape with the
beak as each tier is laid on.
The domestic arrangements of these birds have long puzzled me,
for they embody a strange departure from the usual order. Every nest
that we have watched under construction, and every brood in the rearing,
have shown us a community of five birds, which work in unison, and
share all responsibilities.
It is possible that the explanation of this curious fact may be that
the young of the previous season remain with their parents for such a
period as covers the following nesting season, and break away in the
third season to form new groups.
It has been noticed that the number of individuals in these groups
vary according to the times of the year. In the autumn we frequently
see eight or nine birds in a flock, repreesnting the season’s increase,
while later on still larger flocks are occasionally met with, when the
smaller groups fraternise.
By this arrangement, the young are of great assistance to their
parents during a strenuous period, and, incidentally, gain in experience


by the extra tuition —a sort of apprenticeship, by which they are the
better fitted to assume full responsibilities when they are two years old.
THE DIET.
These birds will eat a small amount of seeds (oats and oat-like
grasses), but their diet is chiefly confined to insect forms. They can
safely be classed as useful to man, and worthy of protection. Their work
is beneficial to forest growths, and as they do not eat fruit, but materially
assist in checking the codlin moth, they should be encouraged among
the fruit trees. The black, or bell, magpie is a fruit eater, and is some-
times mistaken for the chough. Such errors are not profitable, seeing
that they mean the loss of a good worker.
Leach’s book describes the bird as being red-eyed, but this is hardly
correct, because the eyes become red only when it is excited; and then
the change of color seems to be brought about by means of an envelop-
ing membrane. Like other birds of the wilderness, its habitat is ever
becoming more and more restricted.
Being lovers of the wide, lone lands, they usually shun the habita-
tions of man; but here at the Sanctuary they come to the verandah for
morsels of bread; and two groups have just completed their nests.
Their long, mournful whistle to me is reminiscent of my many wander-
ings in the once-wide mallee lands, where observations were difficult
owing to the extreme shyness of these birds.
It has been noticed here that when two birds or groups meet on
friendly terms, they bow to one another, spread their wings, and make
their eyes red. This is a quaint and pretty sight to witness at close
range. Sometimes the same nests are used for several years in succes-
sion, each season showing an addition to the original structure. The
structures are then apt to become top-heavy, and break away from the
branch.
THE BELL MAGPIE.
These birds are fairly common among the scrubby hills around
Adelaide. They hunt among the fallen debris of the forest floor, quickly
scattering bark and leaves with their powerful beaks, which they often
use as picks in excavating buried larvae and pupae.
In conclusion, let me put in a word for the bell magpies. It is a
well-known fact that they are fruit eaters, but their numbers are not great,
and as a contra-account we owe them something for their good work in
the destruction of insect pests. I love to hear their joyous, ringing calls
come echoing through the wooded gullies of these old hills.
SPRING SONG OF THE BELL MAGPIE.
“ Far and wide the rocks are flinging
Echoes of the crow-shrikes singing;
Sable wings their flights are winging
A’tween the mossy trunks of trees.
Where the golden sunlight’s falling,
Don’t you hear their joyous calling


Drifting down the summer breeze?
Cree-eling-dree-e-ling.
Down the wooded aisles they’re ringing,
From the creek the answer bringing;
Sable wings are gliding nearer,
Joyous notes becoming clearer—
Cree-ha-clee-cree-e-ling.
The wood’s alive to the joy of spring.
T.P.B.
The Curlew
DOOMED BY THE FOX.
WEE-E-LOO, Eee-100, Eee-loo! For six years we had their com-
pany during the breeding seasons, but, unlike many other birds,
the curlews never nested twice in the same spot. Their first nest
was about 300 yards to the southward of our cottage; their next season’s
nest was about 250 yards south-west by west; the next was 120 yards
north-west; then 220 yards north-west by north; then 200 yards north-
east by north; and lastly, 400 yards to the east.
Then it was Brer Fox that put an end to our long acquaintance.
The birds had nearly run a circle around our home, and had grown to
trust us. We were sorry to miss our feathered friends and their nightly
serenades; for a while we had heard the mournful calling of a single
bird, but then it, too, disappeared, a trail of feathers revealing its fate.
It was noticed that these birds, in the choice of nesting sites, chose
the open timber, free of bushy undergrowth, and commanding a view
of any approaching danger. On this leaf-strewn ground the pair of
eggs were usually placed beside a dead stick, possibly to protect them
from the hoofs of wandering stock.
At first, when the birds were shy, it was found that interference with
the eggs, or too frequent visits, would cause their removal to another
spot; they would, however, always start afresh within a few yards of
the original site, and always at a lower level. Whether the bird carried
the eggs under its wing or rolled them with its beak I could not say.
Owing to their protective color scheme, the eggs are difficult to find. At
the approach of a stranger the bird creeps away and renders itself as
inconspicuous as possible until at a safe distance.
This season another pair of curlews is in our vicinity, but so far
we have not located their nest. Their wailing cries are most often heard
at the approach of stormy weather. In their forecasts they beat some
of our weather prophets. Where once they were seen in fair-sized flocks,
they are now only found in widely-scattered pairs.
That they are doomed on the mainland is certain. Seeing that they
hold a most useful place in Nature’s scheme, this circumstance is greatly
to be regretted.


Clever Feathered Masons
EVIDENTLY the white-winged chough is a bird not easily discouraged,
for I have known a pair to lose their home and family in a big
storm, and yet sit for a third time. A gale destroyed their second
nest before it was completed. That they are expert builders, the exami-
nation of an old nest proves. Made of clay, reinforced with dry grass
stems, and plastered inside with cow-dung, the construction was perfect;
but the chosen site was faulty. It happened that, in a gale of wind, a
neighboring branch came in contact with the nest, and broke it from its
hold.
These interesting birds have nested here for many years. It is
remarked that they, like many other birds, have a fondness for the old
site, to which they yearly return. The nestings of our various feathered
friends are marked events in our calendar; but, alas, the foxes have
made some gaps.
The curlews, which used to nest near the old homestead, come no
m'ore. They were plucky birds, and would try to drive the children away
from their nest until they found that no harm was intended. We have
missed their mournful calls from the shadowy scrub line so typical of
the earlier days. A sad fate has overtaken our little blue wrens, which
kept us company at meal times. Two limp little bodies were found in
the garden. One bird was on its nest of eggs, faithful unto death.
When we lift the curtain and study the lives of Nature’s creatures
we find they have need to be always alert and watchful, leaving nothing
to chance. It is only by the constant use of all their faculties that they
manage to survive. Without this, there could have been no progress.
It is the old truth of the talents exemplified.
In an occasional peep behind the curtain, we find much to admire,
and many lessons for humanity to learn. Sometimes we imagine we find
something to blame which calls for our interference; but have a care!
Behind Nature is an intelligence that cannot err. There are among our
useful birds and sweet songsters some that have a weakness for fresh
eggs; such will rob the unguarded nest of any other small bird. By
doing this they but enforce the law of Nature, the law of preparedness
or fitness, negligence of which means extinction for the unfit. We have
not the right to interfere or to blame; we drop the curtain, satisfied
that Nature knows best how to govern her realm. What appear to be
enemies may be friends in disguise in the long run.


Call of the Wilds. Part I.
WITH the coining of the autumn months an old instinct awakens in
me—the call of the wilds, the wanderlust of primitive man,
through which the human race has reached every habitable part
of the earth. To me it is Nature calling the wanderer home—calling
him to sense the harmonies, now lost in the turmoil of to-day, and the
mysteries that may awe, but do not affright.
It is to exchange a world of artifice for one of divine simplicities,
muddy water for crystal springs, husks for the bread of life.
The deep blue sky appeals to me, the far distance, the manifold
manifestations of life, the stars, the play of light and shadows among
the rugged mountain peaks. There are the scented spirals of smoke
rising from my camp fire on the bank of some gum-shadowed creek, the
change of air or scene, the spirit of adventure, and the expectancy of
Nature’s revelations.
BEHIND THE LINES.
It is good to drop the routine of our lives at times, and to get away
behind the lines for a spell. It is well to hearken to that primeval call
of the bush. Nature can heal the body and soothe the mind, she can give
us something better than picture shows, and her cathedrals have no need
of stained-glass windows. Spring’s beauty of promise, summer’s
function, life’s ebb and flow—what lessons there are to learn from
Nature! She speaks in a myriad tongues!
“Would joy itself not die, did it not trust
This force persists when dust returns to dust?”
THE WANDER LUST.
“ When Nature calls to the soul of a bird
It lifts itself to the drifting stars,
And guides its course o’er the trackless seas,
Like a captive freed from prison bars,
High up in the silent summer sky
I’ve seen them drift by the waning moon,
Like marshalled troops go drifting by-
Ten thousand hearts that were all atune.”
Have you, from a lonely camp in the bush, heard the calls of the
migrant birds as they pass high overhead through the night sky? To
the Nature lover it is a sound that thrills. Think of the myriads of


feathered creatures that take on this great adventure, and, launching them-
selves into space, face the unknown dangers of journeys that in some
cases cover half our globe.
Whence their confidence, and in whom do they trust if not in the
wisdom of the Creator? I love the call of the migrant birds, and love
to watch their coming and going; but, alas, with the passing of years,
the night skies grow more and more silent!
THE WALK ABOUT.
True, I live in the bush. I have the blue sky, the song of birds, and
the music of the wind in the trees; but still I must have my walk about.
I must see what lies beyond the far ranges, breathe the sweet air of the
wide saltbush plains and the gibber-strewn tablelands, and wander among
the crags of Time’s hoary ramparts.
The call of the wilds does not mean an idle wandering. I follow
in the wake of an ebbing stream of life. I cannot stem the outgoing
tide, but possibly I can save some of its flotsam, something out of our
waste treasure house that can be handed on to the better care of future
generations. lam a hunter, but I take no life, for I hunt with net and
snare.
CALLOUS INDIFFERENCE.
South Australia is losing her interesting wild life, birds, animals,
and plants, with a swiftness that is deplorable, and a callous indifference
that is terrifying. My trips into the backblocks are increasingly dis-
appointing; I may travel hundreds of miles in search of a remnant of
a once-numerous species, to find that it has passed over the brink.
Often those remnants have been victims of the gunmen for sport
or specimens. The pity of it is that so little effort is made to save these
so-called living fossils, and that the butchery of these quaint survivals
of a bygone age is so often held up for laudation.
During the last five years my periodical trips have covered some
5,000 miles. They have been taken largely in the interests of wild life
conservation, and observations connected therewith. My search has been
for birds and animals which are becoming exceedingly rare. We have
lost nearly all of our smaller marsupials within the last thirty years. At
least twelve different species have become extinct in South Australia,
while the surviving forms are in immediate danger.
OFF ON THE TRAIL.
Sleeping bags, blankets, change of clothes, emergency rations, tea,
sugar, tobacco, billy, camera, tracing paper, and other sundries: compass
and burning glass, snares and nets: I run through the list to see if I


have everything I need. I nearly forgot a few presents for any natives
whose services may be required. The whole makes an unhealthy burden
for one man, but all is needed. Good-bye! A last wave of the hand,
and off I go to meet the mail car, two miles out, my younger son helping
me with some of the load. I go by the morning train, bound for the
Flinders Ranges.
ON THE TRAIN.
Off at last—and the first thing to do is to study the faces of one’s
fellow-passengers, and arrange ourselves in congenial groups. Bush
yarns draw the outbackers into one corner of the carriage, the subjects
of discussion varying from the birth of kangaroos to Barcoo rot.
There was a foreigner in our carriage, who took one of our group
for a member of the police force. He turned his kit out to show his
passport, and got very excited. As he was not able to speak English, he
could not be pacified, and some were making fun of him when a voice
said: “Leave him alone, or you will have him pointing a gun at you!”
After that, things quietened down a little. Reaching the Burra, my
interest was awakened, for from there onwards to Black-Jack we would
be crossing the trails I had covered forty-five years ago with a hawker’s
yan. That long lapse of time had so changed the scenery that I found
little on which to hang old memories until we reached Quorn.
My camp was at an old shepherd’s hut, built by the lower spring.
In those days the “Pound” was full of game, and scores of euro and
wallaby came to drink while I waited for the dogs.
I entered the Pound from the west, and one day reached the top
of Mount Arden, and saw Quorn below me —a wide panorama of hill
and plain. My guests that day were wild goats, of which there were
several flocks in the ranges. I wanted them for meat, as a change from
the leaner flesh of the euro and the rock-wallaby.
Call of the Wilds. Part II.
“ Give to me the life I love, let the lave go by me;
Give the jolly heaven above, and the byway nigh me.
Bed in the bush, with stars to see, bread I dip in the river—
There’s the life for a man like me —there’s the life for ever.”
R.L.S.
IT cost me eightpence to leave Matilda and camera outfit at the Quorn
Station. Then I hunted out a boarding-house for a night’s lodging.
“Everyone to their taste.” I find all the privacy and homely comfort
I need at such places, and my presence excites no undue curiosity. The
following morning I took a ticket for Parachilna, my travelling corn


panions being two young school teachers who were returning to their
duties in the north. I am pleased to say that before we parted I had
both their names as members of our Nature Lovers’ League.
To a Nature lover the rugged scenery of the Flinders Range makes
a strong appeal. The ragged, time-worn battlements are seen at their
best in the slanting rays of the rising or setting sun, when the play of
light and shadow brings out their most impressive beauty. For mountain
scenery the northern trip has no equal in this State. There we miss the
soft, rounded contours of the southern ranges, the elevations taking on
the jagged, saw-tooth formation —precipitous on one side—the broken
edges of an upheaved stratum. The other side is usually a long, steep
slope of stony debris.
In some parts, these slopes are covered with a mass of large rocks
lying in a formation which gives the impression that they are the ruins
of a titanic wall that has collapsed. In a sense this is true, for they
once crowned those weathered remnants, a much higher range of cloud-
piercing giants.
Nearly fifty years ago a gum log was found a hundred feet below
the surface of the western plain. That hundred feet of alluvial repre-
sented the wastage, the weathering of countless ages. “The mills of God
grind slowly, but they grind exceeding small.”
On the southern end of the range we have some notable peaks, such
as Mounts Remarkable, Brown, and Arden; also the Devil’s Peak, which
dominates the Pichi Richi Pass.
THE GREAT DROUGHT.
During the great drought which came along about the end of the
seventies two of us retired into these ranges and lived by the chase.
Game was then abundant, and included wild pigs and goats. We even
got back to the primitive system of barter. Game, skins and kangaroo
tails were the medium of exchange for tobacco, powder, shot, and other
things. Our small supply of flour was eked out by a liberal addition
of pollard. The drought was long continued. We broke cover before
it ended, and made a forced march to the River Murray. When we
reached the river our sole capital was sixpence, but river and swamp
provided plenty of food in great variety. It was the simple life, with
a vengeance, for we had lined up with primitive man.
SOMETHING FOR TOURISTS.
One of the most picturesque mounts seen on this northern trip was
Mount Mary. Seen through the mountain mists, it took on a purplish
tint, and was majestically beautiful. It has an individuality of its own.
From the train it appears to be a solid mass of naked rock, weather-
worn into deep runnels. To me it marked a deep note in the harmony
of Nature, and was a gem for the artist’s brush.


A VEGETARIAN’S EXPERIENCE.
We were supposed to have dined at Hawker. However, not belong-
ing to the carnivora, I fared rather badly. One sweet and half a slice
of bread and butter cost me 2/6. Mentally I swore at having to rely on
boarding-houses, wherever such existed. I have, in my bush experiences,
known what it is to live solely on flesh foods, but these days I do not
take any meat. This is somewhat awkward when travelling in the back-
blocks, where meat is the mainstay.
Reaching Parachilna, I interviewed the mailman regarding a passage
to Blinman, but found I would have to travel out by motor truck.
At Blinman I found Mr. Lee, Junr., who was in with the car. This
enabled me to reach the homestead that night, where I was given kindly
welcome by Mr. Lee, who, knowing my quest, gave me valuable assistance
during my stay.
FIRST EXPLORATORY TRIP.
My first exploratory trip was along an adjacent creek, where I found
plenty signs of euro, and evidence that a solitary wallaby had visited
the waterhole during the previous summer. The following day two riding
horses were provided, and, with young Mr. Lee acting as guide, we rode
out to some distant ranges, where a few rock wallabies were reported
to be still lingering; five miles out, their supposed haunt was pointed
out to me.
We then returned, and, after lunch, I rolled up “Matilda”; its
contents included a bundle of snares, a few biscuits, tea, and sugar. I
also took a full water-bag, for which I was truly thankful later on.
I followed the trail of the two horses until, at dusk, I lost them
on some stony ground. I pushed on for some distance, and then made
camp under pines.
The night was cold, so I gathered a great heap of dead mulga wood
and warmed myself inwardly with hot billy-tea. This was my first camp
in the Flinders Range since the time I have referred to previously; but
how different! The night was practically soundless; not even the wail-
ing cry of a curlew was heard.
In the morning I found my waterbag empty, and as I could pick
out no guiding landmark, nor find any good water, I retraced my steps
to the stony rise where I had lost the horses’ tracks. Following these up
a rocky gully, I reached a shallow well that we had passed the previous
morning. Here I stayed to boil the “billy,” but found it necessary to
first remove a decaying fox from the vicinity, which happened to be the
only available camping space in that rock-strewn gorge.
Then I made for those further hills, and climbed to their storm-
worn crests. Hours of close search revealed no sign of the animal I
sought.


YOUNG BROWN SWAMP HAWKS, RIVER MURRAY


THE RIVER MURRAY


Mount Patawurta, in the near distance, I should have liked to
explore, but as I was out of provisions I did not care to face another
night out. I therefore recrossed the range, whose crests were swept by
a gale, and made southward for the homestead, which I reached just
after dark.
Through the kindness of Mr. Lee, a trip was arranged to Oranagan
Creek. Here a small collection of rock carvings was seen. Old and
weatherworn, they did not lend themselves too well for reproduction.
Some five miles up this creek is the spot where John McDouall
Stuart made preparations for his plunge into the then unknown interior.
Like many other outback stations, Angorichina has tapped the ether
waves, and is kept in touch with the outside world. Life in the bush is
now very different from what it was fifty years ago!
My thoughts now turning to Wilpena as a likely place for any
surviving rock wallaby, I bade farewell to my kind friends, who had so
well kept up the bush folks’ reputation for hospitality.
PARACHILNA CREEK.
I took passage from Blinman by the mail car to the site of the
blacks’ camp on Parachilna Creek, taking a snap of the T.B. Hostel en
route. Presently a black gin was seen waving a white rag as a signal
for the mail van to stop. I left the car —or, rather, it left me—and
introduced myself to Mary’s notice through the medium of pictures,
showing her natives of the Murray and the Nullabor Plains. Then,
following the advice of the former owner of Angorichina, I said: “I
stop along here, because Ango-White tell me to. He say you find black-
fellow Larrikin Tom; he take me to ochre mine. Larrikin Tom, he
stop long this camp, eh?”
Mary replied; “Yes. Ango—White, he bin good fellow boss. Lar-
rikin Tom, he take you.”
“All right. Me make camp now. Good water, that one, Mary?”
I pointed to the creek.
“No. I show you good place, where blackfellow get water.”
Mary led me past the pool, lifted a slab of stone, and disclosed a
petrol tin full of clean water—an up-to-date native well.
Turning back to the place at which I had left my swag, I chose for
my camp the shelter of a big log. The ground was free from ants, and
the “bushman’s feather bed” was handy, for the wind had piled dry
gum leaves against every log and stone. I swept together a good layer
of these, and placed over them a couple of bran bags, sleeping bag, and
blankets. The next job was to collect wood for the night’s fire. The
weather was cold, and I found it necessary to frequently stoke my fire
during the night, to keep myself warm.


The Call of the Wilds. Part III.
“ Twilight it is, and the far woods are dim,
And the rooks cry and call;
Down in the valley the lamps, and the mist,
And a star over all:
There by the rick, where they thresh, is the drone
At an end,
Twilight it is, and I travel the road
With my friend.”
John Masefield.
EARLY the following morning, Larrikin Tom put in an appearance.
He was a man well advanced in years, quiet of speech and manners,
as the pure-bloods generally are, and with the eyes of a hawk. Yes,
he knew Ango-White. “He good fellow”; and he would take me out
to the ochre mine. So we arranged terms, and Larrikin Tom went to
hunt up the horse.
As I had not yet located the blacks’ camp, I took a walk up the
creek. I saw no sign of the camp, and came back to the native well;
thence I followed the tracks across the creek and up on to a saddle. It
was an ideal site, for it dominated the lower ground, as well as the
creek bed and the road. The camp itself remained invisible. I found
that Tom had just returned with the horse, and we got away about 9.15
a.m. Just as we were leaving, one of the other natives called out;
“Better take some water!” and threw an empty waterbag into the trap,
which Tom never troubled to fill. “We get water,” he said, “an’ we
be back.” On the strength of this, I took only a few biscuits with me.
We made for the open country, Tom steering south for hour after
hour, the mare’s speed rarely exceeding two miles an hour. It was some
consolation when he at last pointed out a still-distant peak as the site
of the ochre quarry. The only break in the monotony came with the
appearance of some wild donkeys (at least, Tom said they were wild),
that evinced some interest in us. Otherwise the plain was devoid of life.
Threading our way among the many deep washouts, we at last
approached the range. Tom selected three tall mulga-trees, at which
he left the buggy and hobbled the mare. A long, stiff climb, and then
came a test of nerve and endurance. No wonder the blacks at the camp
had expressed some doubt as to my reaching my objective, for it was a
case of hanging on with your finger-nails.
We had to work our way around a long, precipitous mountain-face
that fell sharply away to the creek below. It took all my limbs to hang


on, so I handed the camera over to Tom’s care. It was 4 p.m. when we
reached our destination —a slight depression just below the topmost peak.
THE OCHRE MINES.
The workings consisted of about half a dozen shallow pits. The
older of these were partly filled with boulders thrown out from the more
recent. Two pits were just as they had been left by the native miners
who last visited the place. While I was fixing the camera, Tom dis-
appeared into one of the holes, and presently reappeared with about
five pounds of ochre in a small bag.
“What you do with that, Tom?” I said.
“Mary want ’em,” he replied.
“What she do with it?”
“Oh, she put ’em on herself.”
So it would appear that even to this day early customs linger
among the old folk.
There is a native legend which explains the presence of this ochre
deposit in the following way: Two emus, hunted by the Cooper Creek
natives across many leagues of hills and plains that lay between, were
at last overtaken and slain in this hollow; and it was the blood of
these birds that soaked into the rock and formed the ochre. My infor-
mant could not give this legend in its entirety.*
It is known that Queensland natives used to make periodical visits
to this mine, bringing pituri to the local tribe as payment for the privi-
lege of mining the ochre. Pituri is prepared from the leaves of Duboisia
Hopwoodii. It is mixed with ashes, and chewed, and acts as a stimulant.
The “chew” is carried behind the ear when not in use.
It is said that on one occasion a party of these overlanders became
cheeky, and carried off two young gins, and that in revenge, when the
next party came through, an ambush was laid at the ochre mine. The
visitors were watched by the local natives, who waited until the strangers
had laid aside all their weapons, and were busy in the quarry; then a
rush was made by the local warriors, and all speared, with the exception
of two who escaped into the distant ranges.
It has been reported by whites that, until a few years ago, fragments
of human skeletons were in evidence at this place; but on account of
my late arrival, I could give no time to an examination of the sur-
roundings.
HOW OCHRE IS CARRIED.
When these Queensland natives took the long trail for home, the
ochre was kneaded into a form that would fit the head, something like
the clay mourning caps of the Murray tribe. Carried in this way, their
hands were free for instant action should occasion arise; just a quick
movement of the head would unship the load.
I took a couple of snaps, and reluctantly had to hurry away from
this interesting spot owing to the lateness of the hour.
[* Vide H. Basedow: “The Australian Aboriginal,” page 316.— Editor.]


The sun was sinking low, and we had to get on to safe ground
while it was light enough to pick our going. It was dark when we
reached the plain, and though we searched for hours, we could find
neither the horse nor the buggy. We were hungry, thirsty, and tired;
our predicament was far from pleasant.
“Hang it all, Tom, this won’t do. WeTl have to make a fire and
camp till the morning. Plenty wood there.” I pointed to the shadowy
outline of a gum creek.
Making our way thither, we soon had a fire of logs; then, shifting
what stones we could, we tried to find a comfortable position for our
weary bones. On the one side we were swept by a stream of sparks and
dense smoke, while on the other an icy blast chilled us to the marrow.
Like a joint on a turnspit, we had to keep turning the other side to the
fire. All positions were alike, and the intense cold always reached some
part of our anatomy.
An empty stomach is not the best preparation for a night of ex-
posure. Sitting, lying, standing, carrying wood for the fire, slowly the
night passed, and then the first glimmer of dawn sharpened the outline
of the mountain crests. Up the creek a solitary bird greeted the break
of day with a few notes of song. This and the cawing of a crow were
the only sounds that broke the silence of that chilly morning.
Stiff and sore, with eyes inflamed by the smoke, we resumed our
search for the horse and trap.
FOUND!
Tom steered south, then westward, and eventually struck the buggy
tracks. Following these back, I at last met Tom driving his recovered
turnout, which we had passed in the darkness of the night before. It
was afternoon before we reached camp, and the only thing about us that
was unimportant was our appetite! Luckily, the mailman had left my
bread as he passed, and though I saw by the tracks that my camp had
had a native visitor during my absence, my other provisions were intact;
nothing had been meddled with. I called Tom’s attention to the tracks,
seen plainly in the dust. He said: “No touch other fellow camp.”
Giving honor where it is due, I must admit that in all my experience
.with the natives, I have never had reason to complain.
During this journey I had kept a sharp look-out for rock-wallaby,
but had seen no signs; in fact, no native animals and very few birds
were seen on the trip.
After satisfying the inner man, I took the camera and strolled up
to the native camp. The pure-bloods seem to have an objection to the
camera. Try as I would to bribe Mary to form one of the group, she
was adamant. On asking one of the others the reason, I was told:
“Oh, she no like ’em picture left when she die. She think that no good.”
Out of the nine occupants of this camp, all but three seemed to have
white blood in their veins.


On hearing the words: “Some lady come long a camp,” I looked
around, and it was my pleasure to see Mr. and Mrs. Scammel and Mr.
and Mrs. Horwood, who later joined me at the camp fire, where they
boiled their quart pots and had a picnic lunch.
For me this was a pleasant little break in the programme, and by
their kindness one or two luxuries were added to my larder, such as
tomatoes and oranges, which I found on my bunk when they left. For
bread I depended on the passing mailman, who was very obliging. For
vegetables, the watercress from the spring above the reservoir was much
enjoyed.
Examination of the surrounding hills and gullies revealed no trace
of rock-wallaby or rock-carvings. On information supplied by Ango-
White, I first tried to get Larrikin Tom to guide me to a certain cave
mentioned by him as containing a collection of these rock-carvings. He
pleaded ignorance of their existence.
I tried some of the other natives, with the same result. This hardly
surprised me, as Ango-White had mentioned the likelihood of a refusal,
on the grounds that this cave was even taboo to the blacks themselves,
and their superstition forbade them to lead a white man to its vicinity.
Though I stayed several days at this camp, I could not get the location
of this cave.
A PATHETIC REMNANT.
One thing struck me as remarkable. These last pathetic remnants
of the local tribes still conversed among themselves in the native lan-
guage, whereas to the nomads of the Murray this was now a lost art. I
still have a vivid memory of the sorrowful laments of the old folks
when the younger generation, with the passing of all tribal restrictions,
turned the old language down, meeting protest with ridicule.
The last morning came. I awoke, sensing the near approach of
a human being. Poor old Annie was just squatting down by the still-
glowing embers of my fire, old and withered, with a skin like parchment.
She was waiting until I should wake to beg some trifling addition to her
scant fare.
Presently I went up to bid the natives good-bye. Though it was still
early, the men were already out in the ranges hunting the last few animals
of a once-abundant game supply. Not an idler was left in camp!
I had just fixed “Matilda” right for the road when the motor truck
swung into view. I climbed aboard, and the camp receded from view.
Wilpena was my next objective. There is only one mail a week from
Hawker, and that on a Saturday. I missed it through my night out when
Tom lost the horse and trap. Still, there may be a chance; we shall see.


Wilpena pound
GEM OF THE NORTH.
LET me continue the narrative of my latest tramp. After an un-
eventful journey, I arrived at Hawker. Exposure, combined with
the effects of a cold, had brought on symptoms of an old trouble
—to wit, malaria. It left me unfit for the road for some days. Mean-
while, my friend, Mr. Rodder, was watching for a chance for me to
reach Wilpena. A poisoned hand through the bite of an insect while
sleeping out, added to my troubles.
What most struck me on this tour was the remarkable fertility of
the soil. Wherever water was available there were flourishing cottage
gardens, still gay with blooms, plots of violets, and strawberries that
bore fruit in season. Irrigation would work wonders on these rich soils;
from what I know of these ranges, water can be made available, and
the adjacent semi-desert plains be made to blossom as the rose.
BUSH HOSPITALITY.
In the middle of the week Mr. Rodder introduced me to a Mr.
Smith, and I was motored out to his place; I met with the usual hos-
pitality of the bush. The following day I explored the adjacent ranges
without success. Hardly yet fit, I returned early in the afternoon, and,
later, was summoned to meet Mr. Hunt, who had called to take me on
to Wilpena, where another welcome awaited me.
WILPENA POUND.
Mr. Hunt motored me to the Pound, and it was arranged that I
should meet him at the entrance two days later, in time to catch the
mail train.
The outflow from the Pound is a peaty swamp of varying width,
with occasional rush-fringed pools. Following this for about a mile, I
came to a vacant cottage, which I made my headquarters. I was glad
of the cottage, as the previous night had been very cold. From the place,
I could see the rugged heights around, with wide vistas of mountain
peaks and valleys. Three lordly eagles viewed my presence with in-
difference. A fox slunk away from a rock-hole at my approach, and,
when crossing the flat, I disturbed a feeding euro.
Of small birds, the magpie lark and fussy little babblers were in
evidence; and two pairs of black-duck lingered in the peat-swamp. A
few ringneck parrots lived in the branches of the gums; and I heard


the soft notes of a dove among the pines. Once, passing the pool, 1
saw one of the eagles perched on the fallen, lichen-covered rocks that
margined its shore. The noble dignity of the bird harmonised with the
shadowed pool, the tall gums, and the fallen boughs of the rugged
heights.
A BACKWARD GLANCE,
My comfort while staying in the Pound had been much enhanced
by the kindness of the Hunt family. It was time to leave. From the
creek I turned to take a farewell glance at the lonely cottage, with its
background of pines. It was falling into decay, and in the ruined
sheds a few farm implements were rusting away. Its home-paddocks
were netted in. Once the happy home of some industrious settler, to-day
it speaks of disappointed hopes. The road, which must have cost hun-
dreds of pounds to build, had been swept away, and the homestead, cut
off from the outside world, lost its value as an agricultural proposition.
So the pretty little isolated mountain farm lost its human tenants, and
became again merged into the silence and the solitude of the picturesque
valley.
BEAUTY OF WILPENA.
It was Sunday morning. I was due at the entrance of the Pound
at 9 a.m., so I faced the rocky gorge and was picked up by the station
car. Wilpena has pride of place in South Australia for scenic beauty,
with its towering gums, pine-clad hills, and mountain peaks.
CONVIVIALITY OF TRAVELLERS.
I spent a night in Hawker, and left by bus in the morning for Car-
rington—a journey that was uneventful and uninteresting. Further down
the line, a bottle of whisky and several of beer played their parts. The
jovial fellows greeted me with; “Hey, Dad, what about you? Won’t you
have a nip?” They took no offence at my repeated refusals. Presently
the spirit of song awoke, and the way was beguiled by sentimental songs.
A THIRSTY EMU.
By the camp fire at Parachilna Creek, I listened to Mr. Horwood’s
account of the finding of a thirst-driven emu on the wrong side of his
boundary fence. He saw it staggering up and down the fence, vainly
trying to reach the water, for the want of which it was perishing. When
he lifted it over the fence, it fell to the ground from sheer weakness.
Climbing over the fence, he placed it on its feet, and watched it stagger
away. Let us hope it was able to reach that water in time. Such a deed
warms the heart of every Nature lover. I may be defeated in the object
of my journey, yet I have gained something. I have once more wor-
shipped in Nature’s temple, I have breathed the sweet air of the open
spaces, I have made new friends, seen new scenes, found new channels
for old thoughts, and new settings for old dreams.


A Bush Ramble
THE INTIMACY OF NATURE’S CREATION.
THE top barbed wire of the fence had been broken by the impact
of a leaping buck; the wires were more or less hidden by the
undergrowth. ’Twas a lucky escape, even though the animal was
badly cut. Many kangaroos have met a miserable death when the wire
held, for in that case the second wire is brought up with their feet as
they fall, and twitches the body in a helpless, hanging position. In this
predicament the animal has to face a slow death by starvation and thirst.
Not so long ago I noted four such tragic happenings by the pitiful
remains still hanging to the wires, and the earth scattered during their
impotent struggles for liberty.
A PITIFUL MOTHER.
We observed, however, that these grey denizens of the forest had
learnt of this broken wire by the fact that their tracks converged towards
this point, beyond which the animals had formed a pad across the old
and seldom-used bush tracks, to finally spread again over the grounds
of the Sanctuary.
We make a detour, follow along the higher part of the slope that
leads into an adjoining gully, and pass just below one of their favorite
camping grounds. A doe with a small “joey” rises from the shadows
cast by a clump of scrub gums, swiftly looks around, and darts away;
we note that her line of travel takes her straight to the broken fence.
Poor, frightened little grey mother! Even though we have the form
of thy most dreaded enemy, yet we would do thee no harm. Thy life
is full enough of terrors, to which we would not add, for is not thy
life and that of thy little one as precious to thee as that of mine and
my little one to me?
We watch them leaping away among the tree boles, these last repre-
sentatives of the marsupial life of a large district.
A REPROACH TO MANKIND.
To-day we searched the scrub for signs of their smaller congeners,
and only in one place did we meet with signs of that quaint little
animal, the bandicoot. The flesh of this animal, though eaten by some
of the early pioneers, seems to he held in distaste by the carnivora. I
have never known even a hungry dog to eat it. But though this creature
has survived so long, it is now apparently meeting its fate through the
coming of foxes. We found the signs high on a wind-swept ridge,
among the thickly-growing red-bush that once teemed with typical bush
life, but now mostly harbors the “red terror” of all the smaller countries,
which kills with a ruthlessness only second to man.


To me, this obliteration of our quaint native life forms seems very
sad, and a reproach to our kind. We looked closely for signs of
opossum, but these were only found in the land covered by the Sanctuary,
and where these creatures had been re-introduced. From signs noticed,
the survivors must have been few.
A PICTDEESQUE RUIN.
Crossing a small flat, we passed the site of an ancient, simple bush
dwelling—just the four corner posts and a smother of stones where the
chimney had stood. Nearby was the more lasting monument to the one-
time presence of children—just stones patterned out, as children do.
into playrooms. That some few decades had passed since the occupation
of this lonely home could be told by the well-grown timber that had
sprung from the old stumps. A picturesque background was rendered
by a steep, stony hill, along which ran an open cut where probably the
hopeful dweller had spent some time in searching for the reef of his
dreams. Now, somewhere out in the world, those children are no doubt
carrying memories of struggles with fate in that old bush home.
THE STORY OF MOSES.
The highest point of this steep hill was crowned with an ants’ nest
of some pretensions. The particular species is in some parts known
as the meat ant.
Some thirty years ago, among the few wild characters that occa-
sionally awoke the quiet river town at Mannum to some excitement,
was a fellow named Moses. I do not say that this was his baptismal
name, as he and his confreres were usually fitted with nicknames, such
as Frenchy, The Bunyip, Flash Harry, and Robinson Crusoe. The last-
named was never known to join in any wild jamboree; he was a decent
sort, but eccentric. Away up on Carlot there used to stand a camp
built with bullrushes. This was said to be the home of Moses. He was
an expert fisher, but his cheques generally landed him in a cell of the
“dead house.” Poor old Moses! His faults were mostly against him-
self.
There came a day when he was missed from the River. Enquiry
elicited the fact that he had gone north; that his failing still followed
him I heard in later years.
A HORRIBLE FATE.
At a certain northern township it was the butcher’s practice to
deposit the offal in a certain paddock; consequently this paddock in
time became infested with myriads of meat ants. Moses, who had become
as well known at this town as he had been on the river, had developed
a touch of the “horrors,” and disappeared. No one knew what had
become of him until he was found one day in a dying condition in this


paddock. He was in a shocking state, for the ants had attacked him,
and were devouring him alive. It appears that he had wandered there
in a dazed condition, and had collapsed helplessly among the offal and
ant hordes. Poor fellow! His end was a horrible one.
NATURE’S WHOLE.
Such was the tale I told to my boy as we watched the fierce little
creatures who resented our presence, and were pouring in streams from
their citadel. But there are ant communities of milder disposition than
these, whose social laws and customs are well worth studying as part
of Nature’s whole.
“A million million worlds that move in peace,
A million mighty laws that never cease,
And one small ant-heap, hidden by small weeds,
Rich with eggs, slaves, and store of millet seeds,
They sleep beneath the sod,
And trust in God.”
Charlotte P. S. Gilman.
The Koala, or Native Bear
THANKS to the kindness of the Director of the Victorian National
Museum of Zoology, the Humbug Scrub Sanctuary includes among
its many inhabitants a pair of koalas—the quaintest of Australian
marsupial life forms, remarkable for their structural adaption for an
arboreal existence. The koala might be described as four-handed. Its
general form suggests that it may be distantly allied to the wombats —a
relationship that would connect it up with the diprotodon. “The koala
is in grave danger of extinction if something is not speedily done to
protect it absolutely. Many thousands are slaughtered annually, and
their skins exported. I use the word ‘slaughtered’ (says a writer in the
“Sydney Mail”), “knowing from experience (not personal) what a re-
markable grip on life this inoffensive animal has. And when mortally
wounded (and it takes some killing), its piteous, heart-rending, and almost
human cries remain in one’s mind for all time. In Queensland alone
during the years 1919 and 1920, 1.000,000 koalas were slaughtered for
commercial purposes.”
To make the acquaintance of the koala is to meet one of the quaintest
and most lovable of Australia’s many remarkable creatures, all subject,
more or less, to a senseless and almost unrestricted exploitation that
threatens their speedy extinction.
The pity of it is that the bulk of humanity is so indifferent to the
call that touches their humanity.


Nightingale and Reed-Warbler
SWEET as the song of the nightingale of the English woodlands is
the song of the reed-warbler by Australian streams. Thrusting the
boat among the reed-stems of a Murray swamp or lagoon, I have
wrapped the blankets around me. If there was a breeze, the reeds
whispered, and there was the lap-lap-lap of tiny waves that beat against
the stern of the boat. Perchance there came the booming call of a
bittern, or the harsh croak of a night heron, or the sound of passing
wings of ducks that fed among the lush water-weeds. All around was
moonlight, peace, and great contentment, but dominating all was the
glorious song of the reed-warbler, which, putting into melody the wide
gamut of emotions common to bird and man, thrilled the soul of the
listener.
Joy and sorrow, faith, hope, and love. The baser passions are not
there. Hate is unknown. Only chords that are atune respond to this
exquisite, heart-searching melody. It is just a little brown songster
with no beauty of plumage, but with the soul of a great musician. Well
has it earned the title of Australian nightingale.
TIGER SNAKE THEIR ENEMY.
In the old days, the favorite nesting haunts of this bird were the
reeds. Since the disappearance of those growths, the warblers have taken
to the weeping willow. Their greatest enemy is the tiger snake. On
several occasions the distressful cries of these birds have drawn my
attention to tragedy.
I have seen the glistening coils of a tiger snake twisted in the reeds
and about the nest, the distracted parent-birds recklessly dashing at the
reptile, which waited for the opportunity to strike. Yes, tragedy often
enters the lives of these birds. And methinks it has added something
of pathos to heir song.
I can never forget the nights I spent on the wide lagoons—moon-
light, whispering leaves, and soul-searching melody, all the varied voices
of the night. Over all ruled the peace of God’s untarnished world—the
world of Nature.
Birds, flowers, and butterflies are God’s marvellous gems that crown
creation with beauty. Yet how few of us are grateful for the added
joy they give to our lives. And this lesson of the bird of song is that
of the kinship of all, for chords that vibrate in the human soul to the
song of a bird must be common to both bird and man. There is only
•one element called life, ,and its source is God, for God is life.
MAN AND WISDOM.
Lacking the Australian conscience, our pioneers made the mistake
of building according to old environment. The native birds and animals


were regarded as so much vermin, to be replaced, so far as possible,
by the old familiar forms. To quote the words of one writer: “If some
sympathetic person would bring over a few larks, blackbirds, thrushes,
and robins, you could have Melba for keeps.” This is the spirit that
has filled our land with pests that menace our existence. To interfere
with the balance of Nature by the introduction of alien forms is a very
different thing to experimental work among domestic birds and animals.
The former passes beyond man’s immediate control, but the latter remain
under man’s control. Our experience has been dearly bought. Let us
profit by it.
When Summer Grips the Bush
TRAGEDY OF A HEAT BLAST.
YARNS AROUND THE CAMP FIRE.
FOR days the heat had been unbearable. Even the lowan, injured as
it was, worked with gaping mouth and throbbing throat on the
super-heated covering of the mound. All through the wild mallee
lands its fellows were busy—busy catching and storing the sun’s heat to
tide them through the coming change. The rest of Nature’s creatures
had sought the welcome shade of the scattered clumps of pines.
The following day was even worse. Some men were working three
miles out on a big spinifex flat and open mallee. The encircling sand-
hills made the place a veritable oven. Languidly the men had followed
their usual routine, but by noon their water flagons were empty.
Black Jack was heard to remark that the man who wanted him to
work under such conditions could go to , an opinion seemingly
shared by the rest, for not one of them stirred to resume duty. Accord-
ing to the few words spoken, their thoughts seemed to be occupied with
imaginary “long beers.”
No word of complaint came from the boss, who was watching the
southern skyline. Not a breath of air was stirring. A bird fell from
the branches above, and died where it had dropped. Presently it was
followed by another, when Stumpy said; “Isnt’ it awful, this ghastly
heat?”
It is strange that, although there is every evidence of discomfort
and suffering during periods of excessive heat in the animal kingdom,
there appears no such evidence among the various forms of the vegetable
kingdom. The Flora of these ancient seabeds seems to be specially
adapted to withstand climatic extremes. The grim chains of the drift
demon never relax, and well it is that this is so.


A SOUTHERLY BUSTER.
“Here it comes, boys!” said the boss, who had again turned his
eyes to the southern sky, where low banks of clouds were now seen to
be rising swiftly above the mallee tops. “We might as well make a start
for the camp; it will be cool enough directly!”
Then upon the ear breaks a rapidly increasing volume of sound
that reminds one of the voice of Old Ocean. A southerly buster is boom-
ing across the wide mallee lands. Have a view from some high point
of vantage, and you can watch the flow of the oncoming “waves,”
The ancient sea is again full of life and movement. The illusion
is complete, even to the roar of the surge on a rock-bound coast —a
solemn monotone. Deep calls to deep, its message as indefinable as
that of the sea, and as full of the mystery of the Infinite.
One fact is worthy of note. The air is quite clear. There are no
gritty particles of sand to blind the eyes of the watchers, yet the drift-
demon is sleeping beneath those green, cushiony waves over which the
gale glides harmlessly. No other growth is so well adapted as the
mallee to hold the light sandy soils. Only the foolishness of the white
man would liberate that skeleton in Nature’s cupboard; only the fool-
ishness of the white man will barter life for death.
These long-cut lines are marking out the doom of a wide province.
In them we see the entry of an alien force in man, as opposed to
Nature, the bartering of a birthright for a mess of pottage.
With the cool change, new vigor comes to the life of the mallee
lands. The birds once more awaken with song. Bill, on duty at the
camp, had not suffered to the extent of those in the field. He had noted
the distress of the birds, and had placed tins of water in the shade of
the bushes. He had expected the men to knock off, and had kept the
big “billy” by the fire. The kitchen had been protected from the wind
by sheets of iron, for if a spark had blown afield, the whole country
might easily have been set ablaze.
WHAT THE CAMP SAID.
A wash in a bucket of cool water from the rockhole, followed by
a drink of steaming “billy” tea, put the campers in good humor.
“Well, I reckon the last of that hot spell was a corker,” said Saltbush
Charley.
“I reckon it nearly did for me,” said Stumpy. “Seeing those birds
fall dead with the heat makes me think this is no place for me. What
do you think, Jack?”
“Oh, I’ve seen it worse than that. That was nothing to holler about,
though I did reckon it was better in the shade of those pines than out
on the line. I remember the occasion when two of us (brothers, we
were) tried to get through a bad strip of about a hundred miles wide.
We had marked all the known waters on a chart. The heat was terrific,


and we had arrived at about the middle of the bad lands. The air was
like the breath of a furnace. We were in among granite outcrops, but
every rockhole we found was dry. A storm had passed over the country
about three weeks before; our hopes had been built on that. There was
not a stick to crawl under to give us shade, for the mallee was what
was known as ‘whipstick’; you could see over the top of it all. It was
just an interminable waste of undulating desolation, without water;
and that ball -of fire overhead seemed to crawl across the sky so awfully
slowly. We tried chewing mallee leaves until our mouths dried up.
“Then, at last, I caved in, for I was not so strong as my brother.
I saw my brother stagger on and pass from view. Near where I lay a
reef of granite cut across the slope. I grabbed my sheathknife and dug
and scraped, thinking the reef might hold back some water in the subsoil.
I dug until I could dig no further, but I found cool, damp clay. I put
lumps of this in my mouth, and tried to suck some moisture out of it.
“The coolness gave some relief to my parched tongue. Oh, for
water, the most priceless of God’s gifts! I looked up, and there was
my brother holding to me a billy of water. He had succeeded at last.
It was not too clean, but it was nectar to me. We pushed on to the
water and camped.
THE TRAGEDY OF THIRST.
“Hope again reigned in our hearts. I reckon that find was the
saving -of our lives. We got through the rest of that dry belt in safety,
and thankful we were for our escape. The previous summer it had
claimed a victim, and this knowledge had not added to our comfort when
things were at their worst.
“That was one of my experiences,” said Jack, “but not the only
one. Hunger is bad, but thirst is by far the worse. And yet a little
of it is good for a fellow, for it teaches him to value things. I hate to
see fellows picky over their tucker, or turning up their noses at water
that carries a hit of soil in its body.
“Many a meal I have got while travelling the bush by the aid of
a snare or two (these I generally carry in my swag). Roots and other
native vegetables have regularly been added to the larder. I have even
eaten snake—and it’s not bad, either, when you are really hungry.
“And as for water, it would make you sick if I told yon what
I’ve had to drink. You don’t hesitate long when it’s a case of drink
or die.
“Why, even in the township you had to pay sixpence a glass for
the best drinking water, and a shilling to give your horse a drink. I
tell you, Stumpy, you can thank your stars that you struck this job for
your first bush experience.”


Things, Theories, and Thoughts
THE BEE-EATERS’ HABITS.
V |'iWAS Sunday. The honey flow was just about over, though the
I bees were still busy among the last of the blue-gum blossoms.
Along their lines of flight the bee-eaters were diligently taking
toll of the passing stream of busy workers. This handsome but mis-
chievous bird does not nest here, but arrives in the district about the
beginning of January. The bee-eaters originally preyed upon the native
bees, but having some acquaintance with wasps, they found, with the
introduction of the hive bee, a new and easy source of supply. Now,
in all the settled districts where bees are kept, the bird concentrates its
attention on them. In areas where the apiaries are small and scattered
the bird’s depredations are serious.
In past years, personal examination of stomach contents, as well
as of the subterranean nests of these birds, disclosed nothing but bee
remains. So intent are they in the pursuit of bees that a dull day of
misty showers brings them into the apiary, where they pick the bees from
the hive entrance. Like the kea of New Zealand, they have acquired
a habit that is detrimental to man. They have left the place that Nature
had assigned to them in her scheme of balance, for the easier gains that
man has placed within their reach.
A WONDERFUL INGENUITY.
But even in this they have followed one of Nature’s great laws —
the law of adaptation, which gives the ability for life to persist under
changing environment. In regard to the introduction of the hive bee, I
have already, in previous articles, pointed out its effects on other life
forms. For instance, the honey-eaters and the little green parrakeets,
not from choice, but from necessity, have been driven into the bad habit
of sucking the sweet juices of orchard fruits. Nature had chosen, in
this part of the world, bright plumaged birds for the duty of fertilising
the forest flora. What other changes may be wrought in Flora’s realm
through this alteration remains to be seen. The bee-eater takes, as its
lookout, the dead branches and dead trees along the lines of flight;
sometimes as many as six or seven use the same limb. Dashing into the
passing stream of busy workers, they secure their victim, with which they
return to the dead branch. Then, pressing the bee against the wood, they
rub it to and fro until the barbs of the protruding sting catch in the


wood, and are torn from the body of the bee. Thus treated, the bee
can be safely swallowed. Toward nightfall, these birds gather into a
common roost, amid the dense foliage of a young gum.
FOREST FAIRIES AND FURIES.
Adaptability is a wise provision of Nature. We may call it a
“buffer law,” or “shock-absorber.” By its means man has won the range
of the whole earth. I observe the grass-tree and the undergrowth of low
bushes where the babblers are busy among the fallen leaves; their voices
have a querulous sound, which belies the disposition of these useful and
busy forest guardians. A boohook owl watches me from a branch. The
poor little chap finds lodgings are scarce, for, between bush-fires, opossum
and bee hunters, hollow trees are pretty well gone; and it is not a happy
experience for this chap to be caught in the open, in daylight, by the
other feathered forest fairies. He flits on noiseless wing, and, judging
from the commotion, he has dropped in for a warm time; the fairies
have changed into furies.
I pass into a patch of tussocky grass, and note a line of demarcation
on the one side, where the trees rise mostly with a single trunk, opening
a wider view beneath their spreading branches —vistas of rich coloring,
with timbered heights beyond. ’Tis a bit of the primeval. On the other
side the trees have many trunks that block the view. A closer inspection
reveals the old stumps from which they have sprung. Away to the left
rise the gaunt skeleton arm of trees that have been ring-barked. In each
case the hand of man has marred, but Nature fights to restore the beauty.
She has great recuperative powers.
NATURE—THE BEAUTY GIVER.
In our wooded hills we can grub every tree in a paddock, and plough
up the ground, leaving it unstocked. Yet, ere many years have passed,
it is reclothed with a forest of gum saplings. The pines, sheaok, and
the acacia come again; but the native cherry and the grass-tree rarely
reappear. Like the mallee, their powers of regeneration seem almost
nil. This gives one the impression that these species are overlaps of a
past age. The primitive undergrowths of these ironstone ranges are ill
suited for grazing, but by such means Nature makes and holds the scant
soil in place; by a constant “seepage” process to the lower levels she
enriches the gullies and plains. Thus she clothes the rugged ribs of old
Mother Earth with a beauty that man in his greed destroys. I think
sometimes, with the poet, that “society waits unformed, and is between
things ended and things begun.”
E. J. McAlister & Co., Printers, 24 Blyth Street. Adelaide.
