

Renaious pa** 1 *
BOA I
THE SECRETS^
FREEMASONRY
| umi s». I
I j BY A MASON; |
'JVhO, BEING fuLLY pONVINCED THAT THE pXERTS A
fl- |nfluence on its Jmpeder 4p
JL pociAL Progress, and piviL Povern- E
MENTS, THEREFORE pTATES j-IIS pBJECTIONS N|
f pANDIDLY, AND pEARLESSLY,
ft SHOWING THAT
I FREEMASONRY IS UNLAWFUL, I
4- I
J’ And should be Suppressed or Compelled to V
C Eevise its Objectionable Eitual. T
| MASONIC SIGNS, GRIPS, PASS-WORDS, ILLEGAL OATHS, |
And the most Important Portions of the 'Secret Cere - L
4 monies' in general use throughout the world , jj
given verbatim! V
RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
To the Masonic Fraternity and the Public ; and especially to the Ladies
who should he Excluded From. Neve of Our Societies or Clubs.
r MELBOURNE : MEGCCLXXVIT.
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.




THE SECRETS OE
PBBEMASONEY
REVEALED BY A MASON.
INTRODUCTION.
There appears to be nothing immutable in the universe, so far as we
can comprehend it, but the Divine Nature and Laws of its Great
Architect. Change seems to be indelibly impressed on all created
things. Even inorganic matter is continually undergoing chemical
transformations, and throughout the whole range of animate nature,
vegetable and animal organic mutations are perpetually occurring.
As in the physical world there is not a particle of matter, in any
condition, at actual rest ; so, in the mental and moral world, ‘ per-
petual motion’ is just as visible and continuous.
We cannot remain stationery, as moral or religious beings, any
more than quicksilver in the thermometer. We are ever ascending,
with the good and conscientious, in the scale of useful knowledge,
towards the Source of All Knowledge ; or we are as surely descending
to mingle, perhaps, with the ‘ common herd,’ who are governed more
by passion and prejudice than by reason and prudence ; the height of
whose ambition seems to be the gratification of their natural and ac-
quired appetites, like our ‘ poor relations’ in the forest!
All civilized governments and shrewd business corporations make
provisions, in their constitutions and by-laws, for even the most radical
alterations that may be thought necessary in the future. Social bodies
and even religious sects, should do likewise. Excelsior , instead of Sem-
per Eadem, should be our motto in all our enterprises.
From these remarks, the reader will perceive the folly of any Social
Order adopting an Unalterable Ritual! But a pitiable remnant of the
the once powerful ‘ Medes and Persians’ survive to tell us about their
‘unchangeable laws.’ Excepting some respect for the Decalogue,
Mosesism has likewise passed away. Modem Jews scarcely retain
enough of their ancient rites to deserve the name. If my Masonic
brethren believed in their Ritual being infallible , they could not be
more tenacious of its jots and tittles. The writer has been a Mason
for several years ; and, being fully convinced that Freemasonry exerts
an evil influence on his Brethren and the Public, without further pre-
fatory remarks, he briefly states his objections as follows :
I. Its Claims to Antiquity of Origin are absurd, not being based
on historic data, worthy of credence. Some whimsical writers have
even traced the order to that foolish enterprize, the Tower of Babel!


They have, however, about as much authority for doing so as the
majority of its friends who trace it to the Templum Hierosolyma, as the
records of that famous edifice completely ignore the Craft. But it
should be no excuse for the Order retaining the illegal features of its
Ritual, even if it could trace its origin to Noah’s Ark, or the Garden
of Eden ! People are beginning to judge persons and things now on
their own merits , without so much regard for their ancestors or their age.
We should be guided and governed by the past, only so far as its
teachings are approved of by reason and experience.
11. Its Name is a Misnomer, and ridiculous in our times, having
lost its original significance. There are very few practical Masons in
the Order. It was doubtless originated by them in the ‘ Dark Ages’
when such societies were, perhaps, necessary. They are more injurious
than useful in our times and should be discouraged. ‘ Speculative Ma-
sonry,’ as the order is styled in its Ritual, is a pretty good name for it,
as a great many of the brethren are very fond of ‘ speculating,’ and not
always very particular about the nature of the ‘ speculation.’ But if
the term Masonry is a misnomer, as now used, certainly the term Free-
masonry is much more so, as it implies a still greater contradiction
In view of the real nature of the Order, its proper name should be Slave l
masonry, because
111. Masonry is an Absolute Despotism, by reason of its barbarous
Oaths, Silence or Open Rebellion being a Mason's only Alternatives /
Hence, so many of its best members abandon the Order quietly and de-
nounce it privately ; but fear the consequences of exposing its absurdi-
ties, and thus prevent the public from being victimized by an Association
of misguided men, who try to interfere with the liberty of conscience of their
brethren who may feel disposed to criticise the illegal features of the
Order. The Craft not only object to “ freedom of speech” on such
matters, but even try to secretly muzzle the press ! This is a nice state
of things in view of our boasted privileges ! “ Once a Mason, always
a Mason,” is as preposterous as it is despotic. The Constitution of the
Order in France is more liberal. It states distinctly that “Every
Mason has the right of publishing ;his opinions on every Masonic
question.” See a pamphlet entitled, “ Masonic Reform” published here
in 1865, by “ An Old Mason,” (Mr. James E. Carnegie) which contains
many excellent suggestions it would be well for the Craft to follow.
IV. Masonic Candidates are all deceived as to the Nature of its
Obligations, by being told by the W. M., just before taking the initial
oath, that there is nothing in them “incompatible with your Civil,
Moral, or Religious Duties!” Now, every Mason knows that statement
to be a deliberate, treacherous falsehood, as a variety of savage Death
Penalties are included in them, which no Church or State on earth
would dare to sanction, if discussed in public ! The reader can see
for himself the extracts taken from the Masonic Oaths in actual
use at present, in the following pages. If there is nothing wrong in


them, the writer is greatly mistaken, as he considers them perfectly
diabolical , and regrets having ever entered a Lodge again, after taking
the first Oath. Curiosity and the encouragement of friends , induces
thousands to continue passing from one Degree to another with the
‘ tippling bre thren,’ when their consciences and their ‘ sober second,
thoughts,’ suggest retreat. Another ugly advantage is taken of the
Candidates, in merely announcing the Oaths a word or two at a time }
which the dupes are expected to repeat in a similar manner ; so that
they have no opportunity to consider whether to proceed or not. It is
truly amazing to think that such an unlawful society should receive the
patronage of the people of all classes and conditions, from the Prince
to the peasant! Many are at a loss to know how to account for this
extraordinary popularity of an Order that has in it so much that is objec-
tionable, both in theory and practice, and so little to recommend it. A
complete explanation of that surprising fact would require a pamphlet
much larger than this. It is certainly a gigantic humbug, con-
tinued from generation to generation, by means of impudent and
treacherous misrepresention! As an additional illustration of this feature
of the Order, it may be further mentioned, that the ‘ Crafty brethren’
get hold of as many prominent young men as possible, while at Schools,
Colleges, and Universities, before they have formed fixed principles,
for whom of course, its showy regalia would have special attractions.
Hence thejarge number of eminent men, who, however, retain merely a
nominal connection with the Craft.
V. Masonic Views of Morality are as selfish as they are demoralising,
in limiting special respect for female virtue to certain near relatives
of Master Masons ! (Brethren, see the M. M’s Oath.) This is a very
serious evil in the Order, and accounts, in some measure, at least
for the notorious immorality of many of its prominent Members.
Even the limited number of the fair sex alluded to, are not always
spared by those libertines, who often occupy prominent official posi-
tions in Lodges ; which fact shows conclusively that the brethren pay
but little attention to one of the most vital questions affecting the wel-
fare of society. The female relatives of the members of the two inferior
Degrees even are not included in the special injunctions of the
Masters. And of course all outside of the magic circle of the Craft
would naturally be regarded as legitimate prey by the dissolute mem-
bers. The attention of my brethren and the public is drawn parti-
cularly to this point, because morality seems to be regarded as a
speciality of the Order ! It will be seen in the following ceremonies
that Freemasonry is defined to be “ a peculiar system of morality,
veiled in allegory and illustrated in symbols.” Now, that definition of
the Order sounds very nicely. But, unfortunately, in its practice, and
general influence, one is tempted to paraphrase it thus : “ A peculiar
system of immorality, veiled in allegorical nonsense, and illustrated by
tippling symbols”—bottles, glasses, &c. As a proper regard for mo-


rality, in its broadest sense, constitutes the very foundation of all true
ideas of decent society and good government, surely its rules should
be universal in their application. It is admitted that there are some
nice allusions, in the Ritual, to virtue in a general way; but why
have special injunctions regarding respect to be shown for the chas-
tity of certain’women, which should be extended to the whole sex ?
VI. Masonic Views of Integrity are as selfish as its morality,
and equally injurious to its Members and the public. The Master’s
Oath makes the candidate expressly declare, “that I will not defraud
a brother Master Mason, or see him defrauded, of the most trifling
amount, without giving him due and timely notice thereof.” Now, ac-
cording to this injunction, a Master Mason could even defraud his own
brethren in the Entered Apprentice, and Fellow Craft Degrees, and not
violate his obligation ! And, the writer knows by sad experience, that
Masters do not even treat their own M. M. brethren “on the square at
times. [Of course, so far as the outside public are concerned, they have
no protection excepting civil law from the M.M., by the wording of his
Oath, but must depend on his honor, which unfortunately,;is often want-
ing. This and other Oaths of the Order have a tendency to induce
brethren to entertain a false confidence in each other, only to be too often
deceived and outrageously swindled. Rules regarding such cardinal
virtues, intended for the control of large bodies of men, certainly
should have no limitation. It is even objectionable to be selfish in our
benevolence and business patronage, as we should regard all men and
women, as our brothers and sisters, and equally entitled to our friend-
ship and kind treatment. But to restrict our kindness and charity
mainly to those most intimately connected with us is excusable, but
undoubtedly criminal to make any distinction at all in our treatment
of people regarding virtue and honesty. Surely in those respects the
whole human family should be Mistress Masons as well as Master Ma-
sons ! It is exceedingly astonishing that such an intelligent body of
men should continue saddling themselves and their friends with such
absurd obligations. The only explanation that suggests itself to my
mind, after several years’ experience in the Order, is that, as before re-
marked, the better portion of its Members become disgusted with it,
and quietly abandon it; and the majority of those who remain in it as
active members, are of that free and easy, tippling sort that do not
trouble themselves much about reforms of any kind.
VII. Masonic Religious Tenets, if indeed it has any at all, are
certainly more liberal and accommodating than consistent. The Order
undoubtedly recognises a ‘ Great Architect,’ a ‘Grand Geometrician,
as the Supreme Being is called in the Ritual. Craft Masonry is,
therefore, Deistic, and accepts Mahometans, Jews, and all who are
not absolute Atheists as ‘ brethren.’ But in the advanced Degrees,
intended to recognise Christ, these fheistic brethren are denounced with
the “ heathen”! The Knight Templar, with sword in hand, swears to


defend his creed ‘against all Jews, Turks,’ &c.; yet the Order cer-
tains large numbers of Unitarian Asiatics and Europeans! But where
is the basis, among such a mass of creeds, for “ brotherly love,” &c.?
It is a hollow mockery ! There can be no real union of feeling and
genuine friendship in a society whose members differ so radically
upon such a vital question as religion. It is impossible.
The careless Christian portion of the Order usually agree cordially on
one point— the worship of Bacchus! Their Jewish brethren are generally
too shrewd to debase themselves much with liquor, or spend their
money so foolishly. Their weakness, perhaps, consists in a little too
much devotion to the * Golden Calf—a decidedly less objectionable
kind of idolatry, however, especially in its influence on the public.
But how the Jews can content themselves in an Order in which they
are classed with the ‘ heathen,’ is a mystery. lam aware that those
Christian Degrees are said to be rejected by the highest Masonic Au-
thority—the so-called Grand Lodge of England—to please the He-
brews, and other Deists, doubtless. If that is really so, of course, no
Christian should connect himself with it, if he cares anything about
his faith. To find preachers acting with the Craft has always sur-
prised me, when they know very well it is utterly impossible to re-
concile Masonic obligations with Christ’s teaching.
VIII. Masonic Benevolence is a mere pretence, a cloak used to
conceal their real objects— self-indulgence and self-aggrandisement. It
is well known that the Craft spend more Time and Money in tippling ,
extravagant feasts than in acts of charity. Freemasonry, as a friendly,
benevolent society, is an evident fraud. Connexion with it is more
expensive than with any other similar social body extant. Yet, when
fortune frowns on a ‘brother,’ he finds it rather difficult, and even
humiliating, to obtain any aid from the Order at all commensurate
with the amount he had paid into its treasury. Although the writer
has suffered severely by the treachery of his ‘bibacious brethren,’ still
the above statement is made, not from personal experience, but obser-
vation. He has no desire to misrepresent the Order. It is severe
enough to tell the truth about it. The small amount collected and ex-
pended for charitable purposes, by even metropolitan Lodges, should
convince the public that the Craft feel but little concern in benevolent
enterprises. But it would be rather interesting to have a correct state-
ment of the amount spent annually by city Lodges in useless, debasing,
tippling, gastronomic extravagance. This characteristic of the Order
causes the bankruptcy and ruin of many a generous ‘ brother’ and good
business man, besides setting a bad example to the public.
IX. Masonry Undoubtedly Impedes Social Progress, by producing
a Compromise between Good and Evil agencies. J This charge is further
explained by stating, what is well known by the Craft at least, that
nearly the whole Protestant pulpit and press are directly or indirectly
controlled by Masons. Also the leading Teachers, Professors, Tempe-


ranee ‘Cliques,’ and State Officials, from Premiers to ‘Peelers.’ Now,
all these should be at least friends of Social Reform, if not active
workers in that good cause. Unfortunately, we find that many of
them are not so ; and, worse still, that large numbers of their ‘ Ma-
sonic brethren’ are Licensing Magistrates, ‘ Alcoholic Doctors,’ Pottle
Grocers, Publicans, Pawnbrokers, &c., very properly considered by
thoughtful people, in some countries, to be dangerous enemies of the
peace , happiness , and prosperity of the people. All those ‘ brethren,’
good and bad, are expected to manifest toward each other feelings
of ‘ brotherly love,’ &c.! Hence the compromise and general winking
at the great evils that are afflicting poor, erring humanity, especially
in all our cities and towns. It also explains how so many had men ,
notorious gamblers, and libertines, by ‘ red tape’ and the aid of the
Craft, are appointed to fill important offices of trust and influence,
which they disgrace, besides demoralising the public by their depraved
examples. The idea of selecting law-hreahers to become law-makers ,
and officials to execute law , is, in the highest degree,
The better class of society should protest against such conduct.
X. Masonry often Defeats the “Ends of Justice,” in the inte-
rest of the Craft, by controlling so-called Courts of Justice. This evil
is more common, wherever the Order exists, than the public have any
conception of ; and can only be detected by closely watching the pro-
ceedings in cases where Judges or Magistrates, and the plaintiffs or
defendants, are Masons. It makes some difference, too, in such cases,,
as to which side has the ‘ Masonic counsel’ employed. Many a decision
is obtained “on the square,” which both surprise and disgust the
public, but which are perfectly well understood among the ‘ brethren.’
Judges, &c., sworn to be impartial in dispensing justice, are occasion-
ally so far influenced by the Craft, as to disgrace themselves by their
rulings often attributable to their defective judgement, want of
knowledge of the law, &c., but should be justly chargeable to the
corrupt influence of Masonry. The phrase in the M.M.’s Oath, “or at
my own option,” is made an excuse for a great deal of improper con-
duct, not only in courts of law, but in the ordinary affairs of life.
It is a serious matter to know that nearly all the Courts of Justice, of
every description, throughout the British Empire, are directly or in-
directly controlled by Masonry, which has itself no legal existence,,
and which imposes unlawful obligations on its members ! This state-
ment no conscientious ‘ brother’ of mine will contradict. And it is
equally true that
XI. Masonry is a Dangerous and Demorlising Element in So-
ciety, in Corrupting State Officials and Political Parties. Not only does
the Order try to control the execution of law in its own interest, but
it also endeavours to monopolise every Government Office of any con-
sequence, from the highest to the lowest. And its success in this
respect may be seen in every department of our Imperial and Colonial


Governments. In fact, the whole British Empire is virtually under
the Evil Influence of this Illegal , Bibacious, Gastronomic , Secret Order!
This is no idle remark. Masons actually control the Army, Navy,
Civil Service, almost every office worth having under the British flag.
As an Order, it has no political creed, but adopts, and tries to
obtain control of every form of government on the earth, for selfish
purposes. In France and America, for instance, Masons advocate red-
hot republicanism; whilst in England, Prussia, &c. the Order almost
favours the ‘ divine rights of Icings .’ Anything to get into lucrative
and influential offices ! A serious objection to the 1 tippling fraternity’
is, that they generally favour two great monopolies—Liquor and Land
—which are the curse of the British Isles, and are also threatening
the welfare and real prosperity of these colonies. There can be nothing
expected from these Alcoholic, Masonic Governments, of our times,
favourable to social reform. They are twice as complicated and expensive
as are necessary, and are supported mainly by revenue obtained from
the degradation of the people —as unwise as the foolish women who
resort to prostitution (which destroys their physical, mental, and moral
natures) for the means of living! The question is, how long will
society submit to be pauperized and demoralized by one traffic , the
greatest commercial swindle on earth ?
XII. Masonry is an Unlawful Order, by"reason of the Nature of its
Oaths, and should therefore be suppressed, or be compelled to revise
its Ritual, expunging its illegal obligations, and thus make progress with
the times. Why allow that Order, or any other association, to impose
illegal duties on its Members ? Why not include Masonry under the
provisions of the Friendly Societies’ Act ? It is absurd in our day to
permit an Order to exist in our midst, bound by barbarous Oaths, re-
quiring, under certain circumstances, the execution of a variety of
cruel Death Penalties I The Order is virtually an Imperium in Imperio ,
actually claiming, of course, secretly , certain rights only possessed by
Sovereign States 1 Its obligations are dictated in violation of both the
spirit and letter of all law, human and divine. Every conscientious
Mason must admit this. There is not, as before remarked, a Church or
State on earth that would dare to sanction its rules, if examined in
public. And the reason Masonry has no legal status, is the desire of
the Craft to continue its illegal features, which the State cannot formally
approve of. Only Sovereign States claim the questionable right of
Capital Punishment, for the gravest crimes known to law. And even
some governments are beginning to see the impropriety of it, being as
unwise as it is barbarbous. Yet Masonic Oaths require a variety of modes
of Capital Punishment, for merely breaches of confidence! Although
this is undoubtedly so, yet we find the future ‘King-Emperor’ of Britain
a Member of this illegal Order at home, and it must be admitted, in
some respects, a very suitable figure-head for the Craft!
Masonic Oaths being the most objectionable feature of the Order, the


attention of the reader has been drawn to them a good deal in these
pages. It wont do for Masons, by way of excuse, to state that they
are a mere ‘ dead letter,’ never enforced, &c. If that is so, why re-
tain them any longer ? Why continue imposing such absurd, barbarons
obligations on their Members? Why not establish, like the Oddfellows,
Independent Lodges, on a Reformed Basis, adopting such rules and
ceremonies that they need not be ashamed of, and therefore need not
fear the criticism of any body. My Brethren may depend upon it that
it is useless for them to try to control the Press or prevent Free Speech
in our times.
The murders committed by the Craft in the past have deterred men
from exposing their absurdities effectually. But times have changed a
good deal in half a century. My desire is to show my brethren the
folly of attempting to retain those objectionable Old Relics of the past.
My misguided brothers have tried to end my days, and are yet plotting
my ruin. My only trust is in God for protection, as lam well aware
that those whose sworn duty it is to protect me, are in league with my
secret enemies. They can continue their slanderous abuse, and their plot-
ting as long as they please. I shall do what I think is right , whatever
may he the consequences. These remarks have no reference to the ma-
jority of the Order, who are too honorable to think for ajmoment, of en-
forcing their diabolical penalties. It is only a brutish minority under
the control of perjured Government Officials, that I have any fears of
at all. Yes, perjured Government Officials I How can a loyal Mason
take an oath to uphold the authority, and enforce the laws of his
country, without committing perjury in either capacity ? It is impos-
sible. He must repudiate one or the other of his obligations I
Secret Societies, as a rule, are all humbugs. They are generally as
pernicious in practice, as they are surely ridiculous in theory, as nothing
useful should be kept from the public. Secret Orders have caused great
trouble in the world. There is no excuse at all for their existence in
our times. They are generally under the control of cliques who use
them as * silver sluices or like flocks of sheep to be shorn, &c. by the
* Knowing Ones.’
The following pages contain extracts from the three Degrees of
Craft Masonry, giving the Signs, Grips, Pass-words, Illegal Oaths, and
enough of the Ceremony to enable the reader to understand the Order
pretty well, without being swindled out of Large Fees and disgusted
with Barbarous Obligations in joining the Craft.


SECRET CEREMONIES.
A LODGE OE CEAFT MASONS
Is made up of the following officers: —A worshipful Master, who
is chief officer; Senior and Junior Wardens, Senior and Junior
Deacons, and two Door-keepers, the one inside and the other out,
called respectively Inner Guard and Tiler. The last named of-
ficer is usually armed with a sword, assuming the role outside the
door, for the time being, of a military gent of some consequence,
intended doubtless to impress Candidates with the importance of
the Sanctum Sanctorum within!
The duties of these officers will plainly appear by noticing
closely the following brief description of the opening of a Lodge
in The Entered Apprentice's Degree, which is the first of
the numerous Degrees in Masonry, although the sense contained
in them all might be easily compressed into one. The Craft hav-
ing met to open a Lodge, the Worshipful Master calls them to
order in this First Degree by giving three distinct raps. In all
ordinary business, to attract the brethren’s attention, quiet dis-
order, &c., one rap is usually made. The three raps are repeated
by the Senior and Junior Wardens, after which the following
dialogue commences: —
Worshipful Master. Brethren, assist me to open the Lodge.
To the Junior Warden, What is the first care in the Lodge ?
Junior Warden. To see the Lodge properly tiled (guarded.)
W. M. Direct that duty to be done.
J. W. Brother Inner Guard, ascertain that the Lodge is pro-
perly tiled.
The Inner Guard gives a rap on the door, which is answered
in the same way by the Tiler, or Outer Guard, and indicates
that all is right, that there are no cowans or listeners about the
Lodge. The Inner Guard reports to the Junior Warden ; and
the latter, with three knocks, reports to the Worshipful Master
that the Lodge is properly tiled.
The W. M. then asks, What is the next care, Brother Senior
Warden ?
S. W. To see the Brethren appear to order as Masons.
W. M. See that duty done.
The Senior Warden examines any present, if thought necessary,
by the sign of an entered apprentice, and with the same sign
reports to the W. M, that none but Masons are present.
W. M. To order Brethren, as Masons in the first degree.
Brother Junior Warden, how many principal officers are there in
a Lodge ?
J. W. Three ; namely, the Worshipful Master, and his Two
Wardens.
W.M. Brother Senior Warden, how many assistants are there ?


10
SW. Three; besides the Outer Guard or Tiler ; namely, the
Senior and Junior Deacons, and the Inner Guard.
W.M. Brother Junior Warden, where is the Outer Guard or
Tiler placed F
J.W Without the door of the Lodge.
W.M. His duty.
J.W. Being armed with a drawn sword, to keep all cowans
and' listeners from Masons, and to see that the candidate for
admission comes properly prepared. .
W.M. Brother Senior Warden, where is the Inner Guard
placed ?
S. W. Within the entrance of the Lodge.
W.M, His duty ?
S.W. To admit Masons upon proof, to receive the candidate
in due form, and to obey the commands of the Junior Warden.
W.M. Brother Junior Warden, where is the Junior Deacon
placed ? . .
J.W. At the right of the Senior Warden.
W.M. His duty ?
J.W. To carry the messages and commands of the Worshipful
Master from the Senior to the Junior Warden, that the same
may be punctually obeyed.
W.M. Brother Senior Warden, where is the Senior Deacon
placed ?
S.W. At the right of the Worshipful Master.
W.M. His duty ?
S. W. To carry communications and commands from the
Worshipful Master to the Senior warden, and wait the return of
the Junior Deacon.
W. M. Brother Junior Warden, your constant place in the
Lodge ?
J. W. In the South.
W. M. Why are you placed there P
J. W. To mark the Sun at its Meridian, to call the Brethren
from labour to refreshment, and from refreshment to labour, that
profit and pleasure may be the result.
W. M. Brother Senior Warden, your constant place in the
Lodge ?
S. W. In the West.
W. M. Why are you placed there ?
S. W. To mark the setting Sun, to close the Lodge by the
command of the Worshipful Master, after seeing that everyone
has his just dues.
W. M. Worshipful and Worthy Past Master, where is the
Master’s situation in the Lodge ?
P. M. In the East.
W. M. Why is he placed there ?
P. M. As the Sun rises in the East to open and enliven the
day, so the Worshipful Master is placed in the East to open and
enlighten his Lodge, to employ and instruct the Brethren in
Masonry.


W. M. Brethren, our Lodge being thus duly formed, before
I proceed to declare it opened, let us invoke a blessing from the
Great Architect of the Universe upon all our undertakings. May
our labour thus begun in order, be conducted in peace, and closed
in harmony.
P. M. So mote it be. (The Past Master then advances three
steps, opens the Bible, and remains with his hand on it, until the
ceremony finishes.)
W. M. Brethren, in the name of the Great Architect of the
Universe, I declare this Lodge duly opened, for the purposes of
Masonry in the first degree.
The W. M., S. W., J. W., I. G., and T., then give three
knocks each, in rotation, which announce the Lodge opened ; the
Brethren take their seats, &c.; and the business of the Lodge
proceeds. If any doubtful Brethren appear, they are examined
and if thought necessary are made to take a new oath that they
are real Masons, and that they have not been expelled from any
Lodge. >
CEEEMONY OE INITIATION, IN THE ENTEEED
APPEENTICE’S DEGEEE.
The Lodge being duly opened, and a candidate applying for ini-
tiation, he has to sign a declaration, that he wishes to become a
Mason; and on its being presented to the Lodge, and the candi-
date approved, which is generally done by ballot, a Brother, called
the Steward, is sent out to prepare him in an antechamber. This
preparation consists in the candidate being divested of all money
and metal, of having the right arm, left breast, and left Jcnee bare ,
the right heel slip-shod; in being blindfolded, and a rope, which is
technically called a Cable Tow, is put round the necfc, with a sword
pointed to the breast. In this state the Steward leads the candi-
date to the Tiler, or Outer Guard of the Lodge Door. The Tiler
examines and sees the candidate properly prepared, and an-
nounces his approach by three knocks.
The Inner Guard gives the alarm, and is ordered to ask who
is there. The Steward or Tiler answers:—
A poor candidate in a state of darkness, who comes of his own
free will and accord, and also properly prepared, humbly soliciting
to be admitted into the mysteries and privileges of Freemasonry.
I. G. How does he hope to obtain those privileges ?
T. By the help of God and the tongue of good report.
I. G. Halt, till I make due report.—(Turning to the Master.)
Worshipful Master—a poor candidate, in a state of darkness, who
has been well and worthily recommended, regularly proposed and
approved in Open Lodge, now comes of his own free will, and also
properly prepared, humbly soliciting to be admitted to the mys-
teries and privileges of Freemasonry.
W. M. How does he hope to obtain these privileges ?
I. G. By the help of God, being free born, and of good report.
W. M. The tongue of good report has already been heard in


his favour; do you, Brother Inner Guard, vouch that he is pro-
perly prepared ?
LG. I do.
W.M. Then let him be admitted in due form.
LG. (Jo the candidate at the door.) Enter, free born and of
good report.
He is received by the J. D. from the Steward.
W.M. (Jo the candidate) As no person can be made a Mason
unless he is free born and of mature age, I demand of you, are
you free by birth, and of the age of twenty-one years ?
Candidate. I am.
Then a short prayer is offered by the W.M. who afterwards
addresses the Candidate as to his religious creed. He is then
taken round the Lodge to be seen by the brethren that he is
prqperly prepared &c.
SW. Brother Junior Deacon, it is the Worshipful Master’s
command that you instruct the candidate to advance to the chair
in due form.
This form is by three irregular steps.
W.M. Mr. , it is my duty to inform you that Masonry is free
and requires a perfect freedom of inclination in every candidate
for its mysteries. It is founded on the purest principles of piety
and virtue. It possesses great and invaluable privileges to worthy
men, and, I trust, to the worthy alone. Vows of fidelity are
required ; hut let me assure you that in those vows there is nothing
incompatible with your civil , moral , or religious duties. Are you,
therefore, willing to take a solemn obligation, founded on the
principles I have stated, to keep inviolate the secrets and mys-
teries of the order ?
Mr. . I am.
W.M. Then you will kneel with your left knee, keeping your
right foot in the form of a square, place your right hand on this
book, which is the volume of the sacred law, while with your left,
you will support one point of these compasses to your naked
breast, so as not to hurt yourself, and then repeat the following
Oath :
I, Mr. , in the presence of the great Architect of the Uni-
verse, and of this warranted, worthy, and worshipful Lodge of free
and accepted Masons, regularly assembled and properly dedi-
cated, of my own free will and accord, do, hereby and hereon,
most solemnly and sincerely swear, that I will always hail, conceal
and never reveal any part or parts, point or points, of the secrets
and mysteries of, or belonging to, free and accepted Masons in
Masonry, which have been, shall now, or hereafter may be, com-
municated to me, unless it be to a true and lawful brother or
brothers, and not even to him or them, till after due trial, strict
examination, or sure information from a well-known brother,
that he or they are worthy of that confidence, or in the body of a
just, perfect, and regular Lodge of accepted Freemasons, These
several points I solemnly swear to observe without evasion, equi«
vocation, or mental reservation, of any kind, under no less a


penalty, on the violation of any of them, than to have my throat cut
across, my tongue torn out by the root, and my body buried in the
sand of the sea at low water mark , or a cable's length from the shore,
where the tide regularly ebbs andflows twice in twenty-four hours.
So help me Q-od, and keep me steadfast in this my great and
solemn obligation of an Entered Apprentice Freemason.
W.M. What you have repeated may be considered a sacred
promise as a pledge of your fidelity, and to render it a solemn
obligation, I will thank you to seal it with your lips on the volume
of the sacred law. ( Kisses the Bible )
W. M. Mr. N , having been kept a considerable time in a
state of darkness, what, in your present situation, is the most
predominant wish of your heart ?
Mr.N . Light.
W.M. Brother Junior Deacon, let that blessing be restored to
the candidate.
[The Junior Deacon removes the bandage from the eyes of the
candidate. In some Lodges the Brethren form a circle about the
candidate, and all clap their hands when the bandage is being
removed —to astonish him, doubtless, with light and noise, when
he gets his first view of the Lodge.]
W. M. Having been restored to the blessing of material light,
let me point out to your attention, what we consider the three
great though emblematic, lights in Masonry—namely, the
Volume of the Sacred Law, the Square, and the Compasses.
The sacred volume is to rule and govern our faith ; the square to
regulate our actions ; and the compasses to keep us within due
bounds to all mankind, particularly with our brethren in Ma-
sonary. Eise, newly obligated brother among Masons. (He
rises.) You are now enabled to discover the three lesser lights
in Masonry. They are situated East, South, and West and
are meant to represent the the Sun, Moon, and Master of the
Lodge. The Sun to rule the day, the Moon to govern the night
and the Master to rule and direct his Lodge.
By your meek and candid behaviour this evening, you have
escaped two great dangers; but there is a third which will await you
to thelatest period of your existence. The dangers which you
have escaped are those of stabbing and strangling ; for atyour
entrance into the Lodge, this sword was presented to your naked
left breast, so that, had you rashly attempted to rush forward, you
would have been accessory to your own death by stabbing. Not
so with the brother who held it, as he would have only
remained firm to do his duty. There was likewise this
Cable Tow, with a running noose about your neck, which would
have rendered any attempt to retreat equally fatal by strangling,
but the danger which will await you to your latest hour, is the
penalty of your obligation, that you would rather have your throat
cut across, than to improperly divulge the secrets of Masonry.
As you have taken the solemn obligation of Masonry, I am
now permitted to inform you, that there are several degrees in
Freemasonry, and peculiar secrets restricted to each. These,


however, are not communicated indiscriminately; but are con-
ferred on candidates according to merit and abilities. I shall now
proceed to intrust you with the sign of this degree, or those marks
by which we are known to each other, and distinguished from the
rest of the world. I must first premise, for your general informs-
tion that all squares, levels, and perpendiculars (alludingto the posi-
tion of the body and its limbs), are proper signs by which to know
a Mason. You are, therefore expected to stand perfectly erect,
with your feet formed into a square, your body being thus considered
an emblem of your mind, and your feet the rectitude of your actions.
On your advancement from West to East, you advanced by three
irregular steps ; irregular from the situation you where then in,
not knowing where you were then going; but they allude to
three more regular steps, namely, right lines and angles, morally
teaching us upright lives and well-squared actions. You will now
advance towards me by one 'pace with your left foot, bringing the
right heel into its hollow —That is the first regular step in Free-
masonry ; and it is in this position that the secrets of the degree
are communicated. They consist in a sign, a grip or token, and
a word.
You will place your right hand in this position {level, with the
thumb extended in a square towards the throat), and the thumb to
the left of the windpipe. The sign is given by drawing the hand
smartly across the throat, and dropping it to the side. This is
in allusion to the penalty of the obligation ; implying, that, as a
mason, you would rather have your throat cut across, than impro-
perly divulge the secrets intrusted to you. This is the sign.
The qrip or iolcen is given by a distinct pressure of the top of the
right-hand thumb, of the first joint from the wrist, of the right-hand
forefinger, grasping the finger with the hand. This demands a
word, a word highly prize 1 among Masons, as the to their
privileges ; too much caution cannot, therefore, be used in com-
municating it. It must never be given at length ; but always
either by letters or syllables ; to enable you to do which I must
first tell you what the word is. It is Boaz. As in the course
of the evening you will be called on for this word, the Junior
Deacon will now dictate the answers you are to give.
Here the J. D. proceeds to instruct the candidate as to the
common mode of salutation among masons. Giving him the grip
he asks —What is this ?
Brother N. The grip of an Entered Apprentice Ereemason.
J. D. What does it demand ?
B, N. A word.
J. D. Will you give me that word ? . ...
B. N. At my initiation I was taught to be cautious ; I will
letter or half it with you, which you please, and begin.
J.D. 8.—8. N. 0. —J.D. A— BN. Z.— .Boaz
J. D. This word is derived from the left-hand pillar of the
porch or entrance to King Solomon’s Temple, so named after the
great-grandfather of David, a prince or ruler in Israel. The
import of the word is strength.


A white apron is then presented to the candidate as a “ distin-
guishing badge of a Mason.” There are some charges and lec-
tures delivered, followed by this dialogue: —
Q. Brother Senior Warden, from whence are yon ?
A. From the West.
Q. Whither are you directing your course ?
A. To the East.
Q. What is your object ?
A. To seek a Master, and from him to gain instruction.
Q. Who are you that want instruction ?
A. A Free and Accepted Mason.
Q, What mode of introduction have you to recommend your-
self to notice as a Mason ?
A. ( Gives the E. A. sign) A salute of respect to the Master
in the chair.
Q. Any other recommendation ?
A. ( Gives the sign) A hearty salute to all under his direction.
0,. For what purpose came you hither ?
A. To regulate my conduct, correct my passions, and make a
progress in Masonry.
Q. How do you know yourself to be a Mason ?
A. By the regularity of my initiation, repeated trials and appro-
bations, and a readiness at all times to undergo an examination,
when properly called on.
Q. How shall I know you to be a Mason ?
A. By signs, tokens, and perfect points of my entrance.
Q. What are signs ?
A. All squares, levels, and perpendiculars, and those when
duly given a Mason will hail and obey.
Q. To what do they serve F
A. To distinguish a Mason by day.
Q. What are tokens ?
A. Certain peculiar and friendly grips, which, when reciprocally
given, will distinguish a Mason by night as well as by day.
Q. What are the perfect points of entrance?
A. Points which lam bound most carefully to conceal.
Q, Give me the number ?
A. Three are known to me.
Q. I also acknowledge three, —will you name them ?
A. Eeciprocally with you, I will.
Q Begin, then:
A. Of.
Q. At.
A. On.
Q. Explain them.
A. Of, with respect to apparel. At, the door of the Lodge.
On, my left knee bare and bended.
Q. Why are they called perfect points of entrance ?
A. Because they include the whole ceremony of initiation.
Q. Why so ?
A. Of, includes the whole ceremony of preparation: At, that


16
of due submission : and On, that of a solemn obligation
Q. Where were you made a Mason ?
A. In a Lodge, just, perfect, and regular.
Q. What do you mean by a Lodge ?
A. An assembly of Masons met to expatiate on the mysteries
of Freemasonry.
Q. Wbat makes it just ?
A. The volume of sacred law unfolded.
Q. What makes it perfect ?
A. The number seven.
Q. Of whom is the number composed ?
A. Three Masters, two Fellow- Crafts, and two Entered Ap-
prentices.
O Why so ?
A That every order of Masonry may be virtually present by
their representatives, to ratify and confirm the proceedings of
the whole.
Q. What makes it regular ? _
A. The warrant of constitution.
Q What is the warrrnt of constitution ?
A. The sanction of the Grand Master presiding over Masons
for the country in which the Lodge is held.
Q. When were you made a Mason ?
A. When the the sun was at its meridian.
Q. In this country, Masons’ Lodges are usually held in the
evening; How do you account for this, which at first appears a
parade gun e j n g a g xe( j body, the earth constantly revolving
round on its own axis, it necessarily follows that the sun is
always at is meridian, and, Freemasonry being universally spread
over its surface, it follows as a second consequence, that the sun
is always at its meridian, with respect to Freemasonry.
O. By whom were you made a Mason ?
A. By the Worshipful Master, assisted by the Wardens, and
in the presence of the Brethren assembled.
Q. Where is the Master placed ?
A. In the East.
A. As the sun rises in the East, to open and enliven the day
so is the Worshipful Master placed in the East to open the Lodge,
and employ and instruct the Brethren in Masonry.
Q. Where is the Junior Warden placed ?
A. In the West.
Q. Why so ? _ . ,
A. To mark the setting sun, to close the Lodge by command
of the Worshipful Master, after seeing that every one has his
just due. t
Q. What do they conjointly represent r
A The sun in three stages of its diurnal progress.
Q. Why were you made a Mason ?


A. For the sake of obtaining the knowledge and secrets pre-
served among Freemasons.
Q. Where are those secrets kept ?
A. In their hearts.
Q. To whom are they revealed ?
A. To Masons and to Masons alone.
Q. How are they revealed ?
A. By signs, grips, and particular words. *
Q. What preparation is necessary to be made a Mason ?
A. A preparation of a two-fold nature, internal and external.
Q. Where does the first take place ?
A. In the heart.
Q. That being internal, how is it to be exemplified ?
A. By the declaration I was called on to make with respect to
the motives which induced me to seek the privileges of Free-
masonry.
Q. Of how many parts is that declaration composed ?
A. Three.
Q. Repeat them P
A. First, that I was free by birth, and of the full age of
twenty-one years. Second, that, unbiassed by the improper solici-
tations of friends, and uninfluenced by mercenary or other
unworthy motive, I freely and voluntarily offered myself a can-
didate for the mysteries of Freemasonry. Thirdly, that I was
prompted solely by a favourable opinion preconceived of the
institution, and a desire of knowledge ; and that I would cheer-
fully conform to all the ancient usages and established customs
of the Order.
Q. What further testimony were you required to give as
proof of the sincerity of your intentions ?
A. I was required to sign my name to the substance of the
foregoing declaration.
Q Where did the next or external preparation take place ?
A. In a convenient room adjoining the Lodge.
Q How were you prepared.
A. I was deprived of all metal, and hood-winked, —my right
arm, left breast, and left knee made bare, —my right heel slip-
shod, —and a cable-tow put round my neck.
Q. Why deprived of metal ?
A, That I might bring nothing offensive or defensive into the
Lodge, as the principles of Masonry forbidding the one, render
the other unnecessary.
Q. The second reason ?
A. To prove to me, that wealth and distinction, however valued
in the world, could have no influence in procuring my admission
or advancement among Masons.
Q. The third reason ?
A. To imprint on my memory the peculiarity of a circum-
stance which occurred at the building of the Temple of Jerusalem,
under the auspices of King Solomon, inasmuch as, during the
whole time, there was not the sound of axe, hammer or any other


tool of brass or iron beard within the precinct of Mount Sion, to
disturb the peaceful sanctity of that holy place.
Q. How was this structure completed without the aid of those
implements ?
A. The stones were hewn in the quarry, tliere carved,marked,
and numbered. The timber was felled anil prepareu. in the forest
of Lebanon, and conveyed by floats from Tyre to Joppa. The
metals were fused and cast on the plains ot Zeredathah. After
which, the whole was conveyed to Jerusalem, and there set up by
means of mauls and other implements prepared for that purpose.
Q. Why were the materials prepared so far off ?
A. The better to distinguish the excellence of the Craft; for
although the materials were prepared at so great a distance,
when they came to be set up at Jerusalem, the whole appeared
more like the work of the Great Architect of the Universe than of
mortal hands.
Q. Why were metalic tools prohibited ?
A. That the Temple of God might not be polluted.
Q. What is the moral inference which we derive from their
prohibition ? .
A. That our ancient and venerable institution depends not for
its support and permanency on any principle of a compulsive or
coercive nature, but it is best cemented by the perfect union and
harmony of its constituent parts.
Q. Why were you hood-winked ?
A. In case of a refusal to undergo the accustomed ceremonies
in making a Mason, I might be led out of the Lodge without
discovering its form.
Q The second reason ?
A. That, as I was received into Masonry in the state of utter
darkness until duly brought to light, so it was considered that I
should keep all the world in ignorance of our institutions until
they were lawfully gained.
Q. The third reason ?
A. That my heart might be taught to conceive before my eyes
were permitted to discover.
Q. Why was your right arm made bare ?
A. As a token of confidence, and to show that I was unarmed
and unguarded.
Q. Why was your left breast made bare p
A. As a token of sincerity, and to show that I was no imposter.
Q. Why was your left knee made bare ?
A. As a token of humility.
Q. Why were you slip-shod ?
A. It alludes to a very ancient custom of slipping the shoe
from off the foot, as a pledge of fidelity to the articles of any
solemn compact.
Q. Why was a cable-tow placed round your neck?
A. That if influenced by fear, I should attempt to fall back,
all hopes of retreat might be cut off.


Q. Being thus properly prepared, where were you conducted,
and by w r hom ?
A. ' To the door o£ the Lodge by a friend, whom I afterwards
found to be a Brother ?
Q. Being in a state of darkness, how did you know it to be a
door ?
A. By meeting with opposition, and afterwards gaining admis-
sion,
Q. Whom did you meet to oppose your entrance ?
A. One whom I afterwards found to be the Tiler.
Q. What is his peculiar duty ?
A. To be armed with a drawn sword, to keep away all cowans
or listeners from Masonry, and to see the candidate come pro-
perly prepared.
Q. How did you gain admission ?
A. By three knocks on the door.
Q. To what do they allude ?
A, To a venerable exhortation, seek and ye shall find, ask and
ye shall have, knock and it shall be opened unto you.
[This is one of the absurdities of Craft Masonry, in pretending
to have originated before, and therefore not recognising Christ;
yet, here it adopts almost the exact words he used on one occasion.]
Q. How do you apply that exhortation to your then situation?
A. I sought in my mind, asked of my friend, he knocked,
and the door of Masonry became opened unto me.
Q. Who then came to your assistance ?
A. One whom I afterwards found to be the Inner G-uard.
Q. What is his peculiar duty ?
A. To admit Masons upon proof, to receive the candidate in
due form, and to obey the commands of the Junior Warden.
Q. What did he demand of the Tiler ?
A. Who he had got there.
Q. The Tiler’s answer ?
A. Mr. } a poor candidate, in a state of darkness, who
has been well and worthily recommended, regularly proposed,
and approved in open Lodge, who now comes of his own free
will, properly prepared, humbly soliciting to be admitted to the
mysteries and privileges of Freemasonry.
’Q. What said the Inner Guard ?
A . How does he hope to attain those privileges ?
Q. The Tiler’s answer ?
A. By the help of God, being free-born, and of good report.
Q. Were you admitted on this ?
A. No. I was desired to halt till duly reported, to the Wor-
shipful Master, who, after having observed that the tongue of
good report had already been heard in my favor, was pleased to
order my admission.
Q. On what were you admitted P
A. On the point of a sharp instrument presented to my naked
left breast.


Q. Tor wbat purpose ?
A. To distinguish my sex, and to show that I was no impostor.
Q. After gaining your admission, how were you disposed of ?
A. I was conducted by the Junior Deacon through the exte-
rior avei/ues, tiil I arrived at the portal of the Lodge itself, the
Inner Guard all the while holding a sword to my naked left breast,
and. the Junior Deacon a cable-tow rovnd my neck. On baiting
there, the Worshipful Master.was pleased to observe, that as no
person could be a Mason unless he was tree-born and of mature
age, he demanded ol me whether I was free by birth, and of the full
age of tweniy-oue. To which I agreed that I was.
TO CLOSE THE LODGE IN THE ENTERED APPREN-
TICE'S DEGREE.
(The Master gives a knock, which is answered, by a knock from each
Warden as a call to order.)
W.M. Brethren, assist me to close the Lodge.—Brother Junior
Warden, the constant care of every Mason ?
J.W. To prove the Lodge close tiled.
W.M. Direct that duty to be done. .
J.W. Brother Inner Guard, you will prove the Lodge close
tiled.
(The I. G. gives three knocks on the inside of the door, ivhich are
answered by the Outer Guard, or Tiler, in the same way, which indicates
that the Lodge is dose tiled.)
LG. Brother Junior Warden, the Lodge is close tiled.
(This communication is made with the Entered Apprentice
sign ; the Junior Warden gives three distinct knocks, makes the
sign, and says, Worshipful Master, the Lodge is close tiled.)
W.M. Brother Senior Warden, what is the next care?
S W. To see the Brethren appear to order as Masons.
W.M. To order, Brethren, as Masons.—Brother Senior
Warden, your situation in the Lodge ?
S.W. In the West.
W.M. Your duty when so placed ?
S W. As the Sun disappears in the West to close the day, so
the Senior Warden is placed in the west to close the Lodge by
command of the Worshipful Master, after seeing that every one
has his just dues.
W.M Our Lodge le'ng thus duly formed, before I pro-
ceed to declare it closed, let us with all humility and reverence
express our gratitude to the great Architect of the Universe for
all favours already received; and may he still continue to
support our Order, by cementing and adorning us with every
moral and social virtue.
P.M. So mote it be.
W.M. Brother Senior Warden, our labours being ended, you
have my command to close the Lodge.
S.W. Brethren, in the name of the great Architect of the Uni-
verse, and by the command of the Worshipful Master, I declare
this Lodge closed.


Occasionally, the W. M. delivers a charge, at the close of this
Degree, which has some good precepts in it, but is too long for
insertion here. While the several charges and lectures included
in the different Masonic Degrees contain a good many redeeming
features ; yet they are also permeated with ridiculous allusions
to ancient personages, &c., that every intelligent Mason knows,
had no more connection with Craft Masonry than with the “ Man
in the Moon 1” It is a system of fraud, from beginning to end.
Its lectures and charges are merely the sugar-coatin'] of the
hitter oath-pill’s the poor candidates have to swallow !
THE SECOND OR FELLOW GRAFTS DEGREE.
Opening a Lodge in this Degree being a good deal like the
First, it is thought useless to give it here. We will then pro-
ceed with the
CEREMONY OF PASSING IN THIS DEGREE.
W. M. Brethren, Brother N is this evening a candidate to
be passed to the second degree; but it is first requisite that he
should give proofs of proficiency in the former, I shall therefore
proceed to put the necessary questions.
QUESTIONS REQUIRED TO BE ANSWERED]
In the Entered Apprentice’s Degree and before a candidate is
eligible to be passed to the Fellow-Craft’s Degree.
(The Master now puts the following questions of the first degree , and then
inquires if any brother has any other question to ask. Tice candidate is
then considered as qualified.)
Q. Where were you first prepared to be made a Freemason ?
A. In my heart.
Q. Where next prepared ?
A. In a convenient mom adjoining the Lodge.
Q. Describe the mode of preparation ?
A. I was deprived of all metal, and hood-winked ; my right
arm, left breast, and left knee made bare ; my right heel slip-
shod, and a cable-tow put round my neck.
Q. How did you gain admission ?
A. By three knocks on the door.
Q. Why were you made a Freemason ?
A. For the sake of obtaining the knowledge and secrets pre-
served among Freemasons.
Q. Where were you made a Freemason ?
A. In the body of a Lodge, just, perfect, and regular.
Q. How do you know yourself to be a Freemason ?
A. By the regularity of my initiation, repeated trials and ap-
probations and a readiness at all times to undergo an examination
when properly called upon.
Q. Since you know yourself to be a Freemason, what means
have you of communicating it to others ?
A. By signs, grips, and particular words, which when recipro-


22
cally given, serve to distinguish a Freemason by night as well as
by day.
Q. When were you made a Mason ?
A. When the Sun was at its meridian. .
Q. In this country, Freemason’s Lodges are usually held in
the evening, how do you account for this, which at first appears
a being a fi xe q body, the earth constantly revolving
around on its own axis, it necessarily follows that the Sun is
always at its meridian; and Freemasonry being universally spread
over its surface, it follows, as a second consequence, that the Sun
is always at its Meridian with respect to Freemasonry.
Q W hat is Freemasonry ? ... . n
A. A peculiar system of morality, veiled in allegory, and illus-
trated by symbols. . .
W. M. I will intrust you with a test of merit, which is, a
passing grip and a passing word leading to the door oj the Lodge
into which you seek to be admitted. The passing grip is given by a
distinct pressure of the thumb of your right hand between the joints
of the first and middle fingers of the right hand of a brother.
This demands a passing word, which is Shibboleth. The word
Shibboleth denotes plenty and is usually depicted in our Lodges
by an ear of corn near a well of water, Tou will be particu-
larly careful to remember this word, as without it you cannot
gain admission to a Lodge in a superior degree.
(BrotherN withdraws, and the Lodge is opened in the second degree,
as during his examination and instruction it could only he opened in the
first degree. After the examination of the candidate by the Liter, as to
the passing grip and word, the knock takes place at the door, and the Inner
Guard demands who is there, and reports .)
I. G. Worshi plul Master, at the door of your Lodge stands Brother
N f who has been regularly initiated into Masonry, and has
made such progress as he hopes will recommend him to be passed
to the degree of a Fellow-Craft, for which ceremony he comes
properly prepared.
W.M. How does he hope to obtain the privileges of the second
degree ? „ , ,
I.Gr. By the help of God, assistance of the square, and the
benefit of a passing word ?
W.M. We acknowledge the propriety of the aid by which he
seeks it. Do you. Brother Inner Guard, vouch that he is in pos-
session of that passing word ?
I. I do, Worshipful Master
W.M. Then let him be admitted in due form, Brother Deacon.
J. In the name of the Grand Geometrician of the Universe,
enter in due form a Lodge of Fellow-Craft Masons upon the
square, an instrument which brings rude matter into due form,
and as brethren of this degree are obligated on it, so are they
bound by every law, moral and divine, to act upon it with all
mankind, more especially a Brother Mason.
(The candidate is not now hood-winked ; but his left arm, right brea st


and right Imee are made bare , and the right heel slip-shod.)
W.M. Brother Deacon, let the candidate kneel while the
blessing of Heaven is invoked on what we are about to do
(Master prays.) We supplicate the continuation of thy aid,
O merciful Lord, on behalf of ourselves and of him who kneels
before thee. May the work begun in thy name be continued to
thy glory, and evermore established in us by obedience to thy
precepts. So mote it be.
(The candidate is then raised , and led three times round the Lodge , that
all may see he is properly prepared. As he comes to the Wardens he
gives them the pass-grip and word as at the door , and he is then presented
to the Master.)
S. W. Worshipful Master, I present to you Brother N , a
candidate properly prepared to be passed to the second degree.
W.M. Brother Senior Warden, youwill direct the Senior Deacon
to instruct the candidate to advance to the pedestal in due form.
S.W. Brother Senior Deacon, it is the Worshipful Master s
command that you instruct the candidate to advance to the east
in due form.
W. M. Brother N ,as in every case the degrees of
Freemasonry are to be kept separate and distinct, another obli-
gation will now be required of you, in many respects similar to
the fomer ; are you willing to take it ?
Bro. N. I am.
W. M. Then you will kneel on your right knee, your left
foot in the form of a square, your body erect, place your right
hand on the sacred volume of the law, supporting your left arm
with the compasses, the whole forming a square, and say after
me—
I, N. N., in the presence of the Grand Geometrician of the
Universe, and in this worshipful and warranted Lodge of Fellow-
Craft Masons, duly constituted, regularly assembled, and properly
dedicated, of my own free will and accord, do hereby and hereon
most solemnly promise and swear that I will always hail, conceal,
and never reveal any or either of the secrets or mysteries of, or
belonging to, the second degree of Freemasonry, known by the
name of Fellow-Crafts ; to him who is but an Entered Ap-
prentice, no more than I would even of them to the uninitiated
or the popular world who are not Masons. I further solemnly
pledge myself to act as a true and faithful craftsman, obey signs,
and maintain the principles inculcated in the first degree. All these
points I most solemnly swear to obey, without evasion, equivoca-
tion, or mental reservation of any kind, under no less a penalty,
on the violation of any of them in addition to my
former obligation, than to have my left breast cut open,
my heart torn therefrom, and given t° the ravenous birds
of the air, or the devouring beasts of the field, as a prey •
So help me, Almighty God, and keep me steadfast in this my
great and solemn obligation of a Fellow-Craft Mason. (K.isses
the Bible twice.)
W. M. Eise, newly obligated Fellow-Craft Freemason-


Having taken the solemn obligation of a Fellow-Craft Free-
mason, I shall proceed to intrust you with the secrets of the
degree. You will advance towards me as at your initiation.
Now, take another pace with your left foot, bringing the right
heel into its hollow, as before. That is the second regular step
in Freemasonry, and it is in this position that the secrets of the
degree are communicated. They consist, as in the former in-
stance, of a sign, grip, and word: with this difference, that the
sign is of a three-fold nature. The first part of a three-fold sign
is called the sign of fidelity, emblematically to shield the reposi-
tory of your secrets from the attacks of the cowan.
(The sign is made by pressing the right hand on the left
breast, extending the thumb perpendicularly to form a squared) The
second part is called the hailing sign, and is given by throwing the left
hand up in this manner (horizontal from the shoulder to the elbow t
and perpendicular from the elbow to the ends of the
fingers, with the thumb and forefinger forming a square.)
It took its rise at the time when Joshua fought the battles of the
Lord in the valley of Eephidim, and from the memorable event
of Moses having his hands supported by his brother Aaron whilst
Joshua was fighting the Amalekites. It was also the position of
Joshua when he prayed fervently to the Almighty to continue
the light of day, that he might complete the overthrow of his
enemy The third part is called the penal sign, and is given by
drawing the hand across the breasts and dropping it to the side.
This is in allusion to the penalty of your obligation, im-
plying that as a Fellow-Craft, you would rather have your
heart torn from your breast, than improperly divulge the secrets of
this degree. The grip, or token, is given by a distinct pressure of
the thumb on the second joint of the hand or that of the middle
finger. This demands a word ; a word to be given and received
with the same strict caution as the one in the former degree,
either by letters or syllables. The word is Jachin. As in the
course of the evening you will be called on for this word, the
Senior Deacon will now dictate the answers you will have to give,
S.D. What is this ?
Br. N . The grip, or token, of a Fellow-Craft Freemason.
S. D. What does it demand ?
Br. N. A word.
S, D. Will you give me that word ?
Br. N. I was taught to be cautious in this degree, as well as
in the former: I will letter or halve it with you.
S, D Which you please, and begin.
Br. N. Ja.
S. D. Chin.
Br. N. Jachin.
W. M. This word is derived from the right hand pillar of
the porch or entrance to King Solomon’s Temple. The import
of the word is to establish, and when joined to the one in the
former degree, signifies stability.
Q. Brother, are you a Fellow-Crafc P


25
A. lam so taken and accepted among Brethren and fellows
of the Craft.
Q How shall I know you to be a Fellow-Craft ?
A. By signs, grips, and words.
Q. How did you attain them P
A. By duly passing from an Entered Apprentice to a Fellow-
Craft, in a regular and well-constituted Lodge of the Fellow-
Crafts, there met and assembled.
Q. Of how many did the Lodge consist ?
A Of five in number: the Worshipful Master, the two
Wardens, and two Fellows, of the Working Class.
Q. At what time did this take place ?
A. At evening, after the sun was set.
Q. By whom were you past to a Fello w-Craft ?
A. By the Worshipful Master, the Senior and Junior
Wardens, and the brethren assembled.
Then follow some more dialogues, charges, and lectures too
voluminous for our space here. This degree is then closed in
manner somewhat like the first, and therefore, unneccessary to
insert. The ceremony of opening the
THIRD OR MASTER MASON’S DEGREE
Is also omitted, as our present purpose is to give the reader
the signs, grips, pass-words, illegal portions of the oaths, and
enough of the ceremony to enable him to get a correct idea of
the Order, and to enter any Lodge of Craft Masons in the world,
if he chooses, without having to take their unlawful obligations.
Although this is often done, we do not advise the reader to at-
tempt it, as being neither honorable or of the least possible ad-
vantage to him. If done at all, of course it would have to be
where he was not personally known. Otherwise he might run
the risk of his life. We will now proceed with the
CELEMONY OF RAISING A MASTER MASON, OR
THE THIRD DEGREE.
(The lodge is open in the second degree , and the brethren thus addressed
by the Master.)
Brethren, Brother N is this evening a candidate
to be raised to the Third Degree ; but it is first requisite
that be should give proofs of proficiency in the former ; I shall
therefore proceed to put the necessary questions.
(The Candidate is then examined as to his proficiency in the former
degree , by the Master , and by any other member present who chooses to
question him.)
QUESTIONS REQUIRED TO BE ANSWERED
IN THE SECOND DEGREE BY A FELLOW-CBAFT FREEMASON, BE-
FORE HE CAN BE RAISED TO A MASTER MASON, OR THE THIRD
DEGREE.
Q. How were you prepared to be made a Fellow-Craft ?


A. In a manner somewhat similar to the former degree, but
with this difference—that I was not hoodwinked, my left arm,
right breast, and right knee were made bare, my left heel slip-
shod.
Q. On what did you enter ?
A. On the square.
Q. What is a square ?
_A. An angle of ninety degrees, forming the fourth part of a
circle.
Q. For what were your researches in this degree ?
A. For the hidden mysteries of nature and science.
Q. As it is the hope of reward that sweetens labour, where
did our ancient brethren go to receive their wages ?
A, Into the middle chamber of King Solomon’s Temple.
Q,. How did they receive it ?
A. Without scruple or diffidence.
Q,. Why in this peculiar manner ?
A. Without scruple, knowing they had justly earned it;
without diffidence, from the unbounded confidence they placed in
the integrity of their employers in those days.
Q,. What were the names of the two pillars placed at the
porchway of King Solomon’s Temple ?
A. That on the left Boaz ; That on the right Jachin.
Q,. What were their separate and conjoint meanings ?
A. The former, strength ; the latter, to establish : conjointly,
stability.
W. M. Brother N will you come this way ? Do you
pledge your honour as a man, and your fidelity as a Mason, that
you will steadily persevere through the ceremony of being raised
to the sublime degree of Master Mason ?
Brother N . I do.
W. M. Do you likewise pledge yourself that you will con-
ceal what I shall now impart to you with the same strict caution
as toe other secrets in Masonry ?
Br. N. I will.
W.M. Then I will instruct you with a test of merit which is a
pass-grip and a pass-word, leading to the degree into which you
seek to be admitted. The pass-grip is given by a distinct pressure
of the thumb between the joints of the middle and ring fingers.
This demands a pass-word, which is Tubal Cain, who was the first
artificer in metal; and the import of the word is worldly pos-
session. You will be particularly careful to remember this word,
as without it, you cannot gain admittance into a lodge, in a
superior degree. ( Brother N retires to be properly prepared, which
is to have both of his arms, breasts, arm, knees, bare, and both heels slip-
shod. In the interim the Lodge is opened in the Third Degree. The
same ceremonies take place at the door, as in former degrees, with
the difference of the distinctive grip word, knocks &c., and the Inner Guard
reports to the Master .)


I.Gr. Worshipful Master, Brother N is at the door of the
Lodge, who has been regularly initiated into Masonry, passed the
degree of a Fellow-Craft, and has made such progress as he hopes
will recommend him to be raised to the sublime degree of a
Master Mason, for which ceremony he comes properly prepared.
W.M. The brethren will take notice, that Brother N , who
has been regularly initiated in Freemasonry, and has passed the
degree of a Fellow-Craft, is about to pass in view before them, to
show that he is properly prepared to be raised to the Third
Degree. (He is then conducted round the lodge by the Deacons. At
the first time he shows the sign of the first Degree to the W.M. : then the
first sign with the grip to the J. W. A t the second round , he shows the
second sign to the W.M. and J. W. and communicates both sign and grip
to the S. W. At the third round , he shows the second sign to the W.M. and
J. W., and shows the sign and communicates the Master's pass-grip and
pass-word to the S. W., hy whom he is presented to the Master .)
S.W. Worshipful Master, I present to you Brother N , a
candidate properly prepared to be raised to the sublime Degree
of a Master Mason.
W.M. Brother Senior Warden, you will direct the Deacons to
instruct the candidate to advance to the pedestal in due form.
S.W. Brother Deacons, it is the Worshipful Master’s command,
that you instruct the candidate to advance to the East in due
form.
W.M. It is but fair to inform you, that a most serious of
your fortitude and fidelity, as well as a most solemn obligation
await you, are you prepared to meet them as you ought?
Br. N. I am.
W. M. Then you will kneel on both knees, place both hands on
the volume of the sacred law, repeat your name at length, and
say after me the following OATH :
I, N N ,in the presence of the Most High, and of
this worthy and worshipful Lodge, duly constituted, regularly
assembled, and properly dedicated, of my own free will and
accord, do hereby, and hereon, most solemnly promise and swear,
that I will always hail, conceal, and never reveal, any or either of
the secrets or mysteries of, or belonging to, the Degree of a
Master Mason, to any one in the world, unless it be to him
or them, until after due trials, strict examination, or full
conviction, that he or they are worthy of that confidence, or in
the bosom of a M aster Mason’s Lodge. I further most solemnly
engage, that I will the secrets of the Third Degree keep from
him who is but a Fellow-Craft Mason, with the same strict
caution as I will those of the Second Degree from him who is
but an Entered Apprentice Free Mason: the same, or either of
them, from any one in the known world, unless to true and
lawful Brother Masons. I furthermore solemnly pledge myself,
to maintain and support the five points of fellowship, in act as well
as in word : that my hand given to a Mason shall be the sure
pledge of brotherhood: that my foot shall traverse through danger


and difficulties, to unite with his in forming a column of mutual
defence and safety and that the posture of my daily supplications
shall remind me of his wants, and dispose my heart to succor his
distresses and relieve his necessities, as far as may fairly be done
without detriment to myself or connexions : that my hreast shall
be the sacred repository of his secrets, when delivered to me
as such ; murder, treason, felony, and all other offences contrary to the
law of God, or the ordinances of the realm, being at all times most especi-
ally excepted, or at my own option; and finally, that I will support a
Master Mason’s character in his absence as well as I would if he
were present. I will nut revile him myself, or know ingly suffer
others to do so; but will boldly repel the slanderer of his good name
and strictly respect the chastity of those who are must dear to him
in the persons of his wife, sisters, or his child; fnd that I will
not!knowingly have unlawful carnal connection with either of
them. I furthermore solemnly vow and declare, that I will not
defraud a Brother Master Mason, or see him defrauded of the
most trifling amount, without giving him duo and timely notice
thereof; and that I will also prefer a brother Master M ason in all
my dealings, and recommend him to others as much as lies in my
power, so long as he shall continue to act honourably, honestly, and
faithfully towards me and others. All these several points I pro-
mise to observe without equivocation or montalreservation of any
kind, under no less a penalty, on the violation of any of them,
than to have my body severed in two, my bowels torn thereout,
and burnt to ashes in the centre, and those ashes scattered be-
fore the four cardinal points of heaven so that no trace or re-
membrance of me shall be left among men, more particularly
among Master Masons : So help me God, and keep me steadfast
in this grand and solemn obligation, being that of a Master Mason
{Kisses the Bible three times.')
Special attention is drawn to the italicised and black type portions
of the above oatb. The phrase, “or at my own option,” is very
significant. So also are the female exceptions alluded to. Eules
for chastity and honesty should be boundless in their application.
This Degree is intended to represent a tragedy, said to have
occurred at the building of Solomon’s Temple —the death of Hi-
ram Abiff, —which story the reader can believe or not, just as he
pleases! The manner of his assassination is Masonically reported
as follows:
Fifteen Fellow-Crafts of that superior class appointed to pre-
side over the rest, finding that the work was nearly completed,
and that they were not in possession of the secrets of the Master’s
Degree, which were only known to Solomon, Hiram, King of
Tyre, and Hiram Abiff, conspired together, to obtain them by any
means, and even to have recourse to violence. At the moment
of carrying their conspiracy into execution, twelve of the fifteen
recanted ; but three, of a more determined and atrocious character
than the rest, persisted in their impious design, in prosecution of
which, they planted themselves respectively at the east, north,


and south entrances of the Temple, whither our Master Hiram
Abiff had retired to pay his adoration to the Most High, as was
his wonted custom at the hour of high twelve.
His devotion being ended, our Grand Master attempted to re-
turn by the north door, but found himself opposed by the first
of the three ruffians, who, for want of another weapon, had armed
himself with a heavy plumb rule. In a threatening manner, he
demanded of our Grand Master, the Secrets of a Master Mason,
declaring to him that his death would be the consequence of a
refusal; but Hiram Abiff, true to his obligation, replied that,
those secrets were known only to three, and could only be made
known by consent of them all; that diligence and patience could
not fail to entitle the worthy Mason to participate in those mys-
teries, but that he would sooner suffer death than betray his sacred
trust. On receiving this answer, the ruffian aimed a blow at his
head, but, startled by the firmness of his demeanour, it missed
the forehead, and only glanced upon his right temple, yet with
such violence, as to cause our Grand Master to reel and sink on
his left knee. Recovering from this situation, he rushed to the
south door, where he was accosted by the second ruffian in a sim-
ilar manner, and answered as before, with uudiminished firmness,
when the assassin, who was armed with a level, struck our Master
Hiram a blow on the left temple, which brought him to the ground
upon his right knee. Finding his escape thus cut off in both
these quarters, he staggered faint and bleeding to the east door,
where the third ruffian was posted, who, on receiving a similar
reply to his insolent demand (for our G. M. still remained un-
shaken even in this trying moment), struck him a violent blow
full in the middle of the forehead with a heavy setting maul, under
which this excellent man sunk lifeless at the foot of the mur-
derer Such was the manner of his death ; and I have already
pointed out to you the instructive lesson which his death and
fortitude so powerfully inculcate in the heart of every faithful
brother. Such in like circumstances, will be the magnanimity
of every man whose mind is well constituted, who squared his
life upon the principles of moral truth and justice : who, by im-
proving his faculties in the glory of God, and the good of
mankind, has answered the great end of his creation, and has
learnt to contemplate death as the end of afflictions, and the en-
trance to a better life. Nor will you, I trust, sink beneath the
influence of terror, now that your trial approaches; though you
stand before me a devoted victim ; though the hand of death be
upon you, and though this awful moment be your last.
{At this part of the ceremony the Candidate is struck on the. forehead ,
and thrown down ; and, while shamming a dead man, the Master thus pro-
ceeds.')
The brethren will take notice, that in the recent ceremony, as
well as in his present situation, our brother has been made
to represent one of the brightest characters recorded in the annals
of Masonry; namely our Master, Hiram Abiff, who lost his life


30
in consequence of his unshaken fidelity to the sacred trust re-
posed in him. And I hope this will make a lasting impression
on his and your minds, should you ever he placed m a similar
state of trial. —Brother Junior Warden, you will endeavour to
raise the representative of our Master Hiram by the Entered
Apprentice’s grip. ( hie takes him by the fore-Jinger and then lets
it slip from his hand.)
J. W. It proves a slip, Worshipful Master.
W. M. Brother Senior Warden, try the Bellow-Craft’s grip.
S. W. It proves a slip also, Worshipful Master.
W. M. Brother Wardens, haying both of you failed in your
attempts there yet remains a third method, namely, by taking a
firm hold of the sinews of hishand, and raising him on the five points
of fellowship, of which, with your assistance, 1 will make a trial.
(The Master then raises him hy grasping or rather clawing his hand or
mist, hy putting his right foot to his foot, his knee to his knee bringing up
the right breast to his breast, and with his hand over the back.) Ibis is
practised in Masonry as the five points of fellowship.
W. M. It is thus all Master Masons are raised from a figurative
death to a reunion with the former companions of their toils.
Let me now beg you to observe that the light of a Master Mason
is darkness visible, serving only to express that gloom which rests
on the prospect of futurity. It is that mysterious veil which the
Eureka of human reason cannot penetrate, unless assisted by
that light which is from above. Yet even by this feeble ray you
may perceive that you stand on the very brink of the grave into
which you have just figuratively descended, and which, when this
transitory life shall have passed away, will again receive you into
•ts cold bosom.
You are now at liberty to retire, in order to restore yourself
to your personal comforts, and on your return into the lodge,
the signs, tokens, and words shall be explained to you.
(On returning into the lodge , Brother N is desired, to approach the
Worshipful Master as an E. A. and F. C., who thus addresses him:—)
I cannot better reward the attention you have paid to the ex-
hortation and charge, than by intrusting you with the secrets of
this Degree. You will advance toward me as a Eellow-Craft.
Take another pace with your left foot, and bring the right heel
into its hollow, as before. That is the third regular step in Free-
masonry, and it is in this position that the secrets of the degree
are communicated. They consist of signs, grips and words. C)f
the signs the first and second are casual, the third is penal. The
first casual sign is called the sign of horror, and is given from the
Fellow Crafts hailing sign, by dropping the left hand and elevat-
ing the right, as if to screen the eyes from a painful sight, at the
same time throwing the head over the right shoulder, as a remove
or turning away from that sight. It alludes to the finding of
our murdered Master Hiram by the twelve Fellow-Crafts. The


second casual sign is called the sign of sympathy or sorrow, and
is given by bending the head a little forward, and by striking
the right hand gently on the forehead. The third is called the
penal sign, because it alludes to the penalty of our
obligation, and is given by drawing the hand across the
centre of the body, dropping it to the side, and then
raising it again to place the point of the thumb on the naval. It
implies, that, as a Master Mason, you would rather he severed in two
than improperly divulge the secrets of this Degree. The grip or token is
the first of the five pioints of fellowship. The five points of fellowship are /
first, a grip with the right hand of each other : wrist, with the points of the
fingers : second, rightfoot parallel with right foot on the inside: third,
right knee to right knee: fourth, right breast to right breast: fifth, hand
over shoulder, supporting the back. It is in this position, and this only,
except in open lodge, and then but in a whisper, that the tvord is given. It
is Mahabone or Macbenach. The former is the ancient, the latter the
modem word.
(,Brother N is now conducted to the S. W., who presents him to the
W. M.)
S.W. Worshipful Master, I present to you Brother N ,on
being raised to the sublime Degree of a Master Mason, for some
further mark of your favour.
W. M. Brother Senior Warden, I delegate you to invest him
with the distinguishing badge of a Master Mason.
S.W.I now invest you with the distinguishing badge of aMaster
Mason, to show that you have arrived at that sublime Degree.
W M. I must state that the badge with which you have now
been invested, not only points out your rank as a Master Mason,
but is meant to remind you of those great duties which you have
just solemnly engaged yourself to observe ; and while it marks
your own superiority, it calls on you to afford assistance and in-
struction to your brethren in the inferior Degrees.
You have been informed of three signs in this Degree. The
whole are five, corresponding in number with the five points of
fellowship. They are the sign of horror, the sign of sympathy,
the penal sign, the sign of grief and death, and the sign of joy
and exultation, likewise called the grand and royal sign. For
the sake of regularity, I will go through the whole. This is the
sign of horror (described). This is the sign of sympathy (de-
scribed)i. This is the penal sign ( described ). The sign of grief
or death is given by passing the hand over the forehead. It
took its rise at the time when our Master Hiram was making his
way from the north to the south entrance of the Temple, when
his agonies were so great, that the perspiration stood in large
drops on his face, and he made use of this sign as a temporary
relief to his sufferings, This is the sign of joy and exultation (to
raise both hands over your head, and exclaim , O Worthy Masons!)
It..took its rise at the time the temple was finished, when King
Solomon and the princes of his household went to view it, and
being so struck with its magnificence, that with one simultaneous
feeling they exclaimed — O Worthy Masons\


Q. How are you prepared to make a Master Mason P
A. Both my arms, both breasts, both knees made bare, and
both heels slip-shod.
Q. On what did you enter ?
A. Upon both points of the compasses presented to both my
breasts.
Q. On your entrance into the lodge did you observe anything
different from its usual appearance ?
A. I did : all was dark, save one glimmering light in the east.
Q. To what did that darkness allude ?
A. Even to the darkness of death.
Q. Am I given to understand that death is the peculiar sub
ject of this degree ?
A. You are.
Q. From what circumstance ?
A, From the untimely death of our Master, Hiram Abiff
Q. What were the instruments made use of at his destruction ?
A. The plumb-rule, level, and heavy maul.
Q. How came you in possession of those secrets ?
A. From having figuratively represented him when I was raised
to the sublime Degree of a Master Mason.
Q, How were you raised ?
A. Upon the five points of fellowship.
Q, Which 1 will thank you to name.
A. Ist, hand to hand; 2n-l, foot to foot ; 3rd. knee to knee ;
4th, breast to breast; and sth, hand over back. These points
are further explained, and the ceremony for this Degree ends like
the preceding ones.
The reader is doubtless tired of the so-called “Sublime Mys-
teries of M asonry,” after reading the preceding pages. This
pamphlet does not contain anything like the whole of the Cere-
monies of the Three Degrees. But no conscientious Mason
will dispute its correctness, as far as it goes.
FITZROY STEAM PRINTING WORKS, GERTRUDE STREET.




