



ii -
ROOT CROPS, LUCERNE, &0.
TOR
STUD SHEEP AND CATTLE.
&
A. J. HOOKINGS, Seed Merchant,
JBRXSBAJSTE.
THE necessity for milking special provision for feeding stud
slice]) and cattle, particularly during winter and early
spring, has led to the extensive cultivation of Lucerne ; and
extended experience of its merits has more firmly established
its character as a most valuable forage plant.
Persons sowing largo areas would do well to entrust their
orders for seed to the undersigned, who imports very largely
from the best markets in the world, and can supply this seed
to advantage, either by the bag or by the ton,
A WIXXOWIXG MACIUXE has hecn imported from England flf
great expense, ex})ic*sln for the jmepoae oj' re-ilrcttsiog Lucerne
St a/, to remove from it “ Dodder ” and other needs.
MANGEL WURZEL.
The seed of this valuable root is grown largely for the
undersigned, and can therefore he depended upon as being
acclimatised and of superior quality.
SWEDE TURNIP.
This root has been very largely grown, during the last three
seasons, by one of the most experienced and successful of our
Queensland graziers ; and the results have been most satis-
factory, not only as to the weight of crop, but also as to its
value as a food for stock during winter and spring,
SUGAR BEET, BELGIAN CARROT, KOHL RABI,
AND CHICORY
Arc also valuable roots, and
TARES OR VETCHES, PUMPKINS, PRESERVING
MELON, AND RAPE (for ShccpJ
Are valuable for fodder.
HAND SEED DRILLS.
A shipment of these useful little machines, imported ex-
pressly for sowing the foregoing seeds evenly and economically,
is now to hand.
t
■xj’
I
ST
I 3
I
I
I
I
■' X
fer
b.
I.
Q>|
ro
¥
t
#
o f
%
F
m-


THE FLOWER SEEDS
Sold by the undersigned are carefully selected to afford the
most varied and brilliant display of bloom at all seasons, ami
include many new and rare kinds, in addition to the seeds of
the choicest flowers in his own garden.
Small Orders forwarded by Post throughout the Colony:
Ton sorts for ss. Id.
Catalogues sent Gratis to any Address,
KITCHEN GARDEN SEEDS.
Ilia long experience, perfect arrangements, and large capi-
tal, enable him to command a supply of the best Seeds from
the first markets in the world ; and, as he has all the tender
kinds grown for him in the Colonies, he is enabled to offer to
STOREKEEPERS, DRUGGISTS, AND OTHER WHOLESALE
BUYERS '
Advantages not to be surpassed by any other house in Australia.
The high character of his collection of
FLOWLRI.N.Q PLA.NT.TS
is still preserved by judiciously culling the choicest varieties
in every new list, and avoiding the common error of adding
indiscriminately every new sort regardless of its quality.
He invites attention to his collection of Tricolor, Fancy,
and Zonale GERANIUMS, DAHLIAS, and HUSKS, as being
unique.
His stock of
CTLLMBING- IPXi.AJSrTS
ia rich in those which arc conspicuous, for beauty of foliage or
brilliancy of bloom ; ami the
■OmMESTAL LLV\ : 'I:'S
include a large number of well-grown Coniferse, four to six feet
high (in large garden pots), suitable for planting for
LANDSCAPE EFFECT OR FOU AVENUES.
A. J. Hockings,
QUEEN STHEET, BRISBANE.


QUEENSLAND
GARDEN MANUAL
CONTAINING CONCISE DIRECTIONS
FOR THE CULTIVATION OF THE
GARDEN, ORCHARD, AND FARM
IN QUEENSLAND.
TO WHICH ARE ADDED SERICULTURE (SILKWORM), AND THE
CULTIVATION OF SUGAR, COFFEE, TEA, AND NUMEROUS
OTHER TROPICAL PLANTS AND FRUIT TREES
ESPECIALLY ADAPTED TO THE CLIMATE AND SOIL
OF THE COLONY.
BY
ALBERT JOLUST HOOKINGS,
AUTHOR OF THE “ FLOWER GARDEN IN QUEENSLAND,” ETC.
SECOND THOUSAND.
ENLARGED, REVISED, AND CORRECTED.
BRISBANE ;
PRINTED BY A. CLEQHORN, EDWARD AND ADELAIDE STREETS.
MDCCCLXXV,


—(M/oh/vv w- 0-<..<, 'i U
d ‘
v /.y
K / /
{ -' C'yA. O}J-xAyt C:.-.


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.
On presenting this little work to the public, the Author feels that some
apology is due for venturing to occupy, as a mere amateur, a position of
authority on Gardening matters which could have been so much more fitly
assumed by a person trained to the profession. Many reasons have com-
bined to induce this step, among the most urgent of which is the total
absence of any directions as to the cultivation and treatment of plants
suited to this Colony and climate, for the guidance of the numerous class
of farmers continually arriving, and anxious to adapt themselves to their
new home. It is not presumed that this want has been fully supplied in
this instance; but it is believed that a large amount of information is here
given, of the most trustworthy character, embracing many subjects not
generally treated of in books; and attention is directed to many plants
of commercial value, which, if grown here for purposes of export, would
tend greatly to the material wealth and prosperity of the Colony,
Seventeen years* devotion to this pursuit in Brisbane has given the
writer many opportunities for observation; and, on all subjects beyond his
personal experience, the best local as well as standard authorities have
been freely consulted, to ensure accuracy. In numerous Instances, how-
ever, where plants have been but recently imported, the information is
necessarily meagre; in other cases omissions may occur, which it will be
his study to rectify in future editions, should his present effort meet with
the approbation of the public.
Brisbane, 1805.
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
The general favor with which the first edtion of this work was received
on its publication, upwards of ten years ago, the sustained interest
which it commanded until the whole number had been exhausted, and
the constant demands which have since been made for a second edition,
have stimulated the Author to use every exertion to render the present
volume worthy of public confidence.
The whole work has been most carefully revised; much valuable
information, in a condensed but intelligible form, has been added in
various parts; the results of enlarged experience in numerous industrial
enterprises have been summarised and noted ; new fruits are described ;
improved methods of cultivation, and important practical hints are
interspersed under the appropriate heads; and In every way it has been
sought to maintain the character of the “Manual’' for being clear,
comprehensive, and trustworthy, without increasing its cost.
Brisbane, September, 1876,


// //-/'/'
/


INDEX.
PAGE.
Atlantiius tree 181
Ailanthus silkworm ... 182
Akee tree 61
Alligator or Avocado pear 61
Almond 61
American blight, to cure 52
~ ~ ... 69
Anchovy pear 63
Ants, destruction of ... 51
Aphides, destruction 0f... 51
Apple 63
Apple, acclimatized by seed 66
Apple, transplanting the 67
Apricot 70
Arrowroot 146
Artichoke, Jerusalem ... 23
Artichoke, Globe ... 23
Artificial grasses 162
Asparagus 24
Banana 72
Bananas, to dry 175
Banana fibre 171
Barberry 74
Beans 25
Beet 27
Bengal quince, Bad Tree 74
Bottling and canning fruits 175
Brazil nut 77
Brazilian cherry 77
Bread-fruit 77
Brocoli 27
Brussels sprouts 27
Cabbage ... ~ 28
Calendar, the 186
Capsicum 29
Caper ~ 160
Cape gooseberry 78
Cardoon 29
PAGE.
Carrot 30
Canning fruits ' 175
Castor oil plant 161
Cassava 145
Cauliflower 31
Celery 32
Celeriac or turnip- (
rooted celery J
Cherry 78
Chicory 155
Chili 29
Chinese grass cloth ... 169
Chestnut 79
Cherimoya 83
Chinese yam 145
Cinnamon IQP
Citron ’ 80
Cocoa-nut 80
Coffee ... 151
Corn or maize 136
Compost for fruit trees I ,
in pots (
Compost for top-dres- \ jgj
sing fruit trees in pots J
Comparative properties ) ,q
of soil \
Cotton 149
Cotton fibre ... 172
Cranberry 82
Cress 34
Cucumber 35
Cucumbers, to grow \ gg
them straight ... J
Currant 82
Custard apple 83
Date .>■ 84
Date plum 85
Deep tillage 5
Destruction of vermin ... 51


PAGE.
Destruction of ants ... 51
Destruction of aphides, &c. 51
Destruction of earwigs ... 52
Destruction of mice ... 52
Destruction of slugs . 53
Destruction of worms in I gg
paths /
Dioscorea hatates, Chi- 1 j^g
nese yam /
Draining and subsoiling.., 2
Draining —does my soil I g-
require ? )
Drain-pipes (table)... ... 5
Drying fruits 173
Durion 85
Dwarfing fruit trees .. 122
Earth-nuts 36
Earwigs, destruction 0f... 52
Egg plants 37
Endive 36
Esohallots 47
Farm, the 136
Fibre plants 169
Fig 85
Figs, to dry 173
Filbert 87
Elaeourtia 88
Bruit trees in pots.. 119
Garden Calendar 186
Garlic 37
Ginger 154
Gishurst compound ... 51
Gooseberry 89
Gooseberry, Cape 78
Grape vine 90
Grapes, to dry 174
Granadilla 89
Grass cloth or Ramie .. 169
Grasses, artificial 162
Guava 98
Gumbo 42
Hallet’s wheat 138
Herbert Vale cherry .. 98
Herbs 38
PAGE.
Hybridization of plants 58
Hookings’ new peaches.. 117
Hops, cultivation of ... 156
Hop fibre 172
Horse-radish ... 39
Hovenia dulcis 99
Hoven cattle 169
Indian com 136
Indigo 156
Irrigation 14
Irrigation with liquid \ y,
manure J
Jack fruit 99
Jerusalem artichoke ... 23
Jube-jube 99
Kitchen Garden 21
Leechee... .. • 100
Leek 39
Lettuce 39
Lemon 100
Lime (West Indian) ... 100
Lime and Salt, value 0f... 11
Liquorice 159
Liquid manure 17
Longau 100
Loquat 101
Lucerne 165
Maize ... 136
Mangostoen 103
Mango 102
Manila hemp 171
Manures, value of 9
Manures, quantities ... 11
Manures, to distribute ... 8
Mammee apple 102
Martynia 40
Matingola plum 104
Medlar 105
Melon 40
Mice, destruction of ... 52
Millet (sorghum) 167
Mulberry 105
Mushroom 40
Mustard 42


PAGE.
Natural grasses IGB
Nectarine 106
New Zealand flax ... ... 172
New fruits 132
Number of plants (acre) 58
Oidium, or vine disease,) g-
to cure )
Okra 42
Olive 107
Onion ... <|.HP
Orchard, the 55
Orchard house culture ... 120
Orange 108
Papaw apple 114
Parsley 44
Parsnip 44
Passion fruit 115
Peach 115
~ select list 117
Pea 44
Pear 121
Pear, alligator or avocado 61
Pear, anchovy 63
Pine-apple ... 123
Pine-apple fibre 172
Pine-apple wine 124
Plants required per acre.. 58
Planting trees (see Apple) 67
Plum 125
Pomegranate 125
Potato 141
Preliminary Observations 1
Properties of soil, com- ) jq
parative )
Pumplenose or shaddock 128
Pumpkin 45
Quince 126
Radish ... 46
Ramie or grass cloth ... 169
Raspberry 127
Rhubarb 40
Rose apple .. 128
Rosella 45
Rotation of crops 19
PAGE.
Salsafy 47
Salt and Lime, value 0f... 11
Savoy 47
Scorzonera . i 47
Sea-kale 47
Seeds, quantity per acre 50
Seedling apple trees ... 66
Selection of seed (Hal- ) ,
let’s wheat) ... j
Sericulture (silkworm) ... 175
Silkworm (ailanthus) ... 182
Shaddock... 128
Slugs, destruction of ... 53
Soil,comparative properties 12
Sorghum saccharatum ... 107
Spinach 48
Squash 45
Strawberry 129
Sugar-cane 157
Sweet potatoes 143
Tamarind 131
Tea 153
Tobacco 147
Tomato 48
Tomato, its medicinal |
qualities j
Transplanting 57
Trenching 7
Turnip 49
Tuscarora corn or white ) .07
maize )
Vegetable marrow 49
Vermin, destruction of ... 51
Vine, the 90
Vineyards, trench & drain 94
Walnut 131
Wampee 132
Water-cress 192
Wet soil, to distinguish.. 73
Wheat 138
Wine palm 133
White maize for flour . 137
Worms, to destroy ... 53
Yam 144


A. J. HOCKINGS,
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.


The Garden.
FIRST PRINCIPLES OF CULTIVATION.
Preliminary Observations.
HE proper growth of our cultivated crops
Kfcrl depends upon certain conditions of the air,
the soil, and water; and that the labor of the
husbandman may be crowned with success he should
thoroughly understand those conditions, and endeavor
to secure such of them for his crops as he can com-
mand. The degree of light and heat, the state of the
atmosphere, and the supply of rain being beyond his
control, his attention may be directed to working the
soil in a manner calculated to produce the best
results in all weathers; to the cultivation of the
crops best adapted to the climate, or meeting the
most ready sale ; the best means by which to keep
the land from becoming exhausted by continual
cropping, and the possibility of obtaining a supply of
water for irrigation in times of drought.
All systems of gardening should be acted upon
with some discrimination; that is to say, while pro-
per attention be paid to the general directions and
rules laid down, allowance must be made for the
difference and variety of soils, of situation, and of
climate, which require a strict attention to the mode
of management peculiarly adapted to each; and it is
the almost proverbial inattention to those important
points which is the chief cause of that want of success
which proves often so discouraging to the inexperienced
cultivator.
B


To work the soil in a manner calculated to
produce the best results in all weathers, the first
principles. of gardening must be understood and con-
sistently applied. It is generally known that plants
derive the greater part of their nourishment from the
soil; and that, to enable the tender roots to extend
in search of food, the earth has to be pulverised. It
is known by sad experience that the crops, in flat
lands especially, are lost season after season by water
in the soil during rainy weather. Crops are fre-'
quently lost from shallow tillage during drought; and
land gets “ worked out ” from continual cropping
without manure. These results are admitted, but we
fear the causes are not sufficiently studied, and we are
satisfied that due precautions are not adopted to prevent
the recurrence of such disasters.
Nature is very bountiful, but the husbandman
will ordinarily only obtain his reward on conforming
to certain conditions. To ensure the best prospect
of success (pre-supposing the soil to be of average
fertility), the grower should drain, subsoil or trench,
manure, irrigate, and adopt a rotation of crops.
These we have placed consecutively according to
their importance j and, as the space at command is
necessarily limited, such short articles will follow on
the various subjects as it is hoped will be sufficiently
explicit to be intelligible to the novice, while confined
within the narrow limits imposed by the moderate pre-
tensions of this little hand-book.
DRAINING AND SUBSOILING.
Several thousands sterling per annum are lost by
the farmers around Brisbane through drought and
excessive rain, the greater part of which they might


save by using the subsoil plough, and draining their
land. Many are aware of this fact, but are deterred
from giving their knowledge any practical effect
because of the expense. This idea of expense is
greatly exaggerated, and what is considered economy,
is, in reality, the most wasteful extravagance in time
and money. Let any farmer calculate the cost of
cultivating the land on which year after year he loses
his crops, either through drought or too much wet,
and he will find that, without counting the value of
the crops he has lost, he will have paid for merely
working the land (from which he has had no return)
sufficient money to have subsoiled and drained it. He
therefore cannot plead that he “ can’t afford it,” for he
has been expending a similar amount of labor and
money, only to reap disappointment.
The limited space at our command will not suf-
fice to do justice to either of the subjects treated of,
and the object aimed at, therefore, is not so much to
convince the reader, as to arrest his attention, that he
may seek more information and then bring his know-
ledge into practice.
Some cultivators think that it is not only super-
fluous, but improper to drain land here, because it is
a hot, dry climate, and we are subject to long
droughts. But it has been proved by long experi-
ence that drained land retains its moisture longer
than swampy land ; for the latter shrinks and
hardens as the wet dries off, gets parched and cracks ;
while the former—being light and friable—admits the
damp vapour to rise through it almost as fast as it
dries from the surface. For similar reasons wet laud
is unfit for vegetation either in wet or dry weather;
for during rain the roots are standing in water and
are smothered, so that the plant either turns yellow
or perishes ; and in drought it strives in vain to push
its roots through the parched, unhealthy mass in search
of moisture it was not able to retain.


Drain the land, and have it thoroughly pulverised,
and it will then lay light, so that excessive rain falling
on it will percolate through and ran off by the drains;
an ample store being retained by absorption for the
supply of plants during drought. By thus draining
we deepen the soil, and allow the roots to travel
further in search of nourishment; we admit an in-
creased supply of atmospheric fertilizers, which
hasten the decay of vegetable and other organic
matter, and accelerate the disintegration of the mineral
parts of the soil. It improves the mechanical texture
of the soil, and warms it, by which the effects of frost
are much modified, and the crops come on earlier in
spring. It allows us to work sooner after rain, pre-
vents the formation of acetic and other acids, and
it admits large quantities of rain to pass into the soil
which is always more or less imbued with the fertilizing
gases of the atmosphere, to be deposited among the
absorbent parts of the soil, and then given up to the
necessities of the plants.
In Barbadoes, drain pipes are put down at in-
tervals of sixteen to twenty-four feet, at a depth of
two feet six inches to four feet (the latter being pre-
ferable), and one-inch pipes are found sufficient to
carry the water into the main drains. The drain
pipes must have a fall throughout to allow the water
to run off. It would be useless to put them at an
equal distance from the surface in uneven ground, as
that would prevent the flow of the water ; but there
must be a decline from one end of the drain to the
other, and it must be at least sufficiently below the
surface, in the shallowest parts, to be out of the reach
of the subsoil plough or the effect of pressure from
horses walking over it. In fact, it should not be less
than two feet six inches below the surface in the
shallowest part, and the main drains should be at a
lower level still, and with sufficient inclination to carry
the water off freely.


1— 1
to
Length of
Tile.
(Inches.)
No. of Tiles per
CO
Acre, the Drains
C5
10 feet apart.
00
No. of Tiles per
Acre, the Drains
o
12 feet apart.
jo
Ho. of Tiles per
CO
Acre, the Drains
15 feet apart.
JO
No. of Tiles per
Cl
Acre, the Drains
to
17 feet apart.
JO
No, of Tiles per
Acre, the Drains
o
18 feet apart.
JO
No. of Tiles per
Acre, the Drains
00
20 feet apart.
A TABLE showing the Number of Tiles required for
THOROUGHLY DRAINING AN ACRE OP LAND, ACCORD-
ING TO THE DISTANCE OF THE DRAINS.
DEEP TILLAGE.
Deep Tillage has been reserved for the second
consideration, not because it is of less importance,
but because it would be useless without drainage.
Of what advantage would it be for a man to trench
his garden three feet deep if the earth stood full of
water? Premising, therefore, that nearly all soils
require draining more or less, and that as want of
drainage renders all other labor on the soil compara-
tively unavailing, it should be first attended to—we
will endeavor in a few words to impress upon culti-
vators the advantages of working the subsoil.
The various plants, during their growth, use the
constituent parts of the soil in different proportions,
some requiring a preponderance of the alkalies, some
the phosphates, &c., and this fact accounts for the
exhaustion consequent upon continually growing the
same sort of crop in a field without intermission;
some necessary food having been extracted from the
soil which is consumed by that plant, and it ceases to
remunerate the cultivator for his labor until he
manures his land—or, in other words, returns to the
soil similar ingredients to those he has carried away


from it in his crops. Such being the case, it will be
admitted that deep ploughing will afford greater scope
for the roots, more food for the plants, and conse-
quently the land will not be so soon exhausted; it
will be almost like two fields in one. In shallow
ploughing a hard “ pan ” is formed at the bottom, as
impervious to water as if it had been puddled, and
during our heavy and continual rains everything is
flooded and destroyed. In drought the result is equally
disastrous, for the four or five inches of earth is soon
dried through to the hard bottom, and the crop either
perishes or yields no return.
There are some subsoils which are unfit for the
support of vegetable life until exposed to the action
of the atmosphere, and thus in shallow tillage the
roots, on reaching the undisturbed subsoil, run along
without penetrating it, and are forced to depend
entirely upon the few inches of surface soil for sup-
port, exposed alike to destruction by either drought
or flood. As an instance of this, some clay subsoils
may be mentioned which owe their color to the pre-
sence of protoxide or oxide of iron, which is deleteri-
ous to vegetable and animal life ; but, by thoroughly
draining and breaking this soil,- and thus fully expos-
ing it to the influence of the atmosphere, more oxygen
is absorbed, and this injurious agent is converted into
peroxide of iron, which is beneficial and necessary,
being a great promoter of vegetation. It also fre-
quently happens that from want of mixture the
surface soil is deficient in some of the important
earths and saline matters in which the subsoil is rich.
In most cases, however, it will be best to break up
the subsoil without bringing it to the surface, and
gradually mix it with the surface soil at each subse-
quent ploughing, as it gets sweetened and ameliorated
by exposure to the air and rain ; and this may readily
be accomplished by using the trenching plough in the
bottom of the furrow after the common plough—for


as it is constructed in a very strong manner, with a
share but no mould boards, it raises the earth in the
bottom of the furrow, and passing under it leaves it in
a loosened state without raising it to the surface.
TRENCHING.
The result aimed at in this operation is similar to
that contemplated by using the subsoil plough, only
it is more uniform and effective; and this is more
generally used in forming gardens, orchards, and
vineyards. As soils differ much in character, trench-
ing has to be modified accordingly: in some cases it
may be desirable to bury the top soil six or eight
inches for the roots of the trees or vines to grow in,
while the next spit would be exposed on the surface
to be gradually ameliorated by the sun and atmos-
phere ; in other cases, such as the gravelly ridges
around Brisbane, which generally have a clay subsoil,
and those of a schistose formation, require digging to
the full depth and mixing thoroughly; while a third
class, having a rank and unproductive subsoil, requires
trenching in such a manner as to leave the bad soil at
the bottom.
Common trenching (which should be two feet to
two feet six inches deep) is performed as follows:
On the upper part of the ground to be trenched,
mark off a strip two feet six inches wide, divide the
remainder of the ground in a similar manner; dig
the whole of the earth out of the first portion to the
full depth, and wheel it to the lower part of the ground
where the work is to terminate ; dig the top spit of the
next space and throw it into the bottom of the newly
made trench, and so on until the second space is to the
required depth, and thus to the end of the work.
The method adopted when the subsoil is to be left
at the bottom is to remove the strip of surface soil two


Distance of
Heaps.
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Yards.
3
640
480
384
320
275
240
214
192
175
160
4
480
360
288
240
206
180
160
144
131
120
5
384
288
231
192
165
144
128
115
105
96
6
320
240
192
160
137
120
107
96
88
80
7
275
206
165
137
118
103
92
83
75
69
8
240
180
144
120
103
90
SO
72
66
60
9
214
160
128
107
92
80
72
64
59
54
10
192
144
115
96
83
72
64
58
53
48
11
175
131
105
88
75
66
59
53
47
44
12
160
120
96
80
69
60
54
48
44
40
feet six inches wide, us directed previously, and dig the
subsoil thoroughly, and as deep as possible, mixing
manure with it if thought desirable ; then dig and
throw in the surface soil from the next portion ; re-
peating the operation to the end.
In trenching land great care should be observed
lest the bottom is left in hollows where water would
collect and injure the soil.
MANURING LAND BROADCAST.
A TABLE SHOWING THE NUMBER OF HEAPS REQUIRED PER ACRE,
PLACED AT GIVEN DISTANCES.
Note. —The figures at the top are the distance of the rows in yards,
those on the left are distance of the heaps ; then under the top, and
opposite the proper figure on the left, are found the number of heaps
required for an acre.


VALUE OF MANURES.
The saving and application of manures have
received much attention of late years in England, and
the farmers of Queensland would do well to follow the
example of the Chinese gardeners and Belgian farmers
in this respect. Refuse of every description, bones,
human excrement, and the excrement of all the domestic
animals and fowls, are carefully collected and applied
to the soil, and urine, which is in many countries en-
tirely neglected, is carefully collected in tanks. With
regard to the value of the latter, Dr. Hodges says : “ A
farmer who keeps three stall-fed cows and one horse,
and collects merely the solid dung, allowing the urine
to escape into the drains, loses annually in the cow
urine 3069 lbs., and in that of the horse, 89 lbs.; in all
upwards of 28 cmt. of dry fertilising matter, equal in
virtue to the best Peruvian Ouano, and which would be
capable, without the addition of any other manure, of
keeping seven acres of land in the most fertile condition .”
The same quantity of Guano would be worth upwards
of £23 in Brisbane.
“ The bodies of both men and animals are derived
from the same materials as the plants that we culti-
vate—both are from the same soil—creatures of the
dust; the plant directly deriving the materials of its
growth from the minerals of the field and the gases
of the air, and the animal indirectly through the
vegetable creation. Chemistry has clearly shown us
that the lime of our limestone mountains, the potash
which exists in our granite rocks, and the phosphorous
of our soils, by the wonderful arrangements of Provi-
dence, become food for our crops, and ultimately build
up the structure of our bodies. Nor are these mate-
rials which nature provides in the earth squandered ; a
wonderful economy is displayed in every part of
creation. The matters which we receive in our food,


which become blood and flesh and solid bone, are not
allowed, even during life, to remain inactive. They
have no sooner performed the office assigned to them
than they are discharged from the body ; and in the
liquid and solid excrements of both men and animals
we discover the mineral materials contained in the bread
and beef, the seeds and roots, which had composed their
food.”— Liebig.
“ By the Belgian farmer the value of the liquid and
solid excrements of an individual is estimated at£l 17/-
per annum, and so carefully is every trace of these
manures collected in the towns, that the public authori-
ties are relieved from all the expense and trouble which
in this and other countries are incurred in the removal
of nuisances. In China also, which has preceded us
in so many of our boasted improvements, strict laws
are enacted for the careful preservation of human ex-
crements.”
What has just been stated of the valuable fertiliz-
ing qualities of human excrements, and the importance
which is at present attached to their preservation in
other countries, may, it is to be hoped, induce farmers
here to give greater attention to these manures. Their
offensive odour may be removed, and their value as
manure increased, by adding to them coal or wood
ashes, or sawdust moistened with a solution made by
dissolving the substance called “ Green Vitriol ”
(sulphate of iron) in water. To fix the ammonia in
urine, add ten drachms of sulphate of iron to each 20
gallons.
The “earth closet system” presents this valuable
manure in the most inoffensive and portable form; and
it should be largely used.
It has been proved by chemical analysis that the
various crops require the constituents of the soil, in
different proportions, for their proper growth, which
will account for the advantage derived from rotation
of crops, and also explain why some experiments have


failed when made indiscriminately with either lime,
bones, guano, gypsum, or salt. They have each been
expected by some of their unthinking advocates to
produce marvellous results on every variety of soil and
for every description of crop. Land already charged
with saline particles will derive no benefit from a dres-
sing of salt, neither will land well supplied with lime
and its compounds be improved with a lime dressing.
But with a moderate amount of knowledge it will be
found there is no land but what may be improved;
and the means of improvement are at the command of
every cultivator, small or great.
Lime and salt are both destructive of insect life
and fungus, .and as they greatly improve the texture
and fertility of soil previously deficient of them, their
application to almost all soils would be highly benefi-
cial.
If all the sweepings and refuse of the farm-house,
fowl-house, pigsty, stable, and the human excrements
were carefully collected, mixed with green weeds,
and rolled into a pit, and all carefully applied to the
land, we should have less complaints of bad crops, and
the necessity of sending to Peru for guano would be
considerably diminished.
Peruvian Guano is rendered less dusty, and, con-
sequently, more easy to handle, by being mixed with
an equal quantity of salt. Its value as a manure is
also increased.
«
The following are the different kinds and rates of
manures applied to the acre of ordinary ground for
producing heavy crops :
10 cwt. of crushed bones per acre.
5 cwt. ditto and 10 tons farm-yard manure ~
5 cwt. ditto and 1J cwt. Peruvian guano... ~
3 cwt. Peruvian guano ... ... ... ~
1J cwt. ditto and 10 tons farm-yard manure ~
20 tons farm-yard manure „


10 cwt. of salt per acre for asparagus, beet, mangel
wurzel, &c.
14 oz. of fresh Peruvian guano to one gallon water
is a safe proportion for guano liquid.
One part by weight of cow dung with ten parts water
is the proportion used for liquid manure.
COMPARATIVE PROPERTIES OF
SOIL.
It is admitted by all gardeners that the soil best
calculated for general garden purposes should be of
rather a light, rich, friable, loamy texture ; dry, mel-
low, and capable of being wrought at all seasons, and
of a good depth—that is, from two feet to three feet
and a-half, and that the worst kinds are those of the
very light, sandy, and stiff clayey texture. A loam
of a middling texture, rather inclining to sand, will
be found the most suitable for the majority of kitchen
vegetables. If the soil be too strong, the roots of
plants push weakly into it, and are apt to canker and
perish ; if too light, and at the same time poor, the
roots of vegetables will wander far in search of
nourishment, and be unable to collect a sufficient
quantity for their support and maintenance. It is a
false principle to depend upon manures entirely, for
were they to be had in the greatest abundance, a too
free application of them would have effects highly
injurious to the quality of vegetables in general. In
the formation of a garden a moderate and prudent
expense should be bestowed at the beginning, if the
undertaking is to be ultimately crowned with success
and satisfaction.
Strong stubborn clays are to be avoided, being the
most unfit of all others, as few vegetables will prosper
in them. Sand, lime, chalk, and coal-ashes, correct
the tenacity of clayey soils, and make them work more


pleasantly; the former, if sharp, or if it be river or sea
sand, with a mixture of shells, will, if given in a
sufficient quantity, render it of a lighter texture.
Chalk should be spread on the surface in spring, so that
the whole may be pulverised by the action of the sum-
mer’s sun and rains, and dug in in the autumn. It
corrects the acidity of the clay, and renders it at the
same time more friable. Lime acts much in the same
way, but should be used more sparingly. Coal-ashes
have much the same effect upon stiff soils. Lime
rubbish dug in is a good corrector of stiff' soils, and is
less objectionable than the coal-ashes. Decayed tan-
ners’ bark, bog mould, or any vegetable mould applied
to strong soils, lightens them considerably. Such soils
cannot be too much wrought by the spade; every
opportunity should be taken to ridge and rough-dig
strong soils ; and such operations should not be done in
wet weather, nor when the ground has been saturated
with wet. .
Orchards, orangeries, vineyards, and pineapple plan-
tations are found to thrive on the stony ridges in the
vicinity of Brisbane better than in the rich alluvial
flacs. The soil for such purposes should be trenched
two feet six inches deep and well drained, at least three
feet deep, no matter what the surface declivity may be.
If manure is required, it may be applied as a top-
dressing, and lightly forked in among the plants.
In this climate great advantage will be derived
from digging such land deep, and roughly throwing it
up in beds to lay exposed to the sun during the summer.
The sun has an effect almost equal to the frost in Eng-
land in causing the disintegration of the soil under
such circumstances.
In procuring mould, either for renewing or im-
proving the soil, care should be taken to prefer such
only as is near the surface, as it is in general the most
productive and fruitful, and is in reality the true
vegetable earth. The top spit, that is, to the depth of


one foot from the surface of any common or field, which
has not been cropped, is to be preferred, and the fuller
it is of fibrous matter the better it will prove for the
growth of the plants.
IRRIGATION.
Irrigation as a means of increasing the produce of
the soil is of great antiquity. It is practised to a
considerable extent in China, India, Italy, and other
countries, and in England the water meadows are a
source of great profit. In Queensland there is
abundance of grass for the cattle without resorting to
this means of providing it; but there is scarcely any
country where the inducement to irrigate is greater.
With the continual risk of drought, and wages at the
maximum rate, it behoves the farmer to adopt every
means within his reach to protect himself against the
former, as well as to economise the latter. One
great obstacle to the general introduction of irrigation
is, that our rivers are mostly salt; and we are not
possessed of any satisfactory information as to how far
such water can be advantageously used for growing
crops. It is not considered safe to use water contain-
ing more than three per cent, of salt; and as from some
experiments made by the late Mr. Eldridge on the
River Brisbane water, after dry weather, it was found
to contain five per cent, of salt, it appeal’s that at the
time when the water would be most urgently required
for irrigation it would be unsafe for the farmers on the
Brisbane to use the water from that river, unless mixed
with an equal quantity of fresh ; and then it should
never be allowed to touch the foliage of the plants.
There are, no doubt, many positions where a
suitable supply of water which, taking its rise at a


greater elevation, would be at command for this pur-
pose, or could be made available at a reasonable out-
lay. Were such circumstances taken advantage of, it
may be safely affirmed that the benefits would be so
striking as to induce more costly operations. It cannot
be too clearly impressed that, in time of drought or
in hot weather, a mere sprinkling from the watering
pot is often injurious, while a good flow of water run-
ning along the alleys among the growing crops for
half an hour in the evening two or three times a week
would produce the utmost luxuriance of growth. Mr.
Knight, one of the first authorities in all matters con-
nected with gardening, says in reference to this subject:
“ The quantity of water which may be given with ad-
vantage to plants of almost every kind, during warm
and bright weather is, I believe, very much greater
than any gardener who has not seen the result will be
inclined to suppose possible ; and it is greater than
I myself could hp,ve believed upon any other evi-
dence than that of actual experience."
It has been found on careful experiment that only
about one-fifth of the rain-fall reaches the water chan-
nels so as to be available for irrigation; but that
quantity stored up and applied judiciously to the farms
around the great centres of population would produce
the most valuable results.
The average annual rain-fall in Brisbane for five
years was nearly 56 inches, which bears favorable
comparison with Sydney, where on an average of
fifteen years the returns indicate only 49 inches. It
will thus be seen that it is not from insufficiency of
rain that we suffer, but the means of storing it up and
applying it to the land. One inch of water is equal to
22,627 gallons on an acre of land.
There are two classes of persons who will be
especially benefited by the development of any simple
and easily managed system by which the produce of
the soil may be increased. These are the agriculturists


and the flock-owners. The former have often to regret
the loss of their crops from the droughts which too
frequently interfere between seed time and harvest.
The latter have to mourn over the loss of flocks and
herds which perish during a drought, partly from want
of food to eat, but principally from want of water.
The flock-owner, again, even when not affected by
drought, is obliged to distribute his flocks and herds
over a large area. The produce of the natural pas-
turage of the country is too scanty to admit of the
depasturage of one-tenth part of the stock which
might be kept upon it, were proper means taken to
increase its fertility, among which means irrigation
ranks highest. The agriculturist is obliged to content
himself with inferior crops from the want of means of
applying the proper stimulus to the soil, which means
would be afforded were he placed in a position to irri-
gate his farm.
The soil and the climate of Lombardy are not
more favorable to cultivation than those of many
parts of this colony; and the district between Milan,
Lodi, and Pavia, containing about 100,000 acres,
supports 100,000 head of cattle, 28,000 horses, and
100,000 head of smaller stock—an amount which
would in this country depasture an area at least
twenty times as great. The increased capacity of
maintaining stock is due entirely to the mode in
which advantage has been taken of the water by which
this district is surrounded to irrigate the whole of it
perfectly.


IRRIGATION OF GRASS LANDS
WITH LIQUID MANURE.
Occupiers of land on the Continent have been for
many years aware of the eminent advantages of liquid
manure. “So long ago as 1829, in a published
account of the various methods of dairy husbandry,
pursued by the Dutch, the practical application and
advantages of liquid manure was well understood by
that industrious and intelligent people,” The method
was as follows: —“ Early in the season part of the
proprietor’s farm and some small fields near the cow-
house were sown with barley and grass seeds, and
watered with diluted cow urine by means of a fire
engine. Barrels full of urine were also conveyed to
the land on hand barrows with broad wheels, which
were easily wheeled along the rich soft ground, which
would have been destroyed by horses and carts. The
contents of the barrels were discharged by means of
pipes eight feet long, perforated with holes. The
grasfi of the field thus irrigated was cut five or six
times a year, and, though not very long in the blade,
there was always great weight of produce. Indeed, it
Was so thick and rich, that it would have rotted unless
cut often. The grass was cut during the day when the
weather was wet or moist, but when it was dry it was
cut late at night or early in the morning, and the field
irrigated immediately after being cut.”
In an experiment made by Dr. Guy, in which the
grass of a park had been partly irrigated with sewage,
the animals found the irrigated grass so grateful to
them, that “ while in other parts of the park they have
suffered the grass to grow without let or hindrance,
they have kept it close nibbled, and will not give it an
opportunity of growing.”
c


Mr. Chadwick relates the experience of Mr.
Barber, Murdnachwood. This gentleman had twenty-
seven acres of land before his house, so poor that it
originally fed only two cows. In a stable near the
house were forty cows and four horses ; the dung of
the cows was put into a tank and largely diluted with
water, and with this he irrigated twenty-two acres.
With the refuse of his house and scullery he irrigated
five acres. The produce was so largo that on that
same plot he has been enabled to feed all the cows
and the horses ; that is to say, the increased produce
was such, that forty-four animals were fed where
there had previously been only food enough for two.
Mr. Smith, Deanstone, says: “ The practical result of
this application of sewage is, that land which let
formerly at from 40/- to £6 per Scotch acre, is now
let annually at from £3O to £4O, and that poor sandy
land, on the sea shore, which might be worth 2/6 per
acre, lets at an annual rental of from £l5 to £2O.
That which is nearest the city brings the higher rent,
chiefly because it is near and more accessible to the
points where the grass is consumed, but also partly
from the better natural quality of the land. The
average value of the land, irrespective of the sewer
water application, may be taken at £3 per imperial
acre, and the average rent of the irrigated land at
£3O, making a difference of £27 ; but £2 may be de-
ducted as the cost of management, leaving £25 per acre
of clear annual income due to the sewer water.”
Every farmer in Queensland should have one or
more tanks of liquid manure to apply to the roots of
his growing crops. To every pigsty, stable, and
water closet there should be a tank conveniently
situated (and fitted with a lid), from which a supply
could be at all times obtained, and being diluted
according to its strength, with three or six times its
volume, applied to such crops as require it. Care
should be taken not to use it too strong.


ROTATION OF CROPS.
Certain plants exhaust the soil of the particular
salts or other mineral matters which are required for
their nourishment. When the substance required by
plants is found in the soil in which they grow, the
plants are vigorous ; but when the soil becomes ex-
hausted of them the plants become weak and sickly,
and a further crop of that plant cannot be grown in
that soil until it has had returned to it the substance
which had been exhausted. Another crop, however,
requiring a different substance may be grown in the
same soil the next year. For instance, plants that
require potash, such as the beet, the mangel wurzel,
and the turnip, may succeed plants that require lime,
such as beans, peas, &c.




THE KITCHEN HARDEN




THE KITCHEN GARDEN.
ARTlCHOKE—Jerusalem—(Helianthus Tuberosus).
HESE are propagated in the same manner as
potatoes. Being very hardy, and spreading
in the soil, they will thrive in almost any
situation ; and as they are difficult to eradicate, they
should be put in some situation where they are not
likely to be troublesome. Plant the small tubers in
spring (or in February if not procurable at that time),
fifteen inches apart, in rows three feet between. To
save time and trouble the rows may be dug alternately,
and the small sets immediately replanted in the same
place after well manuring and digging. By this
method a continual succession is provided in the same
bed.
ARTICHOKE—Globe—(Cynara Scolymus).
Some growers prefer the French or oval artichoke
on account of its superior flavor, but the globe sort is
more generally cultivated because of its dwarf and
prolific habit. In Europe, artichoke bottoms are dried
in the sun for winter use, and are esteemed either plain,
fricaseed, fried, or pickled ; but the whole plant, if
covered with sand, may be preserved for a long time,
and the young ones may be pickled whole.
The artichoke is propagated my means of suckers,
which are planted early in spring. Plant them when
about ten inches high, in rows, four feet apart, and three
feet from plant to plant, in rich, deep, moist loam, well
manured. The situation should be open. Shade with


large pots, and water freely in dry weather, occasion-
ally giving rather strong liquid manure. Remove the
pots when the plants begin to grow. In October re-
move all small suckers, and mulch the ground with dung
three inches thick between the rows. In the’absence
of dung, use grass mowings. The beds last for about
five years, when a fresh plantation should be made.
Manure the beds annually early in spring with a layer
of fine wood or coal ashes forked in, and then a heavy
dressing of half rotten dung. Mulch the ground an-
nually in October.
Artichoke Chords: In October or November cut
away the leaves and stems of a few plants to within
six inches of the ground : many young shoots will soon
appear ; when sufficiently grown, draw them together
and bind them up in haybands. In a month they will
be blanched.
ASPARAGUS.
In making asparagus beds, choose the best soil
which the garden affords. The most favorable is a
deep sandy loam, dug deep and well manured, a good
sprinkling of salt being added to the surface a mouth
or two before the planting season, that the rain and
atmosphere may act upon it. Before planting, the
ground should have another good dressing of well
rotted manure, be trenched again two feet to two feet
six inches deep, and again well sprinkled with salt,
leaving the surface neat and even as the work proceeds.
The Connova is much esteemed by some growers, on
account of its gigantic size.
Planting: During Mayor June, mark out the
beds four feet wide, with paths two feet wide running
north and south. Strain a line parallel with the bed
nine inches from the side; with a spade cut a trench
six inches deep perpendicular on the side next the
line; against this place the plants at fifteen inches


asunder, with great care, spreading the roots out and
leaving the crowns two inches below the surface; till
in the earth quickly to avoid all unnecessary exposure.
Two other rows at fifteen inches asunder, planted in
a similar manner, will complete each bed. The object
in having the beds so narrow is that they may never
be trodden upon, as from the length of time they
remain without any further opportunity for deep dig-
ging, everything must be avoided which would tend to
compress the earth.
Subsequent cultivation: Water must be given
daily in dry weather until the plants are established.
The beds must be kept clear of weeds throughout the
year. Liquid manure should be applied plentifully
twice a week from September through the summer,
and a dressing of salt once a month. In May cut the
stalks down and dig the beds lightly over with a fork,
turning up the paths also. Lay over the beds a good
dressing of manure to remain until spring. Early in
August give the beds a good digging with the fork,
thoroughly mixing the manure; rake the surface
smooth, drawing the rough lumps into the paths. Begin
to cut in September, as ready. Superphosphate of lime
is a good special manure.
About eight square perches will be sufficient for
a large private establishment. The beds should be
entirely free from the shade of trees. In Spain,
Austria, and other continental countries, earthen pipes,
"wooden tubes, and cane joints, twelve to fifteen inches
long, are placed over the tender shoots to ensure their
being more perfectly blanched. The seed roasted and
ground is said to equal coffee.
BEANS— (Broad Windsor, Longpod, and Mazagan).
The soil most suitable for the main crop is a
heavy loam dug deeply and manured, if necessary.


Sow in drills two inches deep, three feet six inches
apart, and the seed nine inches apart in the drills. If
sown in dry weather, have the bottom of the drills
well watered before sowing. For five rows, each five
yards long, a pint of seed will be sufficient. For an
early crop, sowings may be made in March or April,
and for a late crop, in September or October. When
the crop comes into full blossom take an inch or two
off the top of each plant; it is said to strengthen the
plant and throw it into fruit. The crop should be
gathered as it becomes fit for use, whether required or
not, to prolong the succession of supplies.
BEANS—(French or Kidney).
The best dwarf varieties yet tried are the Early
Dun, Negro, China, and Blade and Red /Speckled.
An open situation and light rich soil, well dug,
are required for French beans. They should be sown
in drills two feet or two feet six inches apart, care
being taken not to sow the seed too deep, say never
more than one to one and a-half inch. The plants
should be eight inches to a foot apart in the rows, and
as they grow the earth should be drawn up to the
stems at each side to prevent their being blown over
by high winds.
If the weather should become very dry, and
there is a supply of water at command, the beds
should have a good soaking occasionally. Gather the
beans regularly as they are ready, as it will prolong
their bearing. Successioual sowings may be made in
the neighbourhood of Brisbane from September to
April. The running varieties should have their runners
cut when they have grown a fair size, to check over
luxuriance and induce fruitfulness.


BEET.
The varieties are known as Red Beet and Silver
Reel. The former is grown for the roots, and much
esteemed by some persons as a vegetable ; but more
generally used sliced in salads, sometimes alone with
an acid dressing, and also pickled. Sugar is produced
from the latter; it is also grown for its leaves, which
are used as spinach, and the stalks as seakale. Beet
requires a deep, rich, open soil, well manured. The
ground should be dug at least two spades deep, the
whole of the manure used being turned in with the
bottom spit, to cause the tap roots to descend, and pre-
vent forked or side roots. Sow for early winter crop
in February, and for summer crops in August and Sep-
tember, in drills two feet apart; the seed should be
covered about an inch dee]), and the plants thinned out
to twelve or eighteen inches apart in lows. A dres-
sing of salt dug in with the manure will be found
beneficial, and fine bone-dust or phosphatic manures
are highly valued for this crop.
BROCOLI.
While and Purple Cape, and Grange’s Early
While, are the most suitable for our climate. For
cultivation see Cauliflower. Sowings may be made in
June, August, November, and January for succession.
BRUSSELS SPROUTS.
Tins plant rises up with a very long stem, which
has a spreading open head at the top. The large
leaves are broken down to facilitate the formation of the
little cabbages from all the joints up the stem. They
should be gathered when they have the appearance of
half-blown roses, leaving the top uncut.


The seed may be sown in June and August, and
again in November and February. The cultivation is
the same as for cabbages, but they require more room
on account of their height. They should be planted in
rows three feet apart, and the plants two feet apart in
the rows.
CABBAGE.
The following varieties are selected as the sorts
most approved of for general cultivation: Early—
Wheeler's Imperial, East Ham. Medium— St. John’s
Day, Large York, Sugar Loaf, Nonpareil, King, Dwarf
Dutch, Battersea. Late crops — Drumhead, Flat
Dutch.
Soil : The soil should be rich, moist, but well
drained, and not too light; thoroughly well dug, and
highly manured, turning in 75 to 100 loads of stable
manure per acre.
Sowing: It is desirable to make small sowings
at intervals throughout the year, that plants may
always be ready to put out in favorable weather. The
largest sowings may be made in January and June.
The latter season, the red pickling cabbage may be
sown. It is best always to protect the seed bed from
the sun until the plants have four leaves, by sticking
in small sprigs of brushwood all over the bed. Should
it be deemed advisable to make a sowing of cabbage
seed in dry weather, the following will be found a
good practice : —The bed being well dug, give it a
thorough good watering, not a mere sprinkling; the
next morning repeat it, and in the afternoon sow the
seed, raking it in well; protect the bed from the direct
rays of the sun by a portable calico screen, and, if the
weather continues dry, water every morning until the
plants have got the fourth leaf.
Transplanting: In performing this operation, the


extreme ends of the roots maybe removed, to increase
the tendency to form lateral roots. The small varie-
ties may be planted two feet apart each way, and
the large sorts three feet; in poor soil they may
stand closer. If the plants are at all infected with
the blight, dip them carefully in a weak solution of
Gishurst Compound. In transplanting in dry weather,
holes should be made with the dibble where the plants
are to stand, and abundance of water poured in; in a
few minutes they will be ready to receive the plants
by sinking the setting stick in the centre of each hole
to open it a second time; then let the plants be put in,
closing the earth well at the bottom of the roots.
Culture; Digging between the growing crops will
be of great advantage, especially if the ground has
got hardened by excessive rain. In seasons of drought
the ground should not only be kept open, but mulching
and liquid manure should be resorted to. Lime is a
good special manure.
CHILLI and CAPSICUMS.
Under this head we will include the several sorts
of chilli and capsicum. They are all hardy in the
vicinity of Brisbane, and can be sown in the open
border in September, slightly protecting the bed from
sun and wind until the plants are well up. When
strong enough to transplant, remove them to where
they are to stand, in a rich, warm bed, at three feet
a part. Shade them with a branch placed over them
at the sunny side until established.
CARDOON.
The Spanish variety is considered the best, from
Wie size and succulency of the midribs of its leaves.
The soil suitable for the cardoon is a light deep loam.


In September prepare a trench as for celery, twelve
inches deep and twenty-two inches wide ; fork into
the bottom of it well decomposed manure, four inches
deep; sow three or four seeds in patches eighteen
inches apart along the centre. As soon as the seed
leaf is well formed thin the plants, leaving only the
strongest one in each patch ; hoe frequently among
the plants, and water thoroughly with diluted liquid
manure. When about eighteen inches high rub off
all the side shoots from the crowns to the surface,
and add a little earth to support the leaves ; when they
are full grown (two feet in height or more), tie up the
leaves compactly together with a piece of banana fibre
or soft rope, then wind a hay or straw band, moderately
tight, round from the bottom to nearly the top, and
earth up the same height; when completely blanched
the plants are ready for use.
CARROTS.
The Early Horn is a fine flavored early carrot,
and, on account of its habit of growth, is adapted for
cultivation in soils which would be too shallow for the
other varieties. The Intermediate, Long Orange, and
Altringham are suitable for deep soils.
The carrot requires a light, rich, sandy loam, of
considerable depth, which should be dug two spades
deep, being careful to break all lumps, and to turn in
any manure ten or twelve inches under the surface,
that the roots may strike down straight and smooth.
Sowing: The seed soon perishes, and is more
frequently bad than any other garden seed. The
carrot may be sown either broadcast or in drills one
foot apart. As the seed is liable to hang together, it
should be well nibbed in the hands, mixed with sand,
to separate it previous to sowing ; and as it is very
light it should be sown on a calm day. On light soil,


not subject to binding in wet weather, the seed should
be gently and evenly trodden in, and then evenly
raked over; being careful not to draw the earth into
hillocks. On land of a more retentive nature, it should
be raked in only. Sow for main crop in January,
February, and March, and occasional small sowings for
succession.
Culture: Ply the hoe freely to keep the weeds
down and stir the soil. Thin the.plants out to five or
six inches apart.
CAULIFLOWER.
The Large Asiatic, Early London, Early Dwarf
Erfurt, and Alma have given great satisfaction in
Queensland.
Soil: The soil for the seed bed may be light, but
for final transplanting it can hardly be too rich.
Sowing: For the winter crop, sow in December
and January; for the summer crop in June and July.
It is desirable to protect the seed bed from the dry-
ing effect of the sun and wind, by sticking in a few
twigs of brushwood, in rows over the bed (not too
thickly), until the plants are up, and the seed leaves
well developed.
Cultivation: The soil should be of the best
description, thoroughly dug and manured. Trans-
plant in favorable weather two feet to two feet six
inches apart, watering the plants until established.
During the growth of the plants, water frequently
with liquid manure. Stir the surface as often as it
binds, and draw the soil up to the stems to support
them. When the heads begin to appear, water should
be freely applied, for the flower is greatly improved by
abundant watering. Two or th ree leaves should be bent
over each flower to preserve the color and prevent its
expanding.


A few cauliflower’s may bo preserved for some
time after the crops are over, by attention to the fol-
lowing directions : —Select what may be required for
this purpose a day or two before they are quite ready.
Pull the plants up by the roots, and tie the tops of the
leaves loosely together, then place them in a cool shed
amongst damp sand or sandy soil, and they will keep
quite fresh for several weeks.
CELERY.
The Red Solid and White Solid are grown under
various names. The red is considered more hardy,
and the white is valued for its crispness and delicacy.
A deep, rich, vegetable mould, in a moist situation,
is that best suited for celery. In a light rich soil, in
a shady situation, mark off a seed bed in January.
Having freely watered, sow the seed thinly broadcast,
tread then in evenly, and, if the Weather is dry, cover
lightly with sifted stable droppings or decomposed
manure. When the rough leaf is a little advanced,
prepare a bed by mixing two inches in depth of well
decomposed manure with about three inches of the soil;
level the surface, water thoroughly, and a few hours
afterwards, in the evening, plant out the seedlings five
or six inches apart. The plants should be selected of
an equal size ; and another bed may be pricked out a
month later for a succession.
Final Planting: At five feet apart from centre
to centre throw out trenches a foot broad and a foot
deep. At the bottom lay four inches of well rotted
manure, and mix it well with the soil at the bottom.
The Americans recommend a dressing of salt. Give
the whole a thorough good soaking of water ; and, if
the seed bed be dry, water it also a few hours before
the seedlings are required, and raise up the plants
with a ball of earth by means of a trowel; plant then
in the centre of the trench at twelve inches apart, and


water again. Shelter them until they are rooted.
The plants will be eight to twelve inches high when
finally transplanted, and should at that time .have all
side shoots carefully removed from the crown. The
beds should be so arranged that no water could stagnate
at the roots.
Blanching , dec.: As soon as the plants make a
little growth apply water copiously when required,
and diluted liquid manure, soapsuds, etc., occasionally,
keeping the surface of the soil well stirred. When
the plants are nearly full grown remove any side
shoots, then gather the leaves of each plant evenly,
but not too tightly, together, and tie them up to prevent
the earth getting into the hearts while earthing up.
Draw the earth carefully to the plants on each side to
within six inches of the top ; this operation will have
to be repeated, and should only be done in dry weather.
The plants have greater strength and flavor if the
blanching is deferred until within a few weeks of the
heads being required for use.
In Henderson’s “ Gardening for Profit”—the ex-
perience of a very successful market gardener in
America—the practice of planting in trenches for the
purpose of blanching is deprecated. Henderson recom-
mends that as the seedling plants advance in growth,
the tops be shorn off twice before the time, of setting
out, so as to induce a stocky growth. He sets the
plants six inches apart, in lows which are three feet
apart, on the level ground, the roots being made firm
by pressure of the foot. In six or seven weeks after-
wards sufficient soil is drawn up to the plants to keep
the leaf stems upright, the earth being pressed round
e ach plant with the hand, Tiie blanching process is
finished with the spade, banking up the earth taken
from between the rows against the plants as they in-
crease in height. He grows only dwarf celery, as,
"nlike the taller varieties, the whole of the stem of
this kind is fit for use.
D


CELERIAO, OR TURNIP-ROOTED CELERY.
'This is not much grown in Queensland, but is
highly esteemed by Germans and natives of other con-
tinental nations. The soil and treatment is similar to
celery, but it is not earthed up to the same extent.
The turnip-like root is cooked, or it makes an excellent
salad when sliced and used with vinegar,
CHESS.
The Curled Cress is generally preferred. It
should be sown every fortnight for succession in shallow
drills on a rich light soil. The seed should be very
lightly covered, and the drills need not be more than
three inches apart.
American Cress is hardy, and maybe sown monthly
during the spring and summer in drills nine inches
apart. When the plants are bushy, cut the heads by
the surface of the ground.
Water Cress is an excellent salad and well
deserving cultivation. It is generally propagated by
cuttings, but may also be reared from seed. To raise
seedlings, take a box and set it in a shady place ; see
that there are holes at the bottom to allow the escape
of stagnant water; place two inches of charcoal or
other rough material for drainage at the bottom ; add
six inches of compost, made of equal parts of well
decomposed cow dung and sand, make the surface
quite smooth, and water copiously: when quite
drained off, sprinkle the seed evenly over the soil, apd
sift a small quantity of sand over all, so as just to
cover the seed. Keep the soil regularly watered
with a fine rose watering-pot; be careful the surface
is not disturbed by the water, and that it never gets
dry. As the plants get large enough to handle, they
may be planted out three inches apart in a rich well


sheltered bed, and watered regularly and abundantly
until large enough to plant out in their permanent
positions; they may then be increased to any extent
by cuttings,under similar treatment. A stock of plants
should be kept in the nursery, until the beds have stood
the test of drought and flood.—See Garden Calendar
for June.
CUCUMBER.
The Stockwood, London Ridge, and Cuthill’s Black
Spine have been found good sorts for general cultiva-
tion.
Any good garden soil, rather moist and sheltered
from the west, will be found suitable. The ground
should be double dug, and well manured. In August
mark off the land into six feet squares. If the soil is
not very rich, make a hole at each crossing twenty-
four inches in diameter, mix with the soil two large
spadefuls of sheep or poultry dung, adding a little
ashes, bone dust, and salt, if convenient, and fill the
hole up level with the surface. In the centre of each
bed make a ring and sow five or six seeds half-an-inch
deep. When up, thin out to two plants in each bed.
As the lateral branches show fruit they should be
stopped, and the secondary laterals should be pinched
back to the fruit in the same manner. The various
runners should be placed so as to cover the bed equally.
Whenever the soil has a tendency to bind, stir it
up deeply; and if the weather is dry give the beds a
good soaking with diluted liquid manure at least
once a week. In hot, dry weather plants should be
watered at night, and then not niggardly, but suffi-
cient to damp the bed thoroughly to the roots. Suc-
cessional sowings may be made in September, October,
and November.
To produce straight cucumbers,provide some three-
sided boxes made of three-inch kittens eighteen inches


long; place them underneath the fruit with the open
side uppermost.
ENDIVE.
The cultivation of this useful salad is the same as
for lettuce, which see.
Blanching : When the leaves are quite dry and
the plants have attained nearly their full size, gather
the whole plant up in your hands in a conical form,
and tie it round lightly with a strip of banana fibre,
which is to go several times round the plant, causing
it to end so pointedly at the top as to prevent the rain
or dew from penetrating to the interior. Endive is
sometimes blanched under garden pots, or blanching-
pots, after the manner of seakale. A week to a fort-
night will generally be sufficient.
EARTH NUTS.
This plant is also known as “ pea nut,” and
“ pindar ground pea.” It is grown extensively in the
Southern States of America, in China, and other
countries.
Make the hills in August, two and a-half to
three feet apart, and drop three or four of the shelled
seeds in each; cover them two inches deep ; thin the
plants to two in a hill, and keep the ground free from
weeds. The best soil is a rich sandy loam.
To promote fruiting, the branches should be spread
out evenly, and gently pressed to the soil.
The nuts are highly exteemed in England and
France, and the demand is said to be almost unlimited.
The quantity exported from Bathurst, on the coast of
Africa, had increased from 47 tons in 1835 to 11,904
tons, valued at about £130,000, in 1851. A fine oil is


extracted from them, and the residue makes a valuable
oil cake to feed cattle and swine, of which the latter
are particularly fond. In France the cake is gronnd,
roasted, and used as a substitute for coffee.
In America the consumption of earth nuts is enor-
mous, and the crop which, prior to I860, was very
insignificant, had reached, in 1871, the value of
2,250,000 dollars. The market price varies with the
quality from $2 to $2.50 per bushel, and the weight of
a bushel is from twenty-four pounds, yielding one
quart of oil to the bushel, to thirty-four pounds, yield-
ing five quarts of oil. The crop averages forty bushels
per acre. A machine has been invented by Thos. L.
Colville, of Wilmington, North Carolina, for hulling
and winnowing them. The demand is so great that
pea nut shops have them roasting all day to supply the
retail trade, and the sales of one man amount to up-
wards of one thousand bushels a year. The nuts
thrive best near the sea, and require lime in the soil.
EGG PLANT—(Solanum Melongena).
The seed may be sown in a warm border in Sep-
tember ; and ultimately thin the plants one to two feet
apart.
The fruit is much used in India, France, and Italy,
in soups and stews, and for the general purposes of the
love apple or tomato.
The purple variety is known as the Brinjall in
India.
GARLIC.
Tins vegetable is propagated from the young
bulbs or offsets. They should be planted in winter,
in drills drawn one foot apart and one inch deep.


Press the lower half of the offset into the soil, leaving
them in this state during winter, without covering.
When hoeing them in spring, let the soil fall to them
so as to leave a level surface. When the leaves get
yellow in summer they will be fit to gather and hang up
to dry. A good rich soil suitable for onions will also
suit garlic.
HERBS.
Plants should be procured if possible. They
may be planted any time between April and August,
in a shady border, at eighteen inches apart, and water
should be given in dry weather. Where plants are
not obtainable sow the seed in lines drawn a foot apart,
merely deep enough to cover the seed. When up, thin
out to a foot apart; water and mulch during summer,
and keep the surface loose. In autumn or early spring
take up and divide the roots, planting them at eighteen
inches apart, as first directed.
As some herbs are annuals, a list is given of a
considerable number; and the usual mode of propaga-
tion mentioned for the guidance of cultivators.
Shruhhy plants: Sage, winter savory, rosemary,
thyme, rue, wormwood, southernwood, lavender, hys-
sop, may all be propagated by division of roots, and by
cuttings.
Perennial herbaceous plants : Peppermint, spear-
mint, pennyroyal, balm, tansy, burnet, chamomile,
fennel, liquorice. These are all increased by parting
the roots.
Perennial and annual plants : Caraway, coriander,
dill, anise, sweet marjoram, summer savory, sweet basil,
angelica, borage, horehound. All propagated by sow-
ing the seed.


HORSE-RADISH.
Select in the spring a moist situation, having
a sandy or light soil. Take out a trench two feet
wide and eighteen inches deep; put in the bottom a
good layer of decomposed manure, which mix with a
little of the earth at the bottom; cover this with an
inch or two of soil; cut up the roots into portions
about three inches long and place them along the
centre of the trench six or eight inches apart, then fill
up the trench to the level of the surrounding soil.
LEEK.
The Musselburgh and London Flag are the best
sorts. The soil should be rich, deep, well dug, and
manured with well decomposed manure. Sow the
seed in April and May, in drills six inches apart and
half-an-inch deep. When about eight inches high
transplant them into a bed previously prepared for
them. Shorten the roots to about an inch from the
plant, and cut off two inches or more from the
extremity of the leaves. In drills, fifteen inches
apart and six deep, plant them with a dibble deep in
the bottom of the drill, nearly up to the leaves, at a
distance of eight inches apart. Cut back the leaves
once a month during their growth, to make their
necks swell out. As the plants grow, level down the
soil in the process of loosening it. Late sowings may
be made with advantage, in favorable seasons, during
August and September.
LETTUCE.
The sorts most approved for general cultivation
are the Neapolitan, the Drumhead Cabbage Lettuce, the
Silesian, and the Paris Cos.


Sowings may be made monthly for succession, and
small beds may be transplanted in favorable weather
at fifteen inches from plant to plant.
Some persons having light, rich, moist soil, find it
to advantage to make their summer sowings in rows,
fifteen inches apart, putting the seed in thinly, and
allowing the plants to remain until they arrive at
maturity. In this case especial care must be taken
that the ground does not cake, that it be frequently
stirred, and liquid manure supplied, if necessary. Salt
and ashes are good special manures.
Lettuces may be blanched as directed for endive.
MAKTYNIA.
The seed-pod of this flowering plant is much used
in America for pickling.
MELONS.
The rock and English hybrids are very numerous,
and so much crossed with each other that they are
seldom to be obtained true to name and character.
The water and sugar melons are more generally
grown.
The melon requires a stronger soil than cucumber,
greater exposure to the sun, and not quite so much
water. The soil should be dug deep, and ashes are a
good special manure. Stop the lateral branches at the
third leaf beyond the fruit, renewing the operation
every fresh growth.
For sowing and general cultivation see cucumber.
MUSHROOM.
A red of mushrooms is not so difficult of attain-
ment us is generally believed. There are certain


conditions to be carefully observed, the attention to
which would be amply repaid by an abundant crop.
The bed must not be too hot or too cold, too dry, .and
especially not too -wet. Experience alone, it is pre-
sumed, would enable the novice to determine the
happy medium. Excessive heat and too much wet
are, however, the two great evils to guard against;
and any person having a spare corner of a cellar,
outhouse, or stable, can supply himself with mush-
rooms either in beds or boxes. As mushroom spawn
is not to be purchased in Queensland as it is in
England, one of the most approved methods of pro-
curing spawn artificially will be given, with such modi-
fications as the climate demand; Take two barrow-
loads of cow dung, one load of sheep, and one of horse
dung; dry them well; then break them quite small, so
as they may go easily through a coarse garden sieve.
When well mixed together, lay them up in a round
heap, finishing at the top in a point. It is to be under-
stood that the operation is to be conducted in a dry
shed. Observe to tread the heap as it is put up,
which will greatly save it from heating too much :
the best adapted and most productive heat is from 55°
to 60° Fahrenheit. The heap is to be covered with
horse litter, in a state of fermentation, to the thickness
of four inches all over, if made in the winter ; but in
the summer clean old bags would be better, as the
least over heat would spoil the heap. In this state let
it lie one month ; then throw the litter a little on one
side, thrust the hand into the heart of the heap and
take out a handful ; if the spawn has begun to run you
will observe numerous small white fibres or threads
through the dung ; if not begun to run, cover the heap
up again. The spawn thus procured is of the very
best description, but will not keep.
Growing mushrooms in boxes: Each box may be
three feet long, one and a-half foot broad, and seven
inches in depth. Fill each box half full of fresh horse


dung (if wet, to be dried three or four days pre-
viously), the dung to be well beaten down in the boxes.
After the second or third day, if any heat has arisen
amongst the dung, it is then a fit time to spawn.
Take pieces of the spawn the size of an apple and
place them about four inches apart upon the surface
of the dung; here let them lie for six days, when it
will be probably found that the side of the spawn
next to the dung has begun to run in the dung below;
then add one and a-half inch more of fresh dung over
all, beaten down as formerly. In a fortnight try the
dung almost to the bottom of the box, to see if the
spawn has run well through it; if it has, cover two
and a-half inches of mould all over, the surface being
beaten smooth with a spade. In about a month the
mushrooms will begin to appear; if the mould seems
dry, give a gentle watering with warm water.
MUSTARD.
Cultivation same as garden cress, which see.
OKRA, OR GUMBO-(Abelmoschus Esculentus).
This vegetable is much used in India and the
Southern States of America in soups and stews, for
which purpose the pods should be gathered while green
and tender. Make successive sowings during spring
and summer in any good garden soil; the plants should
be about five feet apart, and the pods may be cut into
thin slices and dried for winter use.
ONIONS.
Onions require a rich, mellow soil, on a dry sub-
soil, and are an exception to the general rule of never


cropping the same ground successively with the same
plant. In order to ensure a good crop, the ground
should have a deep digging in the summer, with a
good supply of manure, laying the ground up as rough
as possible. In February give the ground a good dres-
sing of soot and ashes, and dig it over, breaking all the
lumps. Throw it up into beds of convenient width, and
sow pretty thickly in drills one foot apart and one
inch deep. Tread the seed firmly down, and cover
nicely with a rake. The crop must be kept clean by
frequent hoeings, and the surface of the ground loose,
but not disturbed too deep.
Transplanting : When the plants are about six
inches high, transplant into beds similarly prepared
into rows fifteen inches apart and eight inches apart
in the rows. In transplanting be careful only to
insert the root, as deep planting prevents a proper
development of the bulb. When the leaves begin to
turn yellow, bend down the tops just above the bulb,
to facilitate ripening.
' Sowings have been made in September in the
neighborhood of Brisbane, with the most satisfactory
results. At that season of the year the growth would
be rapid and uninterrupted, provided the soil was
suitable and the weather showery.
Soot, sea sand, salt, guandj and charred rubbish
a regood special dressings for the surface of onion beds,
applied at least a week before sowing.
The Tree Onion is very useful in gardens in the
interior, as, a few bulbs being secured, a crop is almost
sure, whether the soil be rich or poor. The ground
should be well dug, liberally manured, and trod firm.
Choose the largest of the top bulbs ; press these down
firmly to the line at six inches apart. The rows may
be a foot apart. Cover the whole over with three or
four inches of charred rubbish, charred turf, light rich
soil, or sandy road scrapings. When the heads run up,
stakes should be put in at about a yard apart on each


side of the row, to support them when they get top-
heavy with their curious crop of onions at the summit
of each.
PARSLEY.
Parsley may be sown twice a year to provide a
continual supply. Sow in January and August, thinly,
in drills twelve or fifteen inches apart, and about half
an inch deep, covering the seed firmly with the rake.
As the seed docs not germinate quickly, the rows should
be gently shaded by small twigs of brushwood stuck
into the ground on the sunny side until the plants are
up. Thin them out to twelve inches apart, and when
they become strong cut them down, to induce strong,
well-curled foliage.
PARSNIPS.
The cultivation of the parsnip is the same as for
carrots, with the exception that the soil should, if pos-
sible, be dug deeper ; and if the seed be sown in drills,
they should be six inches further apart.
PEA.
Sowings of early peas, such as Daniel O’Rourke,
McLean's Dwarf Gem , and Veitch’s Perfection, may be
made in January; the main crop may be sown in
February, and small occasional sowings through the
winter. Yorkshire Hero, sown in May or June, is an
excellent cropper.
Peas require a rich, light, well drained soil ; and
one of the most frequent errors in their cultivation
is sowing them too thickly. Dwarf sorts should be
sown in drills two feet six inches asunder, the peas


being thinned out to five or six inches apart in the
rows. The varieties growing three feet high should be
in rows three feet six inches apart; and varieties five
to six feet high, would be grown to greater advantage
at eight feet between the rows, and two rows of cabbages
between them. The top of one row should not cast a
shadow on the lower part of the next, and the whole
from top to bottom should be fully exposed to light and
air. Earth up all the crops as they advance, and stake
up the taller varieties as the tendrils appear. Manure
liberally, and give liquid manure in dry weather.
Trellis for Peas : Galvanised wire netting of two-
inch mesh, attached to posts, forms an excellent trellis
for peas. It need not be nearer than ten inches above
the ground, and the tendrils will catch hold of it as
the peas advance in growth.
PUMPKIN and SQUASH.
The cultivation is the same as for cucumber, which
see; the only difference is in the space required to ac-
commodate their more vigorous growth. The holes
should be eight feet apart, instead of six, and only one
plant be left in each hole. Two may be loft of the sorts
which are of a less robust habit.
ROSELLA.
This is a variety of Hibiscus, and in the southern
districts of Queensland is an annual. The seed should
be sown in July or August, protected in a frame if
there is any risk from frost, and planted out in favor-
able weather when the plants are sufficiently strong,
at about six or eight feet apart each way. The fruit,
from which the favorite rosella jam is prepared, con-
sists of the fleshy calyx covering the pericarp or seed


vessel, and is generally fit to gather about May. The
plant thrives in good, rich soil, not too wet, and
requires a free exposure.
RADISH.
Sow occasionally throughout the year. In the
spring small sowings may bo made fortnightly. A
light, rich, garden soil is suitable for them. If sown
broadcast, the seed should be covered evenly about
half an inch deep with soil, and the plants thinned
out to about four inches apart. If sown in drills they
should be six inches apart. The seed may be sown a
little deeper in summer than during winter, and in dry
weather give the bed a good soaking of water when
required, as the plants should be grown quickly, and
used young.
RHUBARB.
The Myatt's Victoria is much esteemed for size and
quality, Prince A Ibert for hardiness.
In August prepare a piece of deep, rich soil, and
sow the seeds in drills eighteen inches apart and one
inch deep. When the plants are well up, thin them
out to one foot apart. As they are tender in this
climate, they must be kept clear of weeds, and have
sufficient water during the dry weather, or they will
die off. In June following, let a bed of similar soil
be dug deep and manured. It should be in a moist,
shady situation, and quite free from stagnant water
in the soil. Plant the roots two feet apart each way,
with the crowns about two inches below the surface.
Water occasionally, while growing, with a weak solu-
tion of guano, liquid manure, or soapsuds. Cut the
flower stems as they appear, which, if they do the
first year, it is a sign that the ground is not rich or


strong enough, or has been badly prepared. In the
autumn apply a good strong dressing of manure, and
fork it in. Mulch during the hot weather, keeping the
ground open.
SALSAFY and SCORZONEEA.
These require the same treatment as carrots.
Sow in drills twelve inches apart and two inches deep,
covering firmly with the rake. Thin the plants out to
four inches apart, and use them as required until the
roots show signs of growing, when they may be taken
up and stored like carrots.
SAVOY.
Cultivation same as cabbage.
ESCHALOT,
May be propagated throughout the year by divi-
sion of the roots. Plant as onions, in rich, sandy soil,
and keep them well weeded. By planting on the t6p
of small ridges, the roots only will be in the ground,
and the bulbs, being on the surface, will develope like
small onions.
SEAKALE,
Cultivation the same as for rhubarb. Obtain
strong two-year-old roots, and plant them three in a
dump, at two feet apart each way. The young shoots
growing from the crowns early in the spring are
blanched, and, when eight or ten inches high, are fit
for the table. The ribs of the leaves are sometimes
used in summer as asparagus. Blanching may be


performed in the usual way by covering with blanching
pots or large garden pots, taking care to cork up the
hole in the bottom, and to draw some earth round to
keep out all light; or may be effected by covering the
beds with leaves or light manure, or with sea sand.
Salt is a good special manure.
SPINACH.
The prickly spinach is more hardy than the
round, and is therefore generally sown for the winter
crops, while the round variety is used for the summer.
Occasional sowings may be made during autumn,
winter, and spring. Sow thinly in drills two feet apart
by two inches deep. Thin out the young plants to
twelve inches apart, using the thinnings for culinary
purposes. After the plants become well developed all
the outside leaves should bo gathered as required for
use until the flower stalks appear.
TOMATO.
There are several varieties of toinatos, yellow and
red. They are much esteemed in America, and are
extremely wholesome.
Sow in August and September in a warm, rich
border. When the plants are six inches high, thin
them out to about three feet apart, and support them
with sticks as you would peas; or put a light trellis to
train them on. By this plan they will not grow so
rambling, and the crops will be much greater and of
superior quality. Stop the plant when the first fruit
forms, by pinching off the end of the shoot. Water
when necessary.
“ Dr. Bennet, a professor of some celebrity, con-
siders it an invaluable article of diet, and ascribes to
it very important medicinal properties. He declares :


1. That the tomato is, one of the most powerful de-
obstruents of the materia medica; and that in all
those affections of the liver and other organs where
calomel is indicated, it is probably the most effective
and least harmful remedial agent known in the pro-
fession. 2. That a chemical extract can be obtained
from it which will altogether supersede the use of
calomel in the cure of diseases. 3. That he has suc-
cessfully treated diarrhoea with this article alone. 4.
That when used as a diet it is almost a sovereign remedy
for dyspepsia and indigestion.
TURNIP.
The White Dutch, Early Snowball, Red American
Stone, and Orange Jelly are the favorite sorts. The
red American stone is much valued in the interior,
where it is found early and hardy, producing a good
turnip in seasons which prove destructive to the other
varieties.
A light, moderately rich garden mould is suitable.
It should be dug thoroughly and broken fine. Bone
dust, lime, ashes, and gypsum are good special manures.
The seed is sown broadcast for main crop during
August, September, and October, rather thinly, cover-
ing the seed with the rake; when the plants have the
rough leaves one inch broad, thin them with the hoe to
six inches apart, carefully eradicating the weeds. They
should be watered during dry weather with diluted
liquid manure. Occasional sowings may be made
during January, February, and March.
VEGETABLE MARROW.
Foe mode of cultivation see “ Cucumber,” the
instructions for which are applicable to the vegetable
marrow, except that only one plant should be left to each
space, and the distance eight feet apart instead of six.
E


SEEDS—Per Acre.
The following table of seed necessary per acre
will be found useful for reference :—
Pounds.
Beets 4 to G
Cabbage .. ... 1 to 14
Carrot 2 to 3
Cucumber in bills 1 to 2
Clover, red, broadcast 15 to 20
Clover, white, broadcast 12 to 16
Clover, white, in drills 8
Furze or Corse, broadcast 30 to 40
Furze or Corse, in drills 10 inches wide 15 to 20
Lucerne, broadcast ... ... ... ... ... 25
Mangel Wurzel ... ... ... ... ... 6
Onion, in drills .. .. .. ... ... 5
Parsnip, in drills ... ... ... ... ... 4 to 6
Radish, in drills 5 to 8
Radish, broadcast ... 12 to 16
Salsify, in drills 6 to 8
Spinach 8 to 10
Turnip and Ruta Baga, broadcast „ 14
Turnip and Ruta Baga, in drills 1
Quarts.
Beans, pole, in hills, 34 x 4 8 to 12
Com, in hills 8 to 12
Broom Com, in hills ... 10 to 12
Millet, for seed 12
Mustard, broadcast .. 12
Sorghum, or Chinese Sugar Cane, in drills ... 2 to 3
Sorghum, or Chinese Sugar Cane, broadcast ... 30 lbs.
Bushels,
Beans, bush, in drills 24 feet apart 14
Corn, for fodder 3 to 4
Barley, broadcast, ... ... ... ... ... 2 to 3
Barley, in drills If to 2
Buckwheat 1 to 14
Grass, lawn .. 2 to 3
Millet, broadcast J to f
Oats 2 to 3
Grass, orchard 2 to 3
Potatoes, in drills or hills, cut tubers 10


Bushels.
Potatoes, cut to single eyes 3 to 5
Rape, broadcast ... ... . ...15 lbs. |
Rye, broadcast ... .■ ... .. to 2
Rye Grass .. 2
Sainfoine ... ... ... .. .. ... 3
Timothy J
Vetches ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 to 3
Wheat, broadcast .. Ij to 2
Wheat, in drills ... i to 1
DESTRUCTION OF VERMIN INJU-
RIOUS TO CULINARY CROPS.
DESTRUCTION OF ANTS.
Ants are very destructive to pot plants. Stand
the plants in water until they are drowned. In the
open ground they may be exterminated with boiling
water applied to the hill at night, or a strong and hot
solution of Gishurst Compound. A piece of fresh
■neat is a good trap: when well covered, scald them
and set it again.
DESTRUCTION OP APHIDES, &c.
A Solution of Gishurst • Compound, applied
warm with a syringe after sunset, or on a dull day, is
the best cure for Aphis, The quantity used may be
two to four ounces of the Compound to a gallon of
Water, according to the plant operated upon. If too
strong it is likely to injure the tender ends of shoots
and young leaves. If the first application is not


efficacious, apply a second dressing after the lapse of
a few days. This solution is also a cure for American
blight, green and black fly, red spider, thrip • and
brown scale, and is also the best agent known for
thoroughly arresting the Oidium blight on the grape
vine during the summer months. The best time and
method of dressing for the destruction of insects in
general is during July, after the winter pruning. The
Gishurst may be used for this purpose at the rate of
four to six ounces to the gallon of boiling water, and,
when thoroughly dissolved and the liquid a little cooled,
it should be applied by means of a brush to every
part of the tree, especially where there are cracks or
crevices.
DESTRUCTION OP EARWIGS.
Where earwigs annoy, place beanstalks, about a
foot long, in the neighborhood they frequent every
evening, and in the morning blow the earwigs through
the stocks into a pail of boiling water.
DESTRUCTION OF MICE.
In positions where there would be no danger
from poison, equal portions of arsenic and butter,
made into a paste and spread on thin pieces of bread,
may be laid about, and will prove very efficacious.
Where poison is objected to, try the following :—Soak
a few peas in water, and when fully soaked, draw a
thread through one of them, with a needle, then place
two little sticks in the ground, at the exact distance
from each other of the breadth of a brick, tie the ends
of the threads to the two sticks, leaving the pea in the
middle, and then let the brick rest upon the thread.
The mouse in devouring the pea will gnaw the thread,
and the brick, losing its support, will fall upon the
mouse and crush it.


DESTRUCTION OP SLUGS.
Scatter cabbage leaves about at night; the slugs
will take shelter under them and may be destroyed next
day. Dressing the land with salt and lime is also de-
structive to these pests.
WORMS IN PATHS, &c.
Worms are often troublesome in lawns, garden
paths, &c. Mix some, lime and water, not very strong,
and water the grass or gravel path with the mixture.
The worms will soon appear at the top, when they may
be destroyed.




THE ORCHARD.


THE ORCHARD.
HERE is probably no country in the world
ji capable of producing in perfection a greater
variety of fruits than Queensland. Enjoying
a climate ranging from that of Europe on the Downs,
to the tropical temperature of Mackay, she may em-
brace in her productions the English Gooseberry,
Strawberry, Apple and Pear; and the Pineapple,
Guava, and Mango. Next to the growth of Sugar,
Cotton, Tobacco, and Coffee, this Colony is likely to
excel in the abundance of its fruits : possessing such a
variety of temperature and a fertile soil, it awaits only
the skill and enterprise of man to transfer its stately
forest into vineyards, orchards, and cornfields. Unlike
the older colonies, here is a large local demand, almost
wholly supplied by importations, and there can, there-
fore, be no doubt as to finding a market for the pro-
duce.
The Orchard should be a feature in every farm.
Every little homestead in the suburbs should have a few
fruit trees of the best sorts, if only for the use of the
household. Quite independent of the wholesomeness
of good fruit in a warm climate (where, as a rule, too
little vegetable food is consumed), it is wise to take
some little trouble to surround the “ home” with such
comforts and attractions as a few fruit trees and a neatly
kept flower border.
In all the directions which follow, it is pre-sup-
posed that the land about to be planted has been
cleared and trenched throughout to an uniform depth


of two feet or two feet six inches, and has been
drained at least six inches deeper than it is trenched.
Some soils and situations do not require draining, but
these are very rare—so rare, indeed, that external ap-
pearance cannot be depended upon, and there is only
one safe test. Persons are often deceived by a sloping
surface, thinking that, because water cannot lie on it,
there can be no need of drainage. If the roots of
the trees grew on the ground they would be right;
but as they are in the ground, and often at a con-
siderable depthy we must dig into the soil to see that
there is no water standing there. Many valuable trees
are lost in a rainy season ; the wet season is blamed,
but the loss arose from want of drainage. Few fruit
trees will live long with their roots standing in water,
and this is often the case without any being on the sur-
face of the soil. The only way to obtain a satisfactory
answer to the question,
“Does my land require Draining?”
is as follows: Immediately after a heavy and long
continued rain, dig several holes three feet deep in
the lowest parts of your trenched land. If in six hours
after there is no water in the holes, your land does
not require draining ; but it will more or less urgently
need it in proportion to the quantity of water found
there.
TRANSPLANTING.
All trees, whether deciduous or evergreen, are
more safely transplanted while in a state of rest, and
for this reason, partly, this operation is generally per-
formed in the winter, when the former class of trees
is denuded of its leaves. Evergreens should also be
transplanted during winter, on account of evaporation
being less rapid at that season. In all cases, calm,


A TABLE
Showing the Number of Plants an Acre of Land will
contain.
Feet
No. of
Feet
No. of
Feet
No. of
asunder.
Plants.
asunder.
Plants.
asunder.
Plants.
2
10,890
9
537
20
,108
3
4,840
10
435
21
98
4
2,722
12
302
25
69
5
1,742
15
193
30
48
8
680
18
134
35
35
cloudy weather should be selected as the most favor-
able, and the roots ought never to be exposed to the
sun or wind for a moment. When trees have
travelled any distance, and appear shrivelled, they
should be carefully protected from the direct rays of
the sun, and high winds, and the bark be kept damp
until they begin to grow; but, in doing so, see that
they have sufficient light, and that the earth does not
get too wet. Directions for planting will be found in
the article on the apple.
Rule. —Multiply the distances into each other, and with
the product divide 43,5(i0 (the number of square feet in an
acre), and the quotient is the number of plants.
THE HYBRIDIZATION OF
PLANTS.
This is a subject alike interesting to the amateur
and the professional gardener. Its success depends
upon facts so easily understood, and the results
obtained by it have boon so important, that every
pei-son possessing a garden should be acquainted
with it.


The labors of Knight, Yan Mons, and others,
have secured to the world varieties of peaches, apples,
pears, &c., as much surpassing the common sorts in
excellence as the latter do the crab; and hybridizing
flowers is now so well understood by some persons, that
with certain flowers they can produce any color they
desire with almost the same precision as an artist mix-
ing his paints.
There are, no doubt, occasional examples of hybri
dization in nature, by bees or other insects; and
valuable sorts of fruit or flowers may thus be
originated; but the issue is altogether too uncertain.
Ten thousand seedlings might be raised without obtain-
ing a variety superior to the parent, and when it is
sought to impart some new quality to a plant, it is
unwise to depend upon chance, when, by bringing a
little natural science to bear upon it, the result may be
reduced to a comparative certainty.
As the most likely and useful direction for expe-
riments in hybridization in a new country will be in
attempting to originate new and acclimatized varieties
of the best sorts of fruit and vegetables, I will attempt
to illustrate the mode of operation by small diagrams
of the orange blossom.
Most flowers are composed of the following parts,
viz.: The calyx, which is usually green, and enveloping
the flowers whilst in the bud ; the corolla or petals,
leaves so beautifully colored, and so delicate in most
flowers; the stamens, or male portion of the flower,
secreting the pollen or impregnating powder; the
pistilis or pointals, the female portion, impregnatable
hy the pollen, and rendering fertile the seeds; and,
lastly, the pericarp or seed vessel.
In conducting experiments of this kind, it is well
hi know that in general the characters of the female
Parent predominate in the flowers and fruit, while the
foliage and general constitution are mostly those of the
parent.


No. 1. No. 2. No. 3.
When the blossom is as No. 1, quite developed,
and on the point of expanding, open the leaves or
petals with great care, and it will then appear as
figure No. 2; then remove with a small pair of sharp
pointed scissors the whole of the stamens, leaving the
pistil only, as in figure No. 3 ; gently close the flower
again, and screen it with muslin or otherwise from the
approach of insects, and when it opens of itself shake
the ripe pollen off the other tree over the pistil, care-
fully exclude insects, and the seed in the fruit thus
impregnated will produce the variety.
There is not a fruit, grain, or vegetable growing
in Queensland which is not susceptible of improve-
ment and further acclimatization by this means. To
those who have the time what could be more inter-
esting than to attempt to give the English raspberry
the productive and hardy habit of our wild raspberry.
The writer has been informed that there exists a very
superior variety of native raspberry on the seaboard
between Brisbane and Wide Bay, and a large and
excellent native yam in the same part of the country,
which might either be improved by cultivation, or
used advantageously to hybridize the West Indian
yam. It is believed that no attempt has yet been
made to obtain a new variety of the English potatoe
from seed, but there is no doubt that by perseverance
a sort might be originated possessing characteristics
peculiarly adapting it for cultivation in this climate.


The undoubted success of many English growers in
raising, in this way, numerous hardy good sorts ; and
of the Americans in originating the early rose, ought
to afford sufficient encouragement.
Time and space alike forbid proceeding with the
subject further; but it is hoped sufficient has been
said to stimulate many persons to the pursuit of this
most interesting study.
THE AKEE TREE—(Blighia or Cupania Sapida).
The Akee Tree is a native of Africa, and attains
the height of 20 feet. The fruit, which is a pome, is
home in racemes in the same manner as the loquat.
It is about the size of a goose’s egg, of a reddish
yellow colour, of a grateful subacid flavor, and much
esteemed in the West Indies.
It is propagated by seeds, layers, and cuttings;
and would be likely to prove a valuable addition to
the Fruit Garden in tropical Queensland.
THE ALLIGATOR OR AVOCADO PEAR-(Persea
Gratissima).
This tree grows to a large size. It is a native of
the West Indies; and the opinions of travellers as to
the value of its fruit are very conflicting. It appears,
however, to be highly appreciated by the residents in
India, who eat it with the addition of wine, lime juice,
*0, The foliage is a beautiful deep green, and the
fruit the size of a large pear. It is propagated by
seeds. It has proved hardy in Brisbane, a tree in the
Botanic Gardens bearing well.
THE ALMOND.
The Almond is indigenous to Barbary, China,
an d many other eastern countries within the latitude
of 20° to 30°.


Varieties: Soft Shell or Sultane, and the Jordan
are the sorts most cultivated. Another sort, however,
appeare to deserve special attention in Queensland. It
is named “ pistache,” after the pistache nut, which it
resembles in shape and size. The fruit is smaller than
the Sultana, being about inches long. The shell is
tender, but not so easily broken between the fingers as
the tender-shelled. The kernel is sweet and well
flavored. It is highly esteemed in Provence and the
southern departments of France, where alone it attains
perfection. The climate of Paris is insufficient to
bring it to full maturity; and, as it requires a very
warm climate, it is well worth trying in some of the
northern coast districts of this colony, which have
proved too hot for the ordinary sorts.
The oil obtained from the almond is of consider-
able use in the arts, and our fair readers are ac-
quainted with it under various names. Macassar oil
is merely oil of almond colored red with alkanet root;
and the no less celebrated Russian oil is the same,
rendered milky by a small quantity of ammonia or
potash, and scented with oil of roses. Rowland’s
Lotion, Milk of Roses, Caledonian Cream, Kalydor,
&c., are nothing but a solution of oxymuriate of
mercury in almond emulsion, with a proportion of
sugar of lead or white oxide of bismuth.
Planting , <Scc.: When convenient, it is better to
transplant early in the season—April, or early in May;
and, under ordinary circumstances, some young roots
will be formed in their new position, which will enable
the plant the better to withstand the effects of the dry
hot spring weather so general in Brisbane. If the
trees have to go any distance they should not be shifted
until the fall of the leaf—May, June, or July. The
pruning of standard almond trees will be the same as
the peach, which it greatly resembles in its growth.
The long straggling branches should be shortened,


crowded or cross branches removed, and the tree kept
open in the form of a cup. Plant twenty feet apart.
The fruit should be allowed to remain on the tree
until the rind becomes quite brown ami the kernel
firm and solid, when it may be gathered, divested of
its outer coat, and then gradually dried until the shell
becomes sufficiently hard.
THE ANCHOVY PEAR—(Grias Cauliflora).
The anchovy pear is a native of Jamaica, grow-
ing in swampy places or shallow water, and attains the
height of fifty feet. The leaves are oblong, and of two
to three feet in length. The fruit is pickled and eaten
like the mango, which it is said to resemble in flavor.
It is propagated freely from the stones, and also fi-om
ripe cuttings.
THE APPLE.
The Apple is unquestionably the most valuable of
European fruits, and may be cultivated with perfect
success in the colder and more elevated parts of Queens-
land. It has been found that many sorts well repay
cultivation in the Brisbane district; and others have
been introduced which thrive in the Southern States
of America and the south of Italy, and are now under
experiment, with every prospect of success. Few
fruits are easier of cultivation, and there are hundreds
of acres in the positions indicated which might be
planted with advantage, and from which the fruit
ought be forwarded by railway to supply the enormous
demands of Ipswich and Brisbane, and thence by sea
ho the more tropical parts of Queensland.
The cultivation of the apple is as yet so limited
that there scarcely exists sufficient data upon which to
ha.se any selection of sorts to be recommended for


planting; but a small and select list of sorts is
appended, which, to the knowledge of the Author, have
been proved suitable to the climate of Brisbane, and a
few others of established reputation have been added
for general cultivation. There are now, probably, over
2,000 varieties of the Apple, but it is not desirable to
grow many sorts in a plantation; but rather select
with great care a few which are known to thrive in a
similar soil and climate ; each sort having some marked
difference in season of ripening, or of quality, to re-,
commend it. The catalogues of local nurserymen afford
ample scope for selection, and those should be preferred
which resist American blight
Select List of Apples.
Those marked thus * have been found productive
in the Brisbane district, and might be tried with ad-
vantage at Maryborough and Bockhampton. All the
varieties are suitable for cultivation at Drayton, Too-
woomba, Warwick, and other temperate districts of the
Colony.
*Blenheim Pippin : Syn., Blenheim Orange, Wood-
stock Pippin. Size large, form roundish, color yellowish,
stained with red on the sunny side ; stalk medium
length; eye open and very hollow; flesh yellow ; flavor
extremely pleasant; habit healthy and vigorous ; and
hence does not produce fiuit while young, but is after-
wards a great bearer; merits—one of the best of our
large table fruit.
* Cox’s Pomona : Size above medium ; skin yellow,
streaked with crimson; flesh white, tender, and
pleasantly acid. A first-rate and very handsome culi-
nary apple. Tree hardy.
*Carolina Red June: Size below medium; skin
smooth, deep red to purple, covered with a light bloom;
flesh very white, tender, juicy, with a brisk sub-acid
flavor.


Gullasaga : Size, medium or large; skin, yellowish,
striped with dark crimson ; flesh, yellowish, tender,
juicy, mild, rich saccharine flavor.
* French Russet: Size, above medium; flattish; color,
greenish yellow, with russet marks, and deep red next
the sun ; flesh, pale yellow; flavor, aromatic, pleasant,
and acid ; merit—a dessert fruit of the first class.
*Gladney’s Red: Size, below medium ; skin, smooth,
deep red ; flesh, white, tender, pleasant sub-acid ; tree,
prolific, producing the fruit in bunches.
*Golden Russet: Size, small; bearing in clusters;
firm, juicy, sub-acid ; tree, slender; prolific.
Gravenstein: Size, large ; form, roundish; color,
yellowish green, streaked with red; firm, crisp, and
juicy; healthy, spreading tree, and good bearer.
Hawthornden : Size, large; color, pale green ; firm,
juicy, sub-acid; great bearer; trees soon come into
bearing.
*Hockings’ Greening : Size, above medium ; color,
green, sometimes slightly tinged with red ; flesh, white
and firm ; juicy, sub-acid ; merit—a first-class kitchen
apple ; good bearer; resists American blight.
*Hockings’ Ganva.de: Size, medium, round; skin,
deep crimson; flesh, yellowish, crisp, juicy, perfumed,
and pleasant sub-acid; one of the very best table apples.
The tree is most prolific.
* Irish Peach: Size, medium; skin, smooth, yellowish
green, dotted with brown, dull red next the sun; flesh,
white, tender, pleasant flavored. Tree healthy and
productive; resists American blight.
*Juneating: Syn., early red Margaret; size, below
medium, conical; greenish yellow, striped with red;
flavor rich ; flesh tender ; good bearer.
Mobbs’ Royal: Size, large, roundish, and flattened ;
skin, yellowish, striped with red ; flesh, tender and
agreeable; tree healthy and productive. The tender
of the texture of the fiuit exposes it sometimes
the ravages of insects.
F


*Triomphe de Luxemburgh; Size, large, roundish,
and flattened ; skin, greenish yellow, bright red next
the sun ; flesh, white, crisp, juicy, sub-acid ; tree, hardy
and vigorous; bears well.
Winter Pearmain: Size, medium; form, same as
other pearmains; color, green, slightly red next the
sun ; stalk, short and slender ; eye, small; flesh, pale
green; habit, moderately robust; good bearer. An
excellent winter dessert fruit.
Propagation of the Apple.
The apple may be propagated by seeds, layers, cut-
tings, budding, grafting, or suckers.
Seeds: Propagation by seed is only resorted to for
raising stocks upon which to graft known and approved
kinds; or with a view to originate a new sort posses-
sing some desirable quality which does not exist in any
cultivated variety. As the latter is the more impor-
tant object, it demands a few words. The greater part
of Queensland being physically unsuited to the growth
of this fruit, there is ample scope for efforts at accli-
matisation. There are wanted a few first-class varieties
of apples which will produce good crops in this climate;
and, from the results already gained by the Author, it
is quite clear that this may be accomplished. The
great danger in raising trees from seed is that the
gardens may get crowded with worthless sorts ; as it is
possible to raise a thousand seedlings and have only
one or two worth preserving. All others should be
eradicated. The most certain and scientific mode of
raising new varieties has been described in the article
on “ Hybridization of Plants,” to which the reader is
referred.
As, however, there are so few sorts of apples which
will bear in the tropical parts of Queensland, it would
be desirable to extend the experiment by sowing seed
from the finest selected fruit of the most esteemed sorts
which thrive in the neighboring colonies. As an


inducement to patient perseverance, it should be re-
membered that if the cultivator only obtains one really
valuable apple, adapted to tbe wants of the country, it
can be increased to thousands of trees of the identical
kind by budding and grafting ; that it may thus exist
to the end of time, extending the means of enjoyment
to many generations, and probably form the basis of
future experiments.
The seeds should be sown as soon after they are ripe
as possible; the soil should be rich and light, and the
situation damp, but well drained. Care is necessary to
protect them from mice and slugs. In the following
autumn they will be fit to plant out to stand for fruit:
and for this purpose may be planted in similar soil, in
rows eight feet apart each way. Williams, a successful
cultivator of the apple, says he has found that such
seedling apples as were allowed to retain their lateral or
side shoots from the ground upwards, but so disposed
that the foliage of the upper shoots may shade those
under them as little as possible, came into bearing in
one half the usual time required by those which were
pruned to a naked stem. •
Soil and Situation : The chief thing to avoid is a wet
bottom. The apple will adapt itself to a variety of
soils and situations, but there should be no water stand-
ing in the soil. A good loam two feet deep on a rocky,
gravelly, sandy, or chalk bottom, in an open situation,
would afford every prospect of success.
Planting : The season for planting extends from the
beginning of May to the end of August; early planting
to be preferred where practicable, and it should be done
in calm, damp, but not rainy weather. Nothing can be
more injurious to a tree than to have its roots exposed
in dry, windy weather.
Beep planting is an evil much to be guard ed against.
•A. good criterion is, to observe the depth the tree had
previously stood in the nursery; be careful that this
mark is at least three inches above the general surface


of the soil when it is planted, and let the earth be
heaped up to that height around it for a couple of feet
or so, in the form of a little hillock. Trees of a larger
size may be rather more elevated. This applies to soils
of the ordinary description; but in damp soils the
elevation should be still greater. In planting, the roots
should- be laid as flat as possible, radiating in all direc-
tions from the stem. If any leaf mould or superior
earth is available, it may be put in between and among
the roots, beyond their circuit, and just above them,
but not below. When it is proposed to add manure,
it should be thoroughly decomposed by keeping twelve
months previously; it may then be mixed with an
equal quantity of surface soil, and applied in the same
manner, not under the roots. The distance for standard
trees will be twenty to forty feet apart each way ; but
dwarf standards may be much closer, according to the
system of pruning pursued.
Pruning : As the methods of pruning and training
fruit trees are very numerous, it will not be possible to
enter upon the subject in a mere handbook, but a few
leading directions will Jbe given. The trees should
have a clear straight stem for three feet from the
ground ; a well balanced head should be trained from
this, consisting of four or five equal shoots in the form
of a cup. At the winter pruning, these may be short-
ened back two thirds of their length, and two young
shoots allowed to grow from each, which may, in their
turn, be cut back in the same manner. The pruning
for the following two seasons may be confined chiefly
to summer pruning, and will consist of pinching back
the young lateral shoots as they appear, at half-an-inch
to one inch long. This operation will have to be re-
peated three or four times during the summer, according
to the vigor of the trees ; and the only pruning neces-
sary afterwards will consist of the winter examination
for the removal of cross branches, the shortening of
long straggling leaders, and keeping the centre of the
tree open.


Diseases : Plant healthy trees in well-prepared, well-
drained land, and they will not be troubled much with
disease. If a tree gets wounded, or a large limb has
to be cut off, trim the wood and bark smooth, and
cover the part with a mixture of Stockholm tar and
grease.
When the American blight appears on apple trees
it should be immediately exterminated, as it is most
destructive if allowed to spread, which it will do very
rapidly if its progress is not arrested. The blight is
caused by an insect which pierces the bark of the tree,
sucking the juice and causing wounds which ulcerate
and corrode through all the sap-vessels, destroying the
branch attacked. The presence of the insect is indi-
cated by a quantity of cottony matter attached to the
branches, which, on being touched, communicates to
the finger a disgusting, chocolate-colored stain. The
most diseased of the small branches should be neatly
pruned off and burned. The older portions of the tree
should have the blight scraped off with a piece of iron
hoop, the earth being removed about the trunk of the
tree, and all suckers carefully cut away close to their
origin. The whole tree, especially the diseased parts,
should then be scrubbed with a dandy brush, soaked in
warm brine, having some potash or soda dissolved in
it, taking care that all the crevices of the bark are
thoroughly explored by the hairs of the brush. Some
use warm lye, turpentine, ammoniacal liquor from the
gas-works, and kerosine. The roots exposed to view, if
diseased, should be treated in a similar manner. The
ground all round the tree, as far as the roots are con-
sidered to extend, should be soaked with strong drain-
ings from a dung heap, to poison whatever insect life
had escaped the brine, and to stimulate the roots of
the tree to new and healthy growth. If the tree is
old and the soil exhausted, the latter should be renewed,
being replaced with charred rubbish, old turf, the
clearings of a muck pit, &c. It has been recommended


that the primings of grape vines be turned in at the
roots of apple trees, as a cure for the American blight.
The effect is doubtless produced by the potash contained
in the cuttings. The chloride of lime wash, recom-
mended for the scale on orange trees at the end of that
chapter, is also an effective cure for the American
blight and mildew. Salt applied to the soil is a pre-
ventative of disease.
Thinning : When trees have a large crop of fruit set,
thin out a large proportion, while very small, or there
will be no fruit the following season.
Manures : Lime and ashes are good special manures
for the apple, to the extent of half-a-peck each, applied
annually to each tree. The ashes should be applied
when fresh burned, or the potash will be lost, which
constitutes their chief value for this purpose.
THE APRICOT.
The native country of the apricot is not known,
but it thrives in the south of Europe, in Egypt, Arabia,
Japan, and China.
As far as our present experience extends, the apricot
grows to perfection on the elevated Downs and colder
parts of the colony; but we have no sorts adapted for
cultivation in tropical Queensland. Efforts should be
made to introduce suitable varieties of this delicious
fruit from Italy, Egypt, and Japan.
Varieties.-— The Moorpark is considered the best
for general purposes, and the Mignion and Pennant
Hills Oval will probably bear in favorable positions in
the vicinity of Brisbane.
1. Hcmskirk —Size, medium, nearly round; flesh,
firm, clear deep orange; flavor, rich and delicate; stone,
small; kernel, nearly sweet; habit, early and hardy;
excellent bearer.


2. Kiasha —Size, medium ; round; flesh, tender;
sweet, and juicy; kernel, sweet; earlier than the
Turkey.
3. Lady Margaret —Size, medium; round ; flesh,
firm; much resembles the Moorpark, of which it is
probably a seedling.
4 . —Size, small; form, round; flesh, firm;
color, dull yellow, with brownish red spots next the
sun; appears hardy, and indicates fruitfulness. De-
serves a trial in Brisbane gardens.
5. Moorpark —Size, large ; form, round ; flesh, deep
orange, separating freely from the stone ; habit, strong
and healthy in suitable positions; flavor, excellent:
ripens late.
6. Orange (Royal) —Size, rather above medium ;
form, nearly round; color, deep orange, tinged with
red, except where shaded; flesh, deep orange, firm,
adhering to the stone; flavor excellent; stone small,
smooth, thick in the middle; kernel sweet; habit
healthy; good bearer.
7. Pale Superb —Supposed to be a Camden seedling.
It is much esteemed in the southern colonies for the
size, beauty, and delicate flavor of its fruit.
8. Pennant Hills Oval —A seedling apricot, raised
near Parramatta, New South Wales; is hardy, fine
flavored, and a good bearer.
9. Turkey —Size, medium; form, nearly round;
color, deep yellow, with many brownish spots next the
sun; flesh firm, pale yellow; flavor agreeable; stone
separating freely from the flesh ; kernel sweet; ripens
earlier than the Moorpark, but so gradually that it
remains longer in perfection than any other apricot;
habit healthy; leaves large.
The Mush Mush (Italian) Peach, Shipley’s, River’s
Large Red, Oulins, and other valuable sorts recently
introduced, can now be obtained.


Propagation : The apricot is propagated by seed for
obtaining new varieties, and by budding and grafting
to multiply approved kinds. (See Peach.)
Planting ; The directions for planting are the same
as already given for the apple, except that these may
be planted closer—say sixteen feet to twenty feet
apart. The soil should be rammed firm about the
roots.
Soil: A good sound loam, with a fair proportion of
vegetable mould, resting on a well-drained sandy or
chalky subsoil, would be suitable, especially if rich
in lime.
Pruning : If properly managed, the summer pruning
would embrace nearly all that was requisite. This
operation consists of rubbing off misplaced shoots, and
stopping the lateral branches while tender. It should
not be commenced until the tree is well out in leaf,
and the first pruning should be light. Winter pruning
should be avoided as much as possible, as the apricot
does not readily heal or cover wounds, and the removal
of large limbs frequently causes canker.
Thinning the Fruit: Where the fruit sets well the
crop should be gone over carefully and all superfluous
fruit removed. It should not be nearer in any part of
the tree than five inches asunder. A little care in
thinning will be beneficial in two ways: large and
better fruit will be produced, and the tree will not be
exhausted.
THE BANANA—(Musa Sapientum).
The banana is one of the most wholesome and
nourishing of fruits, and forms an important article of
diet among the inhabitants of the numerous islands of
the Pacific Ocean.
It is not estimated in Queensland at its true value,
where it is only used in its raw state. It may also be
used in fritters, pies, preserves, or dried as figs; and a


good wine is said to be made from it. The plant being
hardy, its cultivation is much neglected; and, after
planting it in the roughest and most careless manner,
it seldom receives much attention beyond gathering
the fruit. It is a common practice, also, to cut the
fruit before it is mature, and it, consequently, seldom
has its proper flavor. The common banana (Musa
Maculata), when fully ripened on the tree, is so
superior in flavor to those ordinarily sent to market
(which are cut green and ripened in town), that a
stranger tasting them would scarcely credit that they
were the same variety.
Propagation : The banana is increased from suckers
which spring up around the old root. These are
planted at about ten feet apart each way. Where
space is an object, some crop might be grown between
them the first season, which would also pay for keeping
them clean until they began to bear.
Soil: A rich, unctuous, fibry loam, inclined to sand,
will grow the banana to perfection, provided it is
deep, thoroughly trenched, and well drained. A damp
soil is not objectionable, but it should on no account
be wet. To determine if the soil is wet, and requires
draining, let holes be dug three feet deep in the lowest
parts of the ground, after a week’s continuous rainj
examine the holes the next day, and the ground may
be considered more or less wet in proportion to the
depth of water found in them. If they are free of
Water, the soil does not require drainage ; but if the
water is within two feet of the surface, it should be
drained before any further cultivation is attempted.
The soil for bananas can scarcely be made too rich;
they should have a good top dressing of manure, and
the surface be well forked over at least once a year ;
■when the fruit is gathered, the old stems should be cut
to the ground, and chopped up with the hoe into short
lengths, and laid around the clump to rot down.
The purple variety differs from all others at present


in cultivation, as it does not succeed well on rich flats,
but thrives admirably upon hill tops where the soil is
good.
THE BARBERRY—(Berberis Vulgaris).
The barberry is a native of Europe, and only fit
for cultivation in the coldest parts of this Colony.
It is propagated by layers and suckers; prefers a
chalky or light dry soil, and requires little pruning.
The plants should be eight feet apart. All suckers
should be eradicated, and the head kept open. The
fruit, when ripe, is gathered in bunches.
THE BENGAL QUINCE-((Egle Marmelos).
The Bengal quince is a native of the East Indies,
growing in the form of a shrub, eight feet high. It is
allied to the citron. The fruit is represented as
delicious, as possessing valuable medicinal qualities,
and it makes an excellent preserve. It was introduced
by the Author from Calcutta, but has not yet fruited
in Brisbane.
It appears to require the same care and cultivation
as the orange.
In a paper written by Dr. Bennett, of Sydney, the
following particulars are given : —
“ The tree producing the bael or bela fruit, valuable
for its medicinal qualities, is the Cratceva Marmelos of
Linmeus, and the (Egle Marmelos of Correa. It
grows plentifully in various parts of India, more par-
ticularly about the Malabar and Coromandel districts;
it is also abundant in Ceylon, where it is known as the
‘ Wood Apple,’ and named Bcli Gaha (gaha, signifying
tree) by the Cingalese. A few words may be said on


the generic name (Egle (a new genus formed from
Cratceva by Correa), which classical appellation was
given to this tree by Correa, after one of the Hes-
perides; but now, from the well-known medicinal
properties contained in nearly every part of the tree,
it may be more appropriate to regard the name (Egle
(signifying brightness or splendour) to have been given
after one of the daughters of CEsculapius. The tree
belongs to the natural family Auraniiaceos. The fruit
is about the size of an orange, generally round in
form; the rind is of a yellowish brown color, with a
shade of dark green; it is hard, and, when broken,
the pulp is found surrounding the seeds, of a dark
amber, varying to cherry red color; very mucilaginous,
and of an agreeable aromatic odor. One which I
recently received, and was in a very fresh state,
weighed a quarter of a pound. The bark of the root,
the bark of the stem, the leaves, flowers, and fruit, are.
all used for medicinal purposes in India; but the fruit
is held most in estimation. It is only in the third
edition of “ Hoyle’s Materia Medica,” published in
1856, that a very short notice of the bael fruit was
given; but recently more attention has been bestowed
upon it, and it has now obtained a place in the new
British Pharmacopoeia of 1864, in which the fruit is
described thus: ‘ Iloundish, about the size of a large
orange, with a hard woody rind ; usually imported in
dried slices, or in fragments consisting of portions of
the rind and adherent dried pulp and seeds ; rind about
a line and a half thick, covered with a smooth pale
brown or greyish epidermis, and internally, as well as
the dried pulp, brownish orange, or cherry red. The
moistened pulp is mucilaginous.’ The preparation
ordered in the Pharmacopoeia is the liquid extract.
The preparations of the bael fruit to be found in the
shops of the apothecaries in Sydney are the liquid ex-
tract, the confection, and the extract; but I have been
mformed that the high price of the preparations of


this drug imported from England has very materially
limited the demand. This circumstance renders it
still more desirable that every endeavour should be
made to naturalize the tree in the warm districts of
Australia ; and, in the meantime, the fruit could be
readily imported in a very fresh state from Ceylon
(where the price for them is from three to five shillings
the hundred), and the different preparations made in
the colony at a much cheaper rate than those imported
from Europe. The Dutch and Portuguese residents
in Ceylon distil a fragrant cosmetic from the rind and
blossom, called by them ‘Marmell Water.’ Although
the properties of the fruit have been mentioned by
some author as astringent, it is really mildly aperient,
and acts by removing the irritation of the mucous
membrane of the stomach and bowels in diarrhoea and
dysentery, and also obviates costiveness arising from
debility. It has been regarded by some Italian prac-
titioners as a valuable remedy in the scorbutic form of
dysentery, and to succeed when all other remedies have
failed. When the fresh and ripe fruit is used in
Ceylon, it is at first slightly boiled, after which the
rind is easily broken, and the pulp is eaten with a
spoon. In a case of great irritation of the bowels, one
was taken in that way every morning, and in about an
hour relief was experienced, the disease diminishing
daily, until the patient was quite recovered; at the
same time a farinaceous diet was observed, at first
without stimulants, and afterwards animal food with-
out vegetables. It appears to act by removing'the
distressing straining, operating more gently even than
olive oil. The fruit is also named, in some parts of
India, ‘Bengal Quince.’ In Calcutta the pulp of the
fruit is mixed with water, and drank in that form, and
some persons use the dried fruit grated, or in decoction,
when the recent fruit cannot be obtained. The fruit
also makes an excellent jelly, which has been found
very serviceable to obviate costiveness.”


THE BRAZILIAN CHERRY-
(Eugenia Unifolia).
This hardy evergreen shrub is deserving of cultiva-
tion, if only for ornament. Its deep green, shining
leaves and compact habit, the young tender reddish
brown shoots, and the profusion of white blossoms and
bright red fruit, render it at all seasons a desirable plant
for the shrubbery. The fruit has a resinous flavor
when unripe, but afterwards acquires a sharp but
pleasant acid, and is very juicy. It will probably be
found valuable for preserving with other fruits.
Propagation: It may be propagated freely from
seed.
Planting, Soil, d:c.: It may be planted during May,
June, July, and August, at eight feet from plant to
plant, and will thrive in any good garden soil.
THE BRAZIL NUT-(Bertholletia Excelsa).
The Brazil nut of commerce is well known; but we
have little information about the tree further than
that it is a handsome evergreen, attaining one hundred
feet in height, and requires a temperature similar to
Bias bane.
THE BREAD FRUIT—(Artocarpus Incisa).
The bread fruit tree is a native of the South Sea
Islands, and grows about forty feet high. The leaves
are about two feet long, and the fruit (which might
"with more propriety be called a vegetable) is about the
size of a small water melon. The surface is uneven,
like the netted rock melon ; the skin thin. It has a
core running through the centre like a pine-apple. It
>s roasted before it is eaten; and, for convenience of


cooking, on account of its size, it is generally cut in
half, or quartered. In color it is pure white, ranging
to straw color, and in flavor and consistence it is mid-
way between good new wheaten bread and sweet
potato. When taken warm out of the native oven it
is an extremely palatable food, and its wholesomeness is
sufficiently attested by its general use. It grows freely
from the root, and is propagated by suckers, of which
abundance may be obtained around the old trees. It
is well worthy of introduction, and is likely to thrive
in the tropical districts of the colony, if planted in rich
soil and warm aspect.
THE CAPE GOOSEBERRY-
(Physalis Peruviana—Alkekengi).
The plant is found growing wild in the scrubs in
the vicinity of Brisbane, and many other parts of the
colony. It is a rambling herbaceous plant, producing
a profusion of fruit, which forms an excellent substi-
tute for the gooseberry. In flavor it is agreeable,
making a good pie fruit ; a very fine jelly is also pre-
pared from it.
The cultivation of this plant is identical with that
of the tomato, which it much resembles in habit.
THE CHERRY.
The Cherry is not likely to prove of much value for
cultivation in Queensland ; but in those districts where
it will mature its fruit, it will be a very welcome addi-
tion to the garden, in consequence of its ripening so
early in the season. There are some good sorts, natives
of the south of Italy, and, if they could be obtained
Irom there direct, or from the Southern States of Ame-
rica, they might' be found adapted to the climate of
Brisbane.


Varieties. —The Duke and Morello cherries are said
to be more hardy than the Hearts and Biggaream, and
some of the white varieties less subject to the depreda-
tions of birds than the red and black sorts.
Propagation by seeds : The cherry may be grown
from seed when it is desired to raise new varieties ; but,
to effect this with any degree of certajnty, artificial
fecundation must take place. The late Mr. Knight
was in this manner the originator of the following:
Knight’s Early Black (a hybrid between the Biggareau
and May Duke), Black Eagle, Downton, Elton, Water-
loo, Sc., Sc. “ The cherry,” Mr. Knight observes,
“sports more extensively into varieties, when propagated
from seeds, than any other fruit, and is, therefore, pro-
bably capable of acquiring a higher state of perfection
than it has ever yet attained. New varieties are also
much wanted.”
Soil and situation : The soil can scarcely be too dry—
in fact there are few soils sufficiently dry for this fruit.
A good sandy loam on a dry, well drained subsoil,
in an open, elevated position, free from fogs, will be
found the most suitable. The fine Kentish cherry
orchards are usually in a fine deep loam, incumbent on
rock.
Planting, pruning, Sc.: The trees may be planted at
twenty feet apart. The formation of the heads of
young trees should be well attended to, and the
pruning afterwards will be confined chiefly to thinning
out crossed or crowded branches—severe pruning should
be avoided—and all suckers should be carefully removed.
Manure: The application of about eight pounds of
salt to each full-grown tree is recommended as a surface
dressing in the spring.
THE CHESTNUT.
The chestnut has never been much in favor as an
orchard tree in the colonies, although, from its being a


native of the south of Europe, there appears, as far as
climate is concerned, every prospect of its being fruit-
ful. The Author has been informed that a tree at
Kangaroo Point bears fruit, and he has received fruit
from a garden at Dal by.
Planting : It may be planted on the outskirts of the
orchard, in a sandy loam with a dry bottom, at a dis-
tance of thirty feet apart —a dry subsoil is indispensable.
It should not be planted near a residence, as the smell
of the flowers is not agreeable.
Pruning , dec.: The trees are allowed to make bushy
heads, the irregular and overcrowded branches only
being removed.
THE CITRON—(Citrus Medica.)
The citron is allied to the orange, to the article on
which the reader is referred for more extended instruc-
tion in its cultivation.
The citron is an evergreen shrub, growing about eight
feet high, and producing an abundance of fruit in any
of the coast districts of the colony.
It is used in sweetmeats and preserves, and the juice,
with sugar and water, makes a wholesome and refresh-
ing beverage. It is also used in perfumery, dyeing,
and in medicine.
It requires a free, rich soil, moist, but well drained,
and is easily propagated by cuttings, layers, and suckers.
THE COCOA-NUT—(Cocos Nusifera).
The cocoa-nut palm grows by a single stem to the
height of fifty feet. It is generally found growing on
the sea beach surrounding the islands in the Pacific
Ocean, and is converted by the natives to a variety of
useful purposes. The green fruit is full of a delicious
milk; the nut, when ripe, is used for food and for
making oil; the shells make water bottles and drink-
ing vessels; the fibre covering the nut is made into


cordage, matting, &c. ; the leaves of the tree are used
for thatching their houses, and for torches when travel-
ling by night, and the timber is valuable for building
purposes.
It grows naturally in sandy soil, a few feet above
the sea level, and should be planted in a warm spot
sheltered from the cold winter winds. Half a bushel
of salt should be mixed with the soil in which it is
planted, if it is away from the influence of salt water.
At many points along the northern seaboard experi-
mental plantings of the cocoa nut have been made,
with most gncouraging results; and there are, doubtless,
many warm, sheltered spots on the southern coast and
about Moreton Bay, where they might be grown with
perfect success. It is scarcely possible to conceive a more
deliciously refreshing beverage than the so-called milk
of the green cocoa nut just plucked from the tree, as
often enjoyed by the Author while travelling among
the beautiful islands of the Pacific Ocean, in the years
1845-6.
All the products of the tree are so valuable, it bears
so abundantly, and is so beautiful, that all who have
suitable positions should plant some. The growing
nuts are often obtainable in Brisbane at a low price.
Cocoa-nuts are growing wild on the beach at Card-
well, where they appear to have floated from the
islands, and been cast on shore by the surf. A t the Yale
of Herbert there is a splendid clump planted, having
every indication of health and vigor. This station is
twenty or thirty miles inland ; and the owner has the
cocoa nut trees occasionally dressed with salt, to com
pensate for their absence from the sea shore, where they
usually grow. At Mackay, Mr. P. Barnes has made
the first large plantation of cocoa nut trees in Queens-
land, consisting of about eight hundred trees; and, as
they stand at twenty feet apart, they cover an area of
seven or eight acres. At the time of writing, the most-\
of these had been planted four years ; some had been
G


planted five years, many of which were in fruit. The
whole of them were in a most flourishing condition.
In a garden near Rockhampton some trees are said to
be in bearing : and even so far south as Cleveland Point,
Moreton Bay, there are some half-a-dozen trees, which
appear to be healthy and strong; and, although their
growth is not so luxuriant and rapid as in more tropical
climes, they have given very early promise of fruitful-
ness.
With the view of more thoroughly acclimatising this
valuable tree, the fruit ripened at Mackay and Rock-
hampton should be planted further soutiji; and the
Author would be glad to procure some fruit ripened at
Rockhampton for that purpose. The Government also
would do well to have a few clumps of them planted in
favorable positions on the southern coast islands—such
as Frazer’s, Stradbroke, and Moreton Islands.
THE CRANBERRY.
The cranberry is found wild in North America, the
British Isles, and Madeira.
The American and Madeira varieties are the most
approved, and, in a suitable climate and soil, are
extremely prolific. The soil should be damp and
peaty, rich in vegetable matters, with a slight mixture
of sand, and be situated on the margin of a pond or
stream of water.
It is easy of propagation; it strikes readily from
layers and cuttings; the crop seldom fails, and, in
favorable circumstances, a few square yards of ground
will produce sufficient for a large family.
THE CURRANT.
The currant is a native of the northern parts of
Europe, and can, therefore, only be cultivated with
success in the coldest districts of this colony.


Propagation : Cuttings should be taken early in the
autumn, while the leaves are on. Cut off all the buds
except three or four at the top; insert the cuttings
about half way in the mould, in rows one foot apart,
and train one clear stem a foot high, from which four
or five branches may be allowed to radiate at an angle
of 40 or 45 degrees. The young wood only is used for
this purpose.
Soil and Site : Any good garden soil, well manured,
will suit the currant. The black currant prefers a
damp, rich loam, rather shaded. They should be from
five to tei# feet asunder, and have a southern or eastern
aspect if possible.
THE CUSTARD APPLE—(Anona Reticulata).
The custard apple and the cherimoya (Anona
Gherimolia) have long been in our gardens, and have
home fruit for many years. Some other varieties have
recently been introduced, and are being tested. The
former are evergreen shrubs, growing to the height of
about fifteen feet, and producing fruit on the previous
year’s wood. The fruit is about the size of an apple,
and consists of a shell enclosing a soft, rich, agreeable
pulp resembling custard, in which the seeds are em-
bedded.
Planting: They may be planted from May to
August, at fifteen feet apart, and trees which have been
transplanted at the nursery should be procured if pos-
sible, as the roots are not naturally fibrous, and there
is, consequently, great risk of their failure. Frequent
transplanting while young encourages the formation of
fibrous roots ; and such plants can be removed to a dis-
tance with far greater safety than such as have only a
long tap root.
Soil; The soil should be friable, .rich, and well
drained. Lime is said to be a good special manure.


Propagation : They may all be propagated by seeds,
layers, cuttings, and grafting. The former is the most
general, and the latter is adopted for increasing approved
sorts.
THE DATE PALM—(Phoenix Dactylifera).
The date palm attains the height of forty feet. It
is perfectly hardy in the climate of Brisbane, and grows
very freely from the seed. It takes ten or twelve
years to arrive at maturity, and should be planted in
clumps or clusters, to make sure of having among them
at least one male plant, to fertilise the fruit blossoms,
which would otherwise be unproductive.
In Persia they allot fifty female to two male plants,
and, as soon as the pollen is ripe, commence to impreg-
nate with the .latter the blossoms of the former:
alleging that their proximity is not sufficient to insure
the production of fruit.
The first Queensland dates seen by the Author were
grown at Gladstone, about the year 1849, and sent to
him by Sir Maurice (then Captain) O’Connell. They
are now less uncommon ; and, at the time of writing
(March, 1875), there is a tree in Edward Street, Bris-
bane, loaded with a fair crop. It is to be feared,
however, that the sure means of acclimatisation have
not always been kept in view, and that the seeds so
ripened have not been carefully re-sown for further
experiment. A superior sort, known as the Tatilat
date, imported by Mr. J. Smith Travers, of Hobart
Town, was intrusted by him to Mr. Walter Hill for
distribution here, in October, 1870, and, no doubt,
many plants from that seed are now under experiment.
The Author has three in his grounds, which are doing
well.
Any good garden soil will suit the date.


THE DATE PLUM-IDiospyroa Kaki).
The date plum grows and bears well in the neigh-
borhood of Brisbane. There are several varieties of
Diospyros producing edible fruit which have not yet
been introduced; and the Diospyros Ebenus is the ebony
of commerce.
The date plum may be propagated by seeds, layers,
or cuttings. A rich, damp loam is suitable, and the
plants (which grow about fifteen feet high) may be
placed at eighteen feet apart. The only.pruning neces-
sary is, to clear the suckers and undergrowth, and to
keep the centre of the tree open.
The tree is deciduous. Transplant from May to
August.
THE DURION—(Durio Zibethinus).
The durion is a native of the East Indies, and
grows to the height of sixty feet. The fruit is pro-
duced in bunches, and when ripe has a most powerful
and unpleasant odour, somewhat resembling rotten
onions, which offensive smell infects the breath of the
person eating it. The fruit is very large, sometimes
being the size of a man’s head ; the edible part is of a
creamy substance, and of so delicate a flavor that it is
stated to be “ one of the most delicious productions of
nature and that “ when a person has once accus-
tomed himself to eat the fruit, he generally considers
it the most excellent of all.”
THE FIG—(Ficus Carica).
The fig is one of the oldest known fruits; and in
Many parts of the old world has, from the earliest ages,
been used as a highly valued article of food. The


foliage is said to exercise a very calming and soothing
influence on the mind ; and some authors, while urg-
ing that every man should “ sit under his own fig tree,”
particularly recommend that those who have unruly
tongues, or hasty tempers, should have a fig tree under
which they could sit for a quarter of an hour when
they feel an unkindly impulse.
Varieties: The sorts found most suitable to the
climate of Brisbane are the Turkey, Smyrna, Giant,
and Frovince.
Propagation : All the sorts may be propagated freely
by cuttings, layers, and suckers; they may also be
grown from seed.
Planting, soil, <&c.: The Giant fig requires twenty-
five feet, but the other sorts may be planted at fifteen
feet apart. The soil should be rich, dry, and warm.
In a wet soil the growth will be too luxuriant, and not
fruitful; and in a poor sand the fruit is liable to crack
and be shed before it is mature. In Smyrna, where
the fig is grown to great perfection and dried for ex-
portation, great care is taken to keep the ground well
worked around the roots.
Pruning, dec.: After the formation of a good open
head, very little pruning will be required. There are
generally two crops in the season : one crop coming out
with the first leaves in spring, and the second crop
showing at every joint of the new shoots.
The fruit is rich and saccharine when gathered ripe
from the tree, and the latter quality is much developed
in the process of drying. This operation is effected by
exposing the fruit for a certain time to a current of hot
air, by which it is thoroughly heated through, and the
vegetable principle destroyed. Before the fruit is cold
it is pressed down tight into drums, and the juice is
forced to the surface of the skin, where it candies into
a sugary dust.


THE FILBERT- (Corylus Avellana).
The filbert grows in the form of a shrub or small
tree to the height of ten feet, but under a thorough
system of cultivation seldom exceeds six feet. In
Kent, England, where it grows more extensively than
in any other part, the average yield of nuts is about
five bushels per acre, the crop generally failing three
seasons out of five. The male and female blossoms
are formed separate on the same plant; the male is the
well-known catkin, and the female resembles a small
brush, of a pinkish or pale fed color. In many cases
the trees are unfruitful in consequence of there being
an insufficiency of catkins to fertilize the fruitbearing
blossoms.
Propagation: The filbert may be propagated by
' seeds, cuttings, layers, and suckers; the two latter
modes being the most in use.
Planting, soil, <Lx.: They may be planted in winter
at ten feet apart, or in alternate rows with larger grow-
ing trees, allowing sufficient additional space. They
will thrive in any good garden soil naturally rather
damp, but well drained. The aspect should be cool
(southerly) ; and they are only likely to succeed in the
coldest parts of the colony.
Training, , pruning, &c. ; The plants should be al-
lowed to grow to a single stem, unchecked, for the
first season; and in winter, if they are strong, cut
back to one foot from the ground. In the spring, see
that about eight shoots are provided, which train into
an open head the shape of a cup, carefully removing
all suckers and other shoots below those forming the
head. If the plant is not strong enough to furnish a
good head the second year, the shoots must be cut
back the following winter to two buds from their
fcrigin, taking care to cut back to an outside bud, to
keep the head open; and from the shoots thence


springing select sufficient to form the plant as directed.
If it does not take the required form, it may be neces-
sary to fix a small hoop in it, tying the branches
round the edge until fixed. The after cultivation
consists of shortening back the strong leading shoots,
at the winter pruning, about one-third or half, accord-
ing to their strength; removing all cross or over-
crowded shoots ; pruning most of the lateral or side
branches (especially in the centre of the tree) back to
two or three buds, to force out fruit-bearing spurs at
intervals all up the leading branches ; and keeping
down all suckers.
THE FLACOUETIA—(Flacourtia Cataphracta).
The flacourtia is a small evergreen tree, growing
to the height of ten feet. It is a native of the East
Indies, and perfectly hardy in Brisbane, where it
produces its fruit (a small dark purple berry) in great
profusion.
Being covered with a vast number of long thorns it
is well calculated for a hedge plant, as it would, if
properly trained while young, resist with equal success
the attacks of both men and cattle. In its unripe
state the fruit is astringent, and in taste somewhat
resembles the wild sloe, but as it gets ripe it becomes
a little mealy and of a very agreeable flavor. It ripens
during April and May.
Propagation, <L-o.: It may be propagated by seeds,
layers, and cuttings, the former being the most ready
method. It may be planted in any average good soil,
at ten feet intervals, and with very little trouble will
form a handsome shrub ; the foliage being a dark green,
and the young shoots a reddish brown, the effect is
very good.
There are other varieties which are said to product
larger fruit, but they are not sufficiently known to war-
rant an opinion as to their quality and productiveness.


THE GOOSEBERRY—(Ribes Grossularia).
The gooseberry is a native of the northern parts of
Europe, and, therefore, unfit for cultivation in any but
the coldest districts of this colony, and there only in
carefully selected positions.
All the sorts may be propagated by cuttings, layers,
and seed.
Soil: A deep sandy loam is preferable, but they
will do in any ordinary soil with manure. The situa-
tion should be unshaded by trees, and drained of all
stagnant water. They should be irrigated with liquid
manure in the growing season. A good top-dressing
of manure should be forked in round the bushes an-
nually, but not nearer to the stem than the circuit of
the branches.
Winter Pruning consists in removing suckers, and all
over luxuriant growth; and crowded and very weak
shoots should at least be shortened, so as to leave the
bush the shape of a basin for the first few years, to
admit the sun and air to ripen the fruit inside. The
wood left to form the plant should be strong, but not
over luxuriant, and well ripened ; and no two branches
should be allowed to touch. Plant in rows, eight feet
asunder, and six feet apart in the line.
THE GKANADILLA—(Passiflora Quadrangularis).
This variety of the passion fruit has a square stem,
as the name indicates. The fruit is the largest of the
family, being the size of the rock melon. The skin is
soft and very thick, totally different from the common
passion fruit (passijlora edulis), or a yellow sort (pas-
siflora liyularis), which is sometimes erroneously called
the granadilla.


The true granadilla is prolific and hardy. The fruit
agreeable in flavor, and sufficiently distinct to make it
worth growing as a variety. In habit it is less robust
than passi/lora edulis ; it makes its growth chiefly in
autumn, and the fruit ripens in winter and early spring.
The blossoms are very large and handsome, and appear
during March and April.
A rich peaty soil, moist but not wet, would be the
most suitable. Any ordinary open soil with manure
would, however, grow it to perfection.
It may be propagated by seeds, layers, and cuttings.
If planted to run on an espalier, the roots should
be ten to fifteen feet apart, and the branches carefully
secured to the rails by woollen bands, to support the
heavy fruit.
The passi/lora decasneana (or small granadilla) is
in foliage, but much more robust in habit. It
seldom bears fruit unless the blossoms are artificially
fertilised, when the produce is very great. The fruit
is about two-thirds the size of the granadilla, the flavor
very agreeable, and the plant being large and hand-
some, it would be useful for covering rough fences and
other unsightly objects.
A gigantic variety, bearing fruit six pounds in weight,
may now be seen at the Brisbane Botanic Garden.
As Mr. Hill speaks well of its productiveness, and the
quality of the fruit, it is likely to prove a desirable
acquisition.
THE GRAPE VINE-(Vitis Vinifera),
The grape vine is subjected to a larger amount of
mismanagement 'than any other fruit-bearing plant.
Every grower has some theory of his own; and it is
probable that a colonial vineyard left in succession to
six different professed vine-growers, would be mis-
managed by five out of the number. As this little


book is not intended for the instruction of those who
already know how to cultivate the grape, it is not
proposed to discuss the relative value of the different
acknowledged systems of training; and the limited
space will prevent their being even described; but
the principle upon
which the opera-
tions should be
conducted, and the
simplest method of
accomplishing the
desired object (i.e.
moderate succes-
sive crops of good
grapes), will alone
be sought to be elu-
cidated in the few
brief directions
here given.
Varieties : Out of upwards of ninety sorts grown by
the Author, the Black Hamburg is decidedly the best
black grape for Brisbane, and the Sweet Water the besc
white. Six or eight good sorts, ripening in succession,
will generally be found sufficient for all the purposes
of a private garden, and a few of the most hardy arid
prolific are here described, for general planting. It
has not been thought desirable to mention -wine grapes,
as varieties which produce excellent wine, grown in
certain soils and positions, will not show similar results
under other circumstances ; and persons about to plant
vineyards for wine-making, will do well to test several
sorts of grapes before they determine of which their
plantation is chiefly to consist.
1. Black Cluster (Pineau Noir)— Bunches, small,
shouldered; berries, small, round, and very compact on
the bunch, so that they do not all get thoroughly colored •
flavor, good when quite ripe ; an abundant-bearer, but
of little value as a table fruit on account of the insig


nificant size of the berries. It is valuable as a wine
grape.
2. Black Hamburg (Red Hamburg, Black Lisbon,
<kc.) —Bunches, large and long; berries, round and
large ; color, rich dark purple ; flesh, rather firm, rich,
sugary, and delicious ; habit, robust and prolific under
favorable conditions. The best black grape for the
Brisbane district, and probably the most useful grape
in cultivation. Experiments have proved it to be a
good stock upon which to graft the more tender mus-
cats.
3. Black Prince. —Bunches, large and long; berries,
very large, oval, and mostly set loose; color, dark
purple, with fine bloom next the sun—greenish purple
where shaded ; skin, thin, and in wet weather very
liable to decay; habit, moderate free grower; crop,
rather uncertain, and in some seasons liable to blight;
flavor, only medium; but in appearance the most hand-
some of all grapes.
4. Isabella (American) —Bunches, medium; berries,
above medium and oval; flesh, firm, and adhering to
the seed until perfectly ripe, musky, vinous, rich, and
sweet; ripens unequally in some positions and seasons,
and the ripe berries fall off the bunch ; very prolific
and hardy; resists the oidium.
5. Lombardy (Flame-tokay, Wantage) —Bunches,
very large and handsome; berries, large, round to oval;
flesh, tender, sweet, pleasant flavor; quality, second-
rate ; a vigorous grower and abundant bearer.
6. Parsley-leaf Muscadine (Ciotat) —Bunches and
berries similar to the White Muscadine; a good early
grape, but in some very hot seasons the fruit suffers
from the foliage not affording it sufficient protection.
7. White Muscadine —Bunches, shouldered, medium
size, and handsome ; berries, round, rather large, and
loosely set, allowing them to get perfectly ripe; skin,
thin, and if exposed to the sun turning a pale yellow;
92
hookings’ garden manual.


an excellent, early grape, hardy, prolific, and of a rich,
fine flavor. This is commonly sold under the name of
Sweetwater. '*
8. White Sweetwater —Bunches, medium ; berries,
large, round, and grow close on the bunches ; not so
transparent as the Muscadine ; flesh, firmer ; skin, thin,
and when exposed to the sun and fully ripe, pretty
thickly dotted with light russet spots ; pulp, very juicy
and luscious. This delicious grape is the best white
variety for growing near Brisbane in ordinary seasons;
but it is sometimes attacked with blight, and may be
considered less hardy than the muscadine.
The Muscatels, Frontiynans, and other choice table
grapes are to bo found in our gardens, and are adapted
for planting in the cooler parts of the colony, but are
too tender for general cultivation.
Many indigenous and hybrid American grapes have
of late years been introduced by Mr. J. G. Cribb, of
Brisbane, among which some will, doubtless, be found
which will be valuable acquisitions. Greater vigor of
constitution will enable them to withstand the extremes
of our climate better than the more tender European,
sorts; and their new shades of color, their new flavors,
extended season of ripening, great productiveness, and
comparative immunity from disease, unite to recom-
mend them for extended cultivation, as soon as they
are procurable for general planting.
Among those which have thus far given fair promise,
the following maybe mentioned;— Goethe, Maxatawney,
Delaware, lona, Catawba, Anna, Lindly, Salem,
Rogers’ 2, Rogers' 12, Allen's, Adirondiac, Wilder,
Requa, IsvAella, and Greveling.
For the Brisbane district and northern towns it
would be desirable to introduce some of the best sorts
from Greece, Southern Italy, &c., and more of the
American sorts which thrive in the Southern States.
Soil, &c. ; The vine will grow most luxuriantly in a
deep, well drained, rich, friable mpuld, but will adapt


itself and thrive moderately well in a greater variety
of soils and situations than almost any other fruit tree.
In selecting a site for a vineyard, a cool aspect should
have the preference in the warmer parts of the colony,
and the soil (not too heavy) should either be on a
porous subsoil or so situated as to admit of thorough
underground drainage. Some red loams are excellent
for grapes, and a fair proportion of small stones in a
soil would be no disadvantage. The plantation or bor-
der should be trenched to an uniform depth of two feet
six inches, or certainly not less than two feet, and
drained at least six inches deeper than it is trenched, if
the soil requires draining, which can be ascertained in
the manner previously indicated. Deep cultivation
and a porous subsoil, or thorough drainage, are the
indispensable conditions of permanent success in vine-
growing.
Some of the early planted vineyards in Melbourne
were made in conformity with the recommendations
contained in the Government Prize Essay on the sub-
ject—the land was only prepared by being ploughed.
The folly of such mismanagement soon became manifest
by the miserable appearance and decreasing production
of such plantations. For the first few years after
planting all went well, and there was abundant promise
of future returns ; but as soon as the roots reached the
undisturbed soil, and the vines had attained an age at
which a full crop was to be expected, they began to
languish, the produce decreased, and it became evident
that one acre of vineyard properly trenched and drained
was more valuable than ten acres ploughed in.
One-year-old rooted plants should be obtained where
practicable; they should be placed in the soil at the
same depth they had previously been in the nursery,
and at distances according to the mode of pruning and
training intended to be adopted. If for close pruning,
and training to single posts, they may be planted four
feet by six feet apart, or six feet by eight; but, if for


training to espaliers, more space must be allowed, ac-
cording to their height. If planted eight feet by ten,
about 430 plants would be required for an acre.
Manure : Lime, ashes, and bone dust are good special
manures for the vine, and the plantation should have a
top-dressing of salt every spring (before the plants bud
out), at the rate of about two cwt. per acre.
If there is any appearance of disease in the fruit, a
dressing of flour of sulphur, applied with a common
dredging box, in the morning while the dew is on, will
often be found efficacious.
Oidium : The foregoing directions, founded upon the
practice of the most successful and enlightened
vignerons of France, were given in the first edition of
the Manual in 1856, before the oidium had made its
appearance here. Since that time, much, very much
has been written upon the subject, but apparently
without adding anything to the above, as sulphur is
still the most approved dressing for the oidium. Ano-
ther favorite application is composed of 40 lbs. of fine
ashes of wood (which have not been exposed to rain),
20 lbs. of flowers of sulphur, and 10 lbs. of lime,
thoroughly mixed, and either dusted over the vines as
previously recommended, or blown over them through
the sulphuring bellows.
Chloride of lime, soft soap, and sulphur, prepared as
directed for the diseases of the orange, and similarly
applied, in the spring, before the fruit has stoned, will
also be found effective.
Training, pruning, Sc. : All the various systems of
training have for their object the production every
season of the largest quantity of firsLclass fruit, on the
smallest space, consistent with the continued vigor of
the plant. The vine has a tendency to make new
growths from the end of the previous year’s shoots;
and, if allowed to extend itself unchecked, would only
bear at the extremities, leaving the largest part of the
vine without foliage or fruit. The skill of the culti


vator is exhibited in reducing this rambling habit; and,
by high cultivation and judicious pruning, obtaining
fruit of improved quality and most abundant in quan-
tity ■within the radius of a few feet from'the stem.
To effect this, the greater part of the wood produced
each summer is pruned away in the winter, by which
the vine is renewed every year on almost the same spot ,
its vigor is maintained unimpaired, and every branch
produces fruit. It is impossible to lay down any rule
for pruning vines which will suit all alike, as the
different sorts vary much in habit, and even individual
plants of the same sort will differ in constitutional
strength. As among a family of children, some will
need encouraging and some repressing : so in the vine-
yard, the intelligent primer will learn to distinguish
the individual characteristics of his vines, and modify
his pruning to suit them. Mr. Hoare, a standard
authority on this subject, after trying many experi-
ments, came to the conclusion that the bearing capa-
bility of the vine was in proportion to the girth of its
stem just above the surface of the ground ; and states
that no plant should be allowed to ripen fruit until its
stem is three inches in circumference, when it should
be limited to five pounds weight (about ten bunches),
which may be increased by a further five pounds for
each additional half inch, as the stem grows. It is
important to remember that the vine should not be
allowed to bear until the second or third year after it
is planted out; and that all the bunches which appear
before that time should be carefully removed ; for every
pound of grapes, produced under such circumstances,
will so overtask the plant as to cause the future loss of
from twenty to forty pounds of fruit.
The young vines when planted should be cut back,
leaving only one bud on small plants, aijd not more
than two on the strong ones. The following season the
former may be cut down to two eyes, and may then
be treated as recommended by Downing, which mode


of training is figured at the commencement of this
o O
article :
“ The two buds left on the set are allowed to form
two upright shoots the next summer, which, at the end
of the season, are brought down to a horizontal posi-
tion, and fastened each way to the lower horizontal rail
of the trellis, being shortened to three or four' feet, or
such a distance each way as it is wished to have the
plant extend. The next year upright shoots are
allowed to grow one foot apart, and these are stopped
at the top of the trellis. The third year, the trellis
being filled with vines, a set of lateral shoots will be
produced from the upright leaders, with from one to
three bunches on each. The vino is now perfect, and
it is only necessary at the autumnal or winter pruning
to cut back the lateral shoots or fruit spurs to within
an inch of the uprights, and new laterals, producing
fruit, will annually supply their places. If it should
be found, after several years’ bearing, that the grapes (
fail in size or flavor, the vines should be cut down
to the main horizontal shoots at the bottom of the trellis.
New uprights will be produced, which treat as before,”
1 n following the above directions, it must be observed
that unless the vines are in full vigor it will be unwise
to leave the two long shoots the first season. Unless
very strong, they should each be pruned back to two
eyes, from which select the following season the strongest
shouts to train in as directed. As to the fruit, also, it
will be necessary to prevent the vines over bearing the
first few seasons, by removing the surplus bunches as
they appear.
In all operations connected with the vine, see that
the foliage is not injured, and in the summer pruning
do not remove a leaf unnecessarily. The summer
pruning consists of destroying all suckers, stopping
with the thumb and finger the shoots three leaves
heyond the last bunch of fruit, to forward the swelling,
and removing or stopping all lateral branches.
H


To prepare currants and raisins, see “ Fruit Dry-
ing.”
THE GUAVA—(Psidiura Cattleyanuxn).
Evergreen shrubs bearing white flowers, and fruit
of various sizes, forms, and colors. We have six sorts
in our gardens, of which the Purple or Cattley’s, the
Large Yellow or Egg, and the Green guava, are the
most prolific, and best adapted for general planting.
They require a rich soil—moist, but not wet; they may
be propagated by seeds, cuttings, and layers, and may
be planted at from ten to twenty feet apart, according
to the sort. They are used for dessert, and make an
exquisite jelly. The large egg guava is considered by
some persons to be much improved by baking. Time
for transplanting, April to August.
HERBERT VALE CHERRY-
(Antidesma Dallachyanum).
This is a handsome, umbrageous, evergreen tree,
growing to the height of thirty or forty feet, and is
found growing in alluvial soil on the banks of the
Herbert River, Dalrymple Gap, and other places near
Cardwell. The foliage is ovate-oblong, from three to
six inches long, and the branches are very brittle. The
fruit, which is borne in great profusion, on racemes
about four to six inches in length, resembles in its
appearance the Biggaru Cherry. It is about one inch
in diameter; the skin is white to yellow, tinted and
splashed with red ; the flesh is juicy, with a sprightly,
agreeable, acid flavor, it is reddish in color, and adheres
to the stone; the latter is in form a disc, being
thickest in the centre, where it is nearly a quarter of
an inch thick. Mr. F. M. Bailey, who brought plants
from the Herbert River for the Acclimatisation Society,


speaks very highly of the merits of this fruit, and con-
siders it worthy of cultivation wherever the climate
may be found suitable : and states that an excellent
jelly is made from it. From bis description of it, this
must be by far the most valuable indigenous fruit yet
discovered in Queensland.
THE HOVENIA DULCIS.
A deciduous tree of slender habit from Japan,
growing to the height of twenty feet. It blooms in
November, and the fruit is about two inches long, very
narrow, twisted, and irregular. The flavor somewhat
resembles an apple. It can never be of any commer-
cial value, but is worth growing in private gardens of
any size. It may be propagated by seed, layers, and
cuttings; it is hardy, and grows freely.
THE JACK FRUIT—(Artocarpus Integrifolia).
This handsome evergreen tree is allied to the Bread
Fruit, to the article upon which the reader is referred
for its propagation and management. It appears per-
fectly hardy in Brisbane, producing, in the Botanic
Gardens, a profusion of its enormous, rough, green-
skinned fruit. This consists of a number of divisions
of yellow pulp of an agreeable flavor, in the midst of
each of which is embedded a seed about the size of a
plum. The pulp is eaten in its raw state, and is used
in curries; and the seeds, which have the flavor of
beans, are boiled and used at table as vegetables.
JUBE-JUBE—(Zizyphus Ju-juba).
This quick-growing evergreen tree is known also as
the Torres Straits plum, and is called in China “ Ung-
chaw.” It is indigenous in China and in the Straits ;


and in the former country the fruit is dried and forms
an article of commerce. The foliage is a pale green,
and the fruit, which is a drupe, is produced in abundance
in its native countries. The tree has been largely
planted in some of the northern coast towns for shade,
in consequence of its rapid growth, and it there proves
fairly productive; but in the Brisbane district it has
not hitherto been very fruitful. The fruit varies
much in quality, some being more agreeable in flavor
than others; and this may be taken as a conclusive
indication that it is susceptible of improvement by
judicious selection.
THE LEECHEE AND THE LONGAN—
(Nephelium Litchi and Nephelium Longana).
These are evergreen fruit trees with compound
leaves, natives of China, Japan, and the East Indies.
The latter has been fruited by the Author at Brisbane
for many years. The blossom, which is insignificant,
appeared in long spikes during October and November,
and the fruit ripened in March following. It is white,
semi-transparent, slightly glutinous, sweet, pleasant in
flavor, and covered outside with a thin, tough, brown
skin or shell. The fruit of the leechee is dried, and
exported from China in large quantities, and is much
esteemed. The trees grow from fifteen to twenty feet
in height, and may be propagated by seeds, layers, and
cuttings. The leechee is now procurable, and will be
largely planted. Two plants have borne fruit in Bris-
bane.
THE LISBON LEMON AND THE WEST INDIA
LIME.
These plants (Citrus Limonum and Citrus Limetta)
are closely allied to the orange; tlie cultivation and
management arc the same. (See orange).


The refreshing acid juice of the former is applied to
a variety of useful purposes, and the rind is preserved
and imported under the name of “ candied peel.” The
tree grows to the height of fifteen feet.
In India, where the lime attains perfection, the juice
is thought more agreeable than that of the lemon, and
it is used squeezed over fish and meat, imparting to
them a pleasant zest. The lime juice of commerce, so
favorably known for its cooling and anti-scorbutic pro-
perties, is prepared from this fruit. The tree grows
to the height of eight feet.
They may both be propagated by seeds, layers, and
cuttings, but the most usual course is to graft or bud
them on common stocks.
THE LOQUAT— (Eriobotrya Japonica).
A handsome evergreen tree, growing to the height
of fifteen feet. It is the earliest of spring fruits, and
the abundance of long racemes of bright yellow fruit,
bending the branches in graceful curves, relieved by a
background of large, dark green leaves, renders the
tree a conspicuous and ornamental obj ect. It is a native
of Japan, as the name indicates, and is perfectly hardy
in this climate.
It may be propagated by seeds, layers, suckers, and
cuttings ; and may be dwarfed by grafting upon the
quince, to which it is allied.
It has been found to bear larger crops of superior
fruit when planted in well-trenched ridge land (hilly,
rather stony, forest land) than when planted in scrub
soil.
The trees may be planted twenty feet apart. Prick
m with the fork a light top-dressing of well rotted
manure annually, as soon as the fruit is gathered.
Thin outstraggling andinside branches, when necessary,
to keej) the tree open. Watch the fruit as it ripens,


or the birds will gather the whole crop. It blossoms
in Brisbane in February for the first crop, which ripens
in June.
THE MAMMEE APPLE—(Mammea Americana).
The mammee is a tall, handsome, evergreen tree,
attaining the height of sixty feet, with shining, thick,
oval leaves. The fruit is called the wild apricot, from
its resemblance to that fruit; it is round, of about the
size of an egg, and is said to be so fine in flavor as to
rival the mangosteen. The tree is tolerably hardy;
requires a fibry, sandy loam, well drained ; and may be
propagated byseeds, layers, and cuttings. It is a native
of the West Indies and South Africa.
THE MANGO—(Mangifera Indica).
The mango is a rather quick-growing umbrageous
tree, rising to the height of twenty feet, the large,
shining, green leaves of which emit a sweet, resinous
smell. The flowers are white, and appear in long
spikes at the extremity of the branches. The fruit
varies much in size and quality, and is consumed ex-
tensively in India in every possible form ; it is kidney
shaped, has a soft, smooth, resinous skin, pale green,
yellow, or red. When ripe it is delicious, slightly
resembling an apple, but more juicy, and merits a pro-
minent place in all gardens in tropical Queensland.
A moderate degree of cold will not injure it; but the
Author had a fine plant about seven feet high (which he
had received from Calcutta in 1853) destroyed by frost.
Other valuable sorts, however, received from .Mauri-
tius, Java, and Bombay, are now in bearing. It is
frequently planted in India, as an act of piety, to afford
shade, for which purpose its. beautiful leaves, seven or
eight inches long, render it particularly suitable. The


unripe fruit pickled is an article of export; and in
India a large trade is carried on in the young green
fruit, dried in the sun, it being a favorite condiment for
curries.
The fruit should not be left on the tree until it is
fully ripe, as it is liable to fall and get bruised ; but
should be gathered when mature, and beginning to
change color ; and, being carefully packed in clean, dry
straw, should be left until quite ripe, and the fine flavor
and aroma fully developed, which would be in about
ten days or a fortnight. This quality in the mango
will enable growers at the northern ports to ship this
delicious fruit, when it becomes more plentiful, to Bris-
bane, Sydney, and Melbourne. And the command of
such large and remunerative markets ought to induce
o o
the general planting of this beautiful and valuable tree.
It produces fruit at about three years of age, when
raised from seed. The only way to ensure having good
sorts is to obtain layered or grafted plants from fruit
bearing trees of approved quality. The seedlings some-
times turn out well, but more frequently they are
inferior or worthless.
It may be propagated by cuttings, layers, and grafts.
A rich, peaty loam is the most suitable, and it is very
sensitive to a retentive soil or stagnant water.
The seeds do not retain their vegetative powers for
any length of time, but must be sown directly they are
gathered, when they germinate very freely.
The timber is extensively used in India, and is ap-
plied to all the usual purposes of the fir in Europe.
THE MANGOSTEEN—(Garcinia Mangostana).
This tree is allied to the Mammee; it grows in a
most beautiful and regular form to the height of twenty
feet, with a taper stem, having branches on all sides


extending like a flr. It is an evergreen tree, with
oval leaves about seven inches long. The fruit is about
the size and shape of an orange, and is divided inside
in the same manner, having an outside covering like
the shell of the pomegranate. It consists of a “soft,
juicy pulp, of a delicious flavor, partaking of the straw-
berry and the grape, and is esteemed one of the richest
fruits in the world.” Dr. Garcia, an eastern traveller,
from whom the tree is named, says (Phil. Trans.) “ it
is esteemed the most delicious of the East India fruits;
and a great deal of it may be eaten without any incon-
venience ; it is the only fruit which sick people are
allowed to eat without scruple. It is given with safety
in almost every disorder; and we are told that Dr.
Solander, in the last stage of a putrid fever in Batavia,
found himself insensibly recovering by sucking this
delicious and refreshing fruit. The pulp has a most
happy mixture of the tart and sweet, and is no less
salutary than pleasant.”
Soil, propagation, &c., the same as the mamraee.
MATINGOLA PLUM-(Arduina Bispinosa).
The fruit of a thorny, evergreen shrub, having
handsome, shining leaves. It grows hero to the height
of seven or eight feet, and bears white, perfumed
flowers, resembling the jasmine, throughout the spring
and summer.
It is a native of the Cape of Good Hope, where it
has a summer temperature of 60° to 65°, and does not
often bear fruit in the higher temperature of Brisbane.
The fruit has the form of a plum ; it is about two
inches long, and one inch in diameter, and is full of
small seeds.
It is propagated by seeds, cuttings, and layers, and
it thrives best in a sandy loam.


THE MEDLAR—(Mespilus Germanica).
The medlar is only adapted for private gardens, as
the fruit is not considered tit for use until it begins to
decay.
The culture is similar to the apple, which see. Soil,
loamy, but well drained.
THE MULBERRY—(Morns Nigra).
The Black or English mulberry is the sort most
esteemed for 'the quality of its fruit; but au inferior
variety, known as the Cape mulberry, is the most
generally cultivated, as it is more hardy and prolific.
The mulberry is an ornamental tree, easy of cultiva-
tion, producing an abundance of wholesome fruit early
in spring. It is said that the fruit does not undergo
the acetous fermentation, turd is therefore a proper fruit
for those affected with gout and rheumatic diseases to
indulge in ; it is cooling and rather laxative. An ex-
cellent jam maybe prepared from the English mulberry;
a palatable domestic wine may also be made from it;
and a syrup is obtained from the unripe berries, useful
in cases of ulcerated sore throats. “ The root of the
tree has an acrid, bitter taste, and has been used, it is
said, with great advantage, in cases of worms, particu-
larly the tape worm.”— M'Intosh.
The Morns Alba and Morns Alba Multicauhs,
Chinese varieties of the mulberry, have been recom-
mended for feeding silkworms, in consequence of their
luxuriant growth, and their leaves being very large and
tender. Silkworms so fed are said to yield silk
superior both in quantity and quality. Some worms
reared by the Author, usually fed upon the Cape mul-
berry, were offered some of the Chinese leaves with
the others, but would not eat them. This incident is


only mentioned to induce a fair trial of the different
sorts for silk culture, and is not intended as a proof
of the superiority of the sort used; but it may be
found that the worms thrive here on a variety of mul-
berry not so well adapted for their food in a different
climate. A small-leafed mulberry is used in Italy for
this purpose, and if silk culture is ever carried on
here to any extent, it may be found desirable to intro-
duce it.
Propagation : The mulberry may be propagated by
seeds, cuttings, grafting, budding, layers, or suckers.
The first is only used when it is either desired to raise
stocks upon which to bud or graft known sorts, or to
obtain new varieties. Cuttings one foot long, inserted
ten inches in a damp, sandy loam, will strike readily
and grow with great rapidity.
Planting, soil, etc. ; The mulberry is often planted
on a lawn, that the fruit as it ripens may not be in-
jured when it falls. Berries falling without damage
are superior to those gathered. The trees should be
twenty feet apart ; and the soil most suitable for them
is a deep, rich, sandy loam, damp, but not wet. There
must be no stagnant water in the soil.
Pruning : All crossed and crowded branches should
be removed at the winter pruning, and all straggling
shoots shortened one-third or one-half, according to
their strength.
Manure : If grass covers the soil under the trees, a
liberal supply of liquid manure should be given every
autumn; but if cultivated, a dressing of solid manure
should be turned in lightly with a fork.
THE NECTARINE.
The nectarine is classed by most English and
French gardeners along with peaches ; and considered
merely a smooth-skinned variety. It is, however,


sufficiently distinct in flavor and appearance to com-
mand a place in every garden, where the climate is
suitable. Hitherto its cultivation has been found
remunerative only in the colder parts of the colony-
and the growers in the vicinity of Brisbane and the
northern ports have been unable to produce this
delicious fruit. It will require time to prove whether
it is capable of acclimatization ; but, from the success
which has resulted from similar experiments with the
peach, the Author has every confidence in the ulti-
mate issue of his present attempt to acclimatize the
nectarine.
At the present time all the finest sorts grown in
England and France are in our gardens, including the
sweet-kemeled Syrian variety, the Stanwick.
The soil, cultivation, etc., required for the nectarine
being similar to the peach, the reader is referred to the
article on that fruit for further information.
THE OLIVE—(Olea Europa).
The value of the olive for manufacturing purposes
is so great that no apology is needed for its introduction
here. It is an evergreen tree, rising twenty to thirty
feet in height, hardy, and easy of propagation. There
are numerous varieties, but most of the best sorts are
obtainable in the colony.
Propagation : This is effected by seeds, layers, cut-
tings, and roots ; and the latter method is generally
preferred.
Soil, Sc.: The olive is most prolific in a dry, stony,
calcareous, or sandy soil, and could therefore be planted
profitably where few other fruits would be remunera-
tive. It grows luxuriantly in a rich soil, producing
abundance of wood but little fruit, and, like all oil
crops, it impoverishes the soil, which should be well
manured every third year.


Planting, ttc.: Some authorities recommend the
trees to be planied ten feet apart, trained to a single
stem for five or six feet, and then to form the head.
The ripe fruit is bruised between stones which do not
crush the kernel; the pulp is put into rush bags and
gently pressed to obtain “Virgin Oil,” and is after-
wards pressed a second and third time to obtain oil of
other qualities. It deposits a white, fibrous, and albu-
minous matter, and may then be drawn off into clear
glass flasks.
The value of the crop and the longevity of the tree
unite to recommend it for general purposes of shade
or shelter. Enquiry is often made for suitable trees to
plant, singly or in clumps, either as shade for stock,
or for landscape effect, on large, naked areas; and this
tree appears well suited for the purpose. It would
also be valuable, both for shelter and profit, if planted
as a breakwind on the boundaries of runs and large
plantations.
Since the foregoing article appeared in the first
edition of this work, a pamphlet on “ The Olive and
its Products ,” by Mr. L. A. Bernays, one of the Vice-
Presidents of the Queensland Acclimatisation Society,
has been issued from the Government Printing Office;
and all who propose to cultivate the tree for commer-
cial purposes should consult its pages for much valuable
information as to the progress of the industry in the
southern colonics, and for useful diagrams illustrating
the cultivation of the tree, the extraction of the oil, &c.
THE ORANGE—(Citrus Aurantium).
The orange is an evergreen tree, growing to the
height of tw enty feet, and often attaining a great age.
At Versailles, it is said, there are orange trees over 400
years old. It is a native of the temperate zone, and
will probably not thrive very far north, unless on


elevated country or in cold aspects. The pure white,
odorous blossoms are produced in great abundance in
spring, atti-acting the bees from all directions to pre-
pare from them their choicest honey. The old trees
frequently bloom at intervals throughout the year;
and it is no uncommon thing to see ripe and green
fruit and blossoms on the same tree at one time.
The orange is used with advantage in fevers; it is
also manufactured into marmalade, and the rind, when
prepared, is known as candied peel. The Seville orange
is esteemed as preferable for medicinal purposes; and
it is from the highly odoriferous flowers of this kind
that the orange flower water is distilled. The outer
part of the rind is a grateful, warm, aromatic bitter,
often used as a stomachic and corroborant. Seville
oranges also produce the best marmalade and the
richest wine, and, preserved whole, are a fine sweet-
meat, and are justly admired.
It is to be regretted that so little success hqs hitherto
attended the cultivation of this valuable fruit in Queens-
land, possessing as it does a climate at least as favorable
for its growth as New South Wales. The inducements
to renewed efforts are very great, as—in addition to the
large home consumption, which at present necessitates
its-importation to the extent of several thousand pounds
sterling per annum—it is a fruit capable of being ex-
ported, and there is likely to be a good market in the
northern ports for many years.
In the majority of instances this want of success
appears attributable to the nature of the plant not
being understood, and thus it has been put in places
where it could not possibly thrive.
To insure the profitable cultivation of the orange,
two facts must be kept prominently in view : first—
that a small quantity of water in the soil will rot the
bark off its roots, and cause the tree to sicken and die
back ; and second—that the most important of the
roots are “ surface roots.” The extreme tenderness of


the bark of the root indicates that no soil is fit for its
growth which will retain water, but should be free and
open at all seasons, allowing the rain to percolate
freely through and away from the roots almost as fast
as it falls.
In the year 1868, Mr. C. Moore, the curator of the
Botanic Gardens in Sydney, was sent by the Govern-
ment of New South Wales to visit the orange countries
in the old world, to inspect and report upon orange culti-
vation generally, but with special regard to the diseases
of the tree and their cure. Much valuable information
was collected at that time, and we will endeavor to
summarise from that and other trustworthy sources, a
few hints as to the nature and requirements of the tree,
which the orange-grower will do well to note.
In the Azores, some of the best trees are produced
from seed selected from trees which are robust and
prolific, and bear fruit of choice quality; but they are
longer coming into bearing than grafted trees. The
trees worked upon citrons and lemons were the first to
be attacked with a destructive disease called “tears,”
or the exuding of Sap near the bottom of the stem.
The seedlings also suffered; but those worked upon
Seville orange stocks were least affected. The cure was
to strip and expose the surface roots for a short time,
to cut out the bark, wood, and roots effected, and to
drain the land. The sooty fungus was cured by wash-
ing with lime water.
The soil in the Azores is of volcanic origin, being
a good, friable loam, plentifully intermixed with stones
and rocks. The most favorable position for an orangery
is the side of a hill, and the aspect facing the rising
sun.
Analysis of the ash of the orange tree and fruit
gives a very large proportion of potash and phosphate
of lime. Fresh wood ashes, especially of mangroves
and other trees known to yield much potash, should,
therefore, be mixed with bone-dust and applied to them


as a special manure, carefully pricked in with a fork—
particularly for sickly trees. Other suitable manures
are sea weeds, bone manure, and animal refuse, stable
dung, and lime. Lupins are grown in the orchards,
and turned in as a green manure. The trees are pruned
annually, to thin out crowded branches. The superior
quality of the fruit arises from the age of the trees;
the fruit gradually improves with the age of the trees.
In Egypt and other countries, the mandarin oranges,
budded upon the Seville stock, form quick-growing
and fine trees ; but, when worked on the shaddock, they
bear fruit of very superior flavor.
The Bahama Islands and some districts in Jamaica are
celebrated for the delicious sweetness of the oranges
they produce. The islands and districts referred to
are formed of calcareous or limestone rocks, anti this
indicates the necessity for lime in the soil.
Many young trees, grafted from the choicest orange
trees in the countries visited by Mr. Moore, were in-
troduced by him on his return to New South Wales,
and were entrusted to Mr. Pye, of Rocky Hall, near
Parramatta, that they might have the advantage of his
skill and experience. Grafts from the most robust of
these have been distributed, and the Author secured
young trees of the six best sorts.
Varieties: The sorts which have hitherto proved
most hardy in Brisbane district are—the Emperor
Mandarin, Canton Mandarin, Sabina, Siletta, Saint
Michael’s, Parramatta, and Poor Man.
Propagation: It may be propagated from seeds,
grafts, budding, or layers. The former method is only
resorted to for the purpose of raising stocks upon
which to graft approved varieties, or to obtain new
sorts. When the latter is intended, the seeds should
be taken from fruit gathered from the topmost branches
of lofty old trees, heavy and compact, with rich, fine-
flavored juice, and thin skin.


Planting, soil, &c.: It is presupposed that the soil
is thoroughly trenched to the depth of two feet six
inches before planting, and that, if draining is requisite,
the whole space has boon drained at least six inches
deeper than it has been trenched. The trenching should
be done some months before planting time if practicable,
as the texture of the soil gets greatly improved by the
action of the atmosphere. Where the trenching has
been faithfully performed, it will be desirable, when
digging out the holes in which to plant the trees, not
to disturb the earth too deep, or else when it sinks
• down the tree will be taken too far below the surface.
The holes should be dug to suit each tree, so that it is
notsotdeeper in thesoil than it stood in the nursery; and
if the earth is rough, or for other reasons it is deemed
prudent to cover the roots with a greater depth
of earth, it should be brought round the tree in the
form of a mound, or it may be supplied as a mulching.
On planting, the roots should bo spread out parallel
with the surface, and radiating from the stem to all
points; and, if the earth is not naturally tine and of
good quality, some first-class mould should be provided
to place in immediate contact with the roots, filling
up the interstices, and covering them, gently pressing
it down. The trees may be sixteen to twenty-five feet
apart.
Digging should never be permitted nearer the trees
than the tips of the outside branches, as the roots are
on the surface, and, if injured, the branches will die
back.
Some successful growers use the knife very freely
upon young trees, at the winter pruning, with good
results. The tree, while young, appears liable to out-
grow its strength, and the long unripened shoots pro-
duced one year die back the next, leaving it in a
debilitated state, a ready prey fop disease. Observing
this tendency, it should he the object of the intelligent
cultivator to assist nature, by reducing all long, strag


gling shoots, and removing neatly all superfluous ones,
especially where there is any appearance of exhaustion.
In such cases, one-third of the previous year’s wood
may be removed. Trim all the wounds neatly, and
apply liquid manure to the roots at the same time.
The necessity for this mutilation would be obviated
by a proper attention to summer pruning, which con-
sists of nipping off the ends of all over-luxuriant
shoots, and rubbing off all those which are not required,
as soon as they appear. No wounds are left by this
treatment, and the same end is attained.
Some young plants seem pretematurally prolific, and
come out in a mass of blossoms, with scarcely any
foliage. Where this occurs, every blossom hud should
be carefully removed, and the tree well watered with
liquid manure.
The orange should not be exposed to high winds, as,
in a state of nature, it grows under the shelter of larger
trees. An abundant supply of water is also a deside-
ratum ; and so necessary is this considered in orange
growing countries, that the first step towards planting
an orange grove is to provide for an ample supply of
water for irrigation. The lower branches should be
trained so as to protect the roots from the sun without
touching the ground.
A light mulching of well-rotted cow dung, with a
little sheep or fowl dung, may be laid round the circuit
of the stem, to the extent of one foot beyond the
longest branches, about one inch thick. A lighter
dressing of the same material may be added at the
spring and fall, extending the circuit as the tree in-
creases in circumference, and never allowing this part
to he dug.
Diseases : The orange is subject to attacks from the
coccus or scale insect, the aphis, and a black blight like
smut. These scarcely ever appear on trees in mode-
rately good ground, trenched and drained, where water
la supplied in seasons of drought. The most effectual
i


application yet discovered is Gishurst Compound, which
seldom fails. It has been used with the best results
by several growers near Brisbane. Two ounces of the
Compound to one gallon of boiling water is applied
with a syringe when it is quite dissolved, and the
liquor partly cooled, so as not to injure the young
leaves. In New South Wales, some growers rub them
off with a sponge dipped in warm soap and water.
The following treatment has been very successfully
adopted in the northern districts for the cure of the scale
andotherdiseasesof orange trees:—Take one tablespoon-
ful of soft soap, thoroughly dissolve it in one gallon of
hot water ; add one tablespoonful of flowers of sulphur,
and boil ten minutes; then add one tablespoonful of
chloride of lime, and mix thoroughly. Add one gallon
of water to each gallon of the liquid, and in the evening
syringe the affected trees over head with it while as hot
as the hand can bear. This compound is said not to
injure the foliage, to effectually destroy scale and fungus,
and to impart increased health and vigor to the tree.
The removal of dead wood, and a liberal dressing of
manure forked in at the roots at the same time, would
tend still more to secure a satisfactory result.
PAPAW APPLE—(Carica Papaya).
The papaw tree is highly ornamental, partaking of
the character of the palm tribe. It frequently rises
with a single stem to the height of twenty feet, carry-
ing a cluster of its handsome, deeply serrated leaves
near the top, the leaf stalks being about three feet in
length. The effect is very striking, and is sure to
arrest the attention of those to whom the wonders of
tropical vegetation are new. The blossom of the female
fruit-bearing tree is abundant, and beautiful; in color
it is a greenish white, and the odor is delightful. The


fruit is about the size of a rock melon, which it re-
sembles somewhat in appearance and flavor. As they
are mostly raised from seed, the quality of the fruit
varies considerably; but the choice sorts rank high,
and are eaten raw and boiled, pickled and preserved.
If any part of the leaf, stem, or green fruit be punc-
tured with a needle, the white milky sap flows out
freely; and if a couple of drops be put into a cup of
milk, it will very shortly be transformed into curds,
and whey. It is also stated that a few drops of the
sap, or part of a leaf, put into the pot with an old
fowl, it will boil quite tender, or that the same effect
may be produced by hanging tough meat of any kind
for a few hours among its leaves. Care must, however,
be taken not to use too much sap, or allow the meat
to hang too long, or decomposition will set in. The
sap is also said to be a cure for ringworm. Some
growers convert the fruit into jam, adding one-third
the quantity of citron.
THE PASSION FRUIT—(Passiflora Edulis).
The passion fruit is so well known that it needs no
description. It is hardy, prolific, of agreeable flavor,
and wholesome, and should have a few yards of espalier
devoted to it in all gardens.
For cultivation, &c., see “ Granadilla,” to which it is
allied.
THE PEACH—(Amygdalus Persica).
The peach is a native of the temperate zone, now in
course of acclimatization in the latitude of Brisbane.
Many valuable sorts have been raised or introduced to


public notice by the Author, during the last twenty-
seven years ; some of them equal to the wall-grown
peaches of England. Such results should induce ex-
tended experiments, and the issue would, doubtless, be
the acclimatisation of this and other fruits through the
medium of seed, giving life to new sorts—natives of
the climate—which, while possessing most of the good
qualities of the parent, would prove hardy and pro-
ductive in a clime in which the parent was unfruitful.
The same course was adopted in America, by which
some of the most valuable apples now in cultivation
were originated. In growing seedlings, however, one
point should be kept steadfastly in view, namely: on
the tree fruiting, if it does not prove superior in some
particular to what was possessed before, cut it down—
do not be satisfied unless some advance has been gained,
or else the ground will be filled with worthless varieties.
A hundred trees may stand for fruit, and not one prove
worth saving as a new variety.
The peach is grown extensively in America for dry-
ing, for making brandy, and for feeding pigs. The
wood of the tree produces the color called rose pink;
and the leaves boiled in milk will, it is said, destroy
worms in young children. The drying is performed
thus: a small room, in which an oven is provided, is
fitted up with drawers round the sides, lathed at the
bottom ; each tier of drawers has an interval between.
The peaches (which should be ripe) are cut in two and
laid in single layers on the laths, with the skins down-
wards, to save the juice. They are soon dried by the
air of the stove. See also “ Drying Fruits.”
Varieties: The following are a few of the choicest
English, French, and New South Wales peaches,
suitable for cultivation in New England, N.S.W., Darling
Downs, and other parts of Queensland of a similar
temperature:— Noblesse, Royal Georye, Mignonne, Ro-
man, Royal Kensington, Camden Excellent, Camden
Large Red, Bell’s Freestone, and numerous others. In


sheltered situations, in the same localities, we would
recommend the following to be tried on account of
their early ripening :— Flat China, Common China, and
Double Blossom China.
For the neighborhood of Brisbane, Ipswich, Mary-
borough, and the nothern districts, the Flat China is
the peach most especially adapted, as it is a slipstone
peach of good flavor, and ripens so early as generally
to escape the worm, which sometimes destroys the late
sorts. The following successional varieties should be
found in every collection; their merits in this climate
can scarcely be over-estimated ;
Dockings’ Swentoa : Size, medium ; flavor, good ;
freestone; flesh, white, pink next the stone, juicy, and
rich; very prolific ; ripens at Christmas. This peach
is a decided advance upon those previously possessed,
as it has the agreeable flavor of the Persian peach, and
is free from the peculiar acidity and bitterness which
characterise the common round China peaches. It is
an acquisition, and marks an era in the acclimatization
of the peach. (New.)
Hookings’ Remlet; Size, medium ; flavor, excellent;
clingstone; flesh, white, tender, melting, juicy, and
rich ; color, deep red where exposed to the sun ; form,
good; very prolific; ripens first week in January.
This handsome and delicious peach is also of the Per-
sian strain, and, when ripe, it is as tender in texture
as a freestone peach. (New.)
Hackings’ Klumper: Size, medium; flavor, good;
freestone; flesh, yellow at the stone ; prolific bearer;
ripens at Christmas to middle of January.
Hackings’ Shointon : Size medium ; flavor, delicious,
juicy; color, good; downy; freestone; flesh, red at
the stone; prolific; ripens throughout January and
part of February.
Hookings’ Metuah : Size, very large; luscious apricot
flavor ; color, fine; flesh, rich yellow ; freestone ; fruit
often ten inches round; ripens latter part of January.


Hackings’ Drallah; Size, very large; flavor, rich,
sugary, and juicy; freestone; flesh, white and tender;
fruit often ten inches round; ripens first week in
February.
Hackings’ liheny: Size, large; juicy, fine flavor;
color, good and handsomely mottled; skin, downy;
clingstone; ripens second week in February.
In addition to the foregoing peaches, which ripen in
succession in the Brisbane district in the order in
which they stand, and provide an uninterrupted supply
of this luscious and useful fruit, from the end of the
crop of flat China peaches at Christmas, until the end
of February, there are many other useful sorts well
worthy of cultivation, which will be found in the
writer’s catalogue. They embrace slipstones and cling-
stones, early and very late (two good sorts ripening in
April), white and yellow flesh, of greatly improved
flavor, some of them approaching the exquisite quality
of the best English wall-grown fruit.
Propagation ; The peach is propagated by budding
and grafting, to continue or extend improved sorts.
Planting : The trees may be planted from sixteen to
twenty feet apart. Sixteen feet will be sufficient if
the pruning is regularly attended to. From April to
August is the season for removal, and early planting is
recommended where the plants have not far to go from
the nursery. On planting the trees, only take out
sufficient earth to allow depth for their roots, and be
careful that they are not put any deeper than they had
previously stood in the nursery. Let the roots be
spread out as fiat as possible, radiating from the stem
in all directions; fill in between the roots with some
of the finest and best mould procurable, pushing it
into the interstices of the roots with a stick; cover
the roots with a thin layer of the same mould; fill in
a little of the surrounding soil, tread it down gently
but firmly, and draw the remainder around the stem
in the form of a mound, with a flat top. Give a little


water if requisite, and protect the trees from the sun
and wind until they begin to grow.
Soils : The peach should have a rich, open soil, on a
dry, stony, or gravelly subsoil. It should, under any
circumstances, be deep and well drained ; and if it is
not rich, the surface should be kept in good heart by'
a dressing of cow dung every spring and autumn, with
the addition of bone dust, wood ashes, lime, and a
little salt. Lime is an important constituent in the
soil for peaches.
Pruning , &c. : The peach should have all its leading
shoots stopped two or three times during the summer,
and the centre of the tree be kept open by rubbing off
the shoots as they appear. In the winter remove
sickly or cross branches, and shorten back all the strong
shoots about half their length, and the weak ones two-
thirds. Keep the centre of the tree open.
Peach trees in pots or tubs.
Quite a new feature has been introduced into fruit
culture in England during the last few years, in con-
sequence of the extraordinary success attending some
experiments made with fruit trees in pots protected in
a green-house. The great points appear to be, an
abundant supply of manure, sufficient water, and form-
ing the tree into a very compact growth. Great vigor
is thus induced, which, not being allowed to expend
itself in wood shoots, and the buds being fully developed
and well ripened, fruit is formed in abundance and perfec-
tion. The object of introducing the subject here is
that by this means persons who can afford the luxury
may be enabled to produce the flat China peach on the
Downs, where the blossoms are now generally destroyed
by frost, and the delicious late peaches in tropical
Queensland’ where they are now frequently destroyed
by the worm.
Air. Thomas Rivers, the enthusiastic advocate of
orchard houses, in the course of his directions for the


management of fruit trees in pots, says:—“ I now
propose a mode of culture for orchard houses by
forming peach and nectarine trees into close, compact
pyramids, like an upright cypress. For this purpose,
maiden trees with straight stems, and well furnished
with lateral shoots, should be selected and planted in
eleven-inch pots. They should not be more than from
four to five feet high ; if more, their tops may be cut
off to that height. Each lateral shoot should be cut
into two buds; these and the buds on the stem will in
spring give numerous shoots. As soon as they have
made four or five leaves, pinch off the fourth leaf with
the end of the shoot, leaving three, not reckoning one
or two small leaves generally found at the base of each
shoot, which are without buds in their axils, and will not
put forth a shoot. These pinched shoots will soon put
forth a fresh crop; every shoot of this second crop should
le suffered to grow till it has made four or five leaves,
and then he pinched to two leaves ; and all succeeding
crops of shoots must he pinched off to one leaf as soon as
four or five leaves are formed, unless larger and more
spreading pyramids are desired. In such cases three or
even five leaves may he pinched down to with advantage."
It may be remarked that, if from any temporary
neglect of pinching, the shoots are allowed to grow
long, they should be cut back to within three or four
leaves of the main stem, and afterwards subjected to
the treatment previously described.
It is probable that larger pots would be necessary
in this climate, and experiments are now being made
with those measuring sixteen inches.
Mr. Rivers states that peach and other trees may be
grown in pots, and preserved in perfect health and
fruitfulness for twenty years without re-potting, by the
liberal use of liquid manure, and an annual
of rich compost. He recommends one pound of guano
to twelve gallons of water, and that the trees have a
good soaking of this once a week, pure water being


used on all other occasions. For the compost, see
“ Compost for top-dressing,” which follows.
Compost foe fruit trees in fots.
Pare off three inches from a pasture with a tena-
cious, loamy soil, chop it up into pieces about the size
of a walnut, and expose it to the air for two or three
months in the summer, and it is fit for use. Two-thirds
of this loam, with one-third of rotten manure, should
be well mixed, but not sifted or broken fine ; leave it
in lumps. After the tree is planted, ram the earth
down firmly ; many trees fail through inattention to
tins.
Compost for top-dressing.
Horse and cattle droppings, equal portions, tho-
roughly mixed, thrown into a ridge and saturated with
strong liquid manure. Spread a thin layer of finely
powdered charcoal over the whole, and in two days
thoroughly mix and use. There is no surface-dressing
equal to this ; the effect is almost magical. In early
spring every year the surface earth should be removed
from the pot and replaced with this compost, filling the
pot to the rim, and pressing it down.
THE PEAR—(Pyrus Communis).
The pear is preferred to the apple by many persons,
and, in point of merit, may fairly be classed next to
that fruit. It is more hardy and durable than the
apple, taking longer to arrive at maturity, but existing
for centuries in health, vigor, and productiveness. In
France and other continental countries, the pear is cut
into slices and dried over an oven, and, when weil pre-
pared, will keep in good order and preserve its flavor
for several years ; and the sorts best adapted for this


purpose are such as are the least valuable for dessert.
Perry is also made from the juice, and the best sorts are
said to be little inferior to wine.
The instructions for propagation,, planting, soil, (fee.,
and the first formation of the head of the tree, are
similar to those given for the apple (which see). The
subsoil must be dry or well drained.
Seedlings : In raising pears from seed, the proportion
of good sorts out of a given number is very small, and
many will be utterly worthless. They take from eight
to sixteen years to produce fruit, unless grafts are put
upon old established trees. Dr. Van' Mons, of
Brussels, recommends that trees be raised from the fruit
of seedlings, as the second generation of seedlings, if
subjected to high cultivation, is likely to produce an
improved variety.
Mr. Rivers, of Sawbridgeworth, has introduced a
mode of pruning and cultivating fruit-trees, which, if
generally adopted, will cause a revolution in the ma-
nagement of orchards. He recommend that the trees
be worked (grafted) on dwarfing stocks—the apple on
the paradise stock, the pear on the quince, &c. ; that
the trees be kept small by continually nipping off the
ends of the young shoots, by which they are never
allowed to exceed the size of small bushes; and that
they be planted closer together. Eight feet is the dis-
tance for trees thus pruned, and twenty feet for stand-
ards. The mode of pruning he recommends is the same
as he directs for trees in pots, which will be found in
the article on the peach (which see).
Pruning : The pear requires but little pruning. The
head may be formed as recommended for the apple,
and then it will only be necessary to shorten the long
shoots half or two-thirds, and to keep the head open
at the winter pruning. As the fruit is produced on
short, thick branches or knobs (called spurs), clustered
in bunches about the two-year-old wood, they should
be encouraged, at proper intervals, all over the tree.


Manure: The pear requires manure rich in potash
and phosphates ; these can best be suppled in bone dust
and wood ashes. Sulphate of iron is also said to be a
valuable special manure.
THE PINE-APPLE—(Ananassa).
The pine-apple is said by some of its admirers to
combine the flavors of several of the choicest European
fruits. When grown to perfection, and eaten fresh
from the garden, it is one of the most delicious of
fruits.
There are numerous varieties of the pine-apple, each
possessing some marked distinction : many of them
valuable either for size, beauty of form, or season of
ripening. Among these may be enumerated the Black
Jamaica , the Green Providence , the Brown Sugarloaf,
tlie Enville, the Black Antigua, the Ripley, and the
Smooth-leaved Cayenne; but for general cultivation
none of these are equal to the old Queen (which is
commonly planted about Brisbane) for productiveness,
hardiness, or flavor.
The pine-apple is propagated by seeds, crowns, and
suckers. The seeds are sometimes found in the pips,
and may be sown to raise new varieties. This is
seldom attempted ; but as some of the very best sorts
have been obtained from seed, there is every encourage-
ment for those who have the time and opportunity to
try further experiments. With regard to crowns, some
gardeners assert that plants so propagated produce
large, handsome fruit, with broader and flatter pips ;
but that they take one season longer to come into bearing
in open field culture than when grown from suckers,
which is the almost universal practice.
Soil: Any soil will suit the pineapple which is
warm, rich, deep, and well drained. A rich, sandy
loam, a gravelly or schistose ridge, would each produce
the fruit in perfection if the above conditions were


complied with. The soil may be damp, but never wet;
no water should at any time stand in the soil. It should
be trenched to the depth of two feet six inches (leaving
any inferior soil at the bottom), and well manured,
unless naturally very rich. Drains should be put in
six inches deeper than it is trenched, unless the sobsoil
is so porous as to render it unnecessary, which should
be proved by the test previously given.
Planting, <hc. ; Pine suckers may be planted any
time during spring and summer, in rows six feet apart,
the plants being four feet apart in the rows. It is of
great importance that the plant receives no check to
its growth after it is once rooted. In winter, wherever
there is any risk of frost, a good handful of long grass
should be placed close into the heart of each plant,
and a little more scattered loosely over the leaves.
There should also be a provision for watering in hot,
dry weather, with liquid manure. The ground must
be kept clean, and a good annual top-dressing of manure
be given.
Gathering: This fruit should never be gathered for
exportation until the channels between the pips, for a
distance half-way up from the stem, be turned yellow,
or a yellowish green. For immediate use, let them be
taken when the whole fruit is of a pale yellow, directly
all the green has disappeared. If left longer, they
become very juicy, the liesh a dark yellow, the delicacy
of flavor is gone, and a slightly stinging or pricking
sensation may be observed in the month, which arises
from fermentation having commenced.
Pine-apple wine.
The following is stated to make a rich, strong wine,
which keeps well: —Take freshly gathered pine-apples,
which are quite ripe; press the juice from them, strain
it carefully, and mix sugar with it until it will support
an egg; boil the whole gently for fifteen minutes,


keeping it well skimmed; ferment it in an open tub for
three days, and cask it.
THE PLUM—(Prunus Domestica),
The plum has not hitherto been productive in the
Brisbane district, and there are very few instances of
seedlings being raised, as, in consequence of the im-
ported fruit being gathered before it is mature, the
seed does not grow. The first step towards obtaining
acclimatized sorts would probably be the introduction
from the south of Italy of the best varieties which
thrive there, and a few also from the Southern States
of America. The Newman and Wildgoose plums,
lately introduced from the latter country, promise to
be fruitful here.
In our local nurseries the kinds most esteemed by
English and French growers are also now to be found.
The directions given in the article on the peach will
apply to the general treatment of the plum.
The blossoms appear on small fruit spurs in most of
the varieties of the plum, and these spurs will, there-
fore, require a little care and attention. In pruning,
the straggling and over-crowded branches should be re-
moved or shortened.
If the land is poor, apply animal manures, and a
surface dressing of salt around the tree to the outside
limit of its foliage, to the extent of half a peck, is
recommended to be applied every spring. Lime is also
a good special manure.
THE POMEGRANATE—(Punica Granatum).
The pomegranate is highly esteemed in the East,
■where it attains a great age. It is an ornamental
shrub of great merit, and, on account of the beauty of
its foliage, relieved by the brilliant flowers and hand-
some fruit, deserves a place in all large gardens.


The rind of the fruit and the flowers are used medi-
cinally. The wine of the sweet pomegranate, or the
recently-expressed juice, was formerly recommended in
pulmonary complaints; the latter is also given with
great advantage in cases of fever.
Propagation: There are two sorts commonly grown
in Queensland —the double-flowering, for ornament
only; the single-flowering, for ornament and fruit.
They are both easily propagated by layers and cuttings.
Any ordinary garden soil, if well drained, will be
suitable. It is sometimes used for edging; it is rather
too robust for that purpose, but might be advanta-
geously planted for a dwarf hedge.
THE QUINCE.
The quince is not held in much esteem, but among
the ancients it was greatly valued, as much for its
medicinal properties as for its culinary uses. Philips
relates the case of a gentleman in Sussex, England,
who was completely cured of an asthmatic complaint
of long standing by the use of quince wine, which was
made in the following manner;—“ Cut large quinces in
quarters, and core them; grind them in the same man-
ner as apples for cider, and put to every gallon of
pummace a gallon of water ; let it stand a day or two,
and strain it off; to every gallon put three pounds and a
quarter of moist sugar, tun it, and stop it quite close;
the following spring rack it off, cleanse the cask of
sediment, and put it back again; and in the second
year bottle it off,”
Quince marmalade, when well made, is most excel-
lent, and so wholesome that it may be given to children
almost without limit.
Propagation: It may be propagated by seeds, layers,
cuttings, suckers, and grafting.


Soil: The best soil for the quince is a rich, damp,
peaty soil, which will not contain water. Contrary to
the generally received opinion, the quince requires
manure and cultivation. It will grow and produce
fruit without either but it will do better with them.
Large quantities of barn-yard manure should be mixed
with the soil, and abundance of salt. Liquid manure
should be given freely in dry weather. Plant the trees
ten feet apart.
Pruning : Train to a single stem for three feet ; de-
stroy all suckers, and thin out crowded branches.
THE RASPBERRY.
The raspberry is a delicious berry fruit, which is best
adapted for growing in the colder parts of Queensland.
It will, however, grow to tolerable perfection around
Brisbane with ordinary attention.
It is said to possess valuable medicinal properties,
as, like the strawberry, it does not undergo the acetous
fermentation in the stomach. It is recommended in
scorbutic cases, and in gouty and rheumatic disorders.
The wine made from it is highly spoken of, and rasp-
berry jelly is in general repute.
The raspberry is propagated by suckers planted in
autumn or spring.
Soil: A deep, rich, humid soil, slightly shaded, is the
most suitable for this fruit: damp, but no water stand-
ing in it.
Planting, due.; The suckers are planted in stools,
three or four in a stool, at six inches apart, and the
stools to be four feet apart each way.
Pruning, die.: In the winter pruning cut out the
old stems which have produced fruit; preserve three or
four of the strongest of the new shoots to each stool
to stand for fruit, cutting off about a foot of the top,


and tie them to a stake. During the summer keep the
bed clean, and destroy all superfluous suckers.
If a late crop is required, cut down the plants to
within a few inches of the ground in spring.
To improve the fruit, remove the old canes as soon
as the fruit is gathered.
When the pruning is completed, dung the bed well,
giving it a dressing of salt, and fork it in.
THE EOSE APPLE—(Jambosa Aquea).
The rose apple is a beautiful evergreen tree, which
attains the height of twenty feet. The leaves are
lanceolate, shining deep green, and the ends of the
young shoots are a bright chocolate color; the flowers
appear in clusters, are white, and rather peculiar and
attractive, from the vast number of long pendant
stamens with which they are furnished. The fruit is
of a pale yellow, of the size of a walnut, and the effect
of the whole contrast of colors, together with the
slender and graceful character of the branches, is to
form one of the most ornamental of evergreen shrubs.
The fruit is produced in abundance, and consists of a
soft shell, not very juicy, covering one or more large
seeds. It has an agreeable flavor, somewhat resembling
sweetened rose-water.
It will thrive in any good garden soil; may be propa-
gated very easily from seeds or by layers, and may be
planted after rain any time from April to August, at
sixteen feet apart. It blossoms in September.
The only pruning necessary will be to remove any
crowded or cross branches, and occasionally to shorten
long straggling shoots.
THE SHADDOCK or PUMPLENOSE.
(Citrus Decumana).
The pumplenose is a native of Java, the leaves and


fruit of which are the most handsome of the citrus
tribe. There are numerous varieties—some with white
and some with red flesh, some acid and some sweet,
and the quality so diverse that some of the best sorts
almost rival a good orange, while others are worthless.
The fruit is said to grow as large as a child’s head in
Japan, and another traveller states its weight to be
fourteen pounds, and its size two feet in circumference.
It is very valuable on sea voyages, as, from the thick-
ness of its skin, it keeps longer than the orange. The
sherbet prepared from it is a most grateful drink to the
sick.
It is easily propagated by grafting, layers, or cut-
tings, and is said to bear abundantly in India and other
places. It has been some years in the Author's garden
without bearing; but it is probably in an unfavorable
position. The original plant was received by him from
Calcutta.
Since writing the foregoing, some growers have suc-
ceeded in getting small crops of this fruit.
The cultivation, <tc., is the same as the orange
(which see).
THE STRAWBERRY.
This favorite fruit is a native of Great Britain,
northern Europe, and some parts of America; but,
although coming from a much colder climate, there
have been sufficient instances of success attending its
cultivation in the neighborhood of Brisbane to warrant
the assertion that this delicious and wholesome fruit
may be produced in perfection in this climate, if the
same amount of care is bestowed upon its culture which
the successful growers in.England and America consider
necessary.
Propagation: This is generally effected by suckers
or runners. In selecting suckers for this purpose, some
K


judgment should be used, for, among the cultivated
varieties, numerous plants will be found by the
observant grower which produce a profusion of
but little fruit. There are, in fact, three
sorts of blossoms produced by strawberry plants—one,
in which the stamens and pistils are properly formed,
which are, consequently, the most certain croppers ;
the second, in which the stamens or male organs are
excessively developed, and which are often unfruitful;
and third, those in which the pistil is well formed,
but the stamens or fertilizing parts being deficient,
they do not prove fruitful unless the wind or insects
carry the pollen from some staminate blossoms near
them.
It is not proposed that amateur gardeners shall be
troubled to reduce these scientific details to practice,
except in the most simple and easy manner. The
most ordinary observer can see that certain plants in
a bed produce more fruit, and perhaps larger and
better flavored, than others. We would recommend
that little sticks be firmly placed to all such, and suckers
preserved from them only for making the new bed.
Any plants which are found to be unfruitful should be
dug out.
Some of the best of our cultivated varieties have
been raised from seed, and it would be a worthy un-
dertaking for any enthusiastic amateur to endeavor to
obtain a few sorts by this means, suitable to the climate
of Queensland.
Planting: From April to August, if the soil is
damp, plant the strawberries eighteen inches apart, in
rows distant two feet to two feet six inches. They
should be planted with all their roots extending
laterally, and pressed firmly down, but not crammed
together, into a little hole. The beds should not con-
tain more than three or four rows, having an alley two
feet six inches in width at each side, to obviate the
necessity for trampling upon the bed.


Soil and Cultivation: A very deep, rich, free soil,
damp, but well drained, in an open situation, is that
best suited for the strawberry. It should be trenched
two feet six inches deep, leaving the bottom spit where
it was, after being well broken, as previously directed.
The top spit should be well manured with vegetable
manure and ashes. The whole of the soil should be
lightly strewed with hay, straw, dry leaves, or cut grass,
when the plants begin to fruit—partly to protect the
roots from the heat of the sun, and partly to prevent
the rain beating the soil on to the fruit; the supply
should be sufficient therefore to effect both purposes.
Irrigation is absolutely necessary for the strawberry—
water, water, water; but it must not be stagnant.
The runners should be removed as they appear, unless
required for the formation of a new bed. After the
fruit is all gathered, give the surface of the bed a good
dressing of vegetable manure, forking it in lightly be-
tween the rows.
THE TAMARIND—(Tamarindus Indica).
A beautiful spreading deciduous tree, well suited
to the climate. It has long been an inhabitant of our
gardens, and has borne fruit in Brisbane and Glad-
stone. The fruit consists of the dark pulpy matter in
which the seeds are embedded in the pod. It is
separated from the shell, is placed in layers in casks,
and boiling syrup poured over it. The flavor is an
agreeable sweetish acid, and the infusion of the pulp
forms a grateful refrigerent beverage, valuable in febrile
diseases. The tree thrives in a loamy peat, and is
highly ornamental. Distance, twenty feet.
THE WALNUT—(Juglans Regia).
The fruit of the walnut, when ripe, is in esteem for
the dessert, and in its green state is used for pickling.


The wood is valuable for gun-stocks and other similar
purposes, being lighter in proportion to its strength
than most other woods. The tree grows to the height
of fifty feet, and may be planted at intervals of thirty
feet. It is easily propagated from fresh seeds and
layers, and comes into bearing in six or eight years.
It requires a deep soil of fair quality, resting upon a
dry subsoil; and the only pruning necessary is the
removal of crowded or cross branches. The fruit is
produced on the extremities of the previous year’s
shoots.
THL' WAMPEE—(Cookia Punctata).
This esteemed Chinese fruit is the produce of a small
evergreen tree, having compound leaves, which is a
native of China and the Indian Archipelago. It grows
to the height of fifteen feet, and bears fruit in China
at three years, from the seed. The approved sorts are
propagated by layers, but may also be increased by
cuttings of ripe shoots in heat, under a bell-glass. For
the purpose of raising new varieties, recourse must be
had to the seed ; and it is to this means of propagation,
the only true method of “ acclimatising,” that we must
look for its ultimate naturalisation to the soil of
Queensland. It has not yet borne fruit here ; but, as
the Chinese speak of it as superior to the litchi, which
is a universal favorite with them, it is likely to prove
a valuable addition to our fruits. The tree is allied to
Murraya. The soil most suitable for its cultivation is
peat and loam. There are two or three distinct sorts
grown in China.
New Chinese fruits.
The productive character of all the Chinese fruits
hitherto introduced into Queensland should encourage


further efforts to extend the list, so as to embrace all
that would prove of value. Travellers mention apri-
cots as being indigenous, and the Chinese speak of a
kind of plum, of which they have several kinds, as
being hardy, prolific, and roost delicious. These, the
mangosteens, and several others, would prove of value,
and every effort should be used to secure them, now
such facilities exist, by means of the junction of the
Torres Straits and China mail services.
WINE PALM—(Elais Melanococca).
From Elaia, the olive. The natives of Guinea express
an oil from the fruit, in the same manner as the Con-
tinental nations do from the olive. It is used in
Europe in enormous quantities in the manufacture of
soap and candles, and for other purposes, under the
name of palm oil. The leaves are made into mats, <fec.,
and from the sap of the tree an agreeable intoxicating
liquor is made, called palm wine.
This valuable palm, which is a native of New
Grenada, grows to perfection in the Brisbane Botanic
Garden, where it produces its large bunches of delicious
fruit in great profusion. It comes into bearing at
about seven years, from the seed. The bunches of
fruit are rather lax, and are frequently about four feet
in length by eighteen inches in diameter; the fruit,
which is about the size of a plum, hanging pendant from
the flexible foot stalks. The fruit is juicy, and has a
most agreeable aromatic and spiritous fruity flavor.
The tree thrives in a rich sandy loam, and may be
increased by suckers and by seed. Being a native of
the tropics, it will probably grow to even greater per-
fection in all the northern coast districts than it does
in Brisbane.




THE FARM.


THE FARM.
MAIZE or INDIAN CORN.
GOOD rich loam is suitable for this crop. Let
the ground be well ploughed, and both sur-
face and underground drainage provided for.
It is generally sown in rows four feet apart, the
hills being three feet apart in the rows, into which
five or six seeds are placed at a depth of one and a-half
or two inches. The plants are ultimately thinned out
to three in a cluster. Let the weeds be kept down,
lest they smother the young plants, drawing them
towards the corn hills, but not too close until the
second cleaning, when the corn is “hilled up.” The
crop is much improved by two or three ploughings
between the rows during its growth, even so near as to
tear out part of the roots. It should always be cleaned
and earthed up by the light one-horse plough, and, if
the rows are up and down hill or a sideling fall, the
furrows will answer for surface drains in case of long-
continued rains.
Another method is to grow it in rows four feet apart,
dropping the seed into drills two inches deep, at dis-
tances of eight inches apart. This practice has only
been tried by a few cultivators, but the result is stated
to be satisfactory.
A full crop is from fifty to eighty bushels; an average
crop not more than forty bushels ; and it takes about
four months to mature.


Some growers cut the tops off- the corn when dead,
and use them for fodder for their cattle. The inside
husks make good stuffing for mattresses. The stalks
are best burned on the field in heaps, with as much
earth gathered round as the fire will be able to char.
Ashes are valuable as manure for all farm crops.
Seed and time oj sowing : Too much care cannot be
bestowed on the selection of seed. Select the largest
and best cobs, and only sow the seeds from the centre.
Endeavor to procure the longest grain, as the yield
will be greater, the number and width of the grains
being the same. One-tenth greater length in the grain
will give you one-tenth more crop, or fifty bushels more
in five hundred. Sow the common maize in July and
August for summer crop, and in January for winter
crop. The ninety-day maize may be sown in February.
Sir William Macarthur, Camden Park, N.S.W., grows
excellent varieties of early and late maize, which he is
careful to preserve pure.
EARLY WHITE TUSCARORA CORN, &c.
This fine flour corn was introduced here several
years since, and is still cultivated to a small extent.
The pure white flour from this corn, boiled in milk,
would make a most agreeable and heartening breakfast
for the family of the agriculturist, and it is to be re-
gretted that an unreasoning prejudice should interfere
with the extended use of this wholesome grain, in its
various forms as an article of diet. It is of dwarf
habit, ripens in ninety days from the day of sowing,
and may be sown as late as March. An experiment
was made in the season of 1864 by the Author, as
follows:—On August 26th some seed of this corn was
sown ; the season was backward and nights very cold,
and the corn was consequently much retarded. On
November 24th the crop was gathered ripe and dry, and
a row of selected seed was sown. On February 24th


the crop from this was gathered ripe, and a row of
selected seed again sown, the crop from which, much
retarded by heavy rain and floods, ripened and was
gathered on the 31st May. Three crops in succession
in 278 days.
The American pop corn, Darling’s early sugar corn,
and Burr’s large sugar corn—all much used in America
for culinary purposes—ripen here in ninety days.
WHEAT.
Advantages of selecting seed.
The very satisfactory results which have always fol-
lowed the judicious selection of both seeds and animals
for the purpose of propagation, when improvement of
the original stock was desired, have left the ques-
tion beyond dispute; but few persons attempt to
reduce it to practice on their own farms, and those who
do seldom publish the particulars of their success.
The experiments of Mr. Hallett, of Essex, England,
are probably as interesting and instructive as could be
desired for an illustration.
Space will not allow a detailed statement of his mode
of cultivation, but the result has been very striking:
he now has wheat which produces ears eight and a-half
inches long, and having up one side eighteen ranks of
spikelets of grains. The seed is recommended to be
drilled in at the rate of only four bushels to ten acres.
The following extract will explain the mode of selec-
tion adopted for “ Hallett’s Pedigree Nursery Wheat
“ In every plant of wheat, barley, or oats there is
always one best ear, and in every ear there is always
one best grain, which is that one found at the following
harvest to produce the best plant, all the grains having
been planted in competition with each other. The
best of all the competing plants of any ‘ family’ of a
cereal is ascertained by the most studious comparison


of the good qualities they visibly present, and of the
notes of the peculiarities exhibited by each during the
whole course of its growth, such as—the rapidity with
which the parent seed germinates ; the manner, time,
and extent of the ‘tillering’ of the plant; the periods
of its earing, blooming, and ripening ; its powers of
withstanding disease, frost, wet, Ac. ; the toughness of
its straw, and any other characteristics which are
essential to forming a correct decision, and which cannot
be determined by even the most careful inspection of
the perfect plant. This best plant is called ‘ the selec-
tion’ of the year (say 1861) in which it is thus obtained,
and consists of numerous ears, containing many hun-
dreds, and even thousands of grains, which are planted
separately, those of each ear being kept quite distinct,
as, although the best grain of any plant is nearly
always found to lie in the best ear, it may be other-
wise, and the successive parent ears must be preserved.
At the following harvest (1862), the best plant forms
‘ the selection of 1862,’ and its produce is continued on
the experimental ground, while that of the remaining
plants furnishes the annual seed for the farm in the
autumn of 1862, and the crops are in 1863 offered to
the public. Thus, the selection sold is that of 1861,
or in any year that of two years before ; the latest
selection, that of the year immediately preceding, is not
sold, being solely employed, as the home seed, , The sepa-
rate ears of a plant are designated by different letters,
numbers, or names, as A, Z, Ac. ; and each, with its
descendants, form a ‘ family’ which may develop some
valuable peculiarity. Thus, all the ‘ Pedigree Nursery
Wheat’ hitherto sold has been of a family called ‘ A,’
while another family of the same wheat known as ‘ Z,’
having been observed to exhibit marked superiority,
has been continued separately, and has given a greater
progress during 1862 than has been before obtained in
any single year. The original ear (‘A’) contained up
one of its sides 16 ‘ ranks’ (spikelets) of grains, while the


‘Z family’ has produced ears of 18 ‘ranks,’ and this
without any increase in the length of the ear, the
‘ notches ’ of the axis on which the spikelets grow being
placed more closely together. In a small field of this
‘Z’ family, ears with 17 ‘ranks’ were quite common,
while in other fields of the family ‘A,’ not one such
ear could be found.”
Cultivation op wheat.
The land most suitable for the cultivation of wheat
is a moderately rich loam, which should be free of
weeds, in good tilth, and subjected to a proper rotation
of crops. On some soils wheat may be grown alter-.
nately with a green crop, where manure is abundant.
Wheat is exhausting to the soil, and therefore requires
manure; too large a dose, however, will sometimes
cause the crop to lodge, and in some instances the
presence of rust has been attributed to over-manuring
of that crop, and the manure is consequently more
generally applied to one of the other crops in the rota-
tion. The manures most suitable for wheat are animal
matters and lime. Thorough draining is of the utmost
importance.
The land being prepared by a fallow and several
ploughings, the seed should be pickled as follows :
Dissolve the salt in a very small quantity of water;
some lime is slacked with this brine, and the wheat
candied with it, having been previously moistened with
pure water. Wheat prepared in this way is found by
experience to be more free from smut than when any
other preparation is employed.— Young. Stale urine
is preferred by some growers.
Method of setting wheat: “ The lands on which it
succeeds best (Norfolk, England) are either after a
clover stubble or those on which trefoil or grass seeds
were sown in the spring before the last. The grounds,
after the usual manuring, are once turned over by the
plough in a long extended flag or turf, at ten inches


wide, along which a man called a dibbler, with two
setting irons, somewhat bigger than ramrods, but con-
siderably thicker at the lower end, and pointed at the
extremity, steps backwards along the turf, making
holes about four inches asunder every way, an inch
deep ; into these holes the droppers (generally boys)
drop two grains of wheat, which are quite sufficient.
After this, a gate, bushed with thorns, is drawn by one
horse over the land to close up the holes. Seed —three
pecks per acre.”— Young.
Weeding should be attended to, so that the young
plants be not choked.
If the land is sown broadcast, from one to two
bushels of seed will be required, according to the soil.
Sowings maybe made during March, April, and May.
The crop should be cut when thoroughly mature, but
before it is quite ripe, as the grain is a better color, and
it saves waste by scattering.
Salt is a good special manure for wheat, and is a
preventative of rust.
THE POTATO.
The potato is propagated by the tuber, either whole
or cut into “ sets” with an eye to each; since the great
failure, however, many intelligent growers have devoted
attention to raising new varieties from seed contained
in the berry or potato apple, and valuable results have
followed their efforts in the introduction of some new
sorts, said to be free from the disease, hardy, early,
floury, and productive. This is an object well worth
the attention of Queensland farmers, as we are not yet
possessed of an acclimatised variety of this valuable
root. The apples are produced more abundantly in the
spring than in the late crops; they should only be
saved from potatoes of the best quality, and as they
sport into innumerable varieties, each root should be


numbered and kept separate. The seed may be sown
in shallow drills in February, and when about three
inches high thin them out to about eight inches or a
foot apart. The tubers from the seedling plants will
be very small. On digging them up, select the best
roots to experiment with, keeping each cluster separate
and numbered, or otherwise distinguished. On
planting them in the following spring, select an equal
quantity of the best formed tubers of each root, giving
them equal space and attention. When the crop is
ripe, the tubers will be of a sufficient size to determine
their properties.
Having considered not merely the flavor of each
new variety, but the size, shape, and color, the com-
parative fertility and healthiness, earliness or lateness,
reject or retain it for permanent culture accordingly.
Propagation hy tubers: When tubers are intended
to be cut, this operation should be performed several
days before planting, and the sets spread out in a shed
to dry. The cutting should be from end to end, and
not across the potato, as the root end is said to be a
fortnight later than the others, and this would cause
the crop to ripen unevenly.
Time of planting , die. ; The land being well drained
and properly prepared, potatoes may be planted in
March and August, in drills two feet six inches apart,
and the sets twelve inches apart in the rows. The
drills should be four inches deep, and the sets carefully
covered. Medium sized whole potatoes are generally
preferable to cut potatoes, especially for the August
sowing. The season for sowing necessarily varies, not
only with the district, but with the aspect.
The crop should be kept free of weeds, and for this
purpose the scarifier would be found useful. The
potatoes should be earthed up with a light one-horse
plough as they advance; and if at the second earthing
up, the furrows are left pretty deep, they will be valu-
able as surface drains in case of heavy rains.


Shirley Hibbard, a successful grower, who gets nine-
teen tons to the acre, free from disease, gives many
valuable directions for the cultivation of the potato,
which might, with advantage, be tried here in gardens.
He recommends a fresh, crumbly loam, so situated as
not to suffer from heavy rains, which had been manured
heavily for cabbage the previous season, so as to be very
rich and light. It is dug a full spade deep, and the
whole potatoes, about two or three ounces each, are
lightly trenched in—that is, laid along in drills, opened
by the spade at proper distances, and covered by the
spade in making the next trench. The soil above,
around, and under them cannot be too loose and fri-
able, and from the moment the sets are in, not a foot
should be set on it, until the time comes for hoeing
them over. At the time of planting, the sets should
be firm, slightly sprouted; the sprouts close, very stiff,
and strong,and dark green or purple. Charred rubbish,
to the depth of two or three inches, is scattered over
the whole bed after the first hoeing, and the crop is
not earthed up. The potatoes are dug before the haulm
is quite dead.
A large number of new sorts have been imported,
but have not yet been grown to any considerable ex-
tent. A round, white variety, received some years ago,
known as Webster’s Best, has earned for itself a good
reputation for flavor, earliness, and productiveness;
and an American potato, called the Early Rose, which
caused quite a furore there when it was first made
known, has been introduced here by Mr. Cribb, and
has produced very satisfactory crops.
THE SWEET POTATO.
This valuable esculent requires a rich, dry, loamy
soil, inclined to sand. The land should be ploughed
deep, and well manured. Potash and the phosphates


are the special manures indicated by analysis as parti-
cularly required.
It is propagated during September and October, by
suckers or runners, which are planted three feet apart,
and the sets eighteen inches distant in the rows. Some
growers throw the land up into flat ridges, and plant
on the top.
In the interior, or in districts where a supply of
runners or vines are not obtainable, some small roots
should be procured, and planted in a well-prepared bed
in May, and they will throw up an abundant supply of
shoots for transplanting early in spring. If frost is
expected, the bed should be strewn with litter during
winter. Care should be taken to secure the best
quality, as they deteriorate from bad culture. New
varieties may be raised from seed.
THE YAM.
The yam requires a very deep, rich, sandy soil,
which should be dug at least three feet deep, and well
manured if not sufficiently rich. It is propagated by
seed or by the crowns of the old roots. They may be
planted in September and October, five or six inches
deep, and three feet apart each way, placing a stick
firmly in the ground by each plant for the young
shoots to climb up. When the tops die down the
crop is fit to dig, which operation may be performed
by opening a trench at one side of the bed, about two
feet six inches deep, the whole length of the row, and
trenching the bed. By this method the roots may be
got out without breaking; and, if a good dressing of
manure is first put on the surface of the bed, this
trenching will be a good preparation for the next crop,
nothing further being necessary at the planting season
than a good surface digging, and setting the seed or
crowns as first directed. Some growers recommend


the beds to be thrown up in ridges, and the sets
planted along the top, to save the trouble of such deep
digging; but in dry seasons this might endanger tile
crop. The whole yam is covered with eyes, and may
be cut up into “ sets,” and not the crown only, as is
generally supposed.
THE DIOSCOREA BATATES, or CHINESE YAM.
The botanic name is here made most prominent, as
it is by that this useful tuber is most generally known.
This plant is a native of Japan and China, producing
long slender tubers about two feet long, which are
esteemed by many persons as superior to the common
yam. The tuber may be cut up into small pieces for
planting, as the exterior is set all over with eyes or
buds. The sets should be laid by in a warm place to
start the buds, and while they are progressing the
ground should be prepared for their reception. The
soil should be very rich or highly-manured sandy or
fibry loam, and is recommended to be thrown up in
ridges eighteen inches apart, along the top of each of
which the sets are planted six inches apart and four
inches deep. The tops soon cover the soil and smother
the weeds, and, being planted upon ridges, will be found
to greatly facilitate the digging.
THE 0 ASSAY A—(J atropha Manihot).
An evergreen shrub from South America, growing
to the height of three to five feet; tubers somewhat re-
sembling parsnips in size and shape are produced at
the root in great abundance, from which the cassava
flour is manufactured in the most primitive manner.
The cassava is also made from other varieties of the
jatropha, but the Jatropha Manihot is more generally-
cultivated for that purpose in consequence of the tubers
being free from a tough fibre which passes through the
L


others. The tubers, on being dug, are washed and
peeled ; they are then ground down to a pulp through
a rough grater, placed in wicker baskets, and subjected
to a heavy pressure by lever to express the juice or
sap from the mass; this is turned out on skins, ex-
posed to the sun, and, when dry, is baked over a slow
fire on earthen plates. The root in its raw state is said
to be an acrid poison, but the flour and bread prepared
from it are not only wholesome, but pleasant.
Tapioca is prepared from this root, and a flour equal
to arrowroot may also be made from it.
It is supposed that heat alone is sufficient to dispel
its poisonous quality, as the Indians merely roast the
root in the embers.
The plant requires rich, well-drained soil, and as it
is an exhausting crop, the plants should have plenty
of room, and not be put twice in the same bed. The
produce is very great, and the flour nourishing.
ARROWROOT.
Arrowroot, in Queensland, is manufactured from
two different plants; the Maranta Arundinacea or
white , and the Canna Edulis, or purple. Both kinds
yield white arrowroot, and the distinguishing color
mentioned has reference only to the skin of the root or
tuber.
A rich sandy loam is the most suitable for its cul-
tivation, and it should be prepared by deep digging or
ploughing, not less than twelve inches deep. Small
well-formed tubers should be selected and planted in
October, in rows four feet asunder, and two feet apart
in the rows. During the growing season the planta-
tions should be frequently hoed and kept perfectly clear
of weeds ; a little earth may also be drawn around the
plants. A slight frost greatly accelerates maturing of
the crop, which generally occupies the ground nine
months. When the bulbs are dug they are thoroughly


washed to remove all earthy particles, after the roots
have been rubbed off. The washing may be performed
either by hand or in a cylinder revolving in water,
according to the extent of the plantation. The bulbs
should be immediately reduced to pulp by hand or
horse-power grater, or by pounding in a large wooden
mortar. The pulp is thrown into a quantity of clear
water and thoroughly agitated, when the fibre may be
gathered and removed. After the starch has settled
the water is drawn off, more water is added, the resi-
duum is thoroughly disturbed, and the whole strained
through a sieve to remove any pieces of fibre remaining,
and it is allowed to settle as before. This operation is
again repeated if it is intended to prepare a fine article.
The arrowroot is then spread out on clean white cloths
to dry in the sun, and when quite dry is ready for
packing.
The plant is of easy cultivation, and the chief ex-
pense is incurred in the manufacture. Its profitable
production, therefore, depends upon the extent to which
machinery and horse-power may be made available to
economise manual labor; and to this point we would
particularly direct the attention of growers, as upon it
depends our ability to compete for the supply of all
the civilized world.
TOBACCO.
A light rich soil is best suited for this plant—land
which would produce potatoes and turnips in perfection.
It must be free of water, and, if not rich, it should be
well manured with thoroughly decomposed manure.
In August, having prepared a suitable bed, mix
the seed with six times the quantity of sand, scatter
it evenly over the bed, and cover it slightly with a
little sand sprinkled or sifted over it. A little pro-
tection should be given in case of late frosts. When
the plants have so far advanced as to have leaves four


inches long, they are fit to transplant, and their
longer continuance in the seed bed would be injurious.
Plant them out at three feet apart each way. Every
morning and evening they require to be looked over,
in order to destroy a worm which sometimes invades
the bud. When four or five inches high they are
moulded up. As soon as they have eight or nine
leaves, and are ready to put forth a stalk, the top is
nipped off, in order to make the leaves longer and
thicker by directing all the energies of the plant to
them. After this the buds which sprout from the
joints of the leaves are all plucked, and not a day is
allowed to pass without examining the leaves, to
destroy a largo caterpillar which is sometimes very
destructive to them. When they are fit for cutting,
which is known by the brittleness of the leaves, they
are cut with a knife close to the ground, and, after
lying some time, are carried to the drying shed, where
the plants are hung up in pairs upon lines, having a
space between them that they may not touch one
another. In this state they remain to sweat and dry.
When perfectly dry, the leaves are stripped from the
stalks, and made into small bundles tied with one of
the leaves. These bundles are laid in heaps and
covered with blankets. Care is taken not to over-
heat them, for which reason the heaps are laid open
to the air from time to time, and spread abroad. This
operation is repeated till no more heat is perceived in
the heaps, and the tobacco is then stowed in casks for
exportation.
The crop is about three months coming to maturity.
The plants, when cut down, will throw up other shoots,
one of which should be preserved for a second crop.
At three feet apart, there will be 4,840 plants
per acre, and the average yield on good soil is stated
at a quarter of a pound per plant, or about 1200 lbs.
per acre. The ground must be kept perfectly clear of
weeds.


For different modes of culture and manufacture,
the reader is referred to Loudon’s Encyclopaedia of
Agriculture, p. 936.
COTTON,
Varieties ; There are many varieties of the cotton
plant, and probably some very valuable sorts may yet
be produced by hybridising and selection. The Sea
Island or Long Staple and the Egyptian, New Orleans
or Upland are the sorts most cultivated.
Soil; The soil should be rich, ffiable, and deep, and
free of water for two feet six inches in depth.
Cultivation : The land should be well ploughed, and
the subsoil broken up if possible. The seed is sown
three or four in a hole, at four to eight feet apart,
according to the richness of the soil, in September, or
as soon as it considered the frost is over. Great care
is necessary to keep the crop clean by an early weeding,
or it may be smothered by the weeds or destroyed by
caterpillars. In weeding, the plants are thinned out,
leaving the two strongest in each hole. The second
weeding may be done with a light plough or scarifier,
when the plants may be earthed up. If the earth is
stirred as soon as the weeds are a quarter of an inch
high, two or three times during the early growth of the
young cotton plants, the crop will require but little
further trouble.
Cotton picking commences in March, and should be
proceeded with without intermission, as serious damage
often occurs from rain when the ripe bolls are allowed
to remain on the tree, and the sample is much damaged
by dirt and pieces breaking into the cotton from the
dried pericarp.
Notwithstanding the superior quality of the Sea
Island cotton produced in Queensland, and the con-
sequent high price which it commands, the New Or-
leans is growing into favor, as it is stated to possess


three advantages over the former: —lt is said to be
more umbrageous, by which the growth of weeds is
checked and labor saved; to produce a much larger
crop, by which it compensates to a considerable extent
for the difference in price; and to ripen the crop more
uniformly, by which it requires picking less frequently,
to the great saving of labor.
The Queensland farmer has fairly tested cotton as a
crop, and much valuable knowledge has been gained as
to the nature and habits of the plants, the varieties
best suited for the climate and soil, and the probable
returns; and, at the present cost of labor, it cannot be
made to pay.
In addition to the cotton fibre, there are two other
products of the cotton plant at present almost always
wasted, but which are capable of being utilized, namely,
the seed, and the fibre obtainable from the bark of the
plant. Dr. Coxe, of New Orleans, states that “an
increased value of more than £7,600,000 sterling might
be given to the cotton crop of the United States by
utilizing the cottonseed, which is now almost wholly
wasted.” He says—“ 100 lbs. of cotton seed will yield
two gallons of oil, equal to that of Italy termed ‘ salad
oil’—and it sells in New Orleans at four shillings per
gallon (in New York, six shillings per gallon) ; 48 lbs.
of oil-cake (equal or superior to linseed-cake), and 6J
lbs. of soap stock, which, with ingredients of small value,
will make 20 lbs. of soap, equal to the best European
kinds,”
The stalk of the cotton plant contains a fibre not
unlike coarse flax, and an experiment in America upon
120 lbs. of stalk resulted in producing, when steeped
and dressed with flax machinery, forty pounds of thread
suitable for weaving bagging and other coarse cloth.
If the stalk were properly macerated, it could, doubt-
less, be made into paper.
Ridge planting: Where the land is flat, the practice
of throwing it up into high ridges or beds, and sowing


on the top, as is done in America, may, no doubt, be
followed with advantage.
Manure: As most of the land of the Sea Island
plantations is so much impregnated with salt as to be
apparent to the eye, and some of it but recently re-
claimed from salt marshes, it is but reasonable to
suppose that saline manures would be most suitable to
the Sea Island cotton crop in this colony.
COFFEE.
The coffee plant thrives and bears most abundantly
in rich friable soil on the slopes of hills, protected
from high winds; but the small berry produced in the
sandy, dry, hot soil and arid climate of Arabia has the
advantage in flavor. In the West Indies the mango
and other fast-growing, umbrageous trees are planted
on the upper part of the land to protect the plantation
from wind. Bananas are also used for shelter, planted
in rows about every fourth row of coffee. The plants
at present in a bearing state the vicinity of Brisbane
do not appear to have suffered from the absence of
shelter; but it is as well to observe the practice of
other countries where the plant is successfully grown,
and only plant on the sides of hills where they will be
protected from prevailing winds.
Plant in good soil at eight feet apart, giving shelter
and water if required until the plants are well esta-
blished. March or April would be a good time for
transplanting in favorable weather, as the plants would
make new roots before the winter stopped them, and
there would be less risk of loss from a dry spring ; in
dripping seasons, transplanting may be performed as
late as August and September. As the plants grow,
the tops are generally stopped, to prevent their grow-
ing too tall, and to encourage the production of lateral


shoots. The berries are gathered when they begin to
fall, and, after having the outside pulp removed, are
dried on cloths or mats under sheds until the husks
shrivel; they are then passed through between wooden
rollers, which separate the seed from the husk; are
then winnowed, sifted, cleaned, dried in the sun for a
few days, and barrelled up for market. The produce in
Jamaica is about one and a-half to two pounds per
tree; but the return is much greater from the single
trees grown near Brisbane. An industrious man
gathers three bushels a day.
There are several varieties of coffee, and in Ceylon
they have a small sort called the peaberry coffee, which
the planters keep for their own use, the flavor of which
is said to be very superior ; but, as the produce is not
so great as the larger variety, it is not much grown for
market.
In Ceylon the coffee is planted among the stumps and
fallen timber. It is not found to thrive there in low
situations, or on table lands, although they may be of
the requisite The planters assert that
abundance of rocks are almost indispensable to the
proper growth of the shrub ; and the best estates have
been invariably those which, well sheltered and shaded,
are situated in such an amphitheatre-like depression on
the side of a lofty mountain as ensures a rich soil—the
accumulation of ages—a plentiful supply of moisture,
and perfect drainage.
The infusion of coffee is seldom tasted in perfection.
The subtle aroma which resides in the essential oil of
the berry is gradually dissipated after roasting, and
still more after being ground. In order to enjoy the
full flavor, the berry should pass at once from- the
roasting-pan to the mill, and thence to the coffee-pot;
and again, after having been made, should be mixed,
when almost at boiling heat, with the hot milk.


TEA.
The tea plants may be placed on a gentle slope, at
the distance of six feet apart. Transplanting may be
done in August if the ground is in a favorable condi-
tion, and the plants should have shelter and water if
requisite until they are established. In China the'
plants are three years old before the leaves are gathered;
there are then three gatherings, at one month apart, on
which occasions three classes of tea are gathered. This
is performed with great care : the leaves are picked off
one by one. At the first gathering, only the unex-
panded and tender are taken ; at the second, those that
are full grown; and at the third, the coarsest. A picker
collects from 30 to 50 lbs. of green leaf per day.
The tea leaves are cured in houses which contain
from five to ten or twenty small furnaces, about three
feet high, each having at the top a large, flat iron pan.
There is also a long, low table, covered with mats, on
which the leaves are laid, and rolled by workmen who
sit round it; the iron pan being heated to a certain
degree by a little fire made in the furnace beneath, a
few pounds of the fresh-gathered leaves are put upon the
pan,anditisthe business of the operator to shift them
as quickly as possible with his bare hands, until they
become too hot to be easily endured. At this instant
he takes off the leaves with a kind of shovel resembling
a fan, and pours them on the mats before the rollers,
who, taking shall quantities at a time, roll them in the
palms of their hands in one direction, while others are
fanning them that they may cool the more speedily,
and retain their curl the longer. This process is re- ■
peated two or three times, or oftener, before the tea is
put into the stores, in order that all the moisture of
the leaves may be thoroughly dissipated, and their curl
more completely preserved. On every repetition the
pan is less heated, and the operation performed more


slowly and cautiously. The tea is then separated into
different kinds, and deposited in the store for domestic
use or exportation.
One choice kind of tea is scented with orange
flowers when fully expanded. Forty pounds of the
flowers, fresh gathered under the trees, are mixed with
one hundred pounds of perfectly dry tea, and they are
left together for twenty-four hours, when the orange
flowers are sifted out.
The tea leaves are gathered when full grown, but
tender. If left to get hard they are useless for manu-
facturing or rolling. Four pounds of the green leaf
will make about one pound of manufactured tea.
The plant sports considerably by seed, and careful
and intelligent selection would result in obtaining some
very superior sorts. The Indian tea planters appear
to be paying some attention to this.
Some rather extensive plantations have been made
in America, and tea of excellent quality has been pre-
pared. The Americans, as usual, have shown their
originality by departing from the universal method of
preparing the leaf by rolling it, and merely dry it.
Long usage has so accustomed us to see the tea rolled,
and to expect the best quality to be the most compactly
compressed, that the unrolled leaf would not at first
command a high market price. The prejudice would,
however, soon be dispelled if the quality was found to
be good; and the Americans found this to be the re-
sult.
GINGER.
The ginger of commerce is the tuberous root of a
perennial plant. It delights in a rich peaty soil,
pretty moist, in which it will grow luxuriantly, ex-
tending under ground, and sending up at each joint
its rush-like stalks. It is propagated by division of
the roots, and may be planted in rows two feet apart


during October and November; plants one foot apart
in the rows.
To prepare the white ginger for market, dig it up
when quite ripe and the stalks are dead; select the
finest and soundest roots ; carefully wash, scrape, and
dry them.
To make preserved ginger, dig the roots up when
nearly full grown, and quite tender; after being washed,
scald and scrape them. Let them stand in cold water
about twenty-four hours, changing the water three or
four times ; boil in syrup for twelve hours ; make fresh
syrup and boil again for twelve hours; pack in jars
and cover with the syrup.
CHICORY—(Chicorium Intybus).
The vast quantity of chicory imported, and subse-
quently retailed under the name of coffee, should
afford sufficient inducement to some enterprising farmer
to enter upon the cultivation of this plant.
Soil and situation ; The soil should be rich, light,
and moist, but not wet; and the situation open.
Cultivation; Prepare the soil early in August, and
sow in drills two feet apart; cover slightly. When
the plants are large enough to handle, they may be
transplanted in wet weather. If the surplus plants
are not required, they will have to be hoed out to nine
inches or one foot apart in the rows, according to the
richness of the soil The leaves may be blanched and
used as endive, and the surplus will be found valuable
at fodder. If too luxuriant, and the foliage is not
used for the foregoing purposes, it should be thinned
to prevent the plants smothering each other. As the
seed is slow to germinate, it should only be sown on
clean land, or it will be smothered by quick-growing
weeds. The produce in Victoria is said to have been
as much as twenty-five tons per acre—the average at
home being about fourteen tons.


CULTURE OF HOPS.
The hop is a hardy perennial rooted twiner, growing
to the height of fifteen to twenty feet, the top being
annual. The male and female flowers are produced
on different plants ; the female is the one used for plant-
ing, with a few male plants to form seed, which adds
greatly to- the flavor of bops. It is, probably, the
most precarious crop that is grown, being liable to dis-
aster from the moment of sprouting in the spring until
the hop is ready for the kiln, and the market value is
therefore very variable. Considerable success has
attended its cultivation in Tasmania, New Zealand,
Victoria, and South Australia, the returns not only
being fairly satisfactory, but the quality being good,
and, therefore, effectively competing with the imported
article.
The cost of cultivation in the southern colonies has
been from forty to sixty pounds sterling per acre, the
produce varying from 300 lbs. to 1,600 lbs. per acre.
Some experiments have been made in hop cultivation
on the Darling Downs, to test the suitability of the
soil and climate, and with such results as to induce
extended planting.
A hop farm generally lasts in full vigor for ten years.
It is a most exhausting crop, and requires to be liberally
manured in all its stages. Superphosphate of lime,
guano, stable manure, fresh wood ashes, and salt
would provide most of the wants of the plant. The
hop plant ranks high as an ornamental climber, the
growth being luxuriant and the foliage handsome. In
garden culture it may be propagated by cuttings of the
ends of the shoots.
INDIGO.
The indigo plant is well suited to the soil and cli-
mate of northern Queensland, and, where cheap labor
is available, it may be grown to profit.


Soil; Heavy soil produces the best return; but it
grows well in the lighter soils, and they are easier cul-
tivated.
Cultivation : The land should be well worked, to
prepare it for this crop.
Sowing : After the prepared land has been. again
ploughed and harrowed, if the soil is damp in the be-
ginning of September, sow the seed broadcast at the
rate of 35 or 40 lbs per acre, harrowing it in and rolling
the surface. During the first two months the crop
must be well cleaned once or twice, and the horse-rake
may be passed over it to loosen the surface and destroy
the young weeds. The crop is ripe in about ninety
days, and should be cut without delay, or some of the
lower leaves will fall and be lost. The appearance of
the ripe plant must be learned by experience.
Manufacture ; An interesting paper on this subject,
written by an indigo-planter, will be found in the
Queenslander newspaper of November, 1873.
THE SUGAR-CANE.
The the ten years which have elapsed since the ap-
pearance of the first edition of this work, have sufficed
to establish the sugar industry as one of the most
important in the colony. And as the cultivation of
the sugar-cane is now more generally understood, it will
not be necessary to give any very minute instructions
on the subject
Forty or fifty varieties of cane have been introduced
and tested; but these have been grouped in classes, and
are generally spoken of as ribbon, Bourbon, and purple
canes. The Bourbon and purple canes are easier to
trash than the ribbon. In coming to maturity the
purple canes are earliest, ripening in from ten to fifteen
months ; the Bourbons follow next in rotation, and the
ribbons last


A fair average crop of cane would be about 25 to 26
tons, which, at a density of the juice marking 10°
Baurae, would yield about 3 tons of sugar and 5 cwt.
of molasses per acre.
Soil, the.: A deep, rich, loamy soil, damp, but not re-
tentive of water , is the most suitable for the growth of
sugar-cane. The situation should be warm in the
southern part of the colony, to guard against injury
from frost in severe winters; and it should be such as
to afford shelter from high winds.
Planting, <hc. : The soil should be drained of all
stagnant water, at the least six inches deeper than it
is intended to plough it ; the depth to which it should
be ploughed is eighteen inches ; and on a porous
subsoil no drainage will be necessary. To prepare for
planting, run a light plough over the land, and mark
furrows four feet six inches to five feet apart, and cross
furrows at the same intervals. At each intersection of
the lines make a hole about two feet long, and a clear
foot deep, being two inches wide at the bottom. See
that the earth is carefully banked up, so that it will
not fall into the holes. All is now ready for planting.
The best sets are pieces of healthy, well-grown, ripe
cane, containing four well-developed buds and joints ;
the smooth, hard covering over the buds, which is part
of the foot-stalk of the former leaf, should not be
removed. The cane being cut into lengths containing
four joints, one may be placed along the bottom of each
hole, and covered one inch deep with soil, not deeper.
The cuttings should not be exposed to the sun and air,
but be planted immediately they are cut.. The shoots
will generally appear in ten or fourteen days, and,
when six inches high, one inch more earth may be
carefully drawn on to the sets. Avoid putting too
much earth upon them, as it would greatly interfere
with their growth and vigor, but gradually fill up the
holes as the joints of the cane become visible. In
young plantations the hoe should be almost incessantly


at work, as the stirring of the soil stimulates the growth
of the crop; after rain it is very important. In older
plantations the soil is covered with thrash, and the
surface is kept continually light and open. The plank
ing should not be less than twelve inches deep, or the
crop might be destroyed in a season of drought or by
a gale. The ribbon cane is said to require one or two
feet more space than other sorts, in consequence of its
lateral growth after the first season.
Some growers recommend the canes being planted
closer than is here directed. If such a course be
adopted, extra vigilance will be required in keeping the
canes well trashed, by constantly stripping off all dead
leaves.
Planting may be performed during August, Sep-
tember, October, and November. When deferred to
a later period, the shoots have not time to make much
growth before the cold nights check them ; but they
form a number of buds and a mass of roots, which
enable the plants to push out vigorously early the fol-
lowing season.
The plantation should be manured every year,
and the surface broken up with the light plough or
cultivator.
LIQUORICE— (Glycyrrhiza Glabra).
From the roots of this plant the well-known liquorice
of commerce is prepared. The roots extend a consi-
derable distance, and send up strong herbaceous stems
four feet to five feet high. It thrives in a rich light
soil, at least thirty inches to three feet deep, trenched
the full depth and manured. The situation should be
open, and the soil must be rich.
Planting : In July or August take the horizontal
roots which run from the crown along the surface of
the ground, and cut them into lengths of six inches ;
lay these, eighteen inches asunder, along trenches two


inches deep, the rows being three feet apart; cover the
whole with earth. A single crop of lettuces or other
salad may be taken between the rows the first season,
the bed being kept quite clear of weeds.
The only cultivation is to cut down the dead stems
annually, and dig with a fork between the rows to re-
fresh the surface.
After three or four years the crop is ready to take,
in doing which a trench must be thrown out along the
first row to the full depth of the roots, probably three
feet—trenching the whole bed in the same manner, to
get out the roots unbroken and without waste.
THE CAPER—(Capparis Spinosa).
The caper is a hardy, deciduous, trailing shrub,
growing to the height of three feet, of the flower buds
of which the well-known pickle is formed. In the
south of Italy and other places it grows wild on old
walls, rocks, and ruins ; from which it may be inferred
that it requires rather a dry, open soil. It may lie
propagated by seeds, cuttings, or pieces of the root; it
has the habit of the bramble ; and a plant growing in
the open air in England is said to have attained the
age of nearly one hundred years. The root has such
vigor that, although the plant may be cut down an-
nually by the frost, it covers the space with fresh shoots
the next season, and produces a crop of buds. It grows
freely in the Brisbane district, and may be propagated
in spring by striking the lateral shoots when one inch
long, in sand.
THE CINNAMON TREE—fCinnamonum Dulce.)
The cinnamon tree is perfectly hardy in Brisbane,
and grows with great luxuriance. A peaty loam is
recommended as the most suitable soil for it; but in


Ceylon it grows in white sand. It is a handsome ever-
green shrub, and is propagated by layers, cuttings, and
seed.
The preparation of the spice from the bush is very
simple. Sticks, as straight as possible, three or four
feet long, are cut from the bushes in large numbers—
the thickest not much stouter than one’s thumb, the
thinnest not so small as one’s little finger; these sticks
are held by the operator in his left hand, resting
lengthwise on his forearm, whilst, with a sharp knife
prepared for the purpose, he cuts the bark down the
entire length of the stick, and then peels it off, endea-
vouring to retain the pieces of as great a length and
breadth as possible; the strips of bark are then
thoroughly dried in the sun, rolled up into thin
cylinders, the smaller ones being placed within the
larger, and packed for exportation.
A spurious camphor is prepared from the roots of
this tree, but the camphor of commerce is the produce
of the cinnamonum camphora.
THE CASTOR OIL PLANT.
(Ricinus Communis).
This plant grows with great luxuriance over a large
area of the country, especially in rich, well-drained
soil, and produces heavy crops of seed. Like most
plants which are raised from seed, it sports into many
varieties; and in countries where it is grown for manu-
facturing purposes, they possess special sorts which are
highly valued, some of which were received by the
local Acclimatization Society, and distributed several
years ago. The most approved sorts were rather small
seed, but very solid, and rich in oil. Size is no recom-
mendation, as the large seed is often hollow, and does
not yield much oil. Another very important quality
has also to be considered in selecting seed for planting,
M


namely, the manner in which the plant casta its seed.
Some sorts ripen few seeds at a time, and shed them
directly, by which much of the crop is lost; others are
so difficult to shed, that the seed is injured in thrash-
ing. To obtain the greatest combination of good
qualities, Dr. Bancroft, after numerous experiments,
by hybridising the plant, succeeded in raising a variety
which he considered to be worth preserving, and, with
that object, the writer grows a few plants of it.
As the tree would grow and produce heavy crops on
sandy wastes, otherwise sterile and valueless, and there
is a ready market for the oil, it offers some inducement
to utilise such positions in this manner. The return
would be about .£lO per acre.
ARTIFICIAL GRASSES.
With the occupation of the Agricultural Reserves,
it is to be hoped a more perfect system of farming will
gradually be introduced. Hitherto, it has been com-
mon to find men, after a few desultory attempts, relin-
quishing cultivation, because they made more profit
from their few heads of cattle (feeding upon unsold
Crown lands) than they did from the cultivation of the
soil; but the sort of farming we want, and which
would yield the best return to the farmer, would in-
clude the growth of fodder for the cattle, that they
might supply manure to increase the crops. Is is the
opinion of the writer that every farm should have a
certain number of cattle, sheep, and pigs, the manure
from which would double, and in many cases treble,
the produce of the fields. No farm can be carried on
successfully for any lengthened period without manure.
The same crops year after year impoverish the soil,


and the fanner complains that the land is “ worn out;”
this can only be cured by manure, growing a totally
different crop, or giving it rest by laying it down in
grass for a few years. Sheep farming is known to pay
well; but we feel sure that if the fanners were to add
a small flock of sheep to their stock they would get a
far better return, in proportion to the capital invested,
than the large squatters do.
Clover and grass paddocks would enable our farmers
to supply good butter throughout the winter, or fatten
their spare stock for the shambles.
Lucerne mown for hay will yield five or six cuttings
in the season, which, at the present price (£8 to £lO
per ton), affords a very tempting return. Take the
average cuttings as only four per annum, and the
weight only one and a-half tons, at £B, we have a
return of forty-eight pounds sterling per acre per
annum ; and one sowing will last for twenty years.
Some enterprising farmers have tried it successfully,
and their example should be followed.
Most encouraging results attended an experiment
with a flock of sheep fed in a lucerne paddock. The
wool was much longer, and the fleece half as heavy
again, as from sheep in a similar flock fed in the usual
manner on the natural grasses. This, however, was
not the only advantage, as the wool sold for a higher
price per pound in consequence of its extra length.
The value of lucerne for grazing is so well under-
stood now by all improving squatters, that extensive lu-
cerne paddocks are provided for their stud flocks, during
winter and spring, and larger areas are being sown.
The native grassses have hitherto been found unfit
for cultivation, and in the rich agricultural districts of
New South Wales they are everywhere giving place
to imported grasses. The consequence is that Jive
beasts can now be fattened on the same land that
would have starved one previously; and their dairy
produce is so abundant that the teeming thousands


residing in Sydney and Melbourne depend on them
for a supply erf butter during the greater portion of
the year.
A good mixture for ordinary soils (sub-soiled, and
manured if necessary), is— rye-grass, cocksfoot, cow-
grass, ribgrass, sweet vernal, oat-grass, birdsfoot trefoil,
soft grass, perennial rye-grass, Alsyke clover, and praii-ie
grass. This mixture would suit both horses and cattle,
and give early and late feed.
For sheep-paddocks, a little mustard-seed mixed with
the grasses would be beneficial, and, for stock, mix
some parsley.
Mr. Moore, the Director of the Botanic Gardens,
Sydney, in the course of a lecture on “ Structural and
Systematic Botany,” in remarks upon the comparative
value of imported grasses, made the following sugges-
tions as to the mixtures best adapted for the different
soils and situations. He said :—“ In the Illawarra
and Camden districts, whence the best dairy produce
was received, the farmers were not depending upon
Australian grass. The two most valuable grasses for
this colony would be the Poa pratensis and the Fes-
tuca pratensis. The advantage they had in this country
over all others was, that they would grow in the most
exposed situations, and the first, even under trees.
It would stand the hot weather even better than the
common couch grass, and in winter grow in great
luxuriance. The grasses, then, that he should recom-
mend were —for dry soils: Poa pratensis smooth-
stalked meadow grass ; Poa trivudis, rough-stalked
meadow grass ; anthoxanthum odoratum, sweet vernal
grass; festuca ovina, sheep fescue grass ; festuca durius-
cula, hard fescue grass; festuca pratensis, meadow
fescue grass ; festuca elatior, tall fescue grass ; dactylis
glomerata, cocksfoot grass. For wet soils; Holcus
lanalus, meadow soft grass ; holcus mollis, creeping soft
grass ; agrostis abba, moist bent grass; agrostis slolo-
nifera, creeping bent grass ; Lolium perenne var, Ilali


cum, Italian rye-grass. Grasses, as a general rule,
possessed no poisonous qualities; but there was one
species, the olium temulentum, that was, unfortunately,
becoming very common here. The kangaroo grass of
this colony was fast disappearing. In the northern
districts Cynodon dactylon had followed in the steps of
man. So valuable had this grass been found in More-
ton Bay, that a friend had written to him to say that
now, “ instead of having to enclose a hundred-acre
paddock for horses, a small paddock of four acres
sown with this grass has been found sufficient to pro-
vide feed for half-a-dozen horses.”
The prairie grass is now highly valued in the
adjoining colonies, and the more it is known the better
it is appreciated. It requires a deep rich soil, pre-
pared as for oats. If sown alone, twenty pounds of
seed per acre will be sufficient; but to make a thorough
good bottom, about three pounds of cow-grass (per-
ennial red clover), three pounds of perennial rye-grass,
with fifteen pounds of prairie grass, will be required.
It produces a great quantity of seed, which it sheds
very freely; and the quantity of fodder produced per
acre is almost incredible. Its feeding and fattening
capabilies are very great, and if the crop is cut green,
it will yield four to six good cuttings in suitable soil. It
is rapidly spreading in some parts of the Darling Downs,
the flooded water-courses floating the seed away, and
distributing it in every direction.
LUCERNE.
The soil for lucerne should be deep, rich, and friable,
with a porous subsoil, in which no water could stand
in the wettest seasons ; it should be free from weeds
and weed seed, and thoroughly /pulverised. These
being all necessary conditions to success, and the
absence of one or other of them being the cause of


most of the failures in the attempts to cultivate this
valuable plant, it is thought by many to be unworthy
of their attention ; but the Author fearlessly asserts
that, under favorable circumstances, it yields a larger
return per acre, and for a longer period, than any other
fodder-plant in cultivation.
The land should be prepared during summer by
thorough exposure to the sun in high ridges, taking
care to cross-plough and harrow before the weeds begin
to seed. The land being prepared by deep ploughing
and minute pulverization, the seed may be sown broad-
cast, from February to July, at the rate of twenty-five
pounds per acre, and may be covered about an inch
deep by the use of a light harrow. Some growers
prefer a spring sowing (as it makes little progress dur-
ing the winter), and consider July the most favorable
period for sowing. Others recommend a light crop of
oats to nurse the young plants.
If, when sown by itself, weeds should come up
thickly, and threaten to choke the crop (which is very
tender the first six months, until the tap root has time
to get hold of the soil), mow the field carefully before
the weeds seed, and the most of them, being annuals,
will then perish. Before a succession can have time
to rise up and do any damage, the lucerne will have
gained sufficient strength to make head against them.
Lucerne may be transplanted to fill up blanks.
A large quantity of forest land would return good
crops of lucerne by the aid of manure, and, not being
so liable to injury by floods, might, in the long run, pay
better than the richer flats. A good double ploughing
and cross-ploughing, following with a second plough in
the bottom of the furrow at the first ploughing, and
turning in sixty or eighty loads of manure to the acre
with the second ploughing, would be a fair preparation
of the land ; and, if time would allow a crop of maize
to be taken from the land, the additional cultivation
would improve its texture.


The growing field of lucerne should be frequently
examined, and all yellow, stunted, or unhealthy patches
noted, that the necessary cure may be immediately
applied, whether it be a dressing of manure, or the
draining of a hollow.
Land that is lucerne sick, through the long con-
tinuance of the crop on the ground, and not through
want of manure or bad cultivation, is thoroughly re-
covered by two years’ rest. Either fallow a season,
and the following year take a crop of potatoes or corn,
after which lucerne may be sown again; or green
fallow the land for two years, taking one crop of some
cereal each year.
The after culture of lucerne, sown broadcast, consists
in harrowing to destroy grass and other weeds; rolling
after harrowing, to smooth the soil for the scythe; and
a top-dressing of manure once a year.
One great enemy to lucerne is dodder (Cuscuta
Australis), a parasite plant which infests the crop in
New South Wales, and has been introduced here with
the seed from that colony. Wherever it makes its
appearance over the field it should be carefully cut
out, and every little piece removed and burned.
Whatever plants may have been destroyed by it should
be replaced by transplanting in the first favorable
weather.
THE SORGHUM MILLET.
(Sorghum Saccharatum).
This valuable fodder plant is easy of cultivation,
and is more hardy and productive than other crops
raised for that purpose.
The soil should be rich, not too heavy, and well and
deeply ploughed.
If intended for fodder cut green, the seed may be
sown broadcast; but if for seed, it should be sown in
rows three feet apart, the seed being not more than one


inch deep, two or three in a hole, twelve inches apart
in the rows. By this arrangement the plough or cul-
tivator will have room to pass between the rows to
keep down the weeds.
In July prepare the soil, and sow the seed in August.
Other sowings may be made in suitable weather during
February and March. The crop takes about four
months to ripen the seed, and, for green fodder, will
yield several cuttings in favorable seasons. It is not
liable to lodge in heavy rains, withstands high winds
with little damage, is not injured by frost, and will
exist and even thrive in a season of drought which
would prove destructive to most other crops. The
green stuff is easily cured by stacking it after it is
dried, and the cattle eat it as greedily dry as green.
The average yield of seed is said to be thirty bushels
per acre, and the seed coverings are valuable for dyeing;
the exterior pellicule gives a dark purple, and the
inner coat a bright yellow.
NATURAL GRASSES, &c.
Two essays upon this important subject competed
for a prize offered at the Toowoomba Show in August,
1875. They were written respectively by Mr. Angus
Mackay, the indefatigable editor of the Queenslander,
and Mr. F. M. Bailey, the talented author of the
Ferns of Queensland. While the country is but
partially occupied, a practical consideration of this
question will not be forced upon the people; but the
time is near when its immense importance will be felt,
and when that time has arrived, the information col-
lected in the two papers referred to will be found useful
as the basis of further investigation.


HOVEN CATTLE.
Cattle are liable to be injured by eating excessively
of young grass, and from other causes. As the disten-
tion of the beast is chiefly occasioned by carbonic acid
gas, any substance which will combine with that gas
will reduce it. Such a substance is readily found in
ammonia (hartshorn), a spoonful of which, in water,
forced down the animal’s throat, completely removes
the distention.
FIBRE PLANTS.
With the rapid extension of agricultural operations
consequent upon a large and continuous influx of popu-
lation, it has been thought desirable to introduce to
public notice in a brief manner several plants suitable
to the climate, from which an article could be manu-
factured, by simple machinery, for which there would
be -an unlimited demand. If all the farmers of a
certain district grow one or two articles of local con-
sumption, it is very probable that the competition will
soon reduce the price until the cultivation is unremu-
nerative. This is nearly the state in the Brisbane
district at present, and if any additional article of export
can be profitably grown, it will be a great relief to the
farming interest.
CHINESE GRASS CLOTH.
(Boehmeria Nivea, or “ Ramie.”)
Tins hardy plant grows with the utmost luxuriance
in Queensland in any good soil, and, as it produces
abundance of suckers, and the smallest piece of root


will grow, its cultivation could be extended indefinitely
in a short time.
Great improvements have recently been made in the
Southern American States in the machinery for prepar-
ing the fibre, by which the plant may be cleaned on the
field, the refuse being left for manure. The fibre is
then dried, becoming comparatively pure, white, and
silky, divested entirely of gum, and prepared for baling
and for spinning. With the improved machinery, one
laborer can clean the product of ten acres, and one acre
will yield at least two tons, making a total of twenty
tons to the hand. The fibre is estimated to be worth
.£4O per ton. Some cultivators of Alameda got Gilbert
Lyman to report upon an improved machine. He
reports as follows:—“ I found Lefranc’s machine at
work on the stalks of ramie raised in Louisiana. It
turns out 600 lbs. of clean fibre per day—doing its
work with ease and perfection; I send you samples.
This is an improvement on the first machine by this
maker, and it costs more. The price is §SOO, if boxed
for shipment. It has made a revival of interest among
planters, and there will be a large increase of produc-
tion. I find that moist land is preferred, where the
ramie yields three cuttings a year. I have seen several
fields that have been cropped the third year, and they
expect it to bear many years without replanting. It
seems to give less trouble than cotton.
In Louisiana some of the planters are replacing the
sugar-cane with ramie, which does not require replant-
ing, demands comparatively little labor in cultivation,
and entails no great expense for machinery to prepare
it for market. So far as known, it has no insect ene-
mies ; its fibre is less bulky and more easily transported
than cotton, and it is sure of a ready sale at remunera-
tive prices. The fibre, which forms its commercial
product, is the inner bark of the stem, and, when ex-
posed to view by separation from the husk, presents a
brilliant, pearl-white lustre. This fibre is longer and


more uniform than any other except silk ; it is stronger
and more elastic than either hemp or flax ; takes color
as well as a good quality of silk ; and, when properly
prepared from the raw material, may be spun into fine
yam, suitable for mixing with wool in the manufacture
of delaines, worsteds, and other light fabrics. With-
out admixture it can be woven into fabrics, which, it is
said, will surpass the finest linens in beauty, strength,
and durability. The ramie fibre has also the felting
quality superior to either fur or wool.”
Large tracts of land in the south of France and
Algeria have been planted with China-grass; but the
demand is so great for the fabrics manufactured from it
that the markets cannot be supplied. The stalks must
be stripped in their green state, as this plant is not
steeped like hemp and flax. The exquisitely fine and
silk-like muslins and cambrics made of this fibre are
familiar in France and Algiers, though their present
costliness places them only within the reach of the rich.
MUSA TEXTILUS, or MANILA BANANA.
It is from the leaf stems of this plant that the
Manila hemp is made. The fibre is in great demand
for a variety of purposes, and is generally sold at i!50
to £60 per ton. The machinery by which the fibre is
prepared in Manila is of the cheapest and most primi-
tive description : full particulars, accompanied with
tracings, were received from there some years ago.
The removal of the cellular tissue was the great diffi-
culty experienced here in the preparation of the fibre,
some of which was sent to the Great Exhibition. This
sort of banana is grown in Brisbane, and may be
distinguised by the red skin of the fruit. Several of
the bananas yield fibre, and that prepared from the
Musa Dacca (pear banana), and Musa Maculata (tho


large common vaiiety), are said to be quite equal to
this. The estimated produce of fibre is a “ picul ” of
133 lbs. per 100 plants.
PHORMIUM TENAX, or NEW ZEALAND FLAX.
This plant grows well in Queensland, the demand is
unlimited, and the preparation simple. It requires a
damp, rich, sandy loam. It seeds freely in the Bris-
bane district, and persons desirous of growing it could
therefore soon provide themselves with a supply of
young plants. It is used in the colonies for cordage,
wool lashings, &c., and by upholsterers for stuffing, and
numerous other purposes.
THE COTTON PLANT.
The cultivation of this plant is simple, its growth
luxuriant, and its stems yield a good fibre.
THE PINE APPLE.
A fibre of the most beautiful description is pre-
pared from the leaf of the pine apple, producing a fabric
as light as gossamer.
THE HOP.
From the fibre of this plant a strong cloth is made.
It is not yet cultivated in this colony, but in Tasmania
and the neighboring colonies it grows to perfection,
and the climate of the Darling Downs is likely to
suit it.
The hollyhock, tree mallow, hemp, white mulberry,
aloe, and numerous others, might also be mentioned as


producing good fibre. Most of the leading fibre plants
of commerce may be seen growing in the season, in the
Brisbane Botanic,Garden, and Mr. Hill is ever ready
to explain tbeir merits.
DRYING FRUITS.
The preparation of dried fruits forms an important
industry in many countries on the Continent of Europe,
and has assumed gigantic proportions in some of the
American States. South Australia, among the Aus-
tralian colonies, appears to take the palm in drying
fruits for commercial purposes ; but, for home consump-
tion, this method ought to be largely resorted to
throughout the southern districts of Queensland, to
save from waste the surplus apricots and peaches which
now annually go to decay in the height of the season,
especially near Brisbane and Toowoomba.
In America, the “fruit drier” is a necessary adjunct
to farm-houses in the fruit-growing districts. It con-
sists of a box eight feet long and two feet square,
connected at one end with a hot air stove. The box
is fitted with trays with wire bottoms, and is elevated
at the other end about two feet, so that the hot air
entering in at one end traverses the whole length, and
passes out at the other. Freestone peaches and apricots
are split open and the stones removed. The round part
of the fruit is placed downwards on the trays, and,
when partially dried, the trays nearest the stove are
removed to the further end of the box, the others being
pushed down to take their place. Figs could be pre-
served in the same manner. Apples and clingstone
peaches are cut into slices and dried.
Figs appear to find in Aidin (Smyrna) a soil pecu-
liarly suited to them. When perfectly ripe they fall
off the trees, and are gathered up every morning, and


spread upon ground prepared for the purpose, where
they are left to dry. Great care is taken that no water
or dew falls upon them, or they gradually decay.
Many plantations made in adjacent districts produced
good figs ; but they would not keep when packed, the
skin was thick, and was destitute of the delicate flavor
and sweetness of those grown at Aidin.
The heavy dews’and sudden showers to which we are
liable will, doubtless, prevent figs being dried by ex-
posure to the sun’s rays only; but it might be accom-
plished by means of the “ fruit drier.”
The “ prune d’Angen” and two others are dried
successfully at Camden Park, New South Wales. The
former fruit falls from the tree as soon as ripe—that is,
early in March. Fine litter is placed under the trees,
and, if the weather is fine, the plums are allowed to
lie as they fall, being turned over every two or three
days ; in about ten days they are ready to pack. Slight
showers only retard the drying ; but continued wet
hot weather will turn them mouldy. In such cases a
hot closet is used to dry them, heated-from 100° to 120°,
by hot water pipes.
Muscatel raisins and Zante currants are dried at
Camden on straw hurdles, but they require several
weeks. If first dipped in boiling lye of wood ashes
they dry much more rapidly, but lose their bloom and
fine appearance, and part of their flavor. The currants
dry very rapidly in fine weather, and prove a very pro-
ductive crop if in a good situation and well managed.
The plants should be vigorous, and have ample room ;
and at pruning, six times the usual quantity of bearing
wood should be left. They should be well matured
before being gathered.
The hurdles are made of tough sawn pine, 5 feet by
3 feet; the two heads should be 3 in. by 2 in., and the
cross-bars, with centre stay, be 2£ or 3 inches by |.
Long straw is woven in between the bars, or otherwise


secured to them close enough to prevent the fruit from
falling through. In showery weather the hurdles can
be stood on one another, and covered from rain.
The sorts of grapes generally grown in the south of
Europe for making raisins are— muscat of Alexandria
muscatel gordo bianco, larga of Malaga (“ sun raisins”),
pance, or passe, and arignan of Provence.
Bananas stripped of their skins and dried make a
most excellent and palatable addition to the dessert.
Bottling and Canning fruits would also be a highly
remunerative industry connected with large orchards ;
but as the business requires more extensive appliances
than the space at command will permit us fully to de-
scribe, we must be content to direct attention to some
practical articles on the subject which appeared in the
Queenslander newspaper on September 18th, 1875, and
previously.
SERICULTURE.
THE SILKWORM—(Bombyx Morus).
The first step necessary on entering upon this en-
terprise, is obtaining a sufficient plantation of the best
sort of mulberry. The different kinds vary much in
quality, and those which are most rich in serio matter
should have the preference. The mulberry grows very
freely from cuttings, and may be propagated throughout
the spring and summer. The sorts recommended for
this purpose are the white mulberry (morus alba), the
moretta (morus morettiana), and the Manila (morus
midticaulis). The latter is particularly suitable for
growing in the form of a shrub ; and it and the mot-
etto are best for the young worms, but the white for
feeding off with. The distance at which they are


planted for this purpose is six to nine feet; and it is
considered necessary to allow the trees three to seven
years’ growth to acquire established vigor, before the
leaves are taken. It is possible that in Queensland,
where the mulberry grows with so much luxuriance,
and is in leaf for eight months out of the year, that it
might bear denuding at an earlier age, during the forty
or fifty days the worms are feeding.
Construction of Magnannekies or Breeding
Houses.
The following is the description of the largest-sized
magnannerie, capable of accommodating 20 ounces of
eggs, or 700,000 worms. It is from the pen of Mr.
G. E. Cerruti, now managing one of the largest silk
factories at Ning-po, who, while in Victoria, endeavored
by his writings to promote sericulture there. It will
be remembered, however, that the number of worms
mentioned would require fifty acres of young mulberry
trees to feed them, and that therefore such a building
would only be required in a large establishment. In
small undertakings of this nature, any building or
chamber well ventilated, thoroughly dry, and free from
bad smells, will answer the required purpose—these
three conditions, and especially the last, being in all
cases the essential qualifications of a proper breeding
house. In describing the building he says ;
“ This edifice should be about thirty or thirty-four
yards in length, by eleven to twelve in breadth,having
the principal front to the east, on which side must be
left ten or twelve openings ; on the opposite side half
that number ; on the north side four, and on the south
side two. The height of the building should be
eighteen or twenty feet, with a roof so elevated as to
be almost perpendicular, to preserve the interior from
the direct influence of the sun, which would create too
much heat during certain hours of the day, and at all


times produce an injurious variation in the tempera-
ture. The interior is to be divided into three parts, of
which the central one, twenty-one yards in length, is
to contain the shelves; the side compartments, about
five yards each, must be reserved—the southern as a
dep6t for the leaves, the northern as the hatching room.
Internal communication must be provided between the
three compartments, each of the smaller rooms having
two doors—one leading into the large room, the other
into the open air.
“ The arrangement of the hatching room is of the
greatest importance, and it will be necessary to sur-
round it with a double lining of stout planks, and erect
two stoves in the corners of one end. This end of the
room must be appropriated to the hatching of the
worms, having little stands prepared to place the worms
on after they are hatched, so as to regulate at pleasure
their distance from the fires.
“ The large room should be furnished with wooden
uprights, supporting sets of five shelves, four yards
by one and ar-half, placed one above another, and dis-
posed in four rows, so as to leave a passage of one
yard in width between them, to facilitate the operations
of the attendants, and ensure free ventilation through-
out. Shelves, consisting of wooden frames filled with
a network of iron wire, and covered with wrapping
paper, are, according to the opinions of the best culti-
vators, the most economical, as well as the best and
most healthy. The third room, or depdt for leaves,
must be so arranged as to preserve an atmosphere
constantly fresh, without being damp. A few tables
for preparing and cleaning the leaves will be all that is
required in the way of furniture. The cost of the
entire building as described may be about £150.”
Hatching.
“ The hatching chamber being heated to about 77°
Fahrenheit, the eggs are placed on flat sheets of card-
N


board, at the distance of at least two yards apart, and
in such a position that they cannot come under the
direct influence of the fire, taking care to distribute
each ounce over one or two square feet of surface.
Afterwards the temperature may be raised from 86° to
89° Fahrenheit, gradually, moving the eggs from time
to time, until, having become whiter, they will display
about the seventh day the first indications of vitality,
which will be still plainer on the eighth and following
days. If the operations have been properly conducted,
and the eggs selected in perfect condition, the hatching
will generally be completed by the ninth day ; but it is
usual to leave undisturbed those which may happen to
remain uuhatehed until the twelfth day, after which
they are thrown away to avoid too great a difference
in the ages of the worms, and also because there is
considerable doubt whether such eggs may not be
diseased or imperfect.
“On the first symptoms of the hatching having
commenced, leaves must be carefully placed on the
eggs, selecting for the purpose the tenderest that can be
found ; and care must be taken to separate the worms
of the first day’s birth from those of the second, and so
on with the rest, in order that their growth may be
afterwards regulated by placing the youngest nearest
to the fire, and increasing the distance according to the
age of the worms.”
In the Brisbane district the worm appears early in
September, when the mulberry trees are getting into
full leaf, and as the temperature is naturally all that is
required in the daytime, it is probable that a well closed
building would provide the requisite warmth during
the night.
The life of the silkworm is divided into five,stages,
which are marked by four seasons of partial torpor or
sleep, after each of which-the skin is cast off. The
first stage lasts six or eight days from the hatching,


during which period they should be kept warm, and
have fresh tender leaves six or seven times a-day. The
first sleep lasts about a day and a-half, and on their
awakening they should be carefully classified as to age,
as it saves much time when the whole on one shelf or
compartment pass through their several stages together.
The second stage lasts four to six days, during which
the temperature may be reduced to an average of 72°;
the torpor lasts about thirty-six hours. During the
third stage the worm eats voraciously; the room should
be well ventilated, the beds kept clean, and food sup-
plied four times a day, chiefly of white mulberry.
After a rest of about thirty hours the worm issues into
its fourth stage, which lasts seven or eight days, and
during which it should be fed exclusively on white
mulberry, or other sort equally rich in seric matter;
and the apartments should be kept thoroughly venti-
lated. The fourth sleep lasts about thirty-five hours,
after which the worms eat enormously, and their treat-
ment should be the same; great cleanliness being
necessary to preserve them in health. After eight or
nine days they will acquire a yellowish tint and cease
to feed. Small bundles of twigs, ferns, <kc., should be
placed round the frames, in which they will spin their
cocoons, which will take about eight days to complete.
Within ten days of their commencing to spin, select
the cocoons which it is intended to preserve for breed-
ing; choose them for fineness of thread, of oblong
form, slightly contracted in the waist or middle, solid
in construction, and avoid those pointed at the extre-
mities.
About 250 cocoons will be required to produce an
ounce of eggs; one ounce of eggs will produce about
38,000 worms, which yield one hundred pounds weight
of cocoons, worth 2s. per lb. In reeling off the silk
four threads should be wound together. Six hundred
pounds weight of cocoons will produce about 100 lbs,
of silk.


The worms produced from an ounce of eggs are
estimated to consume all the leaves which can be taken
without injury from two acres of mulberry trees,
during the first season of picking, which would be the
second or third year after planting out, according to
their vigor. Each additional year’s growth will enable
the trees to sustain the worms from a further half
ounce of eggs.
In consequence of the large demand in France for
floss and similar silk, for toys and fancy-work, that
country presents the best market for perforated cocoons,
from which the moths have emerged. And the possi-
bility of making profitable sale of such cocoons for
“ carding,” gives further inducement to direct some'
attention to the exportation of grain.
The Japanese provide the greater part of the grain
which is imported into Europe, and appear to dust the
grain over a coarse card, 14 inches x 9 inches, which
had been sized, and to which it adheres. The cards are
supposed to contain an ounce of the eggs or grain each,
and are saleable in France at an average rate of about
12s. each. One of these Japanese cards, with the egg-
shells on it, which was sent to the Author some years
ago, is still in his possession, and will show to those
interested the manner in which they prepare their grain
for shipment to France—a trade which is of such
magnitude as to rank among their chief exports. A
trade in silk-Worm grain has also attained some propor-
tions in California.
Where facilities exist for safe transit to a good
market, the exportation of grain appears very suitable
to the circumstances of a people entering upon the
industry, and unskilled in reeling the silk.
As previously stated, the first year’s picking of leaves
from two acres of mulberry trees will feed the worms
from one ounce of grain—about 38,000 or 40,000—>
and as 250 cocoons produce an ounce of grain, there is
a probable return from these worms of at least 140


cards, besides about 80 lbs. of perforated cocoons, which,
together, would yield an amount sufficiently encourag-
ing, considering the short period during which the
worms require attention. When, however, it is re-
membered that, with the increasing age of the trees,
they will be able to support a very much larger number
of worms, there appears every reason to believe that,
with a ready market for the grain, the pursuit would
be very remunerative under skilful management.
On most large farms space could be found for a few
thousands of mulberry trees, without interfering with
the ordinary crops, and the silk harvest might be made
a very acceptable addition to the income.
The probable returns have here been purposely based
upon the lowest estimate, and still give fair promise of
being remunerative.. Local experience may yet prove
the profits to be much greater ; and, if we are spared
to issue another edition of this work, we shall be glad
to record the fact.
AILANTHITS GLANDULOSA-
(Varnish Tree of Japan),
This plant has been introduced to public notice in
consequence of its affording acceptable food to the
bombyx cynihia, now known as the ailanthus silkworm.
This plant is one of the easiest shrubs to grow—there
is no soil, however bad, in which it will not thrive.
The seed germinates almost as quickly as wheat ; and
as it grows freely from cuttings of roots, and also sends
up abundance of suckers, it is easily propagated. The
plants should be about three feet apart each way, and
cut down every year, so that the young shoots may
spring up and afford tender leaves for the worms; and,
by planting them so close that the shoots join each
other, the worms are enabled to go from one plant to
another.


THE AILANTHUS SILKWORM,
The cultivation of this silkworm in France is said
to have been attended with great success ; the hardiness
of the plant and worm, and the simple management
having greatly recommended it.
From the information contained in a pamphlet
translated by Lady Nevill, from the work of M. F. E.
Guerin, Manerille, it appears that three generations of
worms could be produced in Brisbane and the tropical
districts of Queensland. The eggs do not keep through
the winter, but the live chrysalis remains inactive dur-
ing that period, ready to become a butterfly in the
spring. About forty-five days will elapse between the
laying of the eggs and the formation of the cocoons,
and these latter will remain inactive about twenty-six
days, at the temperature of 70° to 80° Fahrenheit.
The cocoons to be kept during winter are recommended
to be strung up, 100 on a line, and kept in a tempera-
ture not lower than 60°. The eggs hatch at 80°
Fahrenheit, and the ailanthus leaves should be laid on
them, that the young worms may climb on them and
commence feeding ; the leaves ought then to be placed
in a bottle of water, the ends well stuffed in to prevent
the worms getting down into the water. When the
worms are put on the ailanthus trees they should be
well distributed, not placed too close together, or too
many on a tree. When once the worms are fixed on
the leaves of the tree there is no further trouble except
to see that ants and wasps do not carry them off. The
cocoons may be gathered about eight or ten days after
the beginning of the spinning.
Of the Silk.
The great drawback to the cultivation of this worm
is, that no method has yet been discovered of reeling
off the silk, and it consequently has to be sold as


“floss.” This floss is, however, of very superior quality,
being much more glossy than any other; it also bleaches
well, is said to last double the time of the silk from
the mulberry worm, does not spot so easily, washes like
linen, and takes a good dye. It is manufactured in
France under the name of galette or fantaisie, and of
which there is an immense consumption. Mixing it
with thread and wool, it is largely employed in manu-
facturing fancy stufis. The strength of this silk is
remarkable, and to this is attributable the great
durability of the Indian foulards, which are composed
exclusively of it.




GARDENING CALENDAR.


CA LENDAR
OF OPERATIONS IN THE
GARDEN, THE ORCHARD, AND THE FARM,
FOR EACH MONTH IN THE YEAR.
JANUARY.
Kitchen Garden, —Water the vegetable beds freely
in dry weather, occasionally giving liquid manure.
When water is required, give a good soaking, or none,
as a mere sprinkling is rather injurious than other-
wise. Where water is scarce, much protection may
be afforded by mulching the ground with stable litter,
grass, or straw. If a slight dressing of salt was given
to the beds in spring, as recommended in August and
September, the advantage will now be felt. All the
beds now unoccupied should be dug, carefully turning
in at the bottom of the trench all cabbage leaves,
turnip tops, and such green refuse, which form a valu-
able manure. Heavy land should be thrown up
roughly, giving the large lumps a sufficient blow just
to break them asunder. The exposure to the sun will
greatly improve the texture of such soils. In favor-
able weather sow French beans, brocoli, cabbage, car-
rot, cauliflower, celery, mustard, cress, lettuce, endive,
okra, peas, parsnip, parsley, radish, salsafy, scorzonera,
prickly spinach, turnip, Brussels sprouts, and a few
cucumber and melon seeds for late crop. At this
season particular care must be devoted to the seed
beds. The seed should be sown thickly in small beds,
under a portable calico cover, and the beds kept well
watered until the plants are strong. Tobacco water


or Gishurst Compound should be applied on the first
appearance of aphis. Gather herbs for drying;
gather onions, garlic, and eschallots as the tops die
down. Plant out cauliflowers, cabbages, &c., in favor-
able weather, laying a leaf over each, secured in its
place by a piece of earth, to protect the plant from
the sun for a few days until the new roots are formed.
Watch the bee hives, lest the swarms go astray.
Orchard. —Keep the surface of the ground open
by lightly forking it over where there is any appear-
ance of binding; and straw or other litter under the
trees to the outer circuit of the foliage will greatly
protect their roots in dry weather. The fruit should
be gathered as it ripens. Stop long shoots by pinching
off the ends. Vines should be tied as they grow or
break loose, as the wind greatly injures the foliage
by dashing the shoots against-the espaliers. Very
vigorous branches may be checked and rendered pro-
ductive by giving the point a downward tendency, or
curving the shoot downwards. Thin out the fruit
on those trees which are over burdened. Remove
suckers, laterals, and water shoots from vines every
ten days.
Farm. —Destroy weeds before they seed ; break up
land in preparation for future crops ; sow Cape barley
for green fodder, and maize for late crop.
FEBRUARY.
Kitchen Garden. —This should be a season of ac-
tivity, and the store of manure will now be required.
Dig roughly all the unoccupied beds which have been
previously trenched, adding well decomposed manure.
The land not immediately required will be improved
by the exposure, and the remainder will be ready for
use the first shower. Transplant cabbages, Brussels
sprouts, cauliflowers, celery, &c. Sow French beans,
beet, Brussels sprouts, carrot, cauliflower, celery,


mustard, cress, lettuce, endive, onion, peas for main
crop, parsnips, radish, prickly spinach, and turnips.
Former sowings should be carefully thinned out and
kept clear of weeds, that the air may pass freely
through. Mulch round the melon and cucumber
holes, to the depth of five or six inches, with a good
dressing of long stable manure; draw a small ridge
of earth round them, at about two feet from the stem,
to prevent the water running away; and, if the wea-
ther is very dry and the plants appear to suffer, give
about ten to twenty gallons of water in the evening
to each hole. This, will probably not have to be re-
peated during the season. It is easier and cheaper
to do the work effectively at once. Light waterings
are generally very injurious in dry weather; either
water copiously or not at all. It is better to depend
entirely on mulching than to give a mere sprinkling
of water to plants exposed to the sun at this season.
Seeds of plants previously selected should be collected
as they ripen, and before the pods are too brittle.
Cucumbers, melons, French beans, (fee., should be looked
over every day and gathered as soon as they are ready,
whether they are required or not; for, if left on to
perfect their seeds, the plants soon cease to be produc-
tive, or form only ill-shaped inferior fruit.
Orchard. —Tie up loose shoots of the vine, ex-
tending them out to the sun. If the points are
gathered up to a stake (a very bad practice), be care-
ful that the foliage is not bruised or injured. In
banana plantations, see that all the plants are cut to
the ground when the fruit is taken, and remove all
dead leaves and superfluous suckers, that there may
be a free circulation of air among them. Prop up
such plants as require support. If young trees are
to be planted out during the approaching season, pro-
cure a good supply of leaf mould, or fine virgin soil,
for placing among the roots; lay it up in heaps to
sweeten.


Farm. —Continue to prepare land, ploughing it
deeply. Early potatoes may be planted whole, giving
them plenty of-room, or they will be drawn up. Lu-
cerne may now be sown in clean, well-ploughed, deep
soil. Vetches or tares, Cape barley, and sorghum
should be sown for green food for stock. White
tuscarora maize may be sown during the first week.
It is hardy, and ripens in 90 days from the time of
sowing.
MARCH.
Kitchen Garden. —Keep the beds clear of weeds
by frequent and deep hoeing. Plant out cabbages,
cauliflowers, Brussels sprouts, celery, <fec., for succes-
sion, in favorable weather. Always have beds dug in
dry weather, full depth, and manured, so that every
shower may be availed of for transplanting. Where
possible, the plants should be lifted carefully with a
garden trowel, and planted with a ball of earth at-
tached. Rows of cabbages, <fec., on sloping ground,
should be made across the hill; slight ridges drawn
to the stems to keep them upright would give the
plants the advantage of every slight shower, and
openings could be made at proper intervals for the
escape of superfluous rain water. See that the rows
of vegetables are not too close; a free current of air
should pass among them to bring them to perfection.
Give asparagus beds a dressing of salt. Sow English
beans, French beaus, beet, carrot, mustard and cress,
celery, lettuce, endive, leek, onion, peas, parsnip, radish,
prickly spinach, turnip. Transplant eschallots. Let-
tuce runs to seed.
Orchard. —No crops should be grown near young
fruit trees—never nearer than one foot beyond the
outer circuit of the foliage. Orange trees are often
killed by digging near them; the roots upon which
the lateral or fruit-bearing branches depend extend in


all directions near the surface of the ground ; when
these roots are injured, the branches either die back
or become diseased. All land intended to be planted
with vines or fruit trees during the approaching sea-
son should have been trenched, manured, and cropped,
if possible, by this month, to put it in the best state
for planting. If not already trenched, no time should
be lost, being careful to drain all retentive soils six
inches deeper than they are trenched. Orange trees
with the shoots in a state of rest may be transplanted
in favorable weather.
Farm. —Autumn commences on the 20th of this
month, the sun on that day entering the autumnal
equinox. Sow lucerne, clover, rye-grass, prairie-grass,
oats, barley, wheat, vetches or tares, and sorghum.
Plant main crop of potatoes. Watch cotton plants
tion, and house the cotton as fast as the bolls expand,
to secure the crop against injury from rain, and from
damage by broken pieces of the over-ripe pericarp.
Gather maize as it ripens, and cut tobacco as the leaves
arrive at maturity.
APRIL.
Kitchen Garden. —Hoe continually among the crops
in dry weather; let no Weeds appear. Have beds
dug for transplanting the various vegetables now
coming on. Thin out all crops that are overcrowded,
as directed last month. Divide and plant out pot-
herbs, giving a little water if requisite until they are
established. Sow English beans, mustard, and cress,
lettuce, endive, leek, onion, peas,- 'radish, <fec., <fec.
Early celery should be earthed up in dry weather;
in this operation draw the leaves upward one by one,
without straining them, until they are all upright
and in their regular positions; be careful that no
earth gets between the leaves, and, while holding
them together with one hand, fill the earth round the


plant with the other to within six inches of the top.
Fill up occasionally as the plant grows, and it will be
ready in about six weeks.
Orchard , —Where practicable, the transplanting of
young fruit trees should now be proceeded with,
and, if done with care, they will soon make a little
new growth, emit roots, and be established in their
positions before the final fall of the leaf. A full season
will often be saved by this, and the risk of loss by a
dry spring considerablyreduced. This applies to nearly
all fruit trees, but especially to the evergreens, such
as lemons, oranges, dates, loquats, olives, tamarinds,
bananas, &c.
Farm. —Sow vetches, lucerne, wheat, barley, oats,
and maize. Gather sorghum seed as it ripens, or the
birds will either consume or scatter it. Cotton will
require constant attention as directed last mouth. Cut
and house tobacco as it arrives at maturity.
MAY.
Kitchen Garden. —Transplant onions, and keep the
seed beds clean. Plant out cabbages, ike., for succes-
sion ; and sow lettuce, endive, leek, onion, peas, radish,
mustard, and cress. Dig beds intended for asparagus.
(See Asparagus). Transplant garlic, eschallots, rhubarb,
salsafy, scorzonera, &c.
Orchard. —Transplant fruit trees in the manner
directed in the article on the apple, which see. Do
not plant too deep; put fine mould among the roots,
and protect the trees until they start afresh, watering
overhead lightly every two or three days, to prevent
too much evaporation, until the roots begin to act.
Transplant strawberries into leaf mould, or two-year-
old cow dung ; when growing give abundance of water.
In cold situations, protect tropical fruit trees, cover
bunches of bananas, and throw a handful of straw into
the heart of every pine-apple plant.


Farm. —Sow vetches, barley, oats, wheat, lucerne
and other grasses. Cut tobacco. Pick cotton. Earth
up potatoes.
JUNE.
Kitchen Garden. —At this season no colonial-grown
cabbage seed should be sown, as the plants will run to
seed just as they are hearting. English cabbage seed
will not run the first season, and should therefore be
exclusively used until September, when the danger
will be past. Give new asparagus beds the second
digging. Hoe well among the growing crops. Trans-
plant horse-radish, eschallots, rhubarb, strawberries,
sajikale, &c.* Dig over old rhubarb, seakale, and
asparagus beds, giving them plenty of good rotten
manure. Sow brocoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage; also,
red cabbage, cauliflower, lettuce, endive, peas, English
beans, radish, salsafy, scorzonera. Water-cresses may
be planted in trenches as celery, and will grow well in
the neighborhood of Brisbane during the winter and
spring months. Dig abundance of well-rotted manure
into the bottom of the trench, sift a little fine soil over
it, dibble the cuttings in at a foot apart, filling up the
holes lightly with rich mould, and give the whole a
good watering from a fine rose watering-pot. In a
month or six weeks they can be cut, when the bed
should have a thin dressing of manure all over, and a
good watering. Repeat the treatment each cutting,
watering well in dry weather.
Orchard. —In early situations prune grape vines, the
several sorts of China peach trees, and other early
fruits. Transplant fruit trees, giving a little protection
in situations exposed to the dry westerly winds; sup-
port them with stakes where necessary. Cover bunches
of bananas and tropical fruit trees where there is any
risk of injury from frost. In preparing new land for
planting, see that drainage is amply provided for to the
depth of three or four feet.


Farm. —Winter commences on the 24th of this
month. The arrowroot fills out very rapidly after the
frost checks the growth of the top. Sweet potatoes,
ginger, yams, <fec., should be dug. Sow oats, lucerne,
rye-grass, vetches, prairie-grass, &c., <tc. Prepare
land in warm situations for planting and sowing next
month with potatoes and maize.
JULY.
Kitchen Garden. —Asparagus roots may • now be
planted as directed. Sow cauliflower* carrot main
crop, beans, lettuce, endive, radish, spinach, &c. V In
sowing seeds after rain, see that the land does not
clog, or it will be very injurious to move it about.
The soil should never be walked over, or disturbed by
sowing or digging the crops, until it is sufficiently dry
to be friable. Plant out onions and eschallots. The
soil for onions being necessarily rich, the crop is often
in danger of being smothered by weeds in the seed
bed. This may be guarded against to a considerable
extent when sown in drills, by lightly raking over the
bed a few days after it is sown; this will destroy a
vast number of weeds, which, being of rapid growth,
will be up some days before the onions have made a
start. This should not be done except in very fine
weather. If rain falls upon recently raked-land, the
surface runs into one, and the whole cakes over.
Hoe among the crops continually in fine weather,
while the weeds are small, or a few days’ rain will
give them such advantage as to permanently injure
the crops. Foul land harbors slugs, grasshoppers, and
other garden pests.
Orchard. —This is a good time to brush over the
stems of all fruit trees and vines with a strong pre-
paration of Gishurst Compound, as a cure and pre-
ventive of disease; four dhnces of the compound
o


dissolved in a gallon of boiling water, and applied
quite warm with a brush to the trunk and main
branches—the head being well syringed —will be found
to promote the health of fruit trees and vines, and tend
greatly to protect them from the attacks of fungus
and insects. Transplant young trees, especially early
growing sorts. Prepare land hitherto neglected, that
all planting may be finished by the end of next month,
if possible. Plant grape vines. A general inspection
of every fruit tree and vine should take place this
month, removing all suckers, shortening back long
shoots, and cutting out all crowded or cross branches.
Eradicate docks, and give a dressing of salt to the
vines and fruit trees, lightly forking in some well-
decayed manure where necessary—not immediately
round the trunks of the trees, but where the small
roots are to be found, in a line with the outside circuit
of the foliage.
Farm. —Some of the most successful cultivators
of lucerne in the Brisbane district consider this month
the most favorable for sowing that seed. Sow oats,
vetches, &c. Prepare land for potatoes, maize, to-
bacco, sugar-cane, carrots, mangel wurzel, chicory,
and other crops. Potatoes and maize may be planted
in early positions, sheltered from the south-west.
AUGUST.
Kitchen Garden. —Peas sown this month should
be in beds with a cool aspect, as south or south-east.
A few French beans may be sown in a sheltered spot,
open to the north-east. At this season great advan-
tage would be gained by sowing the land with salt
before digging, at the rate of about 7 or 8 lbs. to the
perch; it would tend to sweeten the land, destroy
insects, discourage weeds, fungus, and mildew, and
retain moisture. The latter would prove very im


portant should the weather be dry. Sow beet, brocoli,
melons, Brussels sprouts, cucumber, lettuce, endive,
okra, parsley, pumpkins, radish, rhubarb, round spinach,
tomato, tobacco, carrots (large sowing), leek, cabbage,
cauliflower, chervil, turnip, parsnip, <fec.,.&c. Plant
out horse-radish, rhubarb, herbs, seakale, asparagus,
Jerusalem artichokes, ginger, &c. Keep the crops
clear of weeds, and destroy plants infested with aphis.
Those which are slightly attacked wash with Gishurst
Compound.
Orchard. —Every effort should be made to com-
plete the transplanting of fruit trees, as many casual-
ties, and much labor in watering and shelter, will be
caused if the early growing kinds have to be removed
after this month. Any work left over from" last
month should be completed. Keep the land clean,
and the surface open to receive the dews and showers.
Look over the orange trees, and, if troubled with the
aphis, syringe them well with a solution of Gishurst
Compound. Young orange trees showing too much
bloom, it should be carefully removed by sharp-pointed
scissors, and the tree have a dressing of liquid
manure to encourage foliage. They often die back
after excessive blooming. Dress the vines with lime
and sulphur in the morning when the dew is on them.
Farm. —Clean the crops put in last month.
Plant potatoes, white and yellow maize, rice, yams,
&c. The sweet potato can best be sent to distant
parts by forwarding the tuber at this season, to be
planted when it arrives at its destination ; the suckers
will soon appear, and can be planted out. Sow
sorghum and tobacco in seed beds. Silk-worms will
now require constant attention, feeding them frequent-
ly with young and tender leaves. Hoe up potatoes
before the tops are too high, by drawing the earth
towards them at each side—but not to a sharp ridge,
or it will throw the rain off instead of allowing it to'
find its way to the roots.


SEPTEMBER.
Kitchen Garden —All vacant land should be
trenched, and left to mellow down by exposure to
sun and air. Take every opportunity to collect
manure of all sorts, to be thrown into well-puddled
tanks -to rot down for use in autumn and winter;
weeds and green refuse of every description, with the
drainage of the stable, &c., should be carefully secured
in covered tanks. Manure for use in the garden
during summer should be in the liquid form. Sow all
newly-dug beds with salt, as directed last month.
See that the crops arc not crowded and are kept
clean. Sow a few peas on a cool spot. Sow English
and French beans, parsley, beet, capsicum and chilli,
cardoons, mustard and cress, lettuce, endive, egg-plant,
okra, Cape gooseberry, radish, rhubarb, round spinach,
tomato, tobacco, cucumbers, melons, pumpkins, vege-
table marrows, carrots, parsnips, &c. Transplant
cabbage, cschallots, cauliflowers, &c. for succession.
Water asparagus beds in dry weather. Plant out
Jerusalem artichokes, rhubarb, herbs, seakale, aspara-
gus, ginger, earth-nuts, &c. Sow rosella seed in
sheltered early positions.
Orchard. —■Recently-transplanted trees will require
careful attention, being mulched and protected until
they are established, giving water in dry weather.
Orange trees may be transplanted in calm cloudy
weather, but only those which are in a state of rest;
they should on no account be disturbed if budding
out with young shoots ; and ample protection, mulch-
ing, and a little sprinkling of water overhead, with a
fine rose watering-pot or a syringe every afternoon in
dry weather will greatly assist them. Mulch fruit
trees which appear to suffer from dry weather, to the
circuit of their foliage. Grape vines should be gone
over every week to remove all suckers and other
shoots nearer than one foot to the ground. All super


fluous shoots should be rubbed off, and, in early situa-
tions, the new wood should be secured as a protection
against injury from high winds. Plant out straw-
berries.
Farm. —Clean and earth up growing crops. Plant
out yams, earth-nuts, coffee, sugar-cane, arrowroot,
sweet potatoes, white maize, potatoes. Sow sorghum,
prairie-grass, cotton, &c.
OCTOBER.
Kitchen Garden. —Keep the crops clean, and mulch
and water where necessary. Sow parsley, English
beans, French beans, mustard and cress, lettuce,
endive, okra, radish, round spinach, beet, vege-
table marrow, melon,''"carrot, cucumber, tomato, &c.
A few cabBages" may be put in, taking care to check
the aphis on its first appearance. Sow rosella seed.
Orchard. —Thin out the fruit on China peach trees
and others where the crop is heavy; prop up the
branches. Remove suckers from vines, as directed
last month, tying up the branches as they extend,
but so as not to crush or bruise the leaves; remove
superabundant fruit. Plant out bananas and pine-
apples. Thin out the water shoots from inside of
fruit-bearing trees, to let in the sun and air to ripen
the fruit equally. Dress vines with sulphur on the
first appearance of oidium.
Farm. —Keep the ground loose and clean among
growing crops. Plant sweet potatoes, yams, ginger,
sugar-cane, arrowroot, earth-nuts, &c. Plant out
tobacco. Sow sorghum.
NOVEMBER.
Kitchen Garden. —As the season advances, the
advantage of having trenched the garden land will
become more apparent. Shallow worked land, unma


nured, will scarcely grow anything worth collecting.
The beds should now be laid out, with the ridges
across the hill on sloping ground, to catch every light
shower, openings being made at convenient distances
to allow of the escape of surplus water in heavy
rains. The full space must be allowed between the
crops during summer, or they will be drawn and
worthless; ample room and high cultivation are the
most economical in the long run. Cucumber and melon
plants should be thinned out where over-crowded, the
earth loosened among them, and the branches as they
extend be fastened down with small wooden pegs.
Keep the ground clean and open by the free use of
the hoe and digging fork. Sow French beans, melons,
brocoli, Brussels sprouts, mustard, and cress, cucum-
bers, lettuce, endive, celery, okra, radish, rosella, pump-
kin, &c. Transplant for succession in cloudy, calm
weather.
Orchard . —The China peach tree should have the
crop thinned as soon as the frnit can be used for
cooking, to relieve the trees and improve the size and
flavor of the remainder.' Mulch such trees to a con-
siderable distance around the stems, if not previously
done. Clear out all superfluous shoots to throw the
whole strength of the plant into the crop, not re-
moving or injuring any of the foliage unnecessarily.
Prop up such trees as require it. Remove suckers
from grape vines, stop straggling branches, and rub
off weak, ill-placed shoots, to throw vigor into the
leaders for next season’s fruiting, as well as the ad-
vantage of the present crop. Plant out bananas and
pine-apples, for which operation some of the most
experienced growers consider this month the most
suitable time. Trench land intended for planting next
season, to give it the advantage of the summer’s sun to
sweeten it.
Farm.— Constant attention should be given to the
crops to keep them clean, using the horse-hoe and


cultivator to economise labor. Watch the tobacco
closely, removing caterpillars, and stopping the plants
as required to direct the sap into the leaves intended
for the crop, that they may attain the utmost luxu-
riance. In making oaten hay, cut the crop when well
in ear, but before the seed is near mature; the whole
plant is then in its most nourishing state, and the seed
will not shed.
DECEMBER.
Kitchen Garden. —French beans, cucumbers, vege-
table marrow, &c., should be gathered immediately they
are fit for use, whether they are required or not; for,
if left on, the plants will soon cease to bear. Sow
cabbage and cauliflower seed ; great difficulty will be
experienced in getting it to grow at this season, and the
plants will consequently be more valuable in propor-
tion. Sow also French beans, mustard, and cress,
lettuce, endive, okra, radish, &c. All vacant ground
should be well manured and dug two spits deep ; none
should be allowed to remain idle, or occupied with
stumps, weeds, and rubbish, to harbor insects, vermin,
and disease. Manure and dig as the crops come off,
and the land will be ready for use after the first shower.
Orchard. —Attend to last month’s instructions.
Place straw under the trees, upon which the fruit may
fall without bruising. Tie up the shoots of the vine
as they extend, not injuring the leaves. The China
peaches, as soon as the crop is off, may have their new
wood shortened back a third of its length, cutting to an
outside bud. The centre of such trees should also be
looked to, that they be preserved of the shape of a
cup. This pruning greatly improves-the next season’s
fruit. Trench land intended to be planted next sea-
son ; one crop taken from it, clean, will greatly improve
the texture of the soil, and prepare it for receiving the
poung fruit trees.


Farm. —Too much care can scarcely be bestowed
upon potatoes dug up this month, to protect them from
the sun. They should be dug up as soon as the skin
is firm, as they are liable to rot in the ground from the
great heat. Keep the crops clean, and thin them out
where too much crowded. Attend to the tobacco as
directed last month.


i|p HttsittsknW.
NE W ISSUE.
The New Series contains THIRTY-TWO PAGES, and is
issued with the LEAVES CUT AND SEWN.
The New Issue of The Queenslander, being an entirely
original paper, does not contain reprint articles from The
Brisbane Courier.
Amongst its leading features are—
TALES—The best Original Tales, by English and Colonial
Writers ; Copyright being in each case purchased by the
Proprietors.
SKETCHES—Bynumerous Writers, including Marcus Clarke,
Our New Zealand Correspondent, &o.
SCIENTIFIC and USEFUL—Notes and Records of all the
latest and most important discoveries and inventions.
THE LADIES’ COLUMN—Regular Letters from our Lady
Correspondent in London, on Social, Literary, Musical,
and other subjects.
THE MlNER—Carefully collated news from all the Fields,
with a weekly review of the Mining Industry.
THE REVlEWER—Comprehensive and exhaustive notices,
by the most distinguished Australian Reviewers, of all
new works of general interest.
THE CHILDREN’S CORNER—Selected Stories for the
Young, amusing arid instructive.
THE SPORTSMAN—SpeciaI reports of Local and Inter-
colonial Race Meetings, Cricket and Athletic Sports,
Shooting, &c.
SPECIALITIES —On prominent events.
INTERCOLONIAL NEWS —Special Correspondents’ Letters
from Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and New Zealand.
EUROPEAN and FOREIGN CORRESPONDENCE-Spe-
cial Correspondents’ Letters from Loudon, San Francisco,
Hongkong, and Singapore.
THE STATION, FARM, and GARDEN—FuII reports of
all matters of interest in this department, including Move-
ments of Stock, Reports of Sales, state of country in
respect of grass and water, &c., &c.
LEADING AR TICLES, Parliamentary and Court News, Ship-
ping and Commercial Intelligence, and News of the Day.
Subscription—2ls. per year ; any period short of a year,
6s. 6d. per quarter.


Cl)f Cdnjraplj.
THE TELEGRAPH is the only Daily
Evening Paper published in Brisbane.
PRICE-ONE PENNY.
Subscription—Six Shillings ami Sixpence per Quarter.
It is the Best Medium for Advertising.
Circulation upwards of 19,000 weekly, and steadily
increasing.
Grass Seeds.
The Mixture of Grass and Clover Seeds supplied for
LAWNS and CROQUET GROUNDS
will be found to produce, under favorable circumstances, a
fine and compact rich green sward.
PRICES STRICTLY MODERATE.
The HAY and PASTURE GRASSES
are Mixtures of the most Hardy and Nutritive Kinds in
cultivation.
LUCERNE SEED and PRAIRIE GRASS
can be supplied by the single pound, or by the ton, at the lowest
market price.
COUCH GRASS,
Por Embankments, Head Stations, &c.
A. d. HOOKINGS.


J. HOCKINGrS’
Agricultural Implement Depot,
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.
pOLOKIAL Wrought Iron PLOUGHS,
j For 1,2, 4 horses, from £4 10s. upwards.
NEWBOULT’S “X. L. all ” Angle Iron Beam PLOUGHS, ■
From £.3 10s. upwards.
EWBODLT’S Anti-friction Wheel PLOUGHS, £6 10s.
HOWARDS', RANSOME & SIMS', and other best English
i PLOUGHS, £4 10s. upwards.
AMERICAN EAGLE—COTTON—GARDEN—and other
American PLOUGHS, From £3 upwards.
it
a.
Best COLONIAL Wrought Iron HORSE-HOES or CULTI-
VATORS, From £3 10s. upwards.
Best COLONIAL Wrought Iron HARROWS,
j £2 10s. upwards.
•’very other Article of Best Quality and Workmanship,
and at the Lowest Price.


Fruit Trees.
The advantage in health and comfort obtained by surrounding
the suburban or country home with a few really good Fruit
Trees can scarcely be over-estimated; and, as a good tree
requires neither more room nor care than a bad one, attention
is directed to the very
CHOICE COLLECTION
OP
European & Tropical Fruit Trees
in the Nursery of the undersigned.
With the desire to naturalise in this climate the choicest
fruits of other countries, the best varieties have been intro-
duced from England, Prance, America, China, India, the
adjoining Colonies, and other countries, during the last
twenty-seven years; and it can now be truly stated that
Queensland possesses some of the
Finest Fruits from every Part of the World,
CATALOGUES will be forwarded gratis, upon application to
A. J. HOOKINGS,
Seed and Plant Merchant,
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.


nx T A TFT? r r TT IG P IG F'I?'P <?
wXXaX X wU X X cCsi JtTu j
By the Best Makers—Various Sizes.
CORK CRACKERS.
TVT GTJ'XPT T "X?T>Q
JO AX JZ3I AAAIIAaI XLjcDj
Best Colonial and American Made.
Steel Flour Mills,
With Large Hopper and Fly Wheel.
Ploughs, Harrows, Horse-Hoes, Grubbers,
Seed Drills, Spades, Hoes, Rakes,
German Prongs, Forks, Shovels, Scythes,
Grindstones. Hay Rakes, Hay Knives,
Billhooks, Bagging Hooks, Pickaxes, Axes,
Barrows, Bandicoot Traps, Churns,
And numerous other articles required on a Farm.
Every Article of the Best Quality , ami at the Lowest
Remunerative Price.
A. HQ(C&m®S,
AGRCULTURAL IMPLEMENT DEPOT,
BRISBANE.


/V
C u^V CUTLERY, f
Cof>i iN REQUISITES. i
Pruning Knives, imported direct from the best Eng-
lish Makers; German Vine Knives, of best Steel;
also, Pruning Shears, for Grass and Hedges; Pruning
Scissors ; Flower Gatherers; Rose Pruners; Pruning
Saws; Budding Knives; Grape Scissors; Syringes,
various prices ; Sulphuring Bellows ; Fumigators ;
Tobacco Paper for Fumigating; Sulphur; Watering
Pots; Garden Reels and Lines; Garden Trowels:
Weeding Forks; Hoes; Spades; Rakes; Sieves; Sets
Ladies’ Garden Tools; Pots and Saucers; Hanging
Pots; Seed Pans ; Wire Supports ; Wire Baskets ;
Dock Spuds; Turf Cutters; Scythes; Garden Gloves;
Gishurst Compound; and every oth ;r article required
in a well-ordered Garden.
ALSO,
GARDEN ROLLERS,
Of the best material ami construction ;
LAWN MOWERS,
Of various approved Patterns, with Grass Boxes, &c., &c.
A. J. HOCKING-S,
J3crh [plant ffintlpiil,
QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.
