

August 1, 1845.]
[Price Is.
VINDICATION
OF THE
CHARACTER AND CONDUCT
OF THE
REV. T. WIGMORE, A.B. T.C.D.
MISSIONARY OF THE SOCIETY FOR THE PROPAGATION OF
THE GOSPEL IN FOREIGN PARTS,
And Chaplain of the District of Bothwell in Van Diemen's Land,
IN
A LETTER,
AUDUESSED TO THE
LORD RIMIOP OF TASMANIA,
WITH A PREFACE TO THE PUBLIC.
HOBART TOWN:
Printed and published by John moore,
11, MACQUARIE STREET,
AND SOLD BY THE BOOKSELLERS.
MDCCCXLV.


August 1, 1845.]
[Price Is,
VINDICATION
OF THE
CHARACTER AND CONDUCT
OF THE
REV. T. WIGMORE, A.B. T.C.D.
MISSIONARY OF THE SOCIETY FOR THE PROPAGATION OF
THE GOSPEL IN FOREIGN PARTS,
And Chaplain of the District of Bothwell in Van Diemens Land,
IN
A LETTER,
ADDRESSED TO THE
KORD JBBl!SiaO;P OF TASMMIA,
WITH A PREFACE TO THE PUBLIC.
HOBART TOWN:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY JOHN MOORE,
11, MACQUARIE STREET,
AND SOLD BY THE BOOKSELLERS.
MDCCCXIiV,


J. MOORE, PRINTER,
KO, M, MACQUARIE STREET,
HOBART TOWN*


TO THE PUBLIC.
It is needless to apologize for the liberty I take in
making this appeal to you. Its title is my pass-
port to your sympathy. The Narrative must find
its own level, a cordial reception, if it deserves it;
if otherwise, the rejection of it -and its unworthy
Author.
The Price affixed demands -a’word of explana-
tion. These sheets will not have been many days
in the hands of the Public before the Writer will be
on the high seas, compelled to seek redress at home,
leaving behind him a wife and eight children, with
little other means of subsistence than what may be
derived from the profits of this Pamphlet.
I have no misgivings as to the result, either to
myself or them, under such distressing circum-
stances. \Ye are under the all-directing Provi-
dence of Him whose glory it is, to justify the Inno-
cent and to provide for the Helpless.


TO THE
LORD BISHOP OF TASMANIA.
My Lord,
On receiving ( the instrument of revoca-
tion of my Licence by your Lordship, 1 requested,
as a matter of right, to be furnished with the
charges laid against me, with a view to appeal, as
directed in your Letters Patent to our common
Ecclesiastical Superior, the Archbishop of Canter-
bury, Your stern refusal, in the face of the simplest
elements of justice, has excluded me from this pre-
scribed mode of redress.
My next step was to impugn the legality of your
act by applying to the Supreme Court (the other
mode of redress laid down in the same Letters
Patent) for a Mandamus to compel you t© declare
the grounds of your proceeding to such an extre-
mity against me • which has cost me between 95 and
100 pounds. Here (1 blush while I give publicity
to the injury done to the discipline of our Church)
I was told that a Bishop may trample on the whole
body of his Clergy, if he will lay his hand upon his
heart, and say, that his proceedings were the result
of deliberate and conscientious conviction.


PREFACE.
How will the Report of this decision be heard
by the United Church of England and Ireland,
where one of the most ordinary proceedings on
Church matters in the Temporal Courts is the suing
out Mandamuses to Bishops to show cause for
either refusing or withdrawing an Episcopal Licence,
Shut out, then, from these, the only authorized tri-
bunals of redress, 1 betake myself from the subtle-
ties and technicalities of Courts, spiritual and tem-
poral, to appeal to the reason and judgment of a
Court where I look to be received impartially,
heard patiently, and judged righteously—the Com-
munity, not of Tasmania alone, but of the United
Empire.
Before this tribunal, then, I proceed to slate
my case against your Lordship, premising that 1
have first put up my petition to the Throne of Grace
to be directed in setting forth the truth, and to be
assisted in maintaining the truth with discretion
and firmness.
I have the honour to be
Your Lordship’s most obedient
And once dutiful Servant,
THOMAS WIGMORE, CLERK.
P.S.—I take your Lordship’s permission to adopt
in the sequel the simple style of narrative, instead
of the cumbrous epistle. Be pleased also to over-
look the seemingly studied neglect of ceremonious
diction: I aim at brevity.
V




VINDICATION,
In the maintenance of my character as a Minister of the Church
of Christ and a gentleman, I was driven to the necessity of insti-
tuting two actions in the Supreme Court, against the Messrs.
Horne, father and son, for infamous and malicious libels written
and published. At the very opening of these cases in Court, an
absurd discussion on the words “ mean and vile” induced the pre-
siding Judge to recommend a “nonsuit;” thereby putting both
cases out of Court, and making me liable for the whole costs,
direct and indirect, on both sides, amounting to little short of two
hundred and twenty pounds.
His Honor’s expressions are Votthy of being recorded. No
defect in the pleadings occurring up to these monosyllables, at
the latter he stopped'my lawyer with these remarks; —“I never
saw pleadings more negligently drawn than these. They are bur-
thened with inuendos which cannot be maintained. I teas in the
habit of correcting such pleadings heretofore, but lam come to
the resolution of not doing so again, Mr. Stewart, 1 recommend
you to submit to a nonsuit.”
A fiery persecution, backed by the fiat of the Supreme Court,
soon drove me to seek the protection of the Insolvent Court,
where I had been introduced a few days before my first interview
with the Bishop of Tasmania. This granted, after a suitable
lamentation at seeing such a specimen of his Tasmanian clergy


before him, I was permitted to exhibit my testimonials, public and
private, comprising a period of more than thirty years, twenty-live
of which had been spent in the sacred ministry. They elicited
the following commendation :—“ I have seldom seen such testi-
monials, and spreading over such a period of time.”
We then entered on a careful examination of the circumstances,
which led to my unseemly position. After a patient perusal both
of the documents which 1 exhibited and those furnished him by
the Registry of the Diocese, he was pleased to say he consi-
dered me a much injured man, concluding our interview thus :
“ Mr. Wigmore, I perceive that there has been a dead set
made at you.”
Soon after he informed me that ho would be in Bothwell in the
latter end of October, to investigate my affairs judicially.
When the time arrived, I had a letter from Archdeacon Mar-
riot, dated from Perth, to say “ that the Bishop was afraid to ven-
ture to Bothwell in his low-wheeled carriage, and must, therefore,
leave me as he found me four months before (ill after his voyage
to Sydney.”
I complain of this, knowing, as he did, how anxious I was
for a searching investigation, and supplied as he is by the Govern-
ment with two horses for the discharge of the onerous duties of
the Diocese. Moreover, during all this time the Bishop thought
proper to refuse forwarding the monthly abstracts for my salary.
At length, having taken a legal opinion on the subject, he finds
out his error, and, instead of advising me of his having done so,
as charity would dictate, he sails for Sydney, leaving instructions
with his Archdeacon to pay the salary to my Assignee.
Now, from the fact of my having been permitted by the
Governor to send in my own abstracts lor upwards of a year, 1
am enabled to affirm, that neither the Bishop, nor indeed the
Head of any of the Public Departments, has any thing to do
with the payment of the stipends. Their business is simply to
certify that the duty has been performed. This I was permitted
to do without let or hindrance; indicating that, though'l was


worthy to discharge the sacred duties of my profession, I was
not worthy of my hire. I have learned that “ the labourer is
worthy of his hire.”
Need 1 say that this, besides subjecting me to much annoyance,
entailed also a serious loss, compelling me to sacrifice whatever
of my property was convertible into cash for the support of my
family, as well as to pay a heavy percentage for all ray salary thus
passing through the hands of my Assignee.
Matters stood thus till the Bishop came to Both well to hold a
Confirmation, when, on Sunday, the 14th April, I had the honour
of taking part in the service with him.
Seeing that I had no surplice, nor funds to procure it, he
kindly promised to supply me with one. On the following morning
I addressed a note to his Lordship, lamenting that there were no
candidates (it for confirmation, save thieeof my own children, and
offering to save him the trouble on their account. To this I
received the following reply :
Bothwell, April 1 5th.
Rev. Sir,
I shall be glad to administer the rite of confirmation to
your children, in lire full confidence that you have prepared them
as a Christian should. However we may both regret that more
have not presented themselves, yon were quite right in declining
to receive children so young as those alluded to in your letter.
I remain, Rev. Sir,
Your faithful servant,
F. R. TASMANIA.
llev. T. W igmore.
After the Confirmation he delivered an address, directed
chiefly to those children, and which, as may be supposed, made a
deep impression on them. In the course of it he look occasion
B


more than once to make allusions to me. I have taxed- the
children’s memory for the very words* rather than -set forth my,
own version, They supply me with the following
Hobart Town, August 6, 1044.
My Dear Papa,
As well as I can recollect that part of the confirmation
sermon preached by the Bishop at Bothwell, which related per-
sonally to you, it was in substance as follows :—That, as we were
children of a zealous and sincere Minister of the Church, he need
scarcely urge the necessity of prayer—the practice of which, he
was sure, had been taught us all our lives. And again, speaking
of the necessity of receiving the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper,
he said, that he had given instructions to his Clergy, that they
should bring none to be confirmed who had not promised “to
neglect no opportunity of becoming partakers of the Holy Sacra-
ment;” and, though he was confident that its necessity was before
pointed out to us by a pious and affectionate parent, yet he would
wish to impress upon us the following reasons, for which ho had
made this express condition for Candidates for confirmation.
I remain, my Dear Papa,
Your affectionate Son,
RICHARD WIGMORE.
The Bishop said in his address on the day of Confirmation,
16th of April, 1844, “ That we, as Christian children, and brought
up as he was sure under a Christian parent, should conduct our-
selves as such.” He also said, “ that he had no doubt but, from-
the time we were able to understand, we were brought up to those
truths by that Christian parent, and that he at no time neglected
the duty of family prayer, which was the most necessary thing to
our salvation.” He said, “he wished we would follow the
practice of reading a chapter in the Bible, morning and evening,
which if neglected by ourselves would, he had no doubt, be
enforced by our affectionate father, who he knew was a faithful
servant of the Lord’s, and that in his Ministerial capacity fulfilled
all that was necessary-for the spiritual welfare of his flock.’’
ELLEN WIGMORE.


The Bishop said on the dayof confirmation, April 15lh—
“ That he knew we were brought up in a Christian mannner
-by our parent, who he believed was a Christian Minister.”
“ That he need not impress upon us the duty of prayer,' as
£ he knew it was not neglected by such a Christian parent.”
•• That he need not say much more to us-than what he was
aware had been told us by our father.”
“ That there were few parents who discharged their parental
duties in so Christian-like a manner ; v and that his exhortation
was almost unnecessary.”
ELIZA WIGMORE.
This finished, the Bishop did me the honour of a visit. Being
■sealed, he condescendingly invited me to lay aside all reserve, and
speak with him as a.Brother,mot as a Bishop.
He began the conversation -by telling me' “ that a person, to
whom he had before made a promise by letter, addressed him on
coming out of Church, to know whether he would now investigate
the .charges against Mr. Wigraore; but I told him “ that I knew
nothing in the character or conduct of Mr. AVigmore that 1 could
•make the subject of judicial investigation.”
On this affair I need but remark, that this" Correspondent of
the Bishop of Tasmania had but lately eraerged'fiom Government
patronage, after being twice brought to disgrace and punishment
by the adroitness with which he used his pen, and at this moment
is the keeper of a public house at Bothtvell!
Our next was a delicate subject, on which I took his permission
to express my sentiments freely.
He remarked, “ Mr. Wigmore, your principles are too high-
yon take too high ground for the community in which you are
placed.’’ I sustained my views by a quotation from Scripture,
which, as may bo.supposed, settled the matter.


Touching on the subject of insolvency, he flattered me into a
perfect security, by informing me that a brother Bishop on the
Irish Bench was insolvent; and that the whole affairs of his Dio-
cese, spiritual and temporal, were administered by his Yicar-
General.
Here his Lordship bade a courteous adieu, with a closing
admonition to settle the pecuniary difference between the Synnots
and myself.
He spent the evening in company with these gentlemen, whose
acquaintance he was anxious to cultivate, from the fact, as he told
me, of his having many dear friends among their relatives at home.
At an hour approaching to midnight I received a letter, being
evidently of the Bishop’s dictation, and to which I was requested
to return an answer before six o'clock in the morning. 1 did so
by a friend ; and the Bishop, on hearing that I had given a posi-
tive refusal to the proposition contained, said to my friend, “ The
consequences will be ruinous to Mr. Wigmsre and his family.’’
Here ends the bright side of my story.—“ Mine mild prima mail
lubes.”
Permit me now, reader, to divert a little to an occurrence
of no small moment, and which, prepared as the ground now
was, sealed my doom.
Out of a letter I received from Archdeacon Marriott grew the
following correspondence: —
Bothwell, May 13, 1844.
Rev. Sir,
Having had the honour of a communication from you,
I feel disposed to answer the queries therein contained, as also to
acknowledge the kindness and condescension with which it con-
cludes. But, before I can do so with all the sincerity and free-
dom I could wish, I take leave to apprize you that the issue of
the several interviews I have had with you has left an impression
on my mind that I do not hold that place in your estimation to
which I consider myself fully entitled,


Not thinking it necessary to enter into detail, I pass over the
occasion of our first meeting, when you pronounced, almost judi-
cially, that I had “ rendered myself wholly incompetent to hold
a Colonial Chaplaincy,” I pass over also the occasion when I
was bold enough to ask you in the street whether you had autho-
rity to sign the abstracts for my salary, withheld now nearly five
months. Instead of answering’as humanity would dictate, you took
to chiding me in no very measured terms for daring to maintain
my character by an appeal to the laws of the land.
Dismissing these two, I invite your attention to one of a more
serious character. I allude to the Justification Letter, which I
addressed to the Bishop, and which, you informed me, had given
great offence to his Lordship. When in Bothwell, the Bishop
condescendingly indulged me with rather a lengthened conversation,
in the course of which he assured me that no letter I took upon
me to address to his Lordship gave him the least offence, save one,
in which he said " I might have been more courteous.” Having
pressed his Lordship to specify, it turned out to be one altogether
different, both in matter and time, from that I suspected, and the
expressions, I am happy to say, I was able fully to explain away
to bis Lordship’s satisfaction.
The variance here is too apparent to need comment; and, until
it is in some way cleared up, 1 must decline furnishing any details,
official or otherwise, unless expressly directed by the Bishop, ranch
less availing myself of the kindness tendered for private purposes.
I have the honour to be, Rev. Sir,
Your obedient servant,
THOMAS WIGMORE.
The Venerable F, A. Marriott.
Hobart Town, May 15, 1844.
Rev. Sir,
Your most extraordinary Letter I should at once lay
aside, as best left unnoticed, but for one reason, which induces me
rather to leave it in the Bishop’s hands.
It is not for the personal insult to myself. That I should beg
him not to regard. It is that any one who could write such a


Letter would very likely, as the next step, represent me as unable
to meet a charge ot having told a deliberate lie,
1 shall, therefore, give the Bishop your Letter, when he ar-
rives on Saturday, and beg to refer you to his Lordship, to whom
I shall render any explanation he may desire on your behalf.
Your obedient servant,
F. A. MARRIOTT.
llev. T. Wigmore,
Uothwell, May nth, 1045.
Rev. Sib,
Most sincerely do T regret to see so much of bad feeling
and bad breeding exhibited by a dignitary of our Church as is
apparent in your Note of the 15th. It has given to an affair
guileless, nay, praiseworthy in its intention, an aspect truly for-
midable.
You contemplate my progress in audacity, and say "that ray
next step would be to represent you as unable to make a charge
of having told a deliberate lie.” If this be intended as an insinua-
tion against the veracity of ray narrative, it only remains for me
to tell you that I hold you to be quite as capable of telling a
deliberate lie” as I am.
Believe me I shall be grievously disappointed if the Bishop
does not investigate the whole from its origin to its issue ; and
that, under a fixed persuasion that his Lordship will recognise it to
belong to the duties of his high station, apart from all private or
pergonal considerations, to maintain an humble and unoffending
Parochial Minister in a struggle, as unseemly as it is unprovoked,
with his captious and self-sufficient Archdeacon.
1 have the honour to be, Rev. Sir,
Your obedient servant,
THOMAS WIG MORE.
The Venerable T. A. Marriott.


Hobart Town, May 24, 18-14.
Rev. Sir,
The Archdeacon .lias placed before me your letters to him
of the I3th and 20th instant. It is a matter of astonishment and
regret to me, that any Clergyman in my Diocese should have so far
forgotten himself as to write in such a strain to his Ecclesiastical
Superior.
I really hardly know how to address you, for it would seem
that frank and unreserved communication is dangerous.
Thus much, however, I will say, in order that you may labour
under no further mistake. I am not one to dwell, for months,
upon affronts. It is my habit to forget them as soon as possible ;
and, therefore, I answered you truly, when I saw you at Bothwel),
and told you that your previous letters had left no abiding impres-
sion of offence upon me. The Archdeacon spoke my sentiments
most truly also, when he said, that my first perusal of your letter
of justification gave me much displeasure. If-I mistake not, you
were so informed at the time.
I must now desire you, in conclusion, to confine yourself, in any
letters that you may hereafter send me, to mere matters of detail.
I cannot enter into any other kind of correspondence with one
whose unprovoked insults to the Archdeacon of the Diocese (to
say nothing of other matters unbecoming the position of a Clergy-
man) have at length deprived him of the respect and confidence of
his Bishop.
I remain. Rev. Sir,
Your faithful servant.
F. R. TASMANIA.
Rev. T. Wigmore.
Bothwell, May 27,1814.
My Lord Bishop,
I find no difficulty in paying strict obedience to your
Lordship’s inhibition. lam not conscious of ever having ventured
on the least approach to familiarity, save in the interview with your
Lordship at my own house, which was solely at your Lordship’s
solicitation. As the matter now pending (or, I should rather say.


settled to my cost) has grown out of it, your Lordship will bear
with me while I state verbatim what then occurred. In reply, to
be informed whether any communication of mine had given offence,
your Lordship’s answer was, “ No letter you addressed to me has
given me any offence save one.” I asked was that the letter of
justification. The reply was, “No, but one of much laler date.”
Against this standsthe report of the Archdeacon, “That the letter
of justification had given your Lordship and himself great offence.”
No other intimation ever reached me.
Your Lordship informs me that “ I am henceforth to bo
deprived of the respect and confidence of my Bishop.’' 1 am
quite unconscious of ever having been thought worthy of the one,
and certain of never being made to feel that i enjoyed the other.
Notwithstanding, I lament the prospect of being now for ever
shut out from both. Yet lam not in despair: for, when cast off
by friends, and cast down by foes, I am permitted, nay, invited to
look up to a Bishop, who is no respecter of men’s persons, and
whose confidence will not fail in his people’s extremity. This, my
Lord, is a blessed prospect for both ol us.
I conld wish to conclude here, without calling your Lordship’s
attention to your interjectional comment on my present position.
To the settlement of the matter in question it is quite irrelevant;
in a personal point of view it is calculated to excite rather than
appease ; and, after what has come to your Lordship’s knowledge,
and the sentiments you have expressed, both to others and myself,
it is in the highest degree uncharitable.
I have the honour to be, my Lord,
Your Lordship’s very faithful and obedient servant.
THOMAS WIGMORE.
The Lord Bishop, &c., &c.
Hard upon this several private interviews took place between the
Bishop and the younger Synnot, who was particularly hostile to me,
and whose last public mention of me is too pithy to be omitted.
Stopping at one of the public houses where he regales with
brandy and water, and seeing a goodly number of stock-keepers,
shepherds, and constables around him, he enlarged at some length
on my merits, concluding thus ;—“ He is fitter to be a prize-fighter


than a Clergyman, I’ll get all the district to sign (or his dis-
missal. I’d ga to the gates of hell to injure him!”
Having attained this with the ready co-operation of the Bishop
of Tasmania, I am at liberty to suppose that he is not far oil the
terminus fixed by himself; where I take my leave of him, hoping
that the Bishop may be made the blessed instrument of his recal,
ere it be too late.
Meeting my Solicitor in the street of Hobart'town, he told
him he was on his way to the Bishop, as his Lordship wished to
see him on important business.
I pretend not to fathom the secrets of this conclave ; butSynnot
on the following day, meeting the Rev. Mr. Burrowes and two
Other gentlemen on the high road, reveals thus much i—" Well, I
had a long conversation yesterday with the Bishop on Wigmore’s
business.’’ So and so took place, and it ended thus :—“ Well,
my Lord, I suppose we shall have to be troubled with t he fellow
for another year.” “ No,” replied he, “ I’ll dismiss him imme-
diately.” This took place on the 251 h June. True to his pro*
mise, accordingly, I received the following by the next post :
Hobart Town, June 20, 1844.
Siu,
t am directed by the Hishop to inquire of you under what
authority you are now performing the Ecclesiastical functions of
Chaplain at Bothvvell, since you have received from his Lordship
no licence empowering you to officiate in this Diocese.
1 have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient Servant.
JOHN D. LOCH.
To the Rev. T, Wigmorc, Bothwelf,
0


(Reply.)
Tlie Rev. Thomas -Wigmore was placed on the Ecclesiastical
Establishment of Van Diemen’s Land by order of Lord John
Russell, Secretary of Stale lor tbe Colonies, on recommendation of
the Society for the. Propagation of the Gospel.
On arrival he was immediately nominated to the Chaplaincy of
Bothwell, by the Archdeacon Hutchinspresented as such to the
Sir John Franklin, and in due course con-
firmed in all Ecclesiastical functions by licence of the Lord Bishop
of Australia, then his Diocesan.
■ One short month after this, the revocation of my Licence, under
the hand and episcopal seal of the Bishop of Tasmania, was put
into ray hands by the Police Cleric at Bothwell, by direction, as
he said, of the Police Magistrate, Mr. Barrow, who, for the pur-
pose of exhibition to be sure, first ordered a copy to be taken and
preserved in the Office.
Query . —Does such a duty properly belong to the Police De-
partment? or, is such a document one to be deposited with the
official registries of a Police Office ?
Now this document bears date Hobart Town, July 24th, 1844.
On that fame day young Synnott, returning from Flobart Town*
and meeting the Rev. Mr. Robertson, forty miles from Hobart
Town, unable to contain his extacy, but little dreaming of the
discovery it would lead to, informed him “ that Mr. Barrow would
be in possession of such a document by next post day’’!!!
If this does not betray a treacherous combination for my ruin*
I confess my failure in attempting to prove it.—ln reference to
the document itself, I think it necessary to remark but briefly.
Arriving at the dread moment of pronouncing sentence, the Bishop
sets forth that, “ after due inquiry, lie has found me unfit, both
by conduct and ministry, to retain the Licence of the Bishop of
Australia,
On the subject of “ conduct” I make no doubt but that
he has been more than satisfied by the forenamed Synnot and
tbe publican!


'Of the manner in which I discharge the duties of my ministry,
into which the Lord, I hone, and not man only, has |>ut mo, it
behoves me to speak with modesty. Friends say I acquit myself
efficiently— those who occupy neutral ground, irreproachably—
my most virulent foes have never dared to question my competency.
Thus am I enabled to assert, in the sight of God and before
the eyes of all who read, that the Bishop of Tasmania uever,
-directly or indirectly, received a complaint.of my “ ministry ”
I make this assertion openly, advisedly, solemnly, and I call
■ upon the Bishop of Tasmania to disprove it. . (See his own
judgment on the 15th April.)
The following Notes will close the first part of our Narrative
.and give breathing lime for what is to follow
ißotkwetl, July 29, 1845.
The Rev. Thomas Wigraore, with becoming respect to the
Bishop of Tasmania, acknowledges the receeipt of the document
containing the revocation of his licence. ‘
The same sets forth that such a measure, adopted towards a
Minister of twenty-five years irreproachable service, with a wile
and eight children, destitute—nay, infinitely worse than destitute—-
-separated from friends and surrounded by foes,-“ has been the
result of due enquiry.’’
Mr. Wi gmore, as a matter of right, requests to be furnished
-with the particulars of the charges laid against him in such detail,
as to euahle him to lake proper steps for his justification and
Hobart Town, Avgust 2, 1844.
The Bishop of Tasmania, in acknowledging the receipt of
the llev. T. Wigmore’s note of the 29th ultimo, desires to express
the deep concern he has felt, on finding himself obliged, in the
•exercise of the functions peculiarly belonging to his office, to
resort to a measure which must he so severe in its effects upon
Mr. Wigmore as that of which he complains.


The Bishop is advised that he is not bound to comply with
Mr. Wigtnore’s request, “ as a matter of right 10 be furnished with
particulars, more than are expressed in the instrument of
revocation of his licence ; and that it would not ho compatible
with a due regard to the maintenance of his authority to do so.
He therefore feels himself under the necessity of to
comply with that request.
PART II
Tub Bishop of Tasmania, having learned that his proceedings
against me had created a sensation among his Clergy, as well as
in the community, issued the following Circular;—
• October 31tt, 1844.
The Bishop of Tasmania is very anxious to see such of his
Clergy as may be able to attend at his house on Wednesday next,
November 6, at three o’clock in the afternoon, as he has several
papers and much information connected with Cbnrch matters to
lay before them.
Nine of the Clergy accordingly attended. An animated dis-
cussion (j? discussion it can be called, where one speaks and the
rest are schooled into silence) took place; and, from the particu-
lars, which I am on authority enabled to detail, it will appear that
the sole object of this invitation was to give himself an opportunity
of turning the secret information he had received, and on which he
acted, into his own justification and my total condemnation.
It might have occurred to him that the attitude he assumed
and the marked detestation with which he spoke of me might act
as a reasonable in terrorem lesson to the listening Clergy, of whom
ho had heard such murmuring?.
Though this meeting was called professedly on Church matters
generally, and though the mention of the case of Mr. Bateman
pccurred here and there incidentally, it is plain, both from wlmt


occurred then and from the subject-matter of the Protest and
Answer, by and bye set forth, that 1 was the sole object of attack,
and that the whole artillery of the Bishop was brought to bear on
my single self.
His first assertion was that I had told a palpable lie (a favourite
phrase of his and his Archdeacon’s) in stating that I had a Licence
from the Bishop of Australia. I did so assert; but the document
I subjoin, addressed to me by the Secretary of the then Arch-
.deacon, Mr. Palmer, and franked by him, proves that I did not tell
a deliberate lie.
Archdeacon's Office ,
sth September, 1842.
Rev. Sir,
I am requested by the Secretary to the Bishop of Aus-
tralia, to make application for, and transmit to Sydney, the sum of
one pound, due to him on account of the Bishop’s License issued
from his Office,
I am, Rev. Sir,
Your obedient servant,
ALFRED SWAIN.
The Rev. Thomas Wigiuore.
Now, if I were to turn round and say that the Bishop told a
deliberate lie, I would say what was true; but then I would be
subjecting myself to the charge of insolence and effrontery. This
grows out of the corruption of the times in which our lot is cast.
The rule seems to be, that the great folk should have full licence
to say and do what they please—and that the minores gentes
should demean themselves as if they were tongue-tied. I have
felt this in ray own experience—but it is now a case of life and
death with me. 1 must, therefore, speak and write like a great
radii. It was not so in olden time, when the proverb obtained
“ In maximd potentid minima liccnlia .”


Hear another of his Lordship’s complimentary comments.
Exhibiting a slip of paper with my signature at foot, and which
he could have obtained in no other way than from his privy coun-
cillor, Synnot, he gravely informed his Clergy that I denied on
oath having given that paper to Synnot! I furnish the contents
as literally as possible :
I hereby promise to pay Mr. Walter Synnot his bill of £75 out
of the first ptoceeds of thu corn, which he has handed ovet to me.
THOMAS WIGMORE, CLERK.
Now, hail I remembered the existence of such a paper, I
would have called (or its production in the Supreme Court to
prove my case there against the Symiol's.
In the next place, I would ask, what was the object of its pro-
duction in the Insolvent Court, where the debt was admitted and
proved ? The purpose is not to be mistaken. Seeing that I had
not called for it at the trial, the conclusion was, that I had for-
gotten it altogether. It served them as a trap, but they that laid
it have fallen in themselves.
Finally— l admit that I have been guilty of Perjury, if it be
perjury to swear that I had no recollection of having ever put my
hand to such a document. To close the case, I dety the most
ingenious sophistry to adduce one solitary reason why I should
have denied it. Yet the Bishop will have it so, more majorum
gentium. These are his words:—"lf this is not perjury, it is
something very like it; but I will charitably suppose that he has
forgotten.”
The Bishop’s charity is of a novel kind. It is as if he slew a
man and then charitably sent for a doctor to restore him. It is
as if he hung a mau to the Inst gasp, and then, cutting him down,
stood by, charitably hoping he would come to life again. So,
after his own fashion, he brands me with perjury, and then, chari-
tably, gives me the benefit of a frail memory 1 I!
Dues the Bishop’s charity comport with mine? He would
feot consent to such a communion.


Does it comport with St. Paul’s ? St. Paul’s charity “ thiuketh
no evil.” What were the Bishop’s thoughts, when he grasped the
paper out of the hand of Synnot ? St. Paul’s charity “ rejoiceth
not in iniquity.” What was the Bishop’s joy, when he held up
the damnatory document to nine of my brother Clergy, and pro-
claimed “ Guilty !” Finally , St. Paul’s charily “ rejoiceth in the
truth.’’ If the Bishop’s charity comported with his, would he
not have taken some steps, directly or indirectly, before he com-
mitted a moral murder, to ascertain whether it was flagrant per-
jury or forgetfulness ?
May God enlighten his dark and distorted judgment for the
good of the Church over which he rules !
Now, if I were again to turn round and assert that the Bishop
of Tasmania was guilty of perjury, what would the Tasmanian
public think of me! what would the people of England, whom
also I address, think of me ! Nay, what would the Christian
world think of me ! even though I were to follow up the mortal
blow thus given with a salvo similar to his own, viz.—that “/
would charitably believe that he had forgotten the many solemn
vows and oaths with which he voluntarily bound himself!!!
Believe me, reader, I am not making an effort to invest the
airy fabric of a vision with a real, a substantial existence. Hear
me ; and then, if you think so, give me and my case to the winds.
On the solemn occasion of bis Consecration he was asked, by
the Arch-Bishop, “Will you correct and punish such as be
unquiet, disobedient, and criminous, £witbin your Diocese accord-
ing to such authority as you have, by God’s Word, and as to
t
you shall be committed by the Ordinances of this realm V
he answered—“l will do so by the help of God.”
Now let us examine whether be has discharged this vow.
In the Ist verse of the sth chap., Ist, Tim., 1 read—“ R-
ebuke not an Elder, but intreat him as a father.” Has he done so ?
He entered into familiar conversation with me as Brother, bu*
orgot the intreaty of the Elder!


In the t l£Uh verso of the same chapter I read—“ Against aft*
Elder receive not an accusation, but before two or three witnessesi”
Up to this whiting I am ignorant, and the Bishop has informed
me of his determination to keep me so, of any accusation being
laid against me, I cannot therefore gratify my readers with the
names of the two or three witnesses.
Let us now turn to his compliance with the ordinances of the
realm, lam not competent to offer an opinion on one solitary
Ecclesiastical Law in the Code, having never read one. But I
know there is an act of late date, investing Bishop’s with sufficient
powers for discipline and coercion. By this act the Bishop gives
a commission to five of his Clergy to report, prim&facie, on the
merits of any accusation against a Minister, and according to
their report, he follows up the case by trial or dismisses the com-
plaint. W hat a contrast to the course pursued by the Bishop of
Tasmania both towards the Clergy and myself 1 ! !
Again—He is ordered in his Letters Patent (which one would
suppose was personal enough) to “ call,” &c., as you will see
quoted in the C(ergy Protest. Has he complied with this, his
favourite reference?
Lastly— He is required by the Colonial Church Act to furnish
the Governor with a report of proceedings taken against any delin-
quent Minister; i.e.the charges, the witnesses, the proofs, and
the sentence.
We may infer from what has been already set forth that his
compliance would be an impossibility.
To this fact His Excellency only can reply; but even here I
may hazard a negative, having for upwards of twelve months after
the Bishop’s revocation drawn my salary by the Governors per-
mission,
Jewish law and Roman custom on this point, though recorded
for instruction in righteousness in the Word of God, serve but as
a beacon to warn off his Lordship, not to imitate Jews or Romans
in adopting the simple, intelligible, universal principles of justice.


The finale surpasses all" Now, gentlemen, is there one of
you that can put his hand upon his heart, and in good truth say
that Mr. Wigmore is a fit person to fill the sacred Ministry."
“ If 1 am compelled to restore Mr. Wigmore’s license. I’ll resign
the See."
One dear friend stood up for injured innocence; but he was
soon reseated, being given to understand “ He was not standing
on the arena of a debating Society."
Poor Fellow ! his days are numbered ; he has the misfortune
to be an Irishman ! and his Lordship’s declaration against that
despised race, is on record against him. “ I’ll lake care not to
have any more Irish Clergy in my Diocese.”
Irish Clergy are in some estimation in England.
Verily—we are at the Antipodes.
Hours thus wasted to no purpose, the Bishop failing to con
vince the Clergy, and the Clergy not being permitted to convince
the Bishop, for one or other of which purposes they naturally sup-
posed they had been invited.
His Lordship requested them to address him in writing, which
they did accordingly on the day following.
Hobart Town , B th November, 1844.
May it please Your Lordship,
As you expressed a desire to the Clergymen present at
the Meeting held at your house on the 7th instant, that your
Clergy should communicate in writing to you their opinion upon
the subject submitted to them by your Lordship—we, the under-
signed, Chaplains of Van Diemen’s Laud, beg most respectfully
to slate—
-Ist.—Our deep regret to learn from your Lordship that, in con-
sequence of the legal advice of the Crown Lawyers and Mr.
Pritchard, you had been induced, contrary to your original inten-
tion, to revoke the licences of Mr. Bateman and of Mr. Wigmore,
without having afforded them a legal trial, as provided by your
Letters Patent, which direct “to call before him or them, or
before the Archdeacon or Archdeacons, or the Vicar-General, or
D


other officer or officers hereinafter mentioned, at sucli competent
days, hours, and places, when and so often as to him and them
shall seem most convenient, the aforesaid Rectors, Curates, Minis-
ters, Chaplains, Priests, and Deacons, or any of them, and to
inquire, by witnesses sworn in due form of law, and by all other
lawful ways and means by which the same may be best and most
effectually done,' as well concerning their morals as their behaviour
in their said offices and stations respectively.’ - And they further
“ declare and ordain that, in all grave matters of correction which
are accustomed, according to the practice of the Ecclesiastical
laws of our realm of England, to be judicially examined, the same
shall in like manner be judicially examined and proceeded in before
the said Bishop of Tasmania and his successors, or the said Arch-
deacon, or the said Vicar-General, or other officer or officers afore-
said ; and all such causes shall be proceeded in, to final sentence,
in due form of law and, in consequence of not having proceeded
against them according to the provisions above mentioned, your
Lordship was unable to comply with the directions of the Church
Act, 1 Victoria, No. 16, section 15, which directs “that no salary
shall be continued in any case to any Minister, after it shall have
been certified to the Lieutenant-Governor, by the proper Ecclesias-
tical authority, that he has been tried and found guilty, by com-
petent authority, according to the laws or usages of the Church to
which he belongs, of such misconduct or culpable neglect of duty
(specifying in particular the instance or instances of such neglect
or misconduct) as, according to the same laws or usages, renders
the discontinuance of such salary proper by which means your
Lordship’s sentence is rendered invalid, and many evil conse-
quences have resulted, and may bo apprehended to the Church in
your Diocese.
2d.—That we lamented to hear that your Lordship had deter*
mined to revoke in the same manner, without trial according to due
form of law, the licences of any Clergyman who, in your Lord-
ship’s judgment, had committed a fault deserving such a punish-
ment, against which position of your Lordship’s we would most
respectfully protest, as opposed to the natural right which every
man possesses to a trial according to due form of law previous to
being convicted, and as contrary to the practice of the primitive
Church, to the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Church of England and
Ireland—to the provisions in the Colonial Church Act, and of
your Lordship’s Letters Patent. And we beg to communicate to
your Lordship our most serious conviction that, if your declining
to insert in the monthly abstract of the Colonial Chaplains, fur-
nished by your Lordship to the Colonial Government, the names
of any Chaplains not tried by the forms of Ecclesiastical Law,
should be equivalent to their deprivation, by stopping the pay-
ment of their salary, our stations as Colonial Chaplains under the
provisions of the Colonial Law would be altogether subverted, our
sense of the security and of the permanence of our office under
the protection of the Colonial Law and the Ecclesiastical Laws


of the Church of England would be destroyed, and the effi-
ciency and dignity of our office as Parochial Chaplains materially
weakened.
We have the honour to be,
Your Lordship's most obedient arid faithful Servants,
(Signed) W. BEDFORD. Jun.
GEORGE OTTER.
H. P. FRY.
JOHN BURROWES.
THOMAS J. EWING.
P. PALMER.
EDWARD FREEMAN.
P.S. —This letter bears the signatures of all the Chaplains- who
were present at the Meeting at your Lordship’s house, with the
exception of Mr. Norman, to whom there was no opportunity of
submitting it, and of Mr. Cell, to whom it was not communicated,
-as being your Lordship’s Private Chaplain.
' (Bishop’s Answer.)
Hamilton, November H Ist, 1844.
■Reverend Brethren,— You are, I presume, aware that
your Protest of the Blh instant was received by me within two
hours of my departure from Hobart Town, and that I was thus
detained from doing much more than glancing cursorily at its con-
tents. I feel no desire to discuss at full length the several points
adveited to in that Protest. Indeed lam inclined to think that
such a proceeding would scarcely be consistent with our relative
positions, but that the more decorous course would be merely to
offer, as I do now, a few remarks upon its general tenor. You
will pardon me in expressing my surprize, indeed, I may add,-my
regret, that a body of Clergymen of the Church of England with
fit must, I believe, be conceded) a very slender experience in Eng-
lish usages, should attach so high a value to their Q wn opinion upon
questions of law and practice as to prefer it to the well-weighed
and carefully-considered judgment of four members of the legal
profession. 1 need make no morp than a passing allusion to the
disregard of the Bishop’s own judgment in this matter, or to tho
questioning of his power and authority on the part of some of his
Clergy. More than once in my connexion with them 1 have felt
that L was not m England, And yet, perhaps, ! have no right to
be surprised that a long residence in the Colonies should render
even the Clergy at limes forgetful of the relative position and
privileges of themselves and their Bishop.
I am instructed, and I believe rightly, that in the revocation of
the licences of Messrs. Wigmore and Bateman, which you cun


sideras illegal, I have acted in strict conformity with those Eccle-
siastical Laws, now in force in England, which by my Letters
Patent I am authorized to regard in the exercise of ray functions.
The portions of those letters to which you allude, in the belief that
they contravene this position, are intended, if I mistake not, chiefly
to apply to questions of doubt, of rumour, of disputed accusation,
necessarily not to facts already proven, public, admitted, certified.
Whenever atrial in its proper sense could be entered into, no
one would be more willing to adopt such a course than myself.
It appears to have been forgotten that I distinctly said so.
You further observe, “We lamented to hear * * such a punish-
ment.” You quote from memory, which will account for the inac-
curate version that you have here, unconsciously, given of my
words. The sum of what I did say was widely different in its
principle from the determination you have thus ascribed to me.
My observation to you, unless I am greatly mistaken, was to the
following effect:
a licence in extreme cases, where a heavy and notorious scandal to
the Church was publicly created, where no doubt existed as to the
facts, and where trial in its proper sense would be superfluous. A
case in which 1 declared I should for example exercise this right
was one of Insolvency brought on by proceedings at variance with
the character, the pursuits, and the sworn duties of a Minister of
God. Of the merits or demerits of such cases, of their injurious
effects upon the credit and efficiency of the Church, I, as the
Spiritual Ruler of that Church, certainly claim to be the Judge ;
and I do not propose to allow the Clergy to share with me the right
of deciding whether I am or am not to suffer a party so circum-
stanced to receive or retain a licence from me.
Such is the right claimed and exercised by the Bishops in Eng-
land over all who hold licences from them, and I am yet to learn
upon what principle a Bishop in the Colonies is to be deprived of
the ordinary privileges belonging to his office. If lam incorrect
in these views, I shall be told so by the proper authority at home;
but you will pardon me, if I decline adopting your own opinions as
conclusive on the subject. Bearing in mind that I had so dis-
tinctly said that nothing but a most flagrant and extreme case would
induce me to exercise this power, and that then it would be most
reluctantly put in force—remembering, too, that an appeal to the
Archbishop is reserved to any Clergyman who considers himself
aggrieved by any act or censure of the Bishop of this Diocese—l
cannot but express my surprise that so serious an alarm has been
created amongst you. I had thought that “ Rulers are not a terror
to good works, but to the evil.”
You, surely, whose names are appended to this document, have
no reason to fear that a similar censure can fall upon yourselves.
I will rather hope that your past experience of me will be a sufficient
guarantee to you, that I am not one who would knowingly over-
step his powers or exercise them with undue rigour. But you


must excuse me, if I do not feel it to be within the compass of my
duty to lay down or to disclaim any portion of the ordinary privi-
leges of a Bishop, simply because some of my Clergy regard them
in a different light from that in which they are viewed, not only by
myself, but by others, who are capable (as I think) of forming a
more correct and a mure dispassionate judgment than themselves.
In conclusion, I trust that you never will have occasion to say
truly of me that 1 have kept out of sight an “ important part of the
solemn address made to me at my consecration, ‘ lie so merciful,
that you be not too remiss; so minister discipline that you forget
not mercy,”
1 remain, Reverend Brethren,
Your affectionate Friend and Brother,
(Signed) F, R. TASMANIA.
To the Rev. William Bedford, Jun.,
and the Clergymen who signed the
Protest of November 8, 1844.
Here, for the first time, has the Bishop thought proper to
assign a reason for the withdrawing of my license ; and he asserts
that he is born out in so doing by the well weighed and carefully
considered judgment of four Members of the Legal Profession.
A well rounded period, but there ends its virtue. In the first
place, Mr. Pritchard, has honestly declared to the Rev, Mr. Otter,
that no legal opinion beyond his own was had in the case.
What then are we to suppose,—either that Mr. Pritchard
beguiled the Bishop ; or, that the Bishop hit upon that expedient
to justify his proceedings, and silence farther remonstrance.
In the next, supposing these four legal gentlemen to have
declared that Insolvency was a sufficient depriving cause, I would
plainly and openly impugn the opinion, and challenge them to pro-
duce any one authority, civil or Ecclesiastical to prove Insolvency
among the depriving causes exhibited against a Clergyman.
Copy of the Bishop’s declaration to the Rev. H. P.
written down in his Lordship’s presence, with his permission to
show it to tho Clergy,


That his Lordship will always afford a trial according to
Ecclesiastical law to any Clergyman accused of any offence, unless
that offence be named by him, or he have been convicted of it
before a legal tribunal.
January, 1845.
Upon this curious morceau I bad thought not to have offered a
single remark, confident that it would speak for itself; I yield,
however, to the earnest solicitation of friends, who thought
otherwise.
First to the fact of a Bishop voluntarily undertaking to give a
guarantee to his inferior Clergy. Little did I ever expect to see a
Bishop, particularly one of the rounded front and high bearing of
the Bishop of Tasmania, place himself in so humiliating a position-
It speaks volumes for the conviction of his own mind 1 I say
nothing of the sophistry manifest in the condition which might on
any occasion be neutralized by a secret investigation and admitted
confession in one case, or by a simple conviction in a common
assault before a police magistrate on the other; and what would
then prevent bis receiving a neatly-written document such as mine,
sanctioned by F. fl. Tasmania, in characters of sable black in the
margin, surmounted by the episcopal seal, impressed in blood !
I address myself more especially to the principle on which the
Protest was based, and in violation of which the licences of Mr,
Bateman and myself were withdrawn.
I can easily imagine how an individual who shows a total dis-
regard for principle in the premises should overlook it in the con-
clusion. But how my Rev. Brother would surrender the van-
tage ground he occupied, or be betrayed by such a piece of glaring
trickery, aggravated by the desertion of two of his Brethren in
distress, as yet puzzles me.
I rejoice to find that he is thoroughly impressed with the force
of these remarks, and admits that, so long as the principles laid
down by the Protesting Clergy remain intact, no one of them can
withdraw his name from that document on any necessity or pretext
whatever.


Before his Lordship’s contemplated concession, he informed
Mr. Fry that the Protest and Answer had been forwarded to the
Archbishop of Canterbury. When, however, the aspect of things
was changed, and he deemed it prudent to urge the so-called gua*
rantee, he told the same gentleman that he did not forward it to
the Archbishop, showing that all may yet be made smooth again,
if the Clergy would accept the compromise.
I make no further comment on these documents, than to
observe that the one bears on its forefront arguments, supported
by authority,.maintained with conscious firmness, and submitted
with all'due and respectful courtesy.
1 invite the discerning reader to point out the existence of any
of these recommendations in the latter.
To counteract in some measure the effects of this unpalatable
remonstrance, a sort of antagonist address from the Clergy of the
Deanery of Longford appeared in the Public Papers. It should
not have been necessary for me to have called attention to it in any
wise, but for a circumstance, which justice requires should be
exposed. The document was exhibited by the Bishop to several
of the Protesting Clergy, in the hope, no doubt, of serving as a
seasonable lecture from their younger brethren of the North.
Among other signatures it bore that of the Rev. George Wilkinson,
who happens to be my Brother-in-law.
On arriving at this name, the Bishop, significantly commanding
the attention of the'.Clergy, adds—“ See here, gentlemen, the name
of Mr. Wigmore’s own relative, who, knowing the extent of Mr.
Wigmore’s misconduct, did not rest satisfied with simply affixing
his name, but at the same time said “ This is the way he is always
behaving: he will never do himself any good.”
Conscious that Mr, Wilkinson could make no such declaration
and believing that he did not, I wrote to him on the subject, and
have his absolute denial of “ ever having used these expressions,
or any other in any wise reflecting on me : at the same time saying
that he signed the paper, being assured by Mr. Davis, the rural
Dean of Longford, who got up the address, that it was drawn up
with care to avoid any allusion to the case of Mr. Wigmore.”


Satisfied thus far, I addressed Mr. Davis, who also disclaims
any knowledge of the expression. To whom then are we to
attribute the injenuity of the invention ?
To the Bishop of Tasmania alone!!! With him the thought
originated ; by him the words were promulgated in the name of
Mr. Wilkinson, and on him must rest the guilt of not only under-
mining the character of an innocent brother, but of doing so by
means, which, if not detected, would for ever have separated me
from my dear and highly valued relative. Alas ! Alas! what
can the Church expect? What can the Clergy expect ? What
am I to expect from a man, who could originate such a thought,
endeavour to effect it in such a way, and contemplate such an end—
the destruction of a brother ! ami, of necessity, a wife and eight
children!! all, all at one fell swoop! Finis coronal opus.
APPENDIX.
In the foregoing Narrative, I have carefully abstained from
touching upon either the ministerial or pecuniary branches of my
case.
Of thaformer, I need only say, I have reason to hope that
labours afe not without a blessing—if, at least, it is a fair criterio 11
judge by an increased attendance. The average of my congre-
gation in the forenoon, varies from 130 to 160 ; in the afternoon,
from 30 to 60, which I believe will be found to equal, if not exceed,
that of other rural districts.
I would invite the most rigid scrutiny into my pecuniary
affairs, assured that it roust issue in deep commiseration.
Suffice it here to say that ray resources have been taxed to GO
instead of 20 shillings in the pound : and that every claim on me,
(including that of the Synnot?) had been finally arranged for full
payment ; but that the interference of the Bishop of Tasmania, on
behalf of the Synnots only, broke up the whole, leaving me to the
painful necessity of seeking redress at home ; and the Synnots to
lament the consequences of his Lordship’s acquaintance.
li- MOORE, HIINTES,,NO, 11, MACCPARIZ STREET, HOEART TOWN.


/ / *6Z*=*/
s? at * a« - j “yli^.
/a* >2kC—
>(4A^/^«ss<<: tZ-zJZr
y
- ,


‘f- syi.
£rr^t — y> tr x:*t~ ■^^^e-<c-a r .
- tu-- '" j^* —-
/Zr-TyZ^T
.<7 ~y?t S***r
yiteJ'


sk-o^*^
s&J-
*xf
