

AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE.
AN EPISODE IN THE HISTORY
OF
AUSTRALIAN EXPLORATION.
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE ABOVE ASSOCIATION
BY
A. W. HOWITT. '
MELBOURNE:
McCabbon, Bird and Co., Printers, 479 Collins Street,
1901.




5.—AN EPISODE IN THE HISTORY OF AUSTRALIAN
EXPLORATION.
A. W. Howitt,
The records of Australian Exploration belong to one branch
of historical geography, and in that aspect I present this as a
contribution which will find its place when the history of the
Burke and Wills’ expedition shall be rewritten.
In John M'Kinlay’s Journal of Exploration in Central Aus-
tralia he describes the discovery of a white man’s remains, and a
subsequent encounter with the blacks, at a place which, for
that reason, he called “ Massacre Lake.”
On reading this account I felt certain that the remains were
those of Gray, the fourth member, and the first to succumb, of
Burke’s heroic little party. Doubts have been expressed as to
this being so, and being probably the only person who can now
throw any light on the question, I have thought it well to record
what I know, and the inferences which I draw from M'Kinlay’s
account of the events at Massacre Lake.
Burke, Wills, and King, on their return from the Gulf of Car-
pentaria, reached the depot at Cooper’s Creek on the 21st of
April, 1861, to find it deserted. Four days previously Gray had
died, after being carried on a camel for several days. Wills did
not fix the positions of the camps on the return journey after the
Itth, in Lat. 19° 27" and Long. 140° 59", and therefore the
exact place where Gray was buried has remained in doubt. All
that can be said is, that according to the evidence given by King
before the Royal Commission which sat in 1861, it was about 15
miles from Cooper’s Creek and 70 from the depot.
In the few notes which Burke made there is this record :
“ Gray died on the road from hunger and fatigue.” He was the
first to die from the same causes to which Burke and Wills after-
wards succumbed. The gradual starvation from which they
suffered commenced shortly after they started on their return
journey from the gulf. The rations of provisions were then re-
duced to \ lb. of flour and ten sticks of dried meat per day, and
as Kino- puts it, as much Portulao as they could collect by the
way.” On the 25th of March Wills found Gray eating “ skili-
golee,” made from flour which he had taken without permission.
Wills'says that he received a “ good thrashing from Burke,” but
King says that he “ received six or seven blows with the open
hand on the ear.” As King was present, and as Wills was absent
at the time, the account by the former is the most probable.
As I have said, Gray died on the 17th April, and his comrades re-


retained there the following day to bury him. They left there
some camel pads stuffed with horsehair, a tin-pot and some
other.things. It is also said that the spot was near a large lake.
When I returned to Cooper’s Creek on my second journey, I
formed a depot at a place called by the natives Kallioumaru, or,
as it is now shown on the maps, Callumurra, I established
friendly relations w r ith the Yantruwunta blacks who lived there,
and who were those with whom I had found John King living.
At this time our intercourse was carried on entirely by signs
and gestures, they having no English bejmnd the words “ wilt-
fella,” “ yartaman,” and “ mukketty,” meaning white man, horse,
and gun. These words must have been transmitted from tribe
to tribe, until they reached the wild blacks. When I opened up
a line of communication with the South Australian settlements
at Blanchwater, I obtained a black boy, Frank, who belonged
to the Narrinyeri tribe at the Murray River mouth. This boy
understood something of the Dieri language, which is near to the
Yantruwunta tongue, and tluis I was able to communicate with
the blacks at Cooper’s Creek. When Frank left me I got a
Dieri boy from Blanchwater, who understood English as the
blacks spoke it at that frontier station. From these two boys
I was able to pick up a good deal of the language, and I added
to it by constant practice with the Yantruwunta. Thus I was
able to explain, much information about the geography of the
Barcoo Delta, and even about the country north of Sturt’s
stony desert, on what is now called the Everard or the Lower
Diamantia.
Amongst other matters about which I inquired was as to the
place where Gray was buried, and I was told it was at a place
called Andaginni, where one of the “ warugati wiltfella” (a),
that is, Burke’s party, was buried by his companions, and where
also “ whilpra pinnaru” ( h ), that is, M'Kinlay, fought with the
blacks. My informants pointed in a north-westerly direction for
Andaginni, and said that it was about four days’ journey, or, as I
estimated it, from 60 to 70 miles distant. At that time I was
not aware of M'Kinlay’s account of his being attacked at Mas-
sacre Lake, but when I read it, and of his discovery of human
remains there, I felt no doubt that it was the body of Gray that
he had found.
I have quoted the essential parts of Wills’ diary, Burke’s notes,
and King’s evidence, which have a bearing upon the death of
Gray, and on the identification of the place where he was buried.
I now add particulars, which I find in John M'Kinlay’s Journal
(a) From Warugatti, meaning Emu, but applied by the blacks to the camel, for which
they had naturally no name.
(J>) The word “ whilpra” is a corruption of wheelbarrow, which was applied at that
time on the frontier stations to a cart or dray, and was attached to M/Kinlay because he
had a dray with him, the name being passed on from the blacks at the frontier to the
wild tribes further out. Pinnaru means elder or headman.


(c), as to his visit to Massacre Lake, and other extracts which
seem necessary to place the whole matter in a clear light.
He started from Adelaide on the 16th of August, 1861, as
leader of the Burke Relief Expedition, and arrived at Blanch-
water, the then furthest out cattle station, on the 22nd Septem-
ber (d). A few days before arriving there he was informed that
natives had brought in a report of “ some white men and camels
being seen at some inland water by them, or rather by others
of the Pandoo, or Lake Hope, tribe. From Lake Hope he went
forward, and finally formed a depot at another lake some 50 or
60 miles to the north, which he called Lake Buchanan. In ad-
dition to the white men who formed his party, he had the before-
mentioned black boy Frank, whom he picked up at a station
further down the country. He also had two blacks from Blanch-
water, who, however, ran away from him at Lake Hope, where he
obtained a Dieri black named Bullingani. This man was sub-
sequently with me as a guide, but ran away in the night with
some of my things.
On 29th October M'Kinlay, having formed his dep6t camp at
a place called Wantula, at the outlet of Lake Buchanan, started
in search of the waters at which the white men were supposed to
be, taking with him two of his party, Hodgkinson and Middle-
ton, and the blackfellow Bullingani, who, he says, “ seemed to
say that he knows something of the whites.” M'Kinlay then
says that Bullingani told him that the natives whom they saw at
a place called Moolionthurunie (e), had murdered the white men
they were looking for. That night they reached a place called
by Bullingani, Kadhai-baerri, and which M'Kinlay renamed
Massacre Lake. Ho then describes the finding of a grave in
which there were the bones of a white man, enveloped in a flannel
shirt. The blackfellow (f) said that this man was killed by the
natives, who surprised the party, and that his companions buried
him, but after they left the blacks dug up the body and ate the
muscular parts. M'Kinlay says that they found a second grave
evidently dug with a spade or shovel, and a lot of human hair of
two colours, but found in it no other remains excepting one little
bone. They also found a pint pot and a tin canteen in a native
camp.
On the following morning M'Kinlay rode after and caught
a local native called Kerikeri, who, according to Bullingani,
was one of the murderers. This man took them to a camp,
(c) Printed by the order of the House of Assembly of South Australia, 9th of October,
1862.
( d ) The journal does not give the date of his arrival at Blanch water, but says that he
left it on the 24th of September. Mr. Frank James, who was the manager at Blanch-
water at that time, informs me that M’Kinlay only remained one day there. He must,
therefore, have arrived there on 22nd September.
(e) Apparently the lake shown upon the maps as Moolionburrinna, between Lake
M‘Kinlay and Massacre Lake.
(/) The context seems to show that this refers to Bullingani,


where he dug up a quantity of baked horsehair for saddle-
stuffing, and told them that “ the saddle was burned, the iron-
work kept, and the other bodies eaten.” Also that there was “ a
pistol at a creek to the north-east,” which M'Kinlay sent him to
fetch. He said further that there was a rifle or gun at the lake
last passed, with other articles, and finally he displayed on his
body, before and behind, the marks of ball and shot wounds now
quite healed, which had so disabled him that he had to be carried
about for some considerable time ( g ).
M'Kinlay says that the following morning, just as they were
getting up, and not very clear yet, forty blacks came, headed by
Kerikeri, bearing torches, shields, &c. (sic), and endeavouring
to surround them. As they did not retire when he ordered them
back, he gave orders to fire on them, “ seeing nothing left but
to be butchered themselves.” Several rounds were fired before
they left, but he says that he was “ afraid that the messenger,
the greatest vagabond of the lot, escaped soot free.” This appears
to refer to Kerikeri.
Such, then, is the information which I have been able to
collect as to the death of Gray and the place of his burial. It
may be accepted as settled that Gray died and was buried at a
place called Andaginni, and that Andaginni and Massacre Lake
are the same place ( h ). The camel pads stuffed with horsehair,
the tin pot, and other things left behind by Burke at Gray’s
grave, appear to account for the baked horsehair dug out by
Kerikeri, and for the pint pot and the tin canteen found by
M'Kinlay. Fragments of paper, pieces of a nautical almanac,
and an exploded Ely cartridge picked up near to where there was
“ the dung of camels and horses, which had been tied up a long
time ago,” is strong evidence that the spot was the one where
Burke camped. The distance from Cooper’s Creek, as given by
King, is approximately correct, assuming that the position of
Massacre Lake on M'Kinlay’s map can be depended on.
But the second grave which M'Kinlay says was dug with a
spade or shovel is difficult to account for, unless one considers
that it was the original grave in which Gray was buried, but in
that case one must accept the further conclusion that the body
was dug up and the skeleton reburied in another grave. Such a
conclusion would suggest that the blacks had eaten the flesh and
reburied the bones.
The facts, as we can see them, show that the circumstantial ac-
count given by M'Kinlay of the killing of a white man, or a party
of white men by the blacks, on the authority of statements made
(g) At this time there was cattle-killing at the outside stations by blacks who came in
from the back country, and I think that Kerikeri had been engaged in some such an
expedition, and carried with him the permanent evidence of the manner in which such
raids were met by the whites. Kerikeri must have been a Yaurorka, and these people
intermarried with the Dieri, who were the most usual cattle-killers.
(/<) The name is mentioned in M‘Kinlay’s Journal as TJndaginee.


to him by Bullingani and Kerikeri, is not founded on fact. This
has pressed upon me ever since I first read M'Kinlay’s journal,
and for the following reasons.
Bullingani, when I first knew him some months after this
time, knew no English, and Kerikeri must have been equally
ignorant of it. Moreover, M'Kinlay did not speak Dieri or
Yaurorka. Frank could not have acquired much of the Dieri
tongue, because ho only entered the Dieri country about a month
before, and, besides, lie was not with the party at Massacre Lake.
The other two blacks from Blanchwater deserted M'Kinlay at
Lake Hope. The absence of any means of communication with
those wild blacks that M'Kinlay had to do with is brought out
clearly by certain passages in his journal. On 26th October,
that is, after he returned to the depot from Massacre Lake, he
writes that he “ will send Mr. Hodgkinson with others of the
party to the settlements to procure additional stores” and “ to
procure a native 'who can speak the language of the natives at
Lake Buchanan,” as the blacks he had did not know' one word,
nor, on the contrary, did the natives there understand them.
As to Bullingani he writes on the Ist of November : “ I wish
he understood a little English, as he then would be of much
use.”
It seems, therefore, certain that none of the circumstantial
account of the killing of a white man, or a party of them, could
have been given by Bullingani or Kerikeri by word of mouth,
and if given at all must have been by signs or gestures. The
Lake Eyre tribes are able to communicate freely with each
other by sign language but, from my knowledge of the practice,
I have no hesitation in saying that it w r ould be impossible for
anyone unacquainted with the system of gesture language to
have understood such an account as that attributed to these
blacks, if given in it. One is therefore necessarily driven to
the conclusion that M'Kinlay entirely .misunderstood such signs
and gestures as they may have used when the grave or graves,
together with the horsehair and other things, were found.
As to the attack by the blacks, it is quite possible that they
intended it, but it is against such a conclusion that they should
come up when it was. beginning to be daylight, and that they
should make such an attack shouting and carrying torches.
As it seemed to me quite possible that an account of this
affair might have been known to the Dieri of Blanchwater,
about the time it happened, I wrote, asking for information, to
Mr. Frank James, lately Superintendent of Police in Victoria,
and who at the time of which I am speaking was the manager
of the Blanchwater Station. In reply, he sent me particulars of
the statements made to him by the Dieri at that time, which I
now condense from his more extended account,


The blacks said that some of them fell in with M'Kinlay and
three of his party on a branch of Cooper’s Creek, and tried
to tell him about the fate of Gray, Burke and Wills, and the
rescue of King ; that they guided M'Kinlay to Gray’s grave,
which he opened and closed up again, moving to a lake near by,
where he camped for the night, a few of the blacks remaining
with him. During the night these blacks left him to join some
others who were camped on the lake, and told them what they
had seen and.heard. Some of these then went to have a
nearer view of the white men, but the man on watch roused
the others, who immediately fired on them, killing some and
wounding others. The blacks always declared that they went
with no hostile intention, but had the arms for protection, their
women being left at the camp. None of them ever varied in
their account of this occurrence.
It is not possible to say whether the blacks intended to
attack M'Kinlay or not. My own experience of these Yaurorka
tells both ways. Some six or eight months after M'Kinlay’s
aP’ray with them, I camped on the north-western branch of
Cooper’s Creek, about 20 miles to the north east of Andaginni,
and not far from a strong camp of blacks on the other side of
the water channel. In the evening, it being bright starlight,
I observed a number of them standing on the further bank of
the river, which there was about 2 chains in width, some of
them being in the water. After watching them in the star-
light for some time, I shouted a warning to them, which I had
learned from the black boy, Frank, ordering them to go away,
or that I would shoot them. They then went away. The follow-
ing morning I went to their camp, and, through Frank, told
them that if I saw blacks about my camp in the night I
should “ kill them with the Mukketty,” that is the gun. The
old men with whom I was talking said that they were only
looking at us.
The conclusion to which I have come to, after considering
the whole of M'Kinlay’s account, is that the grave which lie
found was that of Gray, and that he entirely misunderstood
what the blacks tried to communicate to him.








