

“ The Wealth and Progress of the Empire,”
“ Environment and Character,”
—AND—
“ The Need of Labor Representation,”
BY
Alderman Ben Tillett, L.C.C.,
Secretary of the London Dockers’ Union.
PRICE-SIXPENCE.
WORKER CO-OPERATIVE PRINTING WORKS,
227 Castlereagh-street.
1897.


ESTABLISHED 1857.
Wood and Company
• a a
. . FUNERAL DIRECTORS . .
IE IR.S,
CAKRIAKK proprietors.


“ The Wealth and Progress of the Empire,”
“ Environment and Character,”
—AND—
“ The Need of Labor Representation,”
BY
Alderman Ben Tillett, L.C.C..
Secretary of the London Dockers’ Union.
PRICE sixpence.


MIRROR DECORATIONS
• t t
See our Samples of Workmanship.
• • •
830 George street.
• • •
Qovehj §vackct&
i&vtxaU
HI (j&ftbte gtecorattintg
EMBOSSED AND BEVELLED.
■VIE IKY CHEAP,
Depot for Sanitary Paint, Artists’ and Painters
Materials, Wallpapers, and Plate, Sheet,
and Ornamental Glass.
• •
Jas. Sandy & Co.
m and 330 GEORGE STREET,


“The Wealth anil Progress
of the Empire."
Lecture by Mr. Ben Tillett, at the Protestant Hall ,
Sydney, on Wednesday, August 4 t 1897.
Mr. Tillett said Mr. Chairman and dear friends,—
The lecture I am to give to-night will I trust be of
interest to my audience. It will be a presentation ot
the view, of the more intelligent section of the working
classes, upon what is the real progress of our Empire.
The British Empire is the greatest the world has ever
known, and, as we say, an Empire upon which the Sun
never sets. No philosopher, and no poet or statesman
of olden days, ever conceived it possible that such an
Empire could exist—that it could unite under one
Government
400 MILLIONS OF PEOPLE,
comprise one quarter of the earth’s surface, embrace in it
every color, every creed, every nationality, and every
species of man from the savage to the so-called civilised
person ; that it could command such boundless tracts of
country, that side by side with Western religions there
should exist Eastern religions, that side by side with the
development of Western mind we should find the mind
that has been developed for the last six or seven
thousand years ; that we could have a country owning
Eat Parsons’ Flaked Oatmeal.
]Bat Parsons*’ Cooked Rolled Oats,


such vast tracts of land, one that has laid continent to
continent, that has discovered and made use of
machinery and engineering power, that is the wealthiest
Empire among all the Empires, that possesses mineral
wealth, agricultural products, a population and a
commercial system such as we have : and which, when
the vast strides made are considered, we can only look
on with amaze. This British Empire that we are proud
lo boast about is an empire representing
COLOSSAL WEALTH, AND COLOSSAL BEGGARY ;
it represents all the extremes and degrees of luxury and
misery, and sin. It represents all the capacities and
all the incapacities of brain. It has a literature that
was never thought possible by the greatest intellects
of Greece. It has poetry, and has reached a degree in
art which was never imagined possible by the ancients.
It has besides all these things developed a practical in-
dustrial side, and to-day the British Empire produces
every possible food, and every possible commodity,
has the most efficient conveyancing service, the greatest
lines of railways, and
THE FREEST FORMS OF GOVERNMENT,
of any in the world. With an Empire of this
character we ought to be satisfied, and if we could
imagine a savage coming from a cannibal island and
being told of all the wares of the Empire, how from one
part of the world the produce was sent to another, how
in London and in England we could have all the iruits
of the earth in their season and out of their season,
how we never knew such a thing as winter as far as
these products were concerned; how we had locomotives
running at an average of 50 and 70 miles an hour,
vessels whose speed was 25 miles an hour, and which
could carry thousands of tons of cargo, and how we
could produce all the things necessary to man’s
existence —the savage who heard such a tale would
imagine that this was a veritable fairy land, and that
want and wretchedness were unknown. He would
Eat Parsons’ Pure Jams.
Use Parsons’ Pickles and Sauce.


imagine that this people would live together in peace
and concord, that
THERE WOULD BE NO CLAoS DISTINCTIONS,
and that there would be no possibility with such an
intelligent people, of a small section of the community
owning not only the wealth, but the country asid the
very people themselves. The savage would declare it
impossible for such an enlightened people to allow a
small section of their species to dominate, and to
expose them to the caprice of their wishes. The
savage would be too intelligent to believe in the lack
of intelligence of civilisation. He would, therefore,
if he were told that out of 400 millions of people
350 millions were in more or less poverty, say
“ You are playing some trick.” He could not
understand 350 millions being manipulated by 50
millions ; that is, in his ordinary way of counting up
things he would say that seven men are as good as one.
But when he realised that the one was not only as good
as seven but
MADE THE SEVEN HIS SLAVES,
what opinion would he have of modern civilization ?
Yet that practically is the case with all the developments
I have mentioned. This Empire has expiessed in en-
gineering the consummation of service. It has com-
passed the earth and the mountains, and has connected
continent to continent, narrowing Space and lessening
Time. Our great engineering science has developed the
energy capacity of 169 million men ; looking at the
percentages we have developed until to-day, b 5 poi
cent of our industrial energy is expressed in machine
power, 5 per cent in hand power, and 10 per cent in
horse power. That is, we have practically complied with
the terms laid down by Aristotle, who said “ that men
could only abolish slavery when machinery could do
the work of hand labor.” We have got the machine
power to supersede the hand labor, but
WE HAVE THE GROSSEST FORM OF SLAVERY
that the world ever knew. We have by the invention
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats.


of our Watts and Arkwrights, brought the textile
industries to such a state that the fabrics produced
measure 150 yards per inhabitant per annum ; we have
developed to such an extent in this industry that 75
operatives can produce more than all the-operatives
could 100 years ago ; and two seamen to-day represent
a carrying energy more than twelve times the carrying
energy of 80 years ago. We have developed so much
that, instead of one man making one pair of boots,
a girl, in some places in Leicestershire, can do more
than twenty-five men could do. We have developed
in cabinet-making methods to displace hand labor.
We have developed so much that one carpenter is
worth more than twelve were 100 years ago. And
THIS WEALTH WILL CONSTANTLY GO ON INCREASING.
We have had our Watts and Arkwrights in textile
industry, we have had our Stevensons in steam power,
we have had Wheatstone giving the electric telegraph,
we Lave had Bessemer and Siemen in processes con-
nected with steel. We have had all these improvements
made possible by the ever-growing capacity of mankind ;
we have discovered more and more economical processes
in production, until we to-day may safely say to our-
selves that we are self-contained, that we have no fear of
poverty, and that the possibilities of poverty as a
necessity arising from our lack of capacity to produce
has long ago passed into oblivion ; that, in short, the
only cause of the existence of poverty to-day is the
monopoly of the things produced by the worker. In
the period of greatest starvation we are
CONFRONTED WITH THE TERM OVER-PRODUCTION.
To give the thing a simple illustration the position is
that of a mother who says to a child asking for food :
“ Well, my dear child, I can’t give you anything; I
love you very much, but you are extreme.” “ But,
mother, the cupboard is full.” “ But don’t you know,
my dear child, that there is a glut in the market and
the laws of commercial economy say I can’t give you
anything because there has been too much produced.’
Use Parsons’ Pasha and Elephant Coffees.
Use Parsons’ D.S.F. Mustard.


Or the child asks for clothing and the mother says:
“ No, my dear, I really can’t do it, you know the laws
of political economy say I can’t give it to you because
the wardrobe is full.” Imagine what a child would
think of such a thing ; imagine what it would say and
then what it would do. But we are older; and we are
tamer. Looking at the State from the standpoint of
the family, we say that the State which can produce
this wealth and these commodities has no right to
expect seven-eighths of the community to exist in
poverty
BECAUSE OP THE VERY PLENTY THEY HAVE PRODUCED
But of course it is on all fours with our general logic.
If a man steals a watch, he is a criminal and receives
six months for his act. If he steals the value of a
million watches he is a great financier. If he murders
a person by cutting his throat, he is hanged ; but if he
murders 5000 persons by an industrial process, he is a
benefactor to the community. If one person steals a
turnip from a field he is punished, and he is generally
punished by another person who stole the field. That
is our peculiar morality or the morality peculiar to our
civilisation. And yet there is so little reason for this
state of things that it is a disgrace and a blot upon our
so-called civilisation. For have we not had our
religion permeating society through all the centuries ?
Have we not
SPENT MILLIONS AND MILLIONS
upon institutional religion. Have we not caused great
wars and great massacres for religious liberty ? Have
we not had a great code of moral ethics % Have we not
had a great literature ? Have we not had an education ?
And yet with all these things, our sense of justice, of
morality, of real religion, of Godhead, and the father-
hand of God, has been lower, more animal and damnable
than that of the vilest savage that ever lived. Let
us think—and I am not going to blame persons, I
am only I trust discussing systems —we belong to an
Empire that to-day contains 125 million people speaking
Parsons* Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats.


the English tongue ; we have added in the last 60
years something like
FOUR MILLION SQUARE MILES
of land to our Empire ; we have developed riches
until to-day our wealth is five times what it was 60
years ago, and from a manufacturing standpoint six
times greater than it was only 50 years since ; whilst
£2 to-day will buy more than £3 would then purchase.
Now, every cent of that added money represents an
argument for the abolition of poverty. There is a
great deal said about laziness ; you hear of it most
from the person who never works. I happen to have
some very honorable colleagues, and some of them are
earls. They can’t help it ; I might have been born
a duke myself. You often hear remarks of this
description : “ But well, you know, don’t you think
these fellows are
A BIT TOO LAZY,
I’m—yes, men like that ought to be made to work.”
h was accosted by the son of a great earl about this
time last year. I said “ You don't believe in a person
who doesn’t work ?” and he said “ Of course, they get
into mischief, you know.” I said “ How much work do
you ever do.” He said “ That’s quite another question.”
There is going on all through the world a desire to
increase the efficiency of the producer. Produce, produce,
produce, is the cry, and the Englishman is called upon
to recognise himself as being the head of the whole
world. Six English do as much as twelve Germans,
and as much as about 36 Italians. They do as much
as 50 Russians, and more than 75 Portugese, and yet
they are not satisfied. There is
NO BETTER WORKING ANIMAL
in the world than the Britisher. He has been told that
he must work, and has been told it so often that he
really believes it now. He has been told it so often
that he has forgotten the other end of his existence,
that is he has forgotten what to do with the things he
Use Parsons 5 Pasha and Elephant Coffees.
Use Parsons’ D.S.F. Mustard


has produced. If the Commercial Classes, our State
institutions and our Government institutions, iook a
tenth part of the trouble they take in encouraging us to
produce, to help us to consume, we should have more
comfort in the world. In ordinary parlance you would
say that a man who produced great quantities of
valuable commodities was going to get the things he
produced. But he doesn’t. The harder he works the
lower becomes his level of subsistence ; his subsistence
level is ever being reduced, for the capitalist classes are
for ever anxious to make him produce more, calling out
for more results, and then denying the fruits to their
workmen. That is why I find fault with the capitalist ;
there is no running their system in a scientific manner ;
it is run in the most stupid manner they possibly can.
IF THE ASYLUMS WERE EMPTIED
to captain our industry, their inmates could not do it
much worse. These people deny under a wage system
—what is only possible under a capitalist regime—
in their shortsightedness they deny the effective
consuming capacity that gives all the purchasing power
of a wage. They have not recognised the ABC of
Political Economy, even of the Manchester school, for it
seems to be reasonable to suppose that if they deny men
food, and clothing, and furniture, and a nice house-
if they deny them the full enjoyment of existence, they
must cripple them to that extent, in being an active
consuming power. If I can only buy one hat a year, or
use the hat my father wore, if I can only buy one suit,
it means that I am of very little interest to the tailoring
and other kindred industries. But if I can
BUY TWO OR THREE SUITS
a year and have comfort in my home, if I can have
better food and better drink, if I can have more leisure
to travel, if I can have more boots, thereby I increase
my consuming capacity, and as I increase that, so I
make the demand upon trade and make the demand
upon the supply which you hear everywhere spoken of
as the law of Supply and Demand. I would not care if
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats


these people really understood the law of Supply and
Demand ; they don’t even do that, and hence in this
with all its wealth there is an ever-growing
social cancer, and all the evil that arises out of it. You
have the same conditions in Australia--and who does
not think that men who were told all the possibilities
of this colony, and were then told
WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IN 1897,
would not have exclaimed “ surely not.” They would
say it would be impossible in such a wealthy country,—
impossible that the capitalistic system should obtain
among this enlightened people, so that the farmer
would be mortgaged to the storeman, and the storeman
to the merchant, and the merchant to the bank, and
that your public buildings should be built upon a mort-
gage system. And yet this is an uncomfortable system.
The discomfort is not the only serious aspect of the
position. The misery entailed by this lack of organisa-
tion, and this fooling away of the energies of such a
continent as this, —the fooling away of its potentiali-
ties is, I say, the result of your degradation, and your
inability to realise your own powers and your own rights.
Well, then, we have in this Empire what we have won
by battle. We have in the last hundred years availed
ourselves of the continent of America ; the whole con-
tinent would have been ours but for
THE SELFISHNESS ANI) INCAPACITY
of our Government, although it is better perhaps for the
other people that it doesn’t belong to us—we will say
at any rate that the chances are equal. We have added
continent to continent, we have developed from an
agricultural to a manufacturing people, we have changed
from the primitive methods of agriculture and industry,
to the more complex and complete system of industry
—that is we have gone from that state where the farmer
or laborer owned a portion of land, and owned all the
implements to a great land system —and year year
manufacturing processes are for ever developing their
resources, and year by year each undertaking becomes
Use Parsons’ Pasha and Elephant Coffees.
Use Parsons’ D.S.F. Mustard.


colossal, ancl year by year fortunes are becoming greater,
until to-day the number of fortunes over £5OOO is
increasing and the number under £5OOO is becoming
less. We have changed the workshop, the home
industry, to the community and the complete organisa-
tion of a factory.
WE HAVE CHANGED THE SMALL SMITHY
into the great factory, into the great Armstrong works
and the Krupp works of Germany ; we have changed
the small store into the great bon marche ; we have
changed the small into the great manufacturer, and the
manufacturer into the company system, and we are
now changing the company into the great syndicate
or monopoly system. We are going on for ever and
ever enlarging our scope, and giving the capitalist more
and more power, until the more we increase the more
WE ADD TO OUR CHAINS
and aid the displacement of our labor forces. The
more wealth we bring about, the more we increase and
add weight and strength to the chains that environ us,
and, as T said the other night, the great Machine of
Industry becomes instead of a car of peace, a bloody
juggernaut car, crushing out the life of 50 per cent, of
our population. With all these points to be faced,
while we recognise the greatness of our Empire and its
wealth, we say there should not be such a condition of
things that a small portion of the community should
enslave the other portion. For what have we done by
our apathy? We have allowed a small number of
capitalists to for ever increase their command over
industry, until to-day, the brains that run our press,
and superintend and manipulate our manufactures, and
do all the work of the community—form a brain power
monopolised by and paid under a system of wage slavery.
The manufacturer is after all but a superior workman
to the laborer. We are under that condition to-day.
THE CAPITALIST OWNS OUR GOVERNMENT,
the machinery of government and the instruments of
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats


production ; he owns the land and makes the laws,
he works our conquests, he demands the shedding of
our blood. While we can all picture the horrors of war,
I say that the horrors of war are not to be compared
with the horrors of industry, that the life of the worker
takes more risks than that of the soldier. Take a
thousand men engaged in the peaceful pursuits of
industry, and there are more killed by accident and
unhealthy employment than there are on the field of
battle. Industry kills more in twelve months than war
does in twenty years. With these serious conditions
before us, with our sailors braving the deep, with our
miners going down in the earth, and our operatives
having the nerves run out of them by the crash of
machinery, it is a miserable subterfuge to say that we
are lucky not to be engaged in war while we allow our
people to be murdered by the hundred thousand. We
have multiplied the value of our land and the unearned
increment is in the hands of the capitalist and
monopolist.
I AM NOT BLAMING THE CAPITALIST
and the monopolist at all ; I look upon them in a way
as the saviours of society, only I want all of us to know
it. I want them to understand that I am not at all
anxious as to what they are going to be in the future,
neither do I for a moment look with any despair upon
the great Commonwealth of Labor. I recognise that
after all there will come a time when the slave, having
the key to unlock his chains, will do it ; that men
will recognise how empty and weak is the contention of
those persons who call themselves captains of industry.
The real captains of industry are wage slaves. The
captains that superintend and the managers of industry
—for the capitalist will not take the worry of managing
every one of them down to the office boy is tied to a
form of wage slavery. Some day or other all this
brain power, the brain power that builds our literature,
that gives eloquence to the platform and the pulpit,
that gives engineering science its possibilities, that
Use Parsons’ Pasha and Elephant Coffees.
Use Parsons’ DSF. Mustard.


invents, and conducts the work of those inventions, the
pluck, too, that delves in the earth and
NERVES THE EXPLORER AND PIONEER,
will by and by demand for itself its rights, and
the wealth that it has created. Wealth as we
understand it is after all the wealth of the community.
The Manchester school said that the economic
centre of wealth was in money. The enlightened
economist to-day says that the centre of all wealth
is labor, because the commodity is only the emblem
of labor.
MONEY IS NOTHING ;
if all the money were collected into one heap, and an
island were built out of all the money in the world, —
if houses were built there and decorated with diamonds,
the people would take a long time getting their cup of
coffee in the morning. If they withdrew do you think
the Sun would cease to shine, the rivers to flow, or the
ships to carry for our use ? Ihe life on the earth,
animal and vegetable, would it cease ? Would our
intelligence go out, and men lie down to die if all the
capitalists were to get the sulks and say “Me won t
play ?” No, and if it were so arranged that Monarchy
sat on the top, and the Aristocracy sat all round, and
row by row all the social lickspittles were set at their
feet and removed from us, we could be as satisfied and
as joyful as if they had all gone to heaven. For some
occult reason that I am not able to define, the capitalist
has gammoned the brains and the wealth, and the
working intelligence, and the working energy. He has
gammoned the whole of those who control the govern-
ment, and do all the hard work, so that they depend
upon the capitalist for their very existence. No savage
would accept that. A donkey would kick the brains
out of anybody that said that, but
A DONKEY IS A RESPECTABLE QUADRUPED,
and I suppose has been properly brought up. We want
to recognise that under all the pushful energy—and
Eat Parsons Flaked Oatmeal.
Use Parsons' Pickles and Sauce.


we recognise that all the energy of the Australian
colonies, and the other colonies belonging to the
Empire, has made your great cities, with magnificent
piles of buildings, an honor, a reflection too upon the
intelligence of your people here—that with all this
pushing and developing, the squatter class, the agricul-
tural class, instead of being themselves the owners
are hound hand and foot by the capitalist chain.
The more you work, the harder you work, the more
you pay to them. The only people to escape the
penalties of pushful energy, are those who conduct your
banking systems, for they go broke. Even then the
capitalist hardly loses. But when you recognise that
industry after industry, and the very acreage of the
land is mortgaged to the capitalist,—l say that you
Australian people,
WITH ALL YOUR PUSHFUL BRAINY ENERGY,
ought to feel ashamed of yourselves for allowing the
fruits of your labor to go to other people. (A voice :
“ No.”) Anybody but a person fuddled with whiskey
would see that. (Loud applause.) We have to face
the case in its serious aspect, and while we boast of
comprising every creed, and color, and every race
product on the face of the globe, we have not devoted
our attention to the arts of government, we have not
considered the potentialities of our trade ; for while
the monsters of the deep speed over the waters bearing
tremendous cargoes, those that brave the dangers of
the sea and bear the brunt and burden of toil, are
face to face with the fact that in the future as their
productive energy increases, so their subsistence level
remains approximately the same. While this is so it
is useless to say we are happy. In India we have
800 millions of people bringing in an average of
15s. A YEAR PER HEAD.
In England, in the years ’B7 and ’BB, I said there was
in the East end of London a surplus population of
80,000. People writing to the newspapers and criti-
Eat Parsons’ Pure Jams.
Use Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats


be subject to the conditions I have indicated, he would
have taken their stomach and brains away. But
having these necessary organs there is no reason
for a man to limit his aspirations to a condition of
wage slavery.
I HAVE NOT RAILED AGAINST CAPITALISM ;
I have rather railed against the creator of capitalism,
for after all the people of the earth have created the
power that crushes them. In the old countiy we ha\e
a great many institutions contributing reformatory-
elements. Religious institutions have done very little,
for these have always been directed by the capitalistic
classes. Our education system has helped, but the
same class has manipulated the brains and eneigy of
the schools and declared for the poor what they shall
have. That same power has influenced literature, and
has pointed and directed our press. It has directed our
legal system, made it and moulded it. It has moulded
our legislative and governing institutions, it hasfoimed
our deliberative councils, and has had its hand at work
colouring and shaping them for the aggrandisement of
its own class. Through every developement of our
common society, this same power has been at work and
we who boast of being
THE BRAVE AND THE FREE,
and not being slaves, we are all subject to the terms
and conditions determined by the will and intelligence
of what we call the governing class. W e recognise
that, as the power that has gone to make our customs
and traditions and religious beliefs. But 1 am not
satisfied that because an institution is called religious,
we are to call it religious. It may have no religion. A
legislature may call itself a representative institution and
may not be one. If I were asked whether there was such
a thing as a representative institution, I shou say i
might be in the mind, but it was not here. V 0 a y
have a code of morality without a notion of mora 1 y.
We have taken all these codes and all these systems on
Eat Parsons’ Pure Jams.
Use Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats-


trust, and our taking them on trust, our refusal to use
the intelligence and brains with which we are endowed
has resulted in the degradation of the great mass of the
people,—in the possibility of
, Dossrcns in 'inn domain.
as well as dossers in the old country. I want us to
appreciate the fact that this great Empire, magnificent,
colossal, and marvellous as it is, has not brought to the
people concurrently with its growth, a full share of the
plenty it produces. May be there are some to-night
who believe that in Australia a socialist is looked upon
as a man who wants to take from somebody else. If
that were the case the only socialist is the capitalist
While you have in front of you your magnificent
institutions, your houses of legislature, your railway
system, while you superintend and have the ownership
of your streets and bridges, and all the natural advan-
tages of your harbor,—for you to say that Socialism is
impossible, is very stupid while there are these endow-
ments representing the common lot. Instead of these
institutions in their present limited development being
utilised practically for a small section of the community
the socialist who si a scientist
says we want to spread the mantle of protection over
and in regard to them until it shall cover every human
creature that exists in the world. I hat is, we want
for humanity what the capitalist wants for a class.
We want for the good of the people what the capitalist
wants for a small section. Can there be any comparison
between the justice of these two demands 1 While the
dog-in-the-manger policy, the vampire policy of the
moneyed classes, has told us that they are benefiting us,
they have been making use for a class aggrandisement
of the very wealth we create. No,
OURS IS A BROADER PLATFORM —
as broad as humanity. What would we say of the
father of a family who, after growing in riches, denied
Eat Parsons’ Pure Jams.
Drink Parsons’ Coffee Essence.


to his children the benefit of those riches ; if he started
a poor man, became a millionaire, and denied his
children education and culture and leisure and art 1
We should call him in rough language a selfish pig.
But he is no more selfish, no more contemptible, no
meaner, no more criminal than the State is to-day,
that goes on for ever adding to its riches and denies to
the weak, to the poor, to the old, to the lame a share in
its ever-increasing wealth. A savage would naturally
suppose that if there were plenty of fish in the stream,
or food in the the warehouse, the natural thing would
be to go to it. But we don’t, we don’t ;we are
civilised, not savage. A Maori chief would be astonished
if he went into a tribal camp and found he was not
welcome to share the pig. He would consider himself
treated with indignity, and the result would be a bad
time for the other people. We have surrounded our-
selves with property, but after all what is property 1
Your capitalist can’t tell you what part of an engine, or
of a building, belongs to him. He can no more tell you
that than I can what part of your Domain belongs to
me. There is no practical difference in the ideas of
property and you people collectively owning the Domain
—you don’t go out and say
“ I WANT MY 14 YARDB.”
Under a capitalistic system you have practically the
elements of a greater socialistic system, only that the
lesser capitalistic system is a selfish, greedy, inhuman
system, while the other is humane, statesmanlike, and
just. That is the difference between the two systems.
I thought you would be all on fire in the Colonies, but
I find you so tame —I find that there is the type of
man here that there is at home. I want to represent
to-night the more advanced thinkers of the old country.
We are not content with industrial rule. The very
fact that we are Britishers enables us to demand our
freedom. Botany Bay has been an instrument of
reform ; the gallows and the prison have been instru-
ments of reform—real instruments though they have
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Use Parsons’ P ( S.F. Mustard-


been used to hang the wrong people. In our illogical
position we have no sense to see what criminality is.
A poor, half-drunken luney is run in j the whole of
the burglars in the United Kingdom
STEALS LESS THAN A MILLIONAIRE BOES.
One we put in gaol, and the other in a mansion ; one
we hound with police espionage, and the other make a
peer. The advice I always give is—“ If you are going to
steal, do it properly.” We have won our freedom
from Botany Bay. Half of our so-called criminal
class came from men demanding their social freedom.
The capitalistic classes thought to crush out the germ of
reform by the lash, by the gallows, by the convict
system. Did they do it ? Every drop of blood they
shed gave new growth to the harvest to come out of all
that misery. Every man that died for his class utteied
his protest and the cry was heard by men who in their
turn went out to brave the prison and the gallows.
When I read the history of my country, and remember
the events subsequent to the French Revolution, and
remember the murders, and boycottings, and starvation,
and see in my mind’s eye the men who hid themselves
on the moors, and met in cellars, when I remember the
prison, and the gallows, and the convict ships, I have
not much love for the class that rules.
JUDGES MORE BRUTAL THAN JEFFRIES
exercised the law at the beck and call of the governing
class, and in the thirty years at the beginning of this
century there were fifty thousand men and women either
hanged or made convicts of. When I remember that the
black list was sent from town to town and from village to
village until the women and children fell and died—
when I remember those ruthless, murderous days of the
early part of this century, I say that these men who
tell me they are captains and leaders of industry, have
robbed, and maimed, and murdered, and l have nothing
to respect their memory for." When I remember how
Eat Parsons’ Flaked Oatmeal.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats.


pauper childien were sent to the mills, and the work-
shop, when I remember the misery of our women—
EVEN THEIR SEX WAS NOT RESPECTED
while the manufacturer was a church deacon, engaged
in the moral elevation of the people, and all the while
denying them any provision to maintain their sex
delicacy, until they had reduced the position to this,
that ten of the women of our class died to one of theirs
—when I remember that these women were not pro-
tected, that only a few years ago in Fifeshire families
were practically reared in coal mines, and only came up
about once a week, or once a month, there is very little
for us to be thankful about. And when I look round
to-day and see in the pottery districts of Staffordshire
girls working at thirteen, dead at sixteen, poisoned by
the environment —when I know that in the chain-
making districts women ply the bellows with one hand,
rock the cradle with a foot, work sixteen hours a day,
and earn the sum of 3s. 6d. to ss. 6d. a week, when I
think of that,
AM I PROUD OF SUCH A GREAT EMPIRE ?
Not a bit. When I know that our sweating system
sends girls into the streets, and men into prison, when
I know that men after all are but slaves in the
agricultural districts of the old country, while the
money owners are insulted if they don’t get 70 per
cent., I say these are not the things we want. This
is an old Empire, a great Empire, I grant you, but the
people have not availed themselves of it, have not
organised with the skill of an ordinary ant. The very
ant world shows a greater capacity to organise than we
do, that is they combine with their labor capacity a
capacity to systemise, and after all we the “extreme’'
thinkers only want to bring about that—the capacity
to organise, and reconstruct society, until it gives to
every man and woman their common rights, until our
inequalities are met, and every individual shall have
guaranteed to him and her a full economic freedom and
Use Parsons Pickles and Sauce.


right of equal liberty, until an enlightened brain power
shall have developed, and
THE WORLD BE MADE HAPPIER
than it is. This old Empire, this new Empire,
magnificent, yes, the Sun never sets upon it, its drum
beats are heard from zone to zone—we want to alter it.
We want to awaken humanity, and the basest of
humanity, for I recognise that those now in the pay
and the service of a small section of the community in
their heart of hearts desire a better state of things.
They say “ What can we do !’* You can do anything but
sit on your hunkers and talk about it. Until we get
into the water we can never learn to swim. I believe
that inherent in humanity is that one crystal drop, is
the power, the latent hope that looks for better things.
Just as it is possible for us to live evilly so it is possible
for us to live well. Humanity is not made up of pre-
delictions in one direction, we are as disposed to good-
ness as to badness, and our environment is in the main
the cause of the bad.
LET US ALTER THAT ENVIRONMENT,
let us join hands together and heads together, until the
pushful brains and energy of the world shall be
devoted to lifting up the standard of life. I anticipate
the time when you Australians, and we in the old
country, shall have the right of education up to 18,
when that education shall not be deemed sufficient
until it teaches something of governing institutions and
the laws that govern, until it realises something of the
fulness of its possibilities. What is the use of our
grumbling about the larrikins, when we don’t give to
the larrikin a chance to develop his brain, when we
don’t give him an opportunity to understand, when
after all in Australia one of the saddest traits of your
character that I see is this
WRETCHED LOVE OF GAMBLING
and sport that blots out so much good. We want to
alter the backing of gee-gees to the backing of humanity
Eat Parsons’ Plum Fudding and Mince Meat.
Use Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats.


to better things ; we want to widen the limits of our
educational system, until we shall turn out of our schools
intelligent citizens, and not as now leave our government
merely to our leisured classes. This feature of govern-
ment may not obtain here to the same extent as at
Home, hut still it is growing. We want to alter
these things until young Australia belongs to Australia,
which at present it does not. We want to alter these
conditions, until we shall have a real live citizenship,
until we shall have the pluck to own the things that
belong to us. We want to see people going across the
seas and continents, until racial hatred shall die out,
and that can only come by recognising the greater
brotherhood of man. We extremists that the religious
bodies condemn have done what ? We have held back
the hand of the Emperor William, and but for that the
Emperor would have
EMBROILED HIS COUNTRY IN WAR.
We have started in France a power that is increasing,
and that has held back the dogs of war who are different
from the ordinary dogs, inasmuch as they let other
people do the fighting. We want to extend that
fraternal feeling, until out of the gutter, and out of the
depths of misery, there shall be growing up a fuller
humanity, and a greater manhood and womanhood.
Those who can wait, see in the development of the
capitalist a process in the evolution of society that is
working out the remedy which we have at heart. But
lam not one to despair. Go, we say,
(JET YOUR WEALTH, GLUT YOURSELVES
with it, fill more than ever, there will be fewer of you
to take from when the time comes. The smaller
capitalist is being run by the greater capitalist, the
capitalist by the factory system, and so up and down
these processes are going on. Now I want to see the
time come when we shall work together, when the toiler
will know what is meant by travel, and comfort, 0 and
well being. T want to see our youths taught, until
Use Parsons’ Pasha and Elephant Coffees.
Use Parsons’ D.S.F Mustard.


they shall labor not with brute force only, but with a
great deal of their brain power too. I want to see that
time come when we shall, like the Children of Israel after
their sojourn in the wilderness, come within sight of
our kingdom. It may be that some of us will not see
much of an improvement, but we are conscious of the
fact that we are
AWAKENING THE CONSCIENCE OP THE WORLD.
We are conscious that our class is beginning to weigh
in the balance many of our institutions; we are
conscious of that mental and moral growth, and we are
awaiting the fuller consciousness that is coming to the
peoples of the earth. A Pharaoh of capital may pre-
vent and hamper us, and the plagues that come to our
country through our industrial crises, and the plagues
that come to us from industrial war, disease and
famine, they may all come. We may fritter away
our opportunities while we are in the desert, but
any way we have Canaan in front. Let us keep our
principles to the front, let us love each other the more,
and the greater the possibilities of our quarrelling, the
greater should be the charity of our judgments of each
other. Let us climb this hill, let us carry the weak on
our backs, and if the line of road is marked by our
graves, let us have the consciousness of knowing that
the place where we fall to rise no more, is
BUT THE STARTING POINT
of the next generation, that shall go on up the hill
until it shall win its citadel, and men shall dwell together
in that love and peace, equal to all the purity and
blessings, that our moralists picture us as possible to a
people, equal to the best stage of development that we
believe possible to be. With all this, we say don t
speak of the poor lass when she is down ; she has a
claim against society, and if the Great God be a just
God,she will be with the sheep while others are with
the goats. The rich man’s daughter secures all the
advantages of culture and refinement, and with it all
Eat Parsons’ Plum Pudding and Mince Meat.
Use Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats.


there is sometimes a mistake made, but when you
compare her with the child of the streets, and expect
that to grow up a beautiful creature,
WHAT IDIOCY,
what criminal stupidity ! We are creatures of environ-
ment, and the person who wants a beautiful character
must help to enlarge the material plane. When they
talk of moral degradation they are liars. I hope the
time will come when we shall be
AN EMPIRE KNOWING NO POVEBTY,
and knowing no misery caused by material environment,
but that we shall dwell in a healthy, happy, family life,
respecting our women, loving our children, loving the
country to which we belong, and turning our natural
and physical resources to such purpose that they shall
yield to us a Heaven on earth, and may our motto be
“On Earth as it is in Heaven.” If we are equal before
God at least we should be equal before man. r That is
our watchword, equality in the state, equal right to live
a full free life, and a right to enjoy the fruits of out-
work. If that be a dream, it is a good dream ; but
it is based upon scientific lines—it is not a dream, it
is a possibility, and will in the future be the fact that
governs our society.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Roiled Oats
Use Parsons’ D.S.F, Mustard.




Use Parsons’ Pasha and Elephant Coffees.
“Environment & Character.”
Lecture by Mr. Ben Tillett , at the Protestant Hall ,
Sydney , on Wednesdag , August 12, 1897.
Mr.' Tillett said : Mr. Chairman and dear friends :
There are some features of our civilization to which I
wish to draw your attention to-night. While we are
trying to create all sorts of products, the greatest pro-
duct of all nature is still neglected, and while we care
for the development of our rabbits, and horses, and dogs,
we feel no particular interest in the development of
man. From the physical and psychological standpoint
we neglect the culture of man—leave to chance the
culture of humanity; a thing so precious, that if we
only consider for a moment the great miracle of life,
we must, if we recognise what is beautiful, recognise it
to be the highest of any form of life.
WE ARE MET BY THE SUPERFICIAL PERSON
with the remark : well, everybody has had his chance.
If you meet a man and he is well up in the world, he
declares that his brain has done it, his superior powers
and superiority generally. If you meet him some years
hence a dosser in the domain, he has a different argu-
ment altogether. And yet his intellectual development
might have been progressive consistently with his
downfall, —that is his brain superiority might have
gone on increasing while, as he would say, his luck
turned against him. I readily admit that if we restrict
the argument as to character to the mere energy that
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats.


is in a man, if we narrow the conception of character to
the mere force of will, tnere may be something in the
argument. But as one looks round the subject, and
has a clever sight of it, I say that whatever may be the
superior powers of an individual man or woman they are
INVARIABLY THE RESULT OF ENVIRONMENT.
Aud we say again that, taking the offspring of persons
healthy in body and commanding in intellect —we say
that that offspring inherits powers that have come out
of environment, for the physical and intellectual
development of a parent is as much the environment
of the children as are the circumstances of the child’s
life. That must be logical, for if not let me put the
boot on the other foot. Say the offspring inherit bad
tendencies. Weissman, the great German naturalist,
although he has upset many theories of heredity, yet
recognises in the germ-plasm inherited characteristics,
and, supposing the child is the offspring of criminal
parents, that it will in ninety-nine cases out of a
hundred
INHERIT THE WEAKNESSES OF THE PARENT.
Only the healthiest environment in such a case will
prevent the development of these propensities in him.
That should be sufficiently plain. And if it be admitted
on the one hand, you should admit it on the other. If
it is possible to inherit healthy organisms, healthy body,
healthy mind, it is also possible to inherit weak mind,
and weak physique. That principle is recognised by
every boy that understands the rearing of pigeons.
Every horse fancier or rearer will select the best blood
possible to get the best results. Some years ago I was
talking to a lady belonging to the aristocracy, who was
A FRIEND OF THE DUKE OF WESTMINSTER.
We were discussing frankly this question. I was saying
that the Duke of Westminster built very healthy and
handsome stables, and that one of his houses had more
breathing space than a hundred of the Duke’s tenants
on his slum property. And yet the Duke is a great
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Drink Parsons' Coffee Essence.


■Moralist, a great reformer while he is taking the rent
from his slum property ! It is necessary I suppose for
him to be a great reformer. In many cases when
people talk about purity they are living on some other
person’s impurity. I am always suspicious of those
who demand from people characteristics opposed to the
environment that binds them. I was saying to the
lady that children are born on many parts of the Duke
of Westminster’s property in a vitiated atmosphere and
that there is very little possibility of them growing up
with any chance of a healthy life. She said, “Well, dear
Mr. Tillett, don’t you think that the Duke does some
good to this country while he keeps up the breed of
horses ?” The reply was I hope forcible and polite. I
said “ I should be much more interested in the duke if
he would
GO IN FOB A BREED OF MEN AND WOMEN.”
The lady was shocked, I don’t know why ; but if she
could talk so familiarly about the Duke’s horses, she
should be able to talk about the rearing of men and
women. I regret from the bottom of my heart that
woman’s inhumanity to her sister woman prevents a
great many reforms in an economic and moral sense, and
that one of the reasons for the position of woman is
that she has degraded herself. That women who have
been reared in luxury, and have not been subject to
temptations, and have had every one of the nice things
that help to make us nice people—that these women
should be so narrow and mean regarding their sisters
is to me one of
THE GREATEST SINS AND THE GREATEST EVIL
that degrades our social life. As one loving all my
fellows —good, bad and indifferent— I love morality
for morality’s sake, and, so far as I am able, shall be
moral. But there are circumstances over which
persons have very little or no control whatever, and
if all women were subjected to the worst temptations
that the most unfortunate of their sex are subjected
to, all women would be as vicious and unfortunate
Eat Parsons’ Flaked Oatmeal
y§e Parsons’ Pickles and


as the rest. Their circumstances —their environment
—is their virtue, and they should have heart enough,
and sense enough, and soul enough to see it. While
we have heard so much talk about this woman or
that woman, and this man or that man, having
fallen, while we talk about the beauties of moral
character, how many women go to stretch out a hand
of help, how many men do ? Political and social
enemies are always ready to grease the steps of the
upward ladder. They are so anxious for morality
that they are
GREASING THE STEPS TO KEEP THEIR FELLOWS DOWN.
That is because we have a miserable and inadequate
conception of what is moral. We have a prison
system, a social system, no end of preachments, no
end of missions, no end of everything but the right
thing. Everybody that robs a man or woman of self-
respect, be it by the garb of the gaol, be it by the taunts
and insults of their fellows, or by the preachments of
those who preach a so-called religion, everything that
takes away self-respect robs him or her of the power,
and the interest and the ambition to reach higher
levels of morality. One meets, of course, with a
large number of very superficial persons I don t
blame them if they are superficial as the result of
their artificial conditions, and I recognise them as
creatures of environment. I tell them with a
brotherly sympathy, “my poor fellows, you don t
know what you are talking about. You don t know
these people, you don’t know their temptations,
YOU don’t KNOW THEIR SORROW, THEIR DESPAIR.
And these critics who may have passed through a
university, are for ever twisting their moustaches and
talking about the ignorance of these people. Poor
creatures ! The university didn’t even ma,ke men of
them—it made prigs of them ; and if it didn’t teach
them enough to sympathise with the ignorance
those who had not their opportunity, then
Eat Parsons’ Pure Jams.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Pats.


university system is a failure. If the university
teaches love of knowledge for knowledge’s sake, the
small share of enlightenment they have should teach
them modesty and give them an incentive to go out
and teach other people what they boast for themselves.
Now, for these people to talk of ignorance, and to
claim that the child which has had to work from
babyhood almost, in the mine or factory—to claim
that these should possess a similar intellectual and
moral development to that of themselves, is at least
unfair, and shows that their
UNIVERSITY EDUCATION DID NOT TEACH THEM LOGIC.
It should teach them to know, to sympathise, to
study, and from their study to evolve such a wisdom,
such an understanding and such an interest in the
removal of the hindrances to intellectual progress, as
would make intellectual progress possible to the
whole community. Now, we have to teach each
other at least tolerance. A lady that has refinement,
comforts, a nice drawing-room, books and music,
may take an interest in literature, sermons, anything
that relates to intellectual or spiritual life. A lady
that has all her senses and faculties fully trained
acquires character from her surroundings. She hears
the best language, speaks the best English, sees the
best pictures, reads the best books, obtains the best
education. The very ends of her nerves are taking
in perceptions and sensations that are forming her
character and filling her mind with knowledge. Rob
the woman of that and you make her seek the
rendezvous of the dosser, and in a month
ALL THE TRAINING OF A LIFE-TIME WOULD BE BLACKENED
and made vulgar. If all that culture and all that
education can be obliterated in a month, what can
you expect of those who have been born in these
surroundings, who have seen nothing of a higher
life,who have had to live a hand-to-mouth existence,
who have hardly been taught to read, who have not
heard beautiful music, who have not seen fine pictures,
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Drink Parsons’ Cpffee Essenoe,


who have not been surrounded by culture and
refinement, who have all their life heard the foul oath
and seen the still fouler deed. Is there a man who
dares to say that he expects out of these conditions
saints and angels may grow ? Not a bit. Surely
the reformer should recognise that the only way to
train the mind or the body to this virtuous exaltation
is at least to surround it with such conditions as
would help. I often wish I had the power to take
some of these people who talk over their cigars and
champagne—who happen to be born the sons of some
wealthy cow-seller —that I had the power
TO GET HOLD OF THEM BY THE SCRUFF OF THE NECK
and dump them down somewhere to get their
own living for six months. They would come out of
it if they came out of it at all—sadder and wiser
and thinner than when they went in. This argument
of environment is easily defended. Are we not
divided into a babel of tongues ? Has not each
nationality its particular dialect, while these are often
sub-divided into particular dialects again. We can
all tell a Frenchman or a German or a Scandinavian.
Who cannot tell an Irishman ? How many would
make a mistake as to a Scotchman’s accent ? Why
you could cut it. As for a Welshman, why, you
would be smothered if you attempted to hold back
the torrent. You can tell whether an Englishman
comes from the North or the South—whether a
Yorkshireman, a Geordie, or a West-Countryman—
you can tell him by the burr. Environment has
given a peculiar dialect to people, so that after living
for thirty years from their county, they are so
saturated with their mother dialect, that they are
incapable of speaking without revealing it, and the
older they grow the more confirmed it becomes. All
this is an example in proof of my contention. Then
take ~ men in their trade. You can almost see the
woollen merchant with tufts of wool sticking out of
him. You can tell the ordinary artist or writer.
Eat Parsons’ Flaked Oatmeal.
Use Parsons’ D.S.F, Mustard.


Who could not tell a miner or a navvy ? Who could
not tell an engineer? Why you can smell them.
Everyone of our trades begets a peculiar human
development. Those working in certain positions
develop practically the same physiological results. In
dealing with the principle that argument is never
confuted. There are some sailors one has heard of who
cannot go to sleep until the missus has gone out and
thrown
BUCKETS OF WATER AT THEIR BEDROOM WINDOW.
In nature again, take the case of flora, for vegetable
life is associated with particular climates and
countries. The succulent ivatercress of the old
country, if taken to Africa, will form a dam and block
up the rivers; the little watercress will develop into
a tree thirty feet high. The fuchsia will grow very
big here, but in the old country the greatest possible
care is necessary to develop it into any size. Tree
life, plant life, animal life, are all determined in their
shape, form and habits by environments. The insect
of the desert partakes of the colour of the desert, so
that the desert bird is unable to detect it. The frog
practically ,will change its colour to that of its
environment. The ordinary pugilist has one develop-
ment, while the runner has another, and the cyclist
has a different muscular development to either. All
these circumstances are admitted. The tree _ that
will grow luxuriantly in the warm climate wiil be
nipped and die in a colder one. On every side there
are arguments. The rabbit of the old country,
because of the cold weather, doesn’t breed all the year
round, and when it comes to Australia—
YOU WANTED THE BUNNY, AND YOU HAVE TOO MUCH OF HIM
—how different! That is another argument as co
environment. Change the environment, and all your
poison and all your dogs won’t keep him down. He
will starve your sheep out, and live where your sheep
die, because the environment suits his development.
Go from that again to the ordinary man. How many
Eat Parsons’ Pure Jams.
Drink Parsons’ Coffee Essence.


of the children that are born will live in the congested
areas of the old country ? How many women will
die over and above those who should die in peopling
the earth ? I will tell you the pei\ centage and the
rate of mortality. Give me the number of persons
living upon a certain acreage, and I will tell you
within a fraction the number that will die without
coming to maturity, simply because the vitiated
atmosphere will develop phthisis or consumption, or
other forms of disease that take human beings away.
I said I will tell you, but
GOD ALONE CAN TELL YOU
the effects of environment upon human life. No
doctor in his senses will say that human life, simply
because it is human life, can outlive or chase back
material forces that hinder or prevent healthy
development. The doctor is perfectly sane, perfectly
right—nobody questions him. As a social reformer, I
claim him as one who will preach a greater sermon
than the preacher, a greater moral than the moralist,
and a greater truth and reform than the statesman.
If you want grand human character, you must give
human life all that is grand and beautiful and noble
for its use. Take again the sanitarian. He will tell
you exactly, if you tell him what drainage there is,
or how many people live in certain houses, whether
the place is healthy ; he will give you a fair estimate
of the number of diseases that will spring up.
THE SANITARIAN AND THE DOCTOR HAVE JOINED THEIR
BRAINS
and experience, and as one who only wants to base
reforms upon a principle in harmony with the most
advanced science, I say the doctor and the sanitarian
are showing to the world how children are robbed of
life and how many people die before their^ proper
time. <)ln the congested areas of London, the average
life is not fifteen years. Take the whole working
class of the old country, and their average life is not
twenty-eight years. When, in the face of that, I see
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Use Parsons’ n.S F Mustard.


people go fooling round with hysterical nonsense, I
only wish, as I have said, that I could pitch them
down > into the same conditions. We are not
hysterical. We bring the doctor and the sanitarian
to back us up, and we bring, too, the women who in
London are offering up their lives to the reforming
work. There are plenty of missionaries, and police,
and detectives, who go down the slums of London;
but the work is being done better by the loving and
earnest women who are doing it in their own way-
women who go down with the name of sister upon
their lips, and tend their sisters—do their scrubbing
and cleaning. The foulest blackguard that lives in
London holds those women up sacred. We say that
if these blackguards can reverence a woman of that
type, surely there is
SOMETHING IN THE BLACKGUARD THAT IS WOETH BRINGING
OUT.
And all the blackguards in London would not hurt
a hair of her head. That is more than can be said of
the sons of her own class. These women bring us
evidence of what can be done by human love, and
surely if they can do what they do, and their merits
are appreciated, surely the very lowest down of
humanity have the possibility of something higher in
them. We have then the work of the sanitarian and
the reforming woman, then the statistician comes
along. Some say poverty comes from drink ; well,
the champagne drinkers would in that case be in
poverty.
POVERTY IS A MATTER OF MONEY, NOT MORALS,
and while plenty of people who spend a shilling on
beer are in poverty, others who spend five pounds a
week never touch poverty. I suppose, using the logic
of that side, it must be their drink that makes the
champagne drinkers rich. We want to rid our minds
of cant, and take the view of a statistician, r who has
made a specific study of the question. In London,
out of sixteen thousand of the worst-off people, he only
Eat Parsons Flaked Oatmeal.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats,


discovered four hundred whose come down could be
attributed to drink. He found that there were a
million people in London, and an equal corresponding
proportion in all the large centres of the old country,
who were, practically on account of our capitalistic
system,
REDUCED TO A CONDITION OF STARVATION.
If there was less prayiag of one sort—preying on the
people — an d a little more work of another sort, we
might get along. But for us with level heads to say
that because they are fallen it is their own fault,
gives the lie to our civilization. I have
widened the scope of this environment argument, let
me give you the conditions under which people live.
The average wage for the working class in England
is about a pound a week, which means a pound for
every five persons. Now, four shillings a head, when
you come to reckon it up and to provide with it nice
things for living and all that —well, I can only say
you can’t do it. Humanity won’t answer to that
sum ; it is a blackleg price. It means practically 50
percent, of the working population —Frederick Har-
rison said 90per cent., but I willonlysay 50 per cent.—
are within a week of the workhouse, and some within
a week of the gaol. It is not their fault, it is because
they don’t happen to thieve enough. If they had
been more ambitious, bank robbers, or something of
that sort, they would have been better oft, because they
are geniuses who do this. If some people received
imprisonment proportionately to what they steal,
they would have to live from fifteen to twenty
thousand years in gaol. We are quite logical in the
position we take up. We want to alter the environ-
ment.
WE SAY THAT THE CAPITALISTIC SYSTEM IS DOOMED.
We consider it has wrought more murder than any
form of barbarism. It is a system that reduces
ninety per cent, of the people of the earth to a
condition of servility and starvation. Capitalism kills
Eat Parsons’ Pure Jams.
Use parsons’ Pickles and Sauce.


ambition, is responsible with so-called civilization
for criminality and prostitution. It is a failure
because of its selfishness, because of its meanness; a
failure because of its inhumanity; anything that is
inhuman must be bad. I am not blaming the
capitalist. He is also a creature of circumstances.
To-day here is a race for wealth. Do you think the
capitalist has any love for his fellows, while the bank
failures destroy the credit and take the money of the
tradesmen, and the big men never go wrong. Even
Barney Barnato went wrong, because there were other
millionaires besides him. This wolfishness, this
tiger thirst for money, has no mercy.
THE CAPITALISTS KILL EACH OTHER, j
ruin each other, care nothing for the degradation of
each other. The system is built on selfishness, and
crime, and murder, and blood, and must die because
it is founded on these things. The picture I gave
was of fourteen hundred and twenty miles of streets
of poverty, where the woman has not the means to
give succour to her child, where the man will fall
dead over the threshold of his own door. There is
capitalism and its fruits. 1420 miles of this, and
you talk about the glut in the market and over-
production. A great many people say that wo
socialists are fanatics. We make no mistakes. . We
get our data together ; we never take any emotional
action ; we have everything to our hand. The truth
is so ugly in itself that no language could exaggerate
it.
HOW PEOPLE TALK ABOUT CONFISCATION !
The trick of the London thief when he picks a pocket
is to shout out *• Stop, thief! ” He will run alongside
the very man he has taken the watch from, and, if he
can, will get his purse. Confiscation! The biggest
thieves are doing what I have indicated. In their
press and their literature they talk about confiscation.
It is the devil denouncing sin. Capitalism
is nothing but confiscation, nothing but the
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Drink Parsons’ Coffee Essence.


robbery of property. Have not ninety out
of a hundred people a right to property?
Is it only ten, and the ten who collar the property of
the ninety ? What moralists we are ! And yet this
bunkum has sufficed to frighten many old men and
women.' They used to talk about us abolishing the
Established Church and the monarchy. It does not
matter to us about the monarchy.
GOOD LUCK TO THE OLD DUCHESS.
We are not after the million that goes
to the Eoyal Family, but after the thousand
million that goes to the pocket of those
who keep the wealth of the community. As to
the Dis-establishment of the Church, that question is
not taking us away. We don’t want people who own
small amounts of money—and the capitalist tells
these people that their small earnings will be
confiscated—we don’t want their money, it isn’t good
enough. We don’t want to confiscate the savings
and scrapings of a lifetime. c We recognise that if
the business of managing a state is given to it we
could manage to need only twenty years of service.
People could be educated until twenty, live and enjoy
themselves afterwards, have a free pass over the
railway as well as a free pass on the steamers,
(whether they happen to be distinguished visitors or
not), and those who worked for twenty years would
only have to serve for four hours a day.
WE WANT TO ABOLISH CONFISCATION.
Our scope and horizon, as I said, the other night,
embraces the child in the cradle and the tottering
old man or woman going to the grave. What we
say to the moralist is that we want to see the finest
type of manhood and womanhood developed. We
say the binding of yourselves to institutions, and
the binding of these institutions to class, has brought
about the results you see now. Don’t weep for the
fallen sister or brother—they are only products of a
rotten system of society. You have absolutely failed
Use Parsons’ Pasha and Elephant Coffees.
Use Parsons’ D.S.F. Mustard


to remedy this condition, and, as you increase in
wealth, you intensify poverty and increase the
industrial reserve army.
GO TO THE DOSSERS IN THE DOMAIN,
and go with the sermon, hand it them with the
soup—what imbecility, what criminality. We have
do sentiment about this business, and we don’t want
any from the other side. They say that in these
colonies it is possible to have equality Well, as
there is only one premiership and nearly a million
citizens, it would be a million to one against your
getting your chance. And if only 5 per cent, of
the population have means enough to send their
children to school or college to develop the best of
their brain power, there are ninety-five per cent,
that are not. And are you going to say that the
ninety-five per cent, shall be found equal. If you
get two dogs and train one and not the other, and
tell somebody that you expect the untrained dog to
do as much as the other, he would tell you to suck
your brains out to see if you were awake.
AND YET THAT IS THE ATTITUDE OF OUR SUPERIORS.
I went to Professor Bristol’s establishment the other
night. There were plenty of stages of development
shown, and when I looked at the development of
those horses, the cleanliness and spirit of them-
well, I thought, “ better be a horse than a dosser.
But these horses owed their development to environ-
ment. If we want beautiful men and women we
must have beautiful conditions. The rich man an
woman may buy for their children the most hoa y
development. Take the child from them and place
it in the slums, and place the slum child in e
mansion, and the rich child will become
BAD IN SPITE OF HEREDITY,
and the slum child will develop as the other would
have done. And how jealous of character is a
Eat Parsons’ Plum Pudding and Mince Meat.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats.


mother’s love. There is none higher, not even
Christ himself, and His was the highest. Of a
mother’s love that is always the same, Kipling has
written the words:
“ Though I were hanged on the highest hill,
“ Mother of mine, O mother of mine.
“ I know whose love would follow me still,
“ Mother, 0 mother of mine.”
What we want is to have a child reared so that the
mother can have everything ready to her hand.
Whether she has gone to university or not, she will
develop all the natural and beautiful instincts of
maternity. There is nothing greater, better, or
more beautiful than the true motherhood, exercising
its powers to develop the best men and wcmen from
her home. Rob her of the means to educate her
children and you
ROB THE NATION OF ITS POSSIBILITIES OF GOOD.
That, surely, is an argument of environment. The
mother is anxious that her boy or girl shall have the
best society, the best education, the best surround-
ings I imagine her without a wardrobe, without a
cupboard, without culture, without refinement, living
in a filthy condition where the room is no wider than
twelve feet by ten—imagine her maintaining her
sex-purity, and keeping up the respect of her children.
When we know that ninety per cent, are more or
less living under conditions that do not allow of the
best home rearing, that 50 per cent, are without the
ordinary necessaries, and that twenty-five per cent,
are without materials enough for existence, to expect
a healthy moral growth out of that environment is
to expect an impossibility from the institutions of
social life,
WE SAY THAT WE WANT TO ALTER THE CONDITIONS
we want to build beautiful characters, we want to
rear fine men and women Many men and women
Eat Oatmeal.
Use Parsons’ Pickles and Sauce.


are undone from infancy by the very food and drink
they take. There is no sience of dietary taught m the
schools to our childron. We want to alter this, and
to teach our people how to dress and how te live.
You say that there is not enough food to go round.
When Canada and America and your colonies otter
the most agricultural soil possible to the world,
when you have ninety per cent, of the productive
energy of the world in machine power, when you
recognise these things and recognise also that
production is for ever increasing,
IT IS ABSURDITY TO SAY THAT THE THING CAN T BE
DONE,
there is not enough money. We don’t want money ;
that is an invention that only belongs to the
capitalist and the millionaire They tell you that
money is wealth , give me the commodity, give me
the labour, and they can glut themselves with the
money. It is only because they are amassing large
fortunes without any commodity, that we are living
under conditions in which a large per centage of the
population are not reared as they might be.
respect every institution that contributes to the
uplifting of the people. 1 respect every movement
towards social reform that tries to raise the people
higher. 1 recognise that great good has been done
in many instances by social and religious institutions,
but I recognise that
all THESE EFFORTS HAVE FAILED IGNOMINIOUSLY,
because they have not started from a proper standpoint,
They have failed because they have lacked in common
sense, because they have tried the impossible. To start
on a woman of twenty-five who is down or a man of
thirty who is down, is twent'?-five years too late on the
one hand and thirty years on the other. As I have
indicated, we want to change the fact that the first
senses of the child should not be considered, that its
first sense of sight should look upon blackness and
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats


ugliness, that its sense of touch should be revolted and
defiled. To expect after every pigment, molecule and
fibre has been tainted by environment that is foul—to
expect that you are going to grow beautiful things out
of that is absurdity and madness. You would not put
a geranium in the dark, in a corner away from the
light. If you have common sense enough to know
what to do with the geranium, surely
THE CHILD IN THE CRADLE
has as much right to be cared for. Now, the misery I
have indicated is not the result of one life or one
generation, or one century. It is the result of man s
inhumanity to man, and just as humanity has retained
some good and the bad so even with the best conditions
humanity will be slow in the recovery, and the longer
we delay the work of making up arrears the more
arrears there are to make up. But no preachments, no
sermons, no dogmas about thrift and nice habits. Let
the child grow up where it sees the best results of what
others know. One shepherd-dog will teach another
more than anything else, and surely if a dog can
imitate its experienced fellow in its best habits, humanity
can imitate the best in its habits.
YOU IN THE COLONIES ABE ALWAVS TALKING
about the way you have grown out of the lowly con-
ditions of your fathers and mothers. You have grown
at the expense of somebody else, the result of accident
not the result of your own superior mental abilities I
could show you some women keeping a whelk store with
more brains than would keep you and your families.
The Lord does not decide by brains, or there would be
a poor chance for the aristocracy. Let us remember
that the man who becomes wealthy becomes so because
of his environment, not because of his brains. He may
be an unscrupulous person, and it he can put sand in
sugar or sell diseased cattle he may have financial
ability, but it is low down. Whether it is a case like
Use Parsons’ Pasha and Elephant Coffees.
Use Parsons’ D.S.F. Mustard.


that, or of a mother and father robbing a child of food,
the scandal is the same.
I INHERIT MANY QOALITIEB
that T wish l did not. I inherit many tendencies that
[ wish I did not All of us are subject to temptations
—some of us fall. II you want to rid yourselves ot the
miseries entailed by your civilisation, go to work with
scientific weapons ; have some economic principle to
work upon, some sense of economic justice, and so long
as products, so long as commodities, so long as the
means and the instruments of wealth and the powers of
exchange are in the hands of a capitalist minority, so
long will you have born out of a vicious material
environment all those vicious and immoral conditions
you so much deplore. You may say there are excep-
tions, but I am dealing with the generality, with the
majority.
THAT IS QUITE SATISFACTORY ENOUGH FOR ME.
ind if the scientist, in getting any result from his
laboratory, takes a majority of instances as a working
basis, so we take the bulk and the majority of instances
as the basis of our ideas of reform Two thousand
years of institutional Christianity—l don’t say Christi-
anity—have been a failure. Two thousand years of
so-called education have been a failure. Two thousand
years of so-called moral reform have been a failure, and
failure will continue to be so long as material conditions
encourage vicious growths. You say there is to be no
murder ; you speak of it through your press in holy
horror. Out of every thousand people in the congested,
industrial areas 80 people are literally murdered.
there is murder for you.
Talk about your being humane, talk about your indus-
trial capacity when all that murder is going on. It is
a good job perhaps they are killed instead of going on
to the usual span of life. One of your newspapers
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats


speaks about the earnings of capital. Oor friend could
not have read advanced economics. Capital might earn
something il it were a commodity, but as long as it
is a mere token it does not earn anything. 0 For we
could get on without it if we only had clear-sightedness
enough to see what is wealth, dhe commodity is the
wealth.
BARNEY BARNATO WAS THOUGHT TO HAVE £200,000,000
but when his friends looked into it they found he only
had a commodity representing £20,000,000. Gold is
only valuable so long as it represents commodity and a
note is quite equal to gold. Millions and millions worth
of products are exchanged in London without a cent
passing. If we can only recognise that, the economic
centre is in labor, in the commodity, we have the
right grip, and when we say that no persons holding
tokens shall boss the community, we shall then begin
to realise what is possible. To say that will
starve is to lie. Slavery is not inevitable ;or only so
under a capitalistic system. I hope the time will soon
come when the brainworkers will see that their lot is
that of ourselves, when they will come to our side and
have sense to work for themselves and not for the
parasite.
WE WANT TO ABOLISH THE POPINJAY and THE PARASITE.
So long as they live there must be difficulty. Nineteen
centuries of Christianity, of civilization, of learning, of
experience in government, and where are you 1 Nine-
teen centuries behind the early fathers of the early
Christian era. Nineteen centuries behind economio
justice. And the women who want their fellow-women
to be moral, let them go out and work for us. We
don’t want you to give up a cent or to give up youf
own interest, but you can at least
HAVE SUMPTION ENOUGH TO USB YOOR POWERS
political to return certain men and give a certain teaching
to your children. The woman who wauts to see her
Eat Parsons’ Plum Pudding and Mince Meat.
Use Parsons' Cooked Rolled Oats


fellow-woman virtuous unless she does act thus is a libel
on virtue itself. Let the man who wants reform go out
and surround his fellow with such conditions as he
would wish for himself. There is money and produce
in plenty, and there should be brains in plenty to carry
on this work of reform. But so long as the conditions
exist as 1 have indicated your gaols’reforms and schools
are wasted on the wind that comes back and spits
futility in yout face. Let as see in our political and
municipal reforms
that every child has a chance —
pictures, music, beautiful surroundings and something
of that which gives color and refinement to life. I
don t want you to go slum visiting or give tracts or
anything of the sort. I want you women to stir your
husbands up, and you men to recognise that you are
your brother’s keeper, and that you must do what is
right for your brother. If you had a larger perception
of fact and a love for your fellow you could turn the
industrial and political machinery to such use that
neither you nor your child, nor your children’s children,
need fear starvation.
THERE IS NO SECURITY AGAINST POVERTY
save in collectivism. There is no refuge against oppres-
sion, sin, and criminality, but in collectivism. There is
no security against the degradation of mankind but in
creating such an environment as will produce the best
results May we have such a time that when a child
is born the mother may look upon it without fear for
the morrow , not as now when the food supply is taxed
by the capitalist,—taxed and sweated and robbed from
the cradle to the grave. What misery that all this
should exist.
we want the mother s heart to be relieved
of anxiety that the commodity might run short, and the
cupboard be empty—the earth is so full that it could
Eat Parsons’ Flaked Oatmeal.
Use Parsons’ Pickles and Sauce.


keep a thousand times the population it has now.
Mother Earth yields her plenty, the Sun shines and
gives life and should bring hope and plenty to us. The
rivers flow, the green tides rise and swell, the night
follows the day, and all life on the earth’s surface is
surrounded by laws that conduce to plenty. Man’s
intelligence gives the possibility of using all these
things, and with this plenty, and Nature yielding her
sustenance to all her children, let us have such an
environment that the man who robs the public will be
banished as the real murderer. I want to see oui slums
abolished.
IN THIS MAGNIFICENT EXPERIMENT
there are great possibilities only resting with yourselves
We must fight selfishness, it is the mother of all the
sin and all the sorrow. There is insecurity even to
the wealthiest. Let us abolish that insecurity by a
greater fraternity, and a greater love, and the measure
of our fraternity and our self-sacrifice will be the true
measure of the blessing that shall come to us and our
children, and our children’s children from the good
things we make their heritage.
Eat Parsons’ Pure Jams.
Use Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats-


H.S.W. FRESH FOOD AND ICE
COMPANY, Limited.-—-
t • •
PIQ3STEEBS OF
The Country Milk Trade
The Factory System of Butter Making (which has
done much for the colony and colonies)
The Creamery System of Butter Making (which has
done more)
Refrigerating
Ice Making.
The Company sells only the very best articles,
supplying all the principal places of
Sydney with
(Dilh Ci* cam fee
Buffet* Fish Came
Poulfmj Fasfrjj &c.
Visit the City Depots (Refreshment)
92 KING STREET, 23 ROYAL ARCADE,
FOR AFTERNOON TEA.
Note.— Arrangements may be made at either of these Depots for
Private Parties.
The Fish Shop at 135 KING STREET is one of the
Best in the World.
Send Orders to the HEAD OFFICE, 25 HARBOR STREET.
They will receive prompt attention. Agents everywhere.
H. PATESON, Manager,




THEHEDOF LABOR REPRESEHTaTIOK
By Alderman Ben Tillett, L.C.C., Secretary of the
London Dockers’ Union,
The necessity of direct labor representation on all
governing bodies, is one which is becoming daily more
apparent to the workers of Great Britain. On all sides
we find that the organisations which are specially
representative of the working classes are beginning to
recognise this necessity, and to take such steps as they
think best fitted to meet it. The annual Trades Union
Congress, held at Belfast in September, 1893, passed
the now well-known resolution in favor of the
establishment of a proper fund and organisation for the
purpose of assisting independent labor candidates in all
local and Parliamentary elections. The London Trades
Council has taken up the same cry, and is now
engaged in formulating a scheme whereby the same
need may be met. Many of the most important of the
Trade Unions have taken steps in the same direction.
The Miners’ Unions, which have long been more
forward in politics than those of other classes of
workers, have, for many years, maintained direct
representatives in the House of Commons. Their
example has been more recently followed by the
National Amalgamated Sailors’ and Firemen’s Union,
while the Amalgamated Society of Engineers has, by a
vote of its 75,000 members, declared itself ready to pay
a levy of 3d. per member, which will realise over £BOO,
for the expenses of Parliamentary candidates., The
National*Union of Boot and Shoe Operatives, the
Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants, and the
Amalgamated Society of Tailors, have each voted to
maintain a member of Parliament, while the National
Union of Teachers has two candidates already in the
field. Many other Trade Societies have endorsed the
Eat Parsons’ Flaked Oatmeal.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats,


candidature of their officials for parliamentary and
municipal offices, and the number of these is being
increased almost every day. Under such circumstances
as these then, when it can no longer be doubted that
the workers are awakening to a sense of their great
need in this respect, it may well be worth our while to
devote a little time to the consideration of the history
of the question, and to the causes which have tended to
produce this growing feeling in favor of the direct
representation of their interests, which is so rapidly
spreading among the artisan and laboring classes of
Great Britain.
If we may place any reliance whatever upon the
lessons of history as taught us by our professors and
economists, it is reasonable to believe that in remote
centuries the civic spirit, the sense of common rights
and duties in the state, was not only absent from the
breasts of the bulk of the inhabitants of these islands,
but was, indeed, necessarily so absent. In the days before
the growth of the large towns, the population of Great
Britain consisted chiefly of the lords of the manors
and their retainers, the High Church dignitaries and
their subordinates, and the serfs and vassals upon their
estates. The workers, secure as they may have been in
the tenure of their small plots, or portions of plots of
land, were nevertheless dependent upon the lord of their
manor for practically all the means of life, and almost
for the very right to live itself. They were far too
occupied with their work upon the land, of which they
were practically the peasant proprietors under certain
conditions, to feel any interest in civic affairs, or to
take any part in the work of government. Their
system 'of farming was perhaps as wasteful and
extravagant as any that could well be conceived. They
had to render service upon the lord’s demesne just at
the time when their own crops most needed attention ;
they were without the use of any but the rudest kinds
of mechanical appliances ; and they had no scientific
system of drainage or of manuring the land. Under
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Use Parsons’ D.S.F Mustard,


such circumstances the mere getting of a living from
the soil must have entailed such hard and engrossing
toil, as to have left the serf neither the energy nor the
time, even if he had had the opportunity, to take any
part in the affairs of the government of his country.
I do not suggest that they felt the need of any such
action. It is indeed probable that in spite of the
untoward circumstances of their lot in many ways, they
were far happier and more contented, and secured a
larger share of the wealth they produced, than is the
case with many thousands of the highly civilised and
highly Christianised people who now occupy their
places. But this absence of desire and of opportunity
on the people’s part to interest themselves in these
questions ultimately cost them dearly. The lords of
the manors were not so fully occupied that they could
not find time to study their own interests in the State.
After many struggles they succeeded, as we know, in
wresting from the monarch the charter of their own
rights and liberties. In this work they were by no
means slow to avail themselves of the assistance of
their serfs. But having gained the powers and
privileges they claimed, they did not scruple to use
them against the simple and unsuspecting class by
whose efforts they had been so largely attained.
It was under such circumstances as these that the
groundwork of our present system of land tenure was
first laid. The rich and powerful lords exerted all
their powers to increase and render more secure their
jiwn possessions. No doubt some of the changes they
effected on their own behalf, were subsequently
advantageous to the nation as a whole, but they were
carried out with a savagery, and a disregard of the
rights of the people and of all civic responsibility,
which must have resulted in enormous an over-
whelming misery to whole classes of the population.
The transformation of the security of tenure, formerly
enjoyed by the serfs and tenants in return for the fixed
services rendered to the lord, into a money payment of
Eat Parsons’ Flaked Oatmeal.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats,


rent, simple as that act may have appeared, enabled
the lords to eventually dispossess their tenants without
compensation of any kind for disturbauca or improve-
ments. The enclosures of the commons which, went
steadily on from the end of the fifteenth century, were
carried out with total disregard to the welfare, or even
the rights of the poor, and led to much suffering among
them. In every direction the landowning and govern-
ing class spared no pains to secure their own interests,
and if those interests happened to clash with the
previously accepted conceptions of right and duty, it
was simply so much the worse for those conceptions.
Against this spoliation the mass of the people, simple
and ignorant as they were, had absolutely no remedy.
They did indeed rise in spasmodic rebellions under the
leadership of a few more sagacious men such as Wat
Tyler, or Ket the Tanner of Norwich. But all such
movements were rapidly and ruthlessly suppressed by
the authorities acting under the orders of the dominant
class. The “ dim inarticulate multitude ”of those days
had very few means of even making their grievances
known, and the full extent of their sufferings at this
time have probably never been revealed. But the
extreme miseries caused by the dispossession of the
serfs, and by the transition from a state of feudalism
involving a fixed occupation and a certain living, to
that of a workless and homeless freedom ; the intensi-
fication of those miseries by the enclosure of the
commons in order to make sheep farms, combined with
other causes such as the depreciation of the currency,
have left their mark upon the Statute-book. Laws
containing the harshest and most stringent provisions
for harrying and repressing beggars, tramps, and out-
of-works, formed practically the entire industrial
legislation from 1350 to 1550. Whipping, branding
on the forehead, the loss of one or both ears, slavery,
and in the last resort death, were the punishment?
awarded by these statutes in graduated stages of refined
cruelty, to those who should be unfortunate enough to
Eat Parsons’ Pure Jams.
Use Parsons’ Pickles and Sauce,


wander about workless. Even these terrors, however,
were not found to be sufficiently effective as detertents.
For while the main part of each new statute was
devoted to increasing with the utmost severity the
cruelty of its predecessors, the preambles to these same
acts are full of plaintive confessions of the impotence
and uselessness of the preceding provisions, and of
complaints of the great increase in the numbers of
“ valiant beggars ” and of “ sturdy rogues and
vagabonds.” During the reign of King Henry VIII.
alone, enormous numbers of such persons were executed
as tramps and vagabonds. Thus the old, old game was
played. First make your criminals by depriving the
poor of every chance of obtaining an honest living——
then punish them severely for the offence. But it is
needless to dwell longer on the misrule uuder which
the people at that time suffered, and against which they
remained for centuries without any means of redress.
were deprived of any voice in the conduct of
government, and compelled to accept whatever their
lords and masters chose to give them. Mr. Gladstone
has summarised the position exactly when he says that
up to the time of the great Reform Act of 1832 “ the
determing influence of our government lay with the
peerage and the possessors of the land. They formed
a partnership harmonious enough, and strong enough
to hold the citadel of the constitution against the
people. And the people were governed this way or
that way with their will or without it.”
It was under such conditions as these that the
growth of industry and commerce led to the rise of the
great towns. For a time it looked as if the inequalities
of wealth and power created by the land monopoly
were to be to some extent remedied by a more equal
distribution of property and influence in the towns.
Industries grew up largely as small crafts, carried on
by the master craftsman himself, and strictly controlled
by the guild or company of the trade and the corporation
of the town. In both of these communal organisations
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats.


the master craftsman, even if not also his assistants,
took a share in the work of government, and it is
probable that it is from this period that the growth of
the civi& spirit largely springs. How far the guilds
embraced the whole working population is a matter of
considerable doubt. There was probably always a
large class of unskilled laborers, belonging to no handi-
craft, who were debarred from the exercise of any
municipal rights. But at any rate the bulk of the
skilled artisan class must have exercised during
mediaeval times, either as members of their guild or as
freemen of their city, considerable influence in the
corporate life and government of the towns.
But whatever may have been the part played in
municipal government by the ordinary town artisan or
master craftsman of the Middle Ages, he was not
destined to survive. With the rapid growth of com-
merce and the discoveries and inventions of science, a
new order was ushered in. The vast improvements in
mechanical processes, combined with the growth of
great organising capacity, led to the supersession of the
old handicraft system by the modern “ grand ” industry
or factory system. The new capitalist class which now
arose, consisting largely of offshoots from the land-
owning class, began promptly to study how to secure
to itself the rapidly increasing wealth produced by the
nation. In their turn they strove to wrest from the
dominant landowning class the powers of government,
and to use these powers for their own interests. But
to do this they found it necessary to secure the
assistance of the mass of the population. With this
help they succeeded, after long struggles, in gradually
securing their own predominance in the state, and in
their turn they have not scrupled to use their power to
the detriment of the class which had helped them to
gain it.
The period which followed the industrial revolution
was without doubt that in which the working classes of
Great Britain reached the very lowest level they have
Use Parsons’ Pasha and Elephant Coffees
Use Parsons’ D.S.F. Mustard.


ever touched. Economically, socially, and industrially,
their position was hopelessly bad. Every increase in
the productivity of their labor, whether it was brought
about by increased severity of their toil, or by longer
hours of work, or by the introduction of new processes,
served only to enrich the already wealthy. The workers
were not only not allowed to take any share in the
rapidly increasing work of Imperial government, but
were even deprived, partly by economic causes and
partly by statutes, of that share in the government of
their own towns which they had previously enjoyed.
The privileges which the freedom of their city obtained
by seven years' indentured apprenticeship within its
walls, or by patrimony —had conferred upon the skilled
handicraftsmen were abrogated, partly by the almost
general abandonment of the apprenticeship system, and
partly by changes in the law, which imposed a property
qualification upon citizenship. By 1830, in short, the
whole artisan and laboring class in Great Britain were
practically left without a single means whereby they
could secure direct expression of their opinions or
representation of their grievances upon any public body
in the kingdom, whether local or national. The results
of this absence of any particle of political power soon
became obvious in the rapid degradation, both morally
and physically, of the working class and the conditions
under which they lived. The workers, finding that
their standard of living was being steadily but surely
depressed, endeavored to find a means of redress. But
every attempt on their part was futile, and they found
themselves bound down by laws, in the making of
which they had no voice, but which forbade them to
take any step whatever for their own protection. The
dominant class, whether landlord or capitalist, rigidly
refused to administer such laws as were yet upon the
Statute-book that might have ameliorated the condition
of the workers. Their attempts to put in force the
statute of apprentices, or the Acts authorising the
justices to fix the rates of their wages, were all failures
Eat Parsons’ Plum Pudding and Mince Meat.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats.


from this cause. On the other hand the laws which
prohibited combinations of workmen were strengthened,
and administered with a harshness which exceeds belief.
There can be little wonder that under such circum-
stances as these the working classes were turbulent and
riotous, and easily led into sedition and incipient revolt.
Gradually, however, they began to find other and surer
methods of defence. In spite of all anti-combination
laws, Trade Unions grew up and flourished in almost
every industry. Side by side with this movement
commenced also a steady agitation for political reform.
The early years of this century saw the skilled workmen
everywhere well organised for trade purposes, and
beginning to take part in most of the forward political
movements of the time. From then till now the
workers have steadily pursued their progress on these
lines. They have been, it is true, temporarily led away
by other and chimerical movements, but the sturdy
common sense of their leaders, and the law-abiding
instincts of the masses, have always brought them back
to the true and constitutional line of progress. Gradu-
ally and slowly their strenuous agitation for political
reform has effected its objects. Little by little the
property qualification of citizenship has been reduced,
until now, although the qualification remains essentially
that of property and not of manhood, it is so far
minimised as to be no longer a restriction upon the
great mass of the workers.
But although the workers have thus been steadily
gaining influence in the State since the passage of the
Reform Act of 1832, they have not yet managed to
take anything like full advantage of their position.
Since 1884 there has been a total of about 6,000,000
voters annually placed upon the lists, out of a popula-
tion of about 40,000,000, or roughly, two out of every
three adult men. Thus for ten years, at any rate, the
workers have held in their hands the enormous power
to make or unmake governments. But they have not
yet fully realised their power or their opportunities. A
Use Parsons’ Pasha and Elephant Coffees
Use Parsons’ D.S.F. Mustard.


competent observer has said that although the ultimate
power of political action in Great Britain is in the hands
of the masses constituting the democracy, yet our
institutions have not been democratised. This is the
task which lies before the labor movement to-day. It
is in order to secure the democratisation of our
institutions that the workers are beginning to realise
the necessity for direct labor representation.
For what are the facts of the situation ? In spite
of the democratic machinery of our government and
the wide extension of political power and responsi-
bility, the whole of the work of governing the empire
is still practically in the hands of a small minority of
wealthy people. They, by virtue largely of their
greater leisure and superior educational opportunities,
monopolise all our public offices and fill our elective
councils. Lawmaking, the executive, administrative
and judicial functions are all centred in their hands.
Even in local matters every class but the workers has
been fully represented, and in short every conceivable
office has been manipulated by, and run in the interests
of the wealthy and not of the poor. An analysis of
the membership of the present House of Commons
reveals the fact that of its 670 members no less than
656 belong to the moneyed class, or one or other of the
well-paid professions; leaving only 14 to represent the
working classes. Of the House of Lords there is no
need to speak. Everyone is well aware of the number
of working men it contains. Yet no one, least of all
the workers, can doubt that the legislation turned out
would be vastly different from what it actually is, if a
majority of the House of Commons were working men,
as of course a very large majority of the voters are.
There would be first of all less insistence on the mere
shibboleths of party. The war of words over party
trifles would give way to a stern fight for social
progress, and the annihilation of poverty and its
attendant ills. In this stern fight the workers are
beginning to realise that men who have “ Lived the
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rilled


life ” are above all things necessary if their claims and
difficulties of their class are to be understood properly,
much more so if they are to be dealt with successfully.
But when the workers, recognising for the first time
this fact, seek to secure the adequate representation
of their class in the councils of the nation by means of
the ordinary constitutional methods which other classes
have previously adopted for the same end, they are
adjured by their “ superiors ” to be careful that the
do not make bad worse and ruin our country. We are
told that it is right that the powers of government
should be exclusively m the hands of the wealthy and
“ cultured ” classes, who alone can be expected to
understand the gravity and importance of the issues with
which they deal. But let us examine what have been
some of the social results of this abnegation of its
power by the working classes, and of the last 100
years of government of the “ superior ” and “ cultured ”
ones whose homilies we have been describing. It will
not, I think, be generally disputed that a comparison
of the condition of the working classes now with that
in which they were 100 or even 50 years ago, would
show a very considerable advance. In spite of this
advance, however, the position of the workers to-day
is far from enviable. Notwithstanding the great
increase in wealth and productivity, whole sections of
the people, comprising at least 5 millions, are unable to
obtain a subsistence sufficient for health or efficiency.
Nor can this be a matter for surprise. The total annual
income of the United Kingdom is estimated to be
about £1,350,000,000, of which sum the 26,000,000
workers receive as wages only £500,000,000, or about
one-third of the total, while the remaining £850,000,000
or nearly two-thirds, goes to the remaining 11,000,000
persons who are the recipients of rent and interest, and
of the salaries of professional occupations. And while
a small body of some 222,000 families enjoy incomes
of about £l2OO per annum, the average earning of the
adult male workman does not exceed £77 per year
Use Parsons’ Pasha and Elephant Coffees.
Use Parsons’ D.S.F. Mustard.


Each year, one in every twelve of the manual work-
ing classes is compelled to seek poor relief in one form
or other. Mr. Chamberlain has expressed his belief
that of those of the working classes who attain the
age of 65 years, nearly one-half receive relief before
they die. The maintenance of our paupers costs us
over 101 j millions of pounds yearly, and Mr. Giffen
has spoken of this class of 5,000,000 persons, “ whose
existence is a stain upon our civilisation.” In London
alone, one in every five of the inhabitants will die in
the workhouse, hospital, or lunatic asylum. Over
30,000 persons live permanently in common lodging-
houses in the same city, while 1100 are nightly com-
pelled to seek shelter in its casual wards. While in
addition to all this, Mr. Charles Booth has calculated
that of the 4,000,000 persons in the metropolis, no less
than 938,293, or 22-3 per cent, of the total, are so
poor as to be compelled to live in a state “of chronic
want”; and 1,292,737 or 30-7 per cent, are to be
classed as below the poverty line, their earnings not
exceeding one guinea per family per week. ' And if we
turn from the people themselves to their surroundings,
and inquire what sort of a dwelling our civilisation
gives the workman, we shall find that it is equally bad.
Mr. Booth has shown that in London alone, 300,000
persons, or one in every twelve, must be dwelling in
tenements of no more than one room to the family.
The census returns show that nearly two and a half
millions of persons in England and Wales alone, live
in tenements which the Registrar-General declares to
be overcrowded. In Scotland 22 per cent, of all the
families 3till dwell in a single room each, while in
Glasgow 33 per cent, of the total population are
huddled into single room tenements.
Nor is even this the whole tale. While a large
section of the working population is worked over-long
hours at dangerous and unhealthy occupations, another
section, yet unhappier, is unable to find any work at
all to do. The evidence given before the Royal
Parsons’ Table Jellies and Custard Powders.
Eat Parsons’ Cooked Rolled Oats


vJommissiofi L n Labor proved that many of the chemical
workers, the railway and tramway servants, the iron
and steel workers, the shop assistants and many grades
of women workers, habitually labor for at least 12 hours
a day, whilst many exceed 15 hours. At the same
time there are in London alone, according to the
Mansion-House Relief Committee, an average daily
number of 20,000 unemployed men, while the total
number of unemployed throughout the whole kingdom
at any one time cannot be far short of 500,000 men.
The existence of these with their dependent families,
numbering in all some 2,000,000 persons, forms at once
the most vital and the most pressing of all the problems
of government. Yet no attempt of any kind has yet
been made towards dealing with it.
But it is unnecessary to dwell further upon the
painful details of the present social condition of the
working classes. While the “ superior ” persons are
quarrelling among themselves over the merest trifles,
and assuring the working men of their incompetence to
govern a kingdom, they have by their own mismanage-
ment and selfish and brutal policy permitted the social
condition of a great mass of the people of the country
to remain a stain and disgrace to our civilisation. All
who know anything of these questions are well aware
that the facts as to the condition of this large class of
people could not he drawn too black. Mr. Huxley has
said that he would rather he born a Fiji islander than
a slum child in England ; and speaking of the same
evils, a competent and by no means alarmist observer
has said, “ To me, at least, it would he enough to
condemn modern society as hardly an advance on
slavery or serfdom, if the permanent condition of
industry were to be that which we behold, that 90 per
cent, of the actual producers of wealth have no home
that they can call their own beyond the end of the
week; have no bit of soil, or so much as a room that
belongs to them; have nothing of value of any kind
except as much old furniture as will go in a cart; have
Use Parsons’ Pasha and Elephant Coffees.
Use Parsons’ D.S.F. Mustard.


the precarious chance of weekly wages which barely
suffice to keep them in health ; are housed for the most
part in places that no man thinks fit for his horse ; are
separated by so narrow a margin from destitution, that
a month-of bad trade, sickness, or unexpected loss,
brings them face to face with hunger and pauperism.
. . . This is the normal state of the average workman
n town or country.”
Nor can it be necessary to spend much time in
pointing out the real cause of these evils under which
the working classes suffer. When we remember the
fact that of the total annual income of the country
two-thirds is absorbed by a small class numbering about
one-fourth of the population, the reason for the poverty
of the remaining three-fourths cannot be far to seek.
Happily, on this point, too, the workers are beginning
to value the truth. The four working men com-
missioners who signed the Minority of the
Koyal Commission on Labor, after reciting a long series
of detailed grievances of the working classes, say :
“It is impossible to refrain from connecting this
deplorable condition of the working class with the fact
that two-thirds of the annual product of the community
is absorbed by one-fourth of its members, and that the
annual tribute of rents, royalties, and dividends levied
upon the industry of the nation amounts to nearly
£500,000,000 sterling.”
In other words, the rich have secured to themselves
by legal monopoly the bulk of the wealth produced by
the community. They have manipulated the whole
force of government to this object, and will continue
to do so as long as the rest of the population are
content to allow it.
The remedy for this state of things, however, lies now
in the hands of the working classes themselves. They
possess the power to insist on the full and proper
representation of their interests. Hitherto they have
scarcely recognised the vast uses that can be made of
the franchise, and the governmental machinery it
Eat Parsons Flaked Oatmeal.
Use Parsons Pickles and Sauce,


commands, to ameliorate the evil social conditions under
which they live. Thus, the labor movement has so far
never developed a really powerful and practical organi-
sation for legislative purposes. The Trades Councils,
and the Trades Congress, with its Parliamentary
Committee, form an excellent nucleus for such an
organisation, but they have never been properly de-
veloped or supported by the workers. Happily, how-
ever, they are beginning to see more clearly the
miseries they endure, and to recognise that there is
only one path out of their present state. That path is
clear. The whole force of the democracy must be
thrown into the political arena with the object of
securing the direct control of the machinery of govern-
ment for the workers. That once achieved, steps must
be promptly taken to bring about a reorganisation of
society on a more systematic and equal basis. “It is
indeed certain,” says Dr. Ingram, “ that industrial
society will not permanently remain without a system-
atic organisation. The mere conflict of private interests
will never produce a well-ordered commonwealth of
labor.” . To produce a well-ordered commonwealth of
labor by means of the political power in its hands, is
the work that lies before the Labor party and the
Trade Unions. To achieve it will need that the workers
throughout the whole country shall unite firmly in a
bond of common brotherhood, and, sinking all petty
jealousies and local discords, work heartily and har-
moniously together. Their interests are identical and
clearly defined, and the object of their endeavor per-
fectly definite and realisable if only unity prevails in
their ranks. If the workers really desire to see the
dawn of a better day for themselves and their children
they must devote the whole of their strength to gaining
the power of government and directing it to the sub-
stitution as rapidly as possible of public for private
enterprise and control in industry. Thus, and thus
only, cap, they hope to secure to every worker the
conditions of a reasonable life and of efficient citizenship.
Eat Parsons Flaked Oatmeal.
Use Parsons' Pickles and Sauce,




TO BE UP-TO-DATE
—IN—
UNION AND LABOR MATTERS,
YOU MUST IRE-AUD
THE WORKER,
With Which is Incorporated THE AUSTRALIAN WORKMAN.
Subscription, 4s. per annum in advance.
Tel. 2827. H. LAMOND, Editor and Manager.
Secuefai-ies oF Snades Unions
—AND
A£l* nil£Efl>B OF TIS
ARE CAUTIONED
against bestowing their Patronage-
upon those PRINTING FIRMS who
are employing CHEAP LABOR.
IF YOU ARE IN DOUBT
as to the Firms you should patronize, write to the Secretary of the
Typograhical Association, or send your orders to the
CO-OPERATIYE PRINTING WORKS,
227 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY.
Tel. 2827. H. LAMOND, Manager.


Brother Workers!
CO-OPERATION
Is the best means by which your con-
dition can be greatly improved. It is
therefore to your interests to support
all Co-operative concerns like
The Farmers’ and Dairymen’s
Milk Company,
HARRIS AID THOMAS STREETS
xjLTinvno.
It consists of Country Farmers and Sydney Vendors combined
lor mutual benefit. They are all workers like yourselves; but,
being united as they are, they do away with all middlemen’s profit,
and enable you to obtain the very best Country Milk, Cream, and
Factory Butter, at a less price than you ever obtained it before their
Company came into existence. They, therefore, ask you support
and patronage.
Orders delivered twice daily in City and Suburbs.
The FARMERS’ & DAIRYMEN’S MILK Co. Ltd.
HARRIS & THOMAS Sts., ULTIMO.
SUPPORT CO-OPERATION ACAINST MONOPOLY.
SUPERIOR CREAMERY BUTTER,
Grocers, Storekeepers, and others can obtain supplies of the
Company’s celebrated “ Golden Cow” brand of superior Creamery
Bulk or Prints at ruling market rates.
Orders received and punctually attended to.
Address: JAS. W. CUNNINGHAM, Manager, Harris Street, Ultimo.
