





DESCRIPTIVE VOCABULARY
OF THE
WEST AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINAL LANGUAGE.
Compiled by the Right Rev. Dr. Brady, Bishop of Perth, 1846.
PREFACED BY AN ARTICLE ON THE
MANNERS AND CUSTOMS
OP THE
VARIOUS TRIBES .
Perth :
T. BRYAN, PRINTER, 216 MURRAY STREET.
a , 1899.


r.iiA iii/./ov ;i /munKni
SHT 'lO
vi Aid Ad ta u a ta aw
.a-BAUMAJ J/./IDIiIoHA
-dWH .lists'! o qo> -iis ybtita ,iQ .vafl irigia srt± yci baliqmoO
aht ho ajoiTiiA ha 7a asoATaiw
SMOTSUO QIAA. CS3WMRW
»HT ’lO
,c 3 \V\T ?.UO\3AA/
: rSli-jq
.TasjaTg TAaauM dI2 f 'iaTvn,sra ,hath a .t
OQSt


CSS- 66
ABORIGINES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
Under this heading it is proposed to give a brief
and succinct account of the Aborigines of this Colony
as regards—-
(1.) Their Origin and Language.
(2.) Their Physical and Mental Character-
istics.
(3.) Their Social Condition and Domestic
Habits.
(4.) Their Laws and Treatment of Criminals-
(s.) Their Marriage and Inheritance Sys-
tem.
(6.) Their Superstitions and Peculiar Cus-
toms.
(1.) —Origin and Language.
On account of The divergence of opinion exhibited
by the most celebrated authorities as to the origin of
the Australian aborigines, the only method of pre-
senting an acceptable statement regarding it is to
note briefly the most rational and best known of the
views held by men capable of dealing with this
subject.
Sir GTeorge Grey, than whom no man was more fitted
to speak with authority on the question, decided that,
no matter what the apparent differences between
tribes in the various districts of the Colony might
be, their common origin and fundamental unitv must


be admitted, giving the facts which supported his
decision as follows :
(a.) A general similarity in the sound and
structure of words used in different
parts of Australia.
(b.) The recurrence of the same word with
the same signification in many instances
round the entire Continent, subject
only to unimportant modifications.
(e.) The frequent occurrence of the same
names of natives at totally opposite
portions of the Colonies, and the fact
of children being named from any
remarkable circumstances attendant on
their birth ; an accordance of the names
of the natives being a proof of simi-
larity of dialect.
Objections to the accuracy of the second statement
are explained by noting that synonyms are common,
and that these are given instead of the original words
to travellers who ask the names of certain objects.
The Albany natives use words similar to those of
Perth, with the differences (1) That their words are
shortened to monosyllables, (2) That all verbs have
the ending “ gar,” and not various terminations, as
in the Perth dialect, which fact exemplifies state-
ment ( b).
To this important enunciation some support is
given by all ethnologists, but it is generally regarded
as a fact that the essential characteristics of the race
have been greatly influenced by the influx, from time
to time, of aliens who have landed on these shores.
As to the ethnological division to which the original
r ace belonged, Grey makes no definite statement, but


others have asserted, in more or less decisive terms,
their opinions on the subject. Says one well-known
ethnographer, when alluding to the aborigines:
“ Their physical features, no less than their mental
condition, forbid us to associate these people with the
inhabitants of any other surrounding country. They
are entirely separated from the Papuans of New
Guinea by their silky hair, ample beard, and con-
trasted features —-no less than by their ignorance of
the bow-and-arrow, the chief weapon of most of the
Papuan tribes. Still further removed are they from
the Malays and Polynesians ; so we are driven to
suppose that they are the remnant of an ancient and
peculiar race We must, therefore,
believe that the Australians represent a primitive
family which has been superseded in other countries
by somewhat higher tribes. It is now generally
admitted that the only other people with whom the
Australian aborigines can be associated are some of
the hill-tribes of Central India, with whom, not only
in their physical features, but to some extent in their
languages, they correspond. The Papuans may have
formed a second great wave of immigration.”
A very plausible theory is brought forward by
Curr, who, from a comparison of the customs,
dialects, etc, obtaining in Africa and Australia,
declares that the peoples of the latter Continent are
by descent Negroes crossed with some other race,
differing only as they do in physical characteristics.
The modifications of type found in the North he
assigns to the connection with the Malays engaged
in the trepang fishery.
Another authority contends that, though some
indications would point to African ancestors, the
Australians belong to neither the Negroid nor


Mongoloid types, while in many respects they must
be looked on as Caucasians, like the Ainos of Japan,
Chains of Cambodia, and other Asiatic races possess-
ing' a Caucasian affinity ; with the difference that they
are far lower in the scale of humanity than all these
latter races.
The great difficulty in tracing back the descent of
this race arises from the facts that they have no
written language or records, and that etiquette
forbids any allusion to the dead. The spoken
language of the aboriginies, cut off as they have
been in a marked manner for so many centuries
from the other inhabitants of the world, probably
presents less divergence from its original than that
of any other race. This accidental advantage helps
in a marked degree, and is made use of largely, as we
have seen, by those who attempt to solve the mystery
surrounding their common origin. But there are
some authorities who would point to the cave-
drawings or paintings found in different parts of the
Colony as proofs of their several theories, and these
remarkable anti t uities now claim attention. These
productions of an ancient race are usually found in
the coastal districts —sufficient examples existing,
however, to show that this rule is not absolute..
Thus, in 1830, Ensign R. Dale, while exploring in
the York district, found a sandstone cave, on one
side of which was rudely caiwed a representation of
the sun, “ a circular figure eighteen inches in
diameter, emitting rays from its left side.” and close
to this were impressions of an arm and several
hands.
On 21st September, 1854, Mr. Robert Austin
found singular carvings (representations of human
hands and the feet of different animals) within a.


quartzite cave in the Murchison district. They
were very well executed, and of a type decidedly
superior to some clumsy imitations of a more recent
date in the same cave.
In 1891 rude drawings were seen on a rock face in
Central Australia by Mr. David Lindsay.
In 1896 Mr. Wells reported the discovery of cave-
drawing to the South of the Tropic of Capricorn,
some 500 miles inland from the coast.
But the most important discoveries —those of
Grey, Flinders, and A. Cunningham—were made on
the seaboard of the Northern coast.
The former’s finds, on the 27th March, 1837, and
subsequent dates, in the valley of the Glenelg, wore
situated about 60 miles inland and 20 miles South of
Prince Regent’s River.
At the entrance of the first cave a “ most extra-
ordinary large figure ” was seen peering down upon
him, and paintings of a man and several women
were on the walls and roof of the interior. Superior
artistic instinct was shown by the rock being painted
black, so as to introduce with greater effect the
red and white of the pictures. Hands, heads,
an ellipse, and other objects were subsequently
found; but perhaps the most remarkable discovery
was that of the profile of a human face and head
cut out in a sand-stone rock, which carving bore un-
doubted signs of antiquity. In one instance curious
characters were displayed, and altogether five colours
—red, yellow, blue, black, and white —were used in
the paintings. Grey also found near the coast
several tumuli or barrows.
These silent witnesses all point to the presence, at
gome early date, in this Colony, especially its Northern
portion, of a race superior to that found at the


present time. The existence of individuals of a
lighter complexion and Avith moi’e regular features
than usual, noticed by several travellers —notably
Grey, Giles, and Stokes —is, perhaps, confirmatory of
such an idea, and some writers have iaid great stress
on this circumstance.
The native language is derived, according to some
authorities from the Malayan. The emphasis is
usually on the penultimate, and the structure is
flexible; otherwise the aboriginies could not repeat with
facility the words and sentences of the settlers. No
provision is made for the expression of abstract con-
ceptions, nor for reckoning up further than three,
and although there is no written language, yet the
natives use a cypher, employing a nicked or burnt
stick as the medium of communication. The hunting
cries are Avild and strange, and have a peculiar
distinctness of sound, commencing, as they do, Avith
hard consonants, as the “ K ” in “ Kau ” and “ Kooee.”
The dialects of the North-West natives are more
melodious than those of the Southern, but this is
only one of many differences noticeable between them,
and consequent upon those varieties of climate and
food necessarily found in a country extending from
13° 34' to 35° 13' S. lat., and having an ai’ea of
nearly a million square miles.
N.B. —In a paper read lately at the Australasian
Science Congress Mr. A. W. Howitt, F.G.S., con-
tended that the original occupation of Austral lands
did not occur in a migration by Avater, by means of
ocean-going ships, but any immigrants avlio reached
this Southern Continent must have crossed either by
a land bridge of islands connecting Asia to Aus-
tralia, or over some shalloAV channels at that time in-
tervening between the tAvo Continents, and navigable


for the crude means of conveyance possessed by
these peoples.
(2.) —Physical and Mental Characteristics.
Upon the whole, the Australian aboriginal falls
little short of the average European in height,
though far inferior to. him in muscular development,
the limbs being thin and excessively lean, combined
sometimes with an abnormal corpulence. The
bodies are delicately formed, and there is the usual
total absence of calves to the legs, so characteristic
of the dark races generally. The cranial formation,
somewhat finer in the male than in the female sex,
is, on the whole, narrow and lengthy, with high
cheek-bones, the lower portion of the forehead about
the brows projecting, the upper receding rapidly.
The nose, narrow above, thereby causing the eyes to
appear drawn together, becomes broader and some-
what squat further down. The ears are inclined a
little forward, the mouth large and unshapely, while
the teeth are, on the contrary, fine and white, the
upper row, like the upper lip, mostly overlapping the
lower. The jaw-bone is contracted, the chin small,
and the complexion oftener coffee-brown than
actually black. The pitch-black hair is somewhat
curly, without, however, being woolly, and, when
cleaned from the mass of grease and dirt that usually
clogs it, is fine and glossy.
The duration of life rai'ely exceeds 50 years.
These particulars regarding the physique and ap-
pearance of the natives of this Continent, taken
from the description by Mr. Wallace, apply in the
main, to the aboriginal tribes inhabiting Western
Australia. The average height and girth of 50
aboriginals measured at Eottnest Prison, where


natives from all parts of the Colony are confined,
were found to be and inches respectively.
Their intelligence and reflective faculties are, as
a general rule, of a mean order, but surprising
quickness of apprehension, a keen sense of the
ridiculous, and a great talent for mimicry have
been often exhibited by aboriginals, and make
them, in many instances, very good companions.
Their females have been taught womanly ac-
complishments, and their men have learned
and practised successfully mechanical trades ;
while in the Roman Catholic Mission at blew ISTorcia,
founded by the Right Reverend Bishop Salvado,
they have proved good gardeners and agriculturalists.
Their perceptive faculties are very acute, and make
them invaluable as trackers; and as messengers,
pearl divers, shepherds, horse-breakers, stock-drivers,
hunters, or at any employment requiring only light
manual labour, they have proved satisfactory and
trustworthy. Nor, when instancing the use of
aboriginals to the white man, must Tommy Windich,
Tommy Pierre, and other natives, who accompanied
the early colonial explorers in some of their most
arduous journeys, and proved almost indispensable,
bo forgotten. Those people who, like Dampier,
declare the West Australian natives to be the
“ iniserablest people on the earth,” forget such proofs
of manufacturing skill as are displayed in the spin-
ning of the waist-girdle from the fur of the opossum
or the human hair ; but on the other hand, it must
be acknowledged that their primitive methods of
calculation, such as that by tally-sticks or moons in
the case of time, show them to be low in the scale of
civilisation. The best method to pursue, when
speaking of the mental powers, is to preserve a


happy mean, and to remember, as Englihsmen,
Cicero’s advice to his wealthy friend in Athens:
“Do not obtain your slaves from Britain, because
they are so stupid and utterly incapable of being
taught that they are not fit to form a part of the
household of Atticus.”
(3.) —Social Condition and Domestic Habits.
The social conditions of each tribe are governed
by their food supply and the facilities or difficulties
of intercourse. Aboriginals are conservative in their
habits, refusing, for instance, to imitate the Euro-
pean methods of preparing food by boiling or
stewing.
The tribes, with few exceptions, are essentially
nomads, having neither local habitations, nor places
of refuge, but roving only within the boundaries of
that particular district, of the many into which the
Colony is divided, occupied by them according to
usage. In this they differ from other peoples of
migratory habits, and still more in the fact that the
time of visiting particular portions of their territory
is generally regulated so that their visit to that
place occurs when the particular article of food for
which it is noted will be plentiful or in season.
A curious custom, not peculiar to the Australian
race, is that of the kobong or totem, by which that
particular species of the animal or vegetable kingdom
which is the distinguishing badge of a particular
tribe is forbidden to the tribe as an article of food.
Again, certain foods are prohibited to youths till
they attain a certain age ; but this custom does not
seem to be connected with taboo system mentioned
above, and arises merely from utilitarian motives.
Food is obtained by hunting, fishing, or digging,
and the supply is, as a rule, by no means scanty, a s


some travellers would have us believe, for in a far
from exhaustive list prepared by Sir George Grey,
from personal observation of different tribes which
came under his notice, there occur the names of about
150 articles of food (including the different species
of animals, fish, reptiles, roots, etc.) mentioned.
Nor, although slow in adopting the methods of
aliens, is the Australian’s way of preparing his food
stereotyped or unsatisfactory. Though rude ap-
pliances are used, generally palatable and often
really nice dishes are furnished. Thus, some tribes
prepare fish for cooking by wrapping it in strips of
a species of bark with a peculiarly-flavoured juice,
which exudes in the process of cooking, and being
preserved by the wrappings, gives the fish a flavour
that would satisfy the most capricious gourmet.
In the matter of housing they are less particular,
and their dwellings are of the most primitive descrip-
tion, taking, generally, the form of a breakwind
composed ®f a few logs or thick branches covered
with boughs or clay. In the North- West the natives
sleep in the open, and their fire forms the only camp
they make. Little clothing is required in the case of
the aboriginals, and beside the girdle of yarn (nool-
ban), the only garment used is the booka, a cloak
made from kangaroo skins.
Their ornaments are few, the skin of a wild dog’s
tail worn across the upper part of the forehead, and
a tuft of emu’s or cockatoo’s feathers tied round the
arm or fastened in the hair, being the most fashion-
able, while occasionally fur necklaces have been
noticed by travellers.
By inserting bones in the septum of the nose, and
scarifying the breast and other parts, the face or
figure, from a native point of view, is improved;


while a kind of red ochre (whilgey) is nsed for
colour ornamentation.
The women are very scantily clothed, their hookas
being smaller than those of the men. Amongst other
impedimenta they carry the coota, or bag nsed when
travelling for holding children, food, or other burdens,
the grubbing-stick, or wanna, nsed for digging roots,
and the lighted fire-stick of Banksia, or Casuarina,
which burns like touchwood, while in parts of the
Colony the heart of the Xanthorrhoea, or grass tree,
is used.
The aborigines display great cunning, perseverance,
and agility in tracking, following, and hunting game,
furnished with such simple weapons as they possess,
and have three different ways of hunting the kan-
garoo, as they have also three different ways of
preparing its flesh when killed. Although rude,
their hunting appliances are admirably adapted for
the purposes to which they are put; the principal
weapons being the boomerang (kyley), hatchet
(kajou), knife (dabba), spear (gidjey), mero or
wanner (throwing stick or board), and dowak
(club). The different parts of their weapons are
fastened with pirin (a kind of cement consisting of
blackboy gum and charcoal), and their fishing nets
are ingeniously made from the triodia or spinifex
plant. The first named weapon, the kyley, is so
constructed that, unless interfered with, it will
assume a retrograde or lateral motion at the will of
the person by whom it is thrown. The missile is not
unique, as some imagine, a weapon almost identical
with it having been used for hundreds of years in
Abyssinnia, and earlier still in ancient Egypt. Most
of the hunting weapons already mentioned are, with
slight alterations, also used in war; but in addition,


the wondah, a wooden shield made of cork-wood, with
an inward curve at the ends, and used for purposes
of defence, is occasionally carried.
Tribes obtain by barter products which their own
district does not supply, e.g., the Watchandies, of the
Murchison district, Western Australia, buy a par-
ticular kind of fishing-net, shells for drinking vessels,
and a much-esteemed flint from the North; boomer-
angs, shields, and red ochre from the South; and a
kind of pipeclay, used as mourning pigment, from
the East. In return they supply the Northern tribes
with the Xanthorrhcea gum, to the Southern men
they give the beautiful rose-coloured crests of the
cockatoo, and to the Eastern men flints.
The chief amusements of the natives are spear-
throwing, dancing, singing, story-telling, and adorn-
ing themselves with paint, grease, and feathers—this
last being almost wholly confined to the men.
(4.) —Laws and Treatment of Criminals.
It has been truly said that man in a savage state
is supposed to be endowed with an absolute individual
freedom, whereas, in reality, he is subject to a com
plete system of laws which not only enslave thought,
but allow no scope for intellectual or moral develop-
ment. Such are the traditional regulations which
keep the Western Australian natives in a condition
of barbarism, and cause them to violate many of the
most sacred usages of life.
Speaking generally, the tone of these traditions is
decidedly in favour of the stronger and more
influential members of the community—the older to
the detriment of the -younger —in favour of the man
rather than the woman.
Whether these laws are suited to the conditions of
uncivilised life is an open question, but one of the


most remarkable points about them is their general
acceptance by the people whom they affect, and the
ready submission to the penalties inflicted in accord-
ance with their provisions. An instance mentioned
by the Rev. C. Gr. Eicolay exemplifies this: Two
young persons in the Victoria district, who were
enamoured of one another, were content to suffer
severe punishment three times repeated, in order that,
the law being satisfied, they might afterwards live
together.
With regard to what may be termed “ forest laws,”
the penalties are severe.
It has already been stated that each tribe has a
particular district defined by well-known and recog-
nised boundaries; but, furthermore, in some cases,
each tribe’s district is subdivided, and each male’s
family has a particular section (booja) preserved, the
different sections carrying hunting privileges within
their boundaries, and no stranger, exce ,t by invita-
tion, has the right to enter such sections. “ Poachers ”
in this respect are invariably punished—often by
death.
Stringent laws for the preservation of food are
absolutely necessary and are rigidily enforced.
Thus, no vegetable products used by the natives
as food are plucked or gathered Avhen bearing seed,
and, as mentioned elsewhere, certain classes of natives
are forbidden particular articles of food.
The first great principle in connection with punish-
ment is based on the lex tnlionis, subject to the
modification that the relatives of a culprit are impli-
cated in his guilt.
As a general rule, when a man is killed the duty
of avenging his death, whether it be caused acci-
dently or not, devolves upon his nearest relative, who


is disgraced and disowned if, through mercy or
cowardice, he fails to enforce the laws demands. A
vendetta is established; but, if it be found impossible
to compass the death of the actual culprit, the sacrifice
of some member of the latter’s family—even a child
—will answer the purpose equally well.
This explains to a great extent the murder of
innocent settlers, who have often suffered vicariously
for their precedessors’ misdoings.
Seduction, incest, and adultery are nominally
punishable by death, but are frequently regarded as
only calling for a lesser penalty.
The most common form of punisment less than
death, as used for minor offences, is the spearing of
the offender through different parts of the body, pi*e-
ferably the leg or thigh.
As an instance of the law’s inequality of burden,
it may be mentioned that unfaithfulness on the part
of a wife is not only visited upon her. but also
frequently upon the wife of the man who has caused
the trouble. Thus the two husbands escape, and the
women, innocent and guilty, are indiscriminately
punished.
On the other hand, a desire for fairness is shown
by the regulation that should an animal be speared
by two persons, it is given to him who threw his
spear first.
(5.) —Marriage and Inheritance System.
The laws relating to marriage and inheritance
amongst the West Australian aboriginals deserve
separate consideration, being almost unique when
compared with those obtaining in other parts of
the world.
As has been mentioned, the natives are divided
I nto tribes with families distinct in themselves; but


this arrangement is to a certain extent temporary
and dependent on the life of the chief or head man.
What is meant by this will be more clearly explained
by examining the two fundamental axioms enunciated
by Grey.
Children of either sex take the clan or family
name of the mother, and a man and his wife cannot
be of the same clan (but the system of intermarriages
varies in different districts).
Examining the second statement first the following
is a tabulated arrangement of relationship in six
families about New Norcia (drawn up by Bishop
Salvado) :
6,3, 2, & | ,
4’ 5’ 1 |1 lirarop
1 ’ 63 4 ’ 3 Palar °P
3, 1, 6,2 ) c ~ ,
2 5 j o Mondorop
2 N-ocognok | 3 ’ g’
A rj, . f6’ 3', 2, 5.
4 loii'iorop j 4
6 Jiragiok 11’ g’ g'
The upper lines of bracketed figures show the
families to which inter-marriage is permitted, the
lower those to which it is forbidden.
(According to Sir John Forrest, the marriage
laws among the natives of the North-West coast are
different from the foregoing. The aboriginals are
divided into four families, the names of which are
Boorunggnoo, Banigher, Kimera, and Paljarie. The
first two can intermarry, and the last two also, but
no other alliance is possible; for instance, if you
meet a Boorunggnoo man, his wife must be of the
Banigher family. The children do not however,
follow the father’s or the mother’s family, and those
of such a union as has been instanced would take
the name of Kimera; whereas if the name of the


husband were Banigher, and of the wife Boorunggnoo,
the offspring would be called Paljarie).
The system of inheritance follows that of names
and is strictly maternal. Thus it follows that,
amongst the tribes first mentioned the possession of
certain districts must be handed over from one
family to another every succeeding generation.
Although the child belongs to the family of its
mother, yet it belongs to the father’s tribe, and he
has consequently the right to decide whether it,
when born, shall live or die.
The crime of infanticide is common, and Grey
found that 41 females, whose cases where noticed by
him, had only 188 children living. The practice
may be attributed to the fact that, in some cases,
the population of a particular hunting ground is too
large in comparison with the supply of food obtain-
able in that district; consequently, some action has
to be taken to check the increase. The female
children are almost invariably assigned at birth, or
when very young, to some particular man, who is
generally one of the older ones.
Thus these men have, usually, a plurality of wives,
and this system entails a disparity between the
number of marriageable males and females; whilst
the younger men, even if successful in obtaining
prospective brides, have ten or more years to wait
till the girls can become their wives.
For these reasons the crime of seduction is a very
common one, and indirectly leads to many of the
murders and tribal troubles which are constantly
disturbing the peace of the community. The levirate
aw, by which, at a man’s death, his wives arc


passed on to his brother, also helps to foment trouble
and to cause dissatisfaction.
The marriage ceremony simply consists in taking
the bride to her husband’s hut which she then
prepares, or, in some cases, makes a new one, for his
reception. After this simple ceremony the bride
becomes her husband’s property so absolutely that
he may hereafter barter, exchange, or mortgage her
at his pleasure.
(6.) —Superstitions and Peculiar Customs.
No people are more slaves to ceremony than the
natives of Western Australia; in fact, for almost
every daily occurrence of life a corresponding form
exists.
The superstitious ceremonies accompanying death
and burial are especially worthy of note, and the
following features seem to be common to several
descriptions furnished from different parts of the
Colony of the forms observed there on such occasions.
At the time of death, professional female mourners
are introduced, and the women relatives and friends
of the deceased exhibit their grief by gashing the
flesh on their cheeks and foreheads, and covering
their heads and breasts with a kind of white pipeclay ;
whilst the men put powdered charcoal on their fore-
heads. A curious custom somewhat similar to that
prevalent at the present time amongst the Bedouins
existed, when the deceased’s hut was torn up imme-
diately after his death.
The funeral obsequies are performed to the ac-
companiment of dirges and lamentations.
A shallow grave, about four feet by three, having
been dug, a bed of leaves is placed at the bottom,
and the body is lowered, its general position being a
doubled-up one with the knees bent up to the breast^


and the arms crossed, the face being turned towards
the East. These operations are presided over by a
booyl-ya or native sorcerer, whose duty, in addition
to the general superintendence of the work is to
ascertain what particular spirit, booyl-ya, or family is
responsible for his clansman’s death, and to see that
the grave lies due East and West. Earth and
boughs are then placed on the body, and the de-
ceased’s weapons on top of them. A heap of bushes
or mound is generally placed over all, and a fire lighted
to attract and keep the evil spirit that is reponsible
for the death, when it returns to the grave; for in
case of its finding no fire, it is thought that it will
probably go to the next camp and do further mischief.
The spirit is supposed to take the form of a small
brown lizard called “ Bilya Backan,” but sometimes
another monster called the “ Wangul,” which is sup-
posed to reside in fresh-water lakes, is blamed.
The booyl-yas, to whom allusion has been made, are
sorcerers who are always objects of mysterious dread,
having power, it is believed, to transport themselves
through the air invisibly. They are supposed to be
able to cure and inflict diseases by means of bones
and other matter which they have invested with evil
influence. Other superstitions of the natives are
those relating to an evil spirit called “ G-inga,” which
the natives avoid, as they also do “ Mullion,” a wicked
being in a high tree, who seizes blackfellows and
devours them in his abode —the Milky Way. A
certain form of crystal-gazing exists amongst the
aboriginals, but their women are forbidden even the
sight of one of the pieces of “ teyl,” as it is called.
With regard to religious superstitions or beliefs, they
use a word “ Piaraa,” which signifies the common
ancestor of the black folk, and may possibly include


the idea of a beneficient deity. It is certain that they
cannot grasp the idea of suicide, and notions as to a
future state are practically non-existent. The most
general of the customs observed by the natives are
the holding of the corroboree, polygamy, circum-
cision, scarring of the person, knocking out the front
teeth, and various rites of mutilation to which the
youths are submitted before their admittance to the
privileges of manhood.
There seems to be some doubt about the localities
to which the practice of circumsion is confined, but,
according to Sir John Forrest, it is performed South
and West of a line drawn from Point Culver to the
Geraldine Mine, on the Murchison Eiver. Mr. H. F.
Johnston found it prevalent in the Eastern part of
the Kimberly district. In this custom, as in many
others, there is a striking similarity to those
observances enforced amongst the Jews in accord-
ance with the Mosaic law.
Of the ceremonies mentioned above, the cor-
roboree is perhaps the most distinctive, although
resembling in many points similar customs of the
Polynesians. It often takes the form of a war
dance, but seems to have several modifications to suit
the celebration of different events. A very usual
method of performing it is as follows :—One native
stands in the centre of a semi-circle of painted and
ornamented savages, who dance in front of him with
wild gesticulations and cries, he, for his part, exhibit-
ing different pantomimic gestures expressive of certain
events, such as the hunting of emus, kangaroos, etc.,
and occasionally chanting a descriptive song. These
dances are, as a rule, confined to the men, perform-
ances by women being exceptional (although, sitting
in the background, they frequently join in the chant.


mg). Instances of melodious native chants and
recitatives have been supplied by travellers, but
generally the singing of the natives in these cor-
roborees is monotonous and unmusical to civilised
ears, so that in no way do these functions prove as
graceful, picturesque, or attractive as aboriginal
performances of the same kind in other parts of the
world. —Government Year Book or JB9§.


PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.
The words contained in tins Vocabulary are those
in most common use in the vicinity of Perfh and the
adjacent districts. The peculiarity of the dialect of
King G-eorge’s Sound is to shorten the words by
cutting off the final syllable, especially when it ends
with a vowel, as kat for katta, the head or top of
any thing ; kat for ka/Ja, fire, which gives the words
a short abrupt sound. Nothing is said here about
thp grammar of the language, because it is not
sufficiently known. A senterice of the West Aus-
tralian dialect would run much in this way: “ I to-
“ day at sun rise in forest walking male kangaroo far-
“ off saw. I creep near, near male kangaroo eats
“ head down low : I spear, heart strike mate kangaroo
“ dead, dead falls, good yes, I good throw, yes very.”
The grammatical construction appears to be inar-
tificial and elemementary as might naturally be
expected.
1. The letters used in this 'Vocabulary are
Abcdeghijklmnopqrtu vw y Thc-
sound of ng is by many ears very difficult to catch ,
but it may be easily attained by bearing in mind the
termination of the English participles ending in ing
2. I have not found any difference between the
nominative and the other cases, except that the
vocative is distinguished some times by the affix kau
as younger kau, oh People, or oh ye People


3. In the degrees of adjectives the comparative
is formed by a repetition of the word, and the super-
lative is formed by the addition of the intensitive
fit, as gumbba (good) gwahba gicabba (better) and
gwabbajil (best).
4. The greatest care is required in the use of the
personal pronouns.
5. Possessive pronouns are formed from the
personal pronouns by the affix uk, as bal, he, she, or
it; haluk, his, hers, or its.
6. In forming the principal tenses of the verbs
but few difficulties present themselves. The present
tense rarely differs from the infinitive mode. The
preterite is generally formed by the addition of ga
to the present, whilst the participle present is formed
•by adding een. Example : Yu-gow to stand, yu-goga,
yu ginv-ren.
JSTo change takes place in the singular or.plural
number of the tenses. The characteristic pronoun
forms the number with regard to the arrangement
of words : in a sentence the substantive precedes the
adjective ; the nominative and' accusative both pre-
cede the verb, the nominative coming' first.
The usual form of negation in a sentence is by
affixing the particle hurt or broo, both of which
signify “ not ” as nganya Kattidje hurt (I understand
not).
A question is always put by terminating the
sentence with the interrogative interjection Kann •
as nginee watto-murrigo Kana?
It will be found that I have given only a few of
the compound words: to have done otherwise would
have swelled the size of this volume inconveniently.
The word most commonly used in compounds is
midde (an agent).


One remarkable point, to which 1 should wish co
call the attention of persons studying the language,
is that whenever verbs express a similarity of action,
this fact would appear to be denoted by a common
termination being given to the infinitive of such
verbs, thus a variety of verbs express the action of
carrying. For instance : Barrang, to carry off or
bring ; Wundany, to wear, or to carry on the back;
Golany, to carry in a bag. Similarly the verbs:
Taan, to pierce or make an opening; Bok-han, to
bite or tear with the teeth ; Tak-kan, to break or
rend.
In an unwritten tongue and amongst an ignorant
and scattered population it will not be thought ex-
traordinary that in a wide range of country I some-
times found many variations in the expression of the
same word, which could not perhaps be fairly con-
sidered as amounting to a difference of dialect.
Examples of this will be seen abundantly in the
Vocabulary.
Table shewing how the possessive pronouns ar
formed from, the personals.
PERSONAL PRONOUNS.
English.
West Australia.
Sgan-ija
Ng eeri-net
BaL
Thou
He, she, or i+
We
Ngan-neel
Nurrang, or Nurano
Baal-goon.
They


POSSESSIVE PRONOUiNS.
English.
Mine, or of me
Thine, or of thee
His, hers, or its
Ours, or of us
Yours, or of you
Theirs, or of them
West Australia.
ISgan-a ink
S’unn-o luk
Bal-uk
Mgan-nul-uk
Nurang-uk
Bal-goon-uk
Table shewing the nominative cases of the dual
personal pronouns.
Brothers Parents Husband
English < Sisters or and j and wife
( Friends | Children j
West Australia.
We two JNga-lec Hgala-a Ngan-neeteh
Ye two New-bal New-bal New-bin
They two 8001-la Boel-a-la 8001-lane
TABLE of numerals
ENGLISH
WEST AUSTRALIA
Gain, kain, or Gyne
Good-jal, or good-dgw
Nga-ril, or Warring
Thre*
REMARKS
Every other number is expressed by warring (three*
or by boo-la (many)
26


VOCABULARY
A, long, as in father, and short at ike end a worn as
in mamma
Abba, a word of friendly salutation
Abbin: getting, becoming, as Gwabbabbm, becoming
you i.
Ad jo, ■pern. vron. I, an imperfect of Ngadjc.
Adjul, I will (see Njadjul).
Ak, or ok of, an a fix signifying possession.
Allia, or alii pronoun it, or that is it.
Amar, a hole or pool of water
An, an affix used to express action, as gurad (short),
gnradan to shorten.
Aug, an affix, of, from , out of, or belonging 10 at
ga.bbi, water ; gabbilang, acouatic
Arda, This is a word of very frequent use and signifies
nothing ; as, what are you doing ? The answer 1
Arda, nothing.
Babba, weak, languid.
Babbiu, a friend.
Badto, water.
Bali, an affirmative particle, always used as an affix,
meaning indeed, as Bundobak, true indeed.
Bakadjo, verb, past tense Bakadgaga, to fight, to
quarrel.
Bakkan, verb, to bite, to pain.
Ad. pSrs. vmn.. third person of all genders, he, she , it.


JkJaJ, imp. verb, leave it, or let it alone
Balbyt, adj. silly, foolish.
Balga, tree. This is a very useful plant to natives.
The flower stem yields a gum used for food.
The trunk gives a resin used for cement, and
when beginning to decay furnishes a large
quantity of marrow like grubs, which are con-
sidered a delicacy. Fire is also readily kindled
by friction of the dry flower stems.
Balgang, tp track, or pursue on a track.
Balgoon, pen. prcn they.
Baljarra, adj. uncovered,, as baljarra ngwundo, to sleep
without a hut in the open air.
Babaian, verb. pres. part. Bailajanin past Baliajanau
to attack.
Baljarok, the name oj a tribe.
Bal-yata, Arm, fixed.
Bkn-dang, all.
Bandi, the ieg.
Bang ag separated by distance.
Bang-all, exchange.
Bang-al-buma, to revenge.
Bang-al-vanga, to exchange, or barter.
Bang-ga, part of anything.
Banga, broken.
Bardang, to fly away.
Bardi, the edible grub in the gran tree.
Bar do, to go.
Barduk, near.
Barnak, to inform.
Barrab-ara, well.
Barrab-art, to go astray.
Barrakattidj, to misunderstand.
Barrang, to carry off, as kardo barrang to carry off a


Barrangdedin, to shut up.
Barrang dordakanau, to save the Life of a person .
Barrangkattidj, to recollect.
Barrang moulkolo, to drag.
Barrangtakkau, to break.
Barra'wangow, to mutter.
Bart, not, always an affix, as nadgokattidj-bart,
not understand.
Batta, the sun’s beams, as the
beams.
sun’s
Battordal, a barren tract of land
Bateri, rough, hard
Bellack, enough.
Belli, excellent, superior.
Belli belli, on this or that side
Bettick, an old man.
Bettick bettick, gently
Bi, a fish.
Bian, to dig.
Bibilyfer, a wild turkey.
Bidi, a vein.
Bidi-baba, weak.
Bidi-rnurduin, strong.
Bidjar, sleep.
Bidgar-ng\n.mdow, to go to sleep
Bidgigurdu, an island.
Bilo, a river.
Binang, to morrow.
Biryt, day light.
Bogal, a hollow , or grave.
Boka, a cloak, or covering.
Boylya-gadar, a magician
Boyu, fat.
Brti, without, as bokabru, without a cloak
Budjor, the earth.


Jioka, a kangaroo cloak
Bula, many.
-Bulala, two, paren J and child.
Buma, to heat, to strike.
Bundo, true, truly.
Bundojil, very true
girl.
Bun-gvte, a girl not betrothed,
Bura, within.
Burda, by and by.
B,u-yal, the south.
Bu-yi, a stone.
Buyu, smoke.
Byl-yur, hungry, empty
Oa, the mouth.
©abba, a knife.
Da-dm, bad.
Dad]a, animal food.
Dadjamaryn, all sorts of animal and vegeta
Daht, sly, cunning.
Dalba, ashes, dust.
Dal bad a, whitened with ashes.
Dallar, flame, as flame of fire, kalia daliar.
Dallar-yar, raw.
Dan-jai, shallow, not deep.
Danjo, together.
Dappa, the native knife
Darong-an, to spill.
Darbow, to drive.
vegetable food
Darda'k, white clay.
Dardaknabow, to go in mourning.
Dargangan, to strike mortally.
' Drnavan, fear.


Darnavanijou, to strike terror, or fear,
Dendang, to climb up.
Deni, brothers in law.
Dedin-wanjow, to close a gate.
Delhi, a leaf.
Dinang, to-carry on the shoulders..
Djallam, hitter.
Djanga, the dead.
Djow, water.
Djul, bad.
Dytamel, the countenance.
Dumbu, the womb.
Dundak, the outward appearance.
Dunugol, a very short person.
Durda. a dog.
Durgul, straight.
D-vuar, die name applied to the mode of burial of
the lowland tribes. They dig the graves east
and west. The body is placed on its back, the
head to the east, the face turned on one side, so
as to look the midday sun. (For the mountain
manner of burial see Gotit).
D-yuwo, an exclamation of dissent, oh, no, not so.
Ech-enna, to happen.
Edabungur, to make a noise like thunder.
En-gallang, to surround.
Ennow, to walk.
N.B. —The sounds of G and K are in many
instances nsed indiscriminately.
G-ahbar, wide.
Gabbarn, the abdomen.


Gabbi, water.
Gabbijikup, fresh water
Gabbikarning, salt water.
Gabbi kolo, running water.
Gabbi-odern, sea water.
Gabbin, perhaps.
Gadak. is always used in compound as warda
gadak, having fame.
Gambarn, to associate.
Gang-a-nginnow, to take a person as a friend to live
with.
Gangow, to take or carry.
Gan now, to kick.
Garba, a piece of wood, as matta garba, wooden legs.
Garbang, to point or scrape a spear.
Garbel, scraped or poiriied, as gidgt garbel, a f ishing
spear very sharp.
Gardang, younger brother.
Gargit, as gabbi gai-git, a running water.
Garrang, anger, passion, rage.
Garro, again
Garro-dgin, look out, take care.
Garro-yal. to return.
Getget,, speedily.
Gidji, a speara native spear is furnished with a
wooden barb, and pointed like a needle.
Goa, to laugh.
Gon-go, the back.
Gorada, short, little.
Gorali. a lona time ago.
Gori .just now.
Gory at. first before
Gotang,io carry in a bag,
Goto, a ha'i for provisions.
Got} t, the native burial.


Goyarra, sand.
Gudja, an infant.
Gudja-igow, to hear children
Gudjal, two.
Gudjir, also, and.
Gudjyt, the firmament.
Gulambiddi, a young man.
Gularn-win, the sea breeze.
Gulang, a child. The sex is indicated by adding
yaga, or maramarap, a man or woman child,
gulang ara, children.
Gulang-gara, the little one.
Gulbaug, to go, to proceed.
Gulin, to tell lies.
Gul-yambar, a mere pretence.
Gumbar, big heavy.
Gumbu, to make water.
Gumbur-gumbur, the itch.
Gunabal, deprived of, having lost a friend.
Gunal-yatta, successful in killing game.
Gunam, an expert marksman.
Gundir, a hag of kangaroo skin about two feet long
and one and a half wide to carrying the child
when not at the breast.
Guning, stingy, unwilling to give.
Gup, as gup Perth, an inhabitant of Perth.
Guragor, old, aged; it is a compound of g-orah-n-orah.
a long time ago.
Gurdak, anxious for, as gabbi gurdak, thirsty.
Gurdin, curled.
Gurdar, a pair or couple.
Gurdor, noise or sound.
Gurdu, the heart.
Gurdu-bakkrn-yugow, to want.
Gurdu-dgul, displeased


G-urdu-gwa,bba, pleased.
Chirdu-gyn-yul, unanimous, of one heart,
Gurdumit, the soul, or agent of the heart.
Gnti-gannow, to steal slyly on anything.
Gwa, yes.
Gwabba, good.
G wabbalitch, beautiful.
G-wabba migow, to put in order.
Gwabbagat, first in order.
Gwardo, to fall, to die.
Gwel gammow, to step aside from the spear ,
Gwyticn, just noir, immediately.
Gvn, one.
Gy n-yak. enough, sufficient
Gvn-yarr, once.
Idoor-da, a dog.
I-i, yes, sign of assent
Igen, to mock.
Igow, to place.
Ilakilak, quickly.
liar, dry.
Pyn, stout
Ilyn-godak, stout, fat.
Ingat, where.
Ingar, parched.
Injarannan, to dry up,
from wingi, where.
Ira, upright.
Irap, to rise up.
Irap, get up.
Ira-yugow, to stand up
Jerau, to tear asunder
Oddi, a shower.


Jii, the adj. superl. as gwabbajil, very good.
Jilba, the spring segson.
Jilia.p, pointed, as gidji jillap, a sharp spear.
Jin, like.
Jindo-mel-gindo, sharp eyed.
Jinna, the foot.
Jinnagur, the toes.
Jet a hole
Jul&goling, name of the evening star.
N.B.—The sounds of K and G are used indiscrimi-
nately.
Iva Or.
Kaa enough. K O b
Kaabo, a battue of Kangaroo, a word denoting that a
number of persons are going to hunt Kangaroo.
Kadjin, a soul or spirit, the form which rises after death
and goes over to the island of souls
Ka.'l'o, a native hammer
K '.djo, a strong gum.
Kaudang, ignorant, not understanding.
Kakam, the rump.
Kalbyii, to exercise some charm to cause bad weather.
Kalla, fire, as ndngi kalla, where is your place of fire
now ?
Kallak, hvrning, or hot.
Kallang, warm.
Kallang gabbi, hot water.
Kalian-kallang, burning, hot,
KalTor, deadly.
Kallarditan, to wound mortally.
Kallili, the formica maxima, or lion ant.
Kail ip, a knowledge of people and localities as ngan-na-
v kallip, m.y land.
Kab gal, always.


Kau-di, to creep, to steal on game.
Kau-d'a.ng, to vomit.
Kaugal, the rising of the,sun.
Kaiiiiah, is it'so, or not? He! verily.
Kannagil, a more intensitive form of interrogation than
the former ; is it true ?
Ivarda-born, to cut right through
Kardagor, amongst.
Karda-takkan, to break in pieces.
Kardidi, thin, small.
Kardo, a-marHed or bethrothed person, or husband and
wife.
Kardo-barrang, to marry, to take a wife.
Karra, conduct.
Karra-karra. or karrawa, that is it, or that will do.
Karfadjud, trdublesome.
Karrdgwabba, well behaved.
jtatta, the head, or top of anything.
Katta-katta kabbin, to hesitate.
Katta mordo, the mountains.
Kattidj, to hear, know, or understand.
Kattidj bailor, to know secretly.
Kattidj murdoiiidn, to mind, or fix the attention upon „
Kobbalo, the stomach or belly.
Kobattanan, to decoy, compound of kue and bado, to go
Kogang, in ambush.
Keljiang, to proceed.., to go forward.
Kolbardo, to depart.
Kole, a name.
Kolo, a word denoting motion in general, as watto kolo,.
be off.
Kot-ye, a hone.
Kot-yedak, bony,.
Kui-buldtan, to cough.
E:wa, yes.


Ky-bra, a ship.
Ky-li, a flat earned throwing weapon made plain on one
side and slightly convex on ties other.
K'yn, one.
Kyn-ya, soul, or spirit.
Xypbi, water in some plane, or kyp, water.
Mamin an, a father.
Mammarap, a man.
Manda, amongst, qs mapdk yong owtin, to be divided
amongst several pqrsofts.
Mandjar, a market or fair for natives.
Mandu, the sun, as battffi paandu, sun’s beams.
Mangara, hair, as kUtta mangara, hair of the head.
Ma-ow, a few.
Mar, a cloud, or wind.
Marcia, bald, as kajbta mar da, bald headed.
Mardaijgwin, hunting by fke light of the mom.
Marhra, the hand.
Maryri, vegetable food.
Maryn-dadja. food of all sorts
Matta, a leg.
Matta-boka, leg cloths.
Mel, the eye.
Mendyk, ill.
Met, attentively.
Metgil,’ accurate.
Mettagong, tlie name qf an evil spirit.
Miak, the mom; see Miga.
Middi, the agent, medium: always used as an affix to
other words, as yungar barrang middi, the people
carrying agent or yungar ngaanow middi, the
people-eating-agent or aamtibal, the wofr thus
applied is ,qf frequent amid most extensive use iv
the native language.


Miga, the moon.
Mikang, moonlight.
Mila, here, or after.
Milgar, new. as boka-milgar, a new cloak,
Mil-yarn, the stars.
Ming-al, a tear.
Ming-al-ya, tears.
Mingo, the chest.
Miuning, I might.
Minob, to be jealous.
Min-yi, dew.
Minyt, the countenance.
Miralgar, balancing the spear in a quivering state.
preparatory to discharging it.
Miran, to poise or quiver the spear.
Miro, the throwing board used by the natives to t/viow
the spear.
Mi row, to call , or cry o>a
Mo-an, black.
Mogang, a stranger.
Meham, to bellow.
Molar, large.
Monak, clear.
Mongoral, stout.
Monno, wind.
Monong, a pool of water.
Mon-yo, a ceremonious meeting for the purpose of con-
ferring upon certain females the office of Moyran
Mordak-dtip, steep, or high.
Mordakakana-n, to dmwn.
Mdrdakalap, drowned
Mordibang, T.nnhle to do anything.
Mordo, a maintain.
MorK-ragadak, to-morrow,
f Vorh-Bogsdo, to-morrow.


Moyran, a granafaher or grandmother.
Mnhrr, a large, lake.
Mui-ya, the nose.
Mul-yak, the commencement of any thing.
Mul-yet, surest.
Mun, an affix signifying altogether, as yago mun
winjal P where are all the women.
Mandat, the bash, or the woods.
Mundakal, in the bush , as bal Mun data! vvatto, he s
gone into the bush.
Munong, at a great distance.
Mnrada, satisfied.
Murdo, m vain.
Murdoagal, a n ountcmiecr.
Muxduin, 'powerful.
Murga, a circle of men.
Murgyl, plentiful.
Murh ronabbow, in mourning.
Murna, the sound, or rustle of any living creature in
the woods.
Murrijo, to move, to go, or to walk .
Mya, the voice ; My-a, a house.
Mya-akowa, an echo, voice come.
My-ardak, night.
My-art, darkness.
Myra-gvn, the day before yesterday.
Nabow, to rub, or anoint.
Naga, this, or that.
Magabel, that very thing.
IN agal, friendly.
Uagal-yang, a thief, or a robber.
Nagga, cold.
Nago, to know.
Nagoluk, to he acquainted with.


oh, ah.
Nag-Jia-it, wlimt is that I
.NalgOj teeth.
jjalja, to peep sideways.
jTannap, stop, or halt
lianp, mud, pqft ground.
•Xappal, burned (pound:
tfappang-wanjac, 'to cover up anything.
STarrang,' stamping with the foot.
Xarbow, to burn.
N'etingar, a term used by the natives to designate their
forefathers' 1 .
tSfidjak here, in , this place.
Xidjalla,. here, tn this place
Xodyteh, the dead.
Noyt, the.spirit or soul.
X that.
X’ y&l, present.
NJ"’ to look.
IS? yinni, thou, yon.
5T- yin now, t > sit, or remain vn a p6m*.
Xytbi, nothing.
X ytinaluk, thifne.
X yimdul, will you I
X’ yurang, ye.
N.B. —I\Gr is introduced as a distinct letter, amd
sounded as ng in ring, sing.
N’gadjo, 1.
'STgajul, 1 will.
Xgagaga Mucrigo, to proceed as the messenger or herald
of news.
Xgaggow, to beg, or to ask.
Xgagyn, stolen, as marjn agagyn, stolen food.
?feragyn-barrang, to steal away privately.


Ngalla, or Jigala, we, two. parent and child
Ngaman, bow many ?
Ngambam, tatooing.
Nganalak, mine.
Ngandul, who will ?
Ngandyn, unwell.
Nganga, the sun, as nganga batla, the sun's beams
Nganganbni, an orphan.
Ngangar, the. stars.
Ngamia, my..
Kganni-jugowin, who is there ?
Nganiil, us.
Is gannilak, ours or belonging to us.
Kgannong, whose ,
Ngattnow, to eat.
Ngardak, downwards.
Ngardai, below.
Ngardang, to creep downwards.
N gat-tang, to wound,
Ugatti-ngatti, again and again.
Nginni, there.
Ngubow, blood.
Ngubul-ya, bloody.
Ngwidane, seriout, in earnest
Ngwundow, to lie down.
here.
Ngy-anga, a wave of the sea.
Odern, the sea.
Ordak, a particle affixed to verbs signifying to intend, as
©rdak-dtan, to intend to pierce
Ordak-barrang, to intend, to take.
Orphi-n. plenty.


N.B.—The sounds of P and B are in many instances
used indiscriminately , the predominant sound varies in
different districts
Pal, lie, site, or n
Pandopen, to faint.
Par, a nail of the hands or fee,
Peil, the na<vel.
Per-dook, near
Pian-gar, to dig, w scrape, or scratch
Pil-iar-m, a' dmible-barhed spear
Po-ko, there.
Po-uait, the knee.
Pool, several, many.
Poo-tuk, to wink, to open, or shut the eyes.
Poo-yu, smoke.
Pu-deer, the string to fasten the cloak with.
Pug-gal-10, to him.
Pug-gal, his.
Purt-up, to lie , to deceive.
Qua, yes.
Qua-la, a name,.
Qua-la, a song, or to sing
Quap-ul, to steal.
Quart, to throw.
Queen-een, a species of By-yu, the nut of the Xamia
tree when, enveloped, with pulp in the natural state ;
the pulp of this nut is poisonous, but the natives,
who are very fond of it, deprive it of its poisonous
qualities by soaking it in water for a few days, and
then burying it in the sand, where they leave it until
the pulp is nearly dry ;it is then fit to eat. They
generally roast it, after which it has a mealy flavour
not unlike a chestnut. It is in full season in the
month of May


Quel-bain, to shake.
Quib-bang, to do anything secretly.
Quippal, to steal,
Quap-gum, a crow.
N.B.—The sounds of T and D are in many instances
used indiscriminately or interchangeably, s'o much that it
is very difficult to distinguish, which sound is most pre-
dominant.
Taan, to pierce, to make an opening.
Tabba, the native knife, a rude implement formed of
sharp-edged chips of quartz set in a row about four
inches long, and faced by means of Kadgo, or
Xanthoria gum, to a short wooden stick.
Tab-burt, to fall, to set as the sun.
Tab -an, to break (takan-yun), broken.
Ta-kil, a feather.
Tap-in giir, to steal.
Tar-gat, the windpipe.
Tda, the mouth, or opening
Tda-biteh, dry.
Tdo-duk, raw.
Tdon-dail, fair, white-coloured.
Tdu-dar, a girl.
Tdur-dang, green.
Tdur-teen, trackless, without a path.
Tee-luk, a species of bird commonly called the magpie.
Teeyl, any crystals ; the same name is applied to any-
thing transparent.
Te-ne, a brother-in-law
Ter-gur, to enclose.
Ti-on-dee, stars.
To-101, straight forward, direct
Ton-ga, the ear.
Ton-ga-birgi, to confuse


I'eo-koon, to cook, to lay anything cm the firt
Torn-a'-mag-af, to fight, to-amtekd
Tup-put, slow. law.
Waar-dat, the west.
Wad-j.u, fastened up, as katta mangara wad-ju. the
hciir of the head rolled up in the way the native>
wear it.
Wa-dum. serious.
Wad-jo-gadak, awed, terrified.
Wad-ga, neatly dressed, as katta mangara
Wad-ju, the hair of the head dressed.
Walb.vn, to cure by enchantment This process is per-
formed by drawing away the Bojl-ya, who is in the
patient, from the diseased part to some of {he
extremities of the body , whence he is expelled by the
operator , who effects his purpose by squeezing the
afflicted part with his, hands, gradually drawing
them towards the extremities. He is, however,
very careful after each squeeze to shake his hands
ami blow well upon them, to save himself from being
afflicted by the Boyl-ya. If any person has -•
grpat reputation for performing the operation, the
natives will, in the event of the illness of a relative,
travel many miles to secure his attendance. The
mode of cure sometimes adopted resembles the
process or animal magnetism.
Waldga, a very large dark brown mountain eagle.
Walgen, the rainbow,
Walgap, the stem of Xanthorea, or grass tree flower.
It is this stem or rather stick which serves the
natives to produce fire by friction. The length of
the stem varies from 8 fee i to 10 feet, and the
thickness from that of a marl's finger to that of a
man’s urrist) the flower cord dns much honey in
the proper season.


Wal-la-ra, carlessly, as wallara miim-jebeeu, walking
along without looking.
Wal-yal, the lungs.
Wandang, to wear, or carry on the buck
Wang-en, well in 'health.
Wang-ow, to speak, to talk.
Wan-ga, to leave.
Wanna, the long heavy staff? pointed and hardened at
one end hy fire, carried about hy the women for
the purpose of digging roots.
Wanni, to die.
Wanniga, dead.
Wan-yur-du, indisposed.
Waow, an exclamation ol surprise and warning
Warba, otherwise.
Warda, fame, or renown .
Warda-gadak, a hero.
Waruang, a crow.
Wardo, the neck or throat.
Wardonarrowin, thirsty. The native is careful not to
drink from stagnant water, hut makes a hole in
the sand at some distance. and drinks the filtered
water. This is to guard against swallowing in-
sects, a precaution which the stranger might
prudently imitate.
War-dyl, to whistle.
War-gat, to search, to look for.
Wahr-rang, numeral three.
\\ arh-ral, whirlwind.
\\ arra, had.
W arrang-an, to tell, to relate.
Warrow, to raise, or rise, as my a warn) ween, building
a hut. or gabbi, warroween, the water is rising,
maar warroween, the clouds are rising.


Warrjn, a word. The native language is not copious
as many compound words are used, and there are
few or no terms to express abstract ideas
Watto, away, be off as ngan ya watto. I am off
Watto-bardo, to go away.
Watto-barrang, to carry off.
Watto-dgin, keep out of the way.
Wattogoor-no, to push away
Wan, inhere.
W aubatin, full.
Waubow, to play, or to tease.
Waugal, cm imaginary aquatic monster residing in
deep dark water, and endowed with supernatural
powers. To this crectture’s inff uence the aborigines
att rbute all sores and wounds, for which they
cannot otherwise account ; its supposed shave is
that of a huge winged serpent : it is a living
remnant of the old serpent or evil spirit.
Waugalan, sick, ill, or under the influence of tht
waugul or evil Spirit.
Waugur, breath or breathing.
Wau-gurt, pierced through.
Wau-ioo, clear or light.
Wau-mil-yar, colonialiy called manna, a white sweet
substance, found under certain trees and plants ;
it is much prized at Perth , it is called also DangyL
Wauma another.
Welo, a name given to all people living to the north of
them in the same way, as Varon is applied to all
people eastward,
Wendang, had
W T er, and or also.
Wet-dang, to mix.
Widing, then.
W T idgi, am emu.


Wil-ban, white.
Wilgi, an oeherish clay which when burned turns to
a bright brick dust colour, which, either in dry
state or saturated with grease, the natives,
both men and women, are fond of rubbing them-
selves over.
Welgilam, red.
Willarak, a sandalwood tree
Wil-yan, to miss.
Windang, worn ovt, old
Windo useless.
Win-galla, where.
Wingi, where, as wingi watto, where are you going ?'
Winniginbar, now, or at this moment.
Winnir, so many.
Winnirak, similar to.
Wiril, slender.
Wiring, straight-
Wolang, to put on one's cloak
Wogin, living.
Wunnang, to throw.
Wut-yan. on the other side,
Wulgar, guilt. Those who are not in the state of
Wulgar are said to be gdyte.
Wunda, a shield. The native shield is a,bout two
feet long, and very narrow; it is convex on
the exterior face, rounded at each end, having
a ■ slit cut in the thickest part of the middle of
the back to serve as a handle.
Wnndun, to stare, or to wonder.
Wun-gan, to embrace. When a native is in a
passion, his friends hold him, wungan, from
attacking, till the fit goes off.
Wunno, this way.
Wunnoitch, thus.


Wu-yan, the soul.
Wyen, to dread.
Wyen, a coward.
Wyeron, to build, as mya wyerowin, to build a hut
Yago, woman.
Yalla, thirst.
Yallabel, that ue-y thing, or place.
Yalling-bardo, to go one side
Yallor, the native dance.
Yallor-wangow, to sing or chant.
Yallor-gannow, to step or dance.
Yambor, abreast, all in one line.
Yambong, certainly.
Yanbi, what are you about ?
Yan, what?
Yang, the strongest expression of thanks or gratitude ,
Yanganan, to praise or to bless.
Yangor, the kangaroo species in general.
Yannow, to move slowly.
Yarbelli, incest.
Yeddi, or yetti, a song.
Yeddi garroAv, to sing.
Yekan, to drive.
Yetti yetti, peevish.
Yemang, the forehead.
Yenang, a widow.
Yirak, elevated.
Yiragan, high up.
Y ]o, 1 ; see gnadjo.
Y jul, I will ; see gnadjul, / will.
Ynnga, to give.
Yowir-giddi, confused, as a drunken man.
Yowirgwart, to faint.


Yowerin, being giddy, as katta yowirin, my head is
turning round,
Youda, no.
Yual, here, or come. here.
Yogow, to be. to stand, to exist.
Yugow-murrijo, to run, literally, to he going.
Yiilang, nearer.
Yulap, hungry.
Yul-man, in return.
Ynl -man-wangow, to answer.
Yul -man-yonga, to exchange.
Yul-yang, to smear, to rub with gum the green shafts of
the spears.
Yundo, yellow.
Yung-ar, the people, the name by which they designate
themselves.
Yurang, to shake together.
Yurda, a place where a fire is, or has been.
Turdo, the forehead.
Yurdang, to take by f rce.
Yurro, as gabbi-yurro, discoloured water.
Yutt-barrang, to pull down.
Yuttock, the last time, or the last of anything.
Yuttarn, to fasten, to tie.
Yy-i, to-day.
Yy-inang, new, fresh, young, or strange.


BEYOND COOLGARDIE.
They are fighting beyond Coolgardie, dusty and worn and brown.
Leading the outward legion from dawn till the sun goes down,
Under their blue sky-banner, standing true to their guns,
Singly and shoulder to shoulder, brothers and sires and sons.
They are faint in the burning noonday, and weary when day
is dead,
They have never a thought of resting till hope from their hearts
has fled ;
They are toiling—some for a sweetheart, some for a home and
wife,
And many are striving for riches, and some are fighting for life !
They are dying beyond Coolgardie, in sight of their untouched
prize,
With no one to break Death’s tidings, and no one to close their
eyes ;
They lie in the scrub and the sand-wreath, with never a stone
to mark
The grave where the bush-crows gather, and the dingo crosses
at dark !
******
They are reading the news by the slush-lamps from under the
chandaliers,
And the words of the dazzling message are blurred with the
readers’ tears ;
They are praying away to the southward, mothers and daughters
and wives.
Asking no golden harvest, but only their loved ones’ lives.
Glbneowan, in the “Australasian.”




' ': - # I# \;
5: . ' ■' ■ ' ■ - ■ ■ ' - ' 5 V
u * ' * ‘ >V- *
'
, ■v: i ,, v ■ , v
