

Criket Extraordinary.
BY
ALFRED D. TAYLOR,
Author of “Sussex Cricket in the Olden Time,”
“Sussex Cricket Battles,” &c.
Reprinted from the “Hove Gaselte."
Hove:
EMERY & SON, LTD., 154 Church Road.
1903.


Criket Extraordinary.
BY
ALFRED D. TAYLOR,
Author of “ Sussex Cricket in the Olden Time,”
“Sussex Cricket Battles,” &c.
Reprinted from the “Hove Gazette.”
s?obr;
Emkuv & Son, Ltd., 154 Church Road.
1903.


Cricket
Extraordinary.
I.—FEATS IN BATTING
We have all heard of the aspirant to county
honours who drove a cricket ball with such
force that it sailed clean out of the ground and
entered the carriage of a west-country express
We are also, I take it, acquainted with the
sequel—the inability of the umpire to grant
“ lost ball" because they all knew exactly
where it was. The same unreliable authority
tells us that something like 1,000 runs were
scored off that particular hit, before the ball
could be recovered—i.c., before it could be
despatched from Exeter, the first stopping
place of the said express—and that, being the
first ball of the match, the bowling analysis
presented a remarkable sight. But this as it
may, Mr. J. Ward, of Denstone College and
Staffordshire fame, relates that a similar event
occurred to him, and as ntt’boundaries were
recognised 40 runs were agreed upon for the
hit. This understanding was far more satis-
factory than that of a ball being picked up
and innocently swallowed by a cow, much to
the disgust of the players and the perplexity
of the umpire, who was called upon to decide
the number of runs accruing from the hit. In
a match in Australia in 1896 a ball was played
into the out field and immediately seized by a
greyhound. A stern chase ensued, but the
arrears required to win—l2o runs—were success-
fully knocked off before the ball could be se-
cured. Here is another incident from the same


country, which, if not a hoax, must be con-
sidered the mightiest bona-fide hit on record.
It occurred in a match at Bonbury, Western
Australia, in the early nineties, between two-
scratch elevens from the neighbourhood. The
“ gumsuckers ” went in first, and the very first
ball of the match was skied into a three-
pronged branch of a tall Jarrah tree. Lost ball
was cried, but the umpire ruled that the ball
Was in sight, and could not be lost. The bats-
men immediately started running for all they
Were worth, while the fieldsmen sent for an
axe to cut down the tree. No axe being pro-
curable, somebody brought forward a rifle, and
the ball, after numerous misses, was eventually
shot down, but not before 286 runs had been
scored. The innings was then closed, and the
opponents were afterwards dismissed twice for
insignificant totals and the match eventually
Won by a single hit.
The biggest authenticated hit in England
occurred in a match between the Gentlemen of
Dorset and the Gentlemen of Devonshire, when
Mr. J. N. Scobell, the Marlborough cricketer,
succeeded in making 37 runs from a leg hit.
The ground sloped down on either side, and
the ball, reaching the end of the ground, com-
menced its Journey down the hill. It re-
quired nearly all the fieldsmen, who stationed
themselves at intervals, to return the ball. At
length it was landed a few yards from the
wicket-keeper, who, regardless of the conse-
quences, hurled it at the wicket. He missed it,
and the ball gaily set off down the opposite
slope. Painfully the field toiled after it, leav-
ing a trail of curious words behind them as
they went, and eventually 37 runs were regis-
tered before the ball became “ dead.” A simi-
lar occurrence took place on the Brighton Race
Course in 1892, when a player by the name of
Lingard claimed 34 runs. At Petworth Park,
too, in the forties, a William Boxall scored 21
by a leg hit which rolled down a hill near the
ground. The fieldsman not being an expert
thrower failed to land the leather on top of
the hill, the result being that it rolled back
again. Boxall could have made many more


runs, but the fun is recorded to have been so
immense that he laid down and laughed until
he cried.
On June Ist, 1865, Mr. J. H. Eoupell made a
clean hit for 10 on level ground, the ball
travelling 240 yards.
Cricket has been played in many climes, and
we are actually told that in 1822-3 it was in-
dulged in near the North Pole by members of
the ships Fury and Hecla. Curious appella-
tions, too, have been given to matches. At
Plymouth on July 13th, 1867, eleven Ugly men
defeated eleven Handsome men, while at Maid-
stone Thirteen Heavy with Sin tested their
rights with Thirteen Light with Honesty.
Deaf, dumb, and even blind persons have in-
dulged in the game, the latter invariably hav-
ing a tiny bell fixed in the ball in order that
they can judge in which direction it has tra-
velled.
Matches against odds are of frequent occur-
rence. At Shillinglee Park, Sussex, in 1846,
fifty-six labourers played Earl Winterton’s
Eleven, while in Samoa as many as seventy
aside have been known to contest, the game
frequently lasting a fortnight. And this re-
minds me that Mr. W. L. Murdoch in 1893
journeyed from Sussex to his native land, a
distance of 14,000 miles, to participate in the
game between New South Wales and Victoria
at Melbourne. Judge the surprise and disap-
pointment of both the exponent and the pub-
lic when the famous batsman was dismissed for
a “ duck ” after his fruitless journey over the
greater part of our globe. Walter Humphreys,
too, in 1892 failed to score, yet he saved his
county from an inglorious defeat, remaining at
the wickets for one hour and ten minutes,
during which time he eluded the wiles and
strategies of the men of Kent.
“ Do not despise a duck’s egg
Until you see it hatched;
It may turn out good luck’s egg.
If it saves a match.”
Cricket has been indulged in in many curious
places. It has been played on the Goodwin and


Nore Sands many times, on the bar of Shore-
ham Harbour, on the top of Table Mountain,
South Africa, on house-tops in the city of
London, on ice, on the Great Eastern steam-
ship, and even on horseback. It is frequently
resorted to in lunatic asylums, while we are
told that when Lefroy, the murderer, was wait-
ing his trial in Lewes Prison he amused him-
self by playing cricket in his cell with other
convicts.
First-class cricket, too, has its curiosities, as
witness the batsman who journeyed to the wic-
ket without his bat, and the. cricketer who,
making his first appearance before a large as-
sembly, ran the wrong way when he hit the
ball. At one time it was the ambition of every
hitter at Lord’s to endeavour to damage the
face of the clock affixed to one of the buildings,
and I believe the M.C.C. actually encouraged
the batsmen in their desire, adding a sum of
£ 5, if a professional, in recognition of the feat;
but only one man—Albert Trott—-has ever sent
a ball over the new pavilion. Mr. Walter Pel-
lows holds the record for long hitting. Play-
ing at Oxford in 1856, he sent a ball from
Rogers which travelled 175 yards before it
reached the ground.
A feW years ago Hirst, of Yorkshire, scored
48, 48, and 49 in' three consecutive innings for
Yorkshire. On each occasion his contributions
were most valuable, yet he failed to receive his
talent money because he did not reach his 50.
The Yorkshire Committee immediately per-
ceived the folly of the system, and talent money
is now left to the discretion of Lord Hawke,
the captain. In 1899 Mr. C. B. Fry made seve-
ral scores of 90 in first-class cricket, but Mr.
Burnup, of Kent fame, possibly holds the re-
cord in this respect, compiling during the sea-
son of 1896 scores of 98, 92, 93, 95, 94, and 92.
Clem Hill experienced a spell of hard luck in
the test matches in Australia in 1892, register-
ing, in three consecutive innings, 99, 98, and
97. To be dismissed in first-class cricket with
one’s score at 199 must be galling in the ex-
treme, yet both George TJlycft and Mr. Hill, of
Hampshire, have undergone the experience. In


the Cambridge University v. M.C.C. match of
.1895 Mr. N. F. Druce underwent an even more
remarkable experience. When the eighth wic-
ket fell his individual score stood at 199 not
out, yet he failed to receive another ball, and
consequently did not have an opportunity of
increasing his score. This recalls to mind an
incident that occurred in Australia in 1886 be-
tween the second elevens of the Marrickville
and St. Peter’s Clubs. It appears that Rey-
nolds, a player of the former, went in third
wicket down, and, notwithstanding that he
was in possession of the wickets during the re-
mainder of the innings, he, strange to relate,
did not receive a single ball, although over 60
runs were scored during his occupation. There
are other forms of hard luck in batting. For
instance, Mr. C. G. Taylor, the once celebrated
Eton, Cambridge University, Sussex, and All
England batsman, was sent back six successive
times for 0. Ephraim Lockwood, the famous
Yorkshire batsman, registered 0,0, 0,0, and 1
in five consecutive innings in 1882. That bril-
liant hitter, Mr. C. E. de Trafford, was dis-
missed for 1,0, 1,0, 0,2, and 4 in seven
consecutive innings in 1897, while the great
Australian batsman, Joe Darling, only made
three runs in six innings during the tour of
1902.
Of our great batsmen I believe Messrs. W. G.
Grace, W L Murdoch, K. S. Eanjitsiithji, C. B.
Fry, and F. S. Jackson are the only ones that
have never earned the “ enviable pair,” but to
claim a “ pair of spectacles ” by knocking a
“ pair of spectacles ” on the wickets when play-
ing a ball, as experienced by an aspirant to
fame some years ago, must be annoying in the
extreme.
In cricket, as in other sports, accidents t®
players will occur, but it will take some time to
equal the misfortunes attending the match in
which seven legs were broken. It was between
the “ One Leg ” and “ One Arm ” players—
the legs were wooden.
I have always contended that the match be-
tween Surrey and Middlesex at Prince’s in 1875
was the most remarkable for curious incidents


ever played. Surrey were 21 to the good ou
the first innings, and won by exactly that num-
ber—each team scoring 130 at second hands.
For Surrey J. Swan made eleven in each in-
nings and was out Ibw on each occasion. J.
Southerton, also for Surrey, got six wickets in
each innings, and on both occasions 44 runs
were made off his bowling. Both he and T.
Hearne were over 47 years of age, and both
played in the match; while for Middlesex W.
H. Hadow made 42 not out when stumps were
drawn on the first day and was dismissed with-
out adding to his score on the second day. It
is very curious that on the second evening he
had again made 42 not out, and again, ou the
third day, failed to increase his score. But
enough of feats with the willow.
II.—BOWLING EXTRAORDINARY.
Statistics are alluring; they work on the
roasting jack principle, only allowing one to
see one side at a time. In the old days it was
not even deemed necessary to keep a bowling
record; the analysis was unknown until the
nineteenth century was some thirty or forty
years advanced. The stumps had to be lowered
by the trundler in those times if he desired
the honour of being credited with the wicket.
In the match between the Players of England
and the Australians at the Oval in 1878 E. Bar-
rett, the old Surrey professional, obtained the
whole of the ten wickets in the first innings of
the Colonials for 43 runs; yet he did not bowl
a single batsman out. Old Lillywhite would
marvel at this revolution in bowling.
Let us glance at the hidden side of this ima-
ginary roasting jack. How often do we school-
boys, in hastily perusing cricket scores, cast
our eyes over the bowling analyses with the
object of ascertaining who obtained the wickets?
It is an every day occurrence. If an unknown
Smith did not capture a single wicket we are
apt to curl our lips disdainfully; yet, per


chance, did we let our eyes dwell upon the
figures a little longer, we should perhaps per-
ceive that he delivered twenty overs, sixteen
maidens, for six runs. There is something in
the roasting jack principle after all, hut we
cannot see both sides at the same time.
Let me take you back to the time when
single wicket matches were the order of the
day. George Brown is my hero. He and three
others challenged Mr. Osbaldeston (and Lam-
bert), who was* defying the whole of England.
Brown, you must know, was a “ demon ”
bowler of the most pronounced type. Tradition
says that on one occasion a person endea-
voured to stop one of his deliveries with his
coat; but the ball not only penetrated the
garment, but killed a dog afterwards. Certain
death awaited him who was bold enough to
keep wicket when Brown was bowling, and to
atone for the deficiency a couple of long-stops
were requisitioned. They used to protect them-
selves, we are told, with sacks stuffed with
straw. But this as it may. In the match
alluded to Brown commenced bowling at a
terrific pace. This induced Squire Osbaldston
to remark “ You won’t keep up that pace long.”
*‘ Oh yes,” retorted Brown, “ 1 "can bowl like
that all day if you like.” It is a fact that for
over four hours he sent down expressers with-
out showing the least sign of fatigue, the re-
sult being that off 230 of his balls only eight
runs were scored!
The supremacy of batsmen over bowlers is
conspicuous in cricket, and it is only the ap-
pearance of Jupiter Pluvius that enables trund-
lers to perform remarkable achievements with
the leather. It is difficult to define the “ re-
cord” in this respect, but I suppose Edmund
Peate, the old Yorkshire professional, is en-
titled to this distinction. It occurred in a
match against Surrey in 1883, and so deadly
did Peate bowl that after he had delivered
sixty-four balls the Surreyites were disposed of,
his eight wickets costing but five runs.
Alfred Shaw has performed some remarkable
feats with the ball at times. He is the only
bowler, I believe, in first-class cricket, who has


performed the “hat trick” twice in a match,
although others have narrowly escaped the
distinction. E. Wainwright, too, bowled with
extraordinary success against Sussex in the
early nineties by dismissing five victims in
seven balls.
Many can recollect the first appearance of the
Australians at Lord’s in 1878, when Spofforth
obtained six wickets for four runs and his
vis-a-vis, Boyle, six for three (not five for three
as generally chronicled). But Pougher re-
gained the laurels for us in 1896, his analysis
against the ninth Australian team for the
M.C.C. on the same ground reading:
vv w . . I . w
.. I w
.... 1 . w
To Alfred Shaw belongs the record of having
delivered over 100 “ overs ” in an innings since
the extension from four balls has been recog-
nised. Playing for Sussex against his native
shire in 1895, he sent down 501 balls—five to
the over—for four wickets.
Turning to the expensive side of the ques-
tion, E. J. Tyler had no fewer than 212 runs,
hit from him for the capture of a single wicket
against Somersetshire in 1895; but George
Giffen even allowed 309 runs to be knocked
from him by Stoddart’s team at Adelaide the
same year before he took himself off. It is a
bad thing for a captain to be a bowler.
In a match played at Hastings in the early
sixties “ Farmer ” Bennett sent down an over
of four balls, each being dispatched for six by
the old Surrey player George Griffith; but Mr.
G. Nevilc Wyatt was once the object of a very
novel experience. In the Surrey v. Cambridge
University fixture of 1877, and during the first
innings of the latter, Mr. Shuter deemed it
advisable to give Wyatt a trial with the ball..
For once Mr. Shuter’s judgment was in error.
Mr. I). Q. Steel' was at the wickets, and the
first ball Wyatt delivered the light blue
cricketer despatched for four. The second de-
livery he sent flying down Yauxhall way fof


six, the third ball he out for a couple, and the
fourth ball be drove finely for five. Seventeen
runs off an over of four balls. That was the
only over Mr. Wyatt ever bowled for Surrey!
In minor cricket phenomenal bowling feats
are quite common. J. Bryant performed a
feat in October, 1887, that is almost unique—
I say almost, because Spofforth is credited
with a similar accomplishment. In a match
designated Erskine v. Deaf Mutes, at Mel-
bourne, Australia, he dean howled the entire
twenty wickets. Mr. Ironside tells us in his
“ World of Cricket ” that a well-known amateur
once hit the stumps ten times in succession, bus
Mr. Ironside is not to be relied upon, judging
from Chapted X. of his book—which is one
mass of unauthenticated feats.
The greatest number of wickets ever taken
b j a bowler with consecutive deliveries is
eight, as captured by James Walker, for Ash-
combe Park against Tunstall in May, 1882. In
1885, too, Mr. Y. H. Tippett, the Pemberton
House scholar, was responsible for seventeen
wickets at a cost of a single run when playing
against the Alford Grammar School, and fre-
quently a bowler has dismissed the whole side
in a single innings without being scored from.
Perhaps, however, a better performance can be
claimed by Messrs. Constable and Crabtree,
when, on the longest day of the year 1875 they
dismissed a team at Earl’s Heaton in seventeen
balls—the innings lasting but ten minutes!
III.—ACHIEVEMENTS IN FIELDING.
Good fielding necessarily improves inferior
bowling to an appreciable extent, and why more
attention is not paid to this very important de-
partment it is difficult to imagine. A statistician
has recently supplied us with a chart dealing
with dropped catches and their results, and,
believe me, the sequel is astounding. A
cricketer once went so far as to state that an
innings of ■ 100 had never yet been compiled


that did not give a chance in the field, and
although we should certainly not go so far as
that, quite 50 per cent, of drawn games would
be finished if proficiency in the art of fielding
was accomplished. Dr. E. M. Grace was an
adept in the art, and his brother, " W. G.,” has
told us that, when in his prime, he could do
anything in the fielding line except keep wicket
to his own bowling. Exceptional performances
in the field are so rare in cricket that they are
looked upon almost as curiosities. A difference
in the colour of the ball has been suggested,
but we fail to see that better results would be
realised. Before the introduction of practice
nets it was necessary for several scouts to
place themselves in different positions of the
field, a fact that may have been responsible for
the superior fielding of our forefathers. J.
Hunter once caught nine men behind the
wicket, while Lilley, Pooley, Butt, Huish, and
Russell have each dismissed eight batsmen in
a similar capacity, but in other positions seven
is the highest number of batsmen ever been
disposed of by catches. True, H. Wright once
sent back nine men in a minor match, while in
1854 E. C. Tinley disposed of twelve men at
“point,” but it was against a team of twenty-
two. The Fords have all been good fieldsmen.
A. F. J. Ford secured seven men at Lord’s in
a match in 1882, when fielding in the slips,
while his brother, “ P. G. J.,” caught five of the
seven men dismissed in the Cambridge Univer-
sity v. M.C.C. encounter six years later. An-
other brother, “ W. J.,” once narrowly escaped
making a catch in mid-air when on the top of
Lord’s pavilion. In 1877, too, Mr. A. J. Webbe
caught six of the ten men in the second in-
nings of the Gentlemen v. Players’ match at
Lord’s, which must rank as the greatest field-
ing achievement of recent years.
When assisting the M.C.C. against Sussex
some three or four decades ago Grundy acted
as wicket-keeper, bowler, long-stop, short-slip,
and point in one innings, but this scarcely fur-
nishes a parallel to W. G. Grace’s work when
representing England against Australia at the
Oval in 1884. On that occasion the champion


took every position in the field, yet it was not
until he relieved Alfred Lyttelton at the wicket
that he effected a catch —surely a unique occur-
rence in first-class cricket.
“The most marvellous catch I ever saw/'
writes Mr. Woolgar, “ was at Stokes Bay, when
a player by the name of Jurd, a gardener at
the Rectory, was playing ‘ long field/ who, when
a tremendous skyer was hit, rightly judging its
fall, made a desperate running jump over a
stream, and arrived in time to get under the
ball, and caught it.”
William Adams, of Dublin, who afterwards
became a distinguished member of the Phoenix
Club, was famous for his fielding. On one occa-
sion whilst playing for the Phoenix against the
Military, a ball was struck with great force
high up and in his direction, and as it was
going over the railing that encircled the
ground he jumped the railing and caught the
ball in mid-air. It was a splendid performance,
and one for which he was made a life member
of the Club. Old William Yalden once accom-
plished a similar feat, jumping a fence, falling
on his back, and catching the ball in that
position.
It is no uncommon feat to catch a ball off a
fieldsman or umpire’s head, but here is an un-
usual occurrence. During the tour of Stod-
dart’s tetim to Australia, and in a match
played between his combination and All Aus-
tralia, the bowler sent down a swift ball which
Mr. Stoddart smartly cut. The leather went
into the hands of the man fielding at point,
who failed to hold it, but who so altered its
course as to send it into the slips. Again the
fielder did not succeed in holding the ball, but
allowed it to pass on to the wicket-keeper, who
let the ball drop into the top of his pad.
Quickly pulling it out he appealed to the um-
pire, and the batsman was given “ out!”
Here is another novel catch. It occurred at
Cavendish, near Hamilton, on St. Patrick’s
day, 1877. A batsman sent a ball in the direc-
tion of “ long-on ”at a terrific pace. The
fieldsman made a plucky attempt to catch it,


when, heigh presto, it disappeared. None could
tell where it had vanished; those in the field
were nonplussed; the spectators wondered, and
the batsmen continued to run. When the
fieldsman who made the gallant attempt re-
covered from the shock he felt a lump in the
body of his shirt, and, putting in his hand, he
extracted the leathern sphere and joyfully cried
“How’s that?” It afterwards transpired that
the ball had hit his wrist, ran up his sleeve,
ripping it up as it went, and safely lodged it-
self in the body of his shirt. Yet another
extraordinary catch, for which we have the
authority of Mr. Trower. In a match at Tice-
hurst in 1823 the ball from the bat of Mr.
Thomas Cowper was caught on the point of a
knife which a woman named Stapley, who kept
a ginger beer stall on the ground, was using.
Her hand was much cut, and the ball so deeply
perforated that some little force was necessary
to draw the knife from it.
Turning to the serious side of fielding, a
cricketer named Tucker once endeavoured to re-
cover a ball that had been hit on the railway
metals that adjoined the ground. He was un-
fortunately crushed between two railway trucks
in the attempt and succumbed immediately.
Many deaths have resulted through the folly
of the venturesome fieldsman in endeavouring
to recover the five ounces of leather —two of
which I am tempted to quote. Some time ago
a number of clerks employed at the Somers
Town goods station were playing cricket, when
the ball was knocked on to the glass roof of
the station—a feat which gave the batsman the
fullest opportunity of scoring a record hit. Un-
fortunately one of the players, when endeavour-
ing to regain the ball, fell a distance of 50
feet, and was killed. This accident was quickly
followed by one in many respects similar, the
victim being a little boy who was playing
cricket on the drying ground on the top of
Tine Street Buildings, Tooley Street. The
ball, in this case was sent on to the roof of an
adjoining wash-house, and to gain it the ad-
venturous player had to climb a stackpipe 27
feet high, walk along a dangerous sloping roof.


climb another stackpipe, and another roof 15
feet in height. His fellow-players missed him
after a time and went to look for him, and
eventually he was found dying in a spare room,
having fallen 20 feet through a skylight. He
was a cricketer to the last, the ball being found
in his pocket. During the bombardment of a
town in South Africa, during the late war, a
captain of the British Army was in the act of
bowling a ball when he was hit by a shell. He
died immediately, clutching the ball firmly in
his grasp—a cricket hero truly.
IV.—PERFORMANCES AT THE WICKET.
The earliest wicket-keeper on record was one
Cerberus, who kept the Styx. As a watchful
keeper he must have taken the cake—which,
we are told, he frequently did—for we have the
authority of Hesiod that he possessed fifty
heads. Other mythologists tell us this is all
wrong, three being the correct number. Being
stationed at the entrance to hell, he must have
experienced a very warm time; and had it not
been for Orpheus, who was an adept with the
lyre, and who lulled him to sleep with mystic
strains from his instrument he might have held
his unenviable position until now.
SbVebal Thousands or Tears are supposed to
Elapse.
Wicket-keepers still have warm times occa-
sionally, as judge the cricketer who was set on
fire when officiating in the capacity. The ball,
it should be mentioned, struck a box of matches
that were in his pocket, and which instantly
ignited. The following furnishes a fine study
in wicket-keeping, proving the man behind the
stumps should be ever on the alert. It oc-
curred in a match at Simla, in the month of
April, 1901. Captain Onslow had made 23
runs, when he received three balls in succes-
sion that should have each been dispatched to
the boundary. Each one he missed, which so


annoyed him that he stamped his foot with
rage and gave vent to his annoyance in strong
language. The moment, however, that his
foot was off the ground M. O’C. Tandy, who
was officiating in the capacity of wicket-keeper,
immediately whipped off the bails, and Captain
Onslow was stumped.
Another Army Captain, P. C. W. Trevor, is
considered the finest of wicket-keepers. In
seven consecutive days’ cricket at the end of
August, 1901, he dismissed no fewer than
thirty-one batsmen at the wicket. On another
occasion, in 1898, when assisting Dr. Conan
Boyle’s XI., he sent back eight of the ten
men dismissed, six being stumped and two
caught. In the Gloucestershire Colts’ match
of 1897 J. H. Board stumped nine and caught
out four; while in Melbourne on February
15th, 1896, and when assisting the Melbourne
2nd XI. against East Melbourne, the wicket-
keeper sent back four men in four balls. Speak-
ing of Australia reminds me that Mr. S. A.
Jordan, a prominent wicket-keeper in pennant
matches “ down under,” was drowned while
bathing in the river Nepean in December, 1893.
Over 1,000 persons attended his funeral, and his
wicket-keeping gloves were buried with him.
It is generally considered that the longest
distance a bail has been knocked by a ball is
76 yards, but H. W. Hedley, the Australian
chronicler, tells us that the longest distance for
the cricket bail is nine miles. It was knocked
into a stream that ran near the ground, and
was found the next morning, having journeyed
down the river according to the laws of the
tide.
Several wicket-keepers have performed the
“ hat trick,” but only one—W. H. Brain—has
accomplished it in first-class cricket. It oc-
curred at Cheltenham in 1893, when Gloucester-
shire were opposed to Somersetshire. The best
first-class performance, however, must be
credited to Harry Butt, who, in 1890, and when
assisting his county against the Light Blues,
only allowed one bye in an innings of 703.
Again, in 1896, he did not allow a ball to pass


him in Somersetshire’s innings of 465, Glouces-
tershire’s innings of 463, and Yorkshire’s in-
nings of 543. On the other hand, 106 extras
were claimed in a single innings of the M.C.C.
v. Royal Artillery fixture of 1842, while,
twenty-four years later, 102 extras were allowed
(also in a single innings) by the Gentlemen of
Kent when opposed to the Gentlemen of Sussex
at Gravesend. Mr. “ Extras ” has frequently
been the only scorer in minor matches. Re-
verting again to important cricket, we find that
Ted Pooley, the old Surrey player, dismissed
twelve men when keeping wicket against Sus-
sex in 1868, while in 1882 ten of the first
twenty wickets that fell in the Australian v.
XI. of England match at Derby were obtained
by the “man in possession.” When assisting
in the annual encounter between Somersetshire
and the Oxford University in 1901 the Rev. A.
P. Wickham underwent the unusual, if not
unique, experience of keeping wicket for both
sides.
I have told how a knight of the gloves once
made a remarkable catch after the leather had
rebounded off “ point ” and “ slip,” but this
scarcely takes precedence with an achievement
of a keeper which took place prior to the intro-
duction of gloves and pads. The aspirant in
this case actually fielded a wasp'
V.—UMPIRES AND UMPIRING.
It once transpired that a youth attended a
final struggle between England and Australia,
when, being of diminutive size, and conse-
quently seeing little of the game, he ejaculated,
“ Oh! don’t I wish I was the umpire.” “ May
your desire never be gratified,” promptly re-
plied a gentleman in close proximity, whose
grey hair denoted advanced age; and the pain-
ful look that accompanied the remark proved
that some very unpleasant incident had flashed
across the veteran’s mind.
The umpire’s lot is not so enviable as this
youthful enthusiast imagined. Many are the


curious appeals pending the decision of the man
in white, and it requires great presence of
mind to successfully pass the ordeal of a first-
class match, where thousands of eyes are
minutely watching every action of the ball as
it journeys from bowler to batsman. The year
1900 furnished several interesting points in re-
spect to umpires’ decisions. At Bristol the
crowd became so disturbed at one of their
heroes being given “ run out ” at a critical
moment of the game that it required all the
tact and judgment of Mr. G. L. Jessop to quell
the impending riot. Later on at Derby, Hirst,
in attempting a big drive, fell upon his wicket
and was caught in the slips at the same time;
while on the same day Jim Phillips operated
upon the amended laws by no-balling Mold for
doubtful delivery when umpiring in the Notts
v. Lancashire match at Trent Bridge at short-
leg. The very next day furnished an excep-
tional case for decision, which neither Moss or
Wood were tempted to give. It appears that
Mr. F. H. B. Champain drove a ball to
Ilichardson, the Surrey professional, who took
it low down, and immediately threw it up.
The batsman, being in doubt, appealed first to
Moss, who was officiating at the bowler’s
wicket, and afterwards to Wood, but neither
would venture an opinion, and although the
batsman left his post in face of the umpires’
silence, he was permitted to resume his in-
nings. The excuse of both officers was, of
course, justifiable, seeing that neither were in
a position to view the catch. It is well-known
that players frequently adopt tactics that are
not in accordance with the true spirit of cricket
to influence the judges of the game. Here is a
case in point. A celebrated Australian bowler,
who frequently threw with success, was a par-
ticipant in a local match in the Antipodes some
years ago. Being aware of his aptitude for
doubtful delivery the umpire watched the
bowler’s arm very keenly. The trundler him-
self was at a loss to know what method to pur-
sue in his endeavour to separate the batsmen.
Of a sudden an idea occurred to him. Wishing
to send down one of his deadly balls, the
bowler, after a very tame delivery, whispered


to the umpire as he returned with the leather,
“Ah! I had yon there.” “What’s amiss?”
queried the official. “ Stepped over the crease,”
was the laconic reply. The ruse worked. The
following delivery was a decided “ throw,” but
the umpire’s eyes were riveted upon the
bowler’s feet—a victim was captured.
The above instance does not in any way ex-
haust the repertoire. The late Mr. Thomas
Padwick, whose authority one would accept
without reserve actually relates that, during
a match between Brockham and Redhill, the
block of an adjoining church was altered to
deceive the umpires.
• Umpires are born, not made. To be a really
good official one must have participated him-
self in first-class cricket for a lengthy period.
He must be a man of iron nerve and sound
judgment, upright, sober, and impartial. His
decisions should be prompt and decided, and,
above all, adverse to criticism. But even with
all these qualities an umpire is apt to err, and
Some exceptional decisions have occasionally
been brought to light. Let us deviate from
important cricket and select a few examples of
curious decisions that have been returned.
I have always considered the dismissal of
Captain Johnson, of the 50th Regiment, the
most remarkable in the annals of the game —
the string of his bat became unravelled to the
length of about a yard, and, while he was
making a stroke, the twine removed the bail,
and the batsman was given out leg before
mw het! To the curious it may be mentioned
that the match was between the Royal Artillery
aud bowler’s XI., at Woolwich, June sth,
1886. The late Mr. Charles Box, for many
years cricket correspondent of the Times , and
a prolific writer on the game, records that an
umpire of the “ sixties ” had the audacity to
no-ball ” a bowler because he delivered the
leathern sphere with both feet behind qhe
bowling crease. Certain savcms present de-
clared in favour of the umpire’s decision, while
°:"® ra as strictly protested against the stu-
pidity of it. On another occasion, not so very


many years since, a short run was called by
the umpire when only a single was attempted.
Twelve years ago —in Sussex—a change of
bowlers was deemed necessary by the captain,
and, whether from his ignorance in officiating
or force of habit, the usual trial ball no sooner
passed the batsman than “ wide ” came the
startling announcement from the judge. As
many as twelve balls have been erroneously al-
lowed in a single over, and on another occa-
sion the umpire appealed to the spectators to
decide a boundary hit. This last instance is
perhaps excusable; more so, at any rate, than
the innocent batsman who was once given out
for hitting with one hand.
But for unabashed candour commend me to
old Fuller Pilch, the once celebrated Norfolk
and Kent cricketer. It happened that on one
occasion—at Canterbury, if I mistake not—an
appeal was made by Stephenson against Tom
Hayward, who was then making a name for
himself. “How’s that?” shouted the bowler.
“Not out,” replied Pilch; and coolly added,
" I want to see the youngster bat!” Another
curious instance took place on the Moat Park
ground at Maidstone. John Jackson—he whose
pace was “ very fearful ”•—was at the wickets,
when, in playing a ball, he overbalanced him-
self. and actually sat upon the wicket, re-
moving the bails from his impromptu seat. A
general appeal for hit wicket was the result,
but Hillyer, who was officiating, innocently
gave him not out, remarking, “ I don’t think
he did it intentionally.”
In country cricket the umpire occasionally
performs such remarkable feats of valour that
sides that have not the remotest chance of
winning suddenly find themselves victorious.
Mr. J. B. Challen, the old Somersetshire
cricketer, relates that on one occasion he took
part in a match in which both elevens ap-
peared on the ground without an umpire.
Two men came up together and offered their
services for the trifling sum of half-a-crown
each and their lunch. The offer was accepted,
and when they had taken their respective po-
sitions and play was about to begin one of


them walked across to where the captain was
stationed and asked; “ All I want to know,
sir, is which side be Ito umpire for?" Yet
with all his errors, the country umpire is im-
partial at heart, and his inaccurate decisions
are frequently the result of excitement caused
by either the state of the game or his indi-
vidual responsibility. I have a memorandum
before me as I write to the effect that an um-
pire was once lost in the game to that extent
that he actually fielded and returned the ball.
It is generally agreed that a batsman can
lose his wicket nine different ways, but poor
George Ulyett used to contend that there was
a tenth mode of dismissal, and when ques-
tioned on the point briefly replied " Umpired
out.” Many batsmen, it is true, have been dis-
posed of in a manner for which the rules of the
game do not provide. Fuller Pilch was once
“ cheated out,” and on another occasion was
given out “ hat knocked on wicket.” Here are
a few other curious verdicts, selected at ran-
dom. In 1777 Wood is recorded “thrown out,”
which savours of Dan Leno’s match; and ten
years later 6. Talbot was given out “P.H.0.,”
which still remains a mystery, though “ put
hand out ” has been offered as a suggestion.
Batsmen have been " nipt out,” “ walked out,”
“played out;" while as recently as 1874 T. Ellis,
the old Sussex hero, was given out for " ob-
structing the ball." In 1840 a cricketer was
not satisfied with playing with his leg, but
actually hid the wicket from view by his bulky
frame. He was compelled to accent the
penalty, the umpire returning a verdict of
“ body before wicket.”
To dispute an umpire’s decision is distinctly
bad form; to reverse it is unsportsmanlike in
the extreme. Yet the M.C.C. have been guilty
of the offence, which is remarkable when it is
considered the umpire was right. It occurred
in a match at Lord’s in 1854 between England
and Nottinghamshire. It appears that J.
Caesar, the old Surrey cricketer, was unwell,
and was accordingly granted a substitute to
run for him. Caesar, nevertheless, owing
either to force of habit or forgetfulness, made


a run and left his representative behind. W.
Clarke promptly put down the wicket at the
end Csesar was approaching, and in answer to
an appeal the umpire gave “ not out.” Clarke
immediately proceeded to the pavilion, and the
dispute was finally settled by the Committee of
the M.C.C., whose verdict was that Ca'sar
should be given out. This not only reversed
the umpire’s decision, but was in itself a wrong
one, as Wisden, his partner, was the person out
of his ground in consequence of Caesar’s repre-
sentative not crossing him; and therefore the
same as two batsmen being at the same wicket.
Umpires themselves have ofttimes undergone
some curious experiences. Not so very long
since a batsman hit the ball sharply to square-
leg, and after a lengthy search the leather was
discovered in ' the capacious pocket of the
official. On another occasion the spectators
ducked a judge of the game in an adjoining
pond for giving an unsatisfactory decision. As
I before remarked, an umpire’s lot is not always
to be envied.
VI.—ON SCORING.
The primitive style of scoring in cricket
matches must have been as uncomfortable to
those responsible for keeping the score as it
was ungainly to witness. Take, for instance,
any old print on the game and notice the con-
ditions under which the operator laboured.
Usually he is discovered squatting upon the
ground in close proximity to the square-leg
umpire, or perchance standing in a like spot.
Be it noticed that the scorers are invariably
found officiating square of the wicket, a fact
that has often caused the writer to conjecture
that the position was changed with the re-
mainder of the fieldsmen on the completion of
each “ over.” But if the attitude of the scorers
was quaint the mode of scoring was even more
so. Two pieces of wood—laths if obtainable —
were usually tied together, which, with a knife
of abnormal proportions, comprised the scorer’s


material. As soon as a run was gained a
notch was cut into each stick, with a deeper
indentation at every fifth run to facilitate
counting. At the termination of the game the
twine was severed, and a stick presented to
each side—hence the non-preservation of old
scores. A couple of scorers were invariably
requisitioned, the second individual acting as
a kind of overseer. Note how keenly he watches
his confrere register the runs, should an old
print come your way. After awhile the notch-
ing was ignored, and the pencil succeeded. In
rambles through rural Sussex an old engraving
of William Davis is occasionally to be met
with, and, judging from the portrait depicted
thereon, scoring in 1830 was carried on under
very pleasant conditions. Not only is the per-
former supplied with a chair and table, but
the proverbial churchwarden and the empty
drinking vessel speak volumes as to the plea-
sures of the office. About 1840 a platform some
eight feet in height was erected at Lord’s for
the exclusive use of the scorers, who were com-
pelled to mount their point of vantage by
means of a ladder. In 1848 Fred. Lillywhite
introduced a combined portable scoring and
printing tent, to be followed in due course by
a wooden structure, wherein the scorers were
excluded from the continual gaze of the specta-
tor and the incessant hubbub for information.
There is yet room for improvements in the
scorers’ box.
Like the generality of mankind, scorers are
not infallible, and on several occasions in first-
class cricket stumps have been drawn and the
match presumed to have been won, yet when
the scorers have gone through their figures it
has been discovered that a few more runs have
been needed, and play has, of a necessity, been
resumed. We have never heard of a scorer
receiving talent money, though they have occa-
sionally deserved it from their extraordinary
scoring abilities. In important cricket, how-
ever, errors are fortunately few and far be-
tween, though one occurred at Brighton in
1881, which deserves passing reference. It was
in Jim Lillywhite’s match, and the Players,
after tying on the first innings, won by a


single run. Mr. Ashley-Cooper, father to the
present cricket statistician, kept the score, and,
curiously enough, made the game a tie. He
afterwards met the Bev. James Pycroft, a great
cricket authority, and he also made the match
a tie on both innings. Although neither of
these two gentlemen advertised their opinion,
it cropped up again in 1894 by a correspondent
of the “ Cricket Field,” and three years later
by an anonymous writer in “ Cricket.” Whether
the scorers blundered it is impossible at this
distance of time to determine, but it is curious,
to say the least of it, that four different sources
—and authorities at that—should be of the
same opinion. A similar occurrence took place
at Prince’s in 1873, when Middlesex and York-
shire were the contestants. The scorers an-
nounced the game won when it was in reality
only a tie; the Yorkshiremen, however, entered
the field again after an explanation, and al-
lowed the Metropolitans to gain the required
run. Probably the greatest error ever made
by scorers occurred in the Eton and Harrow
match of 1827, when, after the drawing of
stumps, it was discovered that Eton required
four runs to win. According to the strict laws
of the game Harrow were entitled to the vic-
tory, but the matter being referred to the
Committee of the M.C.C., it was decided in
favour of Eton.
A parting hand-shake. At Ardingly College
in the early eighties, Mr. Newham tells us he
had a curious experience. “Two of us had
been batting for some hours and hitting
rapidly. There was no telegraph board, so we
did not exactly know how we were getting on,
but I had a pretty clear idea that I had made
about 150, and my partner, who scored rather
faster, must be very near his 200. When
stumps were drawn it was found that .the
scorers were asleep, and that my total was 60
—about 20 per hour. The other man was
lucky enough to have made just over 100 before
the sleep came on.”
The End.
