

The Innisfail Cyclone
the BISHOP OF NORTH QUEENSLAND.
I was not able to visit Innisfail till eight days after
the disaster. The approach to the town from Mouril-
yan Harbour —partly through a tropical jungle torn
to shreds in a manner which I refer to again; partly
through crops of cane lying flat on the ground—or
in the case of the younger growths battered and lean-
ing in every direction —this approach—was ominous
enough; but no effort of imagination could foresee
the state of the town. Only six buildings—including
the Town Hall—were undamaged; the rest presented
every degree of ruin and desolation.
People, though still half dizzy with the effects of
the storm, were working hard to restore order out of
the confusion. Some of them had had very little
sleep for a week, and were worn out with the labour
of effecting rescues, caring for the injured, provid-
ing for refugees and collecting and covering scat-
tered property.
Previous Cyclones.
Terrible as the cyclones of the last thirty years
have sometimes been, this one at its height seems to
have surpassed anything in human memory. Per-
sons who had been through Sigma and Leonta told
me that this, though shorter in duration, was more
appallingly violent than either. A coastal skipper
of long experience said that he had seen several
towns battered by cyclones before, but never such
wholesale destruction as this at Innisfail. The gene-
ral desolation extends on both sides of the town, north
and south, for thirty miles each way. Nearly all


buildings are demolished as far as the eye can see.
The extent of damage further inland is conjectural;
but the fact that several houses were overthrown at
Herberton, which lies well back on the range at a
level of 3,000 feet, suggests that there will be terrible
losses in the track of the storm all the way to the
mountains.
It is clear that Innisfail was right in the path of the
centre of the disturbance, and the barometer read-
ings, so far as they were observed, bear witness to
its almost unparalleled severity.
The last effort of the barograph at the Post Office
was to produce a sharply-descending saw edge line on
the chart running down to the 28-inch mark. Below
that the instrument is not able to register readings.
After this limit was passed, the records were neces-
sarily unofficial: —27.75 was reported for Innisfail
and actually 27.35 for Mourilyan—the world’s record
attained in a typhoon in the China Sea being, I be-
lieve, 27.05.
The Path of the Storm.
No secondhand account can be anything but an
understatement of the terror of this storm. I gather
that the wind from the south-west increased in
strength all through the afternoon of Sunday, March
10, and by 3 o’clock people grew alarmed, as five
houses were being blown off their blocks. Between
6 and 9 the velocity of the storm was so great that
almost all buildings lost their roofs. Their contents
were deluged with rain, clothing and books and fur-
niture suffered fearful damage. As in the Maekay
cyclone, the rain was so salt as to render very brack-
ish the supply of water in the tanks which remained
standing after the storm. By 7 o’clock houses of
even the strongest construction were being shattered.
Those who attempted to rescue their neighbours ran
the gauntlet of flying sheets of iron and lashing
telegraph wires, and were themselves repeatedly


thrown to the ground, while the rain cut their faces
as with whips.
The houses that fared best were those secured to
their ground plates by steel rods running from top
to bottom —the ground plates, of course, being bolted
to the blocks. I was in a house of this kind, which
had rocked and swung for hours, straining at the
rods that held it. Part of its verandah was gone,
and it was severely cracked, but it had provided
shelter for its inmates and others. The blocks, though
sunk 3 feet, had been pushed out of the vertical.
The occupants told me that the roaring and shrieking
of the wind was inconceivable, yet they could hear
the crash of houses in all parts of the town, and cries
for help coming from every side. Those who con-
tinued—at great risk to themselves —to attempt the
work of rescue, say that they beheld the strangest
phenomena. Balls of fire were flying through the
air, and such quantities of broken material whizzing
about that they expected every moment to be killed.
Several people told me that they saw these fire-
balls, which have, I believe, been noted before as
accompanying the worst storms, though I have seen
no explanation of their nature.
Trees Stripped Bare.
At about 9.15 p.m. came the. lull, which indicated
that the centre of the cyclone was passing oyer the
town. Those who had been working all this time
to save life, though their courage was unabated, had
the leisure to find that they were trembling and
shaking from head to foot. At 10 o’clock the tem-
pest raged again from the north-east, and most of the
experiences of the earlier part were repeated. At
about 3 a.m. the wind began to slacken, and by 4 a.m.
the air was still.
The scene on Monday morning must have been woe-
ful in the extreme. I can only describe what I see
eight days later.


The dense tropical jungle which used to cover the
slopes and ridges, and stretched in belts over the
plains, has now the appearance of dry brushwood
or a ring-barked forest. There is hardly a leaf on
any of the trees, but here and there the dishevelled
tuft of a palm waves disconsolate over a scene that
suggests the depth of a European water. Not
merely are the trees stripped of their leaves and re-
duced to an aspect torn and grotesque, with ragged
stumps of branches —reminding one of Bore’s illus-
trations of the lost souls in the Inferno flying from
the avenging demons, and yet rooted to the ground
against their will—but actually in many instances
the very bark is torn clean away as it is from the
English oaks that are peeled as they stand for the
benefit of the tanneries before the sawyer fells them.
Individual examples of the storm’s violence make
one wonder how it was that the deaths were not far
more numerous —fourteen are reported.
Houses Torn from their Foundations.
Here is a house that was sheltering 40 people when
it was torn from its 10-foot blocks and tossed into
the garden. Here is another large house that was
carried bodily across the road and deposited on the
opposite block 90 feet away. Here is a kitchen stove
weighing two hundredweight or more flung from a
ruined house 70 feet into the middle of the road, and
from the opposite side carried by the return blast of
the storm is the whole side of a house that has been
lifted from its base, hurled over the fence, and laid
flat in company with the debris from across the way.
Fragments of chairs, cupboards, dressers, twisted
iron, broken crockery, gas generators, tattered clothes
and curtains still lie about in heaps, though a vast
amount of clearing up has been done in eight days.
Tanks, though quite full, were carried from their
stands; the empty ones performed strange feats. One
bowled down the slope to the Johnson River, skimmed


and rolled across the hundred yards of water, and
ascended the opposite bank. In the main street
few buildings are even recognisable. Here is the
upper story of a boarding-house that has come down
astride of two blocks, helping to crush a large grocery
establishment. Where the ground floor belonging to
this huge fragment had got to I could not discover,
but about 600 square feet of ceiling hung from a
single remaining stud, slanting over its original site,
twisted into a surface of strange curvature that sug-
gested an hyperboloid, or else something of the third
degree. A little further on a stationer’s shop had
thrown itself on top of a barber’s, and between them
they had telescoped the premises of an auctioneer,
which, in turn, had butted into the newly erected
Town Hall. And that last building, to the credit
of the architect, and the great advantage of 300 re-
fugees, remained unmoved.
The Court House had only a few rooms standing, a
table in the centre of the ruins open to the sky was
loaded with files and dockets, sheltered with sheets
or iron from the rain.
Here is a 4 x 4 beam shot clean through the wall
of the next house. Here is the head of a telegraph
pole, 10 inches thick, snapped off 8 feet from the
top, still carrying ten cross pieces and wires tangled
in wild confusion. There are miles of telephone
wires lying everywhere.
From some points of view the town presents few
horizontal lines at all. Roofs huddled together, and
shouldering one another at every angle, suggest an
earthquake or a futurist painter’s nightmare. Over
this bewildering scene rises the parapet of a concrete
store maintaining a precarious equilibrium on the
ends of two walls half destroyed—and 12-ineh con-
crete walls at that. The interior is gutted, but this
lofty sky sign gives a level which emphasises the mad
farrago of intervening confusion.


Church Completely Devastated.
The English Church, which was the most_ attrac-
tive building in the town, is a desperate ruin. It
has been subject to what seems like an irony of fate.
For twenty years it stood on a thoroughly inadequate
site, but in November, 1917, the wardens at last pre-
vailed upon the people to move the church bodily to
a beautiful site on the main street overlooking the
river. The original dimensions of the church, in-
cluding its verandahs, were 40 feet by 38 feet. When
it was re-erected on its new site there was added to it,
at a cost of £IBO, a very graceful apse, the chord
measuring 18 feet, and the sagitta 12 feet. The ex-
ternal proportions of the building thus renewed won
general praise, while the interior showed what an ex-
tremely graceful effect can be gained in a wooden
church where ample space is given to the sanctuary,
the altar well elevated, and the colour scheme carried
out with care. A Gothic arch 18 feet wide and 20
feet high opened upon the sanctuary—not strictly
semi-circular, but constituted by five sides of an octa-
gon—lined with silky cak, and polished so as to pre-
serve the beauty of its grain. Above the altar, which
stood on three steps each 4 feet wide, were three win-
dows, representing the Blessed Virgin, St. Joseph,
and St. Alban—the patron saint. This sanctuary,
with which the worshippers at this church were
justly delighted, gave the keynote to the colour
scheme of the building, which was effected in shades
of brown, darker at the base, and lighter above the
dado, which exactly hit the proper harmony, with a
strain of red recurring through its stencilled pattern.
The painting inside and out, to the last coat of red
upon the roof, was completed on Saturday, March !).
On Sunday morning the Holy Communion was cele-
brated at 7.30 and at 9.30. When the congregation
came out at 11 a.m. the sky had begun to look ugly,
and a stiff breeze was blowing from the south. _ This
increased steadily to a gale, the gale to a hurricane,


and the hurricane to something inconceivable at over
100 miles an hour. The church stood well till about
6.30, when the south verandah was carried away.
The roof was wrenched and lifted bodily from the
building, the nave collapsed and dragged the new
apse with it.
mmr.v
The whole work of removing, repairing, enlarging,
and painting this building had cost £550, and it was,
I think, for its size and style, the most beautiful
church I have seen. For this effort on the part of
the Anglicans of Innisfail there is now nothing to
show but a scatter of irretrievable ruin, and a debt
of £l3O. An American organ that was bought two
years ago for £7O lies hopelessly smashed in the
middle ol the floor.
Mills Suffer Severely.
As to the district, countless farms are ruined. Two
mills —those at Goondi and Mourilyan, can hardly be
repaired for this year. I went to see the Goondi
mill. Its smoke stack, 150 feet high, 8 feet in dia-
meter, built of steel and lined with brick, had broken
all its stays and fallen straight across the mill, mak-
ing a lane right through it. The South Johnson
mill, though damaged, is to be made fit to work in
June. All the schools in the district are wrecks.
The new one, just completed, at South Johnson, ac-
cording to the latest patterns of the Department, was
carried 50 yards from its site and deposited on its
side. It will take the district two years to make
even a partial recovery. From one-third to one-half
of the cane may, perhaps, be harvested this year, but
many farms have lost everything.
A great part of the community is working with
admirable pluck to get things straight, but it is a
heavy task. The people of our Church—and others
too —have been very greatly cheered and sustained
by the fortitude of their rector —the Rev. R. W.
Shand. Many told me of their deep appreciation


of what he had done. He was foremost in the work
of rescue and help from first to last, and had, I think,
for several days and nights scarcely any rest.
We were able to hold a meeting of the Church
Council on Tuesday evening, March 19, in an empty
paint shop next to an hotel. This shop, though its
roof leaks badly, is now used as a church. The altar
and some of the furniture have been carried there.
The Council decided to begin by rebuilding the rec-
tory on the new site provided for it next to where
the church stood. That, with repairs and new ma-
terial, will cost about £2OO. At the same time from
the old material of the church, with as much new
timber as may be needed—about two-thirds, I am
afraid—They will build a hall for, say, £350, at the
lower end of the church block, measuring 40 feet by
25 feet, to provide for services, Sunday school, and
other things till the new church can be built.
Help Urgently Needed.
1 believe that sympathy will be widely felt and
shown towards this plucky congregation. Their
church life was making fine progress, and they will
not be daunted. There are about 350 church fami-
lies in the district, the majority of them now, of
course, in great straits, with no houses, and only the
bare earth remaining. I have told them that I be-
lieve the great cities in the south will come to their
help, enabling their rector to stay among them, and
reorganise Church activities from the bottom. I
think especial sympathy will be felt for the rector
and Mrs. Shand, who have now to begin everything
de novo. Much of their own property, of course,
is spoilt, and the rector has lost nine-tenths of his
library—reduced to pulp—books which he had been
diligently collecting during the last ten years.
‘-“in j
Subscriptions may be forwarded to “The Argus”
or to Canon Hughes, Eastern Hill, Melbourne.
Shipping Newspapers Ltd., Melb.
