

SABBATH BAY.
A. BON AR, ESQ.,
furuw^iou^
Bo * S'
TOOIiAK.
MELBOURNE:
PUBLISHED BY GEO. ROBERTSON, ELIZABETH STREET.




THE
SABBATH DAY.
A. BONAR, ESQ-
TOORAK.
MELBOURNE:
PUBLISHED BY OEO. ROBERTSON, ELIZABETH STREET.


WALKER, MAT AND CO., PRINTERS, 99 BOCRKE STREET WEST.


THE SABBATH.
“In the beginning God created the heaven and
the earth by the word of His power. He spake and
it was done; He commanded, and it stood fast.
(Psalm xxxiii. 9.)
“On the first day, God made the light, and di-'
vided the light from the darkness.
“On the second day, God made the firmament,
and divided the waters above from the waters below.
“On the third day, God gathered together the
seas and let the dry land appear, and clothed it with
His goodness ; grass, herbs, and fruit trees.
“ On the fourth day, God made the sun, the moon,
and the stars.
“On the fifth day, God made all fish sea,
and fowls of the air.
“ On the sixth day, God made every living crea-
ture on the earth, beast, cattle, and creeping things ;
and after divine communication, the Holy Godhead
created man in his own image after His likeness,
and invested him with dominion over the fish of
the sea, the fowls of the air, the cattle, and every
creeping thing upon the earth, and gave for his use
and benefit the fair creation he had called into
being,


“Thus the heavens and the earth were furnished,
and all the host of them. By His own Son, God
made the world, and His Spirit moved on the face
of the waters, reducing all to order and beauty ; ‘by
His Spirit He garnished the heavens ’ (Job xxvi. 13.)
“On the seventh day Goo Instituted the Sab-
bath.”
Having 1 ended His glorious work of crea-
tion, on it He rested from all his work, and
God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it,
because that in it lie had rested from all His
work which God had created and made. Thus
God not only ordained, but the Holy One ob-
served the first Sabbath day and hallowed it.
In His infinite care, compassion, and love,
God made the Sabbath for man (Mark ii.
137); it was needful for him, and was suited to
the nature and constitution with which God
had endowed him ; in supporting and main-
taining its integrity is his blessedness safety
peace, for that which is in harmony with our
Creator’s nature and will is happiness, that
which is opposed, is discord.
The rest of the Sabbath then is indelibly
stamped with the impress of God, and if men
would walk in the footsteps of the maker and
preserver of the worlds, ana not violate his own
nature and constitution, he too will rest from
all work, and hallow and sanctify that blessed


day reserved by God from the labours, cares,
and anxieties of time, for the higher and nobler
ends of his creatures. That we may duly prize
and rightly estimate the high privilege and
sacred importance of this heaven born type
of celestial rest, let us not forget that this day
was one of beatitudes and privileges for the
spiritual improvement and exalted enjoyment
of man, while he still bore the very image and
likeness of God, and while as yet sin had not
entered into the world. The observance then
instituted and sanctioned bv God, who is
«j
unchangeable, the same yesterday, to-day,
and for ever, and enjoyed by pure and un-
fallen man, is not temporary, but permanent,
as are all the adorable perfections of the in-
finite Jehovah.
If any inquire why God has reserved one-
seventh part of time for His own worship and
service, we answer, that besides the spiritual
advantages thereby flowing to man for the ad-
vancement of his highest and eternal interests,
it was right and becoming that God’s high
supremacy, asKingover all, should be asserted
and maintained, as ever lias been, since first
Adam was created and placed in the garden of
Eden, as we learn in his charter of investiture,
when the Lord God commanded him, saying,


of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely
eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, for in the
day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely
die. (Genesis ii. 10, 17.)
The whole order of God’s government of
the worlds he has made, tending’ to one
grand and glorious result, the full accomplish-
ment of Christ’s mediatorial work in the
salvation of His people, demands, nay ne-
cessitates, His power to give or to withhold,
to order or forbid, and implies the special
providential direction and limitation of every
event alike of individuals and nations.
Man sinned and fell in Adam, and in him
all his posterity, whereby mankind lost his
original righteousness and became corrupt in
his whole nature, and ever since, by his
actual transgressions, serves himself, daily
and hourly, heir to his fallen father. By this
lamentable and overwhelming degeneracy all
mankind lost communion with God, are
under his wrath and curse, and so made
liable to all the miseries of this life, to death
itself, and to the pains of hell for ever ! If,
before this sore calamity, the Sabbath was
needful, just, and blessed to man in his
innocence, as a of holy rest from worldly


employments, and as a day for enlarged
spiritual quickening and refreshment, that he
might hold undisturbed, and more intimate com-
munion with his God, and worship him with
graver solemnity, how much more necessary
is it now to man in his lost and fallen estate;
that his thoughts may he withdrawn from
common scenes, worldly and engrossing occu-
pations and pleasures, lawful on other days,
and thereby be the better fitted for enjoying
loftier intercourse with God over all, blessed
for evermore.
That this Sahbath was coeval with the
Creation, and was observed, remembered, and
cherished by God’s people in succeeding ages,
we have the clearest proof; even 1491 years
after, we are informed that the miraculous
food supplied by God to the children of
Israel in the wilderness, might not he
gathered on that day of rest. Day by day
it was supplied, that the Lord might prove
them, whether they would walk in his law
or not, (Ex. xvi. 4) ; if left till the morning,
it stank and bred worms, but on the sixth
day Moses said, “ to-morrow is the rest of
the holy sabbath,” he speaks of it as a day
well known and understood by them, “ bake
ye that which ye will to-day, and seethe ye


that ye will seethe to-day ; and that which
remaineth over, lay up for you to be kept
until the morning;” (v. 24) “and it did not
stink, neither was there any worm therein
(v. 25) “ and Moses said, eat that to-day, for
to-day, is a Sabbath unto the Lord, to-day
ye shall not find it in the field” ; (v. 20) “six
days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh
day which is the sabbath, in it there shall
be none, see, for that the Lord hath given
you the sabbath : abide you every \man in his
place , let no man go out of his place on the
sabbath day.”
This instance might suffice to show that
the Sabbath day was known, and the ob-
servance of it enforced, from the Creation to
the giving of the law.
And now, 1 go forward to that marvellous
event, when the Almighty God, descending
on Mount Sinai, wrote on two tables of
stone the solemn injunctions of his divine
and moral precepts, for the guidance and rule
of mankind, in all succeeding ages of the
world. Before these commands were thus
declared, God had at sundry times and in divers
manners spoken unto the fathers, and through
them communicated his holy and sublime de-
crees but offences increased and because of


defection from, and forgetfulness of God and
his holy word, a new and authoritave declara-
tion of his will was proclaimed : “ The law
was added because of transgressions.”—(Gal.
iii 19.)
Many attempts have been made by wicked
men to separate and divide the divine code
thus promulgated, and the special enmity of
ungodly men has been directed against that
part of it which refers to the Sabbath of the
Lord, its holy observance and most strict and
righteous demands; and some bold in sin,
especially Sabbath-breaking, would, with
ruthless hands, explain away its requirements,
nay expunge the fourth commandment from
the statute altogether, alleging its limitation
to the kingdom of Israel, and contemptuously
designating those who hold its sacred, bind-
ing and perpetual obligation, as u Hebrews ” :
and could they do so, would, with one sweep,
blot out 90 of the 001 words in which the
moral law is summarily comprehended. Now,
to say nothing' of pleasure, ignorantly and
falsely so called, desire of profit eagerly
hunted after, and the many other carnal
principles and actions which draw men’s
souls, and often drown them, T am convinced,
this hostile attack originates and is kept alive,


by carnal limited and contracted views of the
subject, and these perverse, may be quietly
silenced by a clear declaration of wbat the
moral law really is.
What then is this Moral Law ? Is it like
some former enactments by the same divine
authority, temporary in its rule, pointing to
some grand revolution in the government of
God over his people, which shall accomplish
the ends and objects of its institution at some
fixed and definite period of this world’s his-
tory, as were the judicial and ceremonial laws,
till the manifestation of the promised Messias
and the destruction of the commonwealth of
Israel. No, the moral law is the written em-
bodiment of the moral character of God, of
the essential divine nature of the righteous
lawgiver ; a declaration of the absolute, ever-
lasting, and unchangeable truth of God,
which Christ came not to destroy but to fulfil,
one jot or one tittle of which shall in no wise
pass, while heaven and earth endure (Mat.
v. 18) ; and to the end of time, whosoevershall
‘ break one of the least commandments, and
shall teach men so, shall be called the least
in the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever
shall do and teach them, the same shall be
cqlled great in the kingdom of heaven.”


The Moral Law then is one, the declared
manifestation of the inherent moral nature of
God, and therefore it is said (James ii. 10),
“ for whosoever shall keep the whole law, and
yet offend in one point, he is guilty of a 11 .,?
Each and every breach of the law is not only
rebellion against the rightful authority of God
as supreme lawgiver and king, but is an in-
fringement and outrage against his moral
character, his essential unchangeable nature.
With this view then of the sacredness and
unity of the law, I proceed to examine more
particularly that commandment which occu-
pies the largest and most prominent place in
the sacred code, the last of the first four which
enjoin our duty to God, as the other'six
ordain our duty to man, That law respects
and re-establishes the holy Sabbath. And
first let us quote the exact terms in which it
is announced by God, as recorded, (Exod. xx.
8-11):
“ Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy.”
u Six days slialt thou labour, and do all thy
work:”
“ But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God: in it thou shall not do any work, thou,
nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy
maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is
within thy gates


“ For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth,
the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the
seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath
day, and hallowed it.”
It may be remarked in passing’ that a cavil
has been raised by some respecting the change
from the seventh to the first day of the week.
Let it then be observed that the words are
not remember the seventh day, but “ remem-
ber the Sabbath day to keep it holy,” and it
is not the seventh but the Sabbath day which
the Lord has blessed and hallowed. The
seventh day continued to be the Sabbath from
the creation of the world to the resurrection
of Christ; and immediately thereafter the
change took place, to the first day of the
week; the day of our Lord Jesus' Christ’s
glorious triumph over death and the grave,
when the types and shadows of preceding
ages were fulfilled ; and ever since this has
continued to be the Christian Sabbath
Again, the seventh day was set apart by
God, fi •om a common to a special purpose, on
the completion of the creation; the first, or
the Lord’s day, has now been consecrated in
commemoration of an event much more re-
markable and glorious than either the cre-
ation of the world, or the deliverance of the


Israelites out of Egypt, even the accomplish-
ment by our Lord Jesus Christ of the great
work the Father had given him to do, and
which he voluntarily undertook. On the
seventh day God rested from all his work of
creation, but on the first day Christ rested
from his souks travail in the infinite work oi
Redemption. And here 1 cannot but notice
a remarkable passage in Ezekiel, when speak-
ing of the time after the abolition of the
Jewish system, in which he mentions the
eighth as the day on which spiritual sacrifices
were to be offered to the Lord; and adds, to
continue “forward;” that is, to the end of
tiie world.
Not only did Christ sanctify the first day
of the week by his resurrection from the dead,
but on that day he appeared twice to his dis-
ciples (John xx. 19-20); and when he as-
cended up to heaven, he poured out the Holy
Ghost, in an extraordinary manner, on the
day of Pentecost/ The apostles and first
Christians also observed that day above every
other, for the special worship of God (Acts
xx. 7.) On that day too the Apostle Paul met
with the church at Troas (1 Cor. xvi. 1,2);
further, he ordered the special observation of
it above others, for the services of the Church :


and finally, it was called the Lord’s day, be-
cause, like the seventh, it was set apart from a
common to a sacred use.
We come now to the great practical ques-
tion, how we are to
lie member the Sabbath day to keep it holy ;
And in the first place I would premise :
I. That though the Sabbath be a day of rest, it
is not to be spent in idleness, lounging, sleeping, or
sauntering about, as too many in these days care-
lessly pass it; but it is to be a day of spiritual energy
and activity, in which the whole mind shall be
given to God. “And now Israel, what doth the Lord
thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy
God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him ; and
to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart and all
thy soul, and to keep the commandments of the Lord
and his statutes, which I command thee this day for
thy good.” (Deut. x. 12, 13.)
11. Nor in thinking of, or forming plans of world-
ly profit and advantage, saying when will the new
moon be gone, that we may sell corn, and the Sab-
bath that we may set forth wheat, making the ephah
small and the shekel great, and falsifying the ba-
lances by deceit.
111. The Sabbath day is not our own, but the
Lord’s, and we may not do what we please, or
sanction others in so acting, such as giving permis-
sion to the members of our families or domestic
servants to spend the day out, or in any way coun-
tenance, approve, or encourage the breach thereof.
u ln it THOU SHALT NOT DO ANY WORK,”


—Thou, or thy son, or thy daughter, thy man-
servant nor thy maidservant, nor thine ass, nor
any of thy cattle, nor the stranger that is within
thy gates; that thy manservant and thy maid-
servant may rest as well as thou (Deut. x. 14).
We must rest from all worldly employments
and all servile work, by which we are to un-
derstand anything done for our worldly gain,
profit, or livelihood. “ Six days thou shalt
work, but on the seventh day thou shalt
rest; in earing time and in harvest thou
shalt rest.” (Exod. xxxiv. 21.) We may not
sow, reap, plough, dig, bake, wash, split wood,
buy or sell, work at our ordinary callings, seek
our own pleasure, or speak our own words;
read newspapers or profane history, far less
the unprincipled sensation literature so mise-
rably prevalent in the present day; study the
arts and sciences, write letters, or make up
accounts ; drive stock, or travel with drays ;
journey by cars, steamboats, or railways
—these monster Sabbath-breakers, or by
any other conveyances, or on horseback:
specially these are to be avoided, when
of necessity others are involved in the breach
of Clod's law : nor may any ship leave port,
discharge, or take in cargo, on the Sabbath
day. IT e way not walk in the fields or highways


for pleasure, diversion, or profit, nor use our
cattle for the same object: nor talk about
public news, trade, bargains, profits or losses,
much less in vain and idle conversation;
neither may we spend that holy day or any
part of it in visiting friends, feasting, or unne-
cessary preparation of food for ourselves or
others. (Exod. xvi., xxxi., xxxv; Num. xxxii.;
Luke xxiii., 55, 56.) u lf thou turn away
thy foot from the Sabbath from doing thy
pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath
a delight, the holy of the Lord honourable, and
slialt honour him, not doing thine own ways,
nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking
thine own words : then shaft thou delight
thyself in the Lord, and I will cause thee to
ride upon the high places of the earth, and
feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy
father, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken
it.” (Isa. lviii. 13, 14.)
The whole day is to be employed in
the Public and Private exercises of
God’s Worship, except so much as is to he
taken up in works of real necessity and
mercy. u Ye shall keep my Sabbaths and
reverence my sanctuary; I am the Lord.”
Lev. xxvi. 2.)
Suitable exercises for that day are, hearing


the Word read or preached, after careful pre-
paration of the soul by private and family
worship, joining l in praise and prayer, par-
taking 1 of the Sacraments according 1 to Divine
appointment. (Rev. x. 17. ; 1 Cor. i. 2 Acts. ;
xvi. Ift, and xx. 7.) All these exercises are
to be engaged in with that frame of mind
which animated the Apostle John (Rev. i.
10), when he declared, “ I was in the spirit
on the Lord’s day.” Our hearts should also
be employed in meditation on the works and
providence of God, especially the wondrous
scheme of Redemption, and its all-important
consequences; the holiness of God, the
heavenly rest that remaineth for his chosen
people; self-examination, by the light of the
blessed Word, searching to discover our inte-
rest in Christ, and in renewing our covenant
with Him, and all other exercises of a similar
nature. “It is the Sabbath of the Lord in
all your dwellings.” (Lev. xxiii. 3.) In
such heavenly employments there is neither
languor nor “ weariness,” and the reviving,
comforting, and refreshing breathings of the
Holy Ghost are far better than the soft
breezes of a summer day. O ! that men but
knew the value of the great salvation. The
sad neglect of such duties and exercises on


the Sabbath is too true an evidence of the
neglect of all religious duties through the
week, and, consequently, of indifference,
estrangement, and alienation from God, and
too often of profaneness and even apostacy
and atheism.
But there are still more dangers ; granting
that these duties are performed , it is often in
a heartless, careless, and partial manner :
some observed, and others, equally important
and necessary, omitted. Perhaps public
duties attended to, but private and secret ones
neglected, and all of them gone through in a
formal way, that is, without a spiritual appre-
hension of God, whom professedly they
worship, and whose honour and glory they
avowedly desire. Thus performed in a cold,
lifeless, dead, and indifferent manner, without
vigour of spirit, or interest, they are an offence
to the holy majesty of God, who searcheth
the heart and trieth the reins of the children
of men, and anew call down the solemn
warning and rebuke of the u Amen, the
faithful and true witness, the beginning of the
creation of God. I know thy works, that
thou art neither cold nor hot, so then because
thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot,
1 will spue thee out of my mouth.” (Rev. iii.
14, 16.)


The regular attendance on the ordinances
of the sanctuary on the Sahbath day is alike
profitable and necessary, if we would hold fast
the profession of our faith without wavering.
Deprived of the refreshment these wells of
salvation afford, we languish and faint, because
in violation of the express command (Heb.
x. 25) u not forsaking the assembling of your-
selves together as the manner of some is.”
The neglect of the means appointed by God,
through which he is graciously pleased to
communicate his Divine grace, is pregnant
with danger to our immortal souls. Absence
from Worship, even for one Sahbath day, is
not permittee! by Jehovah. “ From one Sab-
bath to another shall all flesh come to worship
before me, saith the Lord.” (Lsa. lxvi. 23.)
Looking to the end and object of the Sab-
bath, its rest from outward employment and
worldly recreations, rest to the toil-worn
bodies, and exhausted spirits of men; the day
on which peculiarly the heralds of the Gospel
go forth as ambassadors for Christ, proclaim-
ing the acceptable year of the Lord, liberty
to the captive, and the opening of the prison-
doors to them that are hound; preaching
good tidings to the meek, binding up the
broken-hearted, and comforting all who


mourn (Isa. lxi. 1,2.) Looking to this calm
and bright day, we would anticipate that its
weekly return would be anxiously waited for
and carefully cherished ns a period of jubilee,
diffusing joy and gladness over a changeful
and fading world. But, alas ! a very different
reception it has had to encounter, from so
great a host of enemies that their name is
legion, but may be designated generally as
the worldly, the careless, the profane, the
ungodly, the carnal of heart, “ lovers of plea-
sure more than lovers of God.”
To all such, as also to strengthen those who
love and revere the Sabbath, we would submit
these four things :
I. —God allows us six days of the week for our own
employment and recreation. “Six days may work
be done” (Exod. xxxi. 15.)
11. —God claims the Sabbath day as his own pro-
perty. “Ye shall do no work therein ; it is the
Sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings” (Lev.
xxiii. 3.) “ Whosoever doeth any work therein,
that soul shall be cut off from among his people”
(Exod. xxxi. 14.) “ Thus saith the Lord, take
heed to yourselves, and bear no burdens on the
Sabbath day” (Jer. xvii. 21.)
111. —God has set us an example of resting on the
Sabbath day which he requires us to follow. “It
is a sign between me and the children of Israel for
ever; for in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, and on the seventh day he rested and was
refreshed” (Gen. xxxi. 17.)


IV. —God requires the Sabbath to bo observed by
us, because he himself blessed and sanctified it
(Gen. ii. 3.)
According to the measure of faith, in anv
man, or the work of grace generally effective
among the people of any land, so is the ob-
servance of the Sabbath day ; and so palpable
is this to the Christian observer, that one
has expressly designated the Sabbath as the
“ Christian thermometer,” because that by the
manner in which the Sabbath is observed,
you may with remarkable exactness ascertain
the absence or prevalence of vital religion.
Let each one for himself frequently examine
and carefully mark its rise or fall.
fn closing this short and imperfect statement,
1 cannot but notice another set of objectors to
the strictness of this holy law, who having a
form of godliness, are more dangerous than the
openly careless and profane. These admit its
binding application under the Old Testament
dispensation, but seek to modify or abrogate
the special sacred obligations peculiar to that
day of peaceful rest; and rising above the
crowd of carnal and worldly arguments, in-
cluding health, recreation, enjoyment and
happiness of the million, with which the Sab-
bath-breakers seek to bolster up their unstable


position, they take a few words of a verse in
Paul’s Epistle to the Romans, and tell us that
“ Christ is the end of the Law.” Has the
Law then merged ? Is its work completed
and done ? Is it ended and gone ? Look a
little more closely to this passage and examine
it. In the first place the words are u for
Christ is the end of the Law to every one
that believeth.” Now the word translated
end, means the object, scope or final cause;
the end proposed and intended, and is so used
by Greek authors.
The Law was ordained to life (Rom. vii.
10) that the man who fulfilled it should live
by it. No man can do this, and the Law
broken, as it is by every man, cannot justify
and give life. Rut God sent his own Son,
and in him condemned sin in the flesh, “ that
the righteousness of the Law might he ful-
filled in us ” who are in him (Rom. viii. 4.)
This then is the end of the law for righteous-
ness to every one that believeth. By and in
Christ the full purpose of the Law is fulfilled
for his people: their life is comprehended in
his, as the blessed Jesus himself testifies, “ I
am come that they might have life, and that
they might have it more abundantly” (John
x. 10.)


Again, the word here translated end is used
by the Lord twice. (John xviii. 4, and xix.
80,); when he said “ I have finished the work
which thou gavest me to doand in
Hebrews the same word is rendered, vi. 1.,
perfection ; also in Ileb. x. 14, “ for by one
offering, he hath perfected for ever them that
are sanctified.” It was then this grand com-
forting truth that Christ was the perfection—
the end of the law for righteousness to every
one that believeth, which the Apostle Paul in
this Epistle sought to impress, and not as
some ignorantly suppose, the abrogation of
the moral law. That law, we repeat, is im-
mutable as the moral charater of God. Christ’s
obedience or righteousness is imputed as their
obedience to all believers. He was made sin
for us, who knew no sin, “ that we might he
made the righteousness of God in Him.”
(2 Cor. v. 21).
By his obedience and death Christ came,
not to destroy the law or the Prophets, but to
fulfil. (Mat. v. 17).
REMEMBER THE SABBATH TO DAY
KEEP IT HOLY.
WALKER, MAY AND CO., PRINTERS, 99 BOURKE STREET WEST,






