

r£TH
£oi~\
RELIGIOUS pamp
&o* I
CONTINUATION
THE MIDNIGHT CRY
AND THE
Voice to % Mjjolc of (ftjmsfcnbom.
BEING THE
Third Pamphlet containing Evidence on the Absolute
Certainty that the Second Manifestation and Personal
Reign on Earth of the Lord Jesus Christ will be
Accomplished in the Flesh.
“And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold the Bridegroom
cometh! go ye out to meet him. Then all those virgins arose and
trimmed their lamps. ” —Matt, xxv., 6, 7.
Dawn of the Millennium.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
M'Carron, Bird and Co., Printers, 37 Flinders Lane West, Melbourne,




CONTINUATION"
THE MIDNIGHT CHI
AND THE
Want fo the Mhole of (fthnsfmbom.
(JO o
BEING THE
Third Pamphlet containing Evidence on the Absolute
Certainty that the Second Manifestation and Personal
Reign on Earth of the Lord Jesus Christ will be
Accomplished in the Flesh.
“And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold the Bridegroom
cometh! go ye out to meet him. Then all those virgins arose and
trimmed their lamps.”—Matt, xxv., 6, 7.
Dawn of the Millennium.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.




SECOND APPEAL
TO THE
Judgment attfr Sjimpafjnr of the J)wrpk of
Sixfom
It Avill be remembered by those of my kind readers who
read my last pamphlet, that I promised to produce divine
evidence on this increasingly important matter that I had
gathered from the Word of God, and put together in the
shape of lectures, which it was my intention to publish had
I received sufficient encouragement; but having met with
so much apathy, lukewarmness, and in certain quarters
antagonism, towards this divine and gloriously interesting
matter, I feel it my duty to make another ellort in writing
this third pamphlet, in order to increase, if possible, a
warmer feeling, and a deeper interest, in this, which should
be to all Christ-loving people, of all subjects, the most
important. Now, as it appears to me to be of great value
that I make myself clearly and easily understood, I must of
necessity use plain language; but if I give offence to any
one by so doing, it is quite contrary to my own wishes; my
simple object and chief desire is to create a deep interest in
the hearts of all who read my evidence in what I know and
am fully persuaded to be the truth on the very best of
evidence—evidence which it is not possible to go astray
upon—evidence divine, which is attested by angels, by_ the
Word of God, by the Divine Spirit of God; therefore, it is as


it were from the mouth of God Himself. Now, I think a
little consideration on this point will show how very valu-
able such evidence must be derived from such infallible
authority; and. this important evidence I fully intend to
place before the public in my lectures. But before produc-
ing, I wish very much to clear the way a little from the
stumbling blocks of pride, prejudice, and lukewarmness that
I find likely to impede the progress such divine and
gloriously important evidence should make in the hearts of
God’s, people. Now, as I wish to be extremely explicit, I
think it is as well for me to divide my remarks separately,
with all due respect to the thi’ee great divisions of this
Christian community—that is, the Church, the Press, and
the Public. But it is to the leadei’s of the Church that
I chiefly direct my reasoning. Now, my dear Christian
friends, I am, I believe, known to many of you, and you, of
course, who have read my pamphlet, and other evidence in
the form of letters to some of the principal leaders of the
Church, will recognise the writer of this as one and the same
person. Now, it is my duty, and my most sincere desire, to
urge upon your attention, in this public manner, the great
necessity there is that you should at once awaken to a sense
of the enormous amount of actual responsibility that rests
upon you individually and collectively, regarding this all
important matter, and I tell you plainly, in the sight of God,
that you have not the slightest foundation for any of the
objections you raise against the Divine work, neither for the
apathy and lukewarm indifference with which you treat my
most explciit communications; because you do not at present
believe my statements, that does not in the least degree
destroy their Divine veracity. God has sent this Divine
work into the very heart of the Christian Church, for it to
be joyfully accepted, and allow me to tell you that it is not
1 alone who declare in God’s great name that it must, and
shall be, believed on. It often occurs to me that the solemn
reproof once administered to Saul of Tarsus is more than
deserved by the leaders of the Christian Churches in these
colonies, at the present time, regarding this Divine matter,
for it seems almost incredible to me that a Divine work, of
such amazing interest and importance, should be sent into


the Church without expectations from on High, that the
Divine mission would be in some measure accepted by those
who call themselves after the name and person of Jesus
Christ. But what has in reality been its reception; has it
not been next door to utter rejection, and why? because, as I
have before stated, the Church universally holds fast
erroneous ideas concerning the Second Coming and future
work on earth of the Lord Jesus. But will you hold those
wrong notions in defiance of the express teaching of God the
Holy Ghost? Is it not on record that it is the Comforter,
the Spirit of Truth, who is to lead us into all truth, and to
show us things to come? Read tenth chapter of St. John to
that effect. How let me entreat you not to set up private
opinions and traditions of men in opposition to the express
council of Divine agency, and the direct interposition of the
Most High, any longer, but at once awaken to a sense of
your great responsibility, and the immense importance of the
Divine work by becoming interested in the glorious matter,
as Christian men should be, and let my Divine evidence
become properly investigated, and you will then find that in
support of its veracity I have confirmations strong, and
proofs of Holy Writ; and in conclusion allow me to ask you
this important question: What is the reason the Church is
not expectant on the matter of the Second Advent of J esus
Christ; at whose door lies the utter folly of looking for the
accomplishment and fulfilment of that Divine and gloriously
important work in any other manner than that declared in
the Word of God? And because you neglect to study the
important matter you refuse to believe the information of
him who does. O, my friends, it is written; “Grieve not
the Holy Spirit of God.”
To the gentlemen who are managers and editors of the
public journals in these colonies, I shall be glad to say a few
words, if they will kindly give me leave. lam sure, gentle-
men, you will be adding lustre to the name of our common
Christianity, as well as serving the best interests of humanity
in every possible way, could you overcome the reluctance you
seem to have in alluding to the subject matter of my
pamphlets in your spare columns —not that I have any wish
to lead you to engage in any religious controversy; but Ido


think that when you see a man sacrificing every earthly
consideration, and enduring cruel persecution, and making
every effort in his power to place before his fellow-creatures
Divine knowledge on a subject which in reality exceeds every
earthly subject in real vital and national importance, you
should really condescend to notice his efforts, if in ever so
slight a degree. And let me remind you of this important
fact, that is, that we, as a people and a nation, call ourselves
Christians, with a Christian Government, a Christian Queen,
Defender of the Faith. Shall a Christian Press be silent
then, advocate, by making public, the impiety of Spiritism
and every other ism that arises, and yet not advocate the
cause of truth and justice, the cause of the World’s Great
Champion, through whom and for whose dear sake, come all
spiritual and temporal blessings to mankind 1 Now, let me
respectfully tell you that in duty bound, you should, as
leaders of public opinion, take an active interest in this most
important mattei’, and help in ventilating and investigating
the facts and evidence that come before you, so that the
truth may become known, and the light which is intended to
enlighten the world by destroying Spiritism and every other
ism that denies the divinity of Jesus Christ, may lighten the
midnight darkness that now, like a funeral pall, casts its
ominous shadow over the Christian Church, and be seen, in
its true character and brightness as the light to lighten the
Gentile world, and eventually becoming the glory of God’s
people of Israel.
And now, I will most respectfully appeal to the public as
a Christian community, who, by congregating together in the
numerous and beautiful houses set apart for the worship of
All Mighty God, show forth their love and approval of the
Word of God, and the doctrines of the Christian religion.
Now my dear friends, I hope you will not think that I make
this second appeal to you, which I conceive to be my duty,
in anything approaching to a spirit of dictation, or for the
purpose of displaying my little knowledge. For in truth it
is not so. The facts of the matter are plainly as I stated in
my first pamphlet. And now, as I find that my informa-
tion on this most important and deeply interesting matter
has not met with anything like the interest I expected, I


feel it to be my duty and pleasure to make another effort,
to awaken in your minds a proper interest regarding this
great national, and, what by examination will prove to be a
Heavenly directed and appointed universal and glorious
work for all Christians who have the good of mankind at
heart, to take part in its accomplishment. You will see, as
you read the evidence, that I have one principal motive in
writing these pamphlets, and, I may add, one fervent wish
that is at present unfulfilled, and that is—the proper and
public examination of the evidence in my possession regard-
ing this most important and atti’active work. That I have
very powerful reasons for this investigation I heartily admit;
for, in the first place, my evidence given previous to the
publication of my pamphlets in Victoria was condemned as
insanity, and I myself subjected to a false and dreadful
imprisonment among really insane people for over five years,
when at the same time my evidence was perfectly and
scripturally true then as now, and I myself in as perfect
and sound a frame of mind and body as it was and is
possible for a man to be in. So it may easily be seen how
very sincere is my desire for some investigation, that it may
be made manifest how very great is the wrong which has
been committed by the punishment inflicted upon me, and also
(which is of far more serious importance) the special, divine,
and glorious information which I was and am instructed to
make known has been cruelly rejected by the false witness
of insanity being preferred against it, thus making it as it is
a flagrant breach of the 9th Commandment —“Thou shalt
not bear false witness against thy neighbour.” Neither is
this the whole of the great wrong committed by the rulers
of this land in ignorantly imputing to me and to my divine
mission the blasphemous calumny of insanity. The most
serious part of the matter is the sad fact, that in my perse-
cution the divine and special instruction of the Holy Ghost
has been impiously and cruelly rejected by the leaders of
both Church and State; and I wish to point this out most
particularly, that in this rejection of God’s work the great
wrong committed falls in reality upon the Divine work
itself, upon the special act of Almighty God. Now, it may
easily be seen by any Christian of unbiassed judgment, that


in this rejection of the messenger and the message the
dangerous and awful sin of blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost is being actually committed, which every one, I am
sure, will admit is a fearful sin to hang over the land, and
has a fearful import from the words of Jesus Christ Himself
concerning that special sin. So that you will now easily
see, dear friends, that I am not altogether selfish in my
desires for investigation of my evidence, and in my efforts
to put before you this matter in its true light. For the
vindication of the nature and character of the glorious work
will of course cause some reparation of the great wrong that
has been inflicted to be accomplished. Then, and not till
then, the great sin will be removed, and then the Divine
work will gradually progress on its glorious course, and
Divine blessings attend the efforts of those who are actively
engaged in promoting the Divine cause. I most sincerely
hope I have now said sufficient to awaken an interest and
arouse the sympathy of many of my readers concerning the
future work and personal reign on earth of the Lord Jesus,
and I will conclude this pamphlet with the promise of the
publication of my lectures as soon as I receive sufficient
encouragement; and I beg my readers to remember that it
is written in the Word of God that—“He that doeth truth
cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest,
that they are wrought in God. ’ —John iii., 21.
M'Carron, Bird and Co., Printers, 37 Flinders Lane West, Melbourne,




