





f \ IS2.C*
DESTINY OF CHILDREN;
A SERMON,
PREACHED AT THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH,
PITT STREET, SYDNEY:
THE
REV. W. B. LANDELLS.
f itWisW lii! npist, fur frinati Sistrilratura.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLEANK,
BRID6® STREET.
1854.




SERMON.
t( Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid
them not, for of such is the kingdom of God.”— Mark,
x. 14.
In connexion with the earthly history of the
Redeemer, there cannot be contemplated a
more lovely or interesting scene than the one
now before us. What a splendid picture it
would make in the hands of a great artist.
Just look at it. Mothers, with joyful haste
depicted on their countenances, rushing with
their children in their arms to the Saviour for
his benediction. With what interest and
love does he regard them, whilst the disciples,
on the other hand, endeavour to thrust them
away from his presence. As you gaze in
imagination upon the scene, what a variety
of strong and conflicting emotions seize upon
you. We admire those mothers who so
eagerly panted for their little ones to receive
the Saviour’s benediction, whilst your hearts
are almost excited to indignation against the


disciples, who strangely attempted to drive
them away from his presence, instead of en-
couraging them to draw near. Jbut it is the
Redeemer himself that in the scene chiefly
arrests our attention, and awakens the loftiest
admiration and the intensest love. Contem-
plate him in the manifestations of his conde-
scension, and the exercise of his sympathy
think of the words which he utters, and the
attitude he assumes, how lovely —how inte-
resting —nay, how wonderful. For Jesus to
stoop to the recognition of little children —
to smile upon them with tenderness —to take
them up 'in his loving arms —to place upon
them his hand, and to utter his own divine
benediction, and whilst he utters it to divulge
a truth respecting those little ones which in
every age since has brought the richest con-
solation, the brightest hope, and the sweetest
joy, to the heart of many a mother bereaved.
The subject of consideration which these
words involve is one of great general interest.
What can be more attractive than to investi-
gate the destiny of children in relation to the
eternal world, and to determine the nature of
that relationship which they sustain to the
Saviour of the world, and the solemn obliga-


tions which arise out of it. But if its general
interest and importance be so great, what
shall we say of that which parents must have
in its consideration, and especially if they
have been bereaved of their little ones, and,
like Rachel, have sometimes refused to be
comforted, because they were not. Here
then is a future opened up to their view with
respect to infantile existence, of the most
cheering and animating kind—one fitted to
bring heaven down into their souls, and to
make it of all places in God’s universe, the
most familiar and endeared to their hearts.
We trust that such will be the result of our
present reflections, whilst the teachers of the
young will receive a fresh impetus in their
great work from the Saviour’s smile and the
Saviour’s benediction.
In the language of the text you will per-
ceive there is a most interesting fact stated,
and a most important exhortation uttered.
I. An interesting fact stated.— Of such is
the kingdom of God. Before we proceed to
consider the nature of this interesting fact,
permit me to direct your attention to one or
two preliminary explanations. Ist. As it
regards the phrase, “ the kingdom of God.”


It is true this phrase, the kingdom of God ,
sometimes refers to Jehovah’s universal em-
pire of Nature and Providence. In this sense
it is frequently employed in the sacred volume,
and varied is the phraseology made use of to
express it. Thus does the Psalmist speak of
it, “ The Lord is good to all, and his tender
mercies are over all his works. All thy
works shall praise thee, O Lord, and thy
saints shall bless thee. They shall speak of
the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy
power to make known to the sons of men his
mighty acts and the glorious majesty of his
kingdom ; thy kingdom is an everlasting king-
dom, and thy dominion endureth throughout
all generations.” It is a sublime idea of the
Divine Being which invests him with absolute
sovereignty, and which makes the universe
one vast and glorious empire over which he
reigns.
It is also true that the phrase “ kingdom
of God,” frequently signifies the divine dis-
pensation of mercy to the children of men —
especially does it refer to the present spiritual
position of those who through grace have
believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, and been
renewed in the spirit of their mind —in this


sense the phrase is profusely scattered up and
down the New Testament writings. The
kingdom of God cometh not with observation
—the kingdom of God is within you —the king-
dom of God is not meat nor drink, but right-
eousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
But neither this interpretation of the phrase
nor the previous one embodies the significa-
tion of the text. If you carefully look at the
connection in which these words, the kingdom
of God , stand, you must come to the conclu-
sion that this kingdom is future, heavenly,
eternal. We come to this conclusion, from
the fact that the Saviour wanted to establish
a connection between children in their
earliest years and their future spiritual con-
dition in the world of bliss, and also from
this additional fact, that little children, on
account of the undeveloped state of the mind
and heart in childhood, are not qualified to
become the believing members of Christ’s
kingdom on earth. The next preliminary
remark which we make is:
2ndly, Respecting the term such —of such
is the kingdom of God. The word here used,
refers to the individuals of whom this king-
dom is composed. Who are they? We do


not deny that those of whom Christ’s earthly
kingdom is composed are frequently com-
pared to little children, and sometimes de-
signated as such. But whenever such
phraseology is employed a metaphor inter-
venes —a figure of speech is made use of.
God’s people on earth are to be like little
children—in sincerity, in guileness of spirit,
in the simplicity and fullness of belief, in
kindliness of disposition, in gentleness of
heart, in freedom from pride and worldly
ambition. All this the Saviour on one occa-
sion most beautifully illustrated. At the
same time, writes the Evangelist Matthew,
came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who
is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven ?
And Jesus called a little child unto him, and
set him in the midst of them, and said, verily
1 say unto you, except ye be converted, and
become as little children, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven"; whosoever,
therefore, shall humble himself as this little
child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of
heaven, and whosoever receiveth one such
little child in my name receiveth me. The
resemblance of God’s people, however, to
little children, is not the truth of the text.


The statement here made is not simply the
language of comparison, but something is
directly affirmed of little children relative to
their own future and eternal state. And the
statement may be thus amplified: Little
children who die in childhood , become the
possessors of eternal bliss , and , on account
of their vast numbers , may with propriety be
said to constitute the heavenly kingdom, or
the kingdom of God .
We now proceed to the proof of this.
And, first, we observe that the contrary sup-
position is repugnant to all the feelings of our
nature and the principles of God’s word. To
suppose that a little child, unconscious of actual
transgression, and incapable of discriminating
between good and evil, can become the sub-
ject of eternal misery, is inadmissible upon
every ground which reason or the Scriptures
can supply. What element of an eternal
retribution would be adapted to the condition
of such —remorse ? the gnawings of a guilty
conscience? the exercise of memory relative to
transgression and guilt ? the embodiment of
corrupt and enslaving passions ? unbelief?
these appeared not in their brief course on
earth, how then can they become the elements


of a retributive existence beyond the grave ?
But then, on the other hand, they are
not in their spiritual nature qualified for
the abodes of blessedness and the regions of
glory. We admit the truth. The taint of the
apostacy is upon them; as the Scriptures say,
they are born in sin and conceived in iniquity.
A truth which speedily becomes a fact clear
and convincing if the period of earliest child-
hood be survived. They therefore need as
much as any other the provision of Gospel
mercy —the blood and spirit of Christ to fit
them for the purity and fellowship of heaven.
But on what principle does this provision be-
come available —not hy the exercise of con-
sciousness, or through the medium of faith —
for such exercises of thought and confidence
they have not acquired the mental or spiritual
pre-requisites; in them the mind has, as yet,
not begun to elaborate its processes of thought,
at least upon the great verities of the gospel,
nor the heart to exercise its sympathies with
respect to religious truth. The capacity to
do either has not yet been developed. This,
however, does not shut them out from the
provision of the Gospel. Faith in the Gospel
is never required where there is, as in the


case of children, no capacity for the exercise
of faith; nor do I apprehend there is any
need of the exercise of faith in children;
faith is an element of responsibility, across the
boundaries of which these children are sup-
posed not to have passed. All that in their
case is required, in order to be connected
with the salvation of the Cross, is for the
Father to accept them unconditionally on the
ground of Christ’s great and glorious work;
and for the spirit of Christ, on the same
ground, to prepare them by his renovating
and refining power for the heavenly king-
dom, to produce that spiritual adjustment
between their nature and the regions of purity
and bliss into which they are introduced, and
which they require. Nor does this appear
foreign to the arrangements of the Gospel,
even with respect to man’s responsibility. For
whatever may be said relative to man’s volun-
taryness, if the salvation of the Gospel be of
grace, then the point of contact at which the
spirit of God begins his work in the soul
must be independent of man’s volition; for I
apprehend that the first step in the divine
process is to make him willing in the day of
God’s power, and therefore man is found by


the spirit of God at enmity through wicked
works—in a state of direct and active hostility
to the very salvation of which we are speak-
ing. In the case of children, their spiritual
nature is passive under his operations, so that
in both cases there is a striking identity of
moral position. In both the awakening power
must be from without and from above. In
the one case, to subdue the active hostility of
the human heart; in the other, that is in the
case of childhood existence, to adjust the
spiritual nature in its incipient principles and
powers to that world of purity and love
which constitutes the kingdom of God.
Taking this view of the grounds and mode
of children’s admission into the heavenly
world, it imparts a unity to God’s gracious
design of mercy. And instead of making the
salvation of children a supplementary consi-
deration in the divine scheme of redemp-
tion, it constitutes it an integral part of that
scheme, and thus through this idea of unity
there is thrown over the whole a beauty and
glory, a wisdom and a benevolence peculiarly
divine.
There is a very important question here to
be considered, which, however difficult of ex-


plication, we must not altogether overlook.
When does human responsibility begin ? In
other words, at what period does the responsi-
bility of children come into existence ? To
this question we answer, as soon as they can
understand the Gospel. I know of no better
reply to make to the question than this, and
yet there is this difficulty connected with it —
when do they understand the Gospel ? in
other words, when can they think, reason,
believe, feel, love, practice the Gospel. Now,
I think it will be admitted that there is no
fixed period of mental and emotional develop-
ment —no specified hour, day, week, month,
or even year, at which a child passes from
an irresponsible existence to an accountable
state of being—it will depend partly upon
physical growth —it will depend partly upon
educational training, and it will depend partly
upon mental peculiarity. In some children
the transition from the one state to the other is
accomplished at a much earlier period than in
others. In all much sooner than is commonly
imagined, and it is this thought which suggests
the solemn and important character of parental
responsibility. Here is a child who, though
young, has exhibited much mental growth and


progress —it can think* reason* judge* under-
stand* believe* love —that is* the faculties
upon which all these mental and emotional
processes depend* are so far developed that the
child can do all this —and* as it respects ordi-
nary and every-day matters* does do all this.
The child dies* whither does it go ? Is it re-
sponsible* and if so* what is likely to be its
condition in the future world ? Now* we say
that if such a child could engage in such
mental processes as we have already stated* it
has passed the boundaries of its irresponsible
condition* and become an accountable crea-
ture. And therefore the child stands upon
the same ground of accountability with man
in general. Here then arises* in all its solemn
features* the responsibility of the parents —has
the child been taught the Gospel* the love
and grace of Jesus? —has it been brought to
him for his blessing and his salvation ? —has
the earnest prayer been poured forth* the
holy lessons inculcated ? If not* is there no
peril encountered* no risk undergone* with
respect to that child’s salvation ? A blessed
thing that Sunday Schools have been multi-
plied so numerously throughout various re-
gions of the globe* to bring children in their


earliest years into contact with the blessings
of the Gospel. Let me, however, here ob-
serve, that sometimes Christian parents have
needlessly inflicted upon their spirits great
sorrow with respect to this subject. I fully
believe that when parental duties have been
faithfully and earnestly performed with respect
to the spiritual education of children, or where
in their stead, if not in conjunction with them,
there has been faithful, efficient, prayerful
loving teaching in the Sabbath School, that in
such cases children, even when responsible
and dying, realize in far greater numbers the
salvation of the Gospel then would be gene-
rally supposed. There is the efficacy of be-
lieving prayer telling with power upon their
destiny—there is the spiritual nature as yet
not obdurated by trifling, procrastination, and
evil habits, long indulged—there is the heart
still empty of worldly cares and anxieties—
there is the memory and the sympathies still
fresh like flowers of early spring—and in such
circumstances the hymn about Jesus and
heaven rises up to the recollection of the child,
to cheer it upon the bed of sickness, and the
childish prayer is uttered—and the delightful
question about some Gospel fact springs from


the Ups, startling the attention and drawing
the tears from the gushing fountain of a mo-
ther’s heart. And thus are the last days of
sickness spent, and the child dies. Who
would refuse to admit that there the spirit of
Jesus has been preparing that child for the
kingdom of God —That of such is the kingdom
of heaven.
Little children, then, dying in infancy enter
into the heavenly kingdom in virtue of the
Saviour’s great atoning work, and through the
gracious operations of the Spirit of God ; and
though ignorant on earth —I am now speaking
of irresponsible childhood —of the grounds of
such admission to the glory, immortality, and
blessedness of the skies, they will at once
there become acquainted with all the glorious
mysteries of redeeming love, and learn to sing
the song of the glorified and the blessed.
How delightful is the thought, and in seasons
of bereavement how consoling the reflection.
But, further, not only are children who die
in infancy admitted into heaven, but on ac-
count of their vast numbers they constitute a
large majority of the heavenly kingdom. This
is a most singular and, to my mind, a most
delightful statement. The number of the


redeemed of which the kingdom of heaven is
who have had to struggle with the
difficulties and trials of a protracted pilgri-
mage, are comparatively few. The great
majority are infants. Of this you will be fully
convinced if you consider the following facts :
In England a very large proportion of the
aggregate comprising the bills of mortality;
are children under two years of age ; and this
is especially observable in the large towns,
and throughout the manufacturing districts.
I suppose similar remarks will hold good with
respect to the United States; at least as it
regards the oldest portions of the Union.
Now, if this be the case with these countries
where the medical skill is the greatest; and
where human life is at a greater premium
than in any other parts of the world—how
much greater must be the proportion of
infantile mortality in other countries, where
life is not so appreciated—where the means
for preserving life are not so well adapted,
or where the circumstances of the commu-
nity are opposed to the principles upon
which the continuance of life depends;
for in the colony of Victoria, for example,
the last returns of the Registrar General


present to us the fearful fact of 80 per
cent, of all deaths being those of children,
that is, four-fifths of the population are dying
in infancy. Now, if such be the great per
centage of deaths during infancy in the present
advanced condition of the world, what must
it have been during past ages, when barbarism
was generally the characteristic of the world’s
social condition —when infanticide prevailed
to a fearful extent, as it still continues to do
in some portions of the earth. If in the pre-
sent condition of the world the majority die in
infancy, how much more so must it have been
during former periods of the world’s his-
tory ? From this brief glimpse of the subject
—for we cannot enter into lengthened details
—you will perceive how it is that children
must necessarily constitute a large proportion
of the heavenly kingdom.
In taking this view of heavenly existence,
there is a disposition to become less interested
in it, because it is composed of a large pro-
portion of children, as if they continued to
be children when admitted into the regions of
the blessed. How contrary to the pleasing
reality is the entertainment of such a senti-
ment, as if the imperfections of physical


existence, the immaturity or the decrepitude
of age, or the undeveloped faculties and
sympathies of our spiritual nature had any
thing to do with the kingdom of God in
heaven. Oh, no, everything there is stamped
with a glorious perfection—condition, cha-
racter, the elements of being. In this respect
there are no children in heaven—just as there
are no decrepid old age—no physical in-
firmity—no mental or moral ailment. No.
There are no children in stature —in growth
—in character—in experience—in enjoy-
ment in heaven. There they are raised
at once to the maturity and perfection
of heaven ; and from the incipient child-
hood of earth they pass immediately as they
enter that glorious world to the maturity of
an immortal life. What a wondrous transi-
tion —how wise in its arrangement —how
gracious in its character—how glorious in its
results. By such an arrangement (that is by
determining that the great majority of the
world’s population just pass away from the
stage of their earthly being in infancy)—l
say by such an arrangement we see how im-
mense numbers of human beings are snatched
at once from a hopeless perdition into which


they would have inevitably sunk, had they
not died in infancy. You have only to glance
your eye over the moral condition of the world
to be convinced of this—look at the world’s
idolatries, superstitions, infidelities, mam-
mon worship—and when you think of all
these as dread antagonisms against the attain-
ment of eternal life, we shall be ready to
reiterate the exclamation —how wise the
arrangement, how gracious its character, how
glorious its result. Or, to use the still more
emphatic language of the Apostle, —“ 0 the
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God ; how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out.
To think that notwithstanding the apostacy,
and the malediction, and the bottomless abyss,
and the awful retribution, such an immense
proportion of the earth’s population are raised
to glory, and made the immortal and the
blessed inhabitants of heaven. But, oh!
what a theme is this for a bereaved mother to
meditate upon —for one who has had snatched
from her bosom the child of her love —to
know that after all the tears she has shed, and
the sorrows which have wrung her heart, that
the dear child is safely housed in heaven —a


cherub spirit before the Saviour’s throne;
and like the song of early dawn, chaunting
forth in tender yet deathless strains the Great
Redeemer’s love. Bereaved mothers —weep
no more, nor even sigh; in yonder world
those beloved ones are dwelling, crowned with
the garlands of heaven, and blessed with the
joys of immortality.
But we proceed to notice
11. The important exhortation founded upon
the preceding fact . —Suffer the little children
to come unto me, and forbid them not. From
the remarks which have been made upon the
destiny of children, we discover at once the
reason why the Saviour displayed such a
tender interest, and manifested such a glowing
delight in the welfare of children, and why he
was so solicitous that they should be brought
to him. If we also have appreciated the
force of those remarks, it .is impossible that
we can be indifferent to the spiritual condition
of children. On the contrary, looking at
them in the light of so glorious a destiny,
everything about them becomes interesting,
and the exhortation of the text assumes an
aspect of inexpressible importance.
It may be regarded in a form like this :


Seeing that there is associated with little
children a destiny so glorious , it behoves
every one , and especially parents and Sabbath
School teachers , so to direct their influence
and instructions , that should their children
survive the period of infancy, they may
become the disciples of Christ on earth , and
his servants in heaven .
Now in embodying this statement, we
would briefly observe, Ist. That the state
of mind which should be cherished towards
children is especially to be regarded.
What should it be? Neither insensibility
nor indifference. And yet how common
are these exhibitions of spirit, not only by
persons generally, but even by Sunday School
teachers, and oftentimes to a lamentable extent
by parents themselves. This insensibility to
the spiritual condition of children involves a
species of cruelty of the most lamentable kind.
To think of every thing but the one thing
needful, and compared with which every thing
besides is utterly worthless. To watch over
their health with the tenderest care—to ad-
minister unceasingly to every physical comfort
—to be solicitous about their dress, their
manners, and their social habits—to toil for


their future temporal welfare—to scheme and
plan for their advancement in life, and in
short to attend to every thing upon which
their earthly happiness depends, and in the
midst of it all to cherish an utter insensibility
to display a complete indifference respecting
the destiny of the soul, which is to live for
ever. You must acknowledge at once that
this is not the state of mind which any one
should cherish, much less teachers of children,
and least of all by those who are bound to
children by the parental ties. What must it
be then ? The intensest solicitude that these
children should come to Christ—should know
him—believe upon him—love him—serve
him. Let it not be said that they are far too
young to be the subjects of a process like this.
This is a most mischievous thought; it has
been productive of the most painful circum-
stances. We know from history and observa-
tion, that children cannot be brought too
early to the Divine Redeemer—cannot come
too early to his feet to learn of him. It is
possible that, like Timothy, from a child they
may be made wise unto salvation, through
faith that is in Christ Jesus—that,like Samuel,
they may be early brought to cry. Speak Lord,


for thy servant heareth—that, like King
Josiah, whilst they are yet young, may
seek the Lord God of Israel. For children
then there should be cherished solicitude,
strong and earnest, and abiding. This will
lead to
Importunate Prayer . —We believe that
with regard to the power of prayer, there is
much yet to be learned. It is an instrument
of omnipotent efficiency. It is so as it re-
gards children. Let the prayer of faith only
be employed on their behalf. Let importu-
nate supplication be presented at the throne
of grace, and tell me if there be anything in
the statements of the Bible —in God’s revealed
mode of procedure —to interfere with the
gracious reception of such supplications. I
cannot refrain from giving utterance to one
remark here which I conceive to be of para-
mount importance. You should not only
pray for children, but with them. Take them
into the secresy of the closet —there by your
tears and entreaties at the throne, awaken in
their tender breasts permanent impressions of
good. Oh how many a soul has been saved
through a mother’s prayers.
Let me also speak briefly respecting the


instruction which should be communicated to
children.
It requires great judgment and skill to
select the befitting material for the purpose of
producing spiritual and saving impressions
upon the heart of a child. Some are not
content without teaching them a whole body
of divinity. Others are not satisfied without
converting into irksome task-work, and
through long and wearisome memorial exer-
cises, the precious truths of God’s word.
Nothing should be taught in this manner, at
least not to the production of satiety or hos-
tility in the breast of the child; win by every
possible means upon the affections of the child
—become a child yourself in the mode of ex-
pressing your thoughts and feelings—employ
the imagination—the fancy —picture, and
paint, and draw in your representations of
divine truth. Make your teachings through
every well-adapted medium to tell upon the
child’s intelligence and the child’s heart.
And, in addition to all this, let there be ex-
hibited a consistent example. Teach nothing
which you do not practice. If you speak
about the love of Jesus, let it be seen even
by a child that you are under the constrain-


ing influence of that love. Nothing is so
destructive of all good result as to make a
separation between precept and example.
Dread —oh dread by inconsistencies of any
kind to place obstacles in the way of children
coming to the Divine Redeemer.
Such, then, are some of the means by
which the exhortation of the text may be
followed. An earnest solicitude for the
spiritual welfare of children—lmportunate
prayer for the communication of that influ-
ence without which no spiritual good can be
secured —the truth as it is in Jesus, imparted
in such forms and measures as are best
adapted to the capacity and hearts of chil-
dren—all combined with the exhibition of an
example that shall add weight to every word
and power to every exercise.
And now let me, in conclusion , urge the
subject upon your thoughtful consideration.
The view which we have taken respecting the
spiritual condition and prospects of childhood,
constitute one of the most powerful motives to
exertion in the training of children for God
and heaven —a motive which should influence
alike the parent and the teacher. Parents —
teachers —let me impress this upon your


hearts. Oh ! what can be comparable to the
winning of children’s souls for Christ—to
prepare them for heaven. And this will be
yours, if you are only faithful, given to prayer,
and devoted. The day of doom will alone
unfold the interesting fact, that most of those
who survived the period of infancy and be-
came the followers of the Saviour, received
into their hearts in the days of childhood the
incorruptible seed of the kingdom—then it
was that it was sown, took root, and ultimately
sprung up to the praise and glory of God.
Let, then, your work from henceforth be-
come the work of prayer, deep devotion, holy
zeal, and untiring perseverance ; seek the
wisdom which is associated with the winning
of souls; imbibe the spirit of Jesus towards
those little ones ; and oh, keep incessantly
before you that glorious day when redeemed
parents and children, teachers and scholars,
shall unite together in singing the one glorious
and blessed anthem: “ Unto him who hath
loved us and washed us from our sins in his
own blood, unto him be glory and dominion
for ever. Amen.”


PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK,
BRIDGE STREET.


3 1508 02236871 1


