

THE
YOUNG AUSTRALIA TIMES
PUBLISHED ON BOARD
THE SHIP “YOUNG AUSTRALIA,”
CAPTAIN CHARLES GREY,
DURING THE PASSAGE FROM
LOND ON TO BRISBANE,
1864
EDITED BY GEORGE GRIMLEY, ESO.
Brisbane, Queensland:
WILLIAM FAIRFAX, PRINTER PUBLISHER,
“ JOURNAL OF COMMERCE” OFFICE, EDWARD STREET,
QUEENSLAND
BLANK BALL LINE OF PACKETS
[?]




The Young Australia
TIMES.
No. I.]
This being the weekly return of the day on which the “Young
Australia” sailed from Plymouth for our new country, and of
the day on which the passengers all met together for the first
time, has been chosen for the first appearance of a publication
intended for the amusement and information of all on board.
The voyage, under the most favourable circumstances, will be
tedious to many among us, and anything that will tend to alle-
viate the monotony will be acceptable to all. With the view of
making the voyage as agreeable as possible we have started oui
journal. Whether it shall be successful or not must depend
upon the passengers. We invite contributions from all, and
only stipulate that nothing dropped into the editor’s box shall be
of a nature that can hurt the feelings of the most sensitive on
board. We subjoin a list of the chief officers and saloon pas-
sengers: —
Captain Charles Grey ; Dr. Le Fehure ; Mr. Byrne, Chief Officer. Pas-
sengers ; Mr. and Mrs. Shaw, Mr. and Mrs. Kerr, Mr. Hacking, Mr. Boyd,
—SrTQninley, Mr. Jackson, Mr. and Mrs. Avins, Mr. Ivory, Mr. Dicken, Mr.
Fryer, Mr. Harman, Mr. Taylor, Mr. Wodehouse, Mr. Kennedy, with 36
second cabin and 204 steerage passengers, and 29 single females.
LETTER FROM THE CAPTAIN.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Sm—I cannot refrain from congratulating you upon your undertaking
the editorship of the “Young Australia Times.” A voyage at sea of
three months is generally very monotonous for the passengeis, and it
requires a good deal of exertion to make days and weeks without occupa-
tion pass away pleasantly and agreeably. Since you take so large a shaie
upon your shoulders towards the general amusement, I feel very grateful to
you, and wish your paper every success. I shall be most happy to con-
tribute my small share in the shape of a weekly log, and every information
on nautical matters which may be useful or interesting to your readers.
The Doctor reports most favourably of the passengers and crew, and I am
happy to state that, to my knowledge, nothing has taken place since we
left Plymouth to mar the pleasures of the voyage. The winds are still
light and variable, but I am certain that the N.E. trades must set in to-day
or to-morrow, and, notwithstanding our slow progress until now, I hope to
get across the Line in less than a month. Trusting you will not find your
duties too arduous, and once more wishing you every success,
I am, yours truly,
Commander.
CHAS. GREY,
Thursday, 2nd June, 1864.
VOLUNTEERS.
The “Young Australia Volunteers” were duly organized,
and proceeded to take upon themselves the responsible duties of
their office on Thursday, the 26th inst. It was hoped that a
larger number might have presented themselves, but through
the laziness of some, and the incapacity of others, the corps at
present is rather reduced; but it is hoped that in a few days w e
shall have the pleasure of adding the names of some others, who,
seeing what a useful body it has become, will overcome their
[Gratis.
scruples and be only too happy to place their services at the
disposal of the Captain. On Thursday was the first (lnlll, ’S
of the “Young Australia Volunteers, and we noticed that by
far the greater number had never been to sea before, and natu-
rally knew little about the ship, sails, etc., yet everything went
well and quickly, and all seemed to combine in doing their best.
It is not usual with us to praise or condemn any particular
person, still, on this occasion, we could not help noticing the
gallant manner in which Messrs. Capel and Trollope went aloft
and furled the mizen royal, in spite of all difficulties. Befoie
concluding, we give our hearty thanks to this useful body, and
feel sure that they will do their best for the honor, saiety and
glory of tbe ship.
VORWERTS.
P.S.—Since writing the above, I am happy to say that the
corps has greatly increased, and for the benefit of all we subjoin
a complete list: —
“Young Australia Volunteer Midshipmen.” —Port \\ atch ;—George
Trollope, Ist Lieutenant; William Harman, Boatswain; Mr Hacking,
Mr, Dicken, Mr. Fryer, Mr. Capel, Mr. Grimley, Mr. Harding, fetarboaid
Watch-— Angus McLeod, 2nd Lieutenant; J. Curry, Boatswain s Mate ,
Mr Shaw, Mr. Bunbury, Mr. Kennedy, Mr. Kerr, Mr. Taylor, Mr. Lapson.
Chaplain, Mr. John Ewart Boyd.
QUOIT MATCHES.
On Monday, the 23rd ult., the game of quoits was inaugurated on hoard
the “ Youn o- Australia.” Several interesting matches took place in the
course of the day, hut the chief interest was centred in those between
Messrs Stacy and Brown on the one side, and Messrs. Kennedy and Dicken
on the other, which came off in the evening. When almost all played so
well it may seem invidious to commend the deeds of any particular indi-
vidual. yet, in our opinion, it would he hardly fair to pass unnoticed the
skill evinced by Messrs. Hacking, Jackson, Stacy, and Shaw. Ihe quoits
were made of rope and covered with sailcloth.
A SALE AT SEA.
Yesterday, a grand auction was held at the top of the second cabin
stair and was patronised by a great number of the nobility on board. The
sales consisted chiefly of articles of clothing, jewelleiy (?) such as golc (.)
chains, silver watches, pins, and brooches. There were also a few knives,
an old revolver which went off at a guinea—about 18s. more than it was
worth —besides a washing tub, and some baby linen, which was bought by a
midshipman, who, we should say, was “ done brown. During the sale,
numerous remarks were made by the bystanders, one of whom, an irish-
man as the beforementioned tub was on the tapis , proposed that the tub
should be filled with something to drink—“ A lectle sthronger than the
wather it was used to hold, though that was pretty sthrong, shure, and
then mayhap it might fetch sixpence more.” The auctioneer seemed to be
thoroughly at home, and set to work in a most businesslike style, inviting
everyone to buy this article and the other, at the same time assuring them
that it was one of the best of its kind—which, though the best, was very
bad —and worth £lO more than tire sum it would fetch. The cook bought
a coat, for which he gave 2s. 6d„ and came back shortly after in high
good humour having got rid of it for ss. Altogether, the sale was con-
sidered a grand success, and brought in about £4O, and was, as the
auctioneer informed us, the first of a series of auctions to be held at
intervals during the voyage.
STONEWALL.
ON BOARD THE YOUNG AUSTRALIA, SATURDAY, JUNE 4, 1864.


INCIDENTS REGARDING THE ABORIGINES OF
AUSTRALIA.
The following is to show the difficulty of civilizing the Abori-
gines from their extreme proneness to savage life :
Jemmy Alexander was a very promising native youth, and was
taken home by a squatter who wished to see the effect home life
would have upon him. He dressed him out very smartly, and
took him to theatres, shows, &c., and almost made a companion
of him, with which Mr. Alexander was highly delighted; but,
to the astonishment of all, on his returning to his native land,
he at once found out his native friends, and ran off to them,
doffed his genteel “ toggery,” and in his natural costume lived
again with them, “as happy as a prince,” in his old wild life,
having distributed his garments amongst his kindred, who com-
menced putting on the coat for a pair of trousers, but finding
that a rather awkward and difficult arrangement they turned
the trousers outside in, and having donned them strutted about
quite proud of their becoming appearance, till they were all
so tickled with the look of the first that each must have a trial,
and so the unmentionables soon went through the whole round,
the “-gins” even laughingly taking their turn of wearing the
breeches for a limited time. Another would be seen walking
about with one stocking on, admiring himself, and being ad-
mired by old “ gins,” and young, who had beautified their heads
with rather fantastic ornaments, consisting of broken delf, pipe
stems, a few pieces of native dogskin cut pear-shape, parrot
feathers, with knots of gum dangling about their faces be-
daubed with yellow ochre, white clay, and apple tree black
mixed with grease —dirt with them often taking the place of
water with us. Jemmy, for some time, made himself very useful
as a sailor in yachting, a squatter at Cleveland having taken
him in hand. He, however, got tired of that also, and again
left friends and master and enlisted into the Native Police Force,
which is paid by Government and collected from all quarters,
even from the Murray Fiver, and is for the protection of the far
out settlers when there are sufficient in any locality to make
it advisable to establish a corps there; they are invaluable,
if properly officered by whites, as they can follow up so un-
erringly through bush and scrub the tracks of any delinquents
whom they wish to punish. Jemmy —or Mr. Alexander, rather
—is now I know not where, having again deserted his post, and
instead of hunting others is now being hunted himself, and he is
certainly a most dangerous customer to be at large, as he is so
well initiated into the manners and customs of the white*.
Many others I have known have been brought up from children
by the missionaries in the way they should walk, but when they
return to their tribes they haunt the towns and public-houses
saving, “What you give it, say Lord’s Prayer—glass of rum ?”
And off they go rattling away at it in any but a very revered
manner, and toss off their glass like regular topers. The fact is
that almost invariably those who have had most education are
the greatest rogues, as they unfortunately combine their civilized
and savage knowledge merely for bettering their own most
selfish and treacherous ends.
REMINISCENCES OF THE CAPE.
A short account of a day or two’s “ buck shooting” at
the Cape of Good Hope may he of interest to some of your
ders *
The “Paarl” is a village with avenues of line trees in it the
houses very white from continual whitewashing. It is situated
about 50 miles from Cape Town, in a valley from six to eight
miles broad, with lofty mountains on each side. The railway was
first opened to it in ’62. The “ Taarl ” derives its name from a
peculiar mountain rising high above the village; its summit m
formed of a huge boulder of smooth round rock, and when tne
sun shines on this after rain the rocky part glistens like a poml
whence the name. The lower part of the lock is cut up imo
crevices, the sleeping-place of a troop of baboons. I took up
my quarters at the hotel of Mr. Gird, a thorough sportsman and
a most pleasant man. The engineer connected with the railway
works and myself were the only two strangers staying in the
house, which was conducted more like a private one than an
hotel. The landlord always took his meals with us. On the
first fine day I started with Gird and his son to shoot “bush
buck,” about the size of roe deer. After we had stocked the
warden with lunch, guns, ammunition, and three saddles, we
harnessed four horses, and after a rough drive of an hour “ out-
spanned” in a large plain covered with long course heather.
Three of the horses were saddled, and the fourth we (the
waggoners) left in charge of a boy. “Bush buck” shooting
consists in three or four riding in a line (as partridge shooters
walk up their game in Norfolk). When the buck starts out of
a bush, the horse is stopped by a slight jerk, and aim is taken
at the stomach of the animal as he springs over the heather,
always using buck sliot.
E. B. K.
( To he continued .)
THE FEMALE EMIGRANT.
Daughter of England, o’er the sea
Yon pass to seek a distant clime,
Yon leave a country great and free,
You quit it in your youthful prime.
You go to toil: well, be it so,
It is the lot of all our race,
The happiest smiles our natures knows
Are borne on labors’ honest face.
And you will wed, perchance ; ’tis good
So best your woman’s life shall wear
The crown of perfect womanhood,
As wife and nursing mother there.
Let unsexed women sneer and scold,
The holiest is yours who rear
The little children —angel soul'd,
In reverence and Godly fear.
The mother’s glory with her sons,
By love’s own hand is interweaved;
From mother's lips earth's noblest ones
First learned the greatness they achieve.
Mother of Englishmen to be,
Though born beneath another sky,
To you their birthright render we,
Of English teachings great and high.
Teachings of Liberty —confined
By sacrifice for common good,
Of all the treasures of the mind,
Of Art, and Skill, and Hardihood.
Oh 1 teach them on your mother knees
To know the beauty of the land,
Whose freedom over distant seas
Entrusts her Charters to their hands.
In perfect faith does she that gift
- To sons of yours in trust confide,
Which her far Colonies shall lift
To their true places at her side.
Hereafter shall they understand,
Whose natures sour'd delight to scold,
How English mothers in their hands
The destinies of nations hold.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Sir, —Is it true that the “Young Australia ” was seen minus a pair of
“Braces" a short time alter she had quitted England? I was told so, hut
could not believe that she wore such things. Were they stolen or hidden?
However this may be, it is to be hoped she will never miss her stays , as
practical jokes of this nature show a bad taste, and tend to promote ill
feeling. “ David Young Australia,” who was born of course in one of the
hatchways, is progressing favorably, and will no doubt prove himself like
her he is named after —a Chip of the old block.
BLOCKHEAD.


(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Sir, —I think that before publishing your paper, a little more time should
ha\ r e been hestoAved on the title of it ; I must say that I think the name
“ Young Australia Times ” is not appropriate. Supposing for instance it
had been the “ Man at the Wheel,” the “ Helmsman, ’ or some name in
which the safe Avorking of the A r essel is concerned—not the name of the
vessel itself. I haw no doubt your columns avIII he aa t c11 filled — I hope they
may, hut if you have a spare corner, please insert these feAV lines.
STIBOO.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Enquirer. —His real name is not Biles, he is only so called on occasions
of ceremony. He never was a member of the P. 8., and never did
fight the Elastic Pot Boy. Of course he was not born with an
umberella in his hand.
Anxious Tommy.— His Christian name is not Stonewall, nor is he the cele-
brated American General of that name; but he has called at our
office to assure us that he could have been if he had liked.
THURSDAY, JUNE 23, 1864.
No. 2.
It is with great pleasure that we issue the second number of our
Paper, and regret that we were unable to appear last week,
owing: to the want of material.
This week the contributions have been so numerous, that with-
out the very efficient assistance we have received we should not
have been able to insert what we have. We hope now to appear
regularly every week until the end of the voyage. We regret
our inability to insert an article we have received, entitled
u Crossing the Line,” on account of want of space.
■ (To the Editor of the Young Australia Times,')
Sir, —Notwithstanding very fine weather and light winds, our good ship
has made considerable progress since the last issue of your valuable paper.
The much-dreaded “ doldrum,” or region of “ variables,” which lies be-
tween the N.E. and S.IJ. “ trades," —and not as generally believed on the
Equator—are far behind us. The north star, and other constellations,
familiar to every one, is far below the horizon, and the stars of the south-
ern hemisphere are rising every day. Centaur and the “ Southern Cross ”
are to be seen at 9 pan., on the starboard bow, when the ship is in her
right course. As we approach the limits of the S.E. “ trades ” rapidly, the
beautiful days and delightful evenings will soon change into stormy ones,
and I hope everyone on board will make the best use of the present fine
weather. We are, to-day, 300 miles off the coast of Brazil, and about 3000
miles from the meridian of the Cape; and I hope, that with the kind assist-
ance of a few jolly westerly gales, to be there in a fortnight. Handing you
enclosed my weekly log,
I remain, dear Sir, yours truly,
CHAS. GREY,
Commander.
AN ENGAGEMENT AT SEA.
An engagement took place on Friday, the 3rd of June, not very far from
the Line, in which the enemy Avere regularly “ dished,” in spite of their
slipperier (superior) numbers. Our fleet Avas manned by Volunteers. The
enemy appeared in sight at 7.30 p.m., and the “ port watch ” —so called, it
is supposed, from their habit of keeping the Port all on their oavh side—
began the action by opening fire on the enemy’s flag-ship MulligataAvny,
which AA r ent to the rear after the first “ broadside.” The enemy then came
up in the following orderPikledsammon, Rostefoule, Biledfoule, Duk,
Sosidgerole, Pastree, &c. The attack began at 8, p.m., and continued with
unabated fury until 11, a.m. The enemy Avere A\ r ell defended by a numerous
corps of marines, who were supplied with stimulants. Several toasts AA r ere
drunk, and—we are afraid—some of the Volunteers. Nevertheless, they
stood their ground nobly, and our “ salts ” were proof against the enemy’s
“ castors.” Although so many Avere wounded, there were no amputations,
but se\ r eral imputations Avere made instead. As no “hacking“ or “saAving’
Avas alloAved, stdl some of the wise saws were attempted to be sharpened
by some of the o>d files, At 8.30, p.m., the Grampus and Duk Avere muzzled
to muzzle, but the latter was soon annihilated by the former. At 10.30—the
enemy's fire not slackening—it was thought advisable to attack the marines
Avith sharpshooters from the “ port watch,” when the slaughter was really
terriffic—our noble Captain, in his best uniform, still talking to his officers
and smiling on his crew, and we all felt exceedingly prou I of our Com-
mander. and would willingly have gone through the engagement again,
but at 11, p.m., the Captain gave orders to “ haul off ” to repair damages—
the gallant Volunteers staggering up on deck and insisting to be led into
action once more. Early next morning, the “cockpit of the ••Young
Australia ” presented such a spectacle as we hope never to sie again.
MARS BACCHUS.
REMINISCENCES OF THE CAPE.
[continued.] ./•
We bad proceeded a few hundred yards, when avo noticed some
dark objects running amongst the heather; these turned out to
be partridges —they resemble the English bird. Shooting from
a horse of 15 hands is no easy matter for a new comer, even
though he may be used to a shooting pony, and the consequence
Avas that I missed. Dismounting, however, I did better. A
brace of “bucks” broke aAvay some distance further on, but
Avere not within range. Gird killed one after some more riding.
During the heat of the day, we returned to the waggon, and
partook of luncheon within it. These waggons are covered over
with cotton, and form a cooler retreat than a tent. Our bag, at
the end of the day, consisted of a brace of “ bucks,” five brace
of partridges and a “ coran.” This is a species of bustard of a
black and AA r hite colour; it makes a loud u clattering ” noise
when disturbed. We “inspanned” and returned home in the
cool of the evening. Though the sport Avas not by any means
first-rate, yet we made a pleasant day of it. After this, I always
walked when shooting, and found, and killed, more than I did
when shooting from horseback.
There are a great many vineyards about the “Paarl;” they
are planted around the base of the “Paarl” mountain. * Sweet
chesnuts are also found here. Higher up the mountain are
Protea bushes, heather and large rocks all over it. Whilst
ascending a very steep part of this mountain, one rainy day, I
saw the heather shaking violently above me; it Avas too slippery
and steep to get quickly to the spot, but I aauis in time to see the
yelloAV hind quarters and curled tail of a tiger, as he was dis-
appearing round a rock —too swiftly for me to get a shot at him.
The Cape tiger is smaller than the common one, and is sure to
be found near baboons on which he lives. Some fine specimens
of the black eagle have taken up their quarters in an in-
accessible rock behind this mountain. The blacks are a very
lazy set about here, and the whites are not much better after a
feAV months’ residence here.
E. B. K.
(To he continued.)
PECULIAR EFFECT OF IMAGINATION ON THE EYES OF
SOME OF YE PASSENGERS OF YE YOUNG AUSTRALIA.
We were rather amused the other night by a number of our fellow pas-
sengers who were, in the darkness of night, eagerly straining their eyes to
see a vessel —which they made sure was to be seen somewhere. One, who
wished to have the honor, no doubt, of proclaiming the “ first sight,” happened
to prove that he was only working upon “second sight,” as it was only a
temporary “ flash in his pan,” though so vociferously given forth. Again
the cry, “ I see it—didn’t you ? ” “ No.” “ Well, I’m sure I did.” “ There
it is again.” “Well, I think I saw it,” answers another —and another, “ Oh,
yes! I saw it veri/ plain.” Next comes a report from the “ forecastle,” that
they can see the vessel and light quite distinctly. We then heard, “ Ivorv,
I'll bet you 10 to 1 that wo see the vessel’s light.” The bet was not however
taken, as it would have been difficult to prove either way to the satisfaction
of all parties, as several waul I have that they had seen what they never saw,
and “ bolted ” to their “ bunks ” to sleep over their allucination.
VENTILATOR.
COMMERCIAL.
Coffee : no demand, being so very inferior ; good samples eagerly sought
for. Tea moves slowly. Rum, in demand, but no stock on hand. Beer,
not being up yet is often unsaleable. Hats : holders rather slack, several
lots having been disposed of on easy terms ; neAvlot just to hand, and highly
prized, called the Brigandi-flapperallabout, and really good for sore eyes to
see. Matches, very scarce ; indebted chiefly to Salt Peter, who has a fair
stock on hand.
The Young Australia Times.


notice to emigrants.
A Gentleman on
LAND ORDERS.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Sru, —It may be of service to your numerous readers, 1 J , h i a p v
your valuable journal the following remarks about the lan an q
them. There are two things to be considered—firs , ‘ ’
secondly, how, if possible, to dispose of them. Not having any P I
by me on the subject, I have to trust to my memory, an c nvprnmen t
say what changes may have been made by the Q ll ®® ns an , + : cc
since I left the colony some months since. First, then, ° termed
are the land orders? They are only available for groun wi s |tuated
- country lots ’’-that is, ground suitable for agricultural P^P ose s, f tuated
without the numerous towns with which the colony is o •
land orders are available in six months after arrival and the ± 1- o •,
after two years. There is also a plan to encouiage 16 nP tition with
allowing him to take up the 30 acres at once without competition, mth
power to rent a further quantity from the Govemmen- 1 at a i
rental, into which plan, with the way to dispose of '
1 will take a further opportunity of addressing you After a land orde
due, the owner thereof can go to any land sale an _ J * q or par t
-and buy any country ground he likes, paying m
payment, as the case may be. He then, of course, buys•
ditionally, which he does not under the other and newer sys .
A SEVEN YEARS’ RESIDENT.
MADEIRA.
On passing the Island of Madeira, it was during the early
port of the day enveloped in a thick screen of clouds, but about
two o’clock they settled down along the sides of the mountains,
leaving the rough and jagged tops high above them. _ 1
island, at this time, presented one of the grandest sights _
is possible for the eye of man to rest upon. Along the Wands,
and up part of the mountain sides, was spread before us by the
aid of a 1 powerful telescope the rich soft beauties of a tropical
landscape whilst midway up the mountains hung the screen
of clouds’as if nature had hung a mantle around them ; whilst
bioh over ah towers the rugged peaks, which, as they stood out
1-iinst the azure vault of heaven, like so many obelisks, bore
i mmistakeable testimony to the dreadful convulsions of natme
that must have placed them there. The whole presented a
(Tail which, for beauty of arrangement, and sublimity of effect,
vas scarcely to be equalled* certainly seldom surpassed. «
B.
THE SHIP “YOUNG AUSTRALIA.”
~ . u u Vrvnr»o- Aimtralia ” amidst the vast Atlantic, yet
A small world is the \o * withill her. she contains a valuable
dear and important it s < worth of honesty, energy and
freight which must be estima e . f t prospects are as variable
virtue separately possessed by each a -^ r hue the
hs their minds; their objects in e % {t} g { birth to see k one in a distant
number are having thei hom To s nch I would
hemisphere, and to that also aaa d f and destined to, a high
say, take earnestly kol logely th e minds bent for labour or profession,
and noble purpose, St y looking back to the turning furrow,
Accept it, pursue it steac „, remains to he broken, and more
but forward to the new ground tha abundant to every
so iu the place you are adopting to them . Our rich
man’s success, if will and action £ paths to fortune, and by then-
men and our great men have ownerß> if it he resolutely
internal principle that cannot a re inheritance is unmanly,
pursued. To sigh or repine over the J* K inheritor, of a large
Every man bequeath, instead of borrow The human
fortune; he should be piouu w i f to wield the sword of
race wants dignity and courage tt y I This is a mean and
valourous
forefathers to forging their j n him, and the
ignoble spirit. Let every ni an principles so greatly requisite in this
Providence over him by self-reliant p U » b t y es wit h his own
age, and much so whither acrust than inherit coffers of
..ood lance. Let him.feel it better to earn eyery man will
gold. This spirit ol elements and capacity of wealth—
self-resources, and can lift hi* face
proudly to meet the noblest among men.
JOHN RUSSEL.
“ VOLUNTEER MIDSHIPMEN.”
{To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
a TR permit me through the medium of your valuable journal, to address
a few observations to the “ Volunteer Midshipmen on board
T , , , -i , _ rMir readers two or three reasons why the corps is
I wish tolybft y it mi ht be and I sincerely trust, that the few
not in so efficient a sta > & effect of stirring the members up to
observations I may make, the e « ect their duty .
fresh exertions, renewed agility, and an eager uesne u /
, nnv individual does not try his best,
Far he it from me to P rcsu , ia t they might do much better,
hut the inference I wish you rg do i ng duty merely to while away the
ESSSESS"" 1 -"
1 v 1 n reasons may be good ones, there san mdivi-
Now although each of t . v( q u uteer movement for a far better
dual on board who has .) d . g the uge seamans hip may be to him—l
reason than any of the ot » turn up the whites of their eyes, and
fancy I see some of yo with seamanship? I don’t intend to make
ZVleTo on b e le I*S
“- te ' which wm have
this to iccon . , oh o ut £6OO per annum, at his own abso-
A young gentleman, elli and too k a berth on board one of
lute disposal, had a mania ’ Q n the passage out, a Volunteer
Messrs. Green’s ships, hound t o our own-which this young
Corps was formed—some £ officers were appointed—watches
gentleman was the ti - 31 . . uniform got up, and strict dis-
chosen —men all statione k P delight in doing their duty, and the
cipline rigidly exacted on ’ h(j c a in of the ship, seeing how zealous
officers were proud of then i • 1 duty, formed a navigation
they were to give the b chi ef
class, and kindly tutored each other f n teaching them “knots,”
officer and boatswain vie seamanship. Under such able discipline
“ splices,” and the practica P imnossihle not to have picked up a vast
as this, it would have been piact ical, and the conse-
stock of nautical kn £ voyage, the Volunteers were able to do
quence was, that at the eI V suprising and I have no hesitation in
their duty in a manner perfectly not so well up in
saying, that I have seen P ’ Well sir the voyage, like everything
their duty as were these Volmrtee themselve g ver difte.rentimrts
else, came to an end the passenges aga in—and doubtless cvBiy-
of India—never perhaps to m this b been entirely forgotten,
thing connected with the ™untcer mo &th o{ the pagt- o ur young
or was only remembered y > returned to his native land, where
friend—tired of ho was go ing to visit Shanghae, and eagerly
he fell m with a gentlemaa who was go many pros and cons they
pressed him to join in t I Volunteer was again afloat,
agreed to sail together, and ina abort channel % hen t u e
All went on smoothly till g Qut of the seven in a beastly
Captain took to drinking, ar . I « bunk ” The ship seemed
state of intoxication, nnab e Swished oveUoardTn a heavy squall, which
doomed, for the chief otocm titfspanker boom, with all the
carried away the foie ai hearted and superstitious, and went aft
gear. The crew became cl icken-heaitea ana who , e time>
in a body to seize the Captain ( and throw him overboard—
using vile the s hip was doomed,
imagining that whilst he (the Captain) vi as the second officer
At this critical junction our Wuntetr ° a responsibmty) , ini-
was a very young man, a ustice of the crime they meditated, and
pressed upon the “ hand? “justice ot h l mself the whole
got them once more to Mb about, and our gallant Volunteer
command of the ship , Her nea t mention that there was
our Volunteer, who could take the sun, or do a day s wor .
For this noble act, the board of Board of ,
and a vote of thanks tire’and I leave them to draw their own
readers the accuracy of this narratue, auu
infer 1 ’ , + Q vino i nn so much of your valuable space, and the
I must apologise for taking P* tbe Volunteers that they may
with
every good wish lor the welfare of the
Yours very faithfully,
DISCIPLINARIAN.
On hoard the “Young Australia,”
28rd July, 1864.


LAND OKDEKS.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia.)
Sir, — Continuing my remarks in your last edition, I have to inform your
readers that, if they think proper, it is allowable for them to take up the
30 acres at once—as I stated in my last —hut, if they do, it is compulsory
that they settle on the ground, as the arrangement is made to meet the
desires of agriculturists only. It is, therefore, quite advisable for those who
do not wish to settle on their ground to wait until their land orders are
actually due—viz., in six months, and two years, respectively. Those who
wish to commence agricultural farming can, in addition to the ground they
receive for their land order, take up and rent from the Government any
number of acres they like, hut in proportion to the value of their land
orders, at a yearly rental of (I believe) sixpence per acre, for the period of
five years, which they are hound to settle on and improve to the best of
their ability—which would, of course, be to their own advantage—and if
they are able at the end of their lease, the Government agree to sell, and
the leaseholders have the power to buy the said land from the Government,
without competition, at the price of £1 per acre; but, if they are unable to
do so, it reverts to the Government, with all improvements which may
have been made thereon. It, therefore, behoves all who contemplate
taking up ground in that way to bear in mind these conditions. It is quite
possible, with even moderate energy and economy, to save sufficient in five
years to pay for the ground, besides improving it. Of course, a great deal
depends upon the season, the description of the soil, and whether it is
situated in a swamp—that is, a bog, of which there are many—or on rising
ground.
With regard to the disposal of the land orders: it is distinctly under-
stood that they are not transferable ; but the difficulty is overcome by the
seller giving to the buyer a power of attorney to act for him, which is, of
course, drawn out by a lawyer, and costs, I believe, about 15s. They are to
be disposed of in that way, and that only—the purport of the Act being to
encourage small farmers, who will settle down on their ground, and not to
give pecuniary help to those who intend to hire themselves out, which can
always be done immediately on arrival, as all kinds of labour are in great
requisition.
To sum up the whole question, in a few words: each individual now has
a land warrant —value £80 —which, immediately on arrival, will have to be
shown to the officials, either on board or at the Colonial Treasurer’s office,
as will be found out directly anyone comes on board, when land orders will
be given in exchange for them, available for taking up 18 acres of land in
six months, and 12 acres in two years; or, all at once, immediately on
arrival—in which case, they must settle on it, and can then rent from
Government any further number of acres, but in proportion to the value of
their land orders, at the yearly rental of sixpence per acre, with power to
buy the same in five years, at the rate of £1 per acre, which they must
improve upon; but, in either case, it is only on the agricultural reserves that
they are available. The land orders are only transferable by giving a
power of attorney to any who will take the orders off his hands at the
market value, which ranges from £lO to £l3 for the £lB order.
The land order system is always being altered, so that many changes
may have taken place in it since I left the colony. I must, therefore, beg
your readers to take my remarks with that reservation—everything I have
written, being, to the best of my belief, correct.
I hope, in a future edition, to give a few words of advice, which may be
of service to some on board; and, if there is anything relative to this
communication which is not exactly understood, I hope they will commu-
nicate with me through your journal on the subject.
A SEVEN YEARS’ RESIDENT.
[We are informed that the system of transferring land orders has been
entirely done away with. —Ed.]
LIVE IT DOWN.
To those few who have never looked grief in the face, and
been taught their weakness by affliction (for a few such the
world contains), it says “Be gentle to all men.” Think of the
hidden sorrows of the earth—sorrows that fall alike to gentle
and simple, to rich men and servants. If you have a temper
proud, or harsh, or inconsiderate, “Live it down,” and add not
pain to those who are heavily burdoned with sadness. To men
penitent for evil wrought long since—-men who have erred through
rashness and inexperience, and are paying the penalty of blunders
which the world sometime punishes too severely ; to men at the
same time brave and weak, who are fighting against temptations
that ever and again get the mastery over them, and have to be
wrestled with anew; to despondent men, whose spirits are
weighed down by thick clouds of gloom ; to men smarting under
wounds inflicted upon them by those whom they have loved and
trusted, it says “ Live it down,” “ Live them down.” Pangs of
wronged affection, temptations from within and without, gloom
and remorse, blunders and sin, evils present, ay, and even many
of the worst consequences of evil committed, are all to be
“lived
To those whose moments are embittered by the shame of an
ugly family story fc or personal disgrace, it says “live it down,”
but not in secret! Don’t world’s eye, throw aside mor-
bid care for the scorn of the m in and heartless; begin life
again frankly, and going forth to the generous and good, win
their sympathy and love.
And to the very wretched of this strange world in which
people trouble themselves so, to the very wretched who can
never receive complete consolation on this side of the grave, it
says “live it down,” patiently, meekly, devoutly, until the life
which is [evermore.
ESSAY ON NOTHING:
Or, Fac . simile of a lively conversation with ye Hediter of the
Young Australia Times.
My brother, no, ’twas my mother, at least I think it was, but that
is of very little consequence; well, it was one of them. Oh, yes,
’twas my brother told me one day when he was out fishing, that he
fell into the river ; no, I think it was a duck pond ; however, that
is of little consequence, and that he caught an awful cold which
nearly killed him ; at least nearly laid him up for a day. However,
he soon got all right again, when he went to take a walk, and oddly
enough he saw a pig ; no, Fm wrong, I mean a dog—-at least I
think so—running away yelping, from another dog which was
chasing him. The poor little thing was so freightened that he
actually put his head between his tail ; no, I’m wrong, ’twas his tail
between his legs—at least so my brother said. It seemed in an
awful fright, and was scampering along at a great rate when mv
brother saw it turn a corner and upset a poor little baby : no, it was
a poor dairymaid’s pail—at least my brother told me so. The poor
dog smelling the milk stopped, and licked it all up —at least a good
deal of it, being, I suppose, awfully thirsty, when the dairymaid
hieing in sight and seeing what was the matter, ran after the dog,
to give it an awful thrashing, when down she suddenly came on her
nose : no, I’m wrong, ’twas somewhere else—at least so my brother
told me, her feet having gone clean from under her,—-however,
that’s of very little consequence.
Well, he went up to her, and held out his foot: no, by the bye,
it was his hand, and kindly lifted her up and put her on her legs
again. Wasn’t that very good of my brother? don’t you think so ?
At least my mother thought so—no, by the bye, I’m wrong, ’twas
my brother ! ! !
GOOD NIGHT OLD CHAP.
(The Hediter vanishes in convulsions.)
HOME!
I have been led, these last few days, through slight indisposition,
truly to feel there is no other word in the vocabulary of nations, that
is so expressive—so suggestive and so important in its wide signifi-
cation, as that which heads this article. Home ! what a talisman it
is—what a spell ? what an invocation ?Is there any heart, old or
young, on board this vessel, that does not beat responsive to the
sound of that one word ? Is there any brain so dull that it does
not fash with a gush of suggestive fascinations !* We have all had
a home, and with few exceptions, are all seeking a home ; yet we
have all had a home. Change of circumstances and time may have
buffeted us about the great world, that we feel an easy adaptation to
all places, and to all sorts of men. We may love that home feeling
which makes some spot an individuality as it were, which nothing
else shall be like—yet the mind will carry us .back to a time, and to
a place, which will, when thought of, be a bright and beautiful spot
in this almost desolate life—resembling the lonely oasis of the desert
which so enchantingly delights the weary traveller as he crosses the
hot and seried plains. Everybody then here has lost a home, is
trying to make a home, or striving to keep the or e he has. Every-
body has his or her idea of somewhere, of some place of rest, of
some complete satisfaction, where the war and the din of the great


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Winchelsea. —We shall be glad to hear from you on any other subject, but
we would rather decline religious controversy.
A. B.—We cannot answer your question, and decline to insert it.
Verses. —A copy of verses written in pencil, not legible.
Annoyances of a Squatter.— Will appear next week. # #
[We cannot insert contributions in futurejdiat are not original. Answers
to connundrums. etc., in our last publication, have not been forwarded us
for insertion.]
world may not be heard ; or if heard at all, would be esteemed for
its serenity within. A home, in fact, without serenity there is no
home. Cold and callous indeed must that heart be, sincerely do I
hope such an one is not in our midst, but who at times has his
moments, when with moistered eyes, and faint sighs, he thinks of
his childhood’s home and his father’s fireside ; and when there will
rise up before him the dim spectral band of past companions, of
past affections, his mother’s tender glance, his father’s counsel, the
playful tenderness of a sister’s love, and in comparison with that
lost home, not lost through fault or folly of his, but swallowed up in
the vortex of time, he will, regardless of all his present trials, and
passing difficulties, dream yet to make a home, where there shall
yet be smiles and peace. Home is dear to all: the busy merchant
strives for it, the pale student labors for it, the mariner feels the
spirit of the holy word, the soldier, as the watch-fire pales at his
feet, dreams of home, and smiles as the vision of his native village
rises before his mind’s eye ; and which of us, when rocked to sleep
in this our temporary-ocean home, has not had sweet visions of
bygone-happy days, and hopeful renewals of the future—the home
spell is around and about us all—the veriest vagrant who begs from
door to door has his home, and how often have we advised a rude
vulgar blusterer to be quiet and “go home.” A happy home ! !
Oh, what a spell is there in the words ! Can human ambition point
to a higher hope than that, unless it abondons its great sphere, and
points to immortality—a happy home for ever ? Is there anything
so gracious to the heart as the home fireside, home voices, their
sights and sounds ? Home tears ever have in them a redeeming
; oy that makes them all but heavenly.
JOHN RUSSEL
* We should be glad if we could understand this sentence—how a brain
can flash with a gush, is entirely beyond our comprehension. —Ed.
PADDLE YOUR OWN CANOE.
Voyagers upon life’s sea,
To yourselves be true ;
And where’er your lot may be,
Paddle your own canoe.
Never, though the winds may rave,
Falter or look back ;
But upon the darkest wave,
Leave a shining track.
Nobly dare the wildest storm,
Stem the hardest gale :
Brave of heart and strong of arm,
You will never fail.
When the world is cold and dark,
Keep an aim in view ;
And towards the beacon mark,
Paddle your own canoe.
Every wave that bears you on
To the silent shore,
From its sunny source is gone
To return no more.
Then let not an hour’s delay
Cheat you of your due :
But, while it is called to-day,
Paddle your own canoe.
If your birth denied you wealth,
Lofty state and power;
Honest fame and hardy wealth,
Are a better dower.
But if these will not suffice,
Golden gain pursue:
To gain the glittering prize,
Paddle your own canoe.
Would you wrest the wreath of fame
From the hands of fate ?
Would you write a deathless name
With the good and great ?
Would you bless your fellow men?
Heart and soul imbue
With the holy task ? then,
Paddle your own canoe,
Would you crush the tyrant wrong
In the world’s free fight ?
With a spirit brave and strong,
Battle for the right.
And to break the chains that bind
The many to the few—
To enfranchise slavish minds,
Paddle your own canoe,
Nothing great is lightly won,
Nothing won is lost:
Every good deed, nobly done,
Will repay the cost.
Leave to Heaven in humble trust,
All you wish to do:
But if you would succeed, you must
Paddle your own canoe.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Sir, — I was much surprised at reading, in your last publication, a letter
from a person who signed himself “ Stiboo,” objecting to the title of our
newspaper, as not appropriate. Your correspondent wishes to suppose that
its name had been “ The Helmsman,” or “ Man at the Wheel,” but fails to
show us in what respect either of those titles would have been better adapted
to the paper. “ Stiboo ” then says, that although it is not appropriately
named, he thinks it will be well filled, and hopes it may, but trusts you will
find room to insert his letter.
Now, Sir, I do not want to enter into a long correspondence with Mr.
“ Stiboo,” but I wish he would be good enough to show the reasons why he
considers the name your have designated our paper by, as inapplicable, and
in what respect its readers would have been bettered by its being called
either of the names he wished it.
A READER.
SATURDAY, JULY 2, 1864,
No. 3.
We, this day, publish, in another part of this paper a letter from
an individual signing himself “ Hooker,” asking the question,
whether the Young Australia Times is to be printed in Queens-
land. We were not aware till the receipt of his letter but that
it was distinctly understood by all on board the ship it would be
printed; and we now state, for the information of all, that suffix
cient copies will be issued to allow each person on board to purs
chase one, if they think proper, With regard to ther other
portion of his letter, proposing that prizes should be given for
the best original essays, or verses, on any given subject, we
heartily concur with him; but, instead of the editor being the
sole judge as to the best composition, he will appoint a com-
mittee of three to fulfil those duties, and, in furtherance of the
same, we publish, as an advertisement, his offer of a prize for
the best set of verses on “ Popping the Question,” and in our
next will offer another on a different subject.
We are sorry to notice the great paucity of contributions, con-
sidering the number of persons on board; but trust, as it is
distinctly stated that the paper is to be printed, sufficient matter
will be sent to make it really worth the same. Anything that
we can do to make it so, we promise shall be done to the best of
our ability, but it is quite impossible for us to fill it ourselves.
The paper is not for any one class on board, but intended for the
information and pleasure of all, and we, therefore, again solicit
contributions. A letter, including the log and other particulars
from the Captain, will appear in each number, which we hope
will be every Saturday to the end of the voyage.
[Ed.]
POSITION OF THE “YOUNG AUSTRALIA.”
Dear Mr. Editor, — I have been frequently asked by some of your readers
what distance we are from the Cape and Moreton Bay, and, thinking it
may be interesting to a great number of your readers, I insert, with my
weekly log, the following distance :
From to-day’s position to 40° S., and meridian of Cape 2080 miles.
From meridian of Cape to Van Diemen’s Land ... 6200 „
From thence to Cape Moreton ... ... ~. ... ... 800 „
Total distance 9080 „
The weather has set in boisterous—and with the exception of a few fine
days occasionally—we must look forward for storms and heavy seas, until
we have run under Van Diemen’s Land, and stand again to the northwards.
Until my next log, I remain, dear Sir, yours truly,
CHARLES GREY, Commander,
On board the “ Young Australia,”
July Ist, 1864,
FROM THE VOLUNTEER GAZETTE.
To date from June 27th, 1864; J. F, Rabson, Esq., to be Second Lieutenant,
vice Angus McLeod, Esq., resigned; Claude Le Febure, Esq., to be Surgeon
of the corps.
The Young Australia Times.


REMINISCENCES OF A SQUATTER.
AND OE A JOURNEY UP THE COUNTRY, AND SOME OF THE LITTLE
ANNOYANCES I MET WITH, OWING TO COMMENCING SQUATTING
WITHOUT PREVIOUS COLONIAL EXPERIENCE.
When in Sydney, a person, who had stipulated to take a
fatherly charge of me, after trying to get me to invest money in
the purchase of some of his catarrhed sheep, finding that the
bait would not take, told me that he had bought sheep for me
from the Australian Agricultural Company, and that I had
better set off to get them from the place they were then running
—as he called it —“ the Basalitic Eock.” I accordingly got ready,
and at once shipped myself to Maitland, on the Hunter’s Eiver,
where I found my dray, team, men, and bullock driver awaiting
me. I got the dray loaded, and, after considerable delay, Jack
took the whip in his hand, and attempted to start the team, but
instead of progressing, they whirled into a regular knot, out of
which it took Jack, who seemed “ no great shakes ” at his trade,
to unravel. He, at last, with any amount of oaths and whip
cracking, succeeded in getting them advanced half-a-mile, when
we came to a publichouse, which, of course, the men all entered
to have a ball, after their severe shouting and labours with the
bullocks. I thought that this work would not at all advance my
interest, so I went in and ordered them all out. The team was
started again, and we came to a boggy, wet part of the road,
two miles further; in this the dray stuck, and J ack wishing to
serve me out, contrived to upset the dray, after first twisting the
axle-tree. I now had to make them unload and reload, which
took so much time that we had to make the best of a bad job,
and sleep there that night —the “ old hands” trying to frighten
me about bushrangers, and people “planting” the bullocks—in
other words, hiding them. Still, I contrived to have a good
sowd sleep, after my first fare of mutton, tea and damper. Next
morning, we set off without breakfast to get the axle-tree re-
paired at a blacksmith’s, about two miles off—the wheels
screeching almost all the way. The blacksmith invited me to
take a salt herring with him, which I gladly accepted, and paid
well for, as he charged me £1 for doing almost nothing. It was
now pretty late, so we only made about two more miles, when
we stuck in the bed of a creek. I began to be slightly disgusted,
and determined to get rid of Mr. Jack at the first opportunity.
We left the dray in the creek, and camped on the top of the
bank for the night. Next morning, the bullocks were not to be
found, so I mounted my horse and rode in every direction, with a
fair chance of being lost in the bush, but I luckily found them
not far off, and wo made a few miles further, after passing one
or two gangs of convicts, who were working with their clanking
chains on the roads—two almost invariably being chained to-
gether—and certainly they were a most villainous-looking set.
Even my horse seemed to have a repugnance towards them, as he
kicked, danced and capered, and would hardly pass. These
gangs constitute the main source of bushranging, as they escape
pretty frequently, and knowing that they will be punished most
severely—if not hanged at once-—they rob all they meet, and
shoot every one who opposes them.
KANGAROO.
(To he continued,')
REMINISCENCES OF THE CAPE.
[continued.]
I engaged two blacks to act as guides, at four skillings per
day each. One named Moovie was a long spare man, intelligent,
but too much addicted to drinking “Cape Smoke,” a vile
beverage, exceedingly fiery, and which can be procured for a
very small sum; the other, Marcirede, was a smaller man:
they were both good hands at spooring, i,e ., following up game
by its tracks, and could both walk well. I started in company
with these two at six o’clock one fine morning, for the mountains
on the opposite side of the valley. We had three pointers with
us, and the two blacks carried food, extra ammunition, and a
large “Kaross.” The “ Kaross ”is a rug composed of six or
more skins—ours was made with sheepskins. Our route, across
the valley of six miles, lay through several farms, the houses of
which were clean and white, and surrounded with high trees.
Vines are the chief crops grown: there are, besides, pompkins,
and Indian corn, better known as “Mealies,” these are boiled
and eaten with butter, pepper, and salt; and are justly considered
the best vegetable at the Cape. The pompkins grow in such
profusion that the pigs are fattened on them. e made for the
“cloof,” or gully, about Torft’s farm. This “cloof” is one of
the easiest to ascent this range of mountains by; a stream runs
through the middle, it is very steep, and thickly covered with
scrub and rocks. We had been ascending a quarter of an hour,
when the dogs rushed into a cave, and after some scuffling, came
out covered with blood; on pulling the bushes aside at the
mouth, we found a hole about a yard deep, and two large porcu-
pines crouched in the corner. These were soon dispatched by a
charge of shot; for as we were obliged to hold the dogs back,
the showed no sport; as, unless baited by dogs, they will often
sit quietly, and are then easily killed; in this case the porcupines
had the great advantage of being in a corner, and we could not
allow the dogs to go in. Whilst on the subject, I may mention
that porcupine hunting is a most exciting sport at the Cape.
Three or four men, around each with a stout stick, and carrying
a torch each, and accompanied by all the dogs of any breed they
can collect, sally out on a moonlight night; the porcupines are
now out feeding on roots amongst the bushes, and in rocky
cloofs; as soon as one is discovered by the dogs, there is a rush
to the spot, and he is attacked by every one ; but it is sometimes
no easy matter to kill him, for the dogs can only hully him, and
he runs backwards with the speed of lightning, so that a new
hand will often have three or four quills in his legs, before he
has aimed one blow at the animal. The quills inflict a very
painful and a poisonous wound, and men and dogs are often
E. B. K.
badly wounded, the latter sometimes killed.
(To he continued .)
THE BOEDER LAND.
There is a land where the heather hell
Hath a stain of the deepest dye ;
Where the gawden whin on the muirland fell,
And the tasselled broom in the shadowy dell,
In their emerald beauties lie.
A land where the blush of the wild rose seems
Eclipsed by a virgin band;
Fresh as the spray o’ their native streams,
A land of love and a land of dreams,
It is our border land,
A land where the ivy-green doth creep
With age o’er the gnarled oak ;
Where the ruins grey o’er the castled keep,
Furrows the brow o’ the grassy steep,
And the breast o’ the iron rock.
A land where the moss-grown cairn alone,
In its lonely pride doth stand,
With a prouder grace than sculptured stone,
Proclaiming the deeds by our fathers done,
Of old in the border land.
A land where the spirit of freedom dwells,
And reigns o’er the mist-capped hills;
Where creddled and nursed mid’ stormy swell,
Its praise is sung by the sweet blue bell,
And the gush o’er the mountain rills.
Tread where you may ’tis hallow’d ground,
And its love, like a mystic hand,
Casts a nameless spell on the cairn and mound,
a priceless worth to each relic found,
Within that border land.
B.
EXTRACTS FROM THE MEDICAL REPORT:—
July Ist; First Lieutenant Shaw, contusio; C. Le Febure, Surgeon; Mr.
W. J. Harman to act pro tern. First Lieutenant, during the illness of First
Lieutenant Shaw


OUR VOLUNTEERS.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Sir, —I am happy to state that the Volunteer Corps are progressing very
rapidly, both in efficiency and discipline, but regret that some of the
gentlemen have resigned, which has caused an alteration in the corps ; so
that for the information of all interested, I subjoin a corrected list, with a
notice of the new appointments : —on Monday, the 27th, at eight p.m., on
the appointment of Mr. J. Robson to the 2nd lieutenancy, the volunteers
spliced the main brace in the saloon, which the captain very kindly gave
up for that purpose. The health of the Queen, the officers, the a. b.’s, the
captain, the chief officer, and “ the ladies,” was drank, Mr. Capel, as the
youngest bachelor, responded for the ladies in a very neat and appropriate
speech, and after “ God save the Queen ” had been sung, the gentlemen
went on deck to join the ladies who were dancing.
Now sir, I am no advocate for dissipation, but must say, I think a little
stir of this kind helps materially to keep up the spirit of the corps, as it
brings them all together, and promotes a social and brotherly feeling
among them.
On Thursday, June 23rd, the first navigation school was commenced for
the Volunteers, under the able tuition of Captain Grey, who took the greatest
pains in explaining the compass, and mode of reckoning the latitude and
longitude, with illustrations on a slate, which were very interesting indeed.
They were eventually dismissed, with three problems each to solve by the
next time they met.
We have had some strong winds, accompanied with a great deal of rain,
which has tested the stuff the Volunteers are made of pretty well; and they
have each tried to outvie the other in assisting the working of the ship, and
however dark or stormy the night, have always been ready to go aloft,
either to “ reef a topsail ”orto “ furl a royal.” As an instance of the
efficiency of the corps, I may mention, that on the night of the 29th the
“ mizen topsail ” was “reefed,” and the Volunteers down again in eleven
minutes from the time they left the deck. Now, considering the short time
the corps has been organised, and the few opportunities they have had of
practising on the sails, I think all comment is needless, as their actions
speak for themselves. The attendance at the muster roll has also been
much better lately, but the latter is a duty which all can perform, and
which occupies so little time that it cannot possibly inconvenience a single
individual, while it tends materially to keep up that proper discipline, with-
out which, any body of men would only become a useless mob; and history
will tell how puny and ineffectual are the efforts of such a mob before a few
r jally disciplined men. Come then, Volunteers! don’t let people think you
are only an ornament, but are really useful members of a useful corps, ready
for any emergency. I am sure the work is not hard, and it keeps you in
health, developes you muscles, and keeps up your spirits ; and we have now
a fund for “ splicing the main brace ” in bad weather, another source of
comfort; and lam sure you ought not to growl about your supper, if report
goes true, for I don't know any thing capable of passing the lonely hours of
the “ middle watch ” better than —
“A nice boiled fowl
With a slice of ham,
Or a shoulder of mutton
With black currant jam.”
PUN.
CROSSING THE LINE.
Our voyage, hitherto, has not been marked by many stirring
incidents, hut there has been one day, at least, -which should not
pass unrecorded in your paper. A day of more jovial fun and
good humour, could not have been, and as it marked a great
event in the lives of many of us, I trust you will not consider a
slight notice of it unworthy of your attention.
Before attempting any description of the great day, however,
I must notice a curious observance on the part of the crew, which
proceeded it. On the 6th ultimo —the month for which they had.,
been paid wages in advance, terminated, and they became
entitled to draw fresh pay, and this joyful occasion they celebrated
by “ drowning the dead horse.”
The steed was a rampant tar barrel, with head and tail com-
plete, which, having been ridden round the “ main deck, was
ultimately hoisted up to the “ main yard arm, and a light having
been applied, the fiery animal was cut adrift, and soon reduced
to ashes. On Tuesday, the 14th, father Neptune came on board,
to announce that on the following day he should hold a “ court,”
at which, he expected the presence of all who had not been
previously presented. At 3 p.m., on the loth the presence
chamber” having been duly prepared, in the shape ofa large
sail, with some three feet of water in it “His Majesty
and suite made their appearance, and the ceremony of presentation
began. Before anybody was fit to appear before “ His Majesty,”
it was necessary that his toilet should be carefully attended to,
and above all things, that he should have a clean face, and this
was most scrupulously looked to by the suite, as became the
attendants on the “ King of Waters.” Not one was found in a
condition to be presented, and all had to undergo the operation
of “shaving,” after which, they were presented with a glass of
the nastiest mixture I ever tasted. One of the first to submit
to the operation was our worthy temporary chaplain, and his
behaviour was such as might be expected from him.
It was clear that he was about to deliver some choice moral
sentiment, and had got as far as “ I say, by Jove I but its of no
consequence ” —when the “ shaving ” brush in his mouth stopped
further eloquence, and with a look of mild disgust on his expres-
sive features, he went over the poop rail,into the water below,
where he was throughly washed by the two gentle “bears” in
attendance for that purpose. Our “ Febs ” having already
crossed the Line some seven times, naturally considered himself
free of the “ court,” but still made his appearance in proper
“court” costume, not knowing whether “His Majesty” might
call on him or not. Having been assured that his presence would
not be required, he retired to pufon ordinary dress, and returned—
looking very nice—to enjoy the sport, when he was suddenly
seized by four pairs of arms, and with a “heave ho! all
together! ” the ponderous mass rose slowly and grandly in the
air, and descended with a swash, which nearly washed the “bears’*
out of the bath.
It was pleasant to see him wallowing about like a tame
hippopotamus ; it was pleasant also to witness his vain struggles
to climb up the side of the bath; and it was equally pleasant to see
those who had thrown him in sent in themselves, head firist, one
after the other.
All who wished it having been presented, and none who did
not wish it took any part in the ceremony, “ His Majesty” and
suite unbent, and cast aside the calm dignity which had hitherto
marked their behaviour, and Neptune’s calling for his wife
seemed to be the signal for some “ court” customs, which lam
unable to describe ; I only know that she went at him feet first,
and immediately knocked him over into the water, upon which,
all the “suite” threw themselves indiscriminately upon the
“royal” couple, and as fast as any got up he was immediately
floored by any of his fellow “ courtiers ” who happened to be on
his legs. The “court” was closed right regally, at 4 p.m., by
“His Majesty” and attendants singing several songs, and gun
fired at 9.30 p.m., when we actually crossed the Line, brought
to a close one of the pleasantest days I have ever spent, and
which passed off without a single circumstance to mar the general
enjoyment, as far as I know.
ESAU.
COMMERCIAL.
Flour : Dear, rolls, heavy.
Cocoa : To be obtained only in the “ middle watch.”
Soup : Large supply—no one being able to keep what he’s got.
Soap : None on board, or the dinner cloth would be washed more
frequently.
: Not obtainable—the doctor imagining the passengers would
Tget too stout.
Fowls : Good—as the constant disappearance of them will guarantee.
Ducks : Go off rapidly.
Cake : Information obtainable at Messrs. Grimley & Fryer’s office.
Plum Pudding :No demand — a donkey being required to ride in between
the plums.
Malt : All but cleared out; holders firm, having bought all up.
Rum : None in the market, nor likely to be for weeks.
Black Strap ; Likely to remain on hand, being totally unfit for use.
Biscuits : Stock reduced to chips, well worth the attention of fowl
fanciers.
Bedding : Supplied gratis on deck.
Revised List of Volunteers.— Port Watch: W. G. Shaw, First Lieu-
tenant ; W. J. Harman, Boatswain ; S. Grimley, F. A. Fryer, E. Hacking,
C. Dicken, Hording, Capel, Goold, D. Simpson. Starboard Watch : J. F.
Rabson, Second Lieutenant; Carry, Boatswain’s Mate; E. B. Kennedy,
H. Taylor, A. Wodehouse, Kelk, H. Kerr, F. Bidwell, W. Gray.


1st verse.
2nd verse.
3rd verse.
4th verse.
fee
Sun
All
Knees
Not
Start
Park
Dress
Sigh
Gun
Call
Please
Shot
Smart
Lark
Yes
NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Rooker. — Read onr leading article and advertisement on the subject of
your letter. Shall be glad to receive the money you mention, and
apply it in the way advertised.
Disciplinarian.— Will appear next week. Sorry that time would not admit
of its being copied this time.
We purpose issuing this paper every Saturday. It is therefore hoped that
all who wish to contribute will oblige by sending in their communica-
tions not later than 12 (noon) each Friday.
Anecdote.—A young lady at Edinburgh, at whose father’s house Prince
Alfred dined, being, no doubt, puzzled as to the proper way of addressing His
Royal Highness, innocently enquired, “ How’s your Mother?” at which the
Prince smiled and said, “ Quite well, thank you.”
PRINTING THIS JOURNAL AND OFFERING PRIZES.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Sir, —As a passenger per “ Young Australia,” I need scarcely say that I
was highly gratified some weeks ago when I heard it announced that a
paper, yclept the Young Australia Times , was about to be started on board,
and was to be opened to receive contributions from all passengers, indiscri-
minately. I anticipated the pleasure we should more or less derive on
perusing any week the effusions—both in poetry and prose—of our fellow-
passengers, and the criticisms, discussions, etc., which would be sure to
• ensue. In fact, I hailed it with joy, as a very pleasant and instructive
means of relieving the monotony and ennui of a long voyage. I felt confi-
dent at the time that it would be appreciated, and supported by the pas-
sengers in general, and I still feel assured that it will be, if the idea is
carried out, as it should be.
If it were generally understood among the passengers that a sufficient
number of each issue will be printed on arrival at Brisbane to enable all
who wish to purchase copies, I am sure you will get a whole host of con-
tributions. I might assign many reasons in support of my convictions on
these points, such as the love all have to see their compositions in print,
etc., but it is needless. If you intend carrying on in this way, I think I
could make a few suggestions which would, if adopted, effect the desired
object. If we consider, in the first place, that the natural existence of a
paper of this kind is held in the hands, so to speak, of its contributors, and
that the amount of vital energy it displays in depth of thought, pungency
of humour, etc., is in fact made up of the sum total of the different items
contributed by each writer, it is evident that, if there is no determination
or emulation exercised by each individual in their several compositions,
that the production, as a whole, will be puerile and weak; and, also, if
there is a backwardness and diffidence exhibited by all, the natural result is
a paucity of contributions, which appears to be the case now. Thus, if we
can by any means apply the literary magnetic shock to lagging and slum-
bering intellects of some of our literary navvies on board, I feel assured
that the Young Australia Times will not be far behind other compositions of
its sort, both in common sense and philosophical essays, and in genuine
mother wit and humour. How, Mr. Editor, can this be done ? Who will
raise this magic battery of batteries, which shall send the emulative shock
from stem to stern ? Believe me, the task is not a Herculean one, and you,
Mr. Editor, can accomplish it, whether you be Lilliput or Brobdignag.
Suppose, now, you offer a small prize to the one who shall produce the best
original essay on a given subject, such as “ Husbands and Wives,” “ Old
Maids and Bachelors,” pro and con —“ The advantages of Single and Married
Life,” according to the views of the writer. I select these few subjects, as
we all know they are such as everyone feels more or less interested in, and
because they will afford much scope for humour and raphsody, in which,
should the idea be carried out, it is hoped the composers will freely indulge.
As an earnest, I myself will give half-a-crown, to the one who shall com-
pose the best set of verses to the following rhymes on the subject of
“ Popping the Question
The prize to be awarded by yourself, and the composition, along with any
of the others, to be published in the papor. Should this be announced, I
will drop the douceur into your box. Apologising for occupying your space,
and wishing you success in your undertaking,
I am, Sir, yours obediently,
HOOKER.
P.S. —I should like to know (I ask as much for my fellow-passengers as
myself) whether it is intended to print the paper on arrival in Queensland,
If so, I think it should be furnished with a “ leader,” every week, on the
progress, etc., of the ship, and other information in the shape of a “log ”
from the Captain, etc., so as to render it interesting to our friends in Eng-
land, as well as to ourselves.
E.
The Yo ung Australia Times.
SATURDAY, JULY 9, 1864.
No. 4.
It is with great pleasure that we, this day, issue our fourth publi-
cation. We were, at one time, afraid that we could not produce
it this week, in consequence of the gale which has been blowing
the last two days; but, as in our last we promised that anything
we could do should be done, we tried our best to-day. We
regret not having received more contributions to compete for the
prize offered last week, and presume that it is in consequence of
the rolling of the ship that contributors are so few. We take
this opportunity of stating that, although we publish any corre-
S23ondence which may be sent to us, provided it is not of a
personal nature, we do not by any means do so as representing
our own opinions.
It has been mentioned to us that some portion of our voyage
has been passed over without any comment whatever being made
on it as yet. We hope, therefore, that this hint will induce
some of the literary individuals on board to favour us with
a sketch of the same, as it would, doubtless, add much to the
value of the paper, when printed, in the eyes of friends in the
“ old country.”
Since our last, we have had beautiful weather until Thursday
evening, when a gale set in, with heavy seas, which makes it
rather unpleasant. We anticipate being abreast of the Cape to-
night, and it is hoped that, with moderate good fortune, thirty
days will see us in Brisbane.
{To the Editor of the Young Australia Times,')
Sir, —Welcome off the Cape! Since we sighted Tristan da Cunha—
Monday, the 4th inst.—which for the information of your readers lies in
lat., 37° 6', S.; long., 12° 8', W.—our good ship has made famous runs, and
performed, since my last “ log,” 1st July, 1,780 miles.
I regret exceedingly to state the melancholy fate of the ship’s carpenter,
who fell overboard last night, without being observed by anyone, and was
drowned. The poor fellow, who was a sober and active workman, leaves a
wife and two young children, for whom I wish to get up a subscription, and
hope every one will give a mite according to means. I beg to say that
the amount contributed by the donors will be published in the Times , and
the money will be forwarded to the bereaved wife and children on our arrival
at Brisbane.
I enclose my weekly “ log,” and remain.
Dear Sir, yours very truly,
Commander.
CHAS. GREY,
REMINISCENCES OF A SQUATTER
[continued.]
IV e now camped at a large waterhole, and I must say that I
enjoyed tlm evening exceedingly; the novelty of my style of
life more like a gipsy than anything else—the quite theatrical
scene of trees most beautifully lighted up by a blazing lire, with
the constant “yarn” going round, and each with his “cutty”
in his mouth looked the picture of hajipiness. We soon “ turned
i ll ” the men under the dray, or beside some tempting log—l,
to my small tent, with my ship-mattress on the ground.
Next morning, as I was anxiously awaiting the arrival of the
bullock driver’s mate with the bullocks. I began to suspect that,
as he was so long in appearing, they were either lost or
“planted” (hidden). The mate some time after arrived, but
no bullocks. I got on my horse, and looked all about, with no
better success, but, on nearing the camp, I saw them all ready
for a start, with a man (said to be the shepherd) who had found
and brought them, and who evidently was waiting for a reward,
which I gave him, too glad to be on my way again, though I
was pretty certain that he was one of a class who follow up the
passing drays to hide the bullocks, and make yearly a large sum
by their roguery. I now made up my mind that I would pay no
more rewards on that score, as I might as well lose my cattle as


so much, money as would buy others, and, thinking that the
driver and mate might be in league with the scoundrels, I gave
them to understand that they must look till they found them or
stay on the same spot. The consequence was, the bullocks were
generally found in good time, especially after our stay for a few
(lays at one place where we ran out of meat, and I feed them
with old parrots, I, of course, sharing in some tough, and not
particularly inviting, food. I had so constantly to “blow” up
Jack that at last he “bolted,” having rather overdrawn his
account, as a matter of course, and helped himself to my new
home-made spurs. I had no idea how to follow him up to
punish him, so had to “pocket the affront.” Luckily, he had
arranged with another man to take his team, and I was too glad
to avail myself of his services, and he certainly was very
superior to the old humbug, and generally made very fair stages.
The driver’s mate “bolted” next. I could not put up with such
work becoming a practice, so I got on my horse, just as the sun
was rising (rather unusual for me), and went to the road to
see whether I could find his track; saw in the bed of a creek,
what seemed very fresh, and leading up country, in the direction
the dray was going, so I put my nag into a swinging canta, with
two small pistols stuck in my valise, in case of accidents, and
had covered about eight miles of road, when I found his honor,
sitting snugly beside another dray, taking his breakfast.
I ordered him at once to return, which fortunately he did, and
for which I may say I was much indebted to my little barkers,
otherwise I don’t believe he would have paid any attention to my
orders: however, on my return, the dray started, and at night
our runaway was again on duty.
KANGAROO.
( To he continued .)
THE OUTWARD BOUND.
In parting, perhaps, we are breaking a link,
Which may ne’er be united again;
And firm as that chain was, ’tis painful to think,
That absence may rend it in twain.
Oh ! when shall we meet ? perhaps not until time
Shall have withered our hearts with our bloom:
And where? in some strange, some far distant place,
Or within the dear circle at home.
When together we dwell, and together decay,
The change is less painful to view;
But oh! it is painful to meet and to say,
Was it thou who last bid me adieu ?
We may meet in sickness, or sorrow, or pain,
Or no more, in this dark world of woe:
But still the fond hope of once meeting again,
Shall cheer us wherever we go.
Perhaps in some popular haunt, we may meet,
Mid the laugh, and the song, and the jest,
Or, perhaps, in some lonely and sylvan retreat,
Where feeling hath room in the breast.
And oh! we may meet, when our hearts are less warm,
Have been chilled by adversity’s blast;
And cold though they be, an invisible charm,
Must hallow the scenes that are past.
A. K.
REMINISCENCES OF THE CAPE.
[continued.]
The sun at ten o’clock began to be very oppressive—we walked
for another hour —we came across a troop of baboons feeding on
roots, on perceiving us, they set up the most discordant yells,
somewhat resembling a pack of curs yelping after a rabbit.
Our route continued through one of the higher valleys of tie
mountains covered with rich grass, and a email stream of water
r unning through the centre. This valley led us to a large plain ;
this plain is, as it were, a half-way between the lower and highei
range of mountains. Fine views of the Paarl valley can be
obtained from it, and tbe towering peaks above, and all around,
are very grand, when viewed from it —good partridge shooting
will be found here.
The mountains at the Cape are usually of a curious shape;
some of them, when viewed from a distance, resemble a crouching
lion, and a most striking example of this, is found at the entrance
of Table Bay. One of the mountains, some 10,000 feet high
above the Paarl, can only be approached by a very narrow and
dangerous ridge of rock, and as bucks are nearly always found
here, and their only means of flight is by the ridge, the sport
can be imagined. Another mountain here, called the )“ Great
Drackenstein,” is rather celebrated for its waterfall: it is a very
difficult mountain to ascend, and this feat has only been per-
formed by one man. He was a farmer living at its foot, and for
a long time he had noticed fowls flying high and towards the top :
this circumstance, and the fact of there being a waterfall, led
him to suspect that there must be a sheet of water at the top; he
accordingly took his knapsack and provisions, and commenced
the ascent of the mountain. He was away three days, and
reported on his return, that he had found the ascent
extremely difficult, and had, more than once, to retrace his
steps, but, that on arriving at the summit, there sure enough was
the lake, and covered with wild fowl which did not seem the least
alarmed at his presence. No one has had the energy to go up
the Drackenstein, since this man made these discoveries. My
reason for not attempting it, was on account of the heavy rains
which set in the very day we had appointed for a start. No
incident, worth remarking, happened during the rest of our day’s
climb, the rain prevented our sleeping in the mountain, as we
intended, and we got back to the hotel the same night.
E. B. K.
(To he continued .)
DEATH.
Fell overboard, on the evening of the Bth inst., Mr. George Craig, ship’s
carpenter, aged 29, leaving a widow and two children, unprovided for.
COMMERCIAL.
Fish : “ Prophetic soles ” cried every night. No buyer.
(H)eels During the late rough weather difficult to keep good.
Beef : A good show by Avins and Co., on deck.
Beer and Stout: A small supply, and holders firm. Taylor and Jack-
son a fair lot, but decline to realise at present prices.
Hardware : Ivory and Co. have a large lot of “holy pokers ” on hand.
Japers : This is a new article introduced into our market. We have not
yet seen a sample, but our chaplain has frequently requested us to “buy.”
Cheek ; Jackson and Co. are always ready to meet any demand, as per
sample, gratis.
Tablecloths Difficult to hold, especially near your nose, judging from
the sample produced last night.
ESAU.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Sir. — In your issue of July 2nd is a letter from a correspondent, signing
himself “ Booker,” upon which X should like to make a remark or two.
Granting, that it is the inalienable right of all rooks to croak when placed
upon their perch, it does not, however, necessarilly follow that the highest
perch places them beyond the reach of shot. Now, it seems that your
correspondent has been taking cognisance of the mental stamina of the
ship; and in his lucubrations has discovered what he calls “ literary navvies ”
(whatever they may be.) Would he just be kind enough to tell us what
they are like, for we have not yet discovered such animals on board, —a cir-
cumstance which arises, doubtless, out of the fact of our being placed on too
low a perch,
Your correspondent does not stop here however, hut goes on to offer half-
a-crown as a prize for the best set of verses on “ Popping the Question.”
Passing over the insult put upon the Muses, by the offer of a two-and-
sixpenny prize ; the schoolboy rules which are given for the guidance of the
rhyme of the verses, it is really what we could not have expected in the
middle of the 19th century, and only discovers your correspondents ignor-
ance of song.
If, however, there are poets on board the “ Young Australia,” we can
v assure our correspondent that none of them will condescend to crawl.
B.


(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Sir, —Being interested in the observations which are placed on the board
from day to day, relative to the ship’s distances, and having in common
with many other persons on hoard, but a comparatively slight knowledge of
navigation, and of the means by which these distances are obtained, I
should esteem it a favor, if you could obtain for me, from the Commander,
Captain Grey, through the medium of your paper, a detailed statement of
the working out and the observation taken on the morning of the 4th
instant, posted as follows: latitude 37° 4' S., longitude 12° W.; the day
previous being, latitude 34° 52' S., longitude 12° 48' W,
It will be recollected that on the morning of the 4th, we passed the island
of Tristan da Cunha, on our right or west, the longitude of which island is
11° 44' W. Now the ship’s given longitude of the day in question, being
12° W., I should be glad to learn, how it was that we, being just due east of
the island, and consequently nearer the Greenwich meridian, were in a
greater latitude than the island referred to. Apologising for the trouble
this may give you and Captain Grey,
I am, etc.,
VERITAS.
SUNRISE.
Pale through the east, the twilight’s feeble ray
Peers through the gloom and bodes the coming day.
The ancient night retreats along the sky,
And vigil stars desert their posts on high.
The rising sun in purple glory rolled,
Unfolds his brightness through a veil of gold ;
The lucid clouds his majesty adorn—
Ambassadors of night, the curtains of the morn.
Slow through the silent ocean of the sky,
In glowing splendor, bends his course on high,
Dispels the mists that veil his radiant form,
And smiles in all the freshness of the morn.
B.
THURSDAY, JULY 16, 1864.
No. 5.
Another week has passed by, and we again address our readers,
and publish our sth number, which we trust will prove as satis-
factory as its predecessors.
On Saturday evening last we had forwarded to us for perusal
a publication issued that day called Etches and Sketches , which
was read out to, and seen, by all in the saloon. The sketches
were remarkably well done, and altogether it was very well got
up. We publish the letter received at the time, and do most
cordially agree with them, that, .though taking different courses,
we may both be of some service to the amusement and instruc-
tion of our fellow passengers. AH we can say is, that we wish
our worthy contemporary every success, more especially in the
way of sketches, as we have, since our first issue, dropped the
term ‘ 1 Illustrated. 5 ’
We publish to-day the prize verses, and will next week award
the prize, but are sorry there are so few competitors.
As there has not been to-day any reply to the hint that some
one would write a kind of history of the voyage, and our worthy
Captain seems to think that it may be ended in about twenty-
three days, we propose that one be published in our last issue,
containing a complete history, as it were, of the whole voyage.
[Ed.]
REMINISCENCES OF THE CAPE.
[continued.]
A friend and myself were once overtaken by tbe rains in these
mountains, and so thick and heavy was the hail that for several
hours we were completely lost, but at length the clouds lifted for
a minute, and, by good luck, we discovered the “ cloof” we had
ascended by: of course we were drenched through, but on reach-
ing the valley we made our way to the nearest farm house, like
all the rest, well whitewashed. The farmer and his wife proved
most hospitable people: his name was John Pilgee. We had
only entered to get rest in a sheltered spot, they, however, not
only gave us shelter, but insisted on our eating bread and butter,
and drinking hot milk and coffee, though we assured them we
had no money with us. However, we emptied the contents of
our powder and shot flasks into a couple of bowls, and found
this was most acceptable, as our friend was out of ammunition.
This farm house is visited by invalids on account of its proximity
to the sulphur baths; we tasted the water, which was anything
but pleasant. After being partly dried we resumed our way,
and were home in a couple of hours. Whilst staying at the
“ Pari” one should not omit to visit the neighbouring village of
Wellington, the Orange Groves, and Baines’ Cloof. With these
remarks I take leave of the “ Pari.”
At Cape Town horses and carriages may be hired for a mode-
rate sum, and there are several places round about, such as
“Eeudebosh,” a village enveloped in trees with a neat little
church. Ten miles from Cape Town is “ Eathfelders” a large
country inn, where, after a hot ride, you may either smoke your
pipe, or eat fruit in a cool room, or play skettles in the shady
garden. This place is a perfect oasis in the desert, the desert in
this case being the Cape Plats —enormous plains with stunted
shrubs growing all over them, and exposed to the great heat all
the day through. The vineyards are worth a visit, within an
easy ride of Cape Town, and a great wine exporter or grower,
Mr. Cloete, is always glad to shew visitors over his wine manu-
factory and vineyards.
Simons’ Bay should be visited, the ride to it is curious, being
along the beaches for some part of the way ; the Admiral’s house
and flag ship are at Simons’ Bay. A pack of hounds are kept
at Cape Town, the meets are always at the Cape Plats, where
foxes are found, which are, perhaps, larger than the English
ones, and their brushes decidedly so. Bucks sometimes give a
good run here ; even in winter the meets have to take place at
three or four o’clock in the morning, so intense is the heat after
nine or ten. There is very little jumping, but the riding is
dangerous owing to the quantities of hillocks and undermined
ground formed by a species of “ mole” nearly as large as a
rabbit. Here, on the Cape Plats, and all the way to Simons’
Town, is a fine field for naturalists, and those fond of collecting
bird skins: there are several kinds of humming birds, besides
larger sorts in great variety and of beautiful plumage. It is
said of the Cape that, first, it has no pretty women; secondly,
its birds have no song; thirdly, its flowers have no smell;
fourthly, its rivers are without fish; but, though this is partly
true, yet the Cape is a very pleasant place to spend a few months
at. farmers and others are most hospitable; if whilst
out walking in the country one passes near a farm house and
does not go in the Dutch farmer turns to his wife, or whoever
may be near, said says, “ There goes a proud Englishman.”
The foregoing reminiscences of the Cape may seem somewhat
dry, especially to those who have no chance of visiting the
Colony, but they will be found useful to any one who finds him-
self at Cape Town with a few months at his disposal; particu-
larly if he wishes for a little sport, combined with grand moun-
tain scenery, living in a comfortable hotel within an easy reach
of Cape Town.
E. B. K.
REMINISCENCES OF A SQUATTER.
[continued.]
We now got stuck again at a very steep greasy hill, the
bullocks would not face it, so we had to turn them out to grass,
and soon after a passer-by informed us that a gang of bushran-
gers were near the top of the hill. This was of rather serious
moment to me, as, if I] lost much of my stores, I must either
have returned to replenish at great sacrifice and cost, or gone on
and paid double prices. I had just to await the result with
patience, having previously hidden my horse and saddle (as I
The Young Australia Times.


believe they prize good ones), and sat down on a log quietly
enjoying my pipe, and wondering how they would serve me
out for acting so sharply with the bolter. We had our supper,
but no alarm, we then replenished our fires to turn in com-
fortably, yet all was quiet, when I awoke next morning very
thankful that there had been no visitation. No bullocks were
to be found for some time; Mr. Better wished me to lend him
my horse, but I was rather too wide awake for that, and sent
him off again for another look out—he returned minus three;
I wondered at this, as a team generally keeps together, at least
so I thought at the time, but I now know that they frequently
part company. I now had to try my luck, but after a good
survey of the surrounding country I also had to appear at
camp with slightly downcast look. I had not long arrived
when X was astonished, hut rejoiced, to see a well-known gang
of bushrangers coming right upon our party. They went by
the name of the “ Jewboy” gang, and they certainly were a
most ruffianly looking lot of fellows, and well known to have
killed and robbed many travellers and people of the district;
luckily they were not so blood-thirstily inclined at the present
moment, being unavoidably under the control of a party of
police, who must have captured them just before making a
descent on us the previous night, and secured them with
manacles. I now felt quite relieved as to further annoyance
from bushrangers for some time, as you seldom fall in with two
gangs in one district. (The whole gang of seven were, I believe,
hanged in Sydney.) »
Having now only seven bullocks, I had to return to a farm
some miles off to get, if possible, three more to make up my
team again. I was lucky enough in getting two that were
suitable, as polers, or leaders, for which I had to pay £2B the
pair I liked them very much, but a few nights alter they also
uot lost and I being unaware that they were sure to return to
their old place, lost both time and money by remaining and
looking after them where I had just lost them, and again having
to buy. At last we got to a small township called _ Muswel-
brook,” and not being sure of my bolters good, behaviour, and
from sundry little suspicions I had regarding him, I went to the
head magistrate and repeated his runaway propensities, when
it turned out on examination that he was a runaway convict and
had I kept him with me till they themselves had discovered his
being in my employment, I would have been fined ss. per diem
for every day he was in my service ; as it was, he was put in
“ quod” to be sent to Sydney per first opportunity, I being very
well pleased at getting so easily rid of him.
Mv small stock of money in hand had now come to an end,
owing to my late heavy purchases. My larder had also got to
its lowest ebb, and I wondered how I was now to proceed with-
out meat. I went to a butcher, spent a few shillings, and told
him with rather a long face my miserable condition, doubting
his doing anything for me. However, he said, Oh. I suppose
I gent?” “ Yes.” Then j»t onto
and I will give you what meat you may require I said you
must dictate, as I know nothing about cheques, and never drew
one in my life, so I at last signed the document, which was the
first of “long series which I had very quickly to fabricate on its
heels, glad, however, at the idea of being so easily enaMed to
issue my currency as occasion required. It was in tins little
township also that I had the extreme fehcity of beholding my
phTz for the'first time for three weeks, when I could not restrain
mv laughter at finding it looking so considerably altered, as I
had now a very creditable incipient moustache and Jeard, which
I forthwith was determined to cultivate. On tint l g *
we were much annoyed, owing to the effects of a drough a
the mnss gone—so we had to fell swamp oak trees (so called m
fr ST S £ w”.; a. p.»
anhiiaisttm taring «do dntj. When .. did come to <m om„
KANGAROO.
I gave them a good spell.
& (To he continued.)
Young Australia, July 15th, 1864,
Latitude, 43° 45' S., Longitude, 44° 6' E.
Dear Mr. Editor,—ln the last issue of your paper a letter appeared, in
which serious doubts were cast upon the correctness of the daily obser-
vations. , , . . , 1 • T .. J
Your correspondent, who is evidently very anxious to exhibit his limited
stock of nautical knowledge, is not acquainted with the correct longitude
of Tristan da Cunha, which is not in 11° 48' W., but 12° 8' W. (as stated in
my last letter). The ship’s longitude at noon of that day, being 12 W., it
is obvious that the island was to the westward of us.
With the exception of one night, the weather has been very fine through-
out this week, and our good ship is to-day about 1,400 miles to the westward
of the Cape, The health of all on board, with one exception, has been
excellent; and our fair ladies, who must be pretty uncomfortable at times,
have borne up well against all discomforts of sea life in rough weather. I
hope to carry them in another twenty days to more genial latitudes, and to
have the pleasure of seeing them all cheerful and happy on deck again.
Handing you my weekly log,
I am, yours truly,
Commander.
CHAS. GREY,
LABOUR IN QUEENSLAND.
No. I.
A few words as regards labour in Queensland will not, I think, prove un-
interesting to many readers of the paper, as I presume that all will seek it
either in one way or another; for it is not advisable that anyone should
commence for themselves without first trying to obtain some experience of
the colony. If they do, it is very probable they will be taken in, from the
fact of not knowing anything relative either to the colony or its ways. It
is not the same in Queensland as in England ; foi, in the foimei, it is not
considered derogatory, however menial the occupation a person may be
doing It therefore happens —as often as not —that you see gentlemen, who
never did “ a hand’s turn ” for themselves in the “ old country,” acting as
shepherds, or stockmen, who, if they go into town, live and act quite as
gentlemen, and are, of course, treated as such; for no one knows how they
have been occupied while in the lone and desert bush.
No doubt, many of the passengers on board will be engaged as shepherds
immediately on arrival, unless they happen to have a trade (which is the
case I believe, with a large number); but those who have been used to
business farming, or any occupation which there is not a large demand foi
in the colony, will not find employment in their own trade (if I may so call
/ it) and will thus be compelled to fall back on the great stand-by—shep-
herding—and a very jolly occupation it is—no anxiety, except to get up in
the night if you hear your flock rushing about in the yard. All you have
to do is to look after your sheep in the daytime, and bring them home at
night and eat your supper. It is the laziest life imaginable, so much so
that many will not do it longer than 12 months, as they say it is too lazy
altogether. The pay for this kind of labour is very good—namely, from
£33*to £4O per annum, with rations of 141bs. meat, 81bs. flour, tea, 21bs.
sugar for a single man; and £4O to £5O, with double the above quantity of
rations, for a married couple, together with house rent fuel, etc. The only
objection to a shepherd’s life is the solitariness and the roughness of the
hut in which they have to live, for you must not expect to tmci houses
similar to those in England. Those who have a trade at their fingeis -
will easily find employment at the ordinary rate of wages, which vary
very little; but there is one thing I would say to all—you are what they
call in the colony “ new chums,” bear in mind; and it will take some six
months, at least, before you will be used to the ways or climate of the
colony for they are entirely different to what you have been used to. it is
scarcely right, therefore, for you to expect the highest wages, when you have
to be taught the way to do pretty well everything, and, as a rule, a
squatter would rather have one “ old hand ” than two new ones, for at least
the first three months after their arrival. I expect that all on board will
have the opportunity of hiring within a week, at the outside, from the
time of our arrival in Brisbane, during which time you will have shelter
found you (that is the emigrant’s) by Government but, if you will not
hire because you consider you ought to obtain the highest late of wages
though moderate have been offered you—the depot you will not be able any
longer to make your home. Those who have the prospect of, at some
future time, commencing for themselves, it will be better for them to learn,
by practical experience, before they require to command others, the way to
work a sheep or cattle station. On a station there are what are termed.
“ general useful men ’—that is, men who are supposed to do anything they
are asked. This kind of employment suits those who have been used to
any trade better than shepherding, and they stand a chance of working a
their own trade, when, if they are not under an agreement, they may very
likely obtain a higher rate of wages than the £35, which is the usual run.
In my next, I purpose completing the above, and giving a few words of
advice (such as it is) to those who are in the position to commence lor
themselves.
A SEVEN YEARS’ RESIDENT.
(To be continued.)


~\\f ANTED, for the Young Australia Times, a quire of FOOLSCAP PAPER,
T T Apply to the Editor.
KNOWLEDGE IS POWER.
ETCHES AND SKETCHES.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
“ Knowledge is power” said the great teacher of inductive
philosophy, and the experience of man has borne unmistakeable
evidence to the truth of the remark. No matter in what position
or circumstances men may be placed, knowledge is a possession
which will at all times confer upon its possessors unspeakable
advantages. The compass of action it forms the stepping stone
to wisdom, for, guided by knowledge, a man is enabled to form
just estimates of men and things, with a view to the realization
of ends, which, without knowledge, he could'never have ex-
pected to have attained. Useful, however, as knowledge may
be, it can only be considered as the rudiments of education. It
is, as we have said, only the compass or stepping stone to
wisdom, and it is only useful in so far as it tends to develop this
invaluable possession. The man who stops short at the mere
possession of knowledge may be said to have missed the grand
purpose for which he acquired it, and will ever figure lower in
the scale of intelligence than the man who has employed his
knowledge to its legitimate purpose, viz., the establishment of
wisdom in his mind. To the eye of the discerning these truths
are quite patent, because he sees them developing themselves in
society daily. There is no danger of the man of mere knowledge
allowing his talent to lie hid under a bushel, whilst the man of
wisdom, acting only for a legitimate purpose, generally attains
his purposes through the quiet and unobtrusive influence of sober
sense. The man of mere knowledge will seek only to dazzle
mankind, whilst the man of wisdom will seek to benefit them.
The man of mere knowledge will pass off the stage of existence,
nor leave a trace behind him, whilst the man of wisdom will
shed a halo of light around his departing steps, and leave traces
behind him which will call forth the grateful acknowledgments
of his kind, as, stimulated by his example, they are more and
more drawn upon the arena of the great and good.
Sir, —I beg to hand you, as Editor of the I. A. Time.?, the first number
of a little periodical which we intend publishing from time to time. As our
motives are identical, though the means employed slightly differ, we trust
that we shall be mutually encouraging to each other in our respective
spheres of labor.
Will you kindly return the paper after perusal—this evening if possible.
With best wishes for the continued success of your paper,
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
WILLIAM SMITH, Ed, E. and S.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Sir, — In your paper of last week there appears a few strictures on my
letter to you of the 25th inst., from a correspondent glorying in the cog-
nomen of “ B.” Surely, Mr. Editor, this is a very hypercritical and dis-
contented little “b” (ee) that has been buzzing around your editorial box,
and has actually dropped his abortive production into it. With a slight
variation I am tempted to ask with Dr. Watts—
“ Why does this little busy bee
So idly spend his hours?”
The Doctor’s beau ideal of bees was, those who “ improved each shining
hour.” Alas! then for the degeneracy of the “ b's,” if we take this literary
“b”as a type! But what kind of bee is he, sir? He has produced no
honey; therefore he cannot be an industrious worker. He has attempted to
sting but has ignominiously failed; from which I opine he cannot be a wasp.
Is he a humble bee? Certainly not —at least in his own estimation. lam
come therefore to the conclusion, Mr. Editor, that he is of the bumbledore
species ; a sort, sir, which, notwithstanding its immense size, bears the same
relation to the insect world that the renowned charger of Baalim does to
the animal.
To proceed, however, allow me to assure your correspondent, that to carry
out his own similie, I am in full reach of shot, if properly aimed and charged.
His first shot has signally failed, for he has not even feathered his bird. Let
him consult Dr. Syntax for the comparative degree of “ Rook,” and aim
higher.
Let us analyse a few of these “ snipe” shot with which he has attempted
to feather a Rook. First, he actually supposes “ I have been taking cogni-
sance of the mental stamina of the ship.” Does he suppose lam a threwol-
ogist, and have been assidiously engaged in manipulating the cranium of
the gentleman at the figure head? But giving him the benefit of this
lapsus, and assuming he means the passengers instead of the ship, I am at
a loss to conjecture how a person whilst engaged in his lucubrations, could
possibly take “ cognisance of the ship’s (sic) mental stamina,” or discern
any “ literary navvies” to be on board. I have not yet discovered any, I can
assure your correspondent—l wait for them to discover themselves. As
regards the definition of the compound itself, I may answer it negatively by
assuring Mr. 8., that he is not one.
I see that in this letter I have made use of the term “ literary bee.” As
your correspondent exhibited a marked dulness last week, in comprehending
the meaning of a similar compound, I will add, for his especial information,
tb:A a “ literary bee” means, in this case, a meddling, buzzing critic ; or to
borrow a phrase from a noble lord in the Upper House, a “ meddler and
muddler.”
B.
COMMERCIAL.
Potatoes : Rotten, but easily parted with. A fine delivery at birds on
Thursday.
Spirits : Higher, since leaving the Cape. At Wodehouse’s. boisterous.
They exhibited a sample this week of a kind called “ Darling Nelly ”
excruciatingly bad.
Wines : The above house parted with a large quantity of claret to
Messrs. Fryer, on Thursday.
Earthenware : After a bad evening at cards mugs are gloomy.
Hardware : Knives, blunt. We have heard no quotations of “ holy
pokers ” since our last.
Fish :No “prophetic soles ” in the market.
. Tablecloths : Same as last.
Flour : Plenty on hand. Rolls, lighter.
Tobacco ; Holders, firm. Our taster, Mr. Wodehouse, has not decided
which sample is best, though he has tasted most on board.
Tumblers : Getting short, our stock is evidently not of the breakable
kind; seen now and then rolling about the decks. We recommend the
steward to look sharply after some, before a smash disposes of said article
entirely.
Sails : Disposed of rather too readily.
Black Eyes : Scarce. One, we are happy to see, losing its sable tint.
Tallow Candles : Not wanted; their odour, for some time, has strongly
smelt ( pies-on) poison.
Just Come Out. —Hacking’s Patent Bed Condenser. For price, and
further particulars, apply at Rat-trap Hall. Beware of counterfeits. None
genuine but those heavily impressed with his own likeness in the form of
HOOKER.
POPPING THE QUESTION.
• / C 4
a 3 v ~/
The Following is the Prize Poem Alluded to in No. 5.
When first I saw that winning eye,
’Twas blue, ’twas brown, ’twas not:
’Twas black ! I heaved a heartfelt sigh,
For Cupid my heart had shot.
The time was when the fiery sun
Had set: it made me start,
For then the roar of the evening gun
Made many a lover smart.
That gun it made us hasten all,
From those pleasant seats in the park,
To attend the bugler’s hateful call,
Mine was love, ’twas not an idle lark.
In that same park on bended knees,
I kissed those lips, aye e’en her dress,
Be mine sweet maid, be mine oh, please!
She looked up, smiled, said—yes.
Cupid asleep.
ESAU.
Narrow Escape. —As a little girl was being carried down the steps
leading from the poop to the main deck, by the chief mate, on Saturday
last, a large sheath-knife was accidentally dropped by a sailor aloft, which
went between their heads, striking the rail alongside of them, we are
happy to say, without injury to either. Had it come on any part of them,
it would, doubtless, have seriously hurt, if not killed, the individual on
whom it fell.
One of Neptune’s family suddenly appeared through the port among us,
spoke a few words, and then vanished to enjoy his briny bed and report
progress. He was remarkably well got up, and quite the picture of his
deified parent.
E. B. K.


The You ng Australia Times.
No. 6.
SATURDAY, JULY 23, 1864.
r. this day issue our 6 f h publication, which we hope will suit all
paities, and trust next week to have more communication than we
have to-day. Our contemporary, Etches and Sketches , issued a
second number on Saturday last, which we think was even an
improvement on the first.
As usual, divine service was held on the poop on Sunday morning
last, but owing to the extreme cold, was very poorly attended; but
that in the evening in the saloon was much better so.
On Saturday evening last, a soiree was held in the saloon by the
port watch ot the Volunteers, which was well attended; the head
and foot of table being taken, as previously, by our worthy Captain
ami Lieutenant Shaw. Sundry games, with a glass to drink now
and again, vveie the amusement ot the evening, which passed off well,
finishing with “ God save the Queen.”
Monday morning we were visited by a severe thunder storm, the
electric fluid struck the main mast, but the lightning conductor saved
it, as it broke the conductor in two places, having quite melted the
metal ot which it was composed. A thunder storm is at any time
a most awful, but grand sight, and is more especially so at sea.
The extent over which the eye can glance is so vast, and the pitching
and tossing of a vessel is so great (as there is, generally speaking, a
high scq, running at the time), that it is quite sufficient to cowlhe
stoutest heart, checking all frivolous thoughts, and, when all danger
is past, to feel how thankful all should be who have passed safely
through so great a peril. Some declare that the lightning actually
struck between them, and others, who were there, actually striking
the deck itself—of course, such could not have been the case, and
was quite an optical illusion. We are glad to say that there was not
any accident at the time, but one happened on Monday morning
early, to a forward volunteer, by the falling of a block on his
which hurt him severely, but we are glad to hear he is out of danger!
We were greatly in hopes that we should have some fine weather
now, but were dissappointed, as on Wednesday morning it was again
blowing a gale from the N.N.E., and suddenly shifted round to°the
west. We are glad to say that, through the care and foresight of
our excellent Captain, none of the masts were blown away, and only
a few of the sails were rent. During the time of the gales, both on
Monday, and Wednesday, it was hailing very hard, and extremely
cold, so much so, as to try the mettle of our volunteer corps, who at
the moment of danger, were found amongst the foremost in the
work, and even those who, at other times, seem to shirk their work,
were now apparently carried away by the spirit of the thing ; and
the Captain has been heard to say, that at a critical moment of the
chaup of wind, he was almost inclined to be proud of his volunteers.
Since Wednesday the wind has continued fair, but variable as regards
strength.
We are glad to see that the list of subscribers (handed to us
by the Captain) to the fund for the widow and children of the late
carpenter, amounting in all to <£23 45., includes donations from all
classes on board. It shows that there are some even on board
an emigrant vessel, who will give, out of their small pittance, a little
towards the sustenance of those more in want than themselves.
At least once, during the past week, dancing has been carried on
in the evening with great spirit, the fair ladies being only too glad of
an opportunity to warm their shoes, for the weather is bitterly cold
at times, and it is now quite a treat to see a lady’s face on deck;
there are only one or two who are game to face it, and they do not
stay up for long
We have not had any “ Police” or “ Ring” news sent us this
week for insertion, so we will hope that there has not been
on the calendar, and that the “ Ring ” club is still in existance.
The prize for Rhymes has been awarded to Ar/B. K., as the best
of those sent us, and we have placed to credit of subscription the
amount, as requested.
[ r d.]
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Dear Mr. Editor, — I have much pleasure in sending you a list of the contri-
butions towards the fund for the poor Carpenter’s Widow and Children. In
the poor Widow’s and Children’s name, I return my most hearty thanks, and may
God bless the kind donors.
The last week, notwithstanding the terrific thunder storm on Monday, and a
stiff gale on Wednesday, has been a most unusually lucky one. The good old
ship has run not less than 1800 miles in seven days. Our voyage is drawing
rapidly to an end ; and it will be, no doubt, interesting to a good many of your
readers to learn, that there is a possibility of arriving in Moreton Bay in a fort-
night from to-day. Enclosed I hand my weekly log, and remain
Dear Sir, yours truly,
CHARLES GREY,
Commander.
On board the “ Young Australia,”
July 23rd, 1864.
LABOUR IN QUEENSLAND.
[continued.]
There are in all the largest towns, such as Brisbane, Ipswich, or Rockhampton,
people carrying on business as labour agents, who have received orders from
squatters and others to hire, and send them up, a certain number of shepherds,
general usetul servants, &c., as they may require. The agent (who it may be is
a storekeeper) will then put up outside his place of business the number of hands
he requires ; and either he will wait until employment is sought from him, or
he will go down to the depot, and there engage the people he wants. There is
not, therefore, any difficulty about the matter, and those who do not hire early I
would advise to start up country themselves (the single men), applying at all the
stations they pass for employment. All they need to take with them is, a pair of
blankets, quart and pint pots, a change of clothes, and a supply of food, with a
few matches to light a fire with. As to money, it is very little they will need, as
they can camp out each night they do not make a station, and when they do it is
usual —in almost all cases —for them to provide a night s accommodation for all
passers-by at the single men’s hut, one of which is on all head stations, and I
have seen as many as 20 to 30 in one night stopping there. Ido not think that
at this time of the year you will have to travel far in seeking employment; of course
you will have to walk, and I would say do not travel too far at first, or your will
find yourselves knocked up in two or three days.
In all cases have a written agreement, stating the period for which it is to last,
the amount of wages, and the kind of servant you are to be called; and those
hiring in town, should have in addition, when wages are to commence, and at
whose expense you are to be conveyed to the station, with your luggage, where
you are to work. Of course, if you have more than a reasonable quantity of
luggage, you will have to pay part of the expense attending its carriage. The
usual mode of conveyance is by bullock dray. For instance, three married couples
and four single men are hired by a squatter’s agent; a dray is in town—going up
to a station; all these engaged parties will have to go up with this dray, sleeping
underneath it at night—at least the married people do so, if room for them all,
and the single men sleeping in the open air. The drays travel, upon an average,
about six miles per day in fine weather, but sometimes in wet they may be stuck
fast for two or three weeks in one place. There are manv disagreeables (of which
this is one) to be put up with in an Australian life, and it would be well if all
went to it expecting that such would be their lot, but I know that it is usual to
put a bright halo round everything, and the consequence is thev are greatly dis-
appointed, aud disgusted when they enter on their duties. It is*to prevent* such
being the case with the readers of this paper that I have written these lines, and
will only add, as my own experience, that with moderate energy, combined above
all with temperance, you cannot help making a livelihood in Queensland.
But there is another class on board to whom a few words may not be unac-
ceptable. 1 allude to those who have the means requisite to commence squatting
at once, or anything else, but wish first to obtain the experience necess-iry to
prevent their losing all they have. The usual way with those who contemplate
becoming graziers is, to go with some squatter on what is termed colonial
experience ; that is, they go on to a station, and in consideration of receiving
theii board and lodging, they give their services for any length of time, as may
suit both parties. I hey will then (if they shew an inclination for it) be shewn
the whole routine of managin ,’, and the practical working of a sheep or cattle
stati m—and there is not very much to learn about it. Of course to do so they
must take an active part in every thing that is going on—not waiting to be first
asked to do every little thing, or be afraid of dirting their fingers— if they wish
to learn it must be in a practical manner—theoretical knowledge will only lead
them astrav. They need not expect any wages, nor is it usual to give colonial
experiencers t eir clothing, tobacco, &c.; but in most cases, where they make


j
themselves useful, the amount is not charged to them. To all who really wish for
practical experience, I would say, go into the new country; i.e., country which
is only now being stocked, for you will there learn squatting in its most primitive
style, without any of the luxuries of a settled and large station ; besides on these
everything has to be done, and by learning in that way, you are more likely to
gain experience in the kind of life you will probably have when you commence
for yourself, the outside districts being the only part of the Colony that is not
already taken up. Many will doubtless ask, How is this kind of emqloyment to
be obtained ? It may be that some of the squatters, who are sure to be in town
on our arrival, may be willing to take some two or three—others have letters of
recommendation to squatters, while the remainder have neither the one or the
other. Those who make arrangements in town will, perhaps, be provided with a
horse belonging to the squatter upon whose station they are going, if he has one
in town to spare, but this is rarely done, upon which he can go up to the station,
and will of course have nothing further to do than to find out some of the par-
ticulars of the route. But those who have to seek employment will have to
provide themselves with horses, and go up the country, either to the party to
whom the letter is addressed, or, if they have not one, asking at any station which
would suit them, whether they are willing to take them on ; but I would not
advise doing so in the settled parts. With regard to your luggage you can store
it either in Brisbane, Ipswich, or Rockhampton, at different storekeepers, paying
a rental —mind whom you leave it with, and obtain a receipt for it “in good order
and condition .” Take up with you as many clothes as you can carry on horseback,
giving the parties with whom you leave your luggage to understand, that you
will write when you wish it to be forwarded. After travelling, say 120 miles
from Ipswich (to which place you can go by water), the expense is very little, as
you will be able to put up at a station every night, where you will be heartily
welcomed and treated exactly as one of the family—all you have to do is to ride
up, ask for the principal on the station, and ask his permission to stay the night,
which is invariably accorded. The way-side hotels being in places 100 miles or
further apart, you will not be able to make such long stages, the usual distances
being about thirty miles per diem, and even then you have to spell (that is rest)
your horses now and again, because you cannot procure corn for them. Horses
are to be procured in either of the places I have mentioned above, but you should
always see your horse ridden before you buy him, or it is not unlikely it might
prove a “ buck-jumper,”—a horse you could not well ride. There is a great deal
of jobbing in this as in all other trades, and they are to be procured from 10s. to
£lOO per head; but the average price for a good serviceable roadster is about
£25. Ido not know the prices in Rockhampton, not having been there, but I
believe they are very little more than in Brisbane. Those who purpose going
into the new country, will do well to go up by steam as far as Rockhampton.
The steamers go there once a week at least, and the fare is £5 in the saloon, and
£2 in the steerage (I think) —for by that means they save 500 mdes of land
travelling, which is an advantage at all times, both as regards time and fatigue.
No one need to think or fear that it will be thought strange their going up
country in quest of employment, because all who are inclined to work, rather
than remain skulking about town, do the same thing, and when you do find
it, you will have to live in the house with the owner, and partake of his fare,
which very often consists of mutton, tea, and damper, for breakfast; with damper,
mutton, and tea, for dinner, as a change. Perhaps his house may consist of only
a few sheets of bark, stuck up together in a peculiar fashion, with only just room
inside to swing a cat, as the saying is, and a smoke now and again for a treat,
be careful when you come to buy sheep, that you purchase good sound stock ;
but before that time you will have learnt a little of Colonial life, and will, I dare
say, many of you, laugh at what I have said, thinking you have learnt sufficient
to know a great deal about everything: all I can say is, mind you are not bitten ;
and if you are, recollect that you have been put on your guard, though not in a
very clear and precise manner. In investing your money, now, I should say
deposit it in one of the banks for a certain period, say three, six, nine, or
twelve months, for each of which periods a different rate of interest is given.
Be sure and keep the deposit receipt, or you might find some difficulty in
regaining possession ot your money. If you go into the new country, take
your revolvers with you, and always be on the look out for the blacks, because
in those districts they are far from quiet, and it may happen, that while you are
in the interior some exploring party may be returning, with some of whom you
may be acquainted, and from whom you might be able to purchase at a low rate
a run which they have discovered ; but even in this you must be guarded, for
such things have been known as the same land being found and sold five or
six times over, of course by dishonest people. In fact, do what you will, you
must be on your guard, and with moderate discretion, combined with, as I said
before, industry and temperance together, with moderate good fortune, as far
as regards wealth, and the blessing of Providence, you may hope to become, ere
many years are passed away, wealthy squatters.
But there may be some who intend to try other branches of business, such as
farming or storekeeping. To the former I will address myself in a future paper
on that subject, but to the latter I say, “ Think before you leap long credit
is the order of the day. No doubt there are many openings in the interior, but
you must reckon upon an eighth of your actual sales being nearly as bad as bad
debts. The profits, not deducting expenses, are no doubt large, but deducting
these makes a great alteration. Carriage, for one thing, is very high, and some-
times drays are months on the road to a township 200 miles from Ipswich.
Another thing is your want of experience as to the kind of store, and the ways
of the people. If you do really wish to try your hand at it, by all means seek
first some employment in that line, before you begin for yourself; it does not
take long, and may save your pocket. Fortunes are to be made at it, but it is
not in the same way that squatters do; in the one the risk is from rain which
destroys, or want of it, which has the same effect, while the other stands a
chance of giving his goods without any return for the same—neither of
which are a paying game.
I do not know of anything further that I can say, but will be glad to
answer any questions which may be addressed to me through this journal.
A SEVEN YEARS’ RESIDENT.
REMINISCENCES OF A SQUATTER.
[continued.]
Having proceeded for some stages, I now passed the only burning
mountain which is known in the colony, o i the Walderen Range. It
is of very little moment however, as it is formed of a mere fissure in
the mountain, with sulphurous thin smoke appearing from its mouth.
The Range here is very steep, being that dividing the Eastern from
the Western waters. We at length got over all safe —thanks to a
kind fellow who yoked on his team to ours, and whom I rewarded—
as he appeared a man that expected nothing—and getting to the foot
we camped at a place called Doyboy Hollow, a spot noted for a des-
perate fight between a corps of policemen and a ruffianly band of
bushrangers, in which there was considerable bloodshed on both sides,
but the gang were eventually captured, and, as usual in those days,
duly strung up. We now looked out for water for pots of tea, but
all we could find was a filthy, muddy, small hole, the water in which,
cattle had been converting into a sort of mud gruel. However, we
were all so thirsty that we had to make the best of it; and boiling it
until we got rid of most of the green scum, which constantly appeared,
we put tea in and tried how it would go down. I took a mouthful,
but only washed my mouth with it, allowing a very small portion to
dribble down my throat to prevent my choking, and got rid of the
rest when I found my teeth grinding a fine, but disgusting sand
between them, to which was added a shocking flavour of all sorts of
mixtures.
We went soon to curbed, to forget, if possible, such disagreeables;
and glad we were, next morning, to proceed 12 miles before water
was to be obtained.
After many more little annoyances I arrived at the Peel River,
having met on my way a character of a shepherd, “ Tim Shay,”
alias “ the flying shepherd,” He used to take a flock of 3,000 sheep
under his care, and travel here, there, and everywhere with his flock,
and a small pack of kangaroo dogs with him, to protect his sheep at
night; and with which, during the night, he invariably camped out
wherever he found a favorable spot. He heard we were out of meat,
and kindly presented me with a fine leg of mutton, and which he joined
us in demolishing ; and having told us several curious yarns, we
parted, mutually pleased with each other. Well, at the Peel was
one of the head Australian agricultural establishments, where I was
to enquire about my sheep. After many enquiries about this
Basaltic Rock —and which none seemed to know under that name—
-1 then said—is there a Basititic Rock ? I was told there were rocks,
beside a sheep station—from which, sheep had been sold to some-
body —but there was no road to it, further than a badly marked tree
line for 70 miles through the bush. I came to the conclusion that
my only plan was to leave the dray, and take my two shepherds and
try my luck, instead of returning to Sydney to ask questions; so I
provided myself with half-a-bag of flour, and a 15 lb. cheese, which
I placed on my horse and commenced my doubtful march. I got on
well enough for 14 miles, when I found myself opposed by an almost
perpendicular mountain, up which, nor anywhere else, could I seen any
more marked trees (trees marked by apiece of bark cut off—generally
as deep as the timber—from each side, generally easily followed, if
the trees are pretty thick and regular). I had only one way to act,
to return and ask, and was informed the marked line did not go up
the mountain ; but was told it was dangerous my attempting to go
by myself, as the blacks were very bad in the intervening country.
I put that down as merely an " old hand’s ” way to frighten a “ new
chum,” so after good night’s sleep, started off early next morning,


and found my way at last to the top of my yesterday’s opponent,
but not without an altercation with my shepherd concerning another
road which turned to the left, when we were half-way up, and which
led to New England, as I was told, and which turned to the West—
my line being to the East. I took out my pocket compass, which
proved that I was right, so I kept my own way, still much annoyed
that I had my only two companions against me. On we went,
threading our wav, sometimes half-an-hour in finding the next tree,
and once or twice by following patches of laid grass, by flocks which
had gone some time past between the 70 miles apart station. We
now camped, made a jolly fire, and nad tea —my men in a sulky
humour, and both bad-looking fellows. I, however, had my two
little “barkers” with me, and placed them loaded under my
saddle, which made my temporary pillow, and soon fell asleep, after
being regaled with the miserable and depressing howl of some
myall dingoes (native dogs). Next morning, I got up, with my
blanket about as firm as a board, and covered with hoar frost,
wondering that I had passed such a good night, but felt very cold.
Meantime, the fire was duly replenished, when we breakfasted,
and again moved on our way. Heard blacks cooeying, but I only had
a glimpse of what I supposed to be one in the distance Luckily,
they had not seemed to notice us, and glad I was when I found that
1 had got out of their locality.
KANGAROO,
(To he continued ,)
A SUBSCRIPTION LIST
Has been commenced for the widow and children of the late
Mr. G. Craig, ship’s carpenter, who was lost overboard on July
Bth. The amount received is £23 45., made up in small sums
principally, and liberally and cheerfully contributed to by nearly
all on board. The Captain headed the list, and kindly offered
to take charge of the money, and remit to the widow on arrival
at Brisbane.
COMMERCIAL.
Fish : Flounders appear sometimes on deck during wet weather. These
are always sold.
Fowls : Pigeons scarce, not sufficient to make a pie. Gulls may be sold
r every day.
Beef ; Messrs. Avings & Co., report that, owing to fluctuation, joints and
loins are anything but easy.
Flour : Puddings : every sort at currant prices.
Tobacco : Our taster now reports, that the sample from Mr. Ivory is only
equalled by that from Mr. Dicken.
Wood : To be found near a house. Furs enquired for this weather, lr?it
none on hand.
Metals: “Tin” is given away every evening, also “coppers,” which
latter, however, do not realize till the morning.
Ivory : We have a remarkable superior sample of this, but the small
amount we possess renders it too valuable to be parted with at any price.
E. B. K.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Sir, —In your last issue is a letter from your correspondent, “ Hooker, ’
which concerns me, and upon which you will please to allow me the privi-
lege of making a few remarks. .
I would just remind your correspondent that there is a wide difference
between replying to the writings of an opponent and personal abuse of the
writer. I confess that I «am truly sorry that any gentleman has so far
forgot himself as to issue such a tirade of personal abuse, and it would only
have given this letter its deserts had I treated it with silent contempt.
Neither have I any thought of making a single remark upon his miserable
attempts at wit, whilst sporting spurious puns upon the initials of my
name. I will just take the liberty, however, of telling him that the less he
says of humility the better ; and I would advise him, to consult his own
respectability before he blows off such a blast of vituperation again. In
conclusion, I would just remind him that, when a man boasts o having
escaped the shot, he will at least, furnish some evidence that he lias not
B.
been stung.
[The above communication must close this correspondence, which has
been quite long enough to serve all purposes. En.]
Seen, the other night, one of that peculiar species of fish called the groper.
The habitat of this genus is generally in the warmer latitudes; so we presume
this peculiar and particular specimen has gone astray.
SONG
PICKED UP IN YE SALOON OF YE YOUNG AUSTRALIA.
AIR —“ Bonnie Dundee."
E. B. K.
(To be continued.)
Several acrobatic feats came off this week. One went slap through a
door, another, on making a summersault, played a harmonious tune on
fiddles with his feet, to the tune of “ Nex my dolly pots kick away,” which
produced great laughter and applause.
We are glad to find our worthy Captain in such good winds lately.
Long may he keep it, and make as many famous runs as lately.
OUR VOLUNTEER MOVEMENT.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Sir, —I beg to return you my best thanks for inserting, in your second
publication, a letter I forwarded to you on the above subject. I must say
that, since its publication, the Volunteers have kept steady to their work,
always ready to “ reef a topsail ” or to swab up a deck. Now, Sir, that I
wish you to draw the inference that I could be so presumptuous as to
imagine that my letter had, in any way, tended to bring them to their pre-
sent state of efficiency, but, as I had previously stated that the corps was
not so well disciplined as it might be, I think it nothing but right to reverse
the order of things, and to give the Volunteers on board that credit they
so well deserve, and to which they are now so justly entitled.
I think, Sir, there was one great mistake in the formation of the corps,
in not having a code of rules drawn up for each man to sign, prior to
enrolling himself as a member, and then each Volunteer would have defi-
nitely understood what his duties were; but, notwithstanding this over-
sight, we have got on admirably, and some of the Volunteers have made
such progress that, I verily believe, they might “ ship ” on board any ship
in the capacity of ordinary seamen, and not overrate themselves.
I.
With our gallant Comander my song I will start,
For ne’er one more worthy did mark off a chart;
The Doctor, the Parson, come next on the seat,
Then Dicken, who late in the morning we greet.
Chorus —You may fill up my cup,
You may fill up my can,
Don’t rouse me up early,
But call out the men,
To work at the pumps, the broom, and squejee,
For it’s eight weeks I’ve been on this changeable sea.
11.
Now Dicken one night lay asleep in his bunk,
When down came the water, through the deck it had sunk,
Then out called great Dicken, “ Boyd a light bring to me,
And the cause of this dripping well very soon see.”
Chorus —You may fill up my cup,
You may fill up my can,
Don’t call me up early,
But rouse out my men ;
You may laugh, you may joke, but who drenches my bed
Will soon feel all the weight of my fist on his head.
111.
How he raved! how he blustered! oh, how he did swear 1
Quoth the Parson, “ By Japers,” pray be quiet there ;
So Dicken coiled up in the stern sheets that night,
And we trust he’ll ne’er be in a similar plight.
Chorus —You may fill up my cup,
You may fill up my can,
Don’t rouse me up early,
But call up the men,
They may work, they may pump, till a quarter-past eight,
While I dream of the water that dripped on my pate.
IY.
One more I must mention, ’tis William the “ shiny,”
See at cards every night how he picks up the “ Kheny ; ”
Hear his martial step sound as he paces above,
Ah! Whitechapel Bill, you’re a leery old cove.
Chorus —You may fill up my cup,
You may fill up my can,
Don’t rouse me up early,
But call up my men ;
Let the “ shiny one ” lie in his peaceful repose,
You may then catch a glimpse of his luminous nose.


WANTED our own side of the TABLE CLOTH, being exchanged for the
? ? dirtier upper cut.
It gave me great pleasure to notice how smartly the “ mizen-topsail” was
“reefed” yesterday afternoon—the men going about their work in a seaman-
like manner—so quiet, and yet so quick—which elicited the warm applause
of several “old salts,” who were watching their proceedings.
I trust the Volunteers will not forget to “clew-up,” and “stow,” a sail,
as we are rapidly bringing our voyage to a close, and I should like the
inhabitants of Brisbane to see what Volunteers are capable of doing.
In conclusion, I hope the Volunteers will call a meeting, and elect a com-
mittee, for the purpose of giving a dinner to Captain Grey, as a slight
return for the kindness we have received at his hands. The interest he has
taken in the welfare of the corps—his assiduous endeavours to promote
harmony and good feeling, as evinced by the soirees he has given us—the
care he has taken and the pains bestowed upon the navigation class, are
but a few of the items to which we are indebted to him,
I think that there is not a Volunteer on board but appreciates the kind-
ness of, and is grateful to, the Captain; and. if some one will make a move,
I am sure they will get a hearty support.
DISCIPLINARIAN.
The Young Australia Times.
No. 7.
FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1864.
We are sorry that the rough weather prevented onr appearing,
as usual, on Saturday. Wedo so to-day, proposing to issue our
next on our arrival in Brisbane, whenever that may be—a week
from now, at the outside, we hope.
The weather the last two Sundays has been so cold and wet
that service could not well be held on deck in the morning, but
in the evening it was held in the cabin, and we were glad to
notice that the chants and hymns were sung to tunes in which
all could join, which added very much to the pleasure of the
service.
Dining the whole of the j)ast week the weather has been very
lough, but fair gale succeeding gale—but we have at last some
fine moderate weather, so much so as to attract the ladies on
deck, v here they have not been able to appear for some time
back. Several very heavy seas were shipped, and many a
hapless individual, who thought himself quite safe, was the
next minute drenched to the skin. One of the water casks on
deck was washed adrift, and had to be stoved in, and a ventilator
was broken off, besides various other damages, but none of any
moment. _ Yesterday, about mid-day, one sea washed nearly up
to the main yard, and the spar, to which the starboard tip boat
was attached, snapped in two~a wonder boat and all did not o> o ,
as the davits are broken too. Much water went down the various
hatches into the ’tween decks, and Messrs. Grimley and Fryer’s
cabin on the deck had the window broken in, swamping beds
and everything in the cabin. As might have been expected, the
rolling was very heavy, sofficiently so indeed to roll some out of
their berths. No real damage was done, however, and we have
luckily passed over the week without any sails being blown
away. Everybody has felt uncomfortable during the whole of
the week, and grumbling was running very high, but the greater
pan of it has ceased now that the fine weather has come again
which shows that there was not any very great cause. We are
now only a good day’s sail from Tasmania, and evervbody is
looking forward to going ashore early next week. Letter writing
is qiute the order of the day, one and all hoping soon to termi-
nate a passage which has been, up to the present time, far from
an unpropitious one.
A proposition has been made to try how much can be raised
or printing this paper, and a list has been going the rounds to
find out how many copies can be disposed of at 2s. 6d. each
W e are sorry to find that only 120 have been marked down as
yet, and it will cost at least £25, so that £lO has yet to be sub-
scribed for in one way or another. The question must soon be
decided, and in our next issue full particulars will be given
about it.
Some changes have taken place in the Volunteer Corps ; 2nd
Lieutenant Ratson having resigned, his post was tilled up by Mr.
Boatswain’s-mate Curry, and Mr. Private Wodehouse was made
Boatsman’s Mate. During the past week the weather has been
so cold and miserable that some have kept entirely below, others
were always at the watch, and when actually required all were
ready when called upon (with some exceptions of course,) and
now that more moderate weather is likely to set in, they will
doubtless be found at their work as regularly as ever they were.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
IR » Every body on board is glad, no doubt, that last week’s rough
weather has gone by. I must admit that it was the most unpleasant and
trying since we left old England ; yet it will be gratifying to all to learn at
the same time that our good ship made again 1,750 miles in seven days,
and that we are to-day, only 340 miles off Van Dieman’s Land, and from
Moreton Bay altogether only 1,600 miles.
With the hope that I shall send you my next letter at anchor in Moreton
Bay (I have enclosed my weekly log),
I remain, dear sir, yours truly,
August Ist, 1864.
CHAS. GREY,
Commander.
REMINISCENCES OF SQUATTER.
[concluded.]
Wb got up early, breakfasted, had some bother with the
marked trees, and camped. About the fifth day we came to a
largish plain; here I was in a fix, as I had no more trees to
follow. I saw a clump about a mile off, to which I told one of
my men to proceed, anxiously awaiting his return, to let me
know whether the line went through it. He came back looking
lather queer, as he told me the whole clump had the bark taken
off them in rings. I knew this was intended to kill them, and
not as a guide. What am Ito do now, thought I; I could only
see one thing for it, so I unloaded my horse, and scoured the
plain a considerable way right and left to see whether there were
any signs of civilisation ; at last, to my inexpressible relief, I
spied a fold of hurdles, and felt most thankful that I would not
likely now be starved in the bush; so I cantered back to the
men, and pleased they were to hear the good news. Wb soon
made to the hurdles, and found a hut close to them, the inmates
of which, though all convicts, treated us most kindlv and civilly,
and expressed their wonder at our making our way so far. I
found that sheep had been sold to somebody, but to whom they
knew not, and they directed me to proceed three miles further,
to the Overseer’s station, who would likely be able to let me
know, so we remained for the night at the latter place, but the
overseer knew nothing about the delivery of the sheep either.
A pretty go this; and he said that I would require to go to the
head station, some 70 miles further, to see about them. I
lather demurred at this, as I knew that such huinbuggin 0 * was
from their own neglect; however, I said that if they would lend
me a horse, and somebody would accompany me, that I would
go, but not unless, so it was settled that the overseer and I were
to start next morning. On arrival I found that they had for-
gotten to give proper instructions, but so far was softened down
m my wrath by having a night once more in civilised societv,
though I had to make sundry apologies to the young ladies, on
account of my beggarly appearance after so many days and
nights in the wild bush. After thanking them for their kind
hospitality, I started next morning, and in two days made my
let urn, got my sheep, had considerable difficulty in getting
them to where the dray was, owing to scrubby, swampy, and
very hilly ground, over which we had to drive them, having
nearly lost them all one pitch dark night, the man who had to
watch them having let them all out of a temporary yard we had
made for them. I happened to awake luckily, and looking into
the yard thought it was very still, and no sheep to be seen, so I


thought it needless to walk after them, as I could scarcely see
my hand, so, as a last chance, knowing that they, if near,
would make a rush when they heard an unusual noise, I gave a
regular theatrical god’s cot call, when I heard, not far off, a
rumbling sound like distant thunder. Here they are, I sang
out to the men, groping their way, and we luckily found them
all right next morning. On my arrival I found that a splendid
watch dog, which I had paid £5 for, had been claimed by
another bullock driver, so they said, that were left with my
dray ; I could not say anything, but was much vexed at losing
my best companion. We now started, many casualties hap-
pening on the road, till, at last, I made a station, where my
partner had appointed to join me. I had nearly got my sheep
scabbed by camping where scabby sheep had been the previous
night, but luckily the frost was so severe that the insects must
have all perished. I, some months afterwards, found out that
the sheep in advance were scabby, and belonged to an old ship-
mate of mine, who I intended to catch by forced marches, if
possible. Luckily I had to turn off in another direction before
I picked him up, and so was saved further risk on that score.
But it was almost a worse risk now, as I had to proceed through
a catarrlued run, where skulls were bleaching all about, and
most thankful was I to hud, after a month or two, that my stock
was quite sound and healthy. This certainly was a good warn-
ing to me, as a new chum, of entering into speculations without
a little previous colonial experience. I now found my partner
awaiting me, and we now travelled on more pleasantly, gaining
experience almost daily, by paying for it, and had still a long
way to get to the end of our journey. Much more- I would
most willingly have narrated, only, as our last weekly number
cannot be expected to be made a book, I must now close, hoping
that I have pointed out to the satisfaction of all, that slow and
sure, with a thorough knowledge of all, is the best ground
work ; not to chance it, as we old chums call it, as by so doing
it is nearly a toss up that you are not very soon ruined.
I must now make mv bow, with sincere wishes that success
may attend all my fellow passengers, bound for a land literally
flowing with milk and honey, where all, with even ordinary
energy, must before many years are over, attain a handsome
competency.
KANGAROO.
AGRICULTURE IN QUEENSLAND.
The above is a very precarious occupation, owing to the want of ordinary
seasons, as in England, of wet and fine weather, and the extreme heat
summer besides; while the rivers available for watering crops all the year
round, are so few' and far between. And farming can only be carried on on
a large scale, by irrigation, which requires a large supply of water; and the
expense of the apparatus, engine, &c., for so doing, is very gaeat. It is true
it would soon pay for itself, but it is not every body that can afford to pay,
say £l2O for one of this kind —I do not mean to say that it is only by using
one it can be made to answer, because I know of several instances, where
parties have begun with their ten or twenty acres, who are now in a fair
way of making their fortune. What I wish to impress upon my roaders is,
the great drawback the heat and drought are. No doubt there are many
places in the Colony, such as the Brisbane River, Logan River, Pine River,
Toowoomba, or Warwick, where the ground is in every way suitable for
farming purposes ; but it must be borne in mind how very far some of these
places are from any market. If there was one close by it would pay very
well in ordinary seasons ; but there is not one, sometimes, for so great a
distance that, in most cases, it pays better to import than to grow, But
there is one thing to be said about it, the Colony is gradually and rapidly
increasing in population, in consequence of the emigration and other natural
causes, and this must, of course, enlarge the tow r ns, and so create a mai net
in each of them. It is contemplated that a railway will be laid down from
Ipswich to Toowoomba, and from thence both to Dalby and Warwick ; in
fact the contract is given for eighteen miles, but I daresay it will be years
before it is finished to Toowoomba. It is chiefly along this railway that the
agricultural reserves will be surveyed, so that produce raised about there
will then always be able to be sold in Brisbane or Ipswich; not but that
sufficient could, and no doubt will, soon be raised about cither of these
places to supply them. There is one advantage in loowoomba, sixty-five
miles from Ipswich, that it is so high, being a table land (as all the Darling
Downs are), on the summit of a mountain ; but they have a poor supply of
water, if required for the purpose of irrigation. Wells can be sunk, but they
are very expensive. Ido not know the average depth of those in Toowoomba,
but I fancy about ninety feet. The swamp is always running, but it is
difficult to get a farm on it. Nearer the sea the creeks are not only deeper,
but more frequent. From what I have seen, I find that parties, with a
family who can work in the grounds, are those who get on ; and, in fact,
those who take up their land-orders, and will be content if they live more
comfortably than in the old country for some time, without actually making
money, why, there is your work before you, but it will be some time before
you can do more, as it will take some time to get the ground cleared and
fenced in. At first I would advise you only to clear as much as you think
it will take to pay your expenses for the time being, which you can plant
with any thing you like ; afterwards you can go on clearing, and planting
as you do so. It is far more economical to clear the ground yourself, as any
one else would charge from £4 to £l2 per acre, and this would take a good
bit if the farm were large. To do it yourself is wiser also, as you will then
be able to plant a little, and, by the time the remainder is cleared, you will
have more experience, and you will be more likely to get more off a little
well tended than a larger one neglected. Much discretion is also necessary
as to planting. The Colony is adapted for almost everything in that way ;
but those articles most in use, such as maize, cotton, pumpkins, grapes, pine
apples, and several other things, should be chiefly grown, because there is
always a demand for them ; but it is advisable to grow also things different
from your neighbour, because it may then happen that you will be the only
person holding that article, and can, of course, command a larger price.
Farming has many advantages: you are your own master; you can keep
your fowls, cow, pigs, &c.; and can, in fact, very nearly produce sufficient
off the ground, in one way or another, to supply the house without buying
anything; but if you want help you will have to pay a very long price; for
the use of a plough is about 12s. per day with the risk ; and 255. per week,
without rations, for a man to help you ; still, as I have said before, money
can eventually be made at it, as, in course of time, machinery may be pur-
chased, and then you cannot help getting on; for the ground is very rich,
and grows very heavy crops, such as 40 bushels of maize to the acre, and
45 cwt. of potatoes from 90 lbs. of seed. As I said in a former paper, see
your ground before you buy it; and if you buy any, be sure you can procure
the deeds for it, as such things have been known as selling the ground which
did not belong to them. But perhaps there are some who are in a position
to purchase a farm already ploughed and fenced in. These same remarks
apply to them also ; but I would advise you not to be in too great a hurry
as to buying. Look well about you, and do not, because a farm is to be sold
cheap, say, I must have that, as it may turn out a very dear one in the end.
Floods in the rivers have to be guarded against, and, as most of the farms
are situated on the banks of streams, it is necessary to see to that. It is
not very long since that half the farmers about Brisbane were nearly ruined
by a flood ; some of the people were on an island —their crops washed clean
away, huts and all, while they themselves had to be fetched off from their
perilous position in boats. Such things do not often happen, nor are they
wished for. Seeds for planting are to be had best from Mr. A. J. Hockings,
Brisbane, from whom all the newest kinds can be obtained ; and those who
think of planting a vineyard, should procure a collection of plants from
him as he has the finest in the Colony.
A SEVEN YEARS’ RESIDENT.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(To the Editor of the Young Australia Time',)
—Now, that we are drawing near to our journey's end, permit me
just to make a few remarks, by way of reflection upon our past, present;
and future. Our journey thus far has been singularly propitious. Our ship
is all that could be desired, whether “in breeze, gale or storm,” and our
Captain, and his two mates, are not only men of skill but of sound sense —
cautious and painstaking in the management of the ship, and, we have no
hesitation in saying, that they have commanded the respect and confidence
of all on board. Various little matters concerning the dietary arrange-
ments have been, and still are, matters of opinion ; but these are things to
be settled with the owners of the vessel, and not with Captain Grey and his
two mates.
It is impossible that any one can revert, without feelings of satisfaction,
to the very pleasant passage which we had from Great Britain all the way
to about 29° S. of the Equator. Since then, we have had strong winds,
approximating to a gale, but they have invariably blown in the right
direction, and, within the last month, our ship has shewn us what she can
do with a fair wind, even though there be a rough sea.
The time is now drawing on when those who were strangers before shall
be strangers again. Friendships, we have no doubt, will have sprung up
which may be lasting; but, in the great majority of cases, the passengers
by the “ Young Australia ” will depart, and, in a few years, know each
other no more. We have had all the characteristics of a little community
.—all the little jealousies, bickerings, and, we are sorry to say, backbitings
of any other little town or country village. And how often have the few
observing characters on board indulged in a smile, as they saw the interest
which the many took in those little social matters, as if they thought the
voyage was to last for years, instead of a few months. And, now that our


journey is drawing to a close, what is to become of all the little heart-
burnings, and private piques, in which the silly have indulged? In the
course of little more than a week, they will be all over, as the circum-
stances which caused them will very likely have vanished.
There is something solemn in the thought of this little world, in which
are, being broken up and scattered abioad * nevei to meet till the
great day of final accounts, when we must “all appear.” But there is some-
thing far more solemn in the thought that, though we shall “ all appear,”
it is possible that our positions may be very different. Some will appear to
testify to the glory of redeeming grace ; others will testify to the justice of
the Judge of all the earth ; for the shrieks that rise up from the place of
woe shouts of unwilling praise to the Holiness that placed them
there.
Trusting that the lessons taught by the various providences of God will
not be lost by the passengers by the “Young Australia,” and that hence-
forth they will remember to live to Him who has bought them with His
blood,
I remain, yours faithfully,
B.
THE THUNDERSTORM AT SEA.
’Twas eight bells in the mid-day watch,
The lightning flashed far off astern,
The thunder’s distant roar we catch,
It warns us of a coming storm.
The winds commence a mournful sigh,
The ocean waves are streaked with foam,
Cold rains descend from the gloomy sky,
From Crozet Isles the storm doth come.
Nor scarcely have ten minutes passed,
When that dark storm which seemed so far,
Suddenly, o’er each stately mast,
In all its thundering power is near.
And all above, and all around,
With ten-fold noise the thunder-blast;
Both winds and waves increase the sound,
The lightnings play around the mast.
We quickly run at each command,
To haul the ropes, whate’er it be,
For all must give a helping hand
In this one danger of the sea.
And now the rain has changed to sleet,
The thunder seems within our reach ;
To the slippery deck scarce hold our feet,
When shaken by each awful crash.
The fiery fluids breath did kiss
The truck of our most lofty mast,
Some said it on the deck did hiss,
Our iron conductor saved the rest.
The storm has passed, we thankful feel;
The elements have harmed us not;
The lamp doth light our noontide meal;
That storm will never be forgot.
E. B. K.
SECOND HALF OF SONG PICKED UP ON YE SALOON OF YE
“YOUNG AUSTRALIA.”
Am—“ Bonnie Dundee .”
Y.
Now Dickon once more to the stern sheets he crept,
Finds Woodhouse the Witty in sweet slumber wrapt,
With a kick he awakes him, “ Come clear out of this
You fat one, how dare you coil up in my place!”
Chorus \_Wrath fully by Dickeri\ —
You may fill up my cup,
You may fill up my can,
But I’ll turn you out early
If this is your game.
You may wriggle, and chuckle, and make up your joke,
But the next time you’re here your round carcase I’ll soak.
VI.
Says Witty to Curly, “You are long it is true,
But my legs, though they’re short ones, I’ll make tell on you,”
They slept little that night, but they both kicked and swore;
Perhaps the great Wit was worsted, for he slept there no more.
Chorus [ triumphantly by Dicken\ —
You may fill up my cup,
You may fill up my can,
I’ve turned him out early,
He won’t come again;
His short legs are no match for my lengthier pins,
Nor his fat clumsy flippers for my elegant fins.
YU.
There’s Hacking, named Esau, from having much hair,
Nuon sees him still snoring asleep in his lair!
He owns that huge engine that’s called the “ rat trap,”
On deck ’twas a caution to many a chap.
Chorus —You may fill up my cup,
You may fill up my can,
If you value your life
He who touches my curtains before eight bells it strikes,
Will find that the rat-trap can pinch when it likes.
VIII.
There’s Harman, who leads all the singers ; I trow,
• From his taking much sleep, he is sometimes called Joe;
And Ivory, he who at chess is so sharp
And musical, list! to that little Jew’s harp.
Chorus —You may fill up my cup,
You may fill up my can,
I have sheep, I have cattle,
I have horses and men,
Till I see Moreton Bay, Oh, I hope ’twill be soon,
I’ll play my accordian, at night vinyl et un.
COMMERCIAL.
Leaks : In abundance, market overstocked. One large one growing out
of the stem of the vessel soon shrivelled up after sales commenced.
Tumblers : Daily getting scarcer. Stewards “ prig ” them whenever
they can. (Owners beware.)
Fowls : Larks —a large supply at Messrs. Fryer’s.
Beef : Owing to heavy falls, “ rounds ” are flat.
Spirits : Our taster has actulaly a bottle of his own, but shows a decided
preference for any one else’s.
Wines: Never were any on board—the nasty decoctions supplied having
no title to that name.
Tobacco: Our taster has at length decided in favour of “Cadged Nail-
rod.”
Metals : Brass —notwithstanding large demands upon it, Messrs. Jack-
son’s stock is not nearly exhausted.
Phosphorus : A large supply on view at night. No buyers, though it
may be had for the asking.
Salts : Samples of this article on board, which, thougfi old, are the more
valuable on that account.
E. B. K.
The Young Australia Times
THUESDAY, AUGUST 11, 1864.
No. 8.
YWp to-day publish our last edition, having arrived safely in
Moreton Bay. It does not contain anything but the Captain’s
letter and log, and a history of the passage, which it is hoped
will be of interest; as a log was not kept on purpose to write
one out from, it is not so full of information as it might have
been, but the best has been done, we are sure, under the
circumstances.
The printing of this paper has been finally decided on, the
saloon passengers making up the amount required by taking an
extra number of copies. Captain Gray has kindly taken charge
of the printing, and will advertise the day on which subscribers
can have their copies. Any who may be compelled to leave
Brisbane before they are finished will have them forwarded by
sending their address to the Captain at Brisbane.
Having now come to an anchor we must bid adieu to our
readers. We have not been as well supported as we expected
to be, but to those who have aided us by their labour we are
much obliged, and to non-subscribers (as regards writing, not
cash,) we can only say that we hope you have been pleased and
satisfied by the endeavours of your fellow passengers, who have
done their utmost to alleviate the monotony and ennui of a long
and (as it always must be) an unpleasant passage. Trusting
that you will all be visited with a fair share of Dame Fortune’s
good gifts, and obtain the blessing of health, which, after all,
is the first earthly consideration, we wish you all farewell.


{To the Editor of the Young Australia Times.)
Sib, —Thanks to kind Providence we are safely in port. As we shall all
part in a day or two, perhaps to meet no more, and this will be my last
letter to you, I wish to express my sincere regret that I shall now lose such
a fine body of passengers who have earned my regard and esteem for their
excellent behaviour throughout the passage, and were ever ready to assist
me in carrying out ship’s discipline.
To my noble volunteer-midshipmen corps, officers, and men, I beg to
return my sincere thanks for their kind and ever-ready assistance in the
navigation of the ship. If it were in my power to give more substantial
tokens of my gratitude towards them, I should willingly do so. I trust
they will take the will for the deed, and hope they will often remember
with pleasure their volunteer-midshipmen’s days on board the “Young
Australia,” and her commander.
To every one, fore and aft, on board, I wish a hearty farewell, and every
success, and may God bless them. You, Mr. Editor. I wish to thank
particularly, for the trouble and care which you have bestowed upon your
valuable paper, and which has afforded me great pleasure. With a hearty
good bye,
*S. am, yours very sincerely,
CHAS. GREY,
Commander.
COMMERCIAL.
Sails : Nearly come to a close.
Mutton : Scarce—the last lot being so quickly disposed of.
Cups and Saucers ; Greatly enquired for, but few on hand.
Beer : After a -slight rise has fallen again, though there is none in the
market.
Salmon : Season just about to commence. Get your tackle ready. A
fair sample leapt, the other day, out of the River Plate, and landed safely
in Messrs. Taylor and Jackson’s “ crib-box.”
Sou’westers : Too plentiful, not wanted, and we should be glad to get
rid of such bad stock.
Iron : Pig—a small quantity found in the nursery, quickly disposed of.
M ater: Very scarce this week—so much so, that some of our hands
could not wash their faces for two days. More plentiful by last advice.
Packing Thread and Neeles: Enormous demand, and likely to gooff
well.
Fish : None, not to be got.
Water Vessels : Getting plentiful.
Cables : In great request, one parted with lately.
OUR VOYAGE .
On the Bth May, 1864, our good ship Young Australia, left the East India
Bocks, was towed down the river, and made fast to a buoy off Gravesend
the same evening, during heavy rain and wind.
9th.—We embarked some of our passengers in the morning, and left in the
afternoon, having on board Mr. Thomas, the channel pilot; came to an
anchor during the night at the Nore.
10th.—Early this morning we set sail with a fair wind, which gradually
freshened, but after carrying us as far as Brighton, deserted us. We passed
close to this town, as well as to Dover, Eastbourne, and some minor places.
11th.—If the wind had held we should have been at Plymouth by this
time, instead of which we were off Portland, and within a few hundred
yards of the Portland Race, where the water was white with foam, though
the rest of the sea was perfectly smooth : we were told that this was owing
to the uneven surface of the bottom.
12.—There being no wind we were tugged into Plymouth this morning.
This short run down the channel was a very pleasant one, the weather was
cold but generally fine. Dancing took place every evening on the poop ;
only a few of the passengers were sea-sick. We passed very close to the
channel fleet off Deal, saluting the flag-ship “Edgar” as we passed; all
went ashore at Plymouth as soon as possible, and the remainder of the
day was devoted, by most of the passengers, to laying in a stock of
luxuries and odds and ends for the long voyage before us. Our live
stock was also got on board, consisting of sheep, pigs, fowls, and ducks.
13th. —Was spent ashore.
14th.—The blue peter being up to-day warned those ashore that it was
time to make their appearance on board again; several fresh passengers
joined us here, who had preferred to perform the journey to Plymouth by
land. Owing to various circumstances we did not weigh anchor till half-
past 9 p.m. We exchanged cheers with the “ Whitehall, ’ an emigrant
ship which left an hour or two before us, for Sydney, and there took a
farewell look at the sound, and the wooded hills of Plymouth; we were
then taken in tow as before, passing close to some of the channel fleet,
which had come in the day before; the tug left us about 11 p.m., in very
smooth water, a few miles out, and with scarcely any wind. Our last
recollections of England were pleasant ones, for instead of the usual
Plymouth drizzle accompanying us we were favored with a gloiious
c.Jm evening on which to take our last luors of the old country.
21st.—This week was altogether a pleasant one, it was ushered in on
the 16th by a dead calm, this was succeeded on the next day by a light
breeze, then another calm, and so on to the end of the week ; the first
few days passengers had enough to do in getting things ship-shape, and
their berths into order. On the 18th some large sun fish were observed
cruising about ; an exciting boat race also took place on this day the two
quarter boats were lowered—the port boat manned by a crew of saloon
passengers, the starboard by the second class ; both boats pulled ahead of
the ship, started there, pulled round the ship from the port side and
finished at the starboard gangway, or rather the davits of the starboard
boat; the saloon crew came in first, but owing to the line of race
mistaken by the coxswain of the other boat, they could not claim the
victory; both crews pulled well, considering the heat. Dancing always
commenced regularly after tea, 8 o’clock, and was kept up with spirit till
after nine, the music consisted of a concertina, with sometimes the addition
of the bones; cards followed till it was time to turn in. We were also
indebted to the Captain for some well executed airs on the piano; his
canaries also added their cheerful songs to the general gaiety, so that we
h id our fair share of music.
28th.—We commenced this week with a fair and strong breeze, which
died away on the next day. The Doctor performed Divine service on
Sunday, on the poop, to a large congregation. The 24th being the Queen’s
birthday was, of course, kept with all due honors, we hoisted the ensign
and our colours, fired a royal salute at 12 a.m., and sang the National
Anthem on the poop. On the 25th a steamer passed us which we supposed
was bound to Madeira; owing to the direction of the wind we steered
inside this island instead of outside. On the 26th we sighted land on the
starboard bow, also on the port, and by 10 o’clock were within four or five
miles of Porto Santo, on the port quarter—this island looked desolate from
this direction ; we were becalmed here, and had ample time to view it
through every description of glass, houses could be seen in a bay, and
patches of cultivated land, we were informed, there belonged to Portu-
gese fishermen. Madeira and the island of Desertas loomed mistingly out
on the starboard bow, fully 15 miles off, a breeze soon after springing up
we lost sight of all the islands. Our corps of Volunteer Midshipmen "was
organised on this day, and went through some drill in the evening. Some
large Grampuses were seen to-day.
4th June.—Sharks were seen for the first time in the early part of this
week. The servicemen Sunday was performed by Mr. Boyd, instead of the
Doctor. Owing to Jalms -we made our shortest run this week being 11
miles from noon on one day to noon on the next. On the 30th May we
sighted an island named Salvages. On the 31st spoke a Portugese corvette,
and during the afternoon of the same day we ran to within a few hundred
yards of an English steamer, named the “ Eleanor,” from Newcastle, for
Adelaide, 21 days out, under canvass only. Small shoals of bonita ap-
peared during the day, but though white rag, red rag, and meat were
held out as inducements, no one succeeded in catching any. The blue
and pink Nautilus, better known as the Portugese man-of-war, floated by.
A great many events happened during the 31st, for we finished it by sight-
ing the Peak of Teneriffe. On the next day, Ist June, the Peak appeared
about 15 miles off, on the starboard bow, Canary Island was also seen on
the front bow. We made out the town of Santa Couz in the afternoon, and
some grassy slopes were visible above the town; the Peak had some snow
on it ; here we were fairly in the influence of the N.E. trades. The
Captain gave a supper to the Volunteer Midshipmen on the 3rd, which
went off with great success. We sighted a full-rigged ship in the forenoon
of the 4th, and were soon within signalling distance; she proved to be the
“Ajmeen,” from London for Otago, 21 days out. The Young Australia
Times made its first appearance on the 4th.
11th June.—The Trades increased in strength the commencement of
this week, the most remarkable occurrence was the number of ships that
we passed. On the night of the sth we passed a ship, and early in the
morning sighted another, and by noon were alongside of her; she turned
out to be the barque “ Leodine,” from Liverpool for Calcutta, 31 days
out. On Sunday service was performed by Mr. Boyd, as usual—in the
morning on the poop, and in the saloon at 8 p.m. On the 6th we sighted
four vessels in the middle of the day, and by 9 p.m. had passed three of
them —the “ Elizabeth,” of Arbroath, from Swansea for Bahia, 31 days
out: the “Lorenzo,” from London for Melbourne, 28 days out: the third
ship was passed some distance to windward. During the 7th, Bth, and
9th the wind changed from the N.E. trades to the variables; the ther-
mometer rose to 81 and 82 in the saloon; spoke a homeward bound ship
on the 9th, the “Octavia,” from Bourbon to Bordeaux. 81 days out. On
the 10th we were becalmed, and signalled a homeward bound ship, the
“ Asia,” from Akyab to Falmouth, 100 days out; in answer to our request
she said she would take letters for us, a boat was accordingly lowered, and
Mr. Byrne took our letter bag for England on board.
18th. —We signalled a ship on the 11th, but she was too far off to make
anything of her. 12th—In tacking about came close to a ship named the
“ Balmyra,” from Liverpool to Bombay, 29 days out; her Captain paid us
a visit. 13th —The S.E. trades commenced. On the 15th the great event
of the week came off—Crossing the Line—Neptune paid us a visit with ail
his suite ; the whole ceremony was carried out in the most perfect style,
none being shaved except those who liked it — the exceptions were, however,


few ; the evening was brought to a close with singing, dancing a 1
&c„ and the whole day’s proceedings were most pleasant and satisjac J.
Our paper should be consulted for further particulars. On the 16th,
and 18th, we were sailing along merrily with the S.L. trades.
25th June.—The past week has brought us nicely on our „
old ship having run nearly 1900 miles-as we now have the Oalevinls
which have been very light, and, at the same time, tickle. Dm mg tne
week the wind has several times shifted in “squalls,” and, consequently our
ship had to be put about several times. On Sunday evening, foi ms ai »
«squall” came 1 up resembling a mountain, and as black as Ever>-
bodv therefore expected a ve?y stiff “squall,” but they were deceived. It
has been quite calm as usual, all the day, and the breeze which spiang up
with the “squall ’ continued to blow for two or three days pretty stron 0 ,
and aUsails^set, 1 with the studding sails also; but, on Thursday evening,
the 23rd, a sudden shift of wind with a heavy sea, and fining caused us
to go on the other tack, but still in our course, and, on
it went back to its old place. Bathing has been m great ** *
the week, and is the only thing which will entice some of the pasi
out of their beds, and even then they return to them, bath is held
about 6 a.in., and is formed by a canvas screen with cover to it, m which
holes are made, and water pumped into it by the pumps close by-a vcrj
simple contrivance, but one which tends towards keeping good the health
of all who make use of it. On Monday, some changes took place
“ Volunteer Corps of Midshipmen,” owing to the resignation of Ist Lieutenant
Trollope, who is succeeded by private Shaw They have been gradua y
gaining in experience, and will, no doubt, be of great service, should ;
favoured with any rough weather: and, on Thursday a lecture was gi*en
them by Captain Grey about the use of the compass—the various ropes, Ac
-which will be of great use to them. They have been pretty busy at
various kinds of work, and, on Friday, they shifted the gun from the mam
deck out of the quarter deck, after which, they scraped and cleaned it, ai id
endeavoured to make it look as respectable as possible ; it was afterwards
painted black. Divine service was held on Sunday morning on the poop,
which was pretty well attended, and, in the evening, the one in the saloon
was fully so —many persons being compelled to stand for the want of seats
—the chants, &c., being sung by all present. We passed two vessels—one
outward, and the other homeward, bound, but did not go close enough to
speak either of them. On Thursday, the second edition of the Young
Australia Times was published, and notice given that it would be issued
every week, which there seemed every probability of their being able to do
so The amusements on board are not very numerous, and the one ot
quoits has been discontinued, in consequence of the excessive heat, but all
quiet games are still in great request.
2nd July.—Another week has passed away, and we have made a inn
during the week of 1039 miles, and have now lost the S.E, “ trades if we
can say that we ever had any. At any rate, they have been uncommonly
light for this time of year. Westerly winds, with ram and “squalls _ have
prevailed throughout the whole week, and, on Thursday, we experienced
our first gale since we left the shores of Old England, and many a lands-
man was surprised at the way the “Young Australia” shook her pas-
sengers about, and to see her scudding away with only double-reefed top-
sails and her foresail set, was a very pretty sight, as she mounted on the
waves just as if she were a duck. Up to the present time, we have had
weather such as one might hope for in a pleasure expedition, but not on a
voyage where speed is the order of the day: but, now we have had a spirt
of rough weather it is probable we shall have as much as we care for it
was rare fun to those who were used to it to see things and individuals
rolling about, going in places they never intended, and trying their best to
keep on their bunks. One or two were seen clinging with, might and mam
with one hand to the bunks they were lying in, and to the one above them
with the other. During this time, as the wind was constantly shifting, the
Volunteers were in great requisition, and they all stuck well to it—doing duty
day and night—but, it is greatlv feared, they will slacken when the
really cold weather sets in, which we may now soon expect, and it is, after
being out in the rain four hours hauling at ropes, off which the wet runs
down the arms, that “splicing the main brace,” as they term it—or, m
other words, a glass of grog, neat and strong—is. found pleasant, 2nd
Lieutenant M‘Loud resigned, and private Ratson appointed m his stead.
It is a great pity these changes take place, as they unhinge the whole move-
ment, but, being voluntary, it cannot be helped. On Sunday, divine service
was held both morning and evening—the one in the evening, when Captain
Grey played the piano during the singing (which was a very great improve-
ment), and the other on the poop, in the morning, were both well attended.
We have not, at any time, seen many fishes; but, on Sunday, we were
greeted with the sight of two whales, who were seen spouting at some
distance from the vessel—blowing the water to the height of some two feet,
or so. Many flying fish have been seen, but none caught, nor did any fly
into the rigging. After the gale was over, on Friday, in the evening, we
passed by a vessel called the “Lightning,” from London to Melbourne, bl
lays out. Many jokes were made about our beating “ Lightning, which
we did very easily—going past her as if she were at anchor and we gave
her three hearty cheers, as we passed, and left her far astern; this we i
with all vessels near enough to hear us. On Saturday, a steamer was seen
m the mast-head, outward bound, but we did not sight her any closer.
Dancing was again commenced this week and the
voyag^^ThiiTevening Tsa^daf),'the^hi Vedition of t
ha~ fa7on heTway tZavds her name-sake (if Queensland from being
thenoHhZekonThursday and Friday. There is one thing to be said of
the winds which we are now having, that they are in variably fan, am
cannot but hope that they will carry us quickly on our way; though at the
same time would prefer a little lighter wind, as our ship evidently sails
better in light winds than she does in those that are so very strong, in con
sequence oilier being small; but there is another thing; it seems that the
sh ns husband as he is termed, or the man, who sees that all is put, ana
that properly on board a vessel, which they may require refused to put
fresh sheets they are called, into the sails, although he was told they
were not in gcol order, and required them ; the consequence has been thac
whenever we have had a strong wind, some sail or other was sure to go ,
this week has not been an exception, as two sails which ought ne\er ' to bo
taken in, however hard it blows, were blown into 100 pieces It is penny
wise and pound foolish, to say the least of it to send a vessel to sea without
proper gear. On Sunday, as usual, we had a calm, and gieat excitement
prevailed as we were to be a-breast of Tristan d’Acunaha to-morrow morning
and if calm (?), and if near enough (?), the Captain said he would lowoi a
boat, and let some have a run ashore, but during the night a nice breeze
sprang up carrying us nicely past the island, which we left on ourng.it
about twelve miles; we were then carrying studding sails, a thing whicn is
very rarely done in those latitudes, but we seem to be quite out of the
regular state of affairs—we ought to have strong winds all the time, instead
of which it is first a gale and then a calm, and so it keeps jogging about.
This Island of Tristan d’Acunaha is said to be inhabited by a man who
goes under the cognomen of “ Governor Glass he is married and has three
daughters (not very young). He trades with the Cape of Good Hope, ms
several vessels with which he does so, and has plenty of sheep and other
things. There are also a great number of wild birds and fishes on the island.
It must be a very solitary life indeed; but, as they must be making money,
they stay there all alone, seeing only the crews of their vessels On the bth r
wc entered upon another period of our passage, having passed that day, into
the eastern part of the world; and many are the opinions expressed by
individuals, as to the time of our arrival in Brisbane; in fact, there is daily
quite a congregation round a board which is placed on the mam deck, upon
which the latitude and longitude, with the distance, is daily written down
at 12 noon. Many bets are made on the runs of our good old ship,_ which
tend very much to alleviate the monotony of our voyage, which is now
beginning to be felt rather tedious by many. On Saturday morning, the
9th, the passengers were horrified by the intelligence, that our ship s car-
penter had fallen overboard, and was drowned, the previous night while
drawing a bucket of water, about 8 o’clock p.m., when, it is supposed the
weight of the water, combined with a strong lurch of the vessel, gave him
his final exit from this world. He was a very steady man, respected by the
Captain and mates as a hard working, industrious, and sober workman.
His death was awfully sudden, and it is strange that he was not seen oi
heard by any body on board, so many being about at the time ; and it was
not until something he was working at was required, at 12 o clock, that it
was found out, and even then it was only known he was seen to be drawing
a bucket of water and the bucket was gone. It cast a gloom o\ ci all, <vm
it has been proposed by the Captain, that a subscription should be set on
foot for his bereaved wife and children. If his death was painful to all on
board, what will be the feelings of that poor woman when she hears of it?
May God preserve her and her little ones in the midst of theii affliction.
Nothing has occurred on board, besides the above melancholy event, morn
than usual, during the past week, which varies very little at any time. On
Monday evening dancing was carried on upon the poop, by the aid of a lamp,
with great spirit, as the temperature will now admit of Cards,
gammon, chess, &c., are in very great demand. I his evening the fourth
edition of the “ Young Australia Times” appeared; and at the same time a
first number of “ Etches and Sketches” made its appearance—a periodical
produced by the 2nd cabin passengers, chiefly; amongst numerous other
things, it contains various sketches of ways and doings on board, which do
the artist great credit.
16th July.—An average of 210 miles per day has been the run which our
good ship has made during the week which terminates to-day; she has
now proved herself to all on board to be anything but a bad sailei every-
body was of that opinion before, as we have not met with any other vessel
which has not soon been left far astern, and as we passed we gave them
hearty cheers, such as Britishers only can give, and away we went,
scarcely having time to say anything to them, so quickly did we glide
past them all. It is not likely we shall see any more until we arc off
the Australian coast, which is a loss to us, for the excitement op ship
ahoy!” was intense, opera and spy glasses were in high requisition,
trying to make out who she might be, what colored coats the men had
on on deck, and it has even been heard that some said they could dis-
The Young Australia Times.


tinguish what color the captain and mates’ beards were, although some
two miles distant; besides which seeing a vessel every other day makes
us forget we are on the wide wide ocean, but now the solitary life begins,
as it may be, a month ere we speak to any vessel again. During the
week that has passed away many changes have taken place in the appear-
ance of the deep and even flowing sea. Sunday, as usual, was calm ; Mon-
day a gale was blowing in the evening, which continued all Tuesday ;
on Wednesday all plain sail was set, and kept on the rest of the time—
in consequence of the gale the sea was excessively rough on Wednesday
and Thursday, but on Friday it was quite smooth again. We have not
been without our misfortunes this week owing to the carrying away of a
topsail sheet, but we have come off better than last. On Monday the fore
and mizen royal yards were taken down and stowed away on deck, because
of the rough weather, but they will be hoisted again before we arrive at
Brisbane ; the lowering of them also lessens the rolling of the ship, which
has been very great. Divine service was held both morning and evening,
upon both which occasions our honorary chaplain took the opportunity
of impressing upon his congregation the importance of being prepared to
depart this life, as exemplified in the case of our poor carpenter, closing
his remarks with a hope that all would subscribe, freely and willingly, to
the fund for his poor wife and children, as it is written, “ God loveth a
cheerful giver.” The subscription list has been well filled in, and upwards
of £2O will be forwarded by Captain Grey to the bereaved family. On
Sunday the union jack, which is usually hoisted on that day, was only
half-mast high in consequence of his death. Not any changes have taken
place in the Volunteer Corps, but on Monday evening a soiree was held by
the starboard watch in the saloon, at 8 p.m, which was well attended,
and closed by the whole company singing “ God save the Queen,” the
interim having been filled up by various games, with a few songs, ac-
companied on the piano by Captain Grey, who is always foremost in the
field when anything is astir for the pleasure of the passengers. Several
things have been proposed by him : quoits were quite the rage the first
part of the passage, then dancing, volunteering, and many other things
are his propositions ; he also spoke of getting up a play, which is again
mentioned this week, the one of “Box and Cox” being thought suitable
—it remains to be proved whether it will be done or not. We are now
nearly as far south as it is proposed we should go, and it is not stretching
a point at all to say that it is cold, and in the extreme too, at times ;
still, even this is liked better than the excessive heat, because in hot
weather it is almost impossible to keep the tween decks cool, and many
of the male passengers just threw themselves down on the deck, but now
it is very rarely that some of them show their faces on deck at all.
We still have many birds about, but none are caught, as they seem to be
up to all the dodges. Some drift wood and sea weed passed by us, it
must have come from some islands (Crozet) which we passed at a dis-
tance of about 150 miles. The fifth edition of the \oung Australia limes
made its appearance this evening, as also the second of Etches and Sketches ;
it is to be hoped that although setting about it in different ways, each
will be not only a pleasure but of some service to many on board, and,
if nothing more, it will be a pleasing reminiscence to send to the
g folks cit homG
23rd July.—Last week we thought the average of 210 miles per day a
good one, but this week it has been which few vessels will
more especially in similar kind of weather, for even since Monday
morning the sea has been excessively high, and the latter part of the
week it has been a cross sea, but they have been light in comparison
to what was expected from the winds which have prevailed. "W e had oui
usual Sunday calm, it is very strange how this has happened each Sunday
since we left; invariably we have had nearly a head wind the lattei pait of
the week, but on Sunday, a calm has followed, after which a fail wind has
sprung up. It did so this day, and on the following one, the woid passed
alone.' it is going to blow —the glass is falling and suie enough it did, foi
about ten o’clock it began to blow, with thunder and lightning in the
distance. Gradually but surely it neared us, until with a feaiful loai, and
flashes like as if the whole ship was lighted up, it came on us with all
its vengance. Twice did the lightning strike the main mast, shivering the
conductor into pieces, breaking it as if it had been burnt thiough m two
places ; it is exceedingly fortunate for us that it did stnke, foi had it not
done so, it must have split the mast in a thousand pieces It appeared
several times to strike the deck, and it was positively asserted that it did
so, but, of course, the individual was mistaken. During the whole time it
was blowing a gale, with hail and sleet together. Ihe whole ship was Ld
with a sulphurous smell, similar to that after lighting a congieve ma c .
Thank God we passed safely through the danger, and Captain Grey says he
never saw lightning so vivid or thunder appear so near. X c vesse seeme
to shiver again at the sound of the claps. Little did those below know the
danger there was above, but seemed heartily glad w en a was ovei.
steady but strong breeze succeeded this, which ended ma ga e -
day morning, blowing very stiff from the north-noi i-eas ,
just about to heave to (as the wind was dead aheac), w , ,
commander spied a break in the clouds about the horizon to the westwaul,
he immediately ordered all hands to the braces and scarcely had hib oidtis
been executed ere the sudden shift of wind to the quarter had taken place.
The ship fortunately answered her helm properly, as the yards weie bi ought
i f *■" *i * f f h i M
round, and scarcely did anybody know the danger till it had passed over
Too much praise cannot be accorded to Captain Grey for the able manner
in which he managed our good old ship, for had he not seen it, just when
he did, and if it had come upon us suddenly, we must have lost some of our
masts if not totally wrecked, We have one and all much to be thankful,
for; never again, perhaps, will the Omnipotent power of the Almighty be so
fully and clearly proved even to the most hardened on board—but it has
passed away, and with it, no doubt, most of the thoughts such as these, It
has continued to blow very hard all the week, and is now pretty fair, which
it was not the former part, It is in scenes such as these that the use of
volunteers are proved, for had it not been for them, the whole of the yards
could not have been brought round at once, and some of the sails would conser
quently have blown away; but there they were, in all the rain, hail, snow,
sleet, thunder and lightning, the more excitement, the more heartily they
seem to work. Not any changes have taken place in their organization
during the past week, and it is now hoped they will reach Brisbane in their
present state, which Captain Grey presages will be about three weeks from
last Sunday ; of course everybody is very sanguine about it, and many bets
have been made as to the day and even the hour we shall cast anchor. On
Sunday Divine service was held morning and evening, the latter being best
attended in consequence of the extreme cold. On Wednesday we were
abreast of the Island of St. Paul, and it is a very strange thing as regards
this island, that very few vessels pass anything near it without having a
gale, and we were not an exception, as Wednesday proved. As usual, when
in the vicinity of land, we passed a good deal of sea-weed, and had an
immense number of birds. A change has taken place this week, by the
exchange of cabins as pantry, with Messrs. Grimley & Fryer; their cabin
leaking to so great an extent that they could not sleep in their bunks.
Whether the change has their advantage is another question; one
thing is certain, however, that the ringing of the bell for meals down in the
saloon is nearly as unpleasant, as is the voice of the mate, going his rounds
in the forward part of the vessel, crying out “ lights out,” at which moment
(half-past ten p.m.) everybody is supposed to put out their candles. It is no
doubt a great inconvenience, as many people will forget, until they hear
five bells, all about it, and they will have to get into bed in the dark the
best way they can —but discipline must be enforced, and if some such regu-
lation was not made, many would keep the lights burning nearly all night.
The usual games have been carried on during the week, though many
mishaps have taken place, such as misplacing all the chess, or backgammon
men, just at a critical moment, but these are the pleasures of ship-life.
On Saturday, the 23rd, the sixth edition of the “ Young Australia Times”’
and third of “ Etches and Stetches,” appeared for the amusement of all on
board.
30th July.—This week has been most trying, after the past rough weather,
to the crew; for it may be said, that since we passed the meridian of the
Cape, our good old ship has not experienced anything but heavy weather,
still she made this week a run of 1,742 miles—not quite so good as last week,
but really an excellent one. This end has not been gained, though, without
some rough weather, ushered in by a very strong breeze on Sunday, contrary
to our usual custom ; but we were favored with a calm on Monday instead ;
even then the sea was so rough that passengers could not well walk about
on deck, besides which they were as slippery as ice from the extreme cold;
but in the evening a strong breeze sprang up, which ended in a gale. On
Wednesday all plain sail was set, and since that time it has been blowing a
gale, unfortunately too, from the wrong direction, so that we could not keep
our correct course, which would have brought us right close to Van Dieman’s
Land, while to-day we are some considerable distance to the southward of
it. As may be expected, many seas are shipped, and on Tuesday a great
many broke over her, one of which washed away a puncheon containing
fresh water, that was lashed on deck to some rings, and the only way to
prevent its hurting someone, was to stave it in, which was done by the 2nd
mate. It also carried away a ventilator which leads down into the single
females’ cabin, and broke the tank holding water for the supply of the hos-
pital, besides various other damages, such as filling cabins a foot deep-
drenching everybody and playing all kinds of antics. Many of the cabins
in the saloon let in water through the roof, which any vessel would have
done considering the weather,' for we have truly had a rough passage the
latter part of the way, but one and all are in high spirits (more especially
those who have been nicknamed as some wild animal or other) at the near
prospect pf being off Tasmania, and consequently near Queensland. One or
two have endeavored to pass away the monotonous time on board ship by
staying in bed till noon, but it is not unlikely that the Australian climate,
as we get off the shore, will entice one and all on deck earlier, as it is not
probable we shall have much more rough weather. From excessive roughness
and cold, divine service was hot held on deck, in the morning last Sunday,
but in the evening the usual pleasant one was conducted by the Honorary
Chaplain, Mr. Boyd, the Captain playing the chants, &c., on the piano.
Service has also been held, by one of the passengers forward, where there
has always been a good attendance. Whilst 100, backgammon, vingt-et-une,
occupy most of the idle time, and many have commenced their home letters.
The usual weekly paper did not appear to day, as the rolling of the ship
would not allow the writing of them. It has been tried to raise a fund for
the purpose of printing the Young Australia Times , which has at last sue
ceeded, so that it will be printed, unless the expense is more than the sui


raised (£2l odd). Something similar has been done as regards our contem-
porary, Etches and Sketches, but it is not yet known whether they will laise
the amount or not—it is to be hoped that they will both be printed, as there
has been a good deal of trouble attending their publication, for writing at
any time is not easily performed on board ship, and to do so on a certain
dav is far less easily accomplished.
11th August.—We have great need to be thankful to Providence that we
are safely at anchor in Moreton Bay, after a very quick and prosperous
voyage ; it is true we have had some rough weather, but it has helped us
nicely on our way. The population has increased, though two deaths have
occurred—a child in the Ist cabin and the poor carpenter. The health of
all has been good, with very few exceptions, and there is not anything to
detaip us on board when the medical officer has been to inspect us. Y e
have made a very fair run up the coast, and have had something rather
more heavy than pleasant; and at the same time we cannot say that
we have had calms but next door to it. On Sunday, 31st, the wind
was fair and squally, sail taken in, but on Monday all plain sail was
set, though not for long as a very heavy and ugly squall came on; all
sail was taken in, and set again at midnight; this day reefed the top-
sails, as it was blowing hard with a great deal of lightning from off Van
Dieinen’s Land ; sail was set again next day, and the wind continued to
change its force, first strong and then light, until Sunday. On Saturday
it was such calm and fine weather that the mizen and fore royal were
sent up, all paint-washed, and in fact was a general clearing-up day, every-
body expecting, and making sure, to be in harbor early on Monday, if
not Sunday evening. They were doomed to a heavy disappointment,
however, for on Sunday morning the wind began to blow very strong
from the S.E., with a terrible heavy swell ; royals were immediately
taken in, and it continued to increase in force, so that about noon
shorter sail was the order of the day, at the distance of 220 miles from
Qiir destination, and so, of course, must be in by daylight next morning,
and ere night it was blowing a very strong gale from that quarter with
very heavy pitching and tossing about. She shipped a great many seas, one
of which washed away the companion ladder on to the poop, and did
various other damages—the fpre sail, main and mizen top sails, and stay-
sail were blown to pieces, the latter had not been set ten minutes before it
went. Great anxiety was felt by many, as we were sure that the ship was
drifting towards the coast, so much so that one gentleman had his life belt,
with many little necessaries, ready to clap on at a moment’s notice, and
many seemed to walk about expecting every minute to hear her bump upon
the rocks ; but thank God she made a better course than it was believed
she could have done, her track next day being due north. The gale con-
tinued to increase in force until about 6 a.m. on Monday when the main
top gallant mast was carried away, caused chiefly by the excessive laboring
of the vessel; the sight that presented itself to our gaze on our first ap-
pearance upon deck in the morning was one of the utmost desolation, the
mast with the top gallant and royal yards were hanging in the main rig-
ging, and they had in their fall cast adrift the braces, &c., of both fore and
mizen yards ; luckily for us the wind commenced to moderate about that
time, and so we were enabled to commence operations at once, but if it
had still been blowing there would have been a mess indeed. As it was the
spectacle we saw was quite bad enough for anything, and presented a fine
opportunity for artistic display of skill on the part of the promoters of
Etches and Sketches, which they will no doubt take advantage of. It was
quite night before all appearances of the wreck were cleared away from
aloft, and we have now come into port minus a top-gallant mast, as if it
were, to point out to some that they should not be too sure of anything
before they have it, as one or two were bragging only on Sunday morning
that we had not lost a mast, little thinking how soon they would have
another tale. The wind quite lulled, and our good ship had all available sail
set, but did not make much progress, and at daylight on Tuesday morning
land was seen on the port quarter; for this we immediately bore down, and
which proved to be an island or part of the main land south of the
Southern Entrance, so we again turned and made for Moreton Island,
endeavouring to overtake two full-rigged ships bound apparently for
Brisbane. We passed the Lighthouse on Moreton Island at 7 p.m., and
then cast anchor as the wind would not permit us to go further in, having
thus made our passage from land to land in 84J days. On Sunday evening
we passed a vessel bound southward, much nearer the coast than we were,
and many have expressed a hope that she rode safely through the storm.
On Sunday week Divine Service was held in the saloon in the evening, as
usual, and on Sunday last in the morning on the poop, when a parting
address was made by the Honorary Chaplain, Mr. Boyd, and all who have
heard him will join in thanking him for the efficient manner in which he
has performed the duties he undertook ; in the evening it was blowing so
hard that service could not well be held. On Friday a vessel was sighted,
and on Thursday evening an address was presented tp Captain Grey by
Dr. Le Febure, on the part of the whole of the steerage passengers ; and on
Saturday, at 2 p.m., one was given him by the Volunteers on the close of
the voyage likewise ; the same evening, at 8 p.m., he was invited to a
dinner by the saloon passengers, when an address was presented to him
complimenting him on his excellent seamanship and general kindness (full
particulars, with the addresses, will be found in another part of this paper,)
and to-day one was also given to the chief officer, Mr. Byrne, expressive of
the high opinion as to his uniform good humour and sailor-like qualities held
by those signing the document. Monday was a day which will not be easily
forgotten by those on board; not only was there the confusion caused by
the wreck, but the cable had to be brought up on deck and fastened to the
anchor ; hands were clearing up, and every body seemed as busy as it was
possible for them to be. The passengers seemed to turn to, as a body, and
worked hard, so that before night the cables were ready to let go, sail was
set, and the wreck all cleared away, and every body turned in early, hoping
at break of day to see a glimpse of the land of their adoption, where many,
no doubt, will make a home for themselves, and there live and die. To
many, if not to all, it will be one of complete change; new associations and
fresh connexions must be formed, and it will remain with themselves
whether it be for better or for worse. Now will be the golden opportunity
offered for breaking off old habits, and wise will be he who may sever
the link between him and any evil ways he may have contracted. As pre-
viously mentioned, the anchor was let go on Tuesday evening, as the wind
would not permit our tacking up, being too strong; the same has been the
case yesterday and to day ; it is fully hoped the wind will moderate so as to
enable us to proceed to the proper anchorage, about twenty-five miles from
where we now are. It is rather tantalising laying here for two or three
days ; but we have company, as the two vessels we saw are now at anchor
close by us; they are the “ Sultana,” a Black Ball Liner, and the “ Earl
Russell,” a Government emigrant vessel; the former seems to have been in
the wars as well as ourselves, for she has lost her foretop-gallant-mast and
her outer jibboom; and the latter has made a much longer passage than
ourselves. It is very pleasant weather here, the sun shines bright and warm,
but the breeze is beautiful and cool. The passengers can now say that they
have a taste of the true Queensland weather. Things are now being got
puite spuare for going ashore, but when that will be goodness only knows.
The pilot is on board, so that we may say our voyage is at an end, and our
worthy Captain has given up his charge to him. Dancing was carried on
last night, fore and aft the ship, and everyboby is anxiously awaiting their
dismissal from a vessel where they have spent three long months. To many
it has been a time of pleasure ; but to most, one of great discomfort, as all
board ship life must be to those who have not been used to suiting them-
selves to circumstances, and we must all feel thankful to Providence, who
has shielded us in many dangers, preserved us in numberless perils, and at
last brought us safely into port; and may our feelings of gratitude be lasting
and enduring—not transient as the day. We have now brought our remarks
up to the present time to a close, and, in conclusion, will hope that the in-
formation we have given will, at some future day, pleasantly remind our
readers of theirpassage from London to Queensland, in the “ Young Australia.”
E. B. K. & S. G.
VOYAGE OF THE “YOUNG AUSTRALIA.”
When from Gravesend we first did sail
Our faces did wax very pale;
And oh! I fear to tell the tale,
How we pitched into the stout and ale,
On board the “ Young Australia.”
Down channel then, oh! we did steer,
And while the frickle wind did veer,
We still stuck well unto our beer,
Tho’ some of us felt awful queer,
On board the “ Young Australia.”
But when we got into Plymouth Sound,
s Twas fun to see how we all came round ;
And the people at home it would astound,
To see the appetites we all had found
On board the “ Young Australia.”
On the tenth of May, at early dawn,
When birds do warble on the thorn,
And flowers the meadows do adorn,
Two puppies and a child were born,
On board the “ Young Australia.”
To be christened the child had then to be,
And a name had tp be found d’ye see,
To the parents and sponsors, and two or three,
Determined at last his name should be
David “Young Australia.”
At last from Plymouth to sea we went,
On making a quick voyage fully bent.
And most of us were quite content,
So the time was very jollily spent,
On board the “Young Australia.”
And then we got into the trades,
Where people of all sorts and grades,
And gentle youth’s roystering blades
Did dance with lasses of all shades,
On board the “Young Australia,”


And ’twas great fun playing hunt the slipper,
Oft joined in by our Jolly Skipper,
Who, when the brogue was in his flipper,
Would give us what they called a ripper,
On board the “Young Australia.”
Then came the Volunteer Corps,
Who mustered hands about a score,
Whose Doctor snored a very loud snore,
While the Chaplain prayed, and the Boatswain swore,
On board the “Young Australia.”
Now when we arrived at the Line,
Neptune and suite came on board to dine,
And shave, and christen, his children in brine,
And dub them knights of the Blackball Line,
On board the “Young Australia.”
The razors they shaved with had very long teeth,
And the blades they were set in a very large sheath,
And wo ! to the chin which w~as scrap’d underneath,
By the Barber who came from the County of “Meath,”
On board the “Young Australia.”
The volunteers each day progressed.
And each man tried to do his best.
Till the winds did blow strong from the west,
And the billow threw its lofty crest
On board the “Young Australia.”
And then they would lie a-bed in the morning,
The advice and remonstrance of officers, snoring,
Even those plucky chaps who went up the rigging,
Unfortunately acquired a penchant for prigging,
On board the “ Young Australia.”
One would steal mutton, another a ham,
While some one else would collar some jam.
And the steward did often curse and d n
The Volunteers, every man Sam,
On board the “ Young Australia.”
One day were missing some tarts and mince pies,
About which the steward made a great noise,
And swore it was the peep o’ day boys,
So he drugged a couple, which he left for decoys
On board the “Young Australia.”
About this time our beer did fail,
And all who were so fond of ale,
Heard with a sigh the horrible tale.
That no more bottles were for sale
On board the “Young Australia.”
So then we took to drinking grog,
Which set our spirits once more ajog,
But some would still go the whole hog.
And lapped it up like any dog,
On board the “Young Australia.”
But now we’re off Van Dieman’s Land,
Some bottled stout has come to hand,
Which is excellent stuff, being Guinness’s brand.
And comes to us through the purser’s hand,
On board the “Young Australia.”
So as we’re off Australia’s coast,
We’ll give our absent friends a toast,
May God preserve those we love most,
And Captain Grey, our jolly host
On board the “ Young Australia.
August the seventh was an awful night,
And the sea presented a fearful sight,
And the winds did howl with all their might.
Which put us all in a very great fright
On board the “ Young Australia.
Our ship, next day, looked very forlorn
With top-gallant masts gone and sails all torn.
And the back-stays had to be cut and sawn,
To clear the wreck that awful morn,
On board the “ Young Australia.
But now, my friends, we soon must part,
Our track is nearly off the chart,
And I wish you all, with all my heart,
Success, whenever you do start ,
From off the “Young Australia.
ADDRESSES TO CAPTAIN GREY.
The following addresses have been handed to us for publication, as
having been presented to Captain Grey. The saloon passengers invited him
to a dinner, at which it was proposed by Mr. Hacking, and seconded by Mr.
Shaw, that the address from the first cabin, now read by the Chairman (Mr.
Ivory), be presented to the Captain, and printed in the two Brisbane papers,
and The Times in London, which was carried unanimously. There was not
anything particular regarding the presentation of the others, which all
testify as to the regard felt for him on board.
[Ed.]
To Captain Charles Grey,
Commander of the ship “ Young Australia,”
Sir, —We, the undersigned, comprising the whole of the chief saloon
passengers, being now about to leave you, after you have safely piloted us to
our destined port, beg to present this address to you (Captain Grey), as a
slight testimonial of our high appreciation of your kind and couteous
conduct towards us, as a boon companion and most careful commander,
during this our short and most prosperous voyage, and for the due con-
sideration you have shown towards the keeping up of friendly and joyous
feelings amongst us all. Though we are now about to part, you may be sure
we shall always look back with pleasure to the happy days we have spent
with you—our most worthy Captain—to whom, in conclusion, we wish
every prosperity, and beg to remain
Your most sincere and hearty well-wishers,
(Here follow the signatures.)
To the Captain of ike “ Young Australia."
Sir—We, the “ Volunteer Midshipmen” of the “ Young Australia,” can-
not allow our voyage to close without a few words of farewell to one to
whom we owe so much. We thank you, Sir, for having first suggested our
organization, and next for the kindly care with which you have always
superintended our efforts. We have generally endeavoured to perform our
duty, and our greatest gratification has been to elicit, occasionally, a word of
approval from so thorough a seaman as yourself. We now bid you fare-
well, and, with every wish for your prosperity, beg to remain,
Yours, very sincerely,
(Here follow the signatures.)
We, the undersigned single females, steerage passengers, on a
voyage from London to Queensland, beg to tender our heartfelt thanks to
Captain Grey for the gentlemanly, courteous and kind treatment we have
experienced from him during the short time we have been placed undei his
jurisdiction. "We beg he will accept our sincere thanks for the same, and
hope he mav be spared to traverse the ocean for many yeais, with the same
success which has attended him on the present voyage.
(Here follow the signatures.)
We the undersigned, single men, steerage passengers per ■ ship
u Young Australia,” from London to Moreton Lay, Queensland, beg to
express our gratitude to Captain C. Grey, Commander of the said ship, for
his courteous and gentlemanly conduct to us during the voyage, which, with
his qualifications as a navigator, has commanded the respect, confidence
and esteem of us all.
(Here follow the signatures.,)
To the Captain of the “ Young Australia A
g IR —We, the undersigned married steerage passengers of the “ Young
Australia,” on a voyage from England to Moreton Bay, Queensland, do con-
gratulate you, Captain C. Grey, commander of said ship, on this proof of
the Divine favor in blessing your instrumentality, together with youi
able chief officers, Messrs. Byrne and M‘Pherson, and subordinate officers,
in navigating this ship on so long a voyage, and through the most turbu-
lent gales, squalls, nay, oftentimes hurricanes; some of us who are no
strangers to the seas in their wildest state, have perceived your watchful
care and constant fatigue of body and mind, day and night. We have
admired your cool and determined demeanour, also your caution and caie,
we have ever had the greatest confidence in doing all that man could do,
aided as you have been by two such mates, and two promising midshipmen.
We feel it our duty thus to address you at our parting, and that God may
bless you in your future command, and spare you and your officers to the
company, and country, is our earnest piayer.
[Here follow the signatures.]
The two following have also been handed to us for publication .
To the Captain of the “ Young Australia .”
s IR —We, the undersigned Roman Catholics on board the “ loung Aus-
tralia” beg to tender you our most grateful and heartfelt thanks for yom
kindness in acting as our Chaplain during the voyage, and for your eloquent
and touching advices to us while acting in that capacity.
ANY OTHER MAN.
August 9th, 1864.


(Left "Plymouth at 9, p.m
, on the 14 th May ; calm and foggy , 1 he Pilot left at 11, p n
i. On the 15 th, off Eddy stone ; still calm.)
j Date
! Lat.
1
Long.
j
Ilist.
Wind and Weather.
i
Date
Lat.
Long.
Dist.
Wind and Weather.
N.
w.
8
J.
w.
May
16
49
00
6
13
90
S.E., fine
July 5
39
00
7
31
240
N. by E., cloudy
V
y 7
17
1 47
12
7
44
128
S.E., light and fine
» 6
40
20
1
47
274
North, strong breeze and fine
18
46
20
8
30
62
S.E., light and fine
8
•
E.
19
45
50
8
47
33
East, fine
„ 7
41
35
5
08
315
N.N. W., strong breeze, squally
20
45
06
9
11
52
East, fine
>, 8
41
30
10
41
254
N.W., strong gale, heavy seas
y y
21
42
06
11
26
204
N.E. by E., fine
„ 9
41
32
16
00
240
W., fresh breeze and fine
y y
22
40
23
12
25
113
East, fine
19
41
44
18
30
112
JN.E., light, gloomy
y 7
23
39
48
12
25
35
North, fine
„ 11
43
06
23
30
238
N.W., strong breeze, cloudy
7 7
24
38
40
13
20
83
North, fine
„ 12
43
04
28
30
220
N.N.W., strong breeze, heavy
5 y
25
35
40
15
45
215
N.W., fine
squalls
y y
26
32
57
16
38
180
W.N.W., fine
„ 13
43
10
33
15
210
Variable light airs, misty
y y
27
31
44
15
30
93
S.W„ fine
„ 14
43
17
37
54
200
North, moderate breeze, misty
? j
28
30
54
15
30
50
Variable and calms
» 15
43
45
44
06
270
N.N.W., strong breeze, cloudy
) j
29
30
43
15
27
11
Variable and calms
but fine
> y
30
30
13
16
10
50
W.S.W., fine
„ 16
44
00
49
10
220
N.N.W., strong breeze & rain
> ’
31
29
32
16
16
48
S.W., fine
„ 17
44
40
55
04
258
N.W., fine
June
1
28
28
15
58
68
N.E., fine - —
„ 18
45
00
61
08
260
North, gale and heavy thunder
) 7
2
27
00
17
10
108
N.N.E., fine
storm at noon ; snow and hail
> j
3
24
55
19
45
190
N.N.E., fine
. '
and terrific lightning ; the
j >
4
22
30
22
00
190
N.N.E., fine
lightning conductor struck
) 7
5
20
00
24
30
205
N.E., fine
twice.
> j
6
16
43
26
10
220
N.E., fresh and fine
„ 19
44
30
67
13
262
W.N.W., fresh breeze and fine
? ?
7
15
19
26
00
204
East, fine
„ 20
45
00
72
03
210
N.N.E., and west fresh gale
) ?
8
11
16
25
36
125
East, fine
„ 21
44
40
78
36
280
N.W., strong breeze and fine
? *
9
9
22
24
50
122
East, fine
22
44
00
84
00
234
N.W., strong breeze & squally
> j
10
7
04
24
48
138
E.8.E., fine —
>, 23
44
00
90
30
280
N.W. by W., strong breeze,
>)
11
6 /
38
24
45
26
Variable, squally
gloomy
> ?
12
6
16
24
48
28
Variable, squally
if 24
45
00
97
30
300
N.N.W., strong breeze, squally
> j
13
5
17
25
4
60
S.8.E., cloudy
„ 25
45
00
100
30
140
Variable, north, gloomy
5?
14
3
35
26
20
140
S.E. by S., fine
» 20
44
40
106
00
220
W.8. W., strong gale, snow and
»?
15
0
58
28
20
200
S.E. by 8., fine
hail, squalls
8.
W.
» 27
44
22
112
00
256
Strong breeze, hail and snow
? J
16
1
40
30
00
188
S.E. by 8., fine
„ 28
44
40
118
00
256
N.N.W., fresh breeze, gloomy
5 )
17
5
08
30
38
212
E.S.E., fine
„ 29
45
10
125
48
330
N.N.W., strong gale, overcast
) J
18
8
04
31
58
194
S.8.E., fine
and rain
? >
19
10
13
33
14
180
Variable and squally
30
45
35
131
24
240
N. by W., strong gale and
j>
20
12
16
33
37
127
S.E., fine
heavy squalls
j >
21
15
26
34
20
196
E.8.E., fine
„ 31
45
47
135
00
145
N.N.W., moderate and fine
j >
22
18
15
33
23
178
East, fine
Aug. 1
46
00
138
00
126
North, fine
) >
23
20
42
31
40
176
N.N.E., gloomy
„ 2
45
50
143
10
217
N. by W., fresh breeze
24
22
35
29
35
163
Variable and fine
3
44
12
148
10
230
N.W., strong breeze gloomy
>?
25
25
12
27
13
205
W.8.W., fine
and squally
5 5
26
25
39
26
30
48
North, light and fine
» 4
41
30
152
34
264
W.N. W, heavy squall through-
5 J
27
27
26
25
20
123
N.W., fine
out
n
28
29
00
23
18
143
S.W., squalls and rain
„ 5
37
50
155
17
252
S.W., moderate and very fine
> ?
29
30
50
22
30
120
N., squally and rain
» 6
3‘4
42
154
34
190
S.E., moderate and very fine
55
30
33
20
20
00
200
Heavy N.N.W., gale —fine
» 7
31
00
154
45
232
S.E., strong breeze and fine
July
1
33
45
16
00
200
Fresh S.W., gale, squally
„ 8
28
54
154
45
126
S.E., heavy gale, and furious
55
2
32
40
12
37
183
8.E., fine
squalls
55
3
34
50
12
58
132
E.S.E., fine
» 9
27
30
153
55
88
S.E., light winds and showers
55
4
i
37
03
12
00
140
N.N.E., fine
As we have it not otherwise in our power to evince to you how truly
grateful we are for your kindness, than by assuring you that our unceasing
prayers shall be offered to the Almighty God for your spiritual and temporal
welfare. We remain, Sir, your very grateful servants.
John C. Ryan, Esq. (Here follow the signatures.)
To the Roman Catholics on board the “ inung AustraliaMoreton Boy.
Gentlemen, —The kind and flattering address which 1 have received
from you to-day has taken me quite by surprise, believing, as I do, that I
have done nothing to merit, at your hands, such an expression of sympathy
and good feeling, and which I can therefore only attribute to your owr
kindness of heart and good disposition.
With regard to yourselves I have much pleasure in stating that your
conduct on board has been such as to merit the approbation of oui ins-
pected commander, who, in the discharge of his onerous and important
duties, has evinced so much interest in the passengers entrusted to his charge.
I can assure you that I shall always look back with feelings of the
greatest pleasure to the short but happy time we have spent together, on
board the “ Young Australia,” and wishing you every success in the country
Believe me to be, your faithful friend,
co
of your adoption,
JOHN CAREW EYAN.
LOG OF THE SHIP “YOUNG AUSTRALIA.”
BRISBANE : W. FAIRFAX, PRINTER, EDWARD STREET.
The Young Australia Times.






