



Jn JJlmomm Jfenwm.
‘ ‘ Thy servants have been keepers of cattle from
our youth even until now, both we and our fathers.”
—Genesis xlvi., 34.
The patriarch Jacob is a striking figure
in the Old Testament. Abraham was and is
perhaps more venerated by his descendants;
but Jacob is probably more loved. The
majesty of Abraham seems to lift him above
the common lot of men—though his life is
very human —while Jacob seems more one of
ourselves, and even more truly human than
his renowned grandfather. As to his occupa-
tion, the text literally describes it. Abraham,
however, had not always been a cattle king,
for his youth and early manhood had been
spent, almost certainty in mercantile pursuits,
in the commercial city of Ur of the Chaldees.
By Grod’s will he migrated from Ur, leaving all
the comforts and refinements and luxuries and
dangers of life in a heathen city for the peace
and quietness of a pastoral life. There, in the
free and healthy life of what we call a cattle
station, his sons and his grandsons were born;
and so, from his infancy till the time when as
an old, old man, he stood before Pharaoh,
Jacob’s occupation had been about cattle. We
have no doubt that in Isaac he had a diligent
religious teacher in his early days, but he grew
up into middle age without a practical religion,


and it was not till he had been brought face
to face with some of the stern realities of life
that he learned more deeply of the God about
whom Isaac had taught him. Having found
that God could not he left out of account in
his daily life, he learned to look to him for
help at all times, hut especially in times of
great trouble and distress, and in the great
crises that he passed through, at Bethel and at
Peniel, he learned to put himself altogether
into God’s hands, and he became what we call
a religious man. But he was still himself.
His religion was not that of Isaiah, consecrated
by glorious vision and seraphic fire for God’s
special work, with clear visions of a wonderful
Messiah; nor that of St. Paul, with his burning
missionary zeal for God’s cause ; but it was the
practical religion of a very busy man. Busy
with his cattle and sheep—busy with a large
and not too happy family—busy in the ordi-
nary matters of life—busy in various dealings
with his neighbours, pleasant and otherwise
—he found that he could do all his work the
better by looking to God for help and by
keeping His laws. His strong family love
was unquenched by painful scenes, and, when
dying in Egypt, away from the fields where
his life had been spent, his eyes are turned
again to the land of his youth, and he entreats
that he will not be buried away in the strange
land, but in the old family burying-ground,
where so many of his kith and kin were laid,
and he affectionately names them one by one.
The life and the death of the patriarch
Jacob present a striking resemblance in many
2


respects to the life and death of another
patriarch who is in our minds and hearts
to-day. Born in Scotland, Mr. Andrew Baton
was brought to Australia in his infancy, and
Australia was his home. Visiting the Mitta
Mitta in his youth, he shortly afterwards took
up his abode here with the other members of
his family, long before most of us had ever
heard of such a river or valley—long before
most of us were born. Here for fifty years
and more he spent a pastoral life, our text
being as true for him as for Jacob, and he was
a “man of cattle even until now.” Bor all
those years, through good seasons and bad
seasons, through summer heat and winter
frosts, through drought and flood, he watched
the Mitta rise and fall and flow ; and, now that
he is gone, the old river still swirls along by
the foot of the hill where his earthly remains
are laid. Strong, lithe and fearless at his
occupation, and strictly honorable in his busi-
ness dealings, he was an admirable sample of
what has built up the best and most striking
side of the Australian character—the country
side of it—the only part of it, in fact, that
gives a distinctness of feature to the Australian
character at all. For many years past he had
been the best known man in the Mitta Mitta
Valley, coming much in contact with his
neighbours, and taking a great interest in
everything pertaining to the welfare and
improvement of the district. He had acted
as a member of the Hoad Board, and after-
wards of the Shire Council ever since it had
come into existence, and his loss at the Shire
3


Council-table is just as great as bis loss from
our Church. Of Scottish birth and descent, he
was of course a Presbyterian; but he was one
in more than name, being much more deeply
attached to the Church of which he was a
member than many others of his fellow
countrymen. Like so many of his faith, he
was not one to talk freely about his religion;
and, if we are to find out what he thought
about it, we must look to his life and his
actions. Judging them by the early records
of our Church, we find that we owe its very
existence far more to him than to any other.
In those days when the Church was being
founded, he seems hardly ever to have missed
a committee meeting, though the meetings
were held ten miles from his home. Though
generally in the chair, he always took a leading
part in the discussion, and it is characteristic
of him that, while we often find his name as
the proposer of a motion, it scarcely ever is
found as a seconder. He was there to lead,
not to follow. A glance at a few of the
motions carried on his proposal shows the
part he played. At a preliminary meeting he
moved that a Church committee should be
formed. Later on, he proposed that certain
plans should be accepted and tenders called
for the building of the Church. At the fol-
lowing meeting it was on his proposal that
the tender of a firm of builders was accepted.
His signature and seal are found on the
contract. He proposed that the first in-
stalment—that various progress instalments—
that the final instalment—be paid. Nor was
4


he satisfied when the Church was huilt. He
took the same interest in the calling of the
various ministers, and it was on his proposal
that the Pev. J. Patterson, the first minister,
was called, just as it was on his proposal that
your present minister was called. Nor did
his interest end with the committee work, for,
whatever seat might he found vacant on the
days when service was conducted at Fernvale
or Yahha, his was always filled, except when
he was out of the district.
Possessed of a particularly strong consti-
tution, he thought he could neglect the ordinary
precautions of health ; but Nature would not be
defied, and insidious diseases set in. Though
for years these must have been gnawing at his
vitals, he laughed it off and was found as usual
on hillside and plain, in Council-chamber and
Church, till the end was near, and he found
that even his strength was undermined by the
ravages of disease. He recognised that his race
was run, and, like Jacob, “he yielded up the
ghost, and was gathered to his fathers.” Just
as Jacob, when dying, turned his eyes to the
old family burying-ground, and wished not to
be buried in Egypt, so, in imagination, we could
hear his wish, though it had not been expressed
in words, and, by a slight alteration of Jacob’s
words, we read what was his desire; —“I am
“to be gathered to my people. Bury me not
“ in Albury, but carry me up to the land of
“ the Mitta, and bury me with my father and
“ my mother in the burying-ground that is on
“ the hill-top on Yabba, which my father laid
“ out for a burying-place.” —Genesis xlvii., 29,
5


30; xlix., 29, 30, 31. So too we may read the
account of his burial: —“And his brethren,
“ and his sons and all his father’s house, went
“up to bury him. And there went up with
“ them both chariots and horsemen, and it was
“ a very great company. And his sons did to
“ him according as he commanded them, for
“his sons carried him up to the land of the
“ Mitta, and they buried him on the hill-top
“which is in Yabba.” (See Genesis 1., 7, 13.)
There his mortal body lies with his father’s,
his immortal spirit having entered into eternal
rest.
■x % a- -x-
At these times, when we are called on to
stand on the brink of eternity and say farewell
to one of our number called away from us, we
thank Grod for the glorious hope that He gives
to all who accept of the redemption and salva-
tion offered through Jesus Christ, when He
bids us sorrow not as those who have no hope.
Christianity is something more than a guarantee
of blessedness for the next world. It concerns
our life in this world, teaching us to spend our
lives in the best way and giving us the power
to do so. But it does more, it carries us into
the land beyond the grave, which to all others
is gloom and weariness, but which has so far
been unveiled to us that, though the language
used is highly poetical and wrapped in figure
and metaphor, we may rest assured that life
there is happiness indescribable and unimagin-
able. Jacob was no unqualified saint; yet to
us, as to his own descendants, his example
6


