

A ROMANCE IN REAL LIFE,
THE ALLEGED
POISONING CASE
Trial if Ex-Constable Dare,
ALIAS PORTER,
FOR AN ATTEMPT TO POISON HIS WIFE.
HIS FLIGHT TO BRISBANE!
HIS CAPTURE!
HIS TRIAL IN NEWCASTLE!
FULL REPORT OF THE TRIAL,
By PRANK WILLIAMS, Reporter.
Om-e Slfa-illim-gr.
Published by R. LANGER, at the
Book Arcade, Newcastle.
1888.




A/ 0/nnvu ot/ww-
Book Arcade
—CORNER OF
MARKET & HUNTER-ST.
RECOMMENDS ITS
Large & Varied Assortment
—OF—
BOOKS, COMMERCIAL, SCHOOL
AND GENERAL STATIONERY,
FANCY GOODS, MUSIC, &c.
AGENCY FOR
W, 11. Paling & Co.’s Limited
CELEBRATED PIANOS & ORGANS.
R. DANGER begs to announce the Completion of Arrangements
for the Direct Import of Reynolds Newspaper,” “ Lloyds Weekly News,”
“ Glasgow Weekly Mail,” Young Ladies’ Journal,” “ Family Reader ” and
“ Herald,” and all other Leading English Papers and Periodicals,
The Prices of Books, Stationery, &c., are all in Plain Figures, and
within the reach of all. The Assortment is Unsurpassed within the Northern
District. Any Books not in stock procured within a few days.
MY MOTTO! “ I,A«GE SAI.ES & SMAIX PROFITS.’
R. RANGER,
FiiMisto, look I lisle Seller,
STATIONER, ETC.,
*• The Book Arcade/’ Newcastle.






ftiiUiDiltq*, |iuiltln;3,
CONTRACTORS.
STEAM
SAW 31ILLS
AVI)
JOINERY WORKS,
BLARE STREET. ,
&C; &G-
OFFICE
—AND—
JOINERY WORKS,
KING AND WATT STREETS
'UJ'CCtj- M&,
§
t. JOHN ASH & SONS,
All Clauds of BimiMoifs 9 Matoirmls. (Semaßmt, Spates,
Cs^wicun/
c/eietf
ew
CCfrMVt


A ROMANCE IN REAL LIFE,
THE ALLEGED
POISONING CASE.
Trial ®! Ex-Constable laps,
ALIAS
PORTER,
FOR AN ATTEMPT TO
Poison Mo Wile.
HIS FLIGHT TO BRISBANE!
HIS CAPTURE!
lIS ' TRIAL II IIWCISTLII
Full Report of the Trial,
ZB IT
FRANK WILLIAMS, REPORTER.
Price One Sla.illi3a.gr.
Published by R. LANGER, at the
Book Arcade, Newcastle.
1888.




THE ALLEGED POISONING CASE,
SENSATIONAL EVIDENCE.
PREFACE.
One act of a many-act life drama, which is rapidly drawing to a sensational
denouement, has been played in Newcastle within the past twelve months,
and the most thrilling situation in the true romance, which is indeed as strange
as fiction, w'as performed not long since in Sydney. As far as can be at
present ascertained, the facts of the case are somewhat as follows. Some
twelve months ago the Newcastle police force was strengthened by the
addition of a probationary constable, of whom great promise was hoped.
He was a young man, and had been he said, in the Imperial army, having
served in the 7th Dragoons, and, being a man of good education, he gained
the golden opinions of everyone with whom he came in contact, including his
superior officers, who appointed him to the responsible position of one of the
lockup keepers. The name of the admirable Crichton, who, among his many
accomplishments, possessed in a great degree the faculty of drawing and
sketching —indeed, so good were some of his drawings that a local architect
promised to give him employment if ever he left the constabulary, to which
-vork he, however, said he had taken a great liking—was, as he then gave it,
William Henry Dare, and under that name he met a young lady of this
town, to whom he swore undying love and unquenchable affection, the result
being that the pair were recognised by mutual acquaintances as “ mated.’’
The course of true love never does run smooth, they say, ar.d this love story
was no exception to the rule, for shortly after another young lady appeared on
the scene. He passed this off by saying that she was his cousin, a girl of
much intelligence and attractiveness, “ worth a lot of money.” After this he,
considering that a man who was contemplating matrimony should endeavour
to find a better “billet” than that of a policeman, had applied for * his
discharge, got it, and became the steward of the Newcaste Club. While in
this position, the “ cousin ” returned to Newcastle from Adelaide, to which
place she had been induced by her “ cousin " to go back. Then came the
climax ! The supposed “ cousin ” turned out to be Dare’s lawful wife, whom
he had deserted ; and it further tranpired that his name was not Dare at all,
but Porter. The betrayed wife, who, it appears, is the daughter of people
respectably known in Adelaide, had traced her husband through the Central
Police Office in Sydney, and, having found his whereabouts, followed and


faced him. Though betrayed and deserted as she had been, she, woman-
like, was ready to forgive and forget, and he, after some apparent consideration,
ostensibly decided to abandon his evil ways. If it had been so, the story
would probably never have reached print, but the sensation was yet to come.
The returning prodigal and his forgiving spouse had many a long debate upon
the matter, and finally it was arranged that the wife should go to Sydney, and
her husband should follow her. This was done, and on the Bth of April, he
took her by night in a tram and a cab to Bondi, “to have a chat over
things” in peace and quietness. At Bondi occurred, if one may judge from
the evidence, one of the most romantic and dramatic scenes that can be
magined. What took place there and in Newcastle, the romantic meeting
and introduction of the wife and the sweetheart, the laying of the information,
the husband’s flight to Brisbane, and all the thousand and one details can be
better and more correctly judged from the following verbatim report than by
any elaborated or pen-painted story. We thus, without in any way attempting
to pre-judge a case w'hich has yet to be finally settled by a judge and a jury,
leave the evidence in our reader’ hands, and ask them to refrain from a hasty
judgment upon an affair about which, with even all this evidence in front of
them, they can possibly know but one side of the story.


NEWCASTLE POLICE COURT.
THUESDAY, MAY 10th, 1888.
(Before Mr. J. Mair, Police Magistrate.)
THE ALLEGrED POISONING! CASE.
James William Porter, alias William Henry Dare, 29,
described as a clerk —recently a constable in the police force
stationed at Newcastle —was charged with maliciously administer-
ing a certain poison, to wit, prussic acid, to Mary Jane Porter,
his wife, at Bondi, near Sydney, on April Bth last, with intent to
injure her.
Inspector Brennan prosecuted, and Mr. T. P. Low de-
fended.
The deposition clerk (Mr. Huntington) [read the depositions
taken before the Brisbane Bench, which were to the effect that
Detective M‘Quaker arrested accused at 5 p.m. on May Ist at
the corner of Albert and Adelaide streets, Brisbane. The detec-
tive said, “ Did you come from Newcastle ?” and accused said he
did. The detective asked, “Were you in the police there?’ and
accused replied “ No.” The officer then queried, “ Aren’t you Mr.
Porter?” and accused answered “No.” The officer said, “Is
your name Dare ?” and he replied, “ I am known by that name.”
The detective then read the warrant to accused, who replied,
“ All right, old man; 1 am the man you are looking for. I
expected there would be a warrant out for wife desertion, but I
know nothing about the poisoning affair.” The next morning
the detective read the warrant a second time, and accused said,
“ I cannot understand this. It is a got up case against me. I
held a good position in this country. I had two hotels; and I
found my wife had gone wrong, and I could not live with her.
I offered her £1 a week to support her, in the presence of the
C.P.S. at Newcastle, which he can prove, but she would not
take it.”


Constable Donald M'Kellar, who brought accused from Bris-
bane, deposed that he was stationed at Newcastle. On Iriday
last he proceeded to Brisbane, armed with a warrant signed by
Mr. James Mair, Police Magistrate at Newcastle. Witness saw
accused m the Brisbane lockup in the custody of the Queens-
land police. In reply to the charge accused said, “1 know
nothing about it.”
Inspector Brennan applied for a remand for one day.
The P.M. remanded the accused until the following (Friday)
morning.
FRIDAY, MAY 11th, 1888.
(Before Messrs. .T. Mair, P.M., and J. Thorn, J.P.)
Inspector Brennan prosecuted, and Mr. T. F. Low de-
fended.
Mary Jane Porter deposed that her information was true.
She knew accused. She was married to accused on June 2nd,
1880, at Port Adelaide (the marriage certificate was produced),
and had three children, the eldest of which was nearly seven
years old. She lived with her hushand up till March 22nd,
1887, when she was in a hotel at Werribee, Victoria. On the
21st March she took her little daughter back to school at St.
Kilda, and, when she returned on March 22nd, she found her
husband was not at home. Finding he did not return, she
made inquiry about him. He did not return, and she was sub-
sequently compelled by the brewers to leave the house under a
warrant of ejectment. * The hotel had been purchased by her
father’s money. In December, 1887, she heard of her husband,
and she then left Victoria for Sydney. She went to the office of
the Inspector-General of Police, and in consequence of some-
thing she heard there she came to Newcastle, where, on
January 7th this year, she went to the police station, and there
saw her husband. He looked surprised to see her, and said,
“ Old lady, what has brought round you here ?” but before this he
said, “ Hush ! don’t speak. lam not known by my our name
here; don’t let anyone hear you at all.” He also said he was known
by the name of Dare. He took her to the back pait of the
station, and gave her a chair to sit down. She began to ask
him why he had left her, when he asked her to meet him on the
Reserve in half-an-hour for the purpose of talking thin gs over.
She met him at 9.30 o’clock the same morning, and he at once
began to persuade her to go back to Adelaide, and he would
follow her afterwards. Witness replied, “I do not want to go ;


I would rather stop here.” She also offered to remain in New-
castle, and to take the name he had adopted. He said it would
ruin him if it was known that he was not a single man, and
that she could not stop. She was finally persuaded, and re-
turned to Adelaide. She received several letters from accused,
the last being dated March 4th, from the Public Library in.
Sydney, but bearing the mark “ ship letter.” The letter was
to the following effect :
Public Library, Sydney,
March 4, 1888.
My Dear Min, — By the time you receive this I shall be away from Aus-
tralia. I cannot but help thinking of you all now ; when I have tried to
think the matter over, I am at a loss to find out a way to get on in the
colonies, so have concluded to give America a trial, as I have an opportunity
of going at once, I know, Min, you will feel inclined to say all kinds of things
about me now, but really, by remaining, I can only see a life of misery before us
both There is no work here, and I will write and tell you what luck I meet
with. I was discharged by paying ,£5 on Wednesday last, but have had to
wait for my pay, and having a pound or so have decided as an opportunity
offered to go to America If you care to write, address my prrper name at
G.P.0., San Francisco. I only arrived from Newcastle this morning, so have
not yet got any of your letters. I should not have taken this decisive step,
but can see no other course open ; it seems we can never arrange to get on
together, and, although if opportunity offered, I should like to have you again,
still I cannot see how we are to manage, and, as I have had a good chance
given me to leave these colonies, have decided to take it. Write, Min. for I
shall want to hear from you all, and I will do my best. If I don’t succeed,
shall go home and enlist, in which case the probability of war will, I hope
soon, for your own sake, make you a widow. With love to all, —I am, Min
dear, your miserable,
WILLIB.
Only wish I had the courage to make you a widow, and set you free at
once, i have written a line to my people.
Witness continued : She did not believe the contents of the
letter, and wrote to the Newcastle Police Office. She received a
reply, and in consequence of that reply came back to Newcastle,
where she arrived on March 28th. She went to the Newcastle
Club, after making inquiries, about 8 o’clock in the morning, and
there saw her husband. He wanted to know what she had come
there for and why she had not written. She told him she was
staying at the Coffee Palace in Scott-street. She asked why he
had written that letter, and he said because he did not want to
go back. He said females were not allowed in the Club, and he
then went into the street with her. He took her to the railway
station and bridge, and again tried to persuade her to go back to
Adelaide, and said he would send her money if she went away;
but only if she went. She refused to go away, and said she
would stop in Newcastle. He said he could not stop and talk as
his time was not his own. He gave her some wine at an hotel.


He also said he would think matters over and see if he could not
come to some arrangement. She met him again and had lunch
with him. He also came to the Coffee Palace and remained that
night. He urged her to go to Sydney, and said he would send her
money and follow her. lie asked her to write home for some
money, and if they got ib he and she could go to Brisbane. She
wrote home. She saw him on Good Friday morning (the next
day), and he said there was a man waiting for him, and that he
wanted to introduce him to her. She objected to be introduced
unless he should say she was his wife, and he said “ Oh, I’ll say
you’re a friend from Adelaide.” She was introduced to the man,
whose name was Flack, and with whom and her husband she went
to breakfast. He said he would be busy and could not see her
until the next day. On that evening he took her for a walk on
the hill, and he said “ If they send the money we’ll get away.
He was constantly urging her -to go back, lie came down on
Easter Sunday morning to the Coffee Palace, and said could
not stop long, as the members of the club were going on a fishing
excursion, and he could not see her until the Monday night.
She did not see him until the Tuesday morning (April 3rd), when
he said if she would not go to Adelaide would she go to Sydney ?
She said “No that she was tired of being told to go to Syd-
ney ; that she would do what she liked, and he could do what he
liked. He then said “ What will you do ?” and she said “ 111
go down and tell Miss Laxton that you are married, and that I
am your wife.”
Mr. Low objected to this evidence, but the Bench over-
ruled the objection.
Witness, continuing, said accused had said it would be a
very unwise thing to do, and he advised her to have nothing to
say to Miss Laxton He further said he did not want her to
show him up in Newcastle. That evening she went down to
Union-street, and waited opposite the Laxtons’ house, where she
stopped from between 8 and 9 o’clock until after 10 o clock,
when she saw her husband come out with Miss Laxton. They
(accused and Miss Laxton) stopped talking for some time, and,
after he had left Miss witness went over and said, I
can stand this no longer.” He wanted her to take his arm, and
said, “ I promised you to break her off by degrees, and I will
do it.” He coaxed her to be quiet, and they walked back to
the Coffee Palace, and, as she was going in, he said, “ Will you
promise me you will go in and not come out again to-night ?
At first she would not promise, until he said he would come
back after the club was closed. He came back and remained
that night with her. He made several propositions to her about
her going away. He promised her on the Wednesday that he


would not go back to Laxton’s. He failed to keep an appoint-
ment for Thursday, and she went down to Union-street again,
and saw her husband come out of Laxton’s. She spoke to him,
saying she would certainly speak to Miss Laxton. (At this
stage witness became overcome, and had to be led from the
court.) He said, “ Oh, no ; don’t. I have made arrangements
to-night to take you away.” On the Triday he told her to get
her luggage ready to go away, and he said “ It would be as well
if you have any clothes not marked to wear them.” Witness
asked why, and he said, “If we had any washing to send
out in Sydney it would look bad to see both names.”
' On the Saturday he came to the Coffee Palace in the morning,
and said he would send a man for her luggage if it was ready.
It was decided they should go by train. After midnight on
Saturday he came down to the Coffee Palace, thence they
went to the station and he asked her to go and get
the tickets, which she did, and they both proceeded
to Sydney, which place was reached about 8.30 o’clock on Sunday,
April Bth. They went to “ No. 1 ” Coffee Palace, where they
had breakfast, and then went to “ No. 2,” leaving the luggage at
“ No. 1.” Accused afterwards sent an order for the luggage.
She slept all day, and got up about 2.30 o’clock, and as she was
dressing was putting on a brooch, which bore her name, “Minnie,”
(a name by which her family knew her,) but he said, “Do you
want to wear that ?” She said, “ Not particularly,” and he said,
“ You might lend it to me to pin my tie down.” He then asked
if the clothes she had on were marked, and she said “No.”
They went out for a walk, had dinner, visited Circular Quay and
the Domain, and about 0 o’clock he said, “ We ll take the tram
and go out to Bondi.” It was then getting dusk. He said there
was a nice beach at Bondi. He went into a shop to get some
tram tickets, which he got, and they went in the tram to Bondi.
After leaving the tram they walked some distance, when a cab
came along. They got into the cab, and accused told the cabman
to drive to the Bondi-road, where the turn was. While the cab
was being driven along accused looked out and said, “ Oh, I think
this will do.” They got out of the cab and walked along the
road, and turned off to the right. Accused said, “We won’t go
where everybody goes.” They walked over some sand and sat
down, but afterwards moved on. They again sat down, and she
said she was tired, and she, at his request, rested her head on his left
arm. He said, “ Have you any more of those sweets in your
pocket?” She said “Yes.” and he said, “ (live me some,” which
she did. He kissed her on the eyes, and told her
to shut them. He told her to open her mouth and
he would drop some sweets into it. She did so, and


he dropped some sweets in her mouth. While she was eating
the sweets she thought they tasted strange and smelled
peculiarly. He took some more sweets and gave her some
more. The smell was more powerful than the taste. He asked
if she had any more sweets, and as she rose up to put her hand
in her pocket —she did not hurry, as she felt sure he was
drugging her—she glanced at his left hand, in which there was a
small bottle. She felt horribly afraid for a moment, and then
she put her hand on his hand in which was the bottle, and said,
“ Have you brought me down here to murder me P ’ He replied.
“ Then why won’t you go away and leave me ?” She said he had
no right to murder her, or throw her aside for the woman he was
carrying on with. He repeated his question, “ Will you go
away ?” and added, “ Or will you stop here and I will send you
money ?” She said she would not. She tried to take the bottle
from him, as he threatened to take some of the contents. He
made some show of resistance, but she got the bottle. She said,
“ llather than you should murder me I’ll take it myself.” She
put the bottle to her mouth, and he said, “ Don’t.” He did not
try to prevent her. She then said, “ You wouldn’t try to prevent
me, so I’ll not take it.” She then wrapped the bottle in her
handkerchief, and put it in her pocket. She asked if he intended
to remain in Sydney, and he said no one but Mr. Kane knew ha
was away from Newcastle. He began to cry. He said his
1 uggage was at Waratah Terrace, and that her luggage never left
the steamer’s office. He said he would have to go back to
Newcastle that night, no matter what happened. At this time
she was lying down, crying. She again declined to stop in
Sydney, and had hardly finished speaking when he pushed her
over, put his knee on her chest, and forced a second bottle into
her mouth. She would not open her teeth, and struggled, and
the stuff from the bottle went on to her tongue and over her
gums and lips and on to her cuffs and hands. The bottle was
completely emptied, and accused threw the bottle some distance in
front of them. She felt ill. He then tried to get the bottle she had in
her pocket, and when she tried to scream he put his hand over her
mouth. She took her handkerchief, in which was the bottle, and
shook the bottle away out of it. Accused searched, but did not
find the bottle. Witness hardly remembered if accused said
anything, as she was almost unconscious. She tried to get over
to a fence which was near, when she fell. He helped her to get
up. She stayed by the fence for a while, and then her husband
helped her to walk along the main road, where she fell, and he
said something about getting assistance. She felt giddy and
almost stupid. She thought she fainted, and just remembered
him walking away from her. She heard his steps coming back,


and ne helped her to rise, and sail Ip" Say yo w? forgive me for
this. I think I must have been mad ; I did not intend to murder
you.” She could not speak, because her tongue was swollen too
much. They then walked along until they came to the tram, on
the outside of which they sat. All the way down to the tram
accused kept asking her to forgive him, and said he was going
back to Newcastle. He also asked if she was in pain with her
mouth, and he looked at her tongue. She said she wanted a
drink, and he said she could get one when they got to the Coffee
Palace. She could not keep her tongue in her mouth, and
accused tied his handkerchief round her face. When they got
out of the tram accused got a cab and they drove to the
Coffee Palace. Accused left her sitting in the cab while he
went upstairs and got the luggage. Thence they Avent
to the wharf, and went on board the steamer for New-
castle. Upon arrival at Newcastle witness was taken to the
Coffee Palace by accused, who left her there. On the following
Wednesday night she saAv accused in Union-street, near the
Laxtons’ place. Previously he had told her that he would, on
his return to Newcastle, have nothing to do Avith the girl
Laxton. The girl Laxton Avas A\ r ith accused on the Thursday
night, and Avitness Avent up and, saying that she Avas tired of
the Avhole business, asked to be introduced to the girl. Accused
said, “ Certainly. Mrs. Porter—Miss Laxton.” Witness did
not offer to shake hands, but said to accused, “ Suppose you.
tell her the relationship betAveen us.” He said, “ Hush !” and
she said, “ I Avon’t ‘ hush ’ any longer,” and then she told Miss
Laxton, in his presence, “1 am his Avife.” Accused said,
“ Curse you ! I hate you !” and caught hold of her arm and
shook her. They then walked along Blane-street, the accused
all the while hitting and screwing her arm. Coming un
Bolton-street, he ran away as hard as he could, and she then
Avent to the NeAvcastle Club, and at 2 o’clock in the morning she
Avent to the Laxtons' house and remained talking to Miss
Laxton and her mother all night. Miss Laxton next morning
went to the Coffee Palace, and gave her tAvo letters in the hand-
Avriting of accused.
Mr. Low objected to these letters being put in evidence,
but the Bench overruled the objection.
The letters Avere to the following effect:—
Newcastle Club, 2/4/88.
My own Polly,—Don’t think, dear, I have run entirely away from yon.
I gave Dick a message for you at dinner-time, and he forgot it. Shall have
something very important to tell you. However, darling Polly, lam ever,
you know, your own Willif.
Love to all ; and mind, pet, I will be up home about 7.30 or 8. Good-
bye, once more, Polly dear.


Newcastle Club, 10/4/88.
Still my own Polly,—Wait, deal girl, till you have seen me before you
utterly condemn me. For God’s sake, Polly, still love me, and hear me. I
cannot live long now, and must make my peace with you. Good-bye, my
pet girl, till I can see you. Ever your loving WILLIE.
The woman you saw is lawfully my wife ; I will explain how ; but I
love only you.
Witness, continuing, said she afterwards saw accused on
April 18th at the Laxtons’ house, in the presence of Mr.
Huntington, the assistant C.P.S. at Newcastle. She asked her
husband to come away with her, as he had suggested. He told
her that if she would go away to Sydney that night he would
meet her there at the Post Office on the following day. She
went to Sydney, but accused did not keep the appointment. She
then returned to Newcastle, and reported what had occurred to
the police. The cuffs she was wearing in Sydney on April Bth
had been washed Her husband had accused her of being
deceitful, saying that she didjnot care for him.
The examination in-chief, which had occupied thi’ee and a
half hours, then terminated.
Witness, re-examined, said she had since, with a detective,
searched the locality at Bondi, but had not been able to find the
bottles.
At this stage a remand was granted until the following
(Saturday) morning.
SATURDAY, MAY 12th, 1888.
(Before Messrs. J. Mair, P.M., and ?J. Thorn, J.P.)
Inspector Brennan was for the prosecution, and Mr. T. P.
Low and Mr. Charles Readett, who had been imported into the
case, appeared for the defence.
Mary Jane Porter, cross-examined by Mr. Readett, stated that
she came to Newcastle after the attempted poisoning by steamer
with her husband. It was on the Wednesday after the affair
that she reported the occurrence to Inspector Brennan and Mrs.
Harvey, of the Coffee Palace. She did not try to see Miss
Laxton on the Monday when she returned to Newcastle. She
saw Miss Laxton on the Wednesday night between 9 and 10
o’clock. Her husband was present at the interview with Miss
Laxton. That night she sat up at Mrs. Laxton’s talking to her.
She wrote a letter to Mr. Brennan, stating that she might have
to trouble him in his official capacity, but she did not mention
what had occurred in Sydney in the letter. It was more than a
week after that that she signed the information.
By Inspector Brennan: In reply to witness’ letter Inspector
Brennan called at the Coffee Palace when she was ill in bed.
She then told him something.


Mr. Low asked permission to cross-examine, and a wordy
conflict between him and Mr. Readett took place as to who was
appearing for the accused.
Pinally the bench gave Mr. Low the desired permission.
The accused said he understood that both solicitors were
appearing on his behalf.
Re-cross-examined by Mr. Readett, the witness stated that
she had once attempted to take her own life, becoming unconscious
at the time. She did not recollect who prevented her from
accomplishing her object. This occurred in Victoria some 18
months ago, and her husband was not there. She jumped into
the river. When she was pulled out, three gentlemen--Messrs.
Moore, Moseley, and Keppel —were there. Her husband did not
assist her to the bedroom. It was about five minutes’ walk from
the house to the part of the river where she jumped in.
By Inspector Brennan : The cause of the attempted suicide
was as follows They kept an hotel, and her husband asked her
to go into the parlour to drink with some old bushmen. She re-
fused, and he got angry with her. He said no more just at the time,
but when they went to their bedroom he struck her a fearful
blow, and knocked her down. It was in consequence of that
that she rushed from the house down to the river.
At this stage of the proceedings Mr. Low withdrew from
the case, saying Mr. Readett had imported himself into the case
and the two could not work together
Cross-examination continued by Mr. Readett: Witness had
once, at her husband’s request, ridden a horse through the house.
She had papers belonging to her husband in her possession and
had refused to give them up because she did not recognise her
husband’s hand-waiting in the note which was sent demanding
them.
Inspector Brennan said lie might state that accused had
sent for him and asked him to get some discharges from Mrs.
Porter. He gave accused permission to write to Mrs. Porter
who would, he thought no doubt, send the papers. The letter
had not been addressed to Mrs. Porter by that name, and there-
fore she had refused to give the papers up. The papers had
nothing to do with the case.
Minnie Davin, housekeeper at “No. 1” Coffee Palace, in
George-street, Sydney, deposed that she was there about five
weeks ago, and saw Mrs. Porter, with a man very much like
accused. It was on a Sunday morning. She received that day
an order to give up some luggage, the order being signed “ J.
Porter,” with a second initial. The order was in a man’s hand-
writing.


The accused admitted being in the Coffee Palace in Sydney
with his wife.
Samuel Flack, tailor and presser, working at Messrs. Sum-
merfield and Co.’s at Newcastle, said he had known the accused
by the name of Dare for the past eight or nine months, while he
had been boarding at Lashmore’s. He afterwards lodged with
accused at Waratah Terrace. He remembered seeing Mrs.
Porter in January last at Lashmore’s with accused. After
knowing witness a few weeks, accused told him Mrs. Porter was a
friend of his, who was going home to England, and who had
come down to Newcastle to see him before she went. Accused
also said the lady had offered to pay his passage if he would go
home with her, and he said it was very good of her. Their
parents, he said, lived as neighbours. Witness also saw Mrs.
Porter in March last, on Grood Friday. Accused and witness
went away from home together, and on the way accused said,
“ Flack, I’ll introduce you to a very nice young lady,” and he
added that she was at the Coffee Palace. As they got near the
Coffee Palace accused said, “ Wait a moment.” Witness
waited, and accused went into the Coffee Palace, but soon came
out with Mrs. Porter. Accused said the lady had been an
actress, stating that “ the poor thing has lost her
voice,” and he was so sorry. They were intro-
duced, “Mrs. Porter —Mr. Flack.” The three then
went to Lashmore’s and had breakfast. On April sth, a
Thursday, about a quarter to 8 p.m., accused and witness walked
down Hunter-street, when accused said, “ Flack, you’re not in a
hurry ?” and added, “ I want you to do me a favour.” Witness
said, “ Certainly, anything I can do.” Accused said, “ I want to
get some poison, as I want to poison a dog, and I want you to be
a witness.” They went to Messrs. Blackall and Hunt’s shop and
asked for some poison “ to kill a Newfoundland slut, which was
a nuisance.” Accused got the poison, which witness believed
was a liquid. Accused asked the chemist, “ How am I to use
it —to mix it with water or not ?” The chemist said, “ Don’t
mix it with water; just put it down its throat, and it will drop
instantly.” The chemist before this asked if the dog were
precious, and accused replied in the negative. Accused then got
the bottle and paid 6d. for it. Accused seemed surprised, and
said it was very cheap. He signed the poisons book, and witness
also signed it. Accused showed the height of the dog by putting
his hand up from the ground. Accused went down Newcomen-
street, in the direction of the Coffee Palace. Witness was very
intimate with accused. The latter had, three or four months ago,
told him he intended to get married, and said he had a good job
at the club. He also said he must be careful and save all he


could, which witness said was very proper. Accused did not
mention the name of the lady he intended to marry, but said she
was a dressmaker, earning £3 clear a week, besides supporting
her parents. He said she had a regular workshop, and employed
a lot of apprentices. He said he made £3 or £4 per week, and
she made £3 per week. He told witness this repeatedly.
Witness was very intimate with accused, and had often given
him good advice. He had often lent accused money, and the
latter now owed Kim Is. [At this stage accused took Is. from
his pocket and passed it over to witness, who quietly pocketed
it.] Accused had told witness that he and his future wife would
be able to save “a little heap,” and “ by-and-bye go home to
England.” Accused had not introduced witness to the lady,
though he met them every dinner-hour.
By the Bench : Witness was not told by accused whose dog
he wanted to poison. Witness knew that the accused had a
little dog when he was in the police force.
By Mr. Beadett: On April 19th witness went to see Airs.
Porter, who was stopping at the Coffee Palace. He had been
told that accused had used poison on her. He asked her if it
was true that accused had used poison on her, and she replied
“ yes.” Her lips were “ pretty well ” swollen, “ pretty near an
inch thicker than they generally are.” Witness told her he
knew something about poison. Witness advised Mrs. Porter to
take out a warrant, because he then thought accused had given
her the same poison, the purchase of which he had witnessed.
At dinner time witness went to Mr. Brennan, and he explained
what he knew about the poison. Witness had never said at
Lashmore’s dinner table that accused was “ a d scoundrel,”
and that he would do what he could against him. He had said
accused would have been “ a d scoundrel ” if he used the
poison on his wife. He had also said “let Dare get all he
deserves,” and he said so now, (Laughter.) Witness had told
Mr. Low, the solicitor, that he was astonished at him taking up
the case; he did so because he was “ pumping ” him on the
matter before hand.
AVilliam Blackall, chemist and druggist, in Hunter-street,
stated that he was registered under the Board of Pharmacy for
the sale of poisons, for which he had a certificate. He knew
accused by the name of Dare. He saw accused in his shop on
April sth by himself. Accused said he wanted some poison to
kill a dog, but he did not say what kind of dog. Witness asked
if accused would have strychnine, but he objected to it on the
score that it would give unnecessary pain. Witness told lmn
that if he brought a witness he would give him prussic acid. He
went outside and returned almost immediately, accompanied by


the previous witness, Black. Witness gave accused two drachms
of Scheeld’s prussic acid in a two-drachm bottle, which would be
about two inches long. He had previously said he wanted the
poison for a dog, but witness was quite certain he did not say
what kind of a dog. Accused asked how he was to use the
poison, and witness said, “ Open the dog’s mouth and pour it
down his throat.” Witness thought he told accused the poison
would kill the dog almost immediately. Accused did not ask
how Jong the poison would take to operate. Accused did not
say anything about the height of the dog. The entry in the
poisons book (produced) showed that accused had bought two
drachms of prussic acid, that Black had been the witness, that
Mr. Blackall (the witness) had sold the poison, and that the date
was April sth. The accused was described as a licensed
victualler; witness so described him because he had something
to do with the Club. There was no column in the book for the
time the poison was bought. -The time was between 9 a.m and
10 a.m. Witness was having his breakfast.
By the Bench: Prussic acid had no effect on the lips or
teeth until after death. If prussic acid got well into the
mouth, it would produce death. It was used medicinally in
doses of three or four drops. If a very small quantity touched
the tongue it would not necessarily produce death.
By Inspector Brennan: Prussic acid exposed to the air would
not blister the lips or produce swelling. AWtness had experimen-
talised with prussic acid and had tasted it, and found that it
produced slight constriction. He did not think it would have any
effect on the lips if they were sore. It would not cause the
tongue to swell. It was not a caustic acid.
By Mr. Readett: If the stopper of a bottle containing
prussic acid were frequently removed the poison would lose its
strength. Witness was quite certain about the time. The smell
was something like that of the oil of bitter almonds. If a drop
or two of prussic acid were dropped on linen or cloth it would
leave no more stain than water would. The bottle was a round
phial. The contents of the bottle would be simply a solution of
prussic acid in water, and would not lose much of its odour after
being exposed for a quarter of an hour.
By the Bench : The fluid accused got contained 4 per cent,
of prussic acid, the strongest solution sold.
By Mr. Readett : The smallest dose on record to cause
the death of an adult was 20 drops.. There was sufficient poison
in the bottle witness sold accused to kill four or five people. In
conversation with witness accused said the animal was a favourite
dog, and he did not want to cause it useless pain. Accused had
bought little things from witness during eight or nine months.


By Inspector Brennan : Owing to the height of the counter
accused might have shown the height of the dog without witness
seeing him, or it might have been while his back was turned and
he was preparing the poison.
Samuel Plack, recalled (Mr. Readett formally objecting),
stated that he was quite sure he accompanied accused to Messrs.
Blackall and Hunt’s between the hours of 7 p.m. and 8 p.m.
on April sth. He never went out between 9 and 10 o’clock in
the morning, being kept hard at work.
Mary Harvey, proprietress of the Royal Coffee Palace in
Scott-street, stated that she knew Mrs. Porter and the accused.
Mrs. Porter was staying at the Coffee Palace from March 28th
until Saturday night, April 7th. Accused had frequently been
at the Coffee Palace with Mrs. Porter. On the following
Monday, April 9th, accused brought Mrs. Porter and said, I
have brought Mrs. Porter bach;..” Mrs. Porter remained there
from that day to the present time. On the Monday morning
witness wanted Mrs. Porter to take some breakfast, but she
showed her her mouth, which she said was very sore, the tongue
being swollen. She took nothing but a little tea. The next
morning, as Mrs. Porter did not come down, witness took her a
■cup of tea, and she then made a statement to her. On the
Thursday Mrs. Porter went out, after being in bed all day, in
the evening, saying that she was going to meet her husband.
She returned that night, and said she had met her husband. On
the following morning (Priday), Mrs Porter was getting out of
bed when she fell back ill. Witness sent for accused, who
came and saw Mrs. Porter. Witness was at this time aware
accused was Mrs. Porter’s husband. Accused had told witness
that Mrs. Porter would be all right in the morning. On the
Saturday, witness sent for a doctor,, as Mrs. Porter thought
she was dying, and afterwards sent, at Mrs. Porter’s request,
for a clergyman (the Rev. Mr. (Prime)
At this stage of the proceedings, the accused was remanded
until the following (Monday) morning.
MONDAY. MAY 14th, 1888.
(Before Messrs. J. Mair, P.M., and J. Thorn, J.P.)
Inspector Brennan prosecuted, and Mr. C. W. Beadett
defended.
Mary Harvey, proprietress of the Boyal Coffee Palace,
Scott-street, cross-examined by Mr. Readett, said it was some
hours after she sent for the clergyman that he came. Dr.
Morgan was the doctor, and witness was in the room when the
doctor was there. Mrs. Porter said to the doctor, “ I have no
wish to live.” Witness sent for the doctor, and not accused.


Witness had said, in her former examination, that accused told
her that his wife would be all right, and that she had better get
up and go to see a doctor. It was on the Saturday that the
doctor wap sent for. Mrs. Porter was then in a fit. Witness
did not remember Mrs. Porter saying anything else, though she
was there the whole time —about five minutes. The doctor did
not say what Mrs. Porter was suffering from, but said she would
soon be all right. Witness’s idea was that Mrs. Porter got ill
from want of nourishment and fretting. Mrs. Porter could not
eat. She was in a great deal of trouble, crying night and day.
Witness thought the weather on Sunday, April Bth, was fine.
When she returred on the Monday morning Mrs. Porter looked
somewhat pale (as she looked in court), but witness saw nothing
the matter with her features. Mrs. Porter ate nothing during
that day, but went to her room. Witness did not notice any
change in Mrs. Porter’s voice when she returned on the Monday,
because she (witness) had to look after her business.
The woman (prosecutrix)' looked pale and ill. Ever
since that Monday the prosecutrix had lived in witness’s
house. To the best of witness’s remembrance, it was on the
Tuesday or the Wednesday morning, she was not sure which,
that Mrs. Porter made a confidante of her. Witness first asked
her how she was, and how her mouth was. Mrs. Porter showed
her her lip, to the inside of which a piece of skin was hanging
(there was no external mark, and then she told her that she had
had terrible trouble in Sydney, and that her husband had
attempted to poison her at Bondi. She also said that she went
out to Bondi in a tram and a cab. She added that accused asked
her was she tired, and told her to sit down and rest her head on
his arm, After that he asked her for sweets, which she had, and
gave them to him, and he gave them back to her. She said those
little sweets she generally carried (witness had seen little round
pink sweets in Mrs. Porter’s possession'. In the letter which
witness wrote to accused she spoke of Mrs. Porter as “ Mrs.
Porter, your sister.” Witness had been pretty friendly with
Mrs. Porter, and had been out with her. She had spoken of the
case with Mrs. Porter, but no more than with other people.
By Inspector Brennan : Mrs. Porter had told witness much
more about the attempted poisoning than witness had stated in
reply to Mr. Readett. Witness would have told Mr. Readett if
he had given her time.
Mr. Readett, sotto voce, made a remark about the witness
giving him the “bitters” and keeping the “sweets’’ for Mr. Brennan.
Mr. Thorn, J.P., said he did not think such remarks should
come from anyone in the case to a respectable woman. They
were unnecessary.


Richard Saunders, a boy employed at the Newcastle Club,
said he bad been at that place two years and six months. He
knew accused by the name of W. H. Dare. He remembered
when accused went into the Club as steward. On Easter
Sunday witness was not at the Club, as the place was closed.
On the following Saturday witness saw accused at the Club
about 8 o’clock at night, and told him that he was going to Lake
Macquarie with the Laxtons on a fishing excursion. The
words he used were, “ I won’t be here to-morrow, as I’m going
in a buggy to the Lake on a fishing excursion with the Laxtons.”
Witness next saw accused on Monday morning. During that
week, two or three days after (perhaps about four days after),
a female came to the Club. That female was Miss Laxton. Miss
Laxton and accused had a conversation together. During the
conversation witness saw accused sobbing, and Miss Laxton
was also sobbing. After a while Miss Laxton left, but Mrs.
Porter came before that. That was before the sobbing. The
three were together. Miss Laxton left first. Witness saw
nothing take place between accused and Mrs. Porter; he was
not looking on the whole time. After that Mrs. Laxton came,
and had a conversation with accused. Witness afterwards took
a note to Miss Laxton at Mrs. P. K. Penney’s. That was on
the same day, Witness had previously taken notes to Miss
Laxton. He took notes regularly. By regularly, he meant
often. He could not say how many ; about fifteen. Witness
had seen Miss Laxton at the Club two or three times previous
to the day mentioned. She used to stand in the passage, 'the
door being closed. Witness used to see them through a fan-light
on the stairs. Accused had never told witness who Mrs. Porter
was, beyond saying that she was a friend who had come out
from England, and she was going to Brisbane before she left
for England again.
By Mr. Readett: Witness knew Mrs. Porter now. He had
last spoken with her on Sunday last at the Coffee Palace, where
witness went of his own accord. Accused had told witness that
he had got a place for Mrs. Porter, when she first came, at the
Coffee Palace, as he could not get her a nice place elsewhere. He
also saw her on Saturday. On Sunday witness was with Mrs.
Porter for about a quarter of an hour. Witness asked, “ What
am Itodo ?” Mrs. Porter did not tell him what he was to do.
Witness was told by Mr. Kane, secretaiy of the Club, that he would
have to go as a witness on Monday. Witness asked Mrs. Porter
would he be asked questions, and she said “Yes.” She was
talking to a gentleman who was tall and not of a light com-
plexion. Mrs. Porter told witness to tell what he knew, and
nothing else. Mrs. Porter did not say what he was to speak


about. It was in the lower passage of the Club where accused
and Miss Laxton were sobbing. That was the passage by which
people passed in. That was about 10 o’clock, a.m. Witness was
upstairs doing his work. The green baize door was in the lower
passage.
The P.M. was proceeding to ask a question, when
Mr. Peadett, in an undertone, made a remark.
The P.M.: You did not say, Mr. Peadett, that I was trying
to make evidence against the accused ?
Mr. Peadett: No, your Worship ; I did not breathe such a
thing.
Witness, continuing, said when Mrs. Porter, Miss Laxton,
and accused were together they were between the front door and
the green baize door, about half-way between. Witness saw the
sobbing ;he saw the tears in their eyes. The door closed with a
spring. The sobbing episode lasted more than a quarter of an
hour. No one else was upstairs with witness. Witness was
running up and down stairs to get water. He was not running
up and down stairs all the time ; he only went up and down
about twice. The green baize door was not made of glass.
There was a fanlight over the door ; the fanlight was shut. He
could not hear the conversation, but saw the people together.
There was a tap for water upstairs, but it was only used sometimes.
The fanlight was not clean then. Mrs. Porter was not crying.
Witness had one other conversation with Mrs. Porter. Witness
did not tell Mr. Peadett this because he did not ask him. The
other conversation was about a month ago. Witness had had
no conversation with Mrs. Porter that (Monday) morning;
he had spoken to her that morning. That was in a room at the
court, when he asked, “ I’ve only got to answer questions?” and
she answered “ Yes, that’s all.”
Mr. Peadett made a remark about “ acting under
instructions,” and said the witness appeared to be “ struggling
very hard with the truth, and it had to be dragged out of him.”
The P.M. said the boy appeared to be a respectable lad.
Witness, continuing, said he saw Mrs. Porter in the clerk’s
room with Mr. Collins and Mr. Huntington.
Mr. Peadett said the witness appeared to have been
“coached” remarkably well.
The P.M. said he did not think Mr. Peadett was right to
make such remarks to a respectable witness.
Mr. Thorn, J.P., ivas of the same opinion.
Mr. Peadett thought it was wonderful to hear a boy detail
a conversation in such a way ; to remember all the prosecution
wanted of him, and to forget all that he (the solicitor) wanted.


The P.M.: Perhaps you want something that witness did
not see.
By Mr. Readett: Witness had a conversation, he did not
know what about, with Mrs. Porter at the Coffee Palace about
a month ago. Witness did not remember the conversation.
Accused’s name was mentioned. Witness had not got a good
memory.
By Inspector Brennan : Witness had taken letters from
accused to Mrs. Porter at the Coffee Palace. He had also taken
a parcel to Mrs. Porter from accused. It was not on any of
those occasions that witness had the conversation with Mrs.
Porter. In the clerk’s room that morning witness saw Inspector
Brennan, two ladies, and several gentlemen. Inspector Brennan
had spoken to witness about the case, telling him to wait in the
room until he was called into Court. Witness never saw a New-
foundland dog or slut in accused’s possession, neither had accused
spoken to witness about a dog.
Robert William Kane, manager of the Bank of New Zealand
in Newcastle, said he was hon. secretary of the Newcastle Club.
He knew the accused William Hare, by which name he was
engaged by the Club as steward. His wages were £2 10s. per
week. Witness remembered Easter Sunday. Witness believed
that accused had spoken about getting leave at that time, and
witness said they (the steward, and other servants) could make
their own arrangements, as the Club would be closed on Easter
Sunday. Witness was not aware of accused asking for per-
mission to go to Sydney on April Bth.
By Mr. Readett: The servants of the Club made their own
arrangements, it being understood that the steward was to be
there to lock up.
Marion Laxton, dressmaker, said she was a single woman,
residing at Newcastle. She knew accused, and had known him
for about ten months. She had kept company with him for that
time. She knew him by the name of William Henry Dare.
She had known him as a single man, but he did not tell her he
was one. She was not engaged to him. She went with him to
Morpeth and to Lake Macquarie. He had given her a ring and
several little things. He frequented her father’s place. He
never offered marriage to her, and she had never gone through
any form of marriage with him. She knew Mrs. Porter. She
remembered accused introducing her to Mrs. Porter outside of
her house one night. He introduced Mrs. Porter to witness as
“ Mrs. Porter,” and Mrs. Porter said, “ And your wife.” That
was the first witness heard of accused being married. At 2
o’clock that morning (April 12th) Mrs. Porter came down to
witness’s house in company with a policeman, and stayed all


night. Mrs. Porter told witness something, and in consequence
of what she was told, witness accompanied Mrs. Porter to the
Coffee Palace, where she showed witness her marriage certificate,
a letter, and some photos of accused and some children.
Witness did not give Mrs. Porter any letters. Mrs. Porter
asked witness if she would let her read the letter (exhibit C)
she had received, and witness handed her one. Witness
declined to let her keep the letter, and Mrs. Porter gave her
the letter back. She accompanied Mrs. Porter to meet accused
on the Reserve that same day, and while they were waiting
witness pulled her handkerchief out, and Mrs. Porter saw
the letter, and asked again if she could read it. Mrs. Porter
had picked up the letter then, and she asked witness if she
might keep it. Witness said “ No,” telling her that she
would destroy it in front of her. Mrs. Porter would not
give up the letter, but opened the bosom of her dress and put
the paper in, saying, “ You need not be afraid ; I would not
use it against him,” adding that she loved him too dearly.
Witness did not give Mrs. Porter any letter. The second
letter (exhibit D) witness thought she had seen before. She
had received a similar letter, but she did not believe that one
(produced) was the one. Mrs. Porter picked the letter from
witness’s pocket. She had not received a large number of
letters from accused. She could not say lioav many —she did
not count them. Accused had remained in witness’s house
from the Monday night until the following Wednesday. She
She had not walked with him about the city during that
time. Witness would swear that accused did not tell her
where he was going when he went off on the Wednesday.
She had not heard from accused since. She had received no
letter or telegram from him on last Wednesday night. She
would not swear anything about a telegram. She would swear
that she did not receive one. She would not swear that she
did not see one. She did not know that she and her father
were defending the case.
Mr. Eeadett objected to this evidence. The objection was
overruled.
Witness, resuming, said she did not know that she and her
father and mother were defending the case. She had not gone
about telling people she was to be married to accused next month.
She had seen the letter (produced) before.
Mr. Eeadett contended that the letter was privileged, and
could not be admitted.
The P.M. thought the letter could he received. The letter
served to show the terms upon which the accused was with Miss
Laxton.


Witness, continuing, said the hand-writing in the letter,
which was written for her mother, was her’s. The letter was as
follows :
“ Union-street, Newcastle.
“ May io, 1888.
“ I was talking with Mr. Readett to-day, and he says that he would work
in conjunction with Mr. Low. Now, if you would like him to work for you
say so, and he shall do it. Don’t stand for anything. I told Mr. Readett I
would suggest this, but if not, reserve your defence, and I will see you have a
barrister at your trial. Please send an answer; or if you have anything to
suggest do, and I will see it carried out.
“ Mrs. Laxton.”
Witness, resuming, said that Mrs. Porter asked her to go down
and ask her husband to live with her again, and witness did so.
The first time she knew that accused was married was when
accused introduced her to Mrs. Porter. The day she went to the
Club was April 12th. She asked accused if he was going to live with
his wife again, and he said, “ No.” She asked why he had left her
and he would not tell her. She then asked if he would see his
wife with her (witness), hut he said he could not, as he had his
business to look after. Witness had been there a little while
when Mrs. Porter came in. She (Mrs. Porter) again asked
witness to ask her husband to again live with her, and she then
asked witness to leave her and her husband together. She left
and went outside. She did not return to the Club, She was not
crying, and she did not think accused w r as crying. Mrs. Porter
spoke to her husband in witness’ presence, and said, witness was
quite sure, “ Will you forgive me and live with me again ?” She
did not say what he was to forgive her for.
By the P.M.: Witness did not know what accused said
when Mrs. Porter asked the question.
By Mr. Beadett: Witness did not give the letters to Mrs.
Porter. She lent them to her to read. They were obtained
without her consent. When in the Club the three—witness,
accused, and Mrs. Porter—stood in the passage. She was not
sobbing, she w r as not in the Club passage long; it might have
been ten minutes or a quarter of an hour. She saw a boy who
was sweeping. During the night that Mrs. Porter stopped in
witness’ house she repeatedly told witness she would kill her •
self. Witness’ mother heard her say so, and said she thought
she was very foolish.
Senior-constable Lloyd, one of the 1 ickup-keepers at the New-
castle police station, said that he was in the lockup on Saturday
morning last, when he received a letter (produced). He went
into the passage and said, Will, there is a letter for you from
Miss Laxton. I cannot give it to you until I have read it.”
Accused said, “All right; open it.” Witness read the letter


and gave it to accused, who read it and returned it to witness.
Accused read the letter a second time ten minutes afterwards.
By Mr. Readett: Witness had been got by accused to write
a letter to his wife, Mrs. Porter. The letter was a demand for
her to hand to the bearer all certificates of discharges and good
character, letters, and papers in her custody. The letter was not
addressed to anyone. Accused signed the order. Witness was
there when the constable who took the note to the Coffee Palace
came hack. The constable (Sells) said, 1 delivered that letter.
She said there was no reply, and tore it up.’' Witness remem-
bered a mangy sort of dog that used to be about the police
station, but did not recollect seeing it before about six weeks ago,
when his attention was called to it by the Inspector of Stock,
who said it was not pleasant to see such a dog in the streets,
and the police ought to destroy it, and they had better do so
at once.
By the P.M. : The accused was not then in the police force.
Witness, continuing, said 'the dog was a brown retriever.
Witness had seen the dog about the streets until lately, he could
not say how long ago. He could give no idea when the dog
disappeared, and he did not know whether the dog had disap-
peared or not, except from what he had been told. He believed
he had seen the dog within the last month, but he could not swear
positively. Witness reported the matter to Sub-Inspector Lynch,
who gave orders about the animal.
By Inspector Brennan: Witness could not say whether the
animal was a dog or a slut. He did not know to whom the dog
belonged. He saw the dog three or four times about the lockup
and the court-house.
William Blackall, re-called, stated that he, four or five weeks
ago, saw a mangy brown retriever dog about the streets. The
animal had been a retriever, and had no hair on ; it was very
mangy. Witness killed it. Witness had been asked to kill the
dog by the police.
Mary Jane Porter, re-called, further cross-examined by Mr.
Readett, said she came from Sydney after the night at Bondi.
She could not say what steamer, but accused told her it was the
Newcastle. Witness carried some of the luggage and her husband
carried the remainder. Witness was not able to talk, but accused
was talking the whole of the time. They went down to the steamer
in a cab. She may have spoken to accused in the cab ; she could
not remember. Witness did not pay the cabman; she did not
know who did. She was very ill at the time. Witness saw a
person whom she believed to be a stewardess on board, but did
not speak to her. In the morning witness asked the stewardess
for a clean towel, and that was the only time she spoke to her.


She spoke to some man in the morning, and asked him if he
knew where Mr. Dare’s berth was and to call him. She spoke to
no other person except the two mentioned. Witness’ parents had
her children. Her father was in the Customs j she did not knov
in what capacity. He had joined as a messenger, and had been
in the service for eighteen years.
The P.M. said he could not see the object of this
examination.
Mr. Readett said their Worships could not possibty see what
his defence was.
The P.M.: No ; that would be impossible.
Witness, resuming said her father bore a portion of the
expense of keeping the children, and her husband s father paid
something—she did not know how much. When she went to
Miss Laxton’s house, at the time Mr. Huntington was there,
witness first saw Mrs. Laxton, who distinctly stated that accused
was not there, and she did not know where he was. By this
time Mr. Huntington, who went first, had gone into the house.
Mr. Huntington walked with witness. Witness did not ask Mr.
Huntington to go. She did not know what made Mr. Hunting-
ton go. She wanted to go to the Laxtons, and did not want to
go to that place alone. Inspector Brennan asked Mr. Hunting-
ton to accompany her to the house. During the interview, as
far as witness remembered, there were present Mr. Huntmgto.n
witness, and accused. Mr. Huntington spoke first, and tried to
show accused the folly of his ways. She did not exactly and
clearly remember what was said. The day of the interview was
a Wednesday, but she could not give the day of the month. In
Mr. Huntington’s presence, accused arranged for her to go
to Sydney, where. he would meet her and arrange about their
going a vay together. Mr. Huntington told accused he was
ruining his own life and witness’s too. When witness was
speaking to her husband, Mr. Huntington said he should listen to
what she had to say. The duration of the interview was certainly
not less than half an hour. Witness told accused she had stood
a lot of nonsense, and did not intend to stand any more, and he
told her to go and do her worst. This was after accused tried
to poison her at Bondi. At the interview accused said, “ I’ve
told you I would send you money if you go away. ’ Witness did
not think he made any proposition. Witness told Mr. Hunting-
ton, before they went to the house, as they were walking down
the street, that her husband tried to poison her. Witness was at
that time willing to live with her husband again if matters could
have been arranged, providing he kept his promises. She had
already told people about the poisoning affair. Mr. Huntington


walked back with witness. This was after her husband had
promised to meet her in Sydney.
The P.M. interrupted the cross-examination, saying he could
not see the use of it.
Witness, continuing, said she had known a Mr. Marshall
who had resided in Adelaide. She preferred not to speak of him
as he had been a relation of hers, and was now dead, and it was
painful for her to speak about him.
This concluded the case for the prosecution.
In reply to the usual questions put by the P.M.
The accused said he wished to put in a written statement.
Subsequently, after consultation with his solicitor, accused
withdrew the above remark, and said, “ With regard to my wife’s
evidence relative to what occurred at Bondi about the attempted
poisoning, there is no truth it in.”
For the defence.
Henry William Hemsworth Huntington, assistant C.P.S. at
Newcastle, said he knew Mrs. Porter and accused. During his-
usual morning call on Inspector Brennan, in his office, on April
18th, witness was introduced to Mrs. Porter, who was there
Witness was in the office only about two minutes The Inspecior
said, “ This is ex-Constable Dare’s good lady,” or something like
that, and witness said, “You don’t mean his wife?” as he had
been under the impression that accused was unmarried. Witness
came into the court, and took depositions, and after the court,
Mr. Brennan asked witness, “ as a good Samaritan,” if he would
endeavour to reconcile accused and his wife. Mr. Brennan
stated that it was rumoured that Dare was about to leave the
colony. Mrs. Porter mentioned that accused was in Newcastle,
at Mrs. Laxton’s, but would not see anyone. A conversation
took place. At first witness demurred about going, and wrote a
letter to accused, but it was not, however, delivered. (The
Bench refused to receive the letter in evidence.) Witness and
Mrs, Porter went down the street together, and to the Laxtons, and
saw accused. Witness knocked at the door, which was opened by
Mrs. Laxton. He asked for the accused, and Mrs. Laxton said
accused had gone away. After a little talk witness said he had
come as a personal friend, and accused came forward. They sat
on the sofa together. Witness said, “ I have come, at the
instigation of Mr. Brennan and myself. We have a great respect
for you and would do all in our power to serve you. Your wife
has been introduced to me this morning, and it is currently
reported you are about leaving for home. Of course, you know,
she wants to live with you, and unless you do so you’ll leave
yourself open to the Criminal Law Amendment Act.’ Accused
replied, “ I won’t live with her. I know she is going to take a


warrant out against me, but she can’t take me here.” Witness
said, ‘‘ You ought to know that you can be arrested in the house
as well as out of it. It is no use you hiding. Be advised by me,
and come to some amicable arrangement with you wife. That
will stop all warrants. Your wife has no wish to arrest you at all.
From what I can see she loves you too dearly for it.” At this time
Mrs. Porter was not present. Witness said to accused “ She loves
you to distraction,” and he replied, “ She’s no good.” Witness
said accused was a coward to make that remark, as he
had already condoned anything by living with her. Witness
urged accused not to be a fool and a madman and
to throw over his wife and children, but for the sake
of his children to make peace. Witness supposed the
word warrant referred to wife desertion, and he at that time
believed accused meant the same thing. A knock came to the
door, and accused went into the next room. Witness heard a
little scrimmage, but did not see it. Witness had previously told
accused that the visitor was his wife. Mr. and Mrs. Laxton left
the room when Mrs. Porter came in, leaving Mrs. Porter, accused,
and witness in the front room. A quarter of what was said would
fill a volume. It was one of the most sensational and pathetic
scenes witness had ever witnessed. Not one word was said about
poisoning ; it all related to the question of man and wife. Some
strong inuendoes were thrown out, which witness did not of course
understand. It was such a scene as would only be witnessed
where a woman with a strong love could appeal to the man she
loved. She said, “Kill me and I’ll live with you, but I will have
you to myself.” She pathetically appealed to his feelings as a
man, and not throw her over for the “new found toy.” Accused
was repulsive to her, and declined to have anything to do with
her, until witness reasoned with him and appealed to his feelings as
a father. Accused said that if he was compelled to live with her
her life would be one of perfect misery. She poured out her
whole soul to him, and she seemed as if her whole existence was
centred in him. Accused said if she came back to live with him
she would have to work for her living. They spoke of the “ bliss
and joy of their early married life uniil the trouble came to them
in Melbourne and their three beautiful children,” but accused
said, “ I don’t care for my wife and child.” He said she could
live apart from him for six or eight months, supporting himself,
and at the end of that time she might live with him. Her whole
heart and soul seemed bound up in him. Accused at first seemed
hard-hearted, and witness used plausible arguments, such as one
married man could use to another, and finally accused appeared
to be melted. Witness said that accused had been leading a life
of deception in Newcastle, but that he (witness) admired him for


his talents, and though he felt he had compromised himself by
coming, yet he and Inspector Brennan would do what they could
for him, and would like to put him on his feet again. Accused
then arranged to meet Mrs. Porter at the General Post Office
in Sydney, and witness then left, though he was doubtful of
accused keeping his word. It was decided that each should go
to Sydney a different way, one by train and one by steamer. On
the way down to the Laxtons’ Mrs. Porter had told witness about the
poisoning. She said accused tried to force poisoned lollies into
her mouth. She also said that if accused cleared out of the colony
“ with this young girl ” she would certainly take out a warrant
against him for wife desertion. On the way back witness met
Mrs. Porter, and spoke of her married life. She said that they
had been a happy couple and would have been happy again only
he was going to marry a girl in Newcastle.
By Inspector Brennan : Nothing was said about “ a very
serious charge concerning Bondi, which I (Mrs. Porter) could
bring against him,” when Mrs. Porter, accused, and witness
were together. She made a very strong inference. She made
no mention of Bondi. She made a pathetic appeal, and said,
“ Oh ! Willy, Willy, you know if I wanted to put you into gaol,
it wouldn’t be for wife desertion.” Accused repelled her, and
said, “I don’t care for warrants, or goal, or anything; you only
want to put me in gaol.”
Martin Brennan, Inspector of Police, stationed at Newcastle,
said he knew accused and Mrs. Porter. The first time witness
saw Mrs. Porter after April Bth he was not certain of. He
received a note from her on the 9th, but was not sure whether he
saw her first on the 9th or on the 10th. He was sure he saw her
on the ioth, when she related the poisoning affair at Bondi. She
told witness in almost the same language as that in which she
gave her evidence. Ten days after, she laid the information.
During the interval, witness knew Mrs. Porter was doing all she
could to make friends v\ith her husband. As a matter of fact
Mrs. Porter had told witness that her husband was to meet her
in Sydney, and mentioned about the arrangements. Witness
said he did not believe that accused would go down, but she,
who seemed thoroughly infatuated with accused, said it would
not do to act precipitately, and that she would go down. All the
details of the attempted poisoning had been given to witness
previous to her giving her evidence, and she gave it even more
fully to witness.
On Mr. Readett’s application, the accused was remanded
till the following (Tuesday) morning, at 11 o’clock.


TUESDAY, MAY 15th, 1888.
(Before Messrs. J. Mair, P.M., and J. Thorn, J.P.)
Inspector Brennan prosecuted, and Mr. C. W. Readett
defended.
James M'Vane, a sergeant in the police force stationed at
Newcastle, said he knew accused. Before accused left the force,,
witness remembered a brown retriever dog that used to be about
the place. They had a conversation about it, and tried to get
hold of it to kill it. The Inspector of Stock (Mr. Durham) made
several complaints about it. Witness was ordered by Sub-
inspector Lynch to destroy the dog. The accused was then
present. Witness suggested poison. That was three or four
months back. The Inspector of Stock was on the footpath
opposite the police station talking to witness, and accused was
standing on the lockup steps, when a conversation took place
about the dog. Witness asked Mr. Durham to buy some poison
to destroy the dog. Eventually witness got Mr. Blackall, the
chemist, to destroy the dog. The dog was an eye-sore about the
street.
By the Bench : The date when accused left the police was on
February 29th last, He came in June, 1887.
By Inspector Brennan: The dog was in the habit of
frequenting the vicinity of the lockup, the court-house portico, and
the post-office, or the other side of the street, whichever side the
sun was on. The animal, witness believed, was a dog, not a slut.
The police on night duty received instructions to destroy the
dog.
James Brady, a constable in the police force, stationed at
Newcastle, said he knew Mrs. Porter, with whom he, on April
last, had a conversation in Scott-street. She came to him on that
(Wednesday) night, about a quarter-past 10 o’clock. She was
crying, and very much excited. She asked witness to go and
tell Mr. Brennan to go down to the Coffee Palace, as she wanted
to see him. Witness said he might be in the office, and advised
her to go there. Witness then asked what she wanted Inspector
Brennan for ? and she said, “ Do you know Mr. Dare ?
Witness said “ Yes.” and she said, *' That is not his name ;
his name is Porter and he is my husband.” She also told him
that she got married eight years ago in Adelaide, and had three
children. She said she had just left her husband, and Miss
Laxton was there along with him. She also said, “He put his
arm around Miss Laxton in my presence and said, * This is the
only girl I ever loved.’ He called me a horrible name, and told
me to go away. I wai.t to go and see him again to see what he s
going to do. If he does not leave Miss Laxton and come along
with me, I mean to throw myself into the sea. I can’t stand it


any longer.” Witness advised her to go back to the Coffee
Palace and remain there till morning, when she would be all
right and think better of it. She did not say where her husband
had his arm round Miss Laxton. After that witness went with
Mrs. Porter to the Club in Watt-street.
By Inspector Brennan: Witness saw Mrs. Porter afterwards
that night in the hall of the Club. At one time witness saw Mrs.
Porter leave the Club very abruptly, and walk half-way across
Watt-street. He never saw her ejected from the Club. Witness
did not see her talking to anyone in the Club. He afterwards
saw her talking to some man, whom he took to be Dare. He
could not say whether Mrs. Porter was pushed out. She appeared
as if she was going somewhere and changed her mind. Witness
remembered speaking to accused at the railway station on April
7th (Saturday). Accused came over to witness, and witness asked
who was the young lady that was with him. The lady was
Mrs. Porter'. Accused said, “ She is a friend of mine; she is
going to Sydney to-night, and I amgoing as far as Honeysuckle
Point with her,” Accused then left and went towards
Mrs. Porter.
By Mr. Readett: Witness was certain about Honeysuckle
Point being mentioned.
This concluded the case for the defence.
Inspector Brennan said Mr. Blackall had made a mistake in
his evidence as to the time at which he had sold the poison to
accused, and he wished to recall the witness to who desired
correct the evidence.
Mr. Readett said he supposed the case would not end in that
court, and he thought it unnecessary to recall Mr. Blackall.
The Bench allowed the witness to be recalled.
William Blackall, recalled, said he wished to correct his
former evidence as to the time at which he sold the poison to
accused. He was uncertain from what he had since learnt as to
whether the poison was sold in the morning or the evening.
The Bench said it was without doubt their duty to commit the
accused for trial.
Accused was then committed for trial at the next Court oi
Quarter Sessions to be held in Maitland on June nth.
Mr. Readett announced that he would not ask foi bail in
this case, as accused had intimated that he would prefer to be in
safe keeping for fear of any suspicion that he might interfere
with the evidence. It was at accused’s own wish and desire tha
bail was not asked for.
The P.M. said the warrant from their Worships would pro-
bably be similar to that upon which accused was arrested, but
the charge would of course rest with the Attorney-General, and


he might alter the charge to a far more serious one, and he would
very probably do so.
Mr. Readett asked their Worships to make an order that
the prosecutrix should deliver up the papers in her possession
belonging to accused.
The P.M. said they had no power to do so. The solicitor
would have to take other steps if Mrs. Porter would not give up
the papers.
The case thus for the present came to a conclusion. Great
interest is being manifested at the probable result of the trial at
Maitland.




BUY YOUR
-from:-
>. COOPER-
Late R. Gordan & Co.,
THBLABGEST.
IN THE CITY
“ EXCELSIOR ”
BOOT EMPORIUM
HUNTER STREET.


FOR THE
Best Tobacco
FOR THE
BEST VALUE
FOR AN
ENJOYABLE DELICIOUS SMOKE,
IN ANY FORM,
Whether Tobacco, Cigar or Cigarette
0-0 TO
f
ca
AND IMPORTER,
WHOLESALE TOBACOO WORKS : C 99 GEORGE-SF.
TWO DOORS FROM GOULBURN-ST., SYDNEY,
ALSO 106 FLEMINGS BUILDINGS
Hunter Street, Newcastle,
NO OTHEREPLACE OF BUSINESS.
