

PRESSING FOR IMMEDIATE SOLUTION,
IN THE INTEREST OF
THE NATION AND THE EMPIRE.
faprs airir 'gtikttt
E. A. MACFIE, M.P.,
MEMBER OP THE ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE.
“IN THE MULTITUDE OP PEOPLE IS THE KING'S HONOUR: BUT IN THE WANT
OP PEOPLE IS THE DESTRUCTION OP THE PRINCE.”
“PORTAS INTRARB PATENTBS ;
PATIBNTE COLONO
ARVA PREMI.”
“ THIS GREAT NATION, WITH BOUNDLESS COLONIES WHICH WOULD REWARD
ENTERPRISE AND ABUNDANTLY YIELD THE FRUITS OP TOIL, YET STANDS
BEFORE THE WORLD WITH THE SHAMEFUL AVOWAL THAT HER POVERTY
AND HER CRIME INFLICT TAXATION UPON HER POPULATION TO THE EXTENT OF
twenty millions A-YEAR.”— Prospectus of Workmen’s Emigration Society.
LONDON:
LONGMANS, GREEN, READER, AND DYER.
EDMONSTON & DOUGLAS, EDINBURGH.
Price One Shilling.]
1871.
[Postage, Twopence.
( //,, %
COLONIAL QUESTION—^


1 AM ANXIOUS THAT, WHILE THE QUEEN’S DOMINIONS ENJOY EVERYWHERE THE
BLESSING- OF TRANQUILLITY, PROSPERITY, AND LOYALTY, THERE SHOULD BE
INSTITUTED SUCH A CONSTITUTIONAL CONNEXION BETWEEN THE MOTHER
COUNTRY AND THE COLONIES AS WILL CONSOLIDATE THE BRITISH EMPIRE,
and sustain its PATRIOTISM, strength, and POWER. — Candidate’s Printed
Address to Electors of Leith Burghs, 1868.


{From the “ Leith Herald Septembe r, 1868.)
<o lo 11
“ I will proceed now to state my views on the great questions that
occur to my mind, although, perhaps, they do not assume in the
popular view all the importance I assign them. I will speak of the
British Empire as a whole. I look upon the face of the globe, and
I find this is the day of great Empires. We have near us the great
Empire of France, and a little further distance away the newly-con-
stituted great empire of Germany. We have beyond that the great
Empire of Russia; and we have, more formidable still, the great nation
of the United States of America. (Hear, hear.) Now, if the United
Kingdom is to maintain its ground—to stand on an equal footing
with these great Empires—l think we must not forget that it is
necessary to maintain our magnitude also. We are possessed of
vast territories, but, for good or for ill, these territories are widely
scattered over various parts of the world. We are not so compact
as any of these four Empires I have mentioned. Well, if we cannot
be compact by being one great land, we may be compact by means
of cordial unions between Britain and her Colonies. (Loud cheers.)
The British people, as a nation, have done, I believe, most ample
ustice to the Colonists that have left our shores and settled in our
valuable territories; but we have, as I apprehend, been too generous
or too confiding. We have not stipulated, in return for the protection
we afford them —for the powers we have conferred upon them—that
these favours shall be at all reciprocated, by furnishing a fair quota of
the men and part of the money that may be necessary for defence,
and perhaps to fight the battles of the Empire. (Cheers.) Nay, we
have been so extremely liberal that, whilst we have removed the
protection in which they formerly revelled, we have allowed them to
institute a new kind of protection injurious to ourselves. Their
own manufactures they protect, and they exclude, by high duties, the
manufactures of the Mother Country. (Hear, hear.) It appears to
me the time has come when we ought to consolidate the British
Empire, and unite this country and these Colonies by some system of
federation, or some system of union, so that the great mass then will
work together and act together, they and we finding the common
fund of men and money requisite for Imperial purposes, and thus
removing all prejudice that might exist in our minds against them.
(Cheers.) Happily, this is a favourable time for seeking such a


1 AM ANXIOUS
BLESSING
INSTITUTE
COUNTRY
AND BUST.
Address t


lo (o “11
{From the “Leith Herald” September , 1868.)
“ I will proceed now to state my views on the great questions that
occur to my mind, although, perhaps, they do not assume in the
popular view all the importance I assign them. I will speak of the
British Empire as a whole. I look upon the face of the globe, and
I find this is the day of great Empires. We have near us the great
Empire of France, and a little further distance away the newly-con-
stituted great empire of Germany. We have beyond that the great
Empire of Russia; and we have, more formidable still, the great nation
of the United States of America. (Hear, hear.) Now, if the United
Kingdom is to maintain its ground—to stand on an equal footing
with these great Empires—l think we must not forget that it is
necessary to maintain our magnitude also. We are possessed of
vast territories, but, for good or for ill, these territories are widely
scattered over various parts of the world. We are not so compact
as any of these four Empires I have mentioned. Well, if we cannot
be compact by being one great land, we may be compact by means
of cordial unions between Britain and her Colonies. (Loud cheers.)
The British people, as a nation, have done, I believe, most ample
'ustice to the Colonists that have left our shores and settled in our
valuable territories; but we have, as I apprehend, been too generous
or too confiding. We have not stipulated, in return for the protection
we afford them—for the powers we have conferred upon them—that
these favours shall be at all reciprocated, by furnishing a fair quota of
the men and part of the money that may be necessary for defence,
and perhaps to fight the battles of the Empire. (Cheers.) Nay, we
have been so extremely liberal that, whilst we have removed the
protection in which they formerly revelled, we have allowed them to
institute a new kind of protection injurious to ourselves. Their
own manufactures they protect, and they exclude, by high duties, the
manufactures of the Mother Country. (Hear, hear.) It appears to
me the time has come when we ought to consolidate the British
Empire, and unite this country and these Colonies by some system of
federation, or some system of union, so that the great mass then will
work together and act together, they and we finding the common
fund of men and money requisite for Imperial purposes, and thus
removing all prejudice that might exist in our minds against them.
(Cheers.) Happily, this is a favourable time for seeking such a


reform. All the Colonies are in a state of the most satisfactory con-
tentment, with one exception—that exception is Nova Scotia, which
has no prejudice against the Mother Country. ... My mind now
naturally turns to the great question of Emigration, for which these
territories offer a most wide field. Now, I must at once say that I
deplore the extent to which the ports of Leith and Liverpool are
made the channel for banishing from our lands so many thousands of
our fellow-countrymen —our most valuable fellow-subjects. (Hear,
hear.) I believe, however desirable change of residence may be for
the emigrant, that it is not required by over-population that any leave
our own country. I believe that by an amendment of the land laws
we could maintain on our soil, thriving and blessed under God, double
the population that now occupies the acres of our country. (Loud
cheers.) The calculation has lately been made as to what is the
value of the article we bestow whefT we send a man abroad. Take
the cost of production —the mother’s care in his youth, his mainte-
nance, his education, and his training in early life—and £IOO would
not pay the value of the gift we bestow on our Colonies when we send
forth an able man* Then that £IOO, itself a producer, is invested in
such a way that it may bring forth twenty, sixty, or one hundred-
fold. Now, much as I value the connexion that subsists between the
United Kingdom and the States of America, I tell you we are hurting
ourselves deplorably in taking active measures to send away these
most valuable workers. One distinction, I think, is drawn between the
emigrant to the Colonies and the emigrant to the United States. The
latter never returns. He becomes for ever, not merely expatriated,
but the citizen of a foreign country. The former frequently comes
back; and while he remains in the Colonies he feels that he is a
British subject, and he maintains his loyal allegiance to the Crown of
his country. (Cheers.) How much, then, ought we to prefer that our
emigrants should flow in the direction of the Colonies, where they will
be equally welcome as in America, and where they may soon become
proprietors of land. That brings me back to the importance of
uniting the Colonies to the Mother Country so thoroughly that we can
still claim their services, and still reap the benefit of the emigrants’
muscles and cordial good-will, and not lose their patriotism, for
which I am sure they will become daily more remarkable.” (Cheers.) —
Extract from Mr. Macfie’s Address at Leith.
* The productive value of a man may more truly and appreciatively
be reckoned £5OO. The reader will excuse such a way of exhibiting
a value that is inestimable. (See page 91.)


PREFATORY NOTE.
The Extracts which precede, and the Object in view,
will, the writer trusts, justify publication of the Papers
which follow, notwithstanding imperfection of style.
In the language of the produce market, they are ex-
posed all-faults.
Questions connected with the relation between the
United Kingdom and the Colonies are now much
better understood, and receive much more attention,
than was the case even so late as two years ago.
Hardly any of the published or spoken addresses at
the last general election touched on them. If we do
not misread “Hansard,” the whole subject was ignored
in both Houses of Parliament in the session of 1868-9.
Not so last session. Still, the course taken by Go-
vernment was regarded as not satisfactory by a
growing number of members on both sides. The
reign of absolute indifference is now past. Were
it otherwise, recent movements in the Australian
Colonies would constrain our earnest attention ; pro-
minent among which is the fact that a Royal Commis-
sion, or Select Committee, at Melbourne has, by a
majority, proposed that the British Parliament should
be asked to sanction some relationship to the Mother
Country, or rather to the Sovereign only, that would


entitle a contemplated Union to make treaties and be
engaged in war, “ as may to the Colonies seem wise
and expedient ” —that is, without regard to the in-
terests or the will of the rest of the Empire; or,
plainly, in practical disconnexion therefrom.
The writer does not attribute the highest import-
ance to the recent speech at Boston of General Butler,
nor to the still later Presidential Address. But the
threat these hold out of non - intercourse, fore-
shadows more or less remote probabilities, and in-
dicate belief, fostered, one is afraid, by observa-
tion of ugly facts, that undue concern for the main-
tenance of trade and manufactures is a snare and a
danger to Britain. Why should the British people
longer so exclusively cultivate and depend on manu-
factures and trade, as to give ground and encouragement
for inimical or hostile treatment ? Are we not disre-
garding the manifest interests of the United Kingdom
and of the whole Empire,—and the opportunities, the
duties, and the career, which possession of invalu-
able and almost boundless territories of our own,
where the British and Irish peasant, more prosperous
than at home, would be gratefully loyal to our Queen
and institutions, unequivocally present and press
upon us, —when we abstain from considering the
best means of welding the Colonies to one another
and to ourselves as a Unitas Fratrum ? Why, in
these times, when the air all around is surcharged
with electricity that may bring the pealing and pelting
thunderclouds of war over our heads, do we neglect the
ready and noble means which union with such a hardy


and attached population as the Colonial would insure
for the raising of additional forces and acquiring addi-
tional power of resistance ? Is there not confidence in
the Colonists that they will discharge the duties, and
fulfil zealously the responsibilities, that will devolve
on them when admitted to their just and equal rights
including in these a fair share of the government of that
ancient and loyal Empire whose honour, and strength,
and union they, like ourselves, fondly and proudly seek
to maintain and promote ?
To illustrate by fresh cases, is it reasonable, is it
prudent, to part with any portion of the British terri-
tory —for instance, a naval station like the Gambia,
which the Cape route, likely to become again our
most reliable one to the East, renders, some tell us,
invaluable—without consulting the Colonists, not even
those whose trade with the Mother Country is con-
ducted along its shore? Or to prosecute the great work
of devising a naval and military system, and making
and manning fortifications (that are demanded by threat-
enings, whose origin, ground, and motives, being im-
perial and national, are as much their concern as ours),
without affording them the means and the satisfaction
of jointly deliberating on, directing, and influencing the
nature and extent of these defences, and the de-
cision of such a question as peace or war ?
Is the Empire to be bereft of its most populous
and populable parts because the rulers of the
United Kingdom have other cares to occupy their
minds ? Is no endeavour to be made to avert the
evil ? When will there be a more convenient
season ?


Success would be the crowning triumph of a
Premier who knows what is due to the people.
The nobles and the masses alike wait not without
deep anxiety his action; continued non-action is predi-
cable failure—foreseen partition of the Empire-trust.
To the Papers read before the Social Science As-
sociation are appended two letters on the same sub-
ject, and extracts from Dr. Lang’s new Book in
favour of Colonial Independence, and from the latest
Beport on Emigration. If the present brochure should
reach that venerable gentleman’s eye, may it lead him
to consider whether the via- media is not tutissima.
Before leaping into the gulf of separation, whence
there can be no harking back, why not “ trust and
I r y; ”■—trust the rest of the nation, which he professes
to love much, and try if those are not in the right
who said a nobler aspiration and a greater and
better future than he aims at will be found in In-
dependent Confederation ?
It is apropos to add that a similar appeal may
fairly be made to the statesmen at home who look
with complacency on Separation. First, do they con-
sider that if their ideas and anticipations should prove
to be a mistake, and if consequently the greater Colonies
are encouraged or allowed to go, there are not now any
other unoccupied territories to be had on the globe
for British colonization ? Secondly, even if they are not
too much afraid of the difficulty of holding Canada in
the event of troubles with the United States (of whose
principle and practice they think disparagingly), why
speak and act so as to generate disloyal and bad feel-
ing in Africa and Australia ?


Probably, when the subject of Federation is pro-
posed, our Irish neighbours may take advantage of the
occasion to delineate their scheme for giving back to
that chronically complaining country a Legislature of
her own. Well, the people of England and Scotland,
though they at present fail to see its practicability and
promise of good, will look at the scheme without ad-
verse prejudice, and would be happy if the consequence
prove advantageous to her or to her and them.
The reader will find a passing allusion to our too
little observed deficiency in national spirit. It is a
significant fact, and the fons et origo malorum, that,
whereas there has long been a United Kingdom, and
in spite of our harmony and unity of feeling, we are,
not only at home, but over the world, anything but a
united people. We call ourselves English, Scotch,, and
Irish, but not British, although, indeed, this last word,
in spite of its inappropriateness, the children of the
great Islands are obliged to use, for want of any other,
when they mean to indicate that common nationality
which exists, and which ought now to be cherished
and made more palpable and pervasive, more endear-
ing and binding and stimulating. We should feel, and
speak, and act everywhere as one]people. Nationalism
is in the ascendant abroad. On the Continent it is
wisely cultivated and trained as a matter of State
policy. We, Briton-Irish or Anglo-Celts, have an
indisputable and fertile ground whereon to plant and
uprear ours. “ Germania,” or the German race, has
surprised mankind by the vigour and number and


effects of its new national songs. Has the Poet
Laureate, whose epic has so nobly prepared the public
mind, struck the first note in Court circles? How
many popular muses will join in concert, and the in-
spiriting “ peaceful notes prolong ? ”
Ashfield Hall,
21 st December, 1870.


CONTENTS.
Notes on Colonial and Imperial Policy : A Paper read before the
Association for Promoting Social Science, at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1870.
PAGE
The Colonial Question not a Party one ..... 1
Constitutional Changes are Required ...... 1
Object to Promote Stability and Interest of Empire ... 1
What the “Empire” is 1
“ The Mother Country ” 1
The Celtic Element, and Service it renders .... 2
Queen and Parliament Act and Legislate for whole British
Dominions 5
British Sway is Mild and Confiding 3
The Transfers of Invaluable Productive Lands ... 3
Those Transfers should have been under Conditions ... 3
Conditions were Implied ....... 3
“ Nation” comprehends all at Home and in Colonies . . . 4
Facilities for Settlers an Imperial Concern .... 4
Emigration to Colonies, not Foreign Countries, the Nation’
Interest 4
In Colonies Emigrants augment Nation’s Wealth and Strength 4
Manufacturing and Trading Pre-eminence is Unstable . . 5
British Consumers far more Beneficial than Foreign . . 5
Manufacturing Prosperity depends on Increased Consumption
or New Markets ......... 6
Trade tends irrepressibly towards Increased Operations . . 5
Dead-locks and Crises inevitable in Commerce .... 6
Farming has no such Drawbacks ...... 6
What is the Permanent Product of our Trading Ascendancy ? . C
Statesmen neglect Agricultural Development .... 6
Agriculture would make Population overflow into Colonies . 7
Causing remarkable Prosperity and Population ... 7
While Britain free from Dangerous Classes .... 7
Policy points to Land-Cultivation in Colonies .... 7
This would lead to Greater National Independence ... 8
And Complete Harmony between United Kingdom and Colonies 8
Grand Field for Reciprocative Supply and Demand ... 8
Formidable Danger of Persisting in Indifference ... 8


Aggrandizement of other Nations 9
Their Advantages not Superior to our Own ... 9
Concessions to Colonies Necessitate Progress in same Direction . 9
Systematised Emigration a Boon Conferrible on Colonies , . 9
Population and Capital should be Diffused over the Empire . 10
National Spirit must be Cherished 10
Other Nations show us an Example ...... 10
The Colonial Office might be Re-Formed ..... 10
Functions of Royalty and Nobility ...... 11
Anciently the Nobles discharged Public Responsibilities . . 11
Division of Great Estates and Exchange of Lands for Colonial . 12
Colonial Orders of Knighthood fall Short , . . . . 12
Equality of Subjects must be Principle of British Rule . . 12
“Mother of Nations” an Objectionable Name .... 12
United Kingdom is a “ Mother of States ” .... 13
Rendering like Allegiance ........ 13
Comparison of Colonies to Children Inapt 13
They and United Kindom are Brothers who are Partners . . 13
The Capital—viz., Lands—held'for Behoof of Family or “ Firm ” 13
Self-Government now Enjoyed by Principal Colonies... 14
They have Equal Interest with us in Good Government o
Empire 14
From Participation in which they cannot longer be Excluded . 14
Experience and Observation show their Participation Required . 14
Business of Colonies at Home now Done Unsatisfactorily . . 15
More Sympathy and Leisure Required at Colonial Office . . 15
Representation in Parliament would not Serve .... 15
A Colonial Board 16
Representation in the British Cabinet Insufficient ... 16
An Imperial Cabinet or Council solves Difficulties ... 16
Only other Alternative is Disruption of Empire ... 17
Parliamentary Negligence and Careless Expressions of Statesmen 17
Letter from Canada showing Apprehensions of Severance . . 18
“ Annexationists ” . 18
Abandonment of Canadian Fortresses 18
Promised Assistance in case of War 18
Congress at Melbourne, and tendency to Independence . . 19
Independence compatible with Confederation .... 19
Lessons from the Growth of other Nations .... 19
A Nation’s Power Proportionate to its Population ... 20
Tenure of India stands connected with Retention of Colonies . 20
Isolation of Portions of Empire is Strength as well as Weakness 20
A Strong Power is usually at Peace with other Nations . . 20
Advantage of Harbours and Depots in Colonies ... 21
Cosmopolitanism of Free-trade must not be Abused ... 21
The Feelings of Colonies must be Regarded .... 21


Foreign and Colonial Trade • 22
Advantage of Possessing Unoccupied Territories. ... 23
Growing Strength of a United Empire ..... 24
Good Understanding with the United States .... 24
Yision of Nearer Relations with United States. ... 25
Firm Resolution to Maintain Colonial Relations ... 26
Consultation with the Colonies ....... 26
Defences of the Empire ........ 27
Cannot be Arranged by Correspondence ..... 27
Council of the Empire 28
Feeling in the Colonies 28
The United Kingdom and the Colonies one Autonomic
Empire : A Paper read before the Association for the Promotion
of Social Science at Bristol, 1869 ...... 30
Comparative Strength of Great Nations ..... 30
The Great Trust Committed to Britons ..... 31
Agriculture versus Manufactures ...... 32
Emigration not Pursued on Sound Principle .... 3j3
Concessions to Colonies have Conciliated 34
Their Equality with the United Kingdom Welcomed ... 34
Amalgamation of Interests. ....... 35
Value of British Connexion to the Colonies .... 35
The United Kingdom must Show itself Worthy .... 35
The National Debt should be Reduced '36
Sufficient Defences must be Maintained 37
The Rights which the United Kingdom has in the Colonies . 38
Responsibilities and Duties of the Peerage 39
Advantage of Colonial Element in London 40
Misuse of the Word “ Imperial ” 40
Letter to a Prominent Member of the Cabinet. . . 41
Evil of Deferring Consideration of the Colonial Question . . 41
The Recent Congress at Melbourne . \ 42
Independence meant is Disintegration of the Empire ... 42
Federation of the Empire ........ 43
Our Position compared with that of Foreign Powers ... 43
Implied Condition to Maintain Waste Lands for the Purposes of
Emigration 44
Proposal for a Convention of Delegates ..... 44
Letter to the Times 45
Extracts from Melbourne Newspaper ...... 45
Extracts from Montreal Newspaper ...... 46
Dangerous Declarations by the Government .... 47
Regarded in light from the Edinburgh Beview . . . . 48


Dr. Lang’s New Book, “ The Coming Event ” ....
Deputations from the Colonies Proposed ... 49
Extract from a New Zealand Newspaper . , 49
Extract from Report of the Victoria Commission . gQ
Remarks made by the Pall Mall Gazette .
KJJ VUD J. U/VU IVJ.UZL ItCZZCZZS , ,' # gQ
Mutual Affections of Canada and the Mother Country 50
Extract from the British Columbia Gazette . ni
Ul/ - LJI \jyjiiAjiii\JMX \tCZZ6ZZ6 , # g-|
Very slight Recognition of the Mother Country . 51
Letter from Captain Colomb on Colonial Defences . 52
Canadian Defences .... M
T.lllrtM * I • 1
Lines of Intercommunication by Sea ... ru
Strategic Points . . . 54
Defences of whole Empire must be Considered Together ’ ’ 55
Author of “Friends in Council ”onUnification and Federa-
tion, and a Council ... _
Clippings from Dr. Lang’s New Book .... 5^
Status quo of Colonial Question not Satisfactory ... ry
Pleas in Favour of Independence . . ’
The Mother Country’s Alleged Consent ’
J V/UllotJUu • . , gO
The Object Dr. Lang has in View ... ’
j • i-j udo 111 V 1U W • • • 58
The Inter-Colonial Conference in Melbourne . re
—iu jL.v±eioourne ... 53
An Incorporating Union of Seven Provinces , en
e uovßii rrovinces «... 59
Protectorate over Figi hinges on Independence ’ ’ f)f)
Talk about Annexation to United States or Germany no
Dr . Lang's Definition of a Colony
i 7 «• wiviiy • • • • AO
Which are the British Colonies ? * 'v
The Object of Colonization , . ’
It is Britain’s Duty to Colonize . . . g 2
General Ignorance on the Colonial Question * .’ ’ ’ r o
wuiumcu question . . go
Bad System of Governing Colonies has Passed Away . .’ ’ go
They Aspire to be Nationalities ... ro
J 1 lllCo • • # /'Q
Improper Views on Allegiance to the Queen ’ ’ fi o
“ The Colonies have Reached their Majority ”
Correction of a Common Misapprehension . . g.
The Views of Mr. Wakefield as to Love of England ’ 65
United Kingdom does not wish to Dominate over Colonies' ’ 65
Confederation . , . vo
The Empire is likely to be Dismembered ” , an
“ The United Kingdom has been Ambitious and Proud ” ' gg
Unwarranted Expressions Emanating from the United Kingdom 66
clrauol PaKd t 0 Sanotion a D “ inte * rati - 88
And Homan , • • • . 68
69


American Colonization 69
Favours Union rather than Disintegration 70
Manner of Dealing -with Waste Lands by United States . , 71
A Quotation from Grotius 71
Dr. Adam Smith on the Relationship of Colonies ... 71
Dr. Benjamin Franklin on the same ...... 72
Resolution of the American Congress ...... 72
Opinion of Jeremy Bentham ....... 72
Opinions of Mr. Merivale and Mr. Carlyle ..... 73
Britain Alleged to have Received Compensation for Planting
C010nie5........... 73
A Great Mistake in the Author’s Views ..... 74
“ Independence is Claimed Irrespectively of Compensation ” . 74
Mr. Wakefield again Referred to 74
“ Colonial Interests must not be Compromised ”... 73
“United Kingdom is Hampered by its Heavy Debt.” . . 75
Mr. Wakefield’s View as to Prestige Controverted. ... 75
Works of Earl Grey and Sir George Lewis ..... 75
Advantages which Colonies Confer on the Mother Country . 76
Those which Colonies Receive from the Mother Country . . 76
The Value of Trade with the Colonies ..... 77
Sir H. Parnell Reckons Unwarrantably on same Trade after
Separation .......... 77
Alleged Advantage of the Separation of the United States
questioned .......... 77
“ Emigration the Grand Question of the Day ” . . . . 78
“ Waste Lands Belonged to the Mother Country ”... 78
“ Waste Lands Belonged to the Mother Country ”
“ It was a Mistake to Alienate Them ” 78
Undue Flow towards the United States ..... 79
Anti-Immigration League and Sentiment in A usiralia . . 79
There Ought to be a Bonus to attract Emigrants ... 79
Valuable Parliamentary Return on Waste Lands ... 80
Negotiations Regarding Australian Waste Lands and Emigration 80
Charge of Mismanagement by Unconditional Transfer . , 80
Australians would yet pay <( Tribute” to Promote Emigration . 81
The Act 18 and 19 Victoria, cap. 54 ...... 81
Lord Bussell .......... 81
Mr. Froude’s Indignation at Transfer of Lands .... 82
How Dr. Lang Persuades the Colonists to seek Independence . 82
Alleged Advantages to the United Kingdom and the Colonies . 83
Great Britain must Dictate Terms when conceding Separation , 83
Dr. Lang’s too sanguine Expectation as to Australian Federation 84
The Abortive London Conference ...... 84
Opinions of Earl Grey and Duke of Manchester .... 84
A Council to Supersede the Colonial Office .... 84


Speech of Lord Sandon in Favour of Confederation of the Empire 85
Working Classes regarded Colonial Lands as their Birthright . 85
Unity of the Empire should be earnestly watched over . . 85
Sir Philip Wodehouse’s Misconception ..... 86
Report op the Emigration Commissioners :
Classification of Emigrants in regard to Nationality ... 86
Increase of English and Scotch Emigrants 87
Emigration, 1869, from United Kingdom to United States . , 87
Emigration in Steamships 87
Mortality in Steamships ........ 88
Total Emigration, 1847-69 ........ 88
Large Sum Contributed from Private Sources .... 88
Misappropriation of Emigration Fund in South Australia . . 88
Emigrants to Canada are largely Destined for United States . 88
Revenue from Land, &c., in New South Wales .... 89
The same in Queensland ........ 90
Table of Emigration in 1870 91
Money Estimate of the Annual Loss of so many Emigrants . 91
Who also leave behind them Unliquidated Liability to National
Debt 91
Americans find too ready Responses to their “ Wilings Away” . 92
Proceedings op the Royal Colonial Institute.— Mr. West-
garth on the Feelings and Position of the Colonies . , .93
Extract of a Letter from Canada 95
An Illustration and Warning from Glasgow .... 96
Index ... . .... 97
