

FOUR
PAMPHLETS,
By JOSEPH SYMES.
The Jokes of Jesus.
If Jesus came to Melbourne.
Christian Evidences: A Satirical Sermon.
Universal Despair; or, Who shall be
Damned if Christianity he True ?
Price Sixpence.
MELBOURNE:
THE “LIBERATOR” PUBLISHING OFFICE,
459 BOURKE STREET WEST.


CHRISTIANITY
ESSENTIALLY A
PERSECUTING RELIGION,
m.
-
W
SECOND EDITION.
* +V*-
BY
JOSEPH SYMES.
MELBOURNE:
JM BLISHED BY JOS. SYMES,
1894.
PRICE TWOPENCE.
*0


TH E
JOKES OF JESUS.
As Parsons, Priests and Laymen
Understand Them.
For many years I have had it impressed upon me that Jesus must
nave been one of the most unconscionable of jokers—a joker who
never once laughed. Perhaps the reader may be startled to find
Jesus set forth as a jester ; but let him read on a few lines and the
truth will become clear to his view and he will see, as I see, that
Jesus must have been the worst joker known to literature.
Of course, the imperturbable air of solemnity and death-like awe
Jesus flings over his sayings puts the reader off his guard, and so
perfectly does he disguise his meaning, even in his worst (or best)
jokes, that I confess for myself I never should have seen through
ms veil it Christian commentators and other members of the
church had not thrown such a flood of theoretical and practical
light upon the subject. Therefore I disclaim absolutely all credit
for the discovery of Jesus’ secret. I always supposed him dead in
earnest until Christian commentators and expounders of the blessed
gospel put me upon the right track. From that time on I have
Jr Jesus as the most consummate humorist that ever lived
Mark Twain is nothing to Jesus in the matter of humor; and all
the popular jokes of the most admired jesters sink into flattest in-
sipidity beside the flashing, sparkling wit of the gospels.
An incident that has occurred since I came to Wellington has
called my attention to this joking element in the character of
Jesus, and I am now resolved, this blessed Sunday morning, Nov.
19th, m the year of our lord one thousand, eight hundred and
ninety three, to put my thoughts permanently on record for the
lasting welfare of the world. The incident I refer to is this—Here
in the hotel is an American traveller, a very sensible sort of man.
g u° od con ?P an y> but he is Pious, goes to church, believes
u Tu le >J? ec ™ se he never read [t '> and he f oels no obligation to
obey the New Testament, except as his neighbours do— that is, not at
all. His Christianity, like the current Christianity of all the Chris-
tian nations, practically and theoretically too, turns the gospels


into jest-books and makes Jesus the most unmitigated joker that
could be conceived.
After this brief introduction, I may now proceed to explicate and
apply the most telling jokes of the holy gospels. And may the
blessed spirit and body who or which inspired these holy jokes
apply them to your hearts and brains, in a way to tickle, amuse,
enlighten and instruct you in the profound mysteries of the faith and
practice of Christianity. Amen, and Amen.
According to Matthew—Jesus began his public joking by calling
upon people to repent (Matthew iv. 17). It has been decided long
since that repentance is much too vulgar a thing for a respectable
believer to do. An extra pound in the collection plate, or a good
donation to the work of god, is the right and proper thing. And
really that was what Jesus meant at the time. Repentance, in the
original tongue which Jesus employed in his public ministrations—
Ahem! jubilee jocularisations—signifies gwmg great gifts to the
parsons and pampering them to the uttermost.
To build a magnificent church is sufficient repentance fo you
and your family from all time past to all time to come, embracing
every soul of your kith and kin, legitimates and the reverse, no
matter what their character or opinions may be. Verily !
When Jesus called his disciples off from their secular avocations
he said,“ Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.”—(Matthew
iv. iq). Here the text is manifestly corrupt—corrupted by some
fanatic who wanted the clergy to be poor. What Jesus really said
was, “ Gentlemen 1 Do you wish 10 be put up to a good thing t
Just follow me, and I will show you how to fish up money and
make cent, per cent., in the most easy and delightful manner imag-
inable ” Then they followed him. Ask any really respectable
clergyman, or layman, and he will tell you that I am doing a work
of supererogation in explaining a text which for ages all their best
clergy have regularly reduced to practice ; because to them it was
given to understand the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, that
is the jokes of Jesus, and to apply them to their own advantage.
It is only the contemptibly poor clergy who ever understood Jesus
literally and they suffer the just judgment of god for their blind-
ness and perversity. Whom the lord loveth he enneheth ; but the
poor are P god’s outcasts, the refuse of his family, who mistake
the solemn jokings of Jesus for his serious opinions. Thus he
deceives them by words they cannot understand, in order that he
may laugh at their calamity and mock them in the day of their dis-
tress On the other hand, those to whom it is given to understand
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven and to see through the
jocularity of Jesus, roll in riches, live in fine manses, prate strings
S holy jokes in fine churches, and are respected by all the sharpers
of the kingdom of heaven. . .
Here is joke number two. “ Blessed are the poor m spirit, for
their’s is the kingdom of heaven.”-(Matthew v. 3). When Jesus
Lid that he wunk a knowing wink, which told his disciples that
w hat he meant was, “ Mind Number One, and keep your weather


eye open.” This is how all respectable and right-thinking men
have always understood him.
And here is another :— ‘‘ Blessed are they which are persecuted
for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Re-
joice, and be exceeding glad : for great is your reward in heaven :
for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.”—
(Matthew viii. 10-12).
No . respectable man ever permitted himself to be persecuted.
Nothing could be more vulgar. The true disciple of Christ suits
himself to everybody—who can help him or injure him ; he is “ all
things to all men,” in order to win all the cash and good things he
Ask Talmage if this is not the true sense of the text. To
imagine that a sensible man like Jesus would advise or encourage
his followers to submit to persecution is the veriest blasphemy that
could be perpetrated. To understand his joke in that vulgar sense
is to confess that you do not understand Jesus’ peculiarities; that
you have missed the true key in interpretation.
So when Jesus forbade adultery, theft, murder, &c M you must
understand his jokes as the priests and parsons do—l mean the
intelligent ones, of course, who have made up their minds to make
the most of that heavenly religion Jesus has conferred upon them.
When he bids them love their enemies, the true disciples laugh
aloud at the exceeding goodness of the joke, and murmur, “ Yes,
yes, blessed saviour ! we love our enemies just like you love Old
Nick and the damned who experience your kindly attentions in
Hell-fire! Bless the lord! we do so love our enemies, especially the
sceptics who expose us so.”
Amongst all the blessed jokes of Jesus, so precious to ids holy
saints, there is not one that excelleth these “ Take heed that ye
do not your alms before men, to be seen of them : otherwise ye
have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. Therefore when
thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the
hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may
have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.
But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy
right doeth : That thine alms may be in secret: and thy
Father which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly.
And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are :
for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners
of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto
you, They have their reward. But thou,’ when thou prayest, enter
into thy closet, and when thou hast shut the door, pray to thy
Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret
shall reward thee openly. Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the
hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces,
that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you they
have their reward.”—(Matthew vi. 1-6 and 16).
All this is to warn the godly not to waste their time in secret
exercises. By an Eastern figure of speech called Hum Bug, and
5


which cannot be so well expressed in our language, Jesus here
teaches his followers to make as much parade and show as possible
of their religion, lest they should lose their reward. It is not
neassary to elaborate the proofs of this, because every respectable
steward of the mysteries of god is so fully posted up in this matter
that he would smile at the pains I am taking to expound what is
so clear that all respectable parsons regularly and devoutly reduce
it to practice. In fact, a parson not doing so would be excluded
from the kingdom of heaven as unceremoniously as the fellow with-
out the wedding garment was kicked into the outer darkness.
Any one who looks around may see how thoroughly the parsons
and the godly in general have seen through these jokes of Jesus.
Look at their public “worship,” their glaring advertisements in
newspapers and elsewhere, their showy theatricals, their “ get-ups ”
for the holy boards and their divine pantomimes. Even their
public charities sustained by prayer are regularly advertised!
Yes, when they pray in secret they run up a signal to let the world
know they are now in communion with the father. Ay, ay ! the
godly cannot be beaten for tricks of trade. And the jokes of Jesus
are far more precious to them than any other style of instruction
could have been.
All impartial readers must admit that either Jesus was joking and
jesting when he uttered the words quoted previously, or else the
Christians treat as mere jests what he intended to be considered as
most solemn duties. The same truth will appear in other texts
from the “ holy gospels.” It is certain Christians no more obey
Jesus than we Atheists do. They quote his words, they preach
from them, and they treat him as the worst jester that ever was.
Let us quote further. “ Lay not up for yourselves treasures
upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves
break through and steal: But lay up for yourselves treasures in
heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through nor steal: For where your treasure
is, there will your heart be also.” —(Matthew vi. 19-21).
I need not say that all respectable Christians, and especially the
bishops, are fully aware that when Jesus said this he winked with
both eyes, and thus gave his hearers to understand that he intend-
ed them to gather up treasure, to the fullest extent of their oppor-
tunities, here upon earth ; and to let heaven take care of itself. I
know of no Christian who does not understand it as a jest. Do
you, My Reader ?
Here again “ And he said unto his disciples, Therefore I say
unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat; neither
for the body, what ye shall put on. The life is more than meat,
and the body is move than raiment. Consider the ravens: for they
neither sow nor reap which neither have storehouse nor barn ;
and God feedeth them: how much more are ye better than the
fowls ? And which of you with taking thought can add to his
stature one cubit ? If ye then be not able to do that thing which
is least, why take ye thought for the rest ? Consider the lilies
how they grow; they toil not, they spin not; and yet I say unto


you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of
tnese. It then God so clothe the grass, which is to day in the field
and to-morrow is cast into the oven ; how much more will he clothe
you, O ye°f Me faith ? And seek not ye what ye shall eat, or
what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind. For all these
things do the nations of the world seek after: and your Father
knoweth that ye have need of these things. But rather seek ye
the kingdom of God ; and ail these things shall be added unto you.
rear not, little flock ; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give
you the kingdom. Sell that ye have, and give alms ; provide
yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that
taileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth
*or where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. Let
your loins be girded about, and your lights burning ; And ye
yourselves, like unto men that wait for their lord, when he will re-
turn from the wedding ; that when he cometh and knoweth, they
may open unto him immediately. Blessed are those servants
whom the lord when he cometh shall find watching: verily I sav
unto you that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to
meat, and will come forth and serve them. And if he shall come
in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find them so
h^f S 6 l a !i e i h ° Se sei T ant , s ‘ And thisknow, that if the goodman of the
house had known what hour the thief would come, he would have
watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken through.
e ye therefore ready also : for the Son of man cometh at an hour
when ye think not.”—(Luke xii. 22-40).
At first sight you would think Jesus to be quite serious and
solemn here ; but no, he is only letting oft one of his most out-
rageous jokes. How do I know ? you demand, Why, the par-
thf>m fAI nC i? la ymen, who love Jesus more than life itself (ask
them if they don t!) who hate and abhor all perversion of scripture
38 Ai? 1084 dead y sin—they, I say, ail treat this passage as a jest •
th gef i ly rU ? aft6r w J orldly S ain as any men that ever
lived. Still they love Jesus, and have secured his favor and are
quite certain to be with him in Paradise. All this demonstrates
that Jesus was joking, “ dies
“ Judge not,” says Jesus, with a knowing toss of the head ; and
t e censorious Christians judge, condemn, send to Hell and roundly
sect'o Screed^ 3 ° * WOman ’ and child who ha PP en not to be of the£
Here is one of Jesus’most sparkling jokes:—“Ask, and it shall be
given you ; seek and ye shall find ; kiock, and it shall be opened
“s* r, y °, U : u For everyone that asketh receiveth ; and he that seek-
thew vH 7^) and t 0 hlm that knocketh [t shall be opened.”—-(Mat-
won!d expect from this that prayer was the road to pros-
P e , lty ' u A J es . u ® knew better. He knew that prayer was useless
a ? d S ,° " dlC f U i ed lt by conically reminding his hearers how com-
pletely successful prayer was—that is, by this bitter irony he exposed
the absuidUy of praying. Ask the rich saints. y P
Inere is an immense joke in Matthew xvi. 28.—“ Verily I say


unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of
death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.
Jesus tickled the fancy of his hearers by pretending he was heir
to a kingdom, and would soon come into possession. Nearly 1900
years arfpasi, and the joke is demonstrated in the non-fulfilment
of the prediction. There are madmen about who stilly expect the
words to be fulfilled, but all rich and respectable Christians rightly
treat the words as a good joke. Of course, they are right, as they
al There is no joke in the world more transparent than this Ma-
tthew xix 23-29.—“ Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily I say
unto you That a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
heaven. ’And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of God. When his disciples heard it ihey were exceed-
ingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved ? Jesus behe d
them, and said unto them, With men this :^“P° s r s * le » £ut with
God all things are possible. Then answered Peter and said unto
him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee ; what
we have therefore ? And Jesus said unto them, Verily 1 say unto
you, That ye which have followed me, in the regeneration when
the Son of man shall sit in the throne of hisgloryyealsohaU sit
upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Is ae •
every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name s sake,
shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting hfe.
1. It is now too well known to require restatement that no
except the rich ever enter the kingdom of heaven. 2. That wealth
is the only grease that enables a man to slip through the needle s
eve. 3. That nobody is now required to give up anything for the
kingdom of heaven's sake, the very reverse-it is the only road to
We The “twelve thrones ” was a joke intended for Peter who had
an eye for a bargain and loved shent per shent _ most dearly. JS
gulled the rest of the poor witlings by promising them a hundred
brothers, sisters, parents, wives, children for every one they gav
up! The joke was transparent enough, but the inspired writers
solemnly recorded it as gospel ! And many solemn souls to-day
wonder why any one should laugh at the text! They don t see the
J ° Jesus never joked more outrageously than when dealing with Hell-
fire.—" Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, Depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
an ft 6 is a lament many centuries the very best of
men in the churches misunderstood this jest of Jesus, and regard
hifuJguage with indescribable horror. During the last few years,
however, the light has dawned upon this text, and now the Chris-
tians perceive quite plainly that Jesus was never so jocular in h s
life as when he sent people to Hell 1 It was only a bit of h s
humor, an ebullition of pleasantry—that’s all. The leading hg


amongst the Christians, and especially the recent converts from
Freethought, have discovered that the devil has no angels; that the
devil himself is only a joke ; that Hell is far from being a region of
fire ; in fact, that Hell has no existence whatsoever !
What more need I say to show that Jesus ows the joker of jokers,
the jester of jesters, the most comical of all comicalities, the clown
that never was equalled.
Why, until modern times his worst jokes have been regarded as
the most solemn of all sober realities. But, thanks to parsonic in-
vestigation, we have found him out, and there he stands, the most
laughable of all low comedians, who made his dupes believe he was
son of god, king of the Jews, a miracle worker, a raiser of the dead,
a general saviour, and the judge of all men !
Ah ! Ah ! Hah! he never meant a word he said. He joked and
joked from his first lispings to the last words he uttered—at least,
the conduct and the language of present day Christians so represent
him. It is nothing to us ; and so we leave them to make what
they please of Jesus.


TUP KNOWLTQN pamphlet
Prosecuted in England and defended l)y
IVlrs. Besant and Charles Bradlaugh.
FRUITS OF PHILOSOPHY”
1
*
R\j STf* Alii A|4 EDITION.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
A. T. WILSON,
456 BOURKE STREET, MELBOURNE,


IF JESUS CAME TO MELBOURNE ?
BY JOSEPH SYMES.
(From the “Liberator,” 14 th July , 1894.)
The parsons frequently play with edge-tools, as Mr. Marshall did
when, a few Sunday’s back, he lectured upon tha above question.
The Freethinker can treat the same subject, and do it much more
impartially and fairly than orthodoxy permits a parson to do.
Unless you admit that Jesus was liable to error and might find
it needful to improve upon his own work, you must allow that,
were Jesus to visit Melbourne, he would do pretty much as when
he visited Judaea. If you say he would not repeat now what he
said and did in Judaea, you should give some reasons. The most
pleasing reason would be the hope that he may have become
civilised and humanised since then. If he has, I should be glad
to make his acquaintance.
. But 1 prefer thinking Jesus has not changed, not moved with the
times ; and will, therefore, picture him coming down Sydney Road,
on foot, barefoot ; bareheaded ; dirty ; so badly dressed that no
“ole do’ would pay 2d. for all he wears ; hair unkempt and mat-
ted with filth as a proof of personal holiness. Poor as a church
mouse, he walks down the road, for the cabs and cars refuse to
carry those who cannot pay.
On he stalks, hands clasped in front, hardly noticing anything in
hiß march, for his thoughts are elsewhere, and his brain is on fire
with emotions he cannot control. All who see him, Mr. Marshall
included, involuntarily think, if they don’t say, “A maniac Tew •
Poor fellow!” J
Jesus hurries along, down Elizabeth-street, on to Prince’s Bridge,
down to the \ r arra Bank, where we will suppose some modern water-
faddist is dipping crowds of imbeciles in hope of washing away their


sins. Jesus insists upon a dip ; and, as nobody disputes that he
needs one, he strips stark and is plunged over head in the flood.
As he clambers up the bank to cover himself —for he has no
towe l su ch a luxury might lead to Hell and damnation—he observes
a laughing jackass flit from a tree, and interprets its notes to be “a
voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved son, Lc,
He is scarcely dressed, when some spirit, or wind, or whim, or
scruple, or insane impulse, sends him off to the desert to keep Lent
and indulge in the holy luxury of a six-weeks’fast for the good of
his soul. At the end of that time he returns and relates his ex-
periences, tells how he had seen the devil ; how Satan had earned
him about, stuck him on the parapet of a 12-storey building and
bade him fling himself down just to see if angels would not catch
and preserve him from harm ; how Satan had taken him off to
Mount Koskiusco and there shown him a panorama of all the king-
doms in the world, from Japan to Mexico, and from the White Sea
to New Zealand, and all in a moment of time. He tells how the
devil offered him all this if he would worship him, which he de-
clined ; and then Satan left him as a bad case.
The reader can readily imagine how such a narrative' would be
received by all except cranks, fanatics, and the hopelessly religious.
Jesus stays in Melbourne and neighborhood for about three years,
and is constantly getting into scrapes—now in prison, now in the
asylum, now pelted with garbage, now cursed by the religious as a
blasphemer, now laughed at as a fool ; and when the policeman is
out of the way, the boys pelt him, pull him about, ask him to work
a miracle, and end by getting gentle Jesus into a magnificent rage.
One day he preaches in the open air and tells the people how
many miracles he had wrought, raised the dead, healed the sick,
&c.. &c. Around him are all the most religious and respectable
people of Melbourne, parsons, priests, judges, &c., &c., ladies and
gentlemen, young and old. In one of his pauses, Dr. Bevan says,
“Instead of boasting of miracles you have performed, we know not
when or where, would you have the goodness to work one here be-
fore us ? Give us a sign that you are what you profess, and we shall
all believe you.” ~ -r , .
Instead of acceding to this most reasonable request, Jesus looks
round upon the respectable crowd and cries out, “An evil and
adulterous generation seeketh after a sign, and there shall no sign be
o-iven to it.” And the scandalised crowd retire with curses loud and
deep. The pulpits all denounce the vagabond and the newspapers
follow suit.
2


One morning, after spending the night as usual in a packing case,
in a right-of-way, Jesus and his small gang of followers, turn out in
quest of breakfast. They find a fig-tree belonging to Dr. Rentoul,
and they carefully search it for figs, quite forgetting that the season
is much too early for fruit. In his disappointment, the son of god
and incarnate creator of fig-trees and all else, cursed and swore in
such wise that that poor tree instantaneously withered and died. Dr.
Rentoul had him up for that, and he got six months, against which
the Spiritualists protested because the man was clearly a medium.
He was not long out of prison when he was in another scrape. He
was at St- Kilda ; and feeling the necessity for some excitement, he
stole two donkeys, and rode both of them at once along the St.
Kilda-road, surrounded by a crowd of boys and others shouting
hurrah, Jesus ! Go it, my hearty ! Does your mother know you’re
out! You should start a circus, &c.
When the son of god and Mary —reached Flinders-st., he eyed
Goe's auction room, called the Cathedral ; and, as it was Sale-day
(Sunday), the bazaar was open. In rushed Jesus with a whip in his
hand and laid about him right and left, overturning money plates
and setting the coin, good and bad, rolling about the floor.
Mr. Goe came forward to remonstrate, and Jesus said, “It is writ-
ten, ‘My house shall be called a house of prayer; but you have made
it a den of thieves !’”
Mr. Goe, scouting his claims to be god’s own son, got him
arrested and sent to the lock-up. The next day Mr. Panton declared
it. was the very worst case he had ever had before him, and sent the
son of god for trial without the option of bail.
Through some unexplained hitch—call it a miracle—the case was
never tried, and Jesus got off on promise to go to Tasmania.
Shortly after, the Salvation Army “found Jesus.”and utilised him
as an awful example. They cleaned him and put him in uniform
and made him Captain. But he went to a wedding, and there
turned all the water in the pipe that supplied the house into wine ;
and there were high jinks indeed at that wedding. All teetotallers
turned against him at once ; and Jesus had to adopt his vagabond life
again.
One of the rev. Mr. Marshall’s head supporters was a pork-butcher
in a large way. On the Yarra Bank, some miles up the country, this
gentleman kept 2000 pigs for the market. He gave the proceeds of
of too pigs per annum to Mr. Marshall’s church affairs ; and the
parson and the butcher were on the best of terms.


Jesus happened to stroll by this farm one day and saw the pigs.
The son of god hated none of his own creation so much as pigs. bo,
instead of sending the pigs to the devil, he sent a legion of devilsto
the pigs. There was the wildest uproar imaginable. Those peace-
ful, unsuspicious porkers, old and young, became frenzied at once ;
they snorted, cocked their tails, pricked their ears, grunted as pigs
had never grunted before, and in pig-language roared, Fire ! bre
And the entire farm of them ran like race-horses down the bank in-
to the Yarra, where every animal of them was drowned.
Jesus had to clear, or he would have been drowned too. Mr.
Marshall and his porky supporter wished the son of god to the devil.
As soon as Patterson the Premier developed religion, the parsons
and priests went on a deputation to him demanding that, as a price
for continued support, he should put down Jesus. What was to be
done ? There was no law to crucify him ;so they sent the holy
ohild” to the Kew Asyhim as a dangerous and incurable lunatic.
There he must stay till death, or until he shall come to destroy the
world and “judge the quick and the dead.”
I may add that Jesus made the acquaintance of several women
while here, was often in their company; and it is said they sup-
ported him. He persuaded one of them that he was the resur-
rection and the life,” and that the dead who believed in him should
rise again; and that the living who believed in him should never
die. It appears that the woman rewarded him for this nonsense,
but she died all the same. . T aa
“And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the
which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even
the world itself could not contain the books that should be written.
Amen.”


A HYMN TO GOD.
BotiS E uDon R m<. am r 1 fe ?i‘ P ' OIIS -. This shows that affliction is
Generally my p,ety takes the shape of poetry
6re IgIOUS sort J an d then I burst out in songs of praise Ac
nstian p ° etr y does not much flourish now-a-days, perhaps the
godly wfllu B6 my humble verses in their holy me/tLTand thus
P M ring ' god H l ? ,d Ca Anyway - * ere * the lay
Sr USe ;: n I trust the criticswill find it equal to
l May thC bIeSSiDg ’ '*»
Holy Puzzle ! Pun Divine !
Blest Conundrum ! Thou art Mine!
How it is I do not know ;
Still, I m sure it must be so !
Thou art God—a Vacuum-
Depth, no line can ever plumb ;
Height thou art, above all height
(Tell me if that phrase is right);
Breadth thou be’est all breadth ayont;
Vaster Breadth thou ne’er canst want.
Whether Length and Breadth in thee
Jiqual or unequal be
Is a geometric quiz
I must leave to roast or phiz—
Unless thou vouchsafe to say
Which it is, and end the fray.
thou great eternal Point,
Without body, “ parts,” or joint;
O, thou vast and endless Line,
Thou in ail thy Length art mine I
U, Thou Angle, Curve and Cone I
i hou art God and thou alone.


All the tangle to untie,
And the mystery unearth
Which enshrouds thy children’s birth !
Nay, now ! drop that thunderbolt I
Don’t be acting like a dolt 1
I am only writing down
What’s in everybody’s crown.
Everybody wants to know
How it was you started so ;
How it was you didn’t wed—
Never to the altar led
Some divine and holy dame
Who had raised your mystic flame ;
How it was you chose to be
Both parents of your progeny !
• • , ,
Thou, O Dad ! art eke a Son !
Both of you are only one ;
You begat him, so they say,
Earlier than the earliest day.
He was never less than you ;
You are ever one, not two ;
He’s as old as you, his sire—
So they say whom you inspire.
Yes, in truth thy son is thee;
Thou thyself art simply he ;
He is Dad and thou art Son—
Son and Dad are merely one.
One ye are, and yet your’re two ;
This is gospel, this is true !
I don t wonder you should stare !
But I merely here declare
What the parson-fellows tell,
To save us from the fires of Hell.
Probably you never heard
Before this gospel trash absurd !
Ho ? Ah, well, you really should
Visit round this neighborhood,
Tramp about upon this Earth-
Scene of sorrow and of mirth—


Noting what the clergy preach,
Jotting down the stuff they teach.
And if that don’t drive you mad,
I’m no prophet, Heavenly Dad !
Why, the quacks assure their dupes,
Gathering round in gaping groups,
How the Father, Son and Ghost
Formed a scheme to save the lost;
How thy Son, and yet thy Sire,
Did from Heaven’s realms retire,
Travelled down to old Judee,
Or to ancient Galilee ;
And that there thy Ghost begat
Once more thy own eternal brat,
On the Spouse of Joseph Blank—
An easy-going pious crank—
There, in Bethlehem the small,
Born he was in byre or stall,
Son of Mary, virgin, maid,
And thy Ghost —a rakish blade.
This the story is they tell—
’Course it pays the fellows well 1
And the unction they infuse
Into this prepost’rous news
Is enough to nauseate
M«n of sense who hear them prate.
How to reckon up this story,
They relate—for thy sole glory !
Is a thing that puzzles me,
And perhaps will puzzle thee 1
Let us for a moment see :
Item first. Thou art a god,
Over all, from man to clod ;
Don’t forget, as I proceed,
Thou art infinite indeed.
Next, it is a certainty
Thou art from eternity.
Now the second item note.
Here’s your Son, on whom you dote.
He is quite as old as thou,
And as infinite, I trow 1


Item third. The Holy Ghost
Can with truth and honor boast
Of an age as great as thine,
And an equal bulk, in fine I
Here the puzzle is complete ;
How three Infinites can meet
In but ONE INFINITY ?
There is space enough for thee ;
But a space enough for three
Must be three time? infinite !
Here, I m sure, my logic’s right.
“ one three and three in one,”
May be Jargon, may be pun ;
May be claptrap, maybe bosh !
-But it s not the thing to wash I
Holy Puzzle! Pun Divine!
Great Conundrum I One and Trine 1
Truth, now arbiter of fate,
Bids thee quick to abdicate.
Gainst that doom there’s no appeal;
All thy followers’ frantic zeal
er thy sentence can reverse ;
Thou must quit, and they disperse !
Hocus-pocus was thy rule,
Trick or fraud thy ready tool ;
All along the track of time
Thou hast left thy poison-slime ;
Every crime to mortals known
Roosted round about thy throne,
Sheltered by thy holy name
From all punishment and blame.
Now the sentence is, Depart I
Man, thy maker, bids thee start.
Oft! and trouble man no more !
Leave him Nature to explore;
Leave him to the juster sway
Of Truth, which grows from day to day.
JOS. SYMES.


PAMPHLETS BY JOSEPH SYMES.
FALSE AND TRUMPERY EVIDENCES OF CHRIS-
TIANITY; A reply to the Hon. Oliver Mowat, Premier
of Ontario, Canada. 6d.
FROM THE WESLEYAN PULPIT TO THE SECU-
LAR PLATFORM, is.
SCAMPS DIRECTORY. 6d.
CHRISTIANITY ESSENTIALLY A PERSECUTING
RELIGION. 2d.
HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES NOT OF
CHRISTIAN ORIGIN, ad.
CHRISTIANITY AND SLAVERY, ad.
PHALLIC WORSHIP, is.
CHRISTIAN EVIDENCES ad. (A Satire on the way
Clergymen make up their Sermons).
HAS MAN A SOUL. ad.
BLUNDERS OF JESUS, ad.
FALL OF MAN; the Devil’s own account of it. True as
Gospel. 3d.
PHILOSOPHIC ATHEISM 6d.
MARVELLOUS SPREAD OF INFIDELITY 3d.
LIFE OF CHARLES BRADLAUGH ; containing the
Famous Three Speeches at the Bar of the House of
Commons ; with portrait of Mr. Bradlaugh. 6d.
SYMES-BERRY DEBATES, No. I.—“ Is it Rational to
believe in God.” Two Night’s Debate between the Rev,
D. M. Berry and Joseph Symes, 6d.
No. 2. —“ Is it Rational to Believe that Jesus Rose from the
Dead.” Two Nights' Debate between the Rev. D. M.
Berry and Joseph Symes. 6d.
GRANT-SYMES DEBATE. Subject :—*• That there is a
Living Personal God, as Revealed in the Bible and the
Book of Nature, who Created Man.” Miles Grant of
Boston, Massachussets affirmative, Joseph Symes, nega-
tive.
No. I—SYMES-SELBY DEBATES. “ Is Christian Theism
more Rational than Atheistic Secularism,” Three Nights*
Debate, between Joseph Symes and Isaac Selby 6d.
No, 2 —“ Is the New Testament Jesus a Myth.” Joseph Symes
affirmative, Isaac Selby negative 6d.


6XPOSUR6
OF
ROMAN 6ATHOIOI6 MORAbS
IN FOUR LETTERS TO
CHRDINHL MORHN.
BY
JOSEPH SYMES.
EXTEACT EEOM PEEPACE:—
These Letters are reprinted from the Liberator. They were pro-
voked by the action of Mr Moran.
The Catholic priests are hereby challenged to reply.
It is inconceivable that any morals, savage or civilised, should be
worse than those exposed in the following pages.
. seems to me they deserve the fullest exposure; but decency for-
bids further exposure than I give.
I respect Catholics as fellow-citizens, and have always pleaded for
fullest justice to them, no matter of what country.
I am an ardent Home Euler, and have been for over 20 years.
But hate the Catholic priests as the worst of men, and the worst
corrupters of Morals
JOS. SYMES.
rK,
PRICE THREEPENCE.
TO BE OBTAINED FROM
A. T. WILSON,
Ppintep and Publisher,
456 Boiirke Street, Melbourne.


THE
FALSE AND TRUMPERY
EVIDENCES of CHRISTIANITY.
By JOSEPH STMES.
. — lB1 — 9
{A reply to the Hon. Oliver Mow at, Premier oj Ontario.)
EXTRACT :
Mr. Mowat studied the Christian evidences in early life, he says, and concluded
that Christianity was not a cunningly devised fable. No, it is not. It is so clumsily
devised that many men of ordinary common sense, if not piously bribed or in-
timidated, can see through its fraud. He praises Paley’s EviStnces. But, pro-
bably a more dishonest book was never written. Keith's Fulfilment of Prophecy
also appears to Mr. Mowat “almost to demonstrate” the truth of his religion.
Yes, Paley and Keith are just the books to satisfy the person who already be-
lieves in Christianity, is determined to stick to it, and is too lazy or too busy to
go behind them and examine their vouchers. When the so-called evidences are
strictly and impartially examined, Paley and Keith are shown to be special
pleaders, making the best of a bad case—or rather no case at all. They have
presented a fine balance-sheet stuffed with items of the most sensational sort
all income and no expenditure; and the financial statement showing enormous
assets, but no liabilities. To read Paley and go no farther in your inquiry, you
would conclude that a sceptic must be the most unreasonable being in the world,
and that a doubting Christian must be absolutely inexcusable But, then,
nothing could be more false or more Jesuitical than Paley's Evidences. The tales
of Roman Catholic miracles are written with equal plausibility. The Catholics
swallow their stories, the Protestants swallow Paley’s argument ■ but the critic
examines, and finds it a tissue of lies, of suppression ot the truth, and of sug-
gestions of falsehood. Christianity has no evidences. It is a gross superstition.
Like Jack and the Beanstalk, it is a story or a bundle of stories ; and the one is
as true as the other.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
cyo CyO
K. T. WILSON,
456 BOURKE STREET MELBOURNE.


PHALLIC OR SEX WORSHIP:
Or the Origin of Religion.
BY JOSEPH SYMES.
One Shilling.
This pamphlet should be read by everyone. It is
a regular eye-opener.
This is how the Australian Christian World commends the
pamphlet:—
Surpasses in blasphemy and obscenity anything we have seen
or heard of.
We could hardly have imagined it possible for a human being
to sink low enough to write it; and we confess that we ase amazed
that the authorities in Victoria should allow a book so utterly
unclean and devilish to be published with impunity in Melbourne
and from thence scattered over the whole land.
We have forwarded copies of it to Sir Henry Parkes and to the
Social Purity Society with the prayer that, on the ground of its
immorality it may be suppressed.
To allow the free and unrestricted circulation of such obscenity
as Mr. Symes has put into print is to expose the whole commun-
ity to an influence which tends to blast everything noble and to
corrupt everything pure in human nature, and to turn the whole
current of thought, especially in young people into such channels
as tend to vice, shame and utter ruin. Can nothing be done to
prevent this. We have a law. Can it not be enforced ?
R. T. camsofl,
PREETHOUGHT BOOKSHOP, 456 BOURKE STREET.
MELBQURN9.


PHILOSOPHIC ATHEISM
A.
PAMPHLET FOR.THINKERS
BY
JOSEPH SYMBB.
EXTRACT: —
Nature nowhere, in no way, manifests government. An overruling providence
finds a place in creeds —that is, in the fictions of the churches ; but it exists no-
where else. Consider these few undeniable facts : (i) Nature has never yet been
able to distinguish, in the very simplest cases, between right and wrong, crime
and accident, sin and misfortune. For example—if a man jump down a precipice
he is dashed to pieces—perhaps he deserves it; but if he should accidentally fall
down he suffers to precisely the same extent; yes. if he is wilfully flung down
by murderers it is all the same in the end. Is that justice? Let us compare.
A jumps wilfully off a house and is killed; B accidently falls off, and meets the
same fate; Cis flung off by his enemies, and is also killed. The three bodies are
taken before a coroner, and the jury, after being acquainted with all the facts of
each case return the same verdict for all three. What should we say if they
pleaded that, whereas A, B, and C did all come by their deaths by too precipi-
tate a descent from the top of a house, therefore, A, B, and C all alike deserved
the fate they met ? Such a verdict and defence of it would involve about equal
quantities of truth, absurdity and injustice. But Nature would justify that
stupid jury, and they might plead in self-defence that, whereas the three died in
consequence of their respective falls, it was evident that Nature regarded them
as equally guilty, and they did not in the least desire to improve upon the ways
of Nature. Now, if Nature must be taken as the exponent of deity, we can only
oonclude that deity cannot distinguish between right and wrong, for in the
course of Nature, by which he governs (?) the sentient beings of this world, he
treats accidents, mistakes, and the greatest misfortunes as if they were the
greatest crimes, and oftener inflicts pain upon the innocent than upon the guilty.
. PRICE SIXPENCE.
TO BE OBTAINED FROM
K. T. WILSON.
PRINTER AND PUBLISHER,
456 Bourke Street, Melbourne.


VARIOUS WORKS-
Published by A. T. WILSON, 456 Bourke-street, Melbourne.
Fattier, Son and Holy Ghost, or the Historv of an
Ancient Jewish Firm, by Jas. Thomson, '2d.
Letters from Hell, by E. Levi , 2d.
Letters from Heaven , D. Howler, 2V.
Open Letter to Jesus Christ, 6y A). M. Bennett, yd.
Hell Open to Christians, Father Pinnamonti.
Illustrated, 6d.
DR, ROLLICK'S WORKS,
matron’s manual.
Serves and tbs Nervous,
diseases of Olomen.
The marriage Guide.
V/0 ETCH
n, T. WILSON,
Printer and Publisher,
156 Bourle-street West, Melbourne.


THE
SCAMP’S DIRECTORY
AND
Classified fot*. the Comfort of Evilndoeps,
DEDICATED TO
The Members of the Bible in State Schools.
LEAGUE.
BY JOSEPH SYMES.
Extract from the “Epistle Dedicatory.”
*' A- 3 y° u are aware, the bitle is man’s only guide in life. Any average par
son will tell you that we have no moral guide; and that without this book we
Should be horribly immoral and wicked. I will take it for granted that you have
children, boys and girls ; and that you wish to train them in the best possible
way. You do not know what they may come to ; they mav rise high in the
land, and share in ruling it by-and-bye. Supposing, then, your son, say, should
by-and-bye become a ruler, what sort of a ruler will he be. if he follow the teach-
mgs and examples of the bible.
PRIG© SIXPONC©.
SEND TO
A. T. WILSON, 456 BourM., Melbourne.


CHRISTIAN EVIDENCES.
TEXT.
“Heigh, Diddle, Diddle!
The Cat with the Fiddle ;
The Cow jumped over the Moon ;
The little Dog laughed to see such sport,
And the dish ran away with the spoon.”
This text itself, like that of the New Testament, is of unknown
origin and date. In some sacred language or another it may be
thousands upon thousands of years old, or it may not be.
We find it preserved as an heirloom in the family of man ; and
that it has been taught to children by pious and Christian people for
many generations, is a fact that will not be called in question. And
I ask, would it ever have been so taught if it had not been true, es-
pecially amongst people professing Christianity? Let the reader
decide, after prayerfully weighing the case.
It is true we do not know who wrote the rhyme ; neither can we
say who wrote the New Testament. But internal evidence shows
plainly the finger and the footprints of Bubblybohoo, the Almighty
Creator, Preserver and Redeemer of the world. This is seen in its
contents j for, surely, none but a divine being could have had such
thoughts or given utterance to such holy conundrums and impossibi-
lities—the very things faith delights to swallow. “My thoughts are
not your thoughts,” saith Bubblybohoo.
1 here ought, therefore, to be no dispute about the text, for it has
been received for many generations without demur; and we challenge
the Sceptic to name a single writer of ancient or modern times who
has ventured to attempt any refutation of it.


It is true, Justin Martyr does not quote this particular piece of
rhyme ; but he does refer to things quite as improbable ; and it is
supposed he must have handled this very text, for many things in
his works bear a striking analogy to it.
Tertullian does not expressly refer to it ; though he does mention
“cow,” and “dog,” and “moon and there is not a word in his ex-
tant works that can be construed as throwing the least doubt upon
the genuineness and authenticity of this most precious fragment of
divine revelation.
Of course, the unregenerate and the sceptical will laugh the whole
thing to scorn. But the devout, the babes in Bubblybohoo, will
'find it most refreshing to their souls. It is to such I speak. And
may the grace, mercy, and blessing of Bubblybohoo and his uncrea-
ted Son, our Saviour, be upon them all. Amen.
I. The first thing we have to deal with in our argument is the Cat
—the Cat with the fiddle —Ahem ! the violin.
As we have no categorical statement of anything the Cat did to
the instrument or the instrument to the Cat, we must be devoutly
cautious not to import anything of our own ; for whosoever addeth
to or taketh away from the words of the book of Bubblybohoo shall
have his part in the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the second
death. And as one death is quite enough, I must not provoke the
divine wrath. Yet, by divine assistance, acid in deepest humility,
aiming solely at the glory of go—Ahem ! Bubblybohoo, I may ven-
ture a few remarks, trusting to your prayers for assistance.
1. A fiddle is intended by its maker to be played upon. And
what, I demand, is more fond of play than a cat ? and especially a
young cat, that is, a kitten ? And it is supposed by all the learned
who have commented upon this blessed text that the sacred animal
in question was a kitten. Some have even alleged that tradition
saith, it was of divine birth and virgin born. But of this we have no
proof. Still the devout mind will edify itself by meditating upon
that suggestion, while the Infidels will laugh. But laughing is not
argument. (Applause.)
2. It is well known that a cat, when young, will play with any-
thing in its way; and, therefore, we cannot doubt that this cat really
played on the fiddle. In fact, it stands to reason.
3. We have no right to argue that because cats in general do not
perform on the fiddle, that, therefore, this one did not. For, note
the language employed by the divine penman. He does not say a
cat or some cat ; or a fiddle or some fiddle ; but the cat and the
fiddle.


This shows he must have had some particular cat and some parti-
cular fiddle in mind. It has been supposed that this particular fiddle
was the only one that ever was made suitable for a cat to perform
upon ; and that the cat in question was the only one that could per-
form upon it. This should settle all disputes ; 'for, if Bubblybohoo
cared to make a fiddle for a cat and a cat for a fiddle, and adapted
these to each other, who shall say him nay? “Wherefore, O, man,
dost thou complain ? Hath not Bubblybohoo a right over all fiddles,
to make one for his favorite cat and all the rest for human beings ?”
4. Though we are not told in set terms that the Cat really did per-
form upon the fiddle, yet the context fairly implies that, for we are
told of the startling effects produced by the performance, which we
shall proceed, by the favor of our heavenly father and mother, to ex-
pound at a later stage in our discussion. It is plain the Cow, the
Dog and the Dish were extremely excited by something ; and what
else could it have been but the Cat’s performance on the fiddle ?
What, I demand ? Let the Sceptic reply. (Loud applause.)
Besides, in all pictures illustrating this wondrous story do we not
find the Cat pictured as performing upon that sonorous instrument?
And the artist must have had good reasons for thus depicting it.
Oh ! the deplh, both of the wisdom and goodness of Bubblybohoo,
who hath given us his most holy word ! Honored and blessed be
his holy name ! Where would morality be, but for this blessed
rhyme, so grand in its divine simplicity ! So plain, yet so profound ;
so clear that the wayfaring man, though a fool, need not err therein ;
and yet so profound that the wisest angel cannot fathom its depths *!
O, the depth, both of the Cat and the Fiddle ! ” (Long-continued
applause.)
But let us proceed. So vigorous, so entrancing, so ravishing, so
exhilarating was the Cat’s playing and the Fiddle’s con-cat-enation of
exquisite sounds, that the Cow began to leap and caper, and finally
vaulted clean over the Moon ! While the little Dog laughed, and
the very Dish, yes my friends, as true as god almighty is in heaven
or the Dish ran away with the Spoon !
The Sceptic may laugh 5 but there is the written word, the scrip-
ture of truth, to attest it. (The audience rise and sing “All Hail,”
&c.)
And this brings us to our second head, namely, the question of the
Cow jumping over the Moon.
11. In expounding this part of the text, I would observe—
1. That there is a Moon. So plainly does this object appear in the
sky, that he who does not sometimes see it must be blind. No matter


how Sceptics may rave about it, the Moon exists, and shows herself
at regular intervals to all the world. I mention this 1» give the objec-
tor no possible loop-hole of escape, for I am resolved to compel him
to come into the circle of believers.
2. Having proved the existence of the Moon, I proceed to show that
there are cows. This surely will not be denied. Cows, my friends,
are animals that give milk, though not all the milk they are credited
with. Their existence is unquestionable.
3. Now it is well-known to all observers that cows are accustomed,
at times, mark, I say, at times—to leap or jump. They do this for
various reasons, some of which are obscure and beyond my reach to
fathom, for cows, it is well known, are more fond of eating and
drinking than of talking. They seem to think silence to be golden ;
or else that talking might lead to trouble. Still, be the motive what
it may, it will not be denied that cows do jump.
It may be true that no living man ever saw a cow jump over the
Moon, but that is no argument against the truth of my text. It is
not here said that all cows or that many cows have jumped over the
Moon ; the text saith that the Cow did it. And it is implied that
this Cow did what no other cow has ever accomplished.
Besides, it is preposterous, absurd, mere wind, Sceptical jargon and
several other reprehensible things besides, to raise so paltry an objec-
tion. For, I boldly demand, who is there that has ever tested the
jumping powers of a cow ? What Philosopher is there that can tell
how far a cow may jump? And until that question is answered,
who can have a right to say that no cow ever jumped over the
Moon ? Let those who deny this blessed truth have the decency to
prove, ay, to prove, that no cow ever did perform this miraculous
feat. The text says the Cow did jump over the Moon ; and I feel
sure all pious and Bubblybohoo-fearing men and women would
much rather believe this ancient gospel than the blatant blasphemy
of any modern Infidel! (Applause.)
Though your cow cannot jump over the Moon, nor your neigh-
bor’s cow ; though no cow now living could do it ; though no cow
in the past 2000 years could do it—though all this, I say, may be
true, yet who is competent to say that no cow that ever lived could
perform this most godly feat and jump this heavenly jump ? Unless
the Sceptic is prepared to bring chapter and verse and prove that the
Cow did not do as the text declares, it is rational and strictly Scien-
tific to believe that she did. (Loud applause from the Cow-mooners.)
The miserable objections which Sceptics raise to the truths of holy
writ are childish in the extreme. Why, before a man could honestly


say that this did not happen, before he could be competent to ex-
press an opinion upon it, he must assure us that he has personally
examined and tested the jumping abilities of every cow that ever
lived ! (Tremendous applause from believers.) Not till that has
been done can any man have the right to be heard upon the subject
—except he take our side and is prepared to defend the faith.
And, my beloved friends, ye who fear Bubblybohoo, let me deal
critically with this subject and in the spirit of sound scholarship,
while you uphold my hands by your prayers and applause.
My sacred text doth not say a Cow jumped over the Moon. Ah !
no, the blessed spirit who inspired the text fully understood the de-
ceitfulness of the human heart; he foresaw the wickedness of these
modern times, and provided in the text itself a reply to unbelievers.
Read carefully and prayerfully, and you will observe, by the blessing
of Bubblybohoo, that the text saith the Cow. And this plainly shows
that the heavenly author had in his mind some one particular Cow,
not any cow, but one he knew ; not a cow that could not perform
the feat, but the Cow which actually did the deed.
So, therefore, were it possible to test all other cows and prove to
demonstration that no other cow either did or could perform such
a deed, still the word of Bubblybohoo standeth sure, for it saith the
Cow, namely, the very Cow that did jump over the Moon, and no
other. If you should ask me what cow it was, I should answer, It
was the Cow, I mean, not some incapable cow, but the identical
Cow mentioned in the text; it was the Cow. And this is enough
for me. And here is the full warrant to me that lam right and
pious and honest and good in preaching the gospel of Cow-Moon-
ism. lam not doing it for money, but from principle, (Tremend-
ous applause )
4. The objection urged against this wonderful miracle, on the
ground of the greatness of the jump, is frivolous in the extreme ;
for “with Bubblybohoo all things are possibleand, I may, with
reverence add, all things are equally possible. Yes, My Beloved
Brethren, it is as easy for Bubblybohoo to make a cow—ay ! an
aged cripple !—yes, mark my words—it is as easy for our heavenly
father to make a cow jump over the Moon as over a milk-pail!
(Enormous cheering). My Friends, the sprightliest cow in the
world could not leap over a straw without Bubblybohoo; and with
his aid, a dead cow could vault over the Sun itself I Let that
comfort you when Sceptics assail your faith and endeavor to lead
you into their own unhappy state of mind.
And, I pray you, do not forget that here we deal with no ordinary


animal, no common, every-day cow. If it were so, we should feel
bound to reject the story. This Cow was one miraculously gifted;
and, like Pharaoh, was raised up by Bubblybohoo for this very
thing, that he might show his power in her. Consequently we are
precluded from judging this case by ordinary rules ; we are deal-
ing with a miracle. And it is just here the Sceptics fall into their
most fatal mistake. They reject miracles, and thus forbid, as it
were, the great Bubblybohoo to reveal himself to man ! The
arrant blasphemy of such conduct must be too apparent to need
any elucidation from me. (Applause.)
5. It has never yet been decided whether this most wonderful
Cow was assisted by Bubblybohoo in her miraculous leap, or was—
I speak it with profoundest reverence—whether, I say, she was
really and truly one of the persons of the Ever Blessed Tri-
nity ; and if the latter, which of the persons she really was. Until
the great day come and the books are opened, I fear this most
adorable mystery must remain unsolved.
If—mark, I say, if —this wondrous bovine animal should be dis-
covered to be one of the divine persons of the Bubblybohooship,
then we must suppose that he became incarnate in that Cow ; that
he left the realms of glory, was begotten by Ipepiboo, born of a
virgin mother, and became flesh for the express purpose of leaping
over the Moon in order to save our sin-stricken race! When
viewed in this light, gratitude alone, not to mention any other sen-
timent, would, we might reasonably expect, prevent the most
hardened wretch from ever calling in question the truth of our
divine text. For where, I ask, would the sinful race of Adam have
been ere now, if the Son of Bubblybohoo had not become incar-
nate in that Cow and leaped that leap over the Moon ! (Applause
and shouts of Glory !)
6, Having established the fact that this Cow was probably an
incarnation of deity, we must go farther and elucidate our subject
still more, that is, divine grace assisting us. We must never per-
mit ourselves to forget that the Son of Bubblybohoo, according to
his own declaration—“ Came down from heaven.” Now this, My
Friends, sets the matter for ever at rest; for he who could descend
from heaven and who finally ascended to that place again, could
have had no difficulty in leaping over the Moon ! (Cries of Halle-
lujah !) It must be apparent to the weakest intellect that even a
leap across the Solar System itself would be as nothing to the
journey from heaven to our world.
Here then we corner the Sceptic most effectually ; and unless he


is prepared to prove, by chapter and verse, that the Son of Bubbly-
bohoo did not descend from heaven, he must, for very shame admit
that this Cow, who is but that Son incarnate, as I have, I think,
most irrefragably proved, not only may have leaped over the Moon,
but really and truly did perform that leap, “for us men and for our
salvation,” (Applause.)
7, Note still another point, and one, I am sure, that must be of
great spiritual profit to all who contemplate it in the right temper of
mind. The Son of JBubblybohoo, not only declared that he descended
from heaven, but he declared that his followers must eat his flesh
and drink his blood, or they had no life in them. To think of eating
a man is nauseating to civilised people ; but when we reflect that
our Saviour was incarnated in a Cow —in this high-leaping Cow—
it all becomes plain. And where, I ask, is there better food than
Cow-flesh for saints to feed upon, or more nutritious pabulum for
the true believer ! (The saints rise and cheer to the echo !)
8. Turning prayerfully once more to our subject, I must remind
you that some theologians do not admit that our extraordinary Cow
was anything more than a creature —a most extraordinary creature.
Even if we were compelled to adopt that view, still we should find
it easy to fall back upon the hypothesis of divine aid—that is, we
should at once say, Well, granted that this Cow is only a creature ;
then she must have been assisted by divine aid in leaping over the
Moon. And here again we have the daring Sceptic cornered most
effectually. For we have most elaborately and logically proved
that the Cow did in very deed jump over the Moon. Of that there
never can be a rational doubt after what has been so convincingly
laid before you. No Sceptic, unless ho be a fool of the first water,
will ever again be able to raise objections to the statement in our
text, that the Cow did leap over the Moon. That has been demon-
strated beyond all cavil.
And that being settled, we are driven to one of two inferences,
either, Ist, that the Cow was a divine being and leaped of her own
intrinsic, eternal, almighty power, for her own eternal honor and
glory; or else, 2nd, that being a creature, she must have been as-
sisted by Bubblybohoo.
Let the Sceptic point to one single flaw—mind, I say, the least
flaw ! —in that argument, and 1 engage to give up my whole case.
(Tremendous applause).
Of course, there is nothing extraordinary about a creature being
assisted by divine grace to do what no unaided creature could do,
as we may learn from holy writ. Does not David say, “By my


god I have leaped over a wall ?” (2 Samuel xxii. 30). Now here
was a wall David could not have jumped over without divine assist-
ance. And this confirms our text; it was divine power that carried
our Cow over the Moon. And qo reverent mind will dare to in-
quire further.
And here, I pray you, observe a very important point I have not
yet touched. I think I must have been inspired by Babblybohoo
himself to reflect upon the extraordinary suggestion I am about to
make. It is this :—David says, “ I leaped over a wall.” At first
sight we see David, in the eye of faith, vaulting over that high
wall, much as a kangaroo will leap along the ground. But this
may be a mistake. What proof have we that “ god” did not bend
down that wall until it was just high enough for David to spring
over it ? (Enormous sensation in the hall, and cries of, Glory!) I
do not say that the wall actually did bow down—Bubblybohoo for-
bid that I should do such a thing without a clear warrant from
above ! But bible walls are confessedly remarkable things. Did
not the walls of Jericho fall down at the sound of the rams’ horns ?
And did not a wall fall upon 27,000 men ? as recorded in the first
book of Kings, 20th chapter, and 30th verse ? From these two ex-
amples we may learn that the wall David leaped over may have
bowed down before him, instead of standing erect as it had pre-
viously done.
And, let it not be forgotten, that when Bubblybohoo works a
miracle he can work it in more than one way. He can bend the
wall down, or he can lift the leaper up. In either case he works
the miracle ; and that is sufficient for the devout.
Having thus proved beyond cavil that David’s wall bent down
for him to jump over, may we not rationally say that the Moon,
too, was lowered down for the express purpose of enabling the
Cow to jump over ? (Applause). Bubblybohoo could lift the Cow
up, he could bring the Moon down. And when we remember that
god “ bowed the very heavens”—mark, I say, the heavens them-
selves !—that god bowed the heavens to rescue David—when, I
say, we remember this, how can we doubt that Bubblybohoo would
bring down the Moon for his servant the Cow to leap over it ?
It is true, some may raise yet one more objection, so perverse is
doubt, so unreasoning is unbelief! It may be said that the Moon
is a body 2160 miles in diameter ; and that, if brought down, no
cow could leap over it ! What ! Cannot Bubblybohoo, who
made an entire woman out of a man’s rib—can he not reduce the
size of the Moon t Who knows, I say, whether the Moon is not a


collapsible body, like a balloon ? Is the sceptic—the wretched
sceptic—prepared to tell us that he has visited the Moon and
found it solid ? If not, we may assume it to be elastic, a thing
which can, in the hands of Bubblybohoo, be squeezed up into the
space of a milk-pail, for the Cow to leap over ! (Uproarious ap-
plause).
Having proved to a demonstration that the Cat performed
heavenly music upon the fiddle and that the Cow did really and
truly jump over the Moon, for the glory of Bubblybohoo, and to
save lost man, I now proceeed,
HI. To describe the action of the Dog—“ The little dog
laughed”—so my text imformeth us.
i. Let us devoutly note that the Dog was little—was *• it not a
little one ?’ I confess to you Ido not know the dimensions of this
divine barker, nor by what standard he was measured. He may
have been little as compared with the Universe, or with our world,
or in comparison with elephants, or even as compared with men.
But the general opinion amongst the learned is that the Dog was
little, as a dog. And no doubt that is the sense of this clause of the
text ; for it does not say “little animal,” but explicitly, “little Doer,’
“ the little Dog.” 5 ’
It is said by some commentators that this Dog was a dwarf-dog,
a stunted, undergrown animal. But I see no biblical or rational
grounds for such an opinion. I think it savors of lightness and
flippancy to put forward such crude views. I entirely concur with
those learned men who hold the Dog in question to have been little
because young, a pup, not yet full-grown. And reflection would
show the most thoughtless that a mature, grave, staid dog would
not be likely to laugh, no matter what fun might be in progress,.
2. It is objected by some that dogs do not laugh ! After what I
have said of the Cow you will know how to treat such an empty
objection. It is absurd. You might as well argue that gods do
not become incarnate, that cats do not play the fiddle, or even that
cows do not jump over the Mcon I Who says that dogs do laugh?
The text doth not mention dogs, but the Hog, So you see how un-
critical the sceptic is ! (Loud applause).
The inspired rhymer saith not one word that could be construed
to mean, or to hint that dogs laugh ; but he saith the Dog, that is,
one particular Dog of his acquaintance, laughed ! He does not say
it was Jack, or Rover, or Dash ; he does not say it wasjgom' dog, or
your neighbor’s dog ; he does not say it was some dog that could
not laugh oh, no ! —he saith, with all the sublime brevity and terse


ness of Bubblybohoo’s own inspired word, ‘-The—little—dog—
laughed.” And what more can our faith require ? (Applause).
3. Observe, it is not said in my text that it was supposed, or it
was reported, or it was thought, or it is probable, that the little Dog
laughed ; but thus saith Bubblybohoo, “ The little Dog laughed.”
There is no speculation here, but positive truth most positively
stated. And it is precisely the “ Thus saiths” of the word of Bub-
blybohoo that strike the Sceptics dumb (Tremendous cheering). It
is not argument, but the round, full-voiced declarations of holy
writ that do the execution (Shouts of Ay, Ay) !
By the eye of faith, purified from sinful doubt, we see that beauti-
ful little Dog, watching with keen interest the events of the hour ;
canting its sanctified head on one fide as it takes in the Cat's me-
lodious performance on the fiddle ; and there we see, too, its radi-
ant face all puckered into a heavenly smile and rippling over with
a godly laugh, as the Cow, with one leap, clears the Moon and
alights on the other side ! Who, but the hardened Sceptic, can
contemplate that scene without feeling his heart raised to the
gates of heaven ? without longing to be with those blest animals
and the seven-eyed, seven-horned lamb, before the throne F (wild
and prolonged applause, mingled with snatches of “Jerusalem, the
Golden !”).
If any should still persist in saying a dog cannot laugh, I an-
swer yet further a. You cannot possibly know what animals could,
or could not do in ancient times, h. I remind objectors that, in the
scripture, it is said god shall laugh. And, note, I beseech you, that
god and dog are spelled with the same identical letters of the alpha-
bet. If you read dog backwards, you have god ; if you read god back-
wards you have dog.
And let me here make the learned remark that in Hebrew it is
the fashion to read from right to left, or, as we should say, back-
wards. With this learned fact in your minds, write down dog,
and then read the word as in Hebrew, and it becomes god. Treat
god in the same way ; and you will find that god is dog, and dog
is god. (Applause).
When all this is carefully pondered nothing can be more plain
thaoi that the little Dog really and truly laughed, as our text so
plainly reveals.
Ere I proceed to expound the last clause of my text, I would, by
the blessing of Bubblybohoo, indulge in a short excursus (that, My
Friends, is a learned word, signifying a digression) here to show


how extremely certain it is that the Cat, the Cow and the Dog
verily did perform the feats alleged in our text.
Behold the animals in the bible! Did not the Serpent reason
and talk ? Did not all the Animal Kingdom, including vermin,
parasites and every land-animal in the world, elect and send to
Noah pairs of their species for the Ark ? Did not Balaam's ass
speak with human voice to his master ? Did not Daniel’s goat
poke down stars from the sky to the earth and stamp upon them ?
Did not the lamb with seven eyes and seven horns take the book
in his hand and open the seals ? Did not locusts rise from the
bottomless pit ? And did not a dragon sweep down a third of the
stars of the sky by one furious fling of his tail ? (Applause.)
Where is the Sceptic so daring as to call these facts in question,
after they have been so fully confirmed by history, by reason and
by Science? And if these animal deeds are true, on what rational
grounds can the Sceptic raise objections against our text ? Let the
Atheist answer that ! (Tremendous applause.)
IV. And, now, lastly, let us proceed to expound the fourth clause
of our text, namely, “The Dish Ran away with the Spoon.”
1. Pray, mark the fact that it is not said the Dish bore off the
Spoon, but it seems that the two ran away together.
I am aware that this paraphrase of mine hath been disputed ;
and there are learned commentators who would have the clause to
signify that the Dish ran off and bore or carried the Spoon with it.
I prefer to believe that the Dish and the Spoon really made up a
match between them, and eloped together, the Spoon, of course,
being the male and the Dish the female.
2. Here, no doubt, the Sceptic would like to raise objections—
paltry objections—he is always objecting !—if I had not so com-
pletely castigated and crushed him in the former part of my most
convincing discourse. But that spoons and dishes do exist, none
can deny. Why, both dishes and spoons are mentioned several
times in holy writ; and that should suffice.
3. If any one should object that these culinary utensils cannot
run away, I would send him to a housekeeper who has had her
table canted up when fully laden, and let him ask her if dishes and
spoons can run 1
4. But, waiving all such trivial examples, let us go to holy writ.
I will not say that dishes and spoons do therein run about or elope
with each other ; but objects quite as unlikly to run do, in holy
writ, behave in most extraordinary ways Did not the Sun and
Moon both stop in mid-journey and rest for about an entire day. at


the command of Joshua the son of Nun ? Who would have be-
lieved that those bodies could hear and obey, if the blessed bible
had not informed us ?
Did not the mountains and the hills leap like lambs when Israel
went out of Egypt ? and did not the Red Sea divide itself in two
at the command of Moses ? And did not Jordan do the same to
permit Israel to pass over into Canaan ?
Surely, I need not multiply examples. The case is clear —to all
but the blinded unbeliever. If mountains and rivers and seas could
and did behave as the bible says, then what objection can be urged
against our text ? or against the last clause, namely, that the Dish
ran away with the Spoon ?
Thus, My Beloved Friends, by the blessing of Bubblybohoo
and these sacred animals and holy utensils, I have defended and
established the truth of divine revelation, and for ever silenced the
Sceptics. Never again can they lift their craven heads ! Never
again can the saints be put to the blush before a sinful world ; for
I have shown that Truth, and Science, and History, and Reason,
and all the really great men of the world are on our side, while the
Sceptic has not a leg to stand upon ! (Enormous applause.)
The Cow-Mooners rise and spontaneously sing, according to pre-
concerted arrangement, —
“All Hail the power of Bubblyb’hoo !
Let Sceptics prostrate fall!
We’ll sing a Cock-a-doodle-doo,
And Crown him Lord of All!”
JOS. SYMES.
A. T. Wilson, Printer, 450 Bourke-street, Melbourne.
12


FROM THE
WESLEYAN PULPIT
TO THE
SECULARIST PLATFORM
OR THE
Life and Death of My Religion.
BY
JOSEPH SYMEB.
“ When I was a child , I spake as a child , I understood
as a child, I thought as a child : but when 1 became a
man, I put away childish things” i Cor. xiii. ii.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
TO BE OBTAINED FROCQ
A. T. Wilson,
156 Bourse Street, Melbourne.


JHOSfITAIsS AND DISPENSARIES
NOT OF
CHRISTIAN ORIGIN.
By Joseph svmes.
EXTRACT;—
A very frequent question put to Secularists, is, What hospitals have you built
or endowed ? And an equally frequent assertion is made to the effect that the
world owes all those institutions for the care and cure of the sick to Christianity.
A greater mistake was never made, as I shall try to show.
In the first place, 1 make bold to assert that mercy, compassion, humanity,
and benevolence did not, and could not, spring from religion. All the gods, or
nearly all, were originally cold, callous, and cruel. They inflicted upon man (if
fables may be trusted) all the horrors he endured, and then stolidly looked on
while he writhed in his agony.
g ®
PRICE THREEPENCE.
®
A. T. WILSON. 450 BOURKE STREET,
MELBOURNE.
THE FALL OF MAN.
A tale as true as Ghnesis, and twice as rational.
By JOSEPH SYMES.
EXTRACT:—
THE DEVIL’S NABRATIVE.
I suppose lam the best abused being in the universe. What villany have I
not been charged with? Theologians call me “the author of all evil;" but here-
in they greatly err, for I neither invented theology, nor originated a priesthood—
the former the sum of all absurdities and lies, the latter an unmitigated curse.
They trace all evil back to me; beforemyday.it seems, it did not exist any-
where ! My ancestors are highly amused when they hear this; for they say
evils of all sorts have been rife enough as long as they can remember, though
some of them are millions of years old. To charge me, therefore, with originating
evil is not only unjust, it is inconceivably absurd. And yet, one need not wonder,
for nothing is too silly for human faith to swallow.
PRICE THREEPENCE.
A. T. WILSON, 456 BODRKE-ST., MELB.


HELLft
OPENED TO CHRISTIANS
TO CAUTION THEM
FROM ENTERING INTO IT.
«
\fb
m
BY REV. FATHER PINNAMONTI.
-- - - ■
This is a Roman Catholic pamphlet, and should he read
bv Freethinkers and Protestants alike. It is illustrated
in true Catholic style and ornamented with vipers,
scorpions , dragons and winged beasts of fearful shape ’
who are hissing , biting and stinging the unfortunate
wretches who are burning to all eternity in a red-hot Hell
fire . Burns says—
“ The fear o’ Hell’s the hangman’s whip
To hand the wretch in order.”
Price Sixpence.
REPUBLISHED BY
A. T. WILSON, 456 BOORKE-ST., MELBOURNE.


PAMPHLETS BY JOSEPH SYMES.
FALSE AND TRUMPERY EVIDENCES OF CHRIS-
TIANITY; A reply to the Hon. Oliver Mowat, Premier
of Ontario, Canada. 6d.
FROM THE WESLEYAN PULPIT TO THE SECU-
LAR PLATFORM, is.
SCAMPS DIRECTORY. 6d.
CHRISTIANITY ESSENTIALLY A PERSECUTING
RELIGION. 2d.
HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES NOT OF
CHRISTIAN ORIGIN. 2d.
CHRISTIANITY AND SLAVERY, ad.
PHALLIC WORSHIP, is.
CHRISTIAN EVIDENCES 2d. (A Satire on the way
Clergymen make up their Sermons).
HAS MAN A SOUL. 2d.
BLUNDERS OF JESUS. 2d.
FALL OF MAN; the Devil’s own account of it. True as
Gospel. 3d.
PHILOSOPHIC ATHEISM 6d.
MARVELLOUS SPREAD OF INFIDELITY 3d.
LIFE OF CHARLES BRADLAUGH; containing the
Famous Three Speeches at the Bar of the House of
Commons ; with portrait of Mr. Bradlaugh. 6d.
SYMES-BERRY DEBATES, No. I.—“ Is it Rational to
believe in God.” Two Night’s Debate between the Rev.
D. M. Berry and Joseph Symes, 6d.
No. 2. —“ Is it Rational to Believe that Jesus Rose from the
Dead.” Two Nights’ Debate between the Rev. D. M.
Berry and Joseph Symes. 6d.
GRANT-SYMES DEBATE. Subject:— *• That there is a
Living Personal God, as Revealed in the Bible and the
Book of Nature, who Created Man.” Miles Grant of
Boston, Massachussets affirmative, Joseph Symes, nega-
tive.
No. I—SYMES-SELBY DEBATES. “Is Christian Theism
more Rational than Atheistic Secularism.” Three Nights’
Debate, between Joseph Symes and Isaac Selby 6d.
No. 2 —“ Is the New Testament Jesus a Myth,” Joseph Symes
affirmative, Isaac Selby negative 6d.


UNIVERSAL DESPAIR;
OR,
Who Will Damned if Christianity be True ?
Many Christians affirm that Atheism is a system of blank despair ;
that death must be inexpressibly dreadful to the unbeliever ; that
only Christians can die in confidence and peace. This, with much
more of a like sort, is constantly pouring from the pulpits and the
ultra religious press ; and, no doubt, millions believe it all.
It is my purpose to set this matter right; to exhibit the incon-
sistencies of Christians ; and to show who are the people that will
be damned if the Christian religion be true. The sequel will show
that nearly all Christians, so-called, will be doomed te endless
punishment; and that their religion is the most ghastly, grim, and
despair-producing of all superstitions in the world.
I. Many Christians to-day are ashamed of the doctrine of hell-
fire. Canon Farrar and Henry Ward Beecher, not to mention
others, have repudiated all that is ghastly in the doctrine, and
seem to have reduced it to next to nothing at all. In August, 1882.
I Lectured at Pendleton, where I was opposed by the rev„ Mr.
Petherick, a Manchester Hear. This gentleman distinctly refused
to use the words “damn” and “damnation,” because they did not
properly belong to the New Testament, and the new version of that
book had entirely omitted them. As I pointed out on the spot,
unless the thing was also omitted from the New Testament, little
would be gained by calling it by softer names. In fact, if eternal
punishment in a lake of fire was really a doctrine of Christianity, it
could not possibly be set forth in terms too strong. Besides, I
continued, is it not cowardly, is it not downright cruelty, and that,
too, in the most intense degree, to call this frightful doom by soft
names, and thus, probably, lure unsuspecting victims on to all its
horrors, whereas a little outspoken honesty might open their eyes
and lead them to salvation ? If hell-fire be a fable, Christians
should do generally what I have been engaged in for years, viz.,
expose it to ridicule, as the best amends that can be made to man


kind for the insults and torments they have endured for so many
centuries through the preaching of it. But if it be a part and
parcel of New Testament doctrine that certain parties shall spend
a literally endless existence in a lake of fire, and in suffering the
wrath of an almighty god—if this is true, no language is strong
enough to express one’s horror of those who claim to be ambassa-
dors of Christ, and yet practically treat hell-fire as a grim joke by
describing it in soft and meaningless terms ! Common decency,
one would think, should compel Christians to decide once for all
whether this be or be not a part of their religion; and, having once
decided, to repudiate it openly on finding it a fable, or to preach it
fearlessly and constantly if it really is the truth. If Christians are
not the most dishonest and the most cruel of mankind, they will
do what I have just pointed out to be their duty.
But damnation is a New Testament doctrine, and has been held
by all the great sections of Christianity. And to repudiate it is to
repudiate Christianity. Indeed, puzzling as the Christian scheme is
with hell-fire, it is ten times more so without it. What means the
incarnation of the son of god ? What means his suffering sacrifi-
cial death, if eternal damnation is a fable ? The atonement and
this doctrine stand or fall together.
And what is to be said of those ghastly stories of Infidel death-
bed scenes, if hell-fire, after ail, is but a bugbear ? Those edifying
stories are still told by respectable (?) parsons. “Tom” Paine and
Voltaire still do duty as scare-crows in Sunday-schools and chapels
and churches, as they did fifty or sixty years ago ; whilst ever and
anon there starts up here and there a competitor in the person of
some out-of-the-way Atheist who has died, nobody knows when nor
where, in terrible agony, realising beforehand “the pains of the
damned” —an awful warning to all Atheists, Sceptics, and Infidels
far and near. But if hell-fire be no part of Christianity, if horrible
and brutal punishment has no place in this scheme of religion, then
what is the value of such stories, even if they are true ? Those
who dupe or are duped by barbarous trash of the sort just described
should, to be anywise consistent, hold the doctrine of hell-fire, with
all its ancient horrors. I presume the real dupes do.
But the doctrine is in the New Testament, and honest exposition
can never expel it, except by expunging the texts which contain
it. Let the reader examine these texts, quoted from the new
version :
(i.) “Depart from me, ye cursed, into the eternal fire which is
prepared for the devil and his angels. . . . And these shall go


away into eternal punishment ; but the righteous into eternal life”
(Matt. xxv. 41-46). Here the punishment of the wicked is de-
clared to be equally long with the life of the righteous. No honest
criticism can ever alter the sense. Though, to be sure, honest cri-
ticism and theology are no more in harmony than fire and water.
(2.) In Mark ix, 43, hell-fire is described as unquenchable.
(3.) In the second Epistle to the Thessalonians it is stated that
Jesus, at his second coming, shall take vengeance on certain cha-
racters (to be afterwards noticed), and punish them with everlast-
ing destruction.
(4.) Revelation xxi. 8 threatens a large number of people with a
“ part in the lake of fire and brimstone.”
It must be admitted, I think, that the writers of the New Testa-
ment could not have used more terrific language, supposing they
really had intended to teach the orthodox doctrine of damnation.
They have employed the strongest language they could find. What
must we say, Christian ? Were they in earnest, or were they only
joking ? Did they mean just what their language seems to mean ?
or did they wish you to understand something infinite degrees less
terrible ? Why did they use this dreadful language, if the punish-
ment they threatened was so very limited in degree and duration ?
And may they not have used language equally hyperbolical in de-
scribing the reward of the righteous ? In a word, what dependence
can you put in them at all, if their utterances have to be discoun-
ted, toned down, modernised, adapted to civilised ideas—or what-
ever you please to call the process—in the way many divines now
treat the ttxts above quoted ?
11. I shall next show that the New Testament not only teaches
the doctrine of endless damnation, but also exhibits most plainly
the characters which will endure it. And this is the principal aim
of the present work ; whatever the parsons may do or leave un-
done, it is my purpose “to declare,” upon this horrible subject,
“the whole counsel of god,” which, being interpreted, means that
I shall exhibit what those who wrote the New Testament, and
many later generations, taught respecting eternal punishment.
(1.) The first text I shall quote is one already referred to :—The
writer of the second Epistle to the Thessalonians speaks of what
shall take place “at the revelation of the lord Jesus from heaven
with the angels of his power in flaming fire, rendering vengeance
to them that know not god, and to them that obey not the gospel
of our lord Jesus; who shall suffer punishment, even eternal de-
struction,” &c. (i. 8,9).


Here eternal destruction is denounced against two class®* of
persons:—
i. Those who know not god. As this must include the whole
world, the threat amounts to universal damnation, for there is no
one knows god, if the Christian god be intended. For this sam®
Christian god has no real existence. If I misrepresent the case, it
is done honestly. Will they correct me if lam in error ? Let
someone who knows god say what it is he knows. That is the
only honest way to expose my blunder
. 2> w h° obey not the gospel of our lord Jesus will be punished
in the way described. This requires a little investigation. The
only gospel of our lord Jesus, we are informed, is in Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, and the rest of the New Testament. This
is sufficient for our purpose, and it will be found “exceeding
broad.’’
a ‘ Thou shalt not kill,” said Jesus ; nor be angry with thy
brother (Matthew v. 21, 22). In every nation of Christendom many
thousands of man are always kept and accoutred for the special
purpose of hilling. Armies and navies exist for little else. Those
who rule “by the grce of god” command them to go and kill as
mf n .y foreigners, in a given place, as they are able. The parsons,
Christ s own ambassadors (always found at the courts of Christian
rulers), consecrate this gory work, no matter whether there is any
justification for the slaughter or not. They pray their god to go
with the hired assassins, to help them in their bloody deeds; and
when the army returns the parsons glorify their god for the blood
■* e . ® spilt, the tears he has caused to flow, and all the misery he
has inflicted upon innocent people. I should be exceedingly sorry
to see it, but if any people deserve endless damnation, they are the
parties just referred to. And, if Christianity be true, there is no
escape for any of them.
b . To call a brother a fool will lead to hell-fire (Matthew v. 22).
Jebus and Paul both transgressed this rule, and so does every par-
son and defender of the faith who is angry enough to quote David’s
designation of the Atheist The fool hath said in his heart,
There is no god.” It is my duty to warn such that they risk the
loss of their poor souls by indulging so their passion for abuse.
c. Swear not at all,” says Jesus (Matthew v. 34). The bigots
not only swear themselves, but endeavor to compel others to do the
same, and still they profess to be Christians. He who swears violates
the command of the gospel just as much as the murderer or adul


terer. Let the Newdegates and Tylers see to it.* They will be
endlessly damned if Christianity be true. If I were as malicious
as they are, I should say that it serves them right. Though I
do not think that even they, bad as they are, deserve everlasting
punishment. A reformatory is a better place than hell, even for
bigots and hypocrites.
d. All who do not love their enemies—love their neighbors as
themselves—turn the other cheek when struck—give up their cloak
when their coat is demanded—are disobedient to well-known gos-
pel commands ; and will, therefore, be punished with everlasting
destruction. I believe this batch of culprits comprises all civil-
ised people, or nearly so. To be sure, parsons never deal with
these commands without twisting them to fit their own conduct,
instead of regulating their conduct by the gospel, as they must do
to escape damnation.
e. But, in one respect, Christianity is evenly balanced in its re-
quirements ; it not merely commands you to do an impossible thing,
viz., to love your enemies ; it also insists that you must hate all
that ought to be dear to you:—“lf any man cometh unto me, and
HATETH not HIS OWN FATHER, and MOTHER, and WIFE, and CHILDREN,
and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot
be my disciple” (Luke xiv. 26). I find it difficult, without absolute
demonstration, to make some Christians believe that this text is in
the New Testament. What would the churches not give to be
able to expunge it ? or to show that their most respectable manu-
scripts did not contain it ? What would they not give to be able to
transfer it to Buddha or to Mahomet ? But there it stands in their
holy gospel, the most atrocious sentence ever written, probably; for
it is not a sudden and solitary ebullition of temper, a bitter taunt
flung at an adversary ; it is a lasting and universal duty imposed
as a price of being admitted to discipleship under Jesus. Fortun-
ately, bad as the churches have always been, few specimens of real
disciples of Jesus appear in their records. But that entails the re-
flection that most Christians are damned for disobeying this divine
command; though, it must be manifest, they would deserve ten
times deeper damnation if they did obey the barbarous injunction.
Where now would civilisation have been, had this awful injunction
been generally obeyed ?
* When this was written Mr. Newdegate and another M.P. were extremely
voluble in their abuse of Mr. Bradlaugh, his two daughters and Mrs. Besant!
Holy malice perhaps never proceeded to a greater extent. Newdegate died ere the
conflict ended, probably killedby Mr. Bradlaugh’s turning the tables upon him
flhe man Tyler may still be alive for aught I know or care.


It is in vain that the commentators strive to wriggle out of the
meshes of this text. It cannot be made to mean otherwise than it
does on its tace, and a new version has not been able to get rid of
the verb hate. The Greek miseo will admit of no other rendering
as scholars well enough know. What will you do, my Christian
reader ? Will you hate all those you ought to cherish and be Jesus’
disciple ; or will you love them and go to hell-fire for ever ? You
have your choice. Your own boasted religion gives you that choice.
It is not my duty to decide for you.
/. All who do not love god with all their heart, and mind, and
soul, and strength, will be damned for disobedience to the gospel
I never knew one that did so. & F '
g'- Ah that love the world and the things in it will be damned;
for the love of the father is not in him that loves the world (i John
11. 15). this text no Christians obey; instead of doing so, they
explain it to mean—well, just what happens to suit them. Cowper
(or some other poet, I am not sure which, I quote from memory,
having learnt it twenty-four or twenty-five years since) very sar-
casacally exposes the popular shuffling which takes the place of
obedience on this subject
“Thus says the prophet of the Turk ;
Musselmen, abstain from pork t
There is a part id every swine.
No friend or follower of mine
May taste what’er his inclination—
On pain of excommunication ! ’
Such Mahomet’s mysterious charge-
And thus he left the point at large.
Had he the sinful part expres-ed'
They might.with safety eat the rest ;
But for one piece they thought it hard
T rom the whole hog to be debarr’d ;
And set their wit at work, to find
What joint the prophet had in mind.
‘ ‘Much controversy straight arose •
These chose the back ; the belly I'hose ;
By some ’twas confidently said
Ee meant not to forbid the head ;
While others at that doctrine rail”
And piously prefer the tail. ’
“Thus, conscience freed from every doo-
Mahometans eat up the hog !
rou } au S h ! ,’tfe well. The tale applied,
May make you laugh on t’other side 1
‘ Renounce the world ! ’ the preacher cries


1 We do !' a multitude replies :
While one as innocent regards
A snug and friendly game at cards ;
Some love the concert or the race.
While others shooting, or the chase ;
And one, whatever you may say,
Can see no evil in a Play.
Reviled, and loved ; renounced, and followed,
That bit by bit the world is swallowed ;
Each thinks his neighbor makes to free.
Yet likes a slice as well as he ;
With sophistry their sauce they sweeten,
Till quite from tail to snout ’tis eaten ! ”
Now, Christian, these lines well describe the almost universal
conduct of the churches who profess to renounce the world. For
yourself, now, if you do love the world, have the honesty to unite
your conduct and profession. Of course, you’ll be damned for
this love; but, at any rate, go to hell like an honest man I
Don’t hypocritically pretend to renounce the world, while you are
hugging it with all your power. You will be damned in either
case ; but the honest man, though damned, may hold up his head
before the universe, and blush only for the almighty barbarian
that sends him to perdition ; but the hypocrite is doubly damned.
So you see, the Sceptic has an immense advantage over "you.
h. All rich people will be damned. The rich man, generally
called Dives, went to hell and was tormented there; while the poor
man, Lazarus, went after death to Abraham’s bosom. Not a word,
beyond the fact that the one was rich and enjoyed his riches, the
other poor and sick—T say, there is not beyond this the barest hint
of any moral qualification either to fit Dives for hell or Lazarus
for heaven. The character of each should have been laid out in
greater detail, if more was required to be known by the reader. As
the story, fable, or parable now stands (Luke xvi.) we are left to
the plain and unavoidable inference that poverty and sickness
qualified the one for heaven, and riches and their enjoyment fitted
the other for hell. No honest criticism can get more out of the
passage. Divines have always felt the force of this ; and hence
Dives has been dubbed the “rich glutton,” and otherwise vilified
until, having passed thr®ugh a process of theological handling and
commentarial development, you all feel that now, if not before, he
ought to be damned. But whoever will examine the story as it stands
will perceive that Jesus here, as in the prodigal son, shows a most
perverted moral vision. There he tells us that the angels think
ninty-nine times as much of a scoundrel who repents as they do of


a respectable man that needs no repentance. How much immoral-
ity is that story accountable for, I wonder ? So here we find that
Jesus introduces three characters in his story, and the best of them
is the one damned. Abraham is religious, cold, callous ; to him
damnation is nothing, so long as another endures it. Lazarus is a
blank, owing all his credit to his poverty and sores. But Dives at
least shows humanity, and begs that warning should be sent to his
brothers . The only spark of goodness that appears in the picture
springs from the heart of the damned one.
Though we need not wo der. He who could send a man to hell
tor no other crime than riches is so monstrously uncivilised that we
co«id not expect to find moral taste in him.
But to show that the fate of Dives will overtake all rich people—
d Christianity be true—l need only quote Matthew xix. 24-26 :
‘ It is easier for a camel to go through a needle’s eye than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of god. And when the disciples
heard it they were astonished exceedingly, saying, Who then can be
saved ? And Jesus, looking upon them, said to them, With men
this is impossible ; but with god all things are possible.”
No text is more perverted by divines than this ; and we need
not wonder. Most will tell you that “needle’s eye” does not mean
what we usually understand by it. But it does-spite of them, it
oes. It means, they say, a low side-door in Eastern camps and
cities by which camels which are too late at night for the regular
gates may wriggle in, though only by coming down on their knees !
this is a marvellous explanation; and we will examine it for a
moment.
Let us grant them their contention for the sake of argument.
Tl ? en ’ u i hen V I- What ™ as there in the words of Jesus to
astonish the disciples so exceedingly? Evidently his declaration
perfectly amazed them'; and in that state they demanded : “Who
then can be saved ?” Now, those disciples must have been easily
amazed if Jesus could startle them by his solemn platitude to the
effect that a rich man would find it just as hard to get into the
kingdom of god as a camel did to get by a side-gate into a city—a
mg that was accomplished frequently, if some commentators may
be trusted. This view reduces Jesus and his disciples to a set of
old women, one of whom gabbles solemn common-places; and all
the rest express unbounded astonishment that a shower of rain
say, should wet the footpath, or that a man climbed to the top of
across , the way upon nothing in the world but a ladder !
Need 1 proceed to inform commentators that, if their views are


correct, the words of Jesus could sot have astonished the disciples
in the least. But they were astonished exceedingly. Explain
why ?
2. Jesus does not recede from his statement, but clenches it by
adding : “With men this is impossible.” What is ? Impossible
to get a camel through one of those narrow gates 7 Is that impos-
sible to men ? If so, my worthy commentator, what do you gain
by substituting gate for needle’s eye ? If it is impossible for men
to get a camel through—which aperture you please—then it is
harder still for a rich man to enter the kingdom of god ! That is,
all rich people are as absolutely excluded from god’s kingdom as a
camel is from a place into which no finite power can get him. And
if they do not, cannot, enter god’s kingdom, they must, I presume,
be damned.
When Jesus adds : “With god all things are possible,”! beg
leave to doubt him. No one, god or man, can get a camel through
a needle’s eye and bring him out the other side a camel. When
that has been done there will be a chance for the rich to enter
heaven. At present the obstruction is absolute. No rich man can
escape damnation except by parting with all he has.
It is singular that Jesus never denounces any other crime (?) in
this fashion. Why did he set his face so against riches and rich
people ? No doubt we have all much misunderstood Jesus. He
wanted to erect a kingdom. He was penniless. Whence could he
get money, except from people with more wealth than brains, as
religious leaders have almost always done ? No feature is more
prominent than this in the history of Christianity, Jesus promises
all the rich, who will give up their riches, riches in heaven, and
even a hundredfold more in the present life. And the first church
in Jerusalem fully followed up his policy, and even murdered
Ananias and his wife for keeping back part of their own estate.
No doubt Christians will object to the views just expressed. So
they may. It is but a side-issue. The mam point just here is
that Jesus teaches that rich people will be damned. We know,
therefore, what becomes of kings and queens, princes and bishops,
rich parsons and opulent laymen, when they “shuffle off the mortal
coil”—they go to hell to join Dives. This is the plain teaching of
their own religion. Will it drive them to —poverty, or despair ?
I suspect their love of wealth drives most of them to —Scepticism,
even though their professing faith in the New Testament is the source
of their income.


i. But all who strive to be rich will share the same terrible fate,
for they disobey the gospel of our lord Jesus. “Be not anxious for
your life” (Luke xii. 22).— “Seek not ye what ye shall eat, and
what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind” (verse 29).
Such were the teachings of Jesus, though most astonishingly per-
verted by modern divines, whose life is the very antithesis of what
Jesus commanded. If he had taught any theological doctrine as
plainly as he has set forth the duty of laziness and poverty, the
churches could never have been so bewildered over his dogmas. No
duty is more clearly set out in the New Testament than that of
trusting in providence for everything, instead of working and caring
for a livelihood. Let divines pervert their sacred book to the utter-
most ; its plain teaching is against them. Most of their dogmas
were never known to Jesus 5 most of what he commanded they
habitually disobey, and even pervert his words to justify their con-
duct. Hence it is that, whilst many sincere people cling to Christ-
ianity in the vain hope that it will save them, nine-tenths of its
present profession is hypocrisy, and hypocrisy of that unblushing
type which openly defends itself against the attacks of honesty.
Those who are familiar with the fanatical and ascetic doctrines
and practices of the people in the East at the time Jesus is sup-
posed to have lived, will well enough understand how the denun-
ciation of riches, the command not to seek for food or clothes, but
to depend upon providence for all—how this, I say, must have
been understood by the hearers of Jesus. He himself was mostly
an ascetic —bade the twelve to have neither purses, spare coats,
money, nor even shoes. The clergy soon found this inconvenient,
then they got rich; then they said Jesus was only joking—or what
amounts to the same thing, for they say he did not mean what he
said. If you wish to see what miserable creatures the models of
the Christian church were, turn to the eleventh chapter of Heb-
rews, where you will find voluntary suffering carried out to perfec-
tion, in the fanatical hope of a better resurrection ! Of the early Christ-
ians, says Lave —“so little kindmess had they for ihis world, they
cared not how little they stayed in it, and therefore readily offered them-
selves for martyrdom at every turn, — Primitive Christianity , Ed.,
Lonoun, 1728, p 246-7. , .
I mention ihis merely to show what Jesus meant, though it
would not have been necessary to do more than quote his plain
words if parsons and commentators had not, to so fearful an extent,
perverted their master’s commands instead of obeying them.
However, all who labor or seek for food or clothes, or try to be


rich, are disobedient to what the gospel teaches, and will, there-
fore, be damned, or everlastingly destroyed, which, I presume, is
the same thing.
So far, we find Christianity remarkably successful—in damning
human beings. It has damned, in fact, all good, honest, hard-
working people, besides muiderers, swearers, and a few others on
the wrong side of morality. And whom has it saved ? One poor
beggar covered with sores, and a few beings who went about in
sheep-skins and goat-skins, in hope of a better resurrection. Are
even those saved ?
k. Ail liberal politicians and reformers will be damned, for god
ordains all rulers, and those who resist them will be damned—
“receive judgment,” says the new version. But that is calculated to
deceive the reader, as the context taken in connection with 2 Thes-
saionians i. 8,9, shows. I ask any divine, Ist, Whether disobed-
ience to god’s word does not entail damnation ? If not, what
does ? 2nd, Is not the epistle to the Romans a portion of god’s
word ? Well, in that epistle (xiii 1,2) every soul is ordered to be
in subjection to the powers or rulers that are, for they are all, with-
out exception, ordained by god. This is an order as positive as
any in the bible, and disobedience entails damnation. Passive
obedience to divinely-appointed rulers is the duty of all men, and
damnation must be the doom of all reformers—if Christianity be
true.
But there is another text I must attend to now—viz,. Revelation
xxi. 8. There we read that certain specified parties shall have their
part in the lake of fire, viz. :
l. The fearful , that is, the cowardly. And those are many. In
the churches they abound. Though the parsons have all the ad-
vantage that prescription can give, and the holy ghost to assist
them, they are so cowardly in regard to Secularists that, with very
few exceptions, they are afraid to meet us, afraid to invite us to
meet them. Instead of manly action, they resort to abuse, calumny,
misrepresentation, and falsehoods in abundance. Well, they will
all be damned, I am sorry to say.
2. And the unbelieving will go the same way. This class com-
prises all Sceptics and Atheists. We expect nothing better than
damnation at the hands of theology. But our opponents are
in the same condemnation. Everyone who does not believe all
religions is an unbeliever so far. He who believes only his own
religion is ten times more an unbeliever than believer, for he be-
lieves only one religion out of many. He should, to make, sure,,


believe them all, for that is the only way he can be sure that he
believes the right one. There is no other safe method. To reject
all but one is to ensure damnation, for that is to be an unbeliever
respecting most creeds without being at all sure that yours is
right.
Besides, do you, my Christian reader, believe all your own re-
ligion ? Come, be candid. Do you believe all that is in the bible ?
or only so much as commends itself to your conscience, or common
sense ? Is that so ? Then you and I can shake hands as fellow-
travellers to the lake of fire ; for I, too, believe everything in the
bible that commends itself to my intellect. Where is the difference
between you and me ? I see none —except that you cling to a few
fragments of a creed which I have flung up entire. But if you
escape hell-fire on believing so much of the bible as fits you, I shall
escape too, you see. If lam damned as a Sceptic, you will be
damned as an unbeliever. There is not much difference between
us ; is there ? except that which I have named, and also that you,
expecting to go to heaven, will go to hell, while I expect the very
fate which both must meet, if your religion be true.
Indeed, this part of the text damns nearly all people now-a-days.
Few believe the bible to-day without a mental reserve, and with-
out explaining its statements. Then they believe, not the bible, but
merely their explanation. If men get saved on the strength of
that, nobody will be damned, for everyone believes his own ex-
planation of the bible. And if one may be thus saved, all may.
And you, sir, will probably find that, after you have been at some
pains to secure a first-class ticket for the New Jerusalem concert,
under the hope that it was, according to the bills, strictly select—
you will find, I say, that those vulgar people, the Sceptics and
Atheists, and all other ists whatsoever, will come trooping in as
well. Good, sir, it is worse even than that; for, if your religion
be true, there is no enlightened man, scarcely a man with the rudi-
ments of education, but he will be damned as an unbeliever, and so
the concert above will be attended by none but idiots, old women
of both sexes, and babies that never grew out of infancy.
3. And the abominable also will go to the lake of fire. Every
fanatic is abominable to all of another religion ; all priests are
abominable to all rival priesthoods ; all religions are abominable
to all who profess others; all gods are abominable to all other
gods of another pantheon; and all gods, priests, and religions are
abominations to honest common sense. So, if all abominable per-
sons are to be damned, none will escape on this count, as well as


others,
4. And murderers. Well, few deserve damnation so much.
Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, Elijah, will be dealt with, then, at
last. They were amongst the worst of murderers. And Jesus —•
he threatened to outstrip them all —would destroy whole cities be-
cause they did not receive his gospel; would give his followers
power to shiver nations like a potter’s vessel; would ride on his
white horse, and kill till blood rose to the horse-bridles for two
hundred miles ! Read the Apocalypse, my Christian enemy, and
you will there find Jesus set forth as infinitely worse than all
other conquerors whatsoever. You see what will become of him,
don’t you ?
5. Fornicators. Abraham, Jacob, Judah, David, and many other
saints, ancient and modern, will be damned under this head.
6. And sorcerers —such as Moses, Samuel, Elijah and Jesus, who
pretended to work miracles, and deceived people by their unholy
tricks. All such will go to the lake of fire.
7. And idolaters. This does not touch Atheists, though 1 fear it
includes all worshippers whatsoever. Every man’s god is an idol
to every other worshipper. And I really do not know any difference
worth mentioning between the gods. I fear this count will sweep
whole nations into hell. My dear reader, I beseech you, do as I
am doing. Never worship any more until you know for certain
that you are paying your addresses to the right god or goddess.
Believe me, that is the only possible way to escape being damned
as an idolater.
8. And all liars ! This is terrific in its sweep ! Nearly all
bible-writers will fall under this head, and its speakers as well,
from him who said he saw god’s back to him who said he came
down from heaven. All miracle-mongers must be damned, unless
saved on account of their invincible stupidity. Nearly all the
church fathers will be damned under this head, for they were, next
to the apostles, the most unscrupulous liars, to use a bible terra
that ever lived. Most of our bitter opponents to-day are of the
same character; and nearly every Tory and weak-kneed Liberal
who has opposed Mr. Bradlaugh in his Parliamentary struggle has
told lies about him. Why, if all liars were to be damned to-day,
what would become of most of our politicians, lawyers, parsons,
newspaper managers and commercial men ? If all liars are going
to the lake of fire for ever, it must be an immense region, or they
will be thicker there than herrings in a barrel.
Besides, if the bible be true, the christian-Jewish god will share


•the same fate, if the lake is large enough to hold him, for he lied to
deceive Ahab (i Kinks xxii. 20-23).
Thus we see what will be the upshot of the world—ay! the
universe—if Christianity be true. It will damn all, from the highest
to the lowest (except idiots and babies), including its own prophets,
priests, saints, parsons, bishops, and its own savior, and its own
god ! What a glorious religion, to be sure ! To wish it success is
to desire your own damnation. And this is the scheme by which
the world is to be converted, saved ! It is a mockery. It is a
machine that grinds everything, including the grinder himself, to
dust.
Despair! The Atheist feels none. It is left for you, my Christ-
ian foe. I pity you. Look at your religion ! What think you of it
now ? The Atheist expects to lie down to an endless sleep, infinitely
profound. Sleep is pleasant—the deeper the sweeter. Its repose is
perfect. The Christian has nothing to look forward to but endless
damnation for himself and most others—if his religion be true.
Thus, as in duty bound, I have laid bare this barbarous religion
—a religion more crowded with falsehood and bitter and unrelent-
ing malice than any other the world ever endured ; a religion
which, while pretending to be one of peace and good will, has ac-
quired incalculable wealth entirely under false pretences, and shed
oceans of innocent blood ; a religion that has stirred up passion
and discord wherever it has come and fully realised the design of
its professed founder, who came to send a sword and fire, and strife
and mutual animosity amongst men ; a religion that has inflicted
upon man more misery than all others, miseries temporal and
spiritual, for it has practised upon human credulity to such an ex-
tent as to fill asylums with maniacs and torture thousands of death-
beds with unutterable anticipations. Wherever this religion pre-
vails all evils spring up in rank profusion. The people are per-
verted in the best sentiments known to men. Where Christianity
rules, Justice, Truth, and Honor are unknown. Professing Christ-
ians who exhibit those good qualities do so at the expense of their
religion, and show themselves superior to their creed.
In a word, Christianity is calculated to fill the world with des-
pair, to paralyse human efforts by extinguishing human hope. In
the name of Truth, Honor, Hope, and all that is beautiful and
noble in human civilisation, let Christianity die. When the almighty
tyrant is dead, and his means of torture destroyed—when men are
wise enough to see through the imposture of the priesthood—then.
Liberty will become man’s actual possession Then will light and
16


truth and manhood abound ; each man will realise the full inde-
pendence his nature can attain to ; and the wholesale bribery and
intimidation on which religion (more especially Christianity) has
ever relied for success will be no longer possible ; for the man of
the future will both despise the paltry joys of heaven and compo-
sedly smile at the threatened terrors of Jehovah’s Bastille. The
priest can neither intimidate nor bribe the man who has grown out
of his superstition.
A. T. Wilson, Printer, 450 Bourke-street, Melbourne.
17


THE
SCAMP’S DIRECTORY
AND
J
Classified for. the Comfort of Evil-doers.
DEDICATED TO
The Members of the Bible in State Schools.
league.
BY JOSEPH SYMES.
Extract from the “Epistle Dedicatory."
* '«=•. An, average per-
should be horribly immoral and wicked 8 I wi’lHat wlthout this book we
boys and girls • and thaTyoS wish 7o rat* that you have
way. You do not know what they may come Jo /h. ln th ? P ossibl «
land, and share in ruling it bv-anH h.,/ a ° me . ’ the y may rise high in the
by-and-bye become a ruler, what sort of a fuSS™ ! n g K th ,f n ’ - your son - say. should
mgs and examples of the blble rUler Wlll he if he follow the teach-
pric© sixpence.
SEND TO
A. T. WILSON, 466 Boiirie-st., Melbourne.


LIFE of CHARLES BRADLAUGH,
iiii
SB
A
1
i
I
II
m
m
BY JOSEPH SYMES.
Price Sixpence.
A. T. WILSON, 456 BOURKE STREET,
MELBOURNE.


Prosecuted by the English Government.
FRUITS OF PHILOSOPHY
OR
THE PRIVATE COMPANION FOR YOUNG
MARRIED PEOPLE.
PR IC©. ON e SHILLING,
This pamphlet was prosecuted early in 1877, when a tremendous sensation
was created throughout the civilised world by the noble stand made by Mr.
Bradlaugh and Mrs. Besant for liberty of the press. No event in history
ever did more for FreethoughLand its propagation.
Extract from the Bradlaugh-Besant Preface.
We believe, with the rev. Mr. Malthus, that population has a tendency to
increase faster than the means of existence, and that some checks must therefore
exercise control over population ; the checks now exercised are semi-starvation
and preventible disease.; the enormous mortality among the infants of the poor
is one of the checks which now keep down the population. The checks that
ought to control population are scientific, and it is these which we advocate.
We think it more moral to prevent the conception of children than, alter they
are born, to murder them by want of food, air and clothing,. We advocate
scientific checks to population because, so long as poor men have large families,
pauperism is a necessity, and Fom pauperism grow crime and disease. The
wage which would support the parents and two or three children in comfort and
deeency is utterly insufficient to maintain a family of twelve or fourteen, and we
consider it a crime to bring into the world human beings doomed to misery or
to premature death. It is not only the hard-working classes which are concerned
in this question. The poor curate, the struggling man of business, the young pro-
fessional man, are often made wretched for life by their inordinately large
families, and their years are passed in one long battle to live; meanwhile the
woman’s health is sacrificed and her life embittered from the same cause. To
all of these we point the way of relief and of happiness ; for the sake of these we
publish what others fear to issue, and we do it, confident that if we fail the first
time, we shall succeed at last, and that the English public will not permit the
authorities to stifle a discussion of the most important social question which can
influence a nation’s welfare.” Charles Bradlaugh.
Annie Besant.
ORDER FROM
•ON, 456 Bourke-st, Melbourne.
