

m jt
& \
HE '
?
1 1
?em-f
I 2- 0 ?
POMAEE,
QUEEN OF TAHITI.
% -Poem.
WITH NOTES AND AN APPENDIX.
? I am like a captive pursued by a warrior whose spear is close to me.?
Letter from Pomari to Queen Victoria.
r*
<M
GO
LONDON:
JOHN OLLIVIER, 59, PALL MALL.
. 1847.


T
?
. ? " ..?>
i , *
I


POMARE, QUEEN OF TAHITI.
Clust?bing like children round a mother?s smiles.
In sweet society, a group of isles
Lie nestled midst the South Pacific wave.
Tahiti is the chief; ?blue waters lave
Its coral, 1 zone-encircled, lovely shore,
And with a wild though not discordant roar,
The crested billows of the ceaseless swell
Burst ?gainst the reef, as if they would rebel
That Ocean?s child should e?er be Ocean?s lord.
Within the zone, smiling in bright accord.
The sparkling wavelets ripple on the strand.
A pyramid of grandeur looms the land,
As from the wave ?tis slowly seen to rise,
Ere yet the sun, with all his myriad dyes,
Has steep?d in loveliness and softest glow
The pure blue sky above, and sea below.
But as it nearer and still nearer grows.
The grandeur melts to beauty; from repose
The giant mountains wake, as o?er the foam
The new-born dancing sunbeams seek a home


Amidst their vast recesses : ev?ry crest,
In the first glittering hues of morning drest,
Tow?ring on high, wears on its lofty brow
The self-same bright undying glories now,
As on creation?s morning first it wore.
The mountains now, as then, are all before,
Their great Creator?s earliest praise to show.
From pinnacle to pinnacle the glow,
Reflected and again reflecting, throws
Its quiv?ring light where it new beauty shows;
While what afar seem?d gloomy dark ravines,
Springing to life, reveal such fairy scenes
As are peculiar to this lovely isle.
Richly luxuriant valleys brightly smile,
Clad in a vesture which the tropics wear,
So wildly beautiful, so softly fair.
Dark stately trees spring from an em?rald field
Of ever-blooming verdure, which they shield
With their thick foliage, whose perennial green
To all around imparts a lustrous sheen.
Leaves of the last and of the present year,
The fragrant blossom and the bud, appear
With the ripe fruit, and while contrasting, tend
The varied hues harmoniously to blend.
Streams, midst the mountains born and by them
In jets of pearly foam have from them burst,
And sporting down their sides, half lost in spray,
O?er rocky shelves dash on their sparkling way ;
But one slight moment seem to pause in air,
As if to gaze on scenes so sweetly fair,
nurst,


Then onwards rush, impatient now to leap
In bright cascades from each succeeding steep,
To wander midst those vales that shine afar,
Radiant with smiles which wintry clouds ne?er mar.
The island in majestic beauty seems
A second Eden or a land of dreams.
Pacific?s Queen 2 she has been justly nam?d.
And midst the lovely, been for beauty fam?d.
The tow?ring mountain 3 ever verdant seen
From base to summit in its varied sheen,
The fertile valley and the glassy lake,
Whose fairy billows dimple, but ne?er break;
The waving woodland and the sloping mound,
Where in their brightness wild flow?rs strew the ground ;
The grassy plain whence fairest fruit-trees rise,
And clearest streams reflect the bluest skies;
These all in grandeur and in beauty blend,
Steep?d in those hues these climes so richly lend.
Nature has here in wild profusion flung
Her choicest gifts; on ev?ry bough has hung
Delicious fruits, and with the brightest flow?rs
A garland twin?d to deck her lovely bow?rs.
And can it be, that in this sunny land.
Uncull?d the fruit should grow, the flow?r expand ?
That valleys ever beauteous, mount and plain
Should bloom in brightness, but all bloom in vain t
Oh no ! a race, the noble and the free,
Once dwelt midst scenes of like nobility;
But from their lands they?ve been by treach?ry driv?n ;
Betray?d by man, they trust, still trust in Heav?n.


Oh ! for a soul like thine 4 who sang of yore
The wondrous beauties of this island shore!
Oh ! for thy ?witching and resistless spell,
An outrag?d nation?s history to tell!
First of this race, in station as in mien,
A woman rul?d, fair Otaheite?s Queen.
Her form majestic, and so full of grace,
That each slight movement on the mind left trace ;
And he who gaz?d upon those lustrous eyes
There met high thoughts and kindly sympathies.
Pomare ! Queen of the Pacific?s queen,
Though sorely tried, how queen-like thou hast been !
Danger and anguish ne?er could from thy soul
One selfish murmur force; a proud control
O?er all a woman?s weakness thou hast shown.
And for thy people?s safety giv?n thine own.
Oh ! noble-hearted woman, fiction?s lays
How needless are to celebrate thy praise !
For thy whole life has been like a romance
Bright with thy deeds, while dark with those of France
Whose sons have shewn, their blood can ne?er forget
When and how died fair Marie Antoinette!
Let them traduce thy proud self-exil?d lot,
It speaks thy fame, and throws on theirs a blot.
Which, like the canker in a stately tree.
Though first unseen, its downfall still will be.
Her youth was one of dreams, and pass?d away,
Bright as the stars from whence she seem?d a ray,
Which all unveil?d within those cloudless skies.
In beauty watch?d her with their myriad eyes.


To join her handmaids in the mazy dance,
Where tuneful step but answers to soft glance,
And in the crowd of sylphs, now gay, now grave,
To skim the turf as sea-bird skims the wave;
To lie beneath the tam?rind?s cooling shade.
In some deep glen whose flow?rets never fade,
And deck with jasmine s sprays her raven hair,
Beside a lake that told her she was fair;
To climb the mountains ever verdant side.
And watch from thence great Ocean?s rolling tide,
Whose fast succeeding, endless billows roar
In ceaseless thunders on her island shore ;
To feel a rapture and a wild delight
As wave on wave burst foaming on her sight,
Then upwards fling its brilliant arch of spray,
And on the reef a rainbow die away:
Or now to lave within the sparkling surf
Her graceful limbs, she?d leave the velvet turf,
And midst the flashing breakers proudly rise,
And joyous laugh as borne towards the skies.
Such was existence in her beauteous youth,
When all around her breath?d the smile of truth,
And year on year unchanging lightly flew,
While she herself each day more ?witching grew.
Till twice eight springs, with all their buds and flow?rs,
Had beauty brought, and with it happy hours?
Bright hours of youth, whereon no shadows fell
With their cold shade her after fate to tell.
The gentle maiden like her sunny clime,
Was softly verging to sweet summer time,


And o?er her spirit a soft languor stole,
A bright, though dreamy listlessness of soul,
Which yet was pleasure, though as undefin?d
As its first cause upon her op?ning mind.
And though till then her light and joyous heart
Was ever first sweet silv?ry mirth t?impart,
Its tone grew chang?d, and pensive, and subdued.
Her one, her only joy, was solitude.
And she would wander through the cooling shade
Of lofty groves, to some secluded glade,
Where a small stream, low warbling as it sped.
Was softly echoed by the birds o?erhcad;
And on the Nahe?s 6 fragrant leaves reclin?d.
Bright reveries would fill her gentle mind.
There half unconscious she would listless lie.
With eyes suffus?d and fix?d on vacancy;
They spoke of joy, without one dream of pain,
That since has turn?d their dew to winter rain.
And hour on hour would thus unheeded fly.
And find her still in trance-like ecstacy;
Till one soft hour of sunny eventide
Had seen her still amidst that forest wide;
When a last sunbeam bathed with golden light
A stately tree, young, vig?rous, and upright;
When to her eyes the kindling soul return?d,
And thoughts revealed, whose fire till then scarce burn?d
For ?gainst the tree a young war chief there leant,
Whose gaze of love on her soft form was bent:
And o?er her spirit a new change now came,
Distinct and bright, for which she knew no name,


Till wooing birds, midst the green leaves above,
In pitying fondness softly whisper?d ?? Love.?
Yes, love it was, whose all absorbing pow?r
Can life concentrate in the present hour,
And though as yet that love was unconfess?d,
It fill?d her soul with longings unrepress?d.
And hopes and fears, whose birth in ev?ry clime,
From love alone has sprung throughout all time.
Fair Northern woman is like Northern snow.
Brilliant above, and pure and cold below.
And as the snow, imbibing sunny beams,
In gradual beauty melts to sparkling streams,
Which ever onward, ever strengthening, pour
Their secret treasures in great Ocean?s store;
So woman?s heart, at first so cold, so shy,
The soul?s bright ray soon melts to sympathy;
From thence to love, whose gushing fondness gives
Each treasur?d thought to him in whom she lives.
But Southern woman is like Southern sun,
Whose course seems noon-day when ?tis scarce begun.
Than her fair rival though less coldly pure,
She still boasts feelings never premature;
Which, like sweet summer flow?rs when seen in spring,
Are priz?d the more for early blossoming.
When love she feels, if woo?d, she soon is won,
But ne?er coquets until a heart?s undone;
Then leaves it crush?d, and to another wed.
Still smiles, misleading, till herself misled.
But the emotions of a truthful heart
To all her features kindred looks impart,


And be they dark as night, or bright as Heav?n,
Tis from the heart those speaking looks are giv?n.
Three moons had flown?Pomare?s plight being giv?n
She cherish?d thoughts ?gainst which she ne?er had striy?n.
And gaily happy, as in the days of yore,
Again with joy she sought the bright sea-shore.
And when calm Ocean?s face would softly woo,
Paddling with agile grace the light canoe,
She?d o?er the waters far and fearless glide,
And on the billows gladly bounding ride,
Till with fatigue and pleas?d excitement spent,
Her frail barque?s course within the reef is bent;
Where motionless the fairy fabric lay
As if asleep upon that sleeping bay;
When o?er its side half dreaming she would lean,
And gaze below upon a witching scene.
For fathoms deep through the transparent wave,
Whose crystal waters greater brightness gave.
On the white sand a coral grove was trac?d 7
Of glowing hues in brilliant contrast plac?d.
Woodland and mountain from th? adjacent shore
Seem?d carv?d upon the coral gems it bore.
Her mind of late so full of love had grown,
That all she gaz?d on caught its soften?d tone;
And now she thought, when first the shadows fell,
Kissing the sea from mountain and from dell,
Each verdant valley and each sea-shore cleft.
Reflected through the depths, its impress left.


Before an altar 8 stand a youthful pair,
As young in heart as years?and one how fair !
it is Tahiti?s lovely island-Queen
And her betroth?d, who now so grace the scene
On her soft cheek the mantling blush reveals
What in her clime no woman?s heart conceals,
But down that cheek in its prophetic flow x
9 One glist?ning tear speaks of impending woe,
Trembling at first?then beautifully bold
It gushes forth, uncall?d for, uncontrolled;
Not from distrust, or woman?s ling?ring fear
Of heart divided, springs that crystal tear;
?Tis deep emotion from some secret source.
Which search defies when mind would trace its course;
A dim foreshadowing of some after fate.
Which tho? it warns, but rarely warns till late.
And thus in tears was young Pomare wed.
Unconscious then, of why those tears were shed;
Though in her path a shadow darkly fell.
Thrown from that land which since has rung her knell;
But soon new ties around her sprung, t?efface
With their calm joys, of evil ev?ry trace.
And midst her people, happy, happy years
Strengthen?d their love, and all dissolv?d her fears.
But soon, alas ! that people and their Queen
Will almost doubt if these bright years have been;
For long sustain?d and still increasing woe,
So wears the mind with each repeated blow.
That when the future is without hope s beam.
The past, the happy past, seems all a dream.


In the lone creek of a secluded bay,
Hidden from view, a small low vessel lay;
A boat is seen in haste to leave her side.
In haste to pull across the flashing tide,
And as her keel grates on the shelving sand,
From off her bow two persons spring to land;
They are two priests, who hither sent from France,
Break through the laws by this their first advance :
For it was written, and for years had been.
That none might land unless so will?d the Queen.
And ere this law is call?d by each harsh name.
Turn towards France?see there enforced the same.
Where not on shore one step the trav?ller dares,
Till he his passport and?his bribe prepares.
That e?er the first, the embryo seeds of war.
Should by Religion have been brought from far!
That the pure spirit of undying love,
Should be invok?d the carnage field above !
?Twas ever so, and rack, and sword, and flame,
Reek with their horrors in Religion?s name.
Man ne?er to man so all forgets his God
As when revenge assumes religion?s rod.
?Twas early morn and in Papeete?s bay,
Anchor?d near shore a huge French war ship lay;
Her bristling broadside in its warlike frown,
With guns run out is turn?d towards the town,
Springs on her cables?and those signs which show,
Whence comes the storm ere it begins to blow.


She came in peace, at least so said her crew,
And soon their acts prov?d these their words how true.
Yes ! ?twas in peace as when an earthquake comes,
Felt by the town that to the shock succumbs,
Yes ! ?twas in peace, with more that war?s worst wiles,
Which lull?d its victim, then betray?d by smiles.
In woman?s anguish poor Pomare lay.
Overcome by pains which hopes can scarce repay;
Almost alone, with no adviser near,
Her mind exhausted and bent down by fear;
Who will believe that in this sacred hour,
Man could approach t? exert his greater power ?
That threats and insults to a Queen were shown,
T? extort a deed which sign?d away her throne ?
It is too true ; and blush, oh France ! to know,
Such were French acts, with woman for a foe.
But vain were threats, all insults too were vain,
While still Pomare might these wrongs sustain ;
But when she found her people too must share
Her dark distress?she sign?d in her despair.
Thus was the fam d! Protectorate obtain?d,
By which, save foes, by France, what has been gained ?
They gave Protection /?prostituted name,
France?s disgrace, though by her sons call?d fame;
The same protection as the vulture gives
To the weak prey that tortur?d, writhing lives :
The same protection as the Upas tree
Of French misrule has thrown Algiers o?er thee.
Hark ! to those shrieks along Tahiti?s shore,
Whose fearful echoes drown the cannon?s roar !


i
Look on this field of dying and of dead.
Here a protected, there protector's head !
Gaze on this form?a mother?s form ! ?but no,
The soul would sicken dwelling on such woe ;
For though in death each line imprinted there,
Speaks to the heart of agony?s despair.
The living infant on that bleeding breast,
Strives, but how vainly, to be there caress?d,
Makes a last effort in low wailing cries,
And with the effort, still unnotic?d, dies !
Such are the fruits. Protection ! borne by thee,
From falsehood?s seed expanded to its tree.
And has great France achiev?d her liberty
T? oppress the weak and to enslave the free ?
At each new act of right o?ercome by might,
Must we still say?whatever is ?is right ?
Oh ! France?Tahiti?s blood?Pomare's tears,
Have dimm?d the glory of thy thousand years.
Land of my Fathers! ?Huguenots of old,
Who meek in faith, were for that faith how bold !
Land where those Fathers made their hearts the shields
Which sav?d to France from foreign foes her fields:
And when that France in her ungrateful pride.
With bigot hate their simple creed belied,
Proved by self exile and ?gainst Rome?s proud sword,
? They lov?d their country, but their faith ador?d.??
Land of my youth ! which to remembrance seems
Unlike the world, save the bright world of dreams :
Land, whose soft sunshine has so fill?d this heart,
That through life?s storms it will not all depart ;


And when a scene, though passing fair, I sec,
That heart in fondness still reverts to thee ;
For there each object doubly bright has grown
By a twin beauty added to its own.
Yes ! to a brightness tangible and real,
Fancy?s rich light has giv?n its ideal.
And as the hues within a rainbow seen,
Outvie the sun which their first cause has been,
So do the tints left on the youthful mind
From some lov?d scene each day become refin?d,
And when retrac?d through a long lapse of years,
Brighter than truth the mind?s mirage appears.
Amidst her wrongs prolong?d from day to day,
Pomarc?s thoughts, her hopes were far away.
The sea, the sea, her gaze was ever there,
And in that gaze her soul escap?d despair;
So long she watch?d, e?en hope had wan?d to fear.
But midst her doubts behold deliv?rance near.
In the far distance between sea and sky,
A sunny speck arrests the roving eye,
Tis onwards borne, and as again it nears.
In conscious pride a gallant ship appears ;
Her lofty sails, her taunt and tap?ring spars.
Seem to belong to whence they point?the stars.
Again she nears; her large and warlike hull
Looks in its peace, like ?tween fierce storms, the lull
And from her bow the dazzling foam is cast.
As if she spurn?d the waves she dashes past.
Between low reefs she slowly winds her way,
Then glides majestic in Papeete?s bay.


The anchor dropp?d, and quickly furl?d each sail,
Hoisted aloft, Tahiti?s flag they hail ;
And as the folds in waving beauty play,
\ Loud boom the guns and their dread homage pay.
The eager natives crowd along the shore.
And blend their cheers with the loud cannons? roar?
Yes! once again that flag has found a friend
As proud to hoist, as able to defend:
That frigate?s chief, by British feeling led,
Obey?d the impulse of both heart and head;
And when a Queen, a woman in distress.
Sought English aid, her deep wrongs to redress,
The aid was giv?n by his chivalric soul.
r hich dar?d resistance, as right dares control.*
Again Tahiti owns Pomare?s sway,
Whose rule of love her subjects? hearts repay.
Again each vale re-echoes with the mirth
Of heart?s rejoicing in Hope?s second birth.
Freedom is seen returning o?er the foam,
On swift-wing?d gladness to her island home;
But she alights not, only hovers there,
To gaze her last on scenes so lov?d, so fair:
Takes one long look, of plain, and mount, and dell,
Then springs on high with tears that speak Farewell!
For soon, alas! from fair Tahiti?s shore.
Those brave defenders wing their way once more.
Too soon, alas! that proud ship of the free,
Whose well won name should (t Vindicator? be,
* Vide the letter from Commodore Nicolas to Admiral Du Petit Thouars,
in the Appendix.


Is order?d hence by those who?d yield like Greece,
A nation?s honor, for a nation?s peace.
She longs to linger, but compell?d t?obey,
Spreads her white wings unwillingly away.
Who can describe what felt Pomare?s heart.
When first she saw that gallant ship depart?
Her past misfortunes, deep and dark distress,
Her present fears, her doubts, her loneliness,
Future misgivings, all fast crowding there
Emotions rais?d, that fill?d it with despair.
She watch?d, how fondly ! that receding deck,
Which onwards, onwards lessens to a speck.
Smaller it grows, it wanes, it disappears,
And leaves Pomare desolate in tears.
Scarce from the shore those sails are lost to sight,
Than French oppression reassumes its might.
?Twere vain to tell of bloody battle fields.
Where in fierce fight the tricolor oft yields.
Though each dispatch more falsely pompous grows
Of vict?ries won, and numbers slain of foes.
Ye who have read or lightly skimm?d the page
Of poor Tahiti?s wrongs, and France?s rage,
Oh ! do not deem the truth has yet been told?
That France herself will e?er her shame unfold :
Disgrace by nations rarely is confess?d.
The more they wrong, they more belie th? oppress?d,
Pomare ! Queen! malign?d has been each name.
Foully has France traduc?d thy woman?s fame:
?Twould seem as if a never changing wind
To one lone isle thy noble deeds confin?d,


While the dark tales thy bitter foes invent,
Like poison?d arrows strike, though windward sent.
And yet some noble advocates are thine,
Who in truth?s cause instinctively combine;
Men who through dangers cross?d the southern wave.
Imped'd by hopes their brother man to save;
They knew thee well, they well have serv?d thy cause ;*
And gain?d the best, their conscience? bright applause.
Far o?er the sea a plaintive cry is heard,
So low, so shrill, as from a wounded bird ;
Tis woman?s wail, in last, in fond appeal
To hearts, till now forwmman first to feel.
She sues for help, but for herself in vain,
Then for her people weeping, pleads again.
?Tis useless all: unmov?d and coldly stern,
Britain replies almost as if she?d spurn ;
Asks by her acts if promises e?er last,
Shuts out the present and forgets the past.
Alas ! alas ! that Britain should confess
Her ear is turn?d from woman in distress.
How chang?d from when it was her proudest boast.
To raise, defend the helpless ?gainst a host!
When her brave arm upheld the sinking right,
And Virtue triumph?d in Britannia?s might.
Whence comes the change ? why English hearts so cold ?
Have they from age or luxury grown old ?
Was it that France might still encouraged be
T? insult our flag when met on ev?ry sea ?
* Vide the eloquent appeal from Mr. Williams, in the Appendix.


It was an act?oh ! History be dumb ?
Of certain evil that chance good might come.
Oh ! Queen, our own lovM island Queen, to thee
Fond hearts appeal, a captive Queen to free ;
Far o?er the wave amidst the southern foam,
Queen pines for Pomare?s home.
What tale of woe can tell her hapless fate,
With heart as kingdom darkly desolate.
Far from her people, who so bravely true,
Proud France may crush, but never can subdue.
Men whose firm minds have sternly sworn to die,
Ere to French yoke they bow their liberty.
What must they feel?what should we feel, to see
Our Queen a captive 10 with no power to free ?
That though each vein its life-blood freely gave,
We ne?er could meet, unless that Queen a slave ?
Save that brave people!-?save, oh ! save their Queen ;
Whose hope, whose trust has in Victoria been.
Lend the prestige of that all glorious name,
As ?twere a shield, to guard that Queen from shame.
She clings for refuge, fondly clings to thee !
Thrust her not forth to die all hopelessly:
It is her last ?her touching, last appeal,
In which she brings her soul at thine to kneel.
Raise it from woe, make tears of joy her tears,
And she will bless thee through all coming years.


NOTES.
(1) ?This coral reef often exhibits one of the most sublime
and beautiful marine spectacles that it is possible to behold.*
It is generally a mile or a mile and a half, and occasionally two
miles from the shore. The surface of the water within the
reef is placid and transparent, whilst that without, if there be
the slightest breeze, is considerably agitated, and being un-
sheltered from the wind is generally raised in high and foaming
waves.
? The trade wind blowing constantly towards the shore, drives
the waves with violence upon the reef, which is from five to
twenty or thirty yards wide. The long rolling billows of the
Pacific, extending sometimes in one unbroken line a mile or a
mile and a half along the reef, arrested by this natural barrier,
often rise ten, twelve, or fourteen feet above its surface, and
then bending over it their white foaming tops, form a graceful
liquid arch, glittering in the rays of a tropical sun as if studded
with brilliants.? ?From Ellis?s Polynesian Researches.
(2) ? About sunset we found ourselves a short distance to the
northward of Point Venus, having sailed along the east and
northern shores of Tahiti; charmed with the rich and varied
scenery of the island, justly denominated the Queen of the
Pacific, whose landscapes, though circumscribed in extent,
are?
? So lovely, so adorn?d
With hill and dale, and lawn, and winding vale,
Woodland and stream, and lake, and rolling seas,?
that they are seldom surpassed, even in the fairest portions of
the world.?
(3) ?In the exterior or border landscapes of Tahiti, and the
other islands, there is a variety in the objects of natural beauty,
a happy combination of land and water, of precipices and level
plains, of trees, often hanging their branches clothed with
thick dark foliage over the sea, and distant mountains shewn in
the sublime outlines and richest hues; and the whole often
? This description although relating more particularly to Raiatea, applies
equally to Tahiti, and to all the islands of the Pacific.


blended in the harmony of nature, produces a sensation of ad-
miration and delight.??? lbid.
(4) Lord Byron in the ? Island.?
(5) ? The hair of the females which was neatly trimmed, and
sometimes appeared in short loose curls, was an object of great
attention: it was ornamented with elegant native flowers, some-
times exhibited in great profusion and variety, at others with only
one or two single jasmine blossoms, or a small wreath inter-
woven with their black and shiny ringlets. They displayed
great taste in the use of flowers, and the adorning of their hair.
Frequently I have seen them with beautiful wreaths of yellow
flowers, worn like fragrant necklaces on their bosoms, and
garlands of the same around their brows, or small branches of
the brilliant scarlet china rose fastened in their hair.
? Though totally unacquainted with what we are accustomed
to call artificial flowers, yet the brilliant and varied odoriferous
plants that grew spontaneously among their mountains or their
valleys, did not suffice to gratify their wishes, they were, there-
fore, accustomed to manufacture a kind of artificial flower, by
extracting the petals and leaflets of the most fragrant plants
and flowers, and fastening them with fine native thread to the
wiry stalk of the cocoa-nut leaf, which they saturated with
monoi or scented oil, and wore in each ear, or fixed in the
native bonnet made with the rich yellow cocoa-nut leaf. Their
mirror was one supplied by nature, and of the clear
water of the stream contained in a cocoa-nut shell. Ellis.
(6) ? Nahe,? a species of sweet-scented fern.
(7) <l As soon as our men had refreshed themselves, we em-
barked in our respective canoes, and resuming our voyage we
proceeded along the smooth surface of the sea, between the
reefs and the shore. The wind died away, and a perfect calm
succeeded. The heat of the sun was intense, and its scorching
effect on our faces was increased by the reflection of the sea.
This considerably diminished the pleasure we derived from
watching through the perfectly transparent waters, the playful
movements of the shoals of small and variegated rock-fish, of
every rich and glowing hue, which often shone in brilliant con-
trast with the novel and beautiful groves of many coloured
coral that rendered the sandy bottom of the sea, though
frequently several fathoms beneath us, in appearance at least,
an extensive and charming submarine shrubbery or flower
garden. The corallines were spread out with all the endless
variety and wild independence exhibited in the verdant land-
scapes of the adjacent shore.?? -Ellis.


(8) ? About noon, on the day appointed for the marriage, the
young chieftain, with his guardian and friends, reached the
chapel where we were waiting to receive them. Aimata (Queen
Pomare) attended by her mother-in-law, the Queen of Tahiti,
her sister, and the wife of Mahine, chief of Huahine, arrived
shortly after. The royal party were attended by the dependants
of Hautia, the governor of the island.
? When the ceremony commenced, Mr. Barff and myself took
our station near the communion table, in front of the pulpit.
Pomare and his friends standing on our right, Aimata, with her
relatives on the left. The Raatiras (chiefs) formed a semicircle
three or four deep immediately behind the bride and bridegroom,
while the body of the chapel was filled with spectators.
? The rich and showy colours exhibited on the apparel of
the chiefs, the uniform white raiment of the Queen and her
companions, presented an unusual appearance; the picturesque
dress of the Raatiras, who wore the purau, or beautifully fine
white matting tiputa, bordered round the neck and the edges
with a most elegant fringe, and bore in the right hand a highly
polished staff, or kind of halbert of black iron wood, together
with the diversified appearance of the spectators, greatly in-
creased the novel and imposing effect of the whole.? ? Ibid.
(9) ? During the ceremony, I observed a tear moistening the
eye of the youthful bride. Agitation of feeling perhaps pro-
duced it, as I have every reason to believe no cloud of anticipated
evil overshadowed her prospects.?? lbid.
(10) By the last accounts from Tahiti, Pomare had taken
refuge in Raiatea, where she was closely guarded by French
cruisers, who were most anxious to obtain possession of her
person.


AN APPEAL TO BRITISH CHRISTIANS,
AND THE PUBLIC GENERALLY,
ON BEHALF OF THE QUEEN OF TAHITI
AND HER OUTRAGED SUBJECTS.
WITH A STATEMENT OF FACTS.
BY SAMUEL TAMATOA WILLIAMS,
SON OF THE LATE MISSIONARY TO POLYNESIA.
The following pages would not have been again intruded on
the attention of the Public, had not the recent events at Tahiti
again urged the attention of British Christians to this lamentable
affair. It was truly said by Josiah Conder, Esq. at the late
meeting at Finsbury Chapel, that the want of information
exhibited in relation to the outrages, and as to their true origin,
was indeed distressing. Believing this, and knowing also that
the facts are unexceptionable, and that the justice of the reflec-
tions on those facts have been confirmed by better and abler
minds, it is thought that this short pamphlet may still be of
use, and more especially if by its sale the Author is enabled to
lend pecuniary aid to the Committee who have taken the matter
up, and who will necessarily lie put to considerable expense in
advertising, &c. The profits. 1 anv wil he hvodcd ?' f? ?h< m�
August 7, 1844.


AN APPEAL
ON BEHALF OF THE QUEEN OF TAHITI.
British Christians and Friends!
The accounts teeming from the public press for some
period past in reference to Tahiti and its Queen, Pomare, have
undoubtedly claimed your earnest attention; and while you have
perused the narrative of transactions, that laugh to scorn all
that is noble and sacred in religion, justice, or humanity, your
blood has boiled with indignation, and you have felt the glow of
jealous anger mantling your countenances.
Your minds are again most solemnly called to consider with
attention the following incontrovertible facts, in order that those
sympathies and emotions may not die away or become merely
sentimental, but that they may be urged into such practical
action and endeavour , as becomes those who profess the religion
of the Lord Christ.
The public are extensively acquainted with the manner in
which Christianity was first introduced into the islands of the
Southern Seas. The word of the living God was proclaimed to
the degraded and ignorant natives of these lovely isles; upon
whose shores no navigator could touch, even under the most
urgent and necessitous circumstances, without endangering the
safety of his crew and vessel; and the result of such proclama-
tion has been, that the barbarous inhabitants have cast their
idols ?to the moles and to the bats.? The Polynesian warrior,
whose hands still reeked with the blood of victims, supplicated
the True God for pardon through Christ, and became meek and
lowly as the lamb. And the mariners who have since then been
driven upon those once inhospitable shores, can testify, and
have with feelings of deep gratitude acknowledged, the benefits
they have received, by the islanders, without a wish or hope of
reward, labouring with their hands, repairing their vessels, and
enabling them, amply provisioned, to pursue their destined
course.
Men of commerce ! Merchants of London ! your attention is
now justly demanded, and if your poor benefactors, from the
statements that shall be laid before you, claim your pity, you


are most seriously exhorted to raise your mighty voice on their
behalf, and attempt to redress the wrongs of those who have
assisted your brethren when ready to perish.
On the 21st November, 1836, a small vessel from Valparaiso
brought to Tahiti (the chief in the Georgian group) two Roman
Catholic priests, natives of France, named Laval and Caret.
They did not land at the usual anchorage, but upon the opposite
side of the island, in direct contravention of a long-established
law, ? that no master or commander of a vessel is allowed to
land any passenger without special permission of the Queen and
Governors,? which was broken by the priests stealthily landing
at an unfrequented spot.
Of course it would be out of place here to discuss the question,
whether this regulation was beneficial or injurious. Unques-
tionably they had a right to form and enforce their own enact-
ments, and this self-same imposition is most carefully urged and
carried into effect by the government of those priests who were
so ready to violate the laws of Tahiti.
Intelligence of the appearance of these men on the island was
conveyed to the Queen, and immediately, and without the least
advice on the part of the English missionaries, (as is erroneously
stated in a letter to the Times, by Mr. Walter Brodie,) and
solely from a determination to enforce what appeared to the
Tahitians a necessary rule, she ordered, or rather most courteously
requested, these Roman Catholic priests to leave her dominions,
by a letter, of which the following is a copy :
November 29, 1836.
Laval and Caret,
I salute you both on your entry into my kingdom. This is
my declaration to you both. Do not remain in my territory. Go away to
your place at Mangareva. There are missionaries in my territory. We
have also been taught in the Word ; and we know the Word. Grace has
sprung up also in my kingdom ; be not wicked ; have no unfriendly
thoughts. Have I done you any injury ? No, you know my attachment to
you both. I myself also know your attachment and kindness for me. Do
not imagine that this declaration comes from any other; no, this declara-
tion is mine, and that of the chiefs. It is our will that you should not
remain in this kingdom. I salute you both on your departure.*
POMARE.
It seems rather unfortunate that the first to violate the
Tahitian law should have been Roman Catholic priests ; for
instantly, but without the least foundation of truth, it is asserted
that the Protestant missionaries, out of enmity to their religious
principles, and jealous lest they should obtain a footing in the
island, instigated the Queen to hasten their departure ; whereas
* Missionary Chronicle, May, 1843.


had any merchant or seaman acted in disobedience to her will,
such an accusation would never have been thought of, although
the law would undoubtedly have been as imperatively enforced.
This kind and reasonable request was utterly disregarded, and
they did not think it proper to give it the least consideration ;
all peaceable means were still tried to induce them to leave, but
without effect, and Pomare was really compelled to resort to
more violent measures. The priests, aided by the French consul,
M. Mourenhout, barricaded their doors: the constables then
took off the roof, and having gently lifted them out, they were
placed in one of the Queen?s schooners, well provisioned and
manned, and thus sent from Tahiti.
All the proceedings of Pomare were strictly of a civil nature,
and as such the English missionaries did not interfere; the
Romish priests infringed the laws, and were they to expect
pardon more than ordinary laymen ? and because they were
requested to depart the island, is it just, without any attempt to
support the assertion, and in direct opposition to the Queen?s
explicit statement, to declare that the missionaries are the cause ?
On the 30th of August, 1838, the Venus, 64-gun frigate, com-
manded by Captain (now Admiral) A. Du Petit Thouars, arrived
off Tahiti, and her commander demanded that the Queen should
apologize and pay down two thousand dollars, as an indemnifica-
tion for the ? ill-treatment and losses the priests had sustained ,?
and threatened, in case of refusal, immediately to commence
hostilities.
Queen Pomare refused in the most positive terms to pay this
exorbitant and most unjust tax, and when Du Petit Thouars
threatened to cannonade her island if his demands were not
complied with within twenty-four hours, her energetic reply was,
?Blow away; I am Queen of Tahiti, and will stand up for my
rights.? This horrible expedient was, however, prevented (no
thanks to the French captain), by the kindness of the mission-
aries and merchants, who raised the required amount, and
satisfied the iniquitous claim.
In consequence of these gross outrages, brought about by the
priests setting the Tahitian laws at utter defiance, the Queen and
chiefs passed the following regulations, which, however severe
they may appear, were really, in a great measure, provoked by
the cruel tyranny of the French on behalf of the papal priests:??
? Let Tahiti, and all the islands of the kingdom of Pomare, Yahine the
First, stand unique under that gospel which the missionaries from Britain
have propagated ever since the year 1797, that is, these forty years past.
? When foreigners come from other countries to this, on their landing let
this law be put into their hands, that they may know, if such persons per-
sist in teaching tenets which are inconsistent with that true gospel which
has been of old propagated in Tahiti; if they build houses for worship, if


they congregate followers in uncultivated places, that they might teach
them all kinds of strange doctrines ; if they trouble the usual modes of
worship, and propagate strange customs for the sake of amusing, that do
not comport with the written word of the God of Truth, such person has
become guilty of breaking the law, and will be judged and awarded. This
shall be his award. He will be sent to his own land, and shall not reside
in Tahiti.
? If any Tahitian shall propagate doctrines inconsistent with the gospel
of truth, such as are called Mamoia, because they are doctrines inconsistent
with those which have been taught by the missionaries from Britain, and
with what is found in the written word of God, that person has violated the
law : if he be a person of rank or a common man, it is the same, he has
broken the law, and will be judged and awarded. This will be his award.
He will be sent to his native land to accomplish the sentence of the law in,
if it be public road, fifty fathoms; if any other work, such as is found
written in the laws.
? If he persist in refusing to do it, he will be judged, and new work im-
posed on him.
? Tahiti, Nov. 8, 1838.?
It is only justice to the missionaries to state, that in accordance
with their uniform unflinching maintenance of civil and religious
liberty, they quite disapproved and opposed this new enactment.
In the year 1839, Captain La Place (who was stationed at
Sydney, with a first-rate frigate, the Artemise ,) received orders
from the French Government to proceed to Tahiti, and to demand
the abrogation of the law just quoted, and immediately he set
sail. When, however, he approached the island, nearing too
closely point Venus, his frigate struck on a sunken rock, called
the Dolphin, and with the greatest difficulty was brought to the
harbour of Papeete, a distance of eight miles ; upon her arrival
at which place the Queen, ignorant of the purpose for which the
frigate had been sent out, commanded all the carpenters who
were residing on shore, together with a large number of natives,
to assist in her reparation, and in a few weeks the work was
completed; in the meantime Captain La Place had ordered all
the bread-fruit trees in the neighbourhood to be cut down, not-
withstanding which the chiefs did all in their power to help
forward the repairs of his vessel.
These trees, in addition to their great beauty and ornament to
the island, are, in fact, the principal means of subsistence pos-
sessed by the natives; and those that the captain had commis-
sioned to be cut down, without for one moment deigning to
consult the authorities of Tahiti, were those from whence their
ancestors had derived their daily food, and were of course
peculiarly venerated.
The damage done to the Artemise having been effectually
remedied through the kind assistance of the natives, La Place,
who, while the work was proceeding, had taken care that the
object of his mission should not be divulged, now explained it,


and obtained the abrogation of the law above alluded to ; since
which time the Roman Catholic priests have been allowed to
settle on the island.
We cannot here avoid noticing a circumstance that occurred
about this time, which exhibits in a very clear light the conduct
of M, Mourenhout:
? Queen Pomare,? says Mr. Walter Brodie, in a letter to the Times,
? gave a piece of land to build a Roman Catholic Church, upon an appli-
cation of the French consul, M. Mourenhout ; the deeds for the land were
drawn out by him, and signed by Queen Pomare, unfortunately without
her reading them. A few weeks afterwards, Mr. Murphy, (an Irishman,)
the head of the Roman Catholic Church, asked the Queen for the land she
had promised, she replied, that the French Consul had applied for it on
behalf of the Church, and that she had given it to him, and also the
deeds. Mr. Murphy then applied to the Consul, when the Consul told him
that he knew nothing about the Church land, but the Queen had given him
(M. Mourenhout) a field of land for himself to build a house upon?a thing
that never was done by the Queen in her life, or by her predecessors. Mr.
Murphy immediately saw through the baseness of the Consul?s fraud upon
the Queen, and endeavoured to persuade her to give up anotherpiece, which
she refused. The Frenchmen then made up their minds that they had two
good cases of complaint to report to the French Government; in conse-
quence of which M. Mourenhout wrote to the French Government about it.
M. Mourenhout being at Tahiti when the three (two) French priests were
sent to the Gambier Islands, and having done all he could to endeavour to
persuade the Queen to allow them to remain, but without any effect, the
Roman Catholic Society in France wrote him a letter, thanking him for
what he had done, intimating to him at the same time that it was their in-
tention to make him some remuneration. Mr. Murphy having heard of
this, immediately wrote to the Society in France, disapproving in the
strongest terms of M. Mourenhout for having applied the land which was
intended for their Church to his own purposes. These dispatches were sent
from Tahiti on November 23, 1841, in a vessel belonging to myself, Mr.
Murphy having chartered her from me expressly to take the news to France
by way of Valparaiso, in hopes that the Society in France would withhold
their intended present from M. Mourenhout.?
This extract also evidently shows that the Roman Catholic So-
ciety in France, ?dedicated to the hearts of Mary and of Jesus,?
is not indifferent to the advance of Romanism in the South Seas ;
indeed it is notoriously known, that Colombon, a priest and
servant of the Society, was expressly sent to these islands, for
the purpose of effecting their designs, disguised as a carpenter.
These proceedings, with many other annoyances, were followed
by the appearance, on the 11th of May, 1842, of a French ship
of war, V Aube, a corvette of 24 guns, under the command of
Captain Dubuset; on which occasion, through the superior
power of the French, the Queen was positively forced to abandon
the laws of her country, and allow her police force to be dis-
banded, because in the performance of their duty they had put
the Commander of a French Whaler into confinement for
drunkenness and riot.


Thus, through the profligacy of those who visited the islands
in trading vessels or otherwise, the laws of Tahiti were violated,
and in spite of that propriety of conduct which civilization
ought to induce, Europeans seemed to have ridiculed the idea of
obeying salutary principles and rules laid down by the Queen
and chiefs for the maintenance of the public peace, order and
decorum; and, unfortunately, backed as they were by all the
infernal machinery of warfare, they were able with impunity to
follow their depraved and vicious determinations.
On the Ist September 1842, the French frigate of 60 guns, La
Heine Blanche, commanded by Admiral A. Du Petit Thouars,
arrived at the harbour of Papeete, when professions of regard to
the Tahitians, and of the desire of the French for peace and
harmony, appear to have been industriously circulated. On the
sth of the month, messengers were dispatched to the Queen,
then residing at Eimeo, (in daily anticipation of confinement),
and to the principal chiefs, requesting them to attend at Papeete,
that the Admiral might pay his respects to them; and conse-
quently his visit to the island was considered to be of a friendly
nature.
On the Bth, the principal chiefs arrived and dined on board
with the Admiral; and the same day an intimation was given
that a meeting was to be held between the French and the chiefs;
that evening the British Vice-Consul and the American Consul,
received an official document from the ship, stating that differ-
ences existed between the Tahitian and French Governments,
which would probably lead to hostilities ; and therefore all British
and American subjects were warned to take means to secure their
persons and property. ?Early on the following morning we
learned,? says an accurate and upright correspondent, ? from
Mure, the Chief Speaker, that the expected meeting (above re-
ferred to) had been anticipated by a secret one held during the
night, between the four principal chiefs and the French alone.?
At this meeting the following document was signed by the four
chiefs:
To the Admiral A. Du Petit Thouars.
Because we are not able to govern in our own kingdom, in the present
circumstances, so as to harmonize with other governments, lest our lands,
our kingdom, and our liberty should become that of another, we, whose
names are written below, viz., the Queen and Principal Chiefs of Tahiti,
write to you to ask that the shadow of the King of the French may be
thrown over us on the following conditions:?
Ist. That the title and government of the Queen, and the authority also
of the Principal Chiefs, remain in themselves over the people.
2nd. That all laws and observances be established in the name of the
Queen, and have her signature attached to them, to render them binding on
her subjects.


3rd. That the lands of the Queen and all her people shall remain in their
own hands, and all discussions about lands shall be among themselves.
Foreigners shall not interfere.
4th. That every man shall follow that religion which accords with his
own desire. No one shall influence him in his thoughts towards God.
sth. That the places of worship belonging to the English Missionaries
which are now known shall remain unmolested, and the British Missionaries
shall continue to perform the duties of their office.
6th. Persons of all other persuasions shall be entitled to equal privileges.
On these conditions, if agreeable, the Queen and Chiefs solicit the protec-
tion of the King of the French. The affairs concerning foreign governments,
and also concerning foreign residents in Tahiti, are to be left with the French
Government, and with the officers appointed by that Government, such as
port regulations, &c. See., and with them shall rest all those functions that
are calculated to produce harmony and peace.
(Signed) Raiata, Speaker to the Queen.
Utami, i
Hitoti, }Principal Chiefs.
Tati, S
The French in the night, with only these four semibarbarous
chiefs, held a meeting, at which this petition and contract was
produced ; and the result, as might be expected, was that they
signed the treaty. The plausible statements of the French
Admiral, after having most probably taken good care that they
were pampered sufficiently with the luxuries of his table, would
have overcome more sagacious and discerning minds than theirs,
who knew little of that bland politeness and hypocritical gene-
rosity which fawns over, while it betrays the unsuspecting victim.
But still the precious document was invalid. The assent of
the intelligent Pomare had yet to be obtained; and in what
manner this was done, shall be stated by men of honour, whose
assertions have never been controverted even by French Jour-
nalists.
The correspondent just quoted, says :
? The 9th was a day of painful suspense; the Queen?s consent was not
yet obtained; the Admiral demanded her signature or ten thousand dollars
for injuries alleged. If neither signature nor money was yielded in twenty-
four hours, he declared his intention of planting the French flag and firing
his guns; thus formally taking the island, and making his own conditions ;
all saw that the islands were virtually taken. The Queen signed just one
hour before the firing commenced. Proclamations are now issued, of which
one clause states, ? That any person who shall either in word or deed preju-
dice the Tahitian people againt the French Government, shall be banished.? ?
A letter addressed to the Morning Chronicle, February 26th,
contains the following:?
? Mr. Pritchard the British Consul at Tahiti, on whom Queen Pomare
had hitherto relied for the transaction of any public business, was absent in
England. No British man-of-war was present in Papeete Bay, when a
French frigate arrived off the island, and demanded from the Queen, as a
compensation for the banishment of some Romish priests from the island,


a sum of dollars much larger than she had ever seen, much less had in her
possession; and in consequence of her inability to pay that sum, the French
captain, thinking it a good opportunity to show his diplomacy, commenced
by bribing two of the most influential chiefs on the island. Secure of these
he then hastened to gain the good-will of the person Mr. Pritchard had left
in charge of the British Consulate?a man who had already shewn himself
too favourable to French interests. With these and the French Consul he
proceeded to the Queen?s residence, and, by dint of threats, and the French
Consul shaking his fist in her face, her signature was obtained.
(Signed) A Naval Officer, icho visited the
Islands in June and July 1843.
Commodore J. Toup Nicolas, commander of H. B. M. frigate,
the Vindictive, after stating the course he had pursued as repre-
sentative of the interests of Britain in that part of the Pacific,
says, in a letter to Admiral Du Petit Thouars ;
? The Queen, however, most solemnly declared again and again, and
which declarations have been transmitted by her both to the King of the
French as well as the Queen of England, that it was through fear, and fear
alone, arising from the menaces that overwhelmed her, that her Majesty
put her name with agonizing reluctance, as she herself states; and this is
confirmed by those who were then around her, to the paper that was sent to
her to sign. I feel convinced, Sir, that when your Sovereign is made ac-
quainted with this important fact, his Majesty will withhold his ratification
until further explanation has been had on this grave question : and I feel
equally satisfied, Sir, that had you been fully acquainted with all the events
that occurred at that period near the Queen at Eimeo, you never would
have sanctioned such proceedings being used towards her Majesty ; and
the more especially so, while you had borne in mind the delicate situation in
which her Majesty then was; ?a situation which has ever claimed from every
civilized nation in the world, protection, and kindness, and favour; and
most from those of a nation which stands pre-eminent in its chivalric gal-
lantry towards that sex whom we all regard it to be our highest honour to
guard from insult, and to shield from wrong.
? In addition to this painful circumstance, I have further to observe, that
I have been credibly assured, that some days subsequent to her Majesty
having, after many hours? refusal, at length, through threats on one side and
urgent importunities on the other, put her name to the first document that
was forwarded to her at Eimeo (the treaty), and which she did, as she then
declared, and still declares, solely to save her subjects from the fire of your
guns, a second (the proclamation*) was laid before her Majesty for her
signature, and which at last her Majesty also signed through the menacing
demands of the Consul of France : and these insulting threats were offered,
it cannot be forgotten, at a time when the Queen?s accouchement was hourly
looked for, and in truth, within one hour of her Majesty?s signature being so
unfeelingly and harshly obtained, she was actually taken in labour; the
pains of which were hastened, as it is universally believed, by the great
distress of mind, together with the offensive conduct of the French Consul
towards this unhappy defenceless woman ! and her Majesty gave birth to
a child, after great suffering, on the following day.
? France, Europe, the World, Sir, will form itsopinion of these unexampled
proceedings, and which you will, I am assured, alike censure and condemn.?
? ? That any person who shall either in word or deed prejudice the Tahi-
tian people against the French Government, shall be banished.?


A few words now on the very artful manner in which the
terms of the contract are framed :?All these regulations, as will
be evident by a slight examination, are altogether and completely
nullified by the last few words, which seem at first sight to be
only casual remarks previous to the signatures: so that in fact
the French have the power of expelling the English entirely?
have the power of controlling all the enactments of the Queen
and her chiefs, which they are allowed to pass by rule 2 and 3,
if these enactments in the opinion of the French are not calcu-
lated to produce harmony and peace. Tahiti, then, we may
safely and truly say, is now governed both internally and exter-
nally by the French, and no one looking for a moment on the
document previously given, we think, will be disposed or able for
one moment to dispute to the contrary.
A supreme council of three Frenchmen, after the treaty was
signed, was appointed, and we doubt not, still exists, from whose
decision there is no appeal but to the King of the French. In-
formation given by a correspondent from the island, written evi-
dently in a hurried and brief manner, will show how the Romish
priests exerted themselves, now that an avenue so cruelly gained
was opened to them :
? Universal liberty,? says he, ? is proclaimed to Protestant ministers,
priests, or any others who choose to teach. Feasts have been given, and plays
have been acted. The priests have been building a large brick house, and
are preparing to erect a cathedral. What the result will be God only
knows.?
Intelligence received in August 1843, from two missionaries
who visited Tahiti in January, supplies us with some particulars
educed from the Queen and chiefs by Sir Thomas Thompson,
commander of H. B. M. frigate, the Talbot.
On the 15th of January, it appears Sir Thomas requested an
interview with Pomare, at Tahiti, at which place she had not
been since the union of the French flag with her own. On the
receipt of his message, she repaired to Tahiti, and on the morn-
ing of the 17th, at ten o?clock, entered the harbour, where her
own flag was flying (never having used the new one herself). A
royal salute was fired by Sir Thomas, and having gained the
deck, the old Tahitian flag was hoisted, and another salute fired.
There were present Mr. H., a missionary, (who objected to taking
part in the proceeding, but was requested most strongly by Po-
mare to accompany her, and therefore determined whatever might
accrue not to abandon her in her trying situation), Sir Thomas
Thompson, the purser, Mr. C. Wilson (vice-consul), the Queen,
her husband, her father or foster parent, her secretary, and two
other members of the family ; and the following facts were again


stated in answer to questions put by Sir Thomas : ?? That she
knew nothing of the application signed by the chiefs alone, until
it had been sent away. That the document signed by her, was
so done through fear, for she felt that had her name not been
appended, she would be responsible for the mischiefs that would
inevitably be brought upon her country and subjects; and she
trusted that so soon as a British man-of-war should arrive, it
would alford her protection from her dreaded foe.?
These Missionaries also state, that at a meeting called by the
Queen, andholden at Papeete on the 9th day of February 1843,
at which meeting were present Sir Thomas Thompson, the pur-
ser, the British Vice-Consul, the American and French Consuls,
with most of the foreign residents, together with about five thou-
sand natives, whose orderly and consistent conduct elicited the
approbation of the foreigners present; the four chiefs were then
before this vast assemblage, and, without any private conference
asked separately, Why they had sought the aid of France ? to
which her Speaker Raiata replied, ? That so many difficult cases
had occurred, and the Missionaries not interfering to instruct
him what he should do, he signed the document which had been
previously prepared by the French Consul.? Tati and Hitoti
said they signed it ?because they saw the names of the two for-
mer chiefs attached to it.? They were again asked, ?Do you wish
the aid of France V* to which all replied, ? that they had no such
wish, and only signed the request because they were teased to do
so.? In addition to this, a friend, now in England, and who
was then at Tahiti, states, that such were the disclosures made by
these unsophisticated men in reference to M. Mourenhout the
French Consul, that he actually exhibited his rage by the con-
tortions of his countenance.
These are the plain, straight-forward and unvarnished facts,
relative to the establishment of the French protectorate in the
island of Tahiti. Protectorate! Yes, if by a protectorate is
meant that the feeble and defenceless are to be crushed down
and tyrannized over by a strong and powerful foe. Protectorate !
Yes, if by that word we are to understand that a people?who
desire no interference ; who only wish that they may be protected
from the hateful presence of their 'patrons and supporters ?are
to be compelled, at the hazard of horrible carnage and bloodshed,
to petition for the patronage of those whose patronage they have
always considered as their deadliest curse. If these are the prin-
ciples of a protectorate, the unfortunate Tahitians have most
assuredly found a firm and steadfast protector in the King of
France.
It is now about eighteen months since the signature of Pomare
has been extorted. Like the confessions of an innocent man,


compelled to acknowledge crimes he has never even conceived,
much less been guilty of, through the terrible torture of the rack,
the Queen is represented in the treaty (which must ever remain
a foul blot on the Government of France), as desiring the fatherly
support of the King of the French ; as praying, ? that his shadow
may be thrown over them while in reality, her honest, ardent
and sincere prayer, was and is that the shadow of Louis Philippe,
if it existed anywhere, might cover a spot so far from her lovely
country, that she would be unable even to think of a name ren-
dered loathsome and hateful to every inhabitant of Polynesia?s
isles.
Let the French, if they deny the truth of these assertions, ex-
plain how it is that patrons, supporters, protectors, allies, and
friends, are compelled to seek admittance into the Tahitian har-
bours through false colours? how it is that parties bearing a
relation like this, are in the constant habit of gaining entrance
through the presentation of English or American flags, instead
of being welcomed by demonstrations of joy and rejoicing, instead
of finding the ports thrown open, and everything they need plen-
tifully supplied?why is it ? The natives spurn them with hor-
ror. They have plundered their country and property, destroyed
their prosperity, demoralized their brethren, and, with demoniac
mockery, called themselves protectors !
Nearly a year has gone by since the intelligence of the pro-
ceedings that have been related reached England, and every one
will recollect the intense excitement the information created.
But why this excitement was suffered to die away, and the minds
of thoughtful Englishmen allowed to grow cool, when, by
leading them, in a moment of warm emotion, into energetic
action, occurrences that are about to be detailed might have been
prevented, still remains a question. Certain, however, it is,
that Tahiti and the affairs of the South Sea Missions did not
long occupy, at least apparently , the attention of Christians till
they were again recently called to contemplate the dethronement
of Pomare and the confiscation of her island.
The intelligence of this new outbreak was first circulated
through the daily papers, and contained in a letter written by
M. Eugene Gosse, of whose lengthy and garbled statement the
following is a summary:?lt is dated from the ? Roads of
Papeete, Nov. 19th, 1843, on board of the Uranie ,? which
arrived three days after the Heine Blanche , on the 4th of the
month, with the frigate Danae. On the following day the
annexed order appeared :
The Vice-Admiral in command of the Pacific Ocean informs the Com-
manding Officers and Crews of Vessels in the Roads of Papeete, that the
Queen Pomare refusing obstinately to recognize the treaty concluded 9th


September 1842, and ratified by his Majesty Louis Philippe, he is compelled
to declare that the Queen Pomare has ceased to reign over the Society
Islands and their inhabitants, and to take possession of the Islands in the
name of the King of Fiance, ?in consequence the frigate Uranie will
debark, at six o?clock to-morrow morning, the company of Marine Artillery
and the men dependent on that service,? &c.
M. Gosse proceeds to explain the circumstances which led to
the issuing of this proclamation.
He states that the treaty was executed when Mr. Pritchard,
the British Consul, was in London ; and although he knew not
of it, he mentioned his fears for the independence of Tahiti to
Lord Aberdeen and his colleagues, who paid little attention to
his statements. Mr. Pritchard then left England and arrived
at Sydney, where, having learnt what had passed, he immediately
proceeded, with Commodore Nicolas, on board H.B.M. frigate
Vindictive, and arrived at Tahiti ; whereupon the Queen, (who
was anticipating the appearance of a British man of-war,) was
greatly re-assured, and soon the flag of Pomare waved in the
place of that of the Protectorate. M. Eugene Gosse then
dilates on the daring of Commodore Nicolas, ? who,? says he,
? lost no opportunity of treating with derision the French
Protectorate,? and would undoubtedly have done so still more,
had he not been ordered away by Admiral Thomas, and his
place occupied by the Dublin. The French considering that
their flag had been dishonoured, felt it urgent to settle upon a
definite basis their relations with the Society Islands, and for
this purpose thought proper not to appeal even to the treaty,
but, with great ceremony, to present themselves before Papeete
with three frigates, which plan, however, did not seem to have
had the desired effect. On Sunday, the sth, the order above
quoted appeared, but, however, in the night was changed, and
a delay until noon was granted. ?We waited,? says he, ?with
lively anxiety ; all the telescopes were directed towards the
Queen?s palace, and men were posted on the tops to look out.
The hour past ?the flag of Pomare was still waving?Pomare,
the blind, the obstinate Pomare, refused to yield to our de-
mands.? Two hundred artillery and marines were landed, with
three or four hundred sailors, and surrounded the Queen?s
house ; all was silent, the flag of Pomare was removed, and the
French Governor of Tahiti, in curious speech, declared that they
would all be content to die in defence of the glorious tri-coloured
flag; and, amid cries of ? Vive le Roi /? the flag was hoisted.
That of the English Consulate was struck, the Governor-
General installed, and the Council of the Government pro-
claimed, which was composed of M. D?Aubigne, captain of the
corvette, Lieutenant Cion, and M. Mourenhout.


When the information thus conveyed was fully authenticated,
leading articles in the several morning and evening papers ap-
peared. In the Times the affair was ridiculed; and the
French, it was assumed, would never trouble themselves about
a nation of savages, pretty shells, cocoa-nuts, and missionaries.
Would that such an assumption were true, or might, upon any
reasonable grounds, be anticipated. None, however, appeared
to advocate the cause with real energy and spirit, and to direct
the agitated minds of the friends of Tahiti, save the Patriot ,
and patriotic as have always been its sentiments, it could
sympathize with the sufferings of those who were deprived of
their father-land. May God still grant it might to defend the
right, through the efficiency of its instrumentality may He
crown its endeavours with success.
What has followed? -how the French Ministry have disowned
the conduct of their Admiral ?how, if sound be any good,
Pomare is restored to her throne, and other facts, it would be
tedious and loss of time to repeat. They are fresh in the
memories of all; it will therefore be simply my duty to notice
the correspondence of Lord Aberdeen, M. Guizot, and Mr.
Pritchard, and to offer a few remarks on the proper course for
the friends of Religion, Peace, Freedom, and Commerce to
pursue, in order to secure for Tahiti its former and original in-
dependence.
In the first letter from Mr. Addington (who, I presume, is
Lord Aberdeen?s secretary,) to Sir John Baryow, it is stated,
? that although the British Government have not acknowledged
the right of France,? ? they nevertheless do not intend to call
that right into question.?
?It certainly would appear,? says he, ? from various reports
received by her Majesty?s Government respecting the transaction
which ended in the surrender of the Queen of Tahiti, of a
portion of her sovereign authority to the French Admiral Du
Petit Thouars, that that cession was brought about partly by
intrigues and partly by intimidation; but the surrender was
notwithstanding voluntarily made, and completed in due form
by Queen Pomare, under whatever impulsion she may have
acted.? (The italics are our own.) Upon this strange incon-
sistency, the British Government appear to have rested their
reason not to interfere. Now in reference to Pomare, without
whose signature the treaty would have been useless, it was
wholly by intimidation ; and yet the writer of the above letter
declares it was voluntary, that is to say, she was compelled of
her own free will to perform a certain act. Monstrous ab-
surdity ! ?lf these the only reasons, and they do on a
candid examination of the correspondence really appear to be


so, I must humbly crave pardon for my boldness, but I say the
Nonconformists of England have no right to be satisfied. 3he
Government, in my opinion, and I mention it respectfully,
seemed to have reasoned thus : the Ministerial party in France
have sanctioned their Admiral, in his endeavours to procure the
treaty for French protection. If, in accordance with the desire
of many Englishmen, we will not allow this treaty, and do not
sanction the French aggression, the war party or opposition will
instantly be clamorous for its retention to the French Crown,
and, of course, they cannot meet with any repulse from the
Ministry who commissioned the Admiral to effect the measure.
England once having stated her utter disapproval of the French
policy, could never consistently retract, and then the question
would have been one of war.
I hesitate not to say, that the French would never have
hazarded a warfare with Great Britain, that the ministerial party
would have overcome the opposition. But on any supposition,
are Governments justified in permitting injustice, violence, dis-
honesty and wrong, to be madly perpetrated, because they may
fear certain consequences ? Is right and eternal equity to bow
to political expediency? I am aware I tread on precarious
ground ; but I desire to ask the friends of universal peace, from
whom I confidently anticipate support. ?Were the Ministry
justified in sanctioning every species of gross injustice, op-
pression, and tyranny, because the result might, peradventure,
have led to hostilities ? My opinion is, that such would not
have been tbe case; but if this would have inevitably followed,
I firmly and sincerely avow my conviction that the
duty of the British Government was plain and clear ; they
ought to have done good, even though disaster should follow ;
and not evil that good might come.
I must not, however, allow, that the Ministry did adopt the
present line of conduct from a desire solely to avoid a collision
with France. I firmly believe that the insignificancy, in their
opinion, of the South-Sea Islands, together with the fact that
Dissenters chiefly are interested in their civilization, were
thought not to be sufficient reasons for repelling with manliness
and vigour the cruel conduct of the French. Had the Church
Missionary Society been placed in the situation of the London
Missionary Society, and instead of a dissenting ministry, had
there been a bishop and clergymen, the flag of Pomare, in all
the glory of independence, would now have been proudly floating
on the island, and Tahiti would now be free.
The next letter is addressed to Lord Aberdeen, from Tahiti,
by Mr. Pritchard the British Consul ; in it is stated the course
of action he had pursued in reference to the French, and for


his authority he cites extracts from letters to the late King of
Tahiti, from Mr. Canning, as follows :
? His Majesty, however, commands me to say, that all hough the customs
of Europe forbid his acceding to your wishes in this respect (hoisting the
British flag), he will be happy to afford to yourself and to your dominions
all such protection as his Majesty can grant to a friendly power, at so
remote a distance from his own kingdom.?
Also from Lord Palmerston :
? You will assure Queen Pomare, that her Majesty will at all times be
ready to attend to any representations that Queen Pomare may wish to
make, and will always be glad to give the protection of her good offices to
Queen Pomare in any differences which may arise between Queen Pomare
and any other power.?
From Lord Aberdeen :
? Upon the occasion of your return to your post at Tahiti, it will be expe-
dient that you should be able to prove to the governing authorities in these
islands, that her Majesty?s Government continues to take that interest in
their prosperity which has hitherto been professed.?
To these, Lord Aberdeen answers in bis instructions to Mr.
Pritchard, without, however, assigning any reason, or proving
any inconsistent interpretation :
? You appear to have altogether misinterpreted those passages in the
letters of Mr. Canning and Lord Palmerston which you cite in your dis-
patch in support of the principle of active interference on the part of Great
Britain, on behalf of Queen Pomare against France.?
Amongst the correspondence there is also a letter from M.
Guizot to the Count de Rohan Chabot, containing the following
extract:?
� ? It is altogether incorrect that our complaints against the Government of
Queen Pomare were frivolous pretexts put forward to justify the necessity
which has led to her submission to the King?s authority. The vexatious
proceedings of the Government towards French subjects, its inability to
maintain public order, the inconveniences which arise from it to all strangers
residing or touching at Tahiti, are notorious and evident facts which im-
peratively called for an energetic interference. The acquiescence shewn by
the English residents, by the missionaries themselves, in the measures of our
Admiral, do not leave a doubt upon this point. I enclose herewith copies
of their letters.?
Now we have seen in what these vexatious proceedings towards
the French Government consisted, and also why the Queen was
unable to maintain public order. The nation who have taken
upon themselves the protection of Tahiti, so as to secure order
and peace, was the nation that alone caused the great confusion
and disorder that existed on the island ; with a strong force
they prevented wholesome laws being applied to offenders ; and
having done this, they again with a strong force practically


called them into question for suffering the peace of the country
to be destroyed, and for allowing disorder to exist. Just upon
a similar principle might the powerful arm of the law compel an
individual by all the terrors it is capable of administering, to rob
or murder his fellows, and then arraign him before the bar of
justice, and consign him to the punishment of death.
Thus then, fellow-countrymen, the facts relative to this un-
fortunate Queen and her country have been impartially brought
before your attention ; you are perfectly at liberty to sift them,
and ascertain if these things really are so. I have stated
nothing for which I have not documents to prove the truth.
I might upon this exciting theme have called forth all the
energies of ray feeble powers, to harrow up the warm and generous
feelings of your hearts, but I refrained. You have, in place of
this, been furnished with a basis upon which you may combine the
approval of the judgment, with the emotions of the mind. The
statements laid before you must call into operation all your
dearest sympathies ; you breathe the air of Britain, as free men,
and you value most truly the blessings of liberty. You are not
trammelled by the caprice and tyranny of a foreign foe, but con-
trolled by mild and benignant laws ; are allowed to pursue the
desire of your minds. Born and bred as Englishmen and
Britons, you have never, to its full extent, considered the
miseries of those who exist under the dominion of a hostile
power. Your blessings, enjoyments, and privileges are so vast,
so free, and follow with such regularity, that you really do not,
and cannot fully understand the dreariness and misery con-
sequent on their curtailment. Oh ! how the poor and heart-
broken captive, who has long been immured in the dark, damp,
loathsome prison, when set free, values and appreciates the
purity of the atmosphere once more so greedily inspired; and
how he rejoices and exults in the glorious light of heaven, of
which he has been so long deprived. The people on whose behalf
this appeal is made have unfortunately undergone the ordeal,
and they can dilate with real and heartfelt eloquence on the
blessings of freedom?for alas! they now experience the sad
consequences of its loss.
The South-Sea Islanders would undoubtedly have enjoyed the
glories of freedom to the present hour, if civilization and Chris-
tianity had not been conveyed to them. Those shores, once un-
safe for any vessel to touch at, were rendered approachable and
hospitable through Christian energy and courage, crowned with
God?s blessing; and now unprincipled men have taken advan-
tage of these things, and deprived them of their liberty.
Shall it thus be? Christians arise, follow up the indomitable
courage of the Missionary pioneers; let England ! let the world


?especially let your oppressed Tahitian brethren, see that if it
was to Christian veterans, who feared not a cruel death, they are
indebted for the liberty of their souls, from galling bondage ; it
is to Christian philanthropists they owe the freedom of their
romantic and beloved country, and the independence of their
Sovereign Pomare.
Friends of justice! humanity! and peace! ye are summoned
to the aid of the oppressed, the suffering and the wronged. The
scenes may be far, far from the spot, where you are called to pass
your days, and may not exhibit all those positive realities which
are seen when right is violated in your native land. But never-
theless, they do most certainly exist, and at this very moment a
violated and oppressed people are commending their country to
Him whose throne is established in justice. You will then, what-
ever may be your political views or your differences in opinion,
cordially assist in the overthrow of injustice, usurpation, demora-
lization, and misery!
Englishmen ! one and all, ?you will not, you cannot (your
open-heartedness, and constitutional generosity and benevolence
are my guarantees) see a nation deprived,?yes, deprived of the
land of their fathers, by dishonest and unworthy means, and a
beloved Sovereign rendered powerless and impotent without be-
stirring yourselves?and then Tahiti will be free!
The course for you to pursue is plain. Let your representatives
in Parliament demand an explanation from the Ministry; let
public meetings be held in every part of England ; and let the
facts be fairly stated ; and at such meetings let memorials to the
British Government be abundantly signed, and also by all Her
Majesty?s subjects (especially Nonconformists). And may God
speed the right.
Coborn Street,
March 27, 1844,
Since the above statement of facts was penned (March 26,
1844), the public have learned how matters have been progress-
ing at the devoted Tahiti. They have been aroused from the
lethargy into which they had fallen, by the appearance of the
British Consul himself, a flying refugee to his father-land ?they
have perused the cowardly language of M. D?Aubigny, in which
he makes known that he has seized ? one Pritchard,? whose
blood shall atone for any outrage that may be committed ; and
now they seem to be moved. British Christians ! have you not
been stirred by a sense of the indignity perpetrated upon your
Consul and your Country, when in vain the heart-rending appeals


of a sacrificed country and outrageously oppressed people were
importunately ringing in your ears ? Ah! had we wist!?may
and ought to be the mournful exclamation of British Christians ;
but for our apathy and that of the leaders of the Christian public,
the Protectorate would have been abandoned, our Consul free
from indignity and?mournful reflection ?the blood of an injured
people been altogether spared ; but alas ! alas ! regrets are una-
vailing?no, not unavailing,?for they will, if rightly allowed to
occupy the mind, rouse to renewed action?they will scatter to
the wind every difficulty?they will not let us rest till we have, by
our fervid zeal, endeavoured to repair the mischief our coldness and
frigidity have caused. Now, at all events, and without delay,?for
death is abroad ; war has commenced ; immortal spirits are being
dismissed, and cruel carnage and bloodshed abound ?let us stand
up as the protectors of the helpless, as the foe of tyranny, op-
pression, and sanguinary men ; as the stern asserters of our own
noble Country?s honour and dignity ; and what ?what can with-
stand the terrible earnestness of an English patriot? of a son of
Britain ? of a Christian philanthropist ? Let every meeting,
without fail, be crowded to overflowing; and let every zealous
spirit be urged under the direction of the acting committee?
unity of purpose, which can alone be secured by the direction of
one centre of mind and intelligence, is the only security we have
of success.
May I just be permitted to ask one question in reference to the
nice, plausible sophisms of the Ministry and their organs, in
which they state that Mr. Pritchard was no longer British Con-
sul when he was seized and imprisoned, for that he had resigned
when the French assumed the sovereignty of the island ? It is
simply this. Can a Consul divest himself of office ? and does he
cease to be responsible till his resignation has been actually ten-
dered, and accepted by the Government ? As a British Consul
he was, the French admit it, incarcerated and punished; and the
shallow and contemptible quibbling of some portion of the morn-
ing press, shews plainly how anxious they are for a loophole of
escape.
In conclusion once more let me entreat you to act boldly, zea-
lously, and religiously; and once more let the prayer of each
warm heart be directed to a throne above. Father of Heaven !
shield the defenceless, and frustrate the oppressor?s designs!
I am,
British Christians and Friends,
Your most obedient, humble servant,
SAMUEL TAMATOA WILLIAMS.
August 7, 1844.


A LETTER from Commodore Toup Nicolas, C.8., to
Rear Admiral du Petit Thoxjars, on the subject
of the late events at Otaheite.
Her Britannic Majesty?s Ship Vindictive,
In Papeete Harbour, Tahiti,
4th Juno., 1843.
Sir,
Having come to this Island in the month of February last,
expressly with the hope of having the honour of meeting you
here, in order to have explained to you fully the exact relation
in which Great Britain stands with regard to Tahiti, I think it
right, now that I am led to expect you daily, thus to convey
to you in writing the nature of those relations. But, first, I
must observe to you, Sir, that which your experience in
diplomacy will at once make manifest to you, that until I re-
ceive the commands of my Sovereign, it is impossible for me
to acknowledge the validity of the treaty which you have made
with the Queen of Tahiti, though I have uniformly shewn every
courtesy towards it, and am still disposed to do so whilst we are
waiting the decision of our respective Governments.
My correspondence with the Officer in Command of the Naval
Forces of France at this place, as well as that which I have had
with the Provisional Government, you will, I trust, do me the
honour to read, as I have requested that the whole of these
documents may be laid before you.
By this correspondence you will observe, Sir, the measures
that 1 have pursued relative to the Queen Pomare and her
Government since my arrival here. These measures have been
guided by the authorities on International Law which 1 have
always kept before me ; and by a reference to these writers, as
quoted in my different letters, I hope and believe that you will
find that I have not digressed, in any shape, from the limits they
prescribe.
Although, Sir, it may now be too late to offer such observa-
tions as I could have desired to have done, as the Senior British
Naval Officer in this part of the Pacific Ocean, had I fortunately
been at Tahiti at the period of your demanding the Treaty in
question ; yet I hope I may still be permitted to call your atten-
tion to certain facts bearing upon it, of which I have acquired
a knowledge during my long detention here ; and the greater
part of these, it is my sincere belief, that you are wholly unac-
quainted with. Several of these facts I transmitted with my


letter of the 28th of May to Captain Vrignaud for yonr infor-
mation, and that of the French Government ; and I would
particularly request your perusal of the declarations of the
different Chiefs at the meetings that have been held during your
absence, as conveying the real feelings of the people of Tahiti
towards our respective nations. These papers are marked from
No. 1 to 10, and are with Captain Vrignaud.
I am aware. Sir, that it will be represented to you by the
French Consul, that I have counselled the Queen Pomare to
adopt certain measures, which he deems an infringement of the
rights guaranteed to Her Majesty under your Treaty. But here,
Sir, I am directly at issue with him ; for I contend, ?and I am
prepared to prove ray assertion, by the authorities to which I
have referred in my several letters, and these are, I believe, the
most celebrated writers on International Law?that the Queen
has not deviated one iota from her prerogative of Sovereignty
which was confirmed to Her Majesty by the Treaty, which, to
use Her Majesty?s words, she ? was compelled to sign in the
month of September last.?
In my letter to Captain Vrignaud, herein before referred to, I
stated to him, that immediately upon my arrival here, and even
before I had anchored, I received a letter from the Queen, in
which she threw herself wholly on the protection of Great Britain,
claiming the fulfilment of those solemn assurances which had
been, from time to time, made to her father and herself by the
British Government.
Being in possession of those assurances, I considered it my
imperative duty to act up to them, to the extent of my power,
by submitting to the consideration of the Queen Pomare my
best advice whenever Her Majesty solicited it, whereby I know
that it has been represented, that whilst the Flag of France has
been her Majesty?s ostensible Protector, that that of Great
Britain has virtually executed this duty. But, Sir, even allow-
ing this to be the fact, I feel and know that 1 have never
exceeded the strict limits of my duty as a British Officer, ful-
filling, to the best of my abilities, the assurances of my Sovereign;
and however much Her Majesty, the Queen of Tahiti, may have
felt the truth of this statement, and that her having acted in
accordance with it, may, at times, have been disagreeable to the
Provisional Government, who may have viewed the terms of the
Treaty differently from the Queen and myself, yet I confidently
trust, that I have acted rightly under the circumstances in which
I have been placed, it having been my most anxious desire to do
this; indeed, so sincerely do I hope that I shall have merited
the approbation of my Government, that were I in a precisely
similar position to-morrow, I would closely adhere to the same
course, be the consequences whatever they might.


To refer more particularly to the existing Treaty, your inti-
mate knowledge of diplomacy must shew you. Sir. that, as I
have just observed, it can have no validity in point of fact, until
it has been ratified by your Sovereign, nor, as regards me, not
until it has been acknowledged by mine. Hence, in my coun-
selling the Queen from'time to time, agreeably to Her Majesty?s
requests, I have only been duly carrying out, as I have already
stated, the views and intentions of my Government, by giving to
Her Majesty all the protection of our good offices in the differ-
ences which unhappily exist between Her Majesty and yourself,
as the Representative of the King of the French in these Seas ;
but in all my advice to Queen Pomare, I have uniformly coun-
selled Her Majesty to confine the exercise of her prerogative for
the present, to the government of her own subjects solely, and
this right was irrefutably secured to Her Majesty by the Treaty
against which she so loudly complains, and which, if ratified by
your Government, will at once take from the Queen all her
attributes as regards her Foreign Relations.
The Queen, however, having most solemnly declared, again
and again, and which declarations have been transmitted by her,
both to the King of the French, as well as to the Queen of England,
that it was through fear and fear alone , arising from the
menaces that overwhelmed her, that Her Majesty put her name,
with agonizing reluctance, as she herself states, (and this is con-
firmed by those who were then around her) to the paper that was
sent to her to sign, I feel convinced. Sir, that when your Sove-
reign is made acquainted with this important fact, that His
Majesty will withhold his ratification until further explanation
has been had on this grave question ; and I feel equally satisfied.
Sir, that had you been fully acquainted with all the events that
occurred at that period near the Queen, at Eiraeo, that you never
would have sanctioned such proceedings being used towards Her
Majesty, and the more especially so, whilst you had borne in
mind the delicate situation in which Her Majesty then was,?a
situation which has ever claimed from men of every civilized
country in the world, protection, and kindness, and favour, and
most of all from those of a nation, which stands pre-eminent in
its chivalric gallantry towards that sex, whom we all regard it to
be our highest honour to guard from insult, and to shield from
wrong.
In addition to this painful circumstance, I have further to
observe, that I have been credibly assured, that some days sub-
sequent to Her Majesty having, after many bout s? refusal, at
length, through threats on the one side, and urgent importunities
on the other, put her name to the first document that was for-
warded to her at Eimeo (the Treaty) and which act she did, as


she then declared, and still declares, solely to save her subjects
from the fire of your Guns, a second, (the Proclamation) was
laid before Her Majesty, for her signature, and which, at last.
Her Majesty also signed, through the menacing demands of the
Consul of France, and these insulting threats were offered, it
cannot be forgotten, at a time when the Queen?s accouchement
was hourly looked for, and in truth, within one hour of Her
Majesty?s signature being so unfeelingly and so harshly ob-
tained, she mas actually taken in labour, the pains of which
were hastened, as it is universally believed, by the great distress
of mind, together with the offensive conduct of the French
Consul towards this unhappy, defenceless woman ! And Her
Majesty gave birth to a child, after great suffering, on the
following day.
France?Europe?The World ?Sir, will form its
opinion of these unexampled proceedings, and which you will,
I am assured, alike censure and condemn.
These facts, which you thus become possessed of, and which I
believe, were hitherto unknown to you, will, I feel convinced,
cause you sincerely to deplore the events that I now describe,
in relation to the Queen of this Island, and these events when
brought to the consideration of your generous Sovereign, will, I
am confident, at once induce His Majesty to restore to the Queen
Pomare all those rights which, it is manifest, she most un-
willingly and most reluctantly surrendered Hence I trust you
will, on becoming acquainted with the true state of Her Majesty s
case, unite with me, and with all who have heard of these facts,
in reprobation of the conduct of the individual* who has been
the main instrument of all the evils that have arisen of late in
Tahiti, and who, I am credibly informed, has been heard to say,
on one or more occasions, ?That it should not be his fault if
there was not a war between the two nations !? meaning I ranee
and England. This feeling he seems indeed to have acted up to
in every transaction ; but I sincerely trust and hope that his
self-interested views will, in this and in every other point, be frus-
trated and rendered wholly abortive.
I must now remark, Sir, that, throughout my correspondence
with the Provisional Government, my earnest desire has been,
that the arguments I have adduced in answer to their various
representations, and in support of the different measures that I
may have adopted, should be submitted to you on your arrival,
or earlier if the opportunities offered of forwarding my several
letters to you ; indeed they were written with this sole inten-
tion, and I gave the copies of two of these letters to Commodore
Lavaud with the request that he would transmit them to you on
M. Mourenbout, French Consul at Tahiti.


his reaching Valparaiso, as I have been very anxious that you
should be informed of the view I have taken of the Treaty
made by you with Queen Pomare and her Chiefs in September
last, and this anxiety has been increased upon my learning the
peculiar, and I may add, I believe, the ? unprecedented circum-
stances which, as I have just represented, attended the
Sovereign?s Signature being procured to that Document.
These circumstances will, I consider, in accordance with the
opinions that have been held by the first Writers on Inter-
national Law, render this treaty void, ah initio , for the following
reasons :
Puffendorf, (book iii. chap. vi. sec. 9, states) that, ? Pro-
mises made under fear, that is, under a vehement terror of the
mind caused by a threatening of some grievous mischief are
evidently not binding.?
And again, in section 10, of the same book and chapter, he
says: ? Aristotle calls those only mixt, that is partly voluntary
and partly involuntary actions, which are undertaken for the
sake of declining some mischief which we are like to suffer,
such as throwing g ;ods overboard in a storm to preserve our
lives.?
And in the same section it is expressly said that, ? Fear alone,
invalidates and destroys an obligation,? (3) (See, also, book
i. chap iv. sec. 9 )
And here I should observe, Sir, that the evident mischief that
the Queen dreaded, was your threat to fire on her subjects if
Her Majesty did not sign this Treaty, or pay into your hands
the sum of ten thousand hard dollars within a stipulated
number of hours; whereas this demand of hard dollars was
quite as impossible for the Queen to fulfil, as must have been
well known to the Consul of France, as if you had stipulated
for ten thousand Rubies !
Barbeyrac, who, you are aware, was the translator of, and
commentator on, the works of Grotius and Puffendorf, and who,
it is said has been considered to have approached the nearest
to the true law of nations, gives in his note (3) to the above
extract from Puffendorf, the following quotation from Cicero ;
? Jam illis promissis standum non esse, quis non videt, quae
coactus quis metu quae deceptus dolo promiserit ? Quae quidem
pleraque Jure Praetorio liberantur non nulla Legibus.? De offic.
I. 1., c. 10. (id est.) ?As for promises extorted by fear and
fraud, who sees not that we are not obliged to keep them ? The
Praetor himself frees us from many of them, and the laws from
others.?
Further, Barbeyrac says in his note 5 to section 10. p. 278,
�We must then conclude that, by natural right, all force, and


every kind of violence, direct or indirect, all menaces, and in
general all unlawful influences which oblige men contrary to
their inclination to give their consent, which otherwise they
would not, takes away that liberty, which is necessary to make
an engagement valid, and consequently renders all promises and
agreements in such cases null and void.?
Further, in section 11, of the same book and chapter (1. 2, ?
book iii, chap, vi.) it is stated, ? Those promises then or pacts,
we take to be invalid which a man is compelled to engage in by
the unjust force of the party to whom they are made?For since
he who extorts any thing from another by using unjust terrors,
is by the law of nations bound to restore it, and must con-
sequently make good what the other person loses by such a
forced bargain.?
And again in the same section, it is stated that, � That which
renders the contract unjust is the hard fortune of the sufferer
not the person of the doer.?? ?It would be a foolish and idle
way of acting when we are once got clear of the danger to pay
voluntarily, which we promised upon force.? ?And it is also
said in this section, that, ?A promise made through the com-
pulsion of fear shall not be binding.?
And in section 13, Puffiendorf gives a quotation from Dionys.
Halicar. (1. viii. p. 509, in fin. Edit. Lips.) wherein it is main-
tained that, ?Whatever is extorted from private men, or from
public states, by force and necessity, holds no longer than the
necessity itself continues.?
Grotius, also, (lib. 2. c. xi. s. 7.) says, ? That if he to whom
the promise was made did obtain it of the other party by
putting him in fear, though never so slight, he is obliged to
release the promiser if he desires it.?
Vat tel, in book iv. chap, iv. sec. 37, likewise maintains the
same principle, as he says of a constrained or forced submission.
? I* ever the plea of constraint may be alleged, it is against an
act which does not deserve the name of a treaty of Peace?
against a forced submission to conditions, which are equally
offensive to justice and to all the duties of humanity.? And
further?? If an unjust and rapacious Conqueror subdues a
Nation and forces her to accept of hard and ignominious and
unsupportable conditions, necessity obliges her to submit, but
this apparent tranquillity is not a peace, it is an oppression
which she endures only so long as she wants the means of
shaking it off, and against which men of spirit rise on the first
favourable opportunity.?
And again ?? Although the law of nations aims at protecting
the safety and peace of nations by enjoining the faithful obser-
vance of promises.?It does not favour oppressors.?


With these incontrovertible data, it is, I contend, quite impos-
sible to maintain the validity of the treaty in question, even sup-
posing you had been furnished with the express credentials from
your Sovereign to conclude it; whereas, if lam rightly informed
you never intended to have entered the harbour of Papeete when
you appeared off it, in September last, had not your Consul on his
visit to you found some pretended causes for your adopting the
course which you at length deemed it right to pursue.
This course I may be allowed to say. Sir, appears the more
extraordinary after the letters that were written to Queen Pomare
by Commodore Buglet, your immediate predecessor in command
of the naval forces of France in these seas, only six months be-
fore your arrival at Tahiti, and those of Captain du Bouzee of
? L?Aube,? written but a few' weeks antecedent to your coming
here, and the copies of these are in my possession, in both of
which were expressed the most -perfect satisfaction with all the
last measures pursued by the Queen wdth regard to the subjects
of the French nation in Tahiti,
Amidst the variety of reflections. Sir, which the delicate duties
that I have had to execute at Tahiti during the last four months
will hereafter create in me, that which I shall ever pride myself
the most upon, will be, the temper and forbearance which I feel
that I have uniformly evinced, and this, every disinterested per-
son here will I am confident confirm, in the various difficulties,
and I may almost add offences, (as my letters, to which I have
called your attention, will prove,) that have been offered towards
me by the individual whom I charge with being the sole cause of
all those late misunderstandings that have arisen in this island,
and which, had I been actuated with the same spirit, must in my
belief have produced a war between Great Britain and France.
That this may be long averted, is, I am assured, the best desire
of the Governments of each, and should be that of all who serve
under them.
I consider it right that I should now assure you. Sir, that I am
confident England seeks not, ?desires not, to possess a paramount
influence in Tahiti. All she seeks is to see the sovereign of this
island free and independent, giving the same favour and protec-
tion to the subjects of every state, without shewing undue par-
tiality to either,
I cannot terminate ray letter without conveying to you my
sense of the amicable disposition that has been generally evinced
by the commander of the naval forces here, Captain Yrignaud,
for the maintenance of harmony between our respective flags ;
and but for his praiseworthy measures I shall always believe that
there would have been a rupture between our two nations.
June Bth. ?Having just heard from Captain Garabier of the


? Satellite,? that you are not likely, in his belief, to come imme-
diately to Tahiti, I will take leave to forward to you this letter
by Captain Yrignaud ; and my best hope is that it may be my
good fortune to have the honour of making your acquaintance at
no distant period, even though I may not be fated to do so at
Tahiti.
With the highest consideration,
I have the honor to be,
Your very obedient,
Very humble servant,
J. TOUP NICOLAS,
Commodore.


A LETTER FROM THE QUEEN OF TAHITI
TO QUEEN VICTORIA.
Tahiti, January 23rd, 1843.
My dear friend and Sister Queen, Victoria,
Queen of Great Britain,
Health and peace to you, and saved may you be by
Jehovah, the foundation of our power as Queens of our respective
countries. We dwell in peace from the arrangements made by
our predecessors.
This is my speech to you, my sister Friend, commiserate me
in my affliction, in my helplessness, and in the difficulties in
which my nation is involved with France.
The existing protectorate Government of France in my
dominions, Ido not acknowledge. I knew nothing of what my
Chiefs and the French Consul had done before I wrote to you
by Captain Jones, I being absent at Raiate.
On the arrival of the French Admiral, ? A Du Petit Thouajs,?
the same Chiefs who formerly signed the document requesting
French protection, assembled, viz : ?the three Governors and
? Paraita,? the person who was left in charge at ? Papeete
(Paraita is the root of this great evil) the French Admiral and
the French Consul after having completed their design in signing
the document, sent it over to me at Moorea, through the medium
of my messengers ? Tairapa,? and Mr. ? Simpson? for my
signature.
?Tairapa? said to me, ?Pomare, write your name under
this document, if you do not write your name you must pay
a fine of ten thousand dollars, five thousand to-morrow, and
five thousand the following day, and should the first payment
be delayed beyond two o?clock the first day, hostilities will be
commenced, and your land taken.?
On account of this threat, against my will I signed my name ;
I was compelled to sign it, and because I was afraid, for the
British and American subjects residing on my land (in case of
hostilities) would have been indiscriminately massacred, no
regard would have been paid to parties.
This is the way my Government has been taken from me, and
constituted into a French Government.
My Government is taken from me by my enemies, ? Paraita,?


! ? ?' *
%
* * '


ifflillillllll
? 1508 00062979 5
