

fsl/
O'
fsl/
pi'
fsl/
Pi'
fsl/
Pi'
fsl/
pi'
fsl/
p,c
O'
fsl/
Pi'
fsl/
pi'
fsl/
pi'
fsl/
O'
si/!
Mi-iaiooa PAHS “°\j
si/*
'i^j
Bo * II
'i's
si/*
9
'i'j
'tM
\l/5
'I'J
sl/»
'I'J
\lp
~'°\~i
sl/1
sl/«
ORTHODOXY!* —-
'l'*
sl/«
f'l'J
sl/«
'l<i
sl/ J
sl/«
'l'J
si/!
'IM
si/-
fsl/
O'
fsl/
Pi'
fsl/
CLERICAL ARGUMENTS REFUTED.
Sfe.
O'
fsl/
pi'
fsl/
pi'
fsl/
O'
fsl/
Pi'
fsl/
pi'
fsl/
fsl/
pi'
fsl/
pl~
fsl/
t?l'
?sl/
P' C
fsl/
pl c
the Rev. J. A. DOW lE, recently published.
By THOMAS WALKER.
si/
si/
si/’
'l\
sl/\,
w
s‘/\
'i'jr
siA
>i^r
sl/J
7 '9
'l'f
sl/>
'l'j
si/
'lf
J^c
Vi'
-'Ac\
'l'jT
oyoe/7 /?e/?// and Appendix to the last Letter of
IPIR/ICIB OXTIB SHILXjIXXGi-.
fsl/
pi'
l sl/
pi'
fsl/
Pi'
fsl/
7,s
Published by THOMAS WALKER,
AND FOR SALE BY THE BOOKSELLERS.
si/*
'l'j
si/'
sip
'i9
sl/^
si/!
'l9
si/’
'l'j
Sl/!
'l'|
si/!
'i9




ORTHODOXY
UNMASKED;
CLERICAL ARGUMENTS REFUTED :
AN OPEN REPLY AND APPENDIX TO THE LAST LETTER OF
THE REV. J. A. DOWIE, RECENTLY PUBLISHED.
THOMAS WALKER.
PUBLISHED BY THOMAS WALKER, AND FOR SALE BY THE
BOOKSELLERS.
1882.


TZ . !
. ■


INTRODUCTION.
The present pamphlet is published as an appendix to that pub-
lished by the Rev, J. A. Dowie a few weeks ago, and entitled
“ Spiritualism Unmasked.” His pamphlet contains our cor-
respondence prior to the letter which now appears in this present
form. This letter is simply a reply to the last letter of the
rev. gentleman, and, as such, ought to have appeared in the
pamphlet containing the previous correspondence. The reason
why it did not do so is made clear on page 17, where it will be
seen that it was the unfair decision of the Rev. John Alexander
Dowie and his friends that any further reply of mine should he
excluded from the correspondence. As it is seldom that a wrong
is done without the doers of it being able to invent and believe
some kind of justification for it, in this case it was attempted to
justify the wrong by the assumption that my rev. opponent had
the right to have the last word. To this must be added the fear of
too great cost of publication, and the dread of the correspondence
becoming interminable. As to the cost of publication, I may
mention that I pointed out to the Rev. Mr. Dowie and his friend,
Dr. Singleton, that that need not deter them from doing me
justice, since I would bear the entire cost of publication myself
rather than allow the correspondence to appear incomplete, or his
letter to appear without its refutation. The argument as to the
correspondence becoming interminable, and therefore that I have
no right to reply to his attacks upon me and others, is too absurd
upon the face of it to require serious refutation. His only
plea of justification for his conduct, therefore, resolves itself into


his assumed right of reply. The answer to this is to beTound in
the pamphlet which he himself has published. It is only
necessary for the reader to make a comparison of the letters
therein to perceive that the right of reply—to have the last
say—is indisputably mine. His pamphlet contains about 50
pages of correspondence and 22 pages of introduction, and the
space allotted to me in all the pamphlet does not amount to a
total of 18 pages. This, on the face of it, has a show of
unfairness; but it is necessary to analyze the letters themselves
to make the unfairness fully self-evident. Observe then :
I. The letters of his and mine up to 11th February simply
discuss the merits and demerits of my challenge to him.
11. His letter of 13th February was the first essentially contro-
versial letter. In this he makes an attack upon me and others.
111. My letter of 20th February was a reply to this attack.
IY, His letter of 18th March was a renewal of the attack.
It not only repeats his old charges, and consequently re-opens
the correspondence, but it introduces a number of fresh topics
for discussion, and notably among these, the question of the
causes of the French Revolution and the general views and
character of A. J. Davis.
Y. According to him, I must not—nay, I have no right to—
reply to this renewed attack with so many reinforcements, but I
must submit like a martyr and bear it in silence !
What a splendid general the Rev. J. A. Dowie would make if
he could only get his enemies to believe him. He would burn
the cities of his foes, ruin their homes and hopes, and then
insist that they had no right whatever to say a word or take
up arms against him.
It may be asked why this letter appears alone, and why I do
not republish the whole of the correspondence 1 Chiefly because of
the expense that such a course would inevitably incur; and since
1 endorse the general accuracy of the previous correspondence as
published by the Rev. J. A. Dowie, I thought it unnecessary to
republish it here. That correspondence is now in the hands of
the public, and, so far as it goes, I endorse it; but it requires this
letter to make it complete. Hence I publish this brochure as an
appendix to it.


There may he some, however, who will read this letter who have
not read those previously published. For the sake of such it is,
perhaps, advisable that I enter into a brief explanation of the
origin of the correspondence in the first place. Happening one
day to meet Mr. Strachan, who had had some conversation with
the Rev. J. A. Dowie upon the subject of Spiritualism, I asked
him if he thought that rev. gentleman was ready to defend his
own beliefs, as he seemed so ready to attack the beliefs of others,
Mr. Strachan did not know whether or not he was as ready to act
on the defensive as he was on the offensive, so I asked him
kindly to write to the Rev. J. A. Dowie and ascertain. For
that purpose I worded these propositions :
Resolved —that Orthodoxy is conducive to Morality and
Progress; and
Resolved—that Infidelity is conducive to Morality and
Progress.
The former of these it was intended he should affirm, whilst I
should affirm the latter.
The Rev. J. A. Dowie, instead of answering the questions
of Mr. Strachan, chose very naturally to inquire first from
whom the challenge to discuss these subjects came. Then Mr.
Strachan referred the rev. gentleman to me for an answer. This
inaugurated the correspondence. The preliminary letters were
simply upon the point as to whether a discussion should be held
or not, and if so, what would be the best subject for discussion.
The attack or defence of our particular views was not introduced,
since the proper place for such, in the event of a discussion being
brought about, would be the public platform. It soon became
evident, however, that my clerical opponent had no desire to meet
me publicly, and leaving the point at issue—the advisability of a
discussion—he commenced in his letter of the 13th of February
an attack, not upon my views, not upon the views I had declared
myself ready to defend, in fact not upon the views of anyone, but
upon views which he himself had manufactured by perverting the
statements and misrepresenting the opinions of others.
Although I was anxious to avoid entering upon any subject not
involved in the wording of the propositions of my challenge to
him, I felt it incumbent upon me, in the simple interests of


justice, to reply to his calumnious charges, to correct his many
misstatements, and to state the truth upon the points he had
mooted. These things I did in my letter of 20th Februaiy, and
at this stage I was perfectly willing to have the correspondence
published.
I say I was perfectly willing to have the correspondence pub-
lished ; for, before my opponent had received that letter, he had
already entered into some arrangements for having the preceding
letters published. He had not said a word to me about it, nor
acquainted me, directly or indirectly, in the slightest degree, with
his intentions. After receiving my letter, however, of 20th Feb-
ruary, he was silent for some weeks ; so, bearing in mind the fact
that he had intended publishing before he had received it, I wrote a
note to him on 13th March, informing him that 1 intended publish-
ing the correspondence, zmless he replied further. Of course, had he
objected to the publication of his letters, I should not have carried
out my intention to publish them at that stage. And it must be
remembered, too, that my first step, after forming the intention, was
to acquaint him with it—not, as he did, to make partial prepara-
tions for its being carried out. It is evident, however, that he
did not wish the correspondence published at that stage ■ for, after
informing me of his intention, he re-opened the correspondence in
the letter to which this now published is a reply.
When the Rev. J. A. Dowie called upon me to gain my consent
to the publication of the correspondence in its uncompleted
stage, I strongly protested against such a proceeding being
carried into effect. He informed me, however, that his mind
and the minds of his friends were made up upon the point,
and that they were fully determined to publish the corres-
pondence as it then stood, whether I gave my consent or
not. It was only left to me, therefore, to inform the rev, gen-
tleman that if he did so I should be obliged to denounce the
publication as soon as it appeared, both from my Sunday evening
platform at the Opera House, and through the columns of the
daily press. When his version of the correspondence appeared,
therefore, I was obliged to characterize the pamphlet as it
deserved, and as I had informed my opponent that I would.


In the columns of the Age arid Telegraph for Saturday, 22nd
April, I placed an advertisement which I wrote and published
for the express purpose of guarding the public from his statements
and his version of the correspondence ; and in the faith, mistaken
or otherwise, that desperate diseases require stringent remedies, I,
as I am firmly convinced, and as I can adduce abundan6e of evi-
dence to show, designated his pi’oduction in language perfectly
truthful, though admittedly strong. Strong as the words were,
however, I felt that I could not protect the public by any milder
terms at my command.
Early in the following week appeared a letter from his pen,
published in the above two papers. In that letter, after attempt-
ing to justify his conduct, and making several serious mis-
statements, he called upon me ‘to publicly apologize for the
publication of my advertisement. A day or so after he sent me
the worded form of an apology which he demanded I should sign,
since anything “ short of that [he] would not accept.” Legal pro-
ceedings for a criminal libel were threatened if I refused to do
this, and to accompany it with several acts of ignominious
humiliation. I positively refused to do anything of the kind,
since I was, and am, perfectly convinced that my advertisement
was not only necessary, but perfectly just, under existing
circumstances.
On his receipt of my refusal to apologize, he at once took legal
proceedings, though, instead of taking the matter into the Supreme
Court, as he threatened that he probably would, he contented
himself with a claim for damages to the extent of £250, as
the equivalent—is it fair to suppose ?—of his alleged loss of
reputation, in consequence of the publication of my advertise-
ment.
It was my original intention to go through his introduction to
his pamphlet as I have gone through his last letter, and, after
dissecting it thoroughly, to correct all its perversions, misrepre-
sentations, and matters foreign to the truth ; but as such a course
would necessarily reveal my points of defence in the forthcoming
trial at the County Court to be held in Melbourne on the 7th of
June, I must refrain, and simply content myself with designating
his introduction as a tissue of perversions. This lam happily
able to prove, not only by an appeal to the internal evidence of


.the introduction itself, but by the testimony of witnesses of unim-
peachable veracity.
Knowing that this letter would be published, I have done what
I could to make it as generally interesting as my abilities would
allow, I have aimed at imparting such information as -would be
not only valuable to the Rev. J. A. Dowie, but to general readers
desirous of gaining knowledge upon the points which have been
discussed. If the perusal of this letter, therefore, will supply the
working men, who have not time for laborious and extensive
reading, with facts and arguments by means of which they may be
enlisted in the army of reform and progress, made free from their
superstitions, and rendered more happy and contented with the
lot of life, my labour will not have been in vain, even should the
Rev. J. A. Dowie remain impervious to common-sense. With the
hope, then, that my letter may be fairly read,
I remain, dear reader, yours truly,
THOS. WALKER.
May lOlh , 1882,


ORTHODOXY UNMASKED.
Preston Cottage, Lennox-streefc (North),
Richmond, 28th March, 1882.
Rev. J. A. Dowie.
Rev. Sir, —You commence your letter dated 18th March with
a saying of the ancient Greeks—“ Against stupidity even the gods
are powerless,”—and, judging by the contents of your letter, I
am inclined to believe the Greeks were not far wrong. Thomas
Paine has immortalized a saying which your letter abundantly
justifies : —“ To argue with a man,” said he, “ who has renounced
his reason is like giving medicine to the dead.” It is out of no
ill-feeling towards you personally that I say this, but because
your letter conclusively proves either that you have not the capacity
to reason accurately, or you have temporarily renounced that
capacity. From the beginning to the end of your letter there is
nothing else but misrepresentation of facts, imputation to me of
views and opinions I have not avowed, wholesale libels upon the
Spiritualists and Free-thinkers, and abuse, and insult, and per-
sonal spleen of the rankest order. lam not going (as you have
done) to accuse you of these serious controversial defects, without
even an attempt at substantiation ; but in this letter I intend to
prove that my charges against you are supported by the facts *
and are such as you have forced upon yourself by your disin-
genuous conduct. This I intend shall be the difference between
my letter and yours, that whereas we both bring charges against
each other, you have failed (as I shall show) to support them with
the necessary evidence; whereas I shall give undeniable proof
(I mean, to all fair-minded men) that what I say of you is fully
borne out by the evidence I shall adduce.
It is, therefore, the utmost folly on your part to shelter your-
self from the force of what I have already said, and what I yet
intend to say, behind a convenient theory of your own, to the
effect that because, forsooth, I do not hold your creed, I must be


under the influence of the devil (whose existence you cannot
prove), and therefore only capable of abusing you. Such a
method of argument puts an end at once to all fair play, and
crushes all logic beneath the iron heel of vituperation. To put
me in the same list with the writer of the verse you have quoted
as from the spirits, and along with those who have threatened
your life, simply because I retorted your abuse upon yourself, and
proved that you had really done all of which you had accused me,
in reference to dishonesty of discussion, is not only to neglect the
rules of common courtesy, but to deliberately vilify by malicious
misrepresentation one against whom you can prove no charge,
but that of being, at least, your equal.
Let us, for just one moment, consider this method of venom-
ously stabbing an adversary, which you have apparently
employed with all the skill and experience of a trained adept.
Certain “ spirits ” have honoured you with a composition which
is anything but flattering. The “ scribe ” of the said “ spirit ”
was an inured gaol-bird ; the composition was accompanied by
abusive epithets, which, if I may be pardoned for saying so, look
more like your own concoctions than anything else ; and the
inference from all this is, that only such things can be expected
from Spiritualists! Such is the legitimate outcome, you more
than insinuate, of the teachings of Spiritualism. Now, Rev. Sir,
what would you say if I were to go to the Melbourne gaol and
to insist that all the Christians there were there in direct conse-
quence of Christian teaching, and that lowness of mind and
conduct was all that could be expected from the believers of
your faith ? The good, the wise, the pure, the virtuous I would
not think about —no, only the liars, the thieves, the murderers
were the true Christians. What would you say then ? Why !
that I had grossly slandered and misrepresented you. Now, sir,
is it not evident even to you that this is precisely the course
you have taken ? You instance conduct for which I am
in nowise responsible, which I would unhesitatingly condemn,,
and which is no more the result of Spiritualism or Free-thought
than are your misrepresentations of my arguments or your
personal abuse of me, and you insist upon placing me upon that
level. I ask you candidly, is it fair? Is it honourable? Would
such reasoning be just if applied to yourself? I will ask you
further, are you prepared to defend the conduct of every mur-
derer, thief, and criminal of every stamp, if he calls himself a
Christian? Am I right if I class you and Ned Kelly together,
because the notorious bushranger called himself a Christian ?
If not, why have you not the common honesty to perceive that
you have acted with great injustice in ranking me with all that
is filthy and objectionable in the Spiritualistic ranks ?
You must pardon me for being a little sceptical as to what


you say touching the correspondence you had with the “ spirits ”
in Sydney—or, rather, the letters you received from them. One
of your sentences on this point commences “ Another of your
friends wrote to me,” by which you affirm that the “ scribe ” out
of Darlinghurst, and the writer of another letter to you, were
my friends. lam very sceptical on this point, for I know of no
friend of mine in Sydney who has been in gaol for the crimes you
indicate, or indeed for any dimes at all. Will you please, there-
fore, to mention their names, or otherwise to withdraw the foul
accusation that they were my “ friends ? ” Please also to mention
the name of the “'circlfe,” and a few of the names of the
“ elevated ” Spiritualists who are alluded to in the letter you
have received and quoted. I am anxious for you to do this
because I feel morally convinced that the whole affair is an
imposition—l will not say of yours, but of someone’s intending
to cast contempt upon the doctrines you have undertaken to
destroy. I therefore await your proofs for the various allega-
tions you have made, and which, if proven, I should denounce as
strongly as you.
< Now, what warrant have you for saying—“Yes, your name is
Legion, for you are many, and your devices are many. You are
things to all men, if by any means you can destroy some with
your master’s many wiles, ancient and modern 1 ” Am I a
Christian ? Evidently not, according to your showing. Then, how
can Ibe all things to all men 1 The fact of the matter is, I have
not reajly avowed myself to be anything but an infidel and
in these letters, and these colours I have never changed
for a single moment. What is more, I do not intend to change
them, t( iat least until better evidence than you have brought
forward cpn be advanced to dislodge me from my position. ’Tis
not I, but your own Paul, upon his own admission, who was “ all
things to all men,” an unblushing hypocrite of the worst dye, and
a dissimulator by profession. And I say this, too, without any
desire to detract from any good he may have done, but simply to
state a fact which is supported by New Testament evidence.
You say, that the statement you made that your beliefs were
not in question “is the exact truth;” and you continue—“ The
question upon which alone you were called .in by Mr. Strachan
to help him concerning was ‘ Spiritualism,’ for that was the only
question discussed between him and J[/ sic]. That question
you have cunningly and persistently evaded. Your calling of my
beliefs in question does not matter # jot,; I met a drunken man
who called them in question the other day, and whilst he was
doing so he stammered, staggered, and fell into the gutter.”
Now, in answer to this perversion of truth, let me refer you to
Mr. Strachan’s letter. In that letter did I accept any challenge
of yours, or was it not I who challenged you 1 It was I who


challenged you, which challenge you could accept or reject as yon
felt disposed. The question which Mr. Strachan asked you was r
“ Would you have any objection to enter into a public discussion
on the following [italics mine] :—you to affirm ‘ That Orthodoxy
is conducive to morality and progress/ and Mr, Thos. Walker
. . . to affirm ‘ That Infidelity is conducive to morality and
progress.’” The challenge, therefore, was to you, and if you did
not feel like accepting it, the simple course was open to you of
declining it. But because this challenge to you was connected
with, or arose out of, a conversation you had with Mr. Strachan,
I am abused because I will not defend, in the manner you wish,
what you attacked in his presence. Although in all probability I
should not have challenged you had you not seen Mr. Strachan,
nor Mr. Strachan seen me, yet the propositions which I worded
for Mr. Strachan’s letter, and for which alone I am responsible,
were my generalization of the real issue there is between us, and
my statement of the platform on which I was ready at any time
to meet you. In my challenge I made no reference to Spiritualism
whatever, and I think it was clear and distinct enough to enable
you to understand precisely what it was that I wanted you to
discuss with me. That challenge, which commenced this corres-
pondence, called your beliefs in question; it asked you if you
were ready to support them by evidence, and, in public discussion,
to show the good you believe them to have done. But avoiding
all this, the plainest of evidence, you insist that I shall be bound,
not to my challenge, but to a conversation which you had with
Mr. Strachan when I was absent f Could anything be more
unfair 1 lam to stand by and defend, I say again, not what I
have admitted my willingness to stand by and defend, but the
opinions of Mr. Strachan, or your idea of those opinions, expressed
to you in the course of a conversation upon the subject of
Spiritualism ; and that too, as I say, when I was absent, and did
not even know of your presence in Melbourne !
But, furthermore, you have made an inaccuracy in asserting
that I was “ called in by Mr. Strachan to help him.” Mr.
Strachan did not call upon me to do anything of the kind. The
facts are as I stated them in my letter of February the Bth :
“ I believe I am responsible for the challenge to you. Mr.
Strachan and I were talking over various matters based upon a
conversation he had had with you, and whilst doing so I asked
him if you, were willing to defend yourself in public. As he did
not know, I requested him to ask you the question.” [ltalics
mine.] Therefore you will see, and you ought to have seen when
you received the letter from which I have just quoted, that the
challenge to you, and my letter to you, were not in response to
any request of Mr. Strachan for help, but for the simple purpose
of asking you if you were willing to defend your cause in public.


There the matter might have dropped if you had answered yes
or no; bat as it is, even with the statement of these facts in your
possession you persistently make it appear that I have broken
faith with Mr. Strachan, deserted my cause, and betrayed the
■confidence of my supporters. Once for all let me again inform
you—
Ist. That the challenge arose with me, and was simply my own
suggestion.
2nd. That Mr. Strachan was simply one of the determining
causes of it, and the instrument of its conveyance to you, but by
no means the dictator or requester of it.
3rd. That its deliberate intention was to call your beliefs in
question, and to ask you if you were ready to defend them.
4th. That I have evaded nothing which my challenge contained.
I took it for granted that he who makes, or fain would make,
such sad havoc of the faiths of others would not be loth to defend
his own ; but it seems in this I was mistaken.
Your case of the drunken man with whom you say you would
not discuss questions of religion and morality is beneath you as a
clergyman, and I am half inclined to think that you invented it
for the occasion. Granted that I am as drunk and incapable of
understanding sound arguments on religion and morality as the
man who fell into the gutter, is it likely to cause me to appreciate
the comforts of sobriety to hear you abusing, falsifying, and
slandering me ? To compare a man to a drunkard in the gutter,
because, having examined your faith he is bound by the laws of
evidence to reject it as wanting in fact and proof, is indeed the
trick of the cuttle-fish with a vengeance. It is too late in the
day to beg the question in this manner, and you should leave the
public to judge whether I am sufficiently sober, mentally and
morally, to understand your arguments,
I have already partially replied to the following statement and
accusation:—“ Spiritualism,” you say, “and that alone, is the
question which originated this correspondence ; but for reasons of
your own, which you dare not avow, you shun it.”
I have shown that “ my challenge ” “ and that alone originated
this correspondence,” so it only remains for me further to
point out the libel of the concluding sentence—l shun
Spiritualism for reasons of my own which I dare not avow f
Nothing could be more false than this statement, for not only did
I in my last letter to you say, “ If you will undertake a defence
of your Orthodoxy, I will undertake a defence of Spiritualism
pur et simple, since you appear to be so much afraid to meet
Infidelity in any other form but I positively stated my reasons
for preferring a discussion upon Infidelity rather than upon
Spiritualism. “ Spiritualism,” said I, “in its present form is of
modern origin • it therefore will not so effectually serve me as


will the term Infidelity, in proving that our progress is not due to
the influence of Christianity.”
I have only so far shunned Spiritualism as to wish to stick to
the terms of the challenge,, though I have followed and corrected
you in your tirade against the Spiritualists throughout. But now
I am free to say more, as showing you that there is no reason for
my conduct which I dare not avow. There are many things
passing under the name of Spiritualism which I cannot defend,
arising solely out of the ignorance and imperfection of humanity,
just as there are follies committed by Christians to which you
could not give your sanction. I believe, at present, that a diffusion
of the sceptical spirit, and a cultivation of the habits of freedom
of thought, are calculated to db farimore good than a diffusion ’of
the belief in Spiritualism among men. So this is the task I
have now set myself:—To make, as far as I am able, my fellOw-
men be critical; to cause them to weigh the evidence of all
facts claiming a super-mundafte origin very carefully; and to
reject even Spiritualism itself ’if the facts do not warrant its
acceptance. There is much of Spiritualism that is simply super-
stition—less hprtful and despicable than that which you profess, it
is true, but, nevertheless, superstition. This lam just as much
anxious to destroy as I am that of yours, as I am anxious to have
all superstition destroyed, even to that which lingers yet on the
horizon of my own mentality. Superstition is the construction of
ignorance; our lack of capacity to properly understand the nature
of cause and effect, and their relation to each other. Men are
superstitious, therefore, to the extent that they do not understand
a phenomenon, its relation to its cause, and the nature of the
cause itself. You, for instance, are superstitious when you
attribute what I do to the action of the Devil; for, in doing so,
you have a false idea of causation which determines my conduct,
which causation is none other than my organization, its natural
antecedents, and my surroundings. It is positive knowledge,
verified by repeated tests, and submitted to the most searching
examinations of criticism, which is calculated to remove all
defects of this description ; and it is this kind of knowledge, whiph
has always been preceded’ by the 1 sceptical spirit, and which has
always been condemned as heresy by the Church in all its
divisions, that I was anxious to defend in a public debate. As I
said in my last letter to you, “ The fact of the matter is, the
Freedom op Thought permitted and encouraged by both Deists
and Atheists has liberated humanity from the slavery of Faith,
and opened to them the thousand doors of Truth.” Again, “ I
was prepared to show the good that all forms of Infidelity have
done, and are still calculated to do; for, encouraging (as they do)
the Freedom op Thought, they enwiden the horizon of human
knowledge, and open a myriad avenues to aspiration, discovery.


and progression.” Such, then, are my reasons more fully stated
for preferring the term Infidelity, and which reasons, though stated
briefly in my last letter, you so shamelessly asserted that I dare
not avow.
As to whether you dare to defend your views in public dis-
cussion or not, I leave to the judgment of whoever may chance
to read this correspondence.
I now come to that portion of your letter which reviews my
charge of numerous misrepresentations. The first is about the
arguing upon two distinct platforms at the same time. I asked
you to quote to me from my letters where I had requested such
an absurdity, and your reply' 1 How is that two letters mentioned
“ can leave no other impression upop candid minds than that you
wanted one discussion, in. which the issues would be confused, and
not two distinct discussions ; you n£ver use the pltfral number, as
would be required if Christianity and Infidelity were to be
separately discussed upoh tlieir respective merits.” And notwith-
standing my explanation in my laist letter, you add “ that is my
impression still.” “Indeed,” you say, “your closing'question in
that letter proves it; for you therein say— ‘ Are you willing to
discuss the relative merits of Orthodoxy and Infidelity 1 ’ You
nowhere speak of two distinct discussions.” It appears to me that
you do not know the meaning of the word “ discussion,” which
Ogilvie gives as “ debate, disquisition, the agitation of a point or
subject with a view to elicit truth, the treatment of a subject by
argument.” Now, it is not necessary to have two discussions to
examine the relative merits of two things. You may discuss
whether the rose or the violet is the more fragrant, without two
discussions, may you not ? And in the same manner you may
discuss the relative merits of Orthodoxy and Infidelity in one
discussion. Before me lies a copy of a debate which I held with
the Rev. M, W. Green in the Temperance Hall in March, 1878.
The title page reads “ Report of an Oral Discussion,” &c.
Subjects:—First Proposition.— “ That Christianity is of
Divine origin.” Affirmed by Mr. Green, defiied by Mr. Walker.
Second Proposition. —“ That the Bible supports and parallels
modern Spiritualism in all its phases, teaching, and phenomena.”
Affirmed by Mr. Walker, denied by Mr. GreeU.
Now, you will observe that there was only one discussion, but
two subjects were discussed. The first subject took up five nights,
and the second four nights, but we were not discussing the two at
the same time, as you say we must if we had only one discussion.
There also lie before me a copy of a public discussion between
the Rev. Brewin Grant, B.A, and George Jacob Holyoake, Esq.;
and another between Rev. A. Hatchard and Annie Besant. In
the former, though it is spoken of as only one discussion, there
are no fewer than six different subjects mentioned for discussion


on the “ Contents ” page. In the debate between Mrs. Besant and
the Rev. A. Hatchard there were two propositions mentioned :
Ist. “That the Jesus of the Gospels is a historical character.’'
Affirmed by Rev. A. Hatchard.
2nd. “ That the influence of Christianity upon the world has
been injurious.” Affirmed by Mrs. Besant.
It is now, therefore, all the more evident that you misrepre-
sented me on that point.
I asked you to point out the place where I demanded that you
should discuss with me on “ Infidelity, Materialism, Rationalism,
Atheism, Deism, and a host of anonymous foes of God and
man, &c. ; ” and, after calling this a most audacious question,
you refer me to my letter of February Bth, where, after expressing
my willingness to discuss Infidelity with you, I stated that
“ Infidelity not only covers Spiritualism, but Rationalism,
Atheism, Deism,” &c., &c. With this before me, I still have to
repeat my question, where have I said that I would discuss with
you upon all of these? I am willing to discuss with you on
Infidelity, which Infidelity covers Atheism and Deism, Material-
ism and Spiritualism; but I did not say that I wanted to
discuss, or, as you elsewhere define it, prove, Atheism and
Deism, Materialism and Spiritualism. Again let me quote the
wording of the proposition. I was willing to affirm “ Infidelity
is conducive to morality and progress.” I am still anxious to
undertake the proof of this, though perfectly conscious that there
has been much called Infidelity from which I must dissent. But
to illustrate my meaning more clearly by stating a parallel case.
Supposing I were to affirm that “ Literature has been conducive
to morality and progress,” should I not in that have your
assistance 1 And yet the word “ Literature ” not only covers the
Bible, the Commentaries, “ Foxe’s Book of Martyrs,” and Jonathan
Edwards’s Sermons, but all the heretical, obscene, and mischievous
books that were ever written. It not only includes the epistles
of Paul, but the “ filthy ” book of Dr. Child. What, then,
because I should be willing to prove that “ Literature has been
conducive to morality and progress,” must I necessarily pledge
myself to defend and uphold every book that ever was published 1
Christianity, you will tell me, has been conducive to morality and
progress. But Christianity covers the Romanists and the Shakers,
the Lutherans and the Universalists, the Ranters and the
Doppers, the Salvation Army and the Baptists, the Wesleyans
and the Unitarians. I therefore charge you with being a
Unitarian, a Shaker, and a Ranter, and with being ready to discuss
with me upon these sects. Not just, you say. Quite so; neither
is it just that you should charge me with pinning my convictions
to everything that I admit the word Infidelity covers. “ What
is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander,” and if you charge


i*
me with sanctioning and adopting everything included in the
term Infidelity, I charge you with holding and supporting every-
thing which has ever passed under the name of Christianity,
This also is still seen to be one of your “ daring misrepresen-
tations,” and all the more so, since you were asked to point me
out the very passage where I said I was willing to do what you
said, and you have failed to do it. I, also, leave this point to the
judgment of honest men.
You repeat the slander that I am like a “mercenary soldier;”
and although you say you have again “ fairly proved” it, I must
confess that Ido not see that you even attempt to prove it. You
call my arguments, which went to prove that I could defend the
good of a system without identifying myself with that system,
“ quibbling,” without showing why they were such. You tell me
that your arguments completely confounded me, and I could not
answer them ; and, mistaking all this for logic, you say, “ I now
repeat the charge, which I have again fairly proved.” Evidently
with you, if we may judge by this specimen, to support an asser-
tion needs only more assertion, and to justify a charge, it is only
necessary to invent others ! Such is not the conduct of men with
a good cause.
Such is your habit of misrepresentation that one is almost
driven to believe that it is your ruling one ; for it appears to be
impossible for you to be just to the statements of another. “ Your
imagination,” say you, “or the misguided inspiration of some
mischievous spirit which was befooling you, led you to say that
the orthodoxy which I would have defended would have included
the most absurd and irreconcilable systems of pseudo-Christianity.”
Where did I say this ? Again I want the very passage. I said
nothing of the kind, sir ; and I challenge you to prove your
assertion. What I did say was, “ Whatever your orthodoxy may
be, in defending it you would be obliged to defend those points
it has in common with the rest of the sects called orthodox.” I
did not say your orthodoxy included the different sects which I
mentioned, but that the word orthodoxy covered both your sect
and the rest; that in orthodoxy, in its general sense, and not in
your orthodoxy, were included all the systems cited, and that
your orthodoxy possessing points in common with the orthodoxy
of other people, in defending your orthodoxy at all (in which those
points are included), you must to that extent defend the ortho-
doxy of the whole lot. Surely you cannot be blind to this fact,
for to me it seems too self-evident to be doubted for a single
moment.
Your sneer about “the misguided inspiration of some mischiev-
ous spirit which was befooling you” I treat with the contempt it
deserves. ~<■
Instead of having “utterly failed” “to wriggle out” of the


supposed “inconsistency” which you say you have “proved”
me to he guilty of by stating that Infidelity covers systems of
belief incongruous with each other, I proved in my last letter,
and I have added to that proof in this, that I was perfectly con-
sistent ; and to my arguments you have not even attempted to
reply. Saying I have “ utterly failed,” and that you have
“proved” a thing, is mere self-assertion, your unsupported ipse
dixit —the folly of the egotist, and not the argument of a logician.
You should show why and where I have failed, and how and when
you have proved your charge. If your mbfe saying a thing
proved it to be so, I admit your letter is abundant in proof; but
if the proof of a statement means the proper and necessary
evidence given in its support, then is your, letter, most deficient in
this requisite, and this point is an illustration of the fact.
Basing an argument upon a .misrepresentation of my last letter,
you say, “ Why, if I did sb [ilbfended orthodoxy, which included
absurd and irreconcilable systems of pseudo-Christianity], I would
be as great a mercenary, as a Christian, as you are as an Infidel
or Spiritualist. You say, the Lutherans believe in the ‘real
presence ’as do the Koman Catholics. The Anglicans and others
do not. On this point there is no incongruity. Yet, in defending
orthodoxy, you must defend both that of the Lutheran and that
of the Anglican.”
In this you have not only repeated the charge, without
adducing one iota of proof, that I am a “mercenary Infidel,”
but you have added to its venom. You continue :—“ Now,
apart from the question of fact as to what are the Lutheran and
Anglican doctrines concerning ‘the real presence,’ I must ask
did any rational being ever make a more irrational statement
than that which I have just quoted? Why, of course, I would
only defend what I believed the Scriptures to teach on that or
any question of Christian belief ; and ItHvould be as easy to get me
to defend the dogma of papal infallibility, or any other screaming
absurdity, as the doctrine of transubstantiation in any form.”
You say, “ Apart from the question of filet'as' to what are the
Lutheran and Anglican doctrines.” Do yoti mean to say, sir,
that I have misrepresented these doctrines on this point? If
not, why do you say “ Apart from the question of fact ?” If
you mean to imply that I have, then I demand your proof.
Now, the statement which you quoted was by no means
irrational, but a simple statement of a fact: it is only your inter-
pretation of it which is perfectly irrational. There is nothing in
the quotation to justify you in concluding that I had said in it
that in defending orthodoxy you would have to defend the
doctrine of “ the real presence.” That is a point, I must conclude
from your letter, upon which the Lutherans are not orthodox.
Y"OU would, therefore, not have to defend that, since, in defending


orthodoxy at all, you would defend the Lutherans only so far as
they are orthodox. The same is the case ’with the rest of the
sects. You would only so far defend them as they are orthodox.
To quote my letter again, “ Yet in defending 1 orthodoxy you must
defend both that [the orthodoxy and not the heterodoxy] of the
Lutheran and that of the Anglican.” Could you do otherwise 1
If so, what could you do 1 “ Why, of course,” you answer “ I would
only defend what I believed the Scriptures to teach on that or any
question of ChristianJadHef.” Quite so; but what you believe the
Scriptures to teach, ydtfibpKeve to be sound orthodoxy, and to the
extent that other people believe that the Scriptures teach the same
things which you believe (however differently they may believe
on other points) to that extent are they orthodox, and in defend-
ing your orthodoxy precisely to that extent would you defend
their orthodoxy. And yet, I having made a clear and self-evident
statement of this kind, you ask—Did any rational being ever
make a more irrational statement 1 You then proceed, upon the
mere basis of your own irrational interpretation, fo build a
pyramid of abuse, and you ask—Do you really think that all
men are fools in every sense, as to suppose such conduct (as that
you have mentioned from the evolution of your own inner-con-
sciousness, but by no authority from me) would be tolerated by
any number of men who were not idiots, or, perhaps, Spiritualists 1
I leave such abuse as this to speak for itself, and to bear its own
witness as to your fairness, honesty, and “righteousness ”
In my last letter I demanded that you should quote the very
passage wherein I stated that Spiritualism, Materialism, Atheism,
Rationalism, Deism, etc., were “equally conducive to morality
and progress.” And how have you replied 1 Have you quoted
the paragraph 1 No ! you have not;, you have again sheltered
yourself behind abuse. You speak of- my.“ theatrical rage,” when
I said “ I insist, sir, out the Aery paragraph, the very
words, or forever know that you have told a lie, either wilfully or
in consequence of your 'logical imbecility.” Since you have not
quoted the paragraph, the very words, you stand convicted of a
gross untruth, and my rage, whether “ theatrical ” or otherwise,
being provoked by a knowledge df this fact, is perfectly justifiable.
The following is your attempt to justify your contemptible con-
duct :
“ This, again, is only another cuttlefish kind of trick, an attempt
to escape from your own words in the passage which I have
already quoted, where you say, that the Infidelity you were
prepared to prove is conducive to morality and progress ‘ covers ’
them all; and, therefore, that they are all equally good is to be
fairly inferred [I did not ask you for your inference, but the
paragraph from my letter], and equally conducive to morality and
progress.


»
“ If I were to say ‘ Christianity covers Truth, Faith, Hope,
Wisdom, and Love, and is conducive to morality and progress,’ it
would be fair for you to say that I held all these graces to be
equally conducive to morality and progress, although I held the
greatest of these to be love ; and. it was just in that sense that I
employed the word ‘ equally .”’
Now, firstly, I did not give you a warrant to use the word
u equally ” in any sense ; and, secondly , the sense in which you
have used it appears to me illogical: although several things are
equal, one of them is the greatest. To me such language seems
like nonsense ; and, employing the word as you have employed it
in the illustration above, I most decidedly object to it being
fathered upon me. You, and you alone, are responsible for the
use of the word in any sense, but more especially in the sense of
its meaning that several things are equal although one is the
greatest ! Doubtless you have borrowed this kind of reasoning
from your belief in the Trinity.
Are all things equal which are included in a general term ?
This you say is a fair inference. Then let us give an application
of this inference to test its validity.
The word animal “ covers ” all that exists in the animal
kingdom, but, to specialize, it covers “ man,” “ monkeys,”
“ toads,” “ snakes,” “ donkeys,” and “ periwinkles.”
All things covered by the same general term are equal to each
other.
“ Clergymen ” and “ donkeys ” are covered by the same general
term (animal).
Therefore they are equal to each other !
How would you like such logic applied to yourself 1 If it be
bad logic when applied to you personally, why should it be good
logic when applied to my statement 1
Having quoted from Dr. Peebles’s work, you ask—Do you wish
to elevate the teaching of this “ spirit” to the chief place in your
system ? This spirit is reported to have taught—
(l) There is no God; nothing in the universe of being but
matter, and the negative forces in matter.
(2) Annihilation is true ; or a conscious future existence in
the sense of endlessness is a farce, &c.
(3) Fatalism is a truth. Man is not responsible for any act
of this life. All things, including men and their actions, are
fated, or necessitated to be precisely as they are. Man is a thing
(italics yours).
I will thus state how far I agree with these statements.
Ist. We have no evidence of anything outside, or beyond, below,
or anywise exterior to Nature. Nature, J. S. Mill has defined as
“the collective name for all facts.”* “ For 1 Nature ’ means
“ Three Essays on Religion,” p. 6.


neither more nor less than that which is; the sum of all
phenomena presented to our experience; the totality of events
past, present, and to come.” f Unless, therefore, we agree
that “ Nature ”is “ God,” we have no evidence of a God. Mark
you, I do not say there is no God, but that we have no demonstra-
tion of any.
2nd. Not being able to grasp the meaning of the word “end-
lessness,” no one having lived till then, I cannot pronounce an
opinion upon the view taken by “ the spirit.” He has, however,
as much evidence on his side as you have on yours.
3rd. I believe that all our actions are as much under the
government of law as the return of the seasons or the movements
of a planet. Nothing takes place without a sufficient cause to
produce it.
“ Man is a thing.” Of course he is. Are you of opinion that
he is nothing 1 He must be some-thing, or else he does not exist.
Now, what I have just said is purely upon my own responsibility,
and not in any representative capacity. There may be very few
Spiritualists who will agree with me; and I feel that it is only
fair to those who cannot go so far as I have gone, that I should
warn you against saddling my expressions upon the entire body
of Spiritualists, and charging them with what they may, along
with you, believe are my actual defects. Ido not shrink from
the defence of the views I have expressed, and I am perfectly
willing at any time to state at length why I have adopted them,
but I object to you making it appear that such views are the
general views of Sph’itualists. The very book from which you
quoted (“ Around the World,” by J. M. Peebles) thus introduces
the quotation:—
“ A French Normandy spirit, claiming to have been in the
higher existence some three hundred years, coming by permission
of the circle, advocated these theoretical {italics mine) dogmas,” &c.
After giving the quotation, the author continues—“ These
exploded theories , once popular among Atheists in France, are still
taught by this shrewd, intelligent spirit.” I have italicized the
first three words of this quotation to show you that Dr, J. M.
Peebles regarded these theories as “exploded.” Neither J. M.
Peebles nor his work, therefore, advocates any such views as those
you have cited.
I asked you in my last letter to be kind enough to quote me
“my words” wherein I had confessed that I was “ a Spiritualist,
Rationalist, Materialist, Atheist, Deist, &c., all rolled into one,” and
in requesting this I specially warned you against misrepresenting
me by saying—“ Let me have no construction of your own, but my
words to express such a confession.” After saying that you are
t Huxley’s “Hume,” p. 131.


tired of doing such things (though you have not done it in a single
instance where I requested you), you state you will do so once
more, and this is the way you do it; —
“ In the first sentence of your letter, 11th February, you say—
‘ I am spreading Infidelity.’ Surely, then, you must admit there
you are an infidel. [Quite right. So far, everything is fair.]
In your letter of Bth February you say— ; Infidelity not only
covers Spiritualism, but Rationalism, Materialism, Atheism,
Deism,’ &c., &c. Surely there you admit that you embody all
these systems in your person. [Where do I. say so ? This is
your inference—your construction, not my confession.] As you
are spreading them all [again your own constructioor J which I did
not ask for, and which is anything but a confession of mine],
according to your own confession of 11th February [which simply
stated that I was spreading Infidelity—not everything that is
covered by the term Infidelity. Again your own construction],
and you are, therefore, what I say you are, ‘ all rolled into one
under the name of infidel.’ 5 ’ And without being able to see that
you have done me a great injustice in so putting yous own con-
struction—which js so manifestly unfair—upon my .language, you
ask, Can anything be clearer? No, rev. sir, nothing can be
clearer than the fact that you have misrepresented, me, and that
you are unable to quote the confession of mine which you said I
had made, but which I knew I never had. At the’irisk of being
tautological to excess, I will use the same logic wijth regard to
you once more, that you may feel the force of its folly.
A being belonging to a class by a general term must
also belong to and ba a member of-all classes covered by that
term.
The term Infidelity covers Spiritualism, Materialism, Rational-
ism, Atheism, and Deism.
Thomas Walker is a Rationalist (and, consequently, an Infidel).
Therefore he is a Materialist, Deist, Atheist, Spiritualist, &c., &c.,
all rolled into one !
Such is your argument, stated fairly. Now for its application
to you;
The term animal covers men, donkeys, elephants, snqil^,' and
crocodiles.
Rev. J. A. Dowie is a man (and, consequently, an anfinal).
Therefore he is a snail, donkey, man, elephant, and crocodile all
rolled into one !
Surely you will not admit that this logic is sound ? And yet
it is your own !
After getting through the charges of “ misrepresentation,” none
of which you have answered, but all of which you have justified
by your conduct, you do a little preaching. Since your little
sermon is neither useful, sensible, nor eloquent, and since I


warned you in my last letter against repeating sucli silly nonsense in
the place of argument, I shall pass it by without further comment.
You say that I have slandered Paul by referring you to
Romans iii. 7, in proof of his admission that he had told a lie;
“ for,” you argue, “ if the Bth verse is read with it, seeing it is a
part of the same sentence, it is at once seen that he is speaking
concerning false charges made against him—thipgs ‘slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say.’ He no more imagines
that if he told a lie it would abound to the glory of God, than he
believes that it would be right to say, ‘ Let us do evil that good
may come.’ He says, concerning those who practise such iniquity,
‘whose condemnation is just,’and that condemnation rests upon
you ; for here you are caught in the very act of slanderously
reporting what you must know to be false.”
Now let us examine this passage, not only in the light of its
own expressions, but in the light, also, of other admissions of
Paul. The passage to which I referred you reads “ For if the
truth of God hath more abounded through my lie \into his glory,
why yet am I also judged as a sinner?”
Now, nothing can be plainer than that Paul here says, in other
words—l have told a lie ! Granted. But if the truth of God
hath more abounded for it, why do you blame me ? The prin-
ciple is distinctly laid down, that if the glory of God is to be
gained, we should not be blamed for our lies ! It is true that, in
verse 8, he calls it a slanderous report to affirm, “as some do,”
that he and others say—Let us do evil that good may come.
But still the fact remains that, in verse 7, he argues that if his lie
hath abounded to the glory of God, he should not he judged for it
as a sinner , and no amount of word-twisting can exculpate him
from the charge. But lest you may conclude that this is simply
my assumption, formed in the heat of controversy, I will quote to
you the language of the Rev. H. C. Y. Leibbrant, formerly a cler-
gyman of the Dutch Reformed Church, afterwards pastor of the
Free Protestant Church at Graaff Reinet, South Africa, and now
the keeper of the Cape colonial archives. He thus writes, in a
letter to the Graaff Reinet Herald :—“ Men of great learning and
irreproachable orthodoxy, like the late Professor Van der Palm, of
Leyden, who, as is well known, translated the whole Bible into
the Dutch language, and which translation is held to be one of
the very best in the world [italids mine], felt this difficulty, and
could not render the passage as it is ordinarily done. He trans-
lates ;— ‘ If God’s truth is more abundantly glorified by my lie,
would it not follow that I could not be condemned as a sinner ?
and if the latter were the case, would we not then (as we are
libelled, and as some say we teach) be permitted to do evil that
good might result, though those who hold the doctrine are justly
punished ? ’


“If we follow the argument of Paul, we find him saying that
though many of the Jews were unbelievers, that unbelief would
not influence the faithful character of God towards man. Though
all people are liars [How could all people be liars if Paul were
not I ?—T. W.] God remains the same truthful being, that the
latter part of the 4th verse of the 51st Psalm may be always
applicable to him. Again, if man’s sins are but additional proofs
of the righteousness ( i.e ., the perfect character) of God, he most
certainly cannot, by the rules of common sense, be considered
unjust when he reveals his anger. Thus far the Apostle is per-
fectly intelligible; but, if he has hitherto spoken in general
terms, he now at once refers to himself, and utters the words
complained of—viz., that i/his lie has furthered the glory of God,
why should he be judged as a sinner because of that lie? Yan
der Palm saw it plainly, that if Paul really did say so, he likewise
did lay down, in spite of his denial to the contrary, the doctrine
condemned in Loyola. But, as Yan der Palm took it for granted
that the Apostle could not possibly have spoken as he is made to
speak in the Greek Testament and the authorized versions, he
gives the translation as quoted by me.”
I have, therefore, the authority of no less a master than the
orthodox professor of Leyden University—the learned Yan der
Palm—for the view I have taken. If Paul did utter the words
of the 7th verse of Romans in the chapter quoted (and they are
to be found in the Greek, the version of King James, and the late
Oxford revision), then did he likewise lay down the doctrine
condemned in the founder of the Jesuits ! You must, therefore,
either prove that Paul did not employ the words attributed to
him, or else admit that he justified lying when he thought he
could add to the glory of God thereby.
I have already quoted a portion of the text where Paul says he
is all things to all men, which he could not be without lying to
some. I will, however, quote the text more fully :
“ And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the
Jews; to them that are under the law, as under the law, that I
might gain them that are under the law; to them that are
without the law, as without the law (being not without law to
God, but under the law to Christ), that I might gain them that
are without the law. To the weak became I as weak, that I
might gain the weak. lam made all things to all men, that I
might by all means save some,”—(l Cor. ix. 20-22.)
In order to save some, Paul here admits that he pretended to
some to be a Jew, to others not a Jew ; to some to be under the
law, to others without the law ; and I ask you how could he pos-
sibly do so without telling or acting a falsehood to one class or
the other? If he was a Jew, then when in the presence of those
who were not Jews he made it appear that he was not one, he


was dishonest; he played the hypocrite, and he falsified his real
character. The same argument applies vice vend. Might not
Paul be alluding to some such dissimulation as this when he said,
according to the revised version, “ But if the truth of God, through
my lie, abounded unto his glory, why am I also still judged as a
sinner?” In the sixteenth verse of the 12th chapter of 2nd
Corinthians, he further admits—‘‘Nevertheless, being crafty, I
caught you with guile.” * -
Ogilvie gives the synonyms of “crafty”'as “cunning, artful,
wily, sly, fraudulent, deceitful, subtle.” (I have taken the liberty
to di'aw your attention to the last three words by italics.)
“Guile” is defined as “craft, cunning, artifice, duplicity,
deceit, wile, subtlety, fraud ” (my italics). I should therefore have
the high authority of John Ogilvie, LL.D., if I thus paraphrased
the admission from- Paul which I have just quoted—“ Neve-
rtheless, being deceitful, I caught you with fraud.” I neither did
an injustice to Paul nor you, therefore, when I advised you “not
to follow Paul too closely in this respect.”*
In speaking of what you are pleased to call my “approval ” of
Voltaire, Paine, and Bradlaugh as liberators of mankind, which I
did not express as such only in so far as they represented Deism
and Atheism, but which I will not disavow, inasmuch as I do
* I had thus far completed my reply to the Rev. J. A. Dowie’s letter
when he, in company with Dr. Singleton, called upon me to request my con-
sent to the publication of the correspondence, without my reply. His plea
was chiefly that, as he was to leave Melbourne very shortly, should the
correspondence continue he would be unable to remain until its completion,
as, according to his view, it would, unless stopped just when he wished
it '—i.e., when he had made a shamelessly abusive attack upon me and the
subjects with which my public life has been associated, and before any reply
to his arguments could be made—swell to a bulk too costly for publication.
His further plea was that he had the right to the last word, inasmuch as
I wrote the first to him; and, so he argued, his letters had simply been in
reply to mine. I pointed out to him how unfair his offer w T as. since it was
/ who was replying to his attacks upon me, and acting on the defensive,
and not vice vend. His letter of 13th February attacked me personally
and misrepresented my views and position, and the view's and position of
others, most maliciously. My letter of 20th February was a reply to that.
At that stage I was perfectly whiling to have the correspondence published,
and to gain his consent or refusal thereto, I wrote to him, stating that it
was my intention to publish it unless he replied to my last letter. After
waiting for nearly a month I finally received the letter of 18th March. In
that letter, not only (as the reader will see) are the old charges repeated,
without the necessary proof of them being given, but new ones are brought
forw'ard. And to these the Rev. J. A. Dowie has the impudence to
request that I will not reply! Could his cowardice, his unfairness, and
the weakness of his position he better proved than by his own disingenuous
conduct ? I therefore warn all readers against any version of this corres-
pondence published by him, since any such version is published without
my consent, is only one-sided, and does not contain my last letter in reply
to his of the 18th March. ’ ‘ * , ‘


greatly approve of the labours of these men, you repeat a charge
that is often made, in these words :
“ The scenes of the reign of terror in France not a century ago,
when Infidelity established its worship of the goddess of reason,
in the form of a shameless woman of the streets, and ruled by the
guillotine, until the land was deluged in blood, by fiends like
Robespierre and Marat—these are triumphs of Paine, Voltaire,
Rousseau, Diderot, and all that horrid infidel crew who then
manned the slave-ship of hell, when it bore the name of ‘ the
Age of Reason.? ”
By those who are interested in. maintaining that all that is bad
must necessarily be the result of Infidelity, it is quite natural to
attribute allthe crimes of the French Revolution to the spread of
Infidelity; but whoever will go to the trouble to examine the
facts in an unprejudiced mood will see that the crimes of that
memorable epoch were the result of a too sudden rebound from
the tyranny and heartless despotism of the Church and State.
True, Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot, and Paine did much to
produce the rebound by cutting the chains that so weightily
pressed upon the people, but only the tension of the chains, and
the force of the swelling powers of liberty; the oppression by
the privileged classes, and the inherent tendency towards freedom
of the downtrodden people, can fairly be charged with the excesses
of September and the evils of the guillotine. People had been
driven to madness by poverty, oppression, and despair, and when
at last the door of liberty opened partially to them, we need not
wonder if they jostled each other in the entrance, forced open the
door without decorum, and, in the heat and excitement of the
moment, committed follies and crimes for which more sober men
would blush. The tiger had long been goaded, he had been lashed
by his heartless masters into sullen fury, starved and branded,
and set to tasks beyond his strength ; but at last he broke his
chain, and in the sweetness of revenge he forgot the sentiment of
justice, and perpetrated deeds of stai’tling cruelty. The flood
had been dammed too long, its waters had swollen to overflowing,
until at last, with a mighty rush, the flood-gates were cleared
away and the unguided torrent flowed devastatingly onward.
By such images may we conceive the true nature of the French
Revolution, which was nothing else but an uprising of the people
against despots, a struggle for human rights, a battle for the
cause of Humanity. During the battle, it is true, there was
much of excess and abundance of fault, but its intention was
good, and on the whole it benefited the world far, far more than
it injured it. The condition of France before the Revolution is
almost, in our day, inconceivable. Two hundred and fifty
thousand tax-gatherers were wringing from the poor the pittance
of their toils; men were dragooned into the army, taken to labour


on the roads, and when starving were told by the minister Foulon
that they could “eat grass.” The nobles, the clergy, and the
king rioted in pompous luxury, whilst the peasants were dying of
hunger, doing the work of cattle, dragging their own ploughs
through their fruitless fields, or being shot for sport from the
tops of houses. Whilst Louis XV. counted his beads and violated
young girls; whilst Madame de Pompadour and Madame du
Barry held the reins of the State; whilst the clergy, sworn to
celibacy, were giving sumptuous suppers and entertaining prosti-
tutes ; whilst the head of the Church was represented by men
most hopelessly corrupt and profligate, the populace was wander-
ing through France, from city to city, asking for bread and
receiving a stone! Turned into a barren pasture, the people
were like sheep, fleeced, till the very skin was cut, by the court,
the nobles, and the clergy. And yet you wonder at the
Revolution, and are horror-stricken at its crimes ! Not a word
against the Christian king, Louis the Well-beloved ; not a word
against the infamous debaucheries of the French clergy; riot a
word about the cruel despotism of the nobles and the collectors of
the taxes. No ! the villanies of these were committed whilst
they waved unto the breeze the Christian flag, therefore they
may be safely forgotten ; but the lesser crimes committed by the
encouragement or sanction of such men as Danton, Robespierre,
or Marat, being committed in a fit of intoxicated zeal for Liberty,
should be treasured in the memory for condemnation, for eternal
hate, for a ready scarecrow, and as a whip by which to rouse the
sluggish Christian hearts to the full bent of a dire revenge.
Whatever excesses Christianity, in her maturity, may have
committed, they are excusable, for “ the flesh is weak ; ” but the
follies of Liberty, whilst she is yet an infant, must never be
pardoned, but held up for ever as the detestable progeny that
naturally issue from her womb !
Lord Macaulay, in his essay on Milton, speaks forcibly to
such as you, who despise Liberty because she has made some
mistakes in her first struggles with the demon Tyranny.
“ Ariosto,” says he, “ tells a pretty story of a fairy, who, by
some mysterious law of her nature, was condemned to appear at
certain seasons in the form of a foul and poisonous snake. Those
who injured her during the period of her disguise were for ever
excluded from participation in the blessings which she bestowed.
But to those who, in spite of her loathsome aspect, pitied and
protected her, she afterwards revealed herself in the beautiful and
celestial form which was natural to her, accompanied their steps,
granted all their wishes, filled their houses with wealth, made
them happy in love and victorious in war. Such a spirit is
Liberty. At times she takes the form of a hateful reptile; she
growls, she hisses, she stings. But woe to those who in disgust


shall venture to crush her ! And happy are those who, having
dared to receive her in her degraded and frightful shape, shall at
length be rewarded by her in the time of her beauty and her
glory 1 .” s
This , same author, who cannot be accused of being an Atheist,
in the same essay, speaking of the English Revolution, said :
“We deplore the outrages which accompany revolutions ; but the
more violent the outrages, the more assured we feel that a
revolution was necessary. The violence of these outrages will
always be proportioned to the ferocity and ignorance of the
people ; and the ferocity and ignorance of the people will be
proportioned to the oppression and degradation under which they
have been accustomed to live.”
Nor is Macaulay alone in this view of the question. Had I
space, I could quote from Lamartine, Michelet, Carlyle, Besant,
and a host of others in his support, who give illustrations taken
from the French Revolution itself. The great historian of
civilization, Henry Thomas Buckle, who was anything but an
Atheist, assures us that, “In France, as is well known, the
movement was extremely rapid; the old institutions, which were
so corrupted as to be utterly unfit for use, were quickly destroyed,
and the people, frenzied by centuries of oppression, practised the
most revolting cruelties, saddening the hour of their triumph by
crimes that disgraced the noble cause for which they struggled.
All this, frightful as it was, did nevertheless form a part of the
natural course of affairs ; it was the old story of tyranny exciting
revenge, and revenge blinding men to every consequence except
the pleasure of glutting their own passions.”
I would advise you, reverend sir, to read in the second volume*
of the work from which I have just quoted, what Buckle points
out as the early and the proximate causes of the French Revolu-
tion. He conclusively proves, by an exhaustive appeal to the
facts, that for long ages the people of France had been living in
a condition of abject wretchedness and servitude, that the
condition of society was utterly corrupt, and that the people
were hampered at every turn by the arbitrary interference of the
governing classes. Under Louis XIV., literature was patronized
by the Court, and from that moment became cringing and
imbecile. Independence of inquiry, originality of research, fear-
lessness of expression, and the truth about society and the throne
became impossible, and the mighty products of genius itself
“ withered in the sickly atmosphere of the Court.” In the midst
of universal corruption, tyranny, and decay, even the intellect of
the greatest grovelled in the dust and fed upon insipid garbage.
But, at last, the ablest of the French took to the habit of visiting
* The edition of Longmans, 1873.


England, and there they came in contact with the startling
freedom of our institutions, and more than all, the glories of our
literature ! Thus it was that “ during the two generations which
elapsed between the death of Louis XIV. and the outbreak of
the Revolution, there was hardly a Frenchman of eminence who
did not either visit England or learn English -; while many of
them did both.” By this means it was that —though “during
two generations no Frenchman ,had : been. Allowed to discuss with
freedom any question, either of politics or religion ” —it eventually
“was English literature which taught the lesson of political
liberty” to them. They to their own country enamoured
with the freedom of ours, which had not been won without our
struggles, and even bloodshed and regicide; this freedom they
desired to transplant to their own benighted land, that it, too,
might be the home of the learned, prosperous, and free ! Alas !
for the wisdom of the people in power, the moment these men
began to exhibit the slightest freedom in their literary expressions,
they were persecuted most shamefully, Lettres de cachet, issued
in profusion to the privileged orders, gave warrant for the
opening of the harsh jaws of the Bastille, into which the unfor-
tunate authors were thrust without remorse or pity. Clarke’s
“ Letters on Spain” were suppressed simply because they con-
tained an allusion to the passion of Charles 111. for hunting,
thereby reflecting, as was supposed, on the same passion in
Louis XV. La Bletterie was excluded from the Academy
because he had ventured to assert that the Emperor Julian
“ was not entirely devoid of good qualities.” Fr6ret was immured
in the Bastille because he affirmed “ that the earliest Frankish
chiefs had received their titles from the Romans.” Lenglet du
Fresnoy was four times punished with imprisonment in the
Bastille on the shallow pretence that his offence had been the
publishing of a “ Supplement to the History of De Thou.”
Rousseau was driven from France, The work of Helvetius on
“ The Mind” was suppressed, burned by the common hangman,
and the author compelled to retract his opinions. The works of
Lanjuinais and Linguet suffered a similar fate. Delisle de Sales,
for writing a work on “ The Philosophy of Nature,” had his
property confiscated and himself sentenced to perpetual exile.
Desforges, “ having written against the arrest of the Pretender
to the English throne, was, solely on that account, buried in a
dungeon eight feet square, and confined there for three years.
This happened in 1749. And in 1770, Audra, professor at the
College of Toulouse, and a man of some reputation, published
the first volume of his ‘Abridgment of General History.’
Beyond this the work never proceeded; it was at once condemned
by the archbishop of the diocese, and the author was deprived of
his office. Audra, held up to public opprobrium, the whole of


his labours rendered useless, and the prospects of his life suddenly
blighted, was unable to survive the shock. He was struck with
apoplexy, and within twenty-four hours was lying a corpse in his
own house.”
These are not one tithe of the persecutions which were heaped
on literary men, but they are sufficient to show the ignorance and
despotism of the “ powers ” that were.
I have alluded to the treatment of Rousseau, one of the
personages you mentioned, and I now desire to show you the
treatment to which Diderot and Yoltaire were subjected.
Diderot happened to write a work in which he said “ that
people who are born blind have some ideas different from those
who are possessed of their eyesight.” “ Whether,” as Buckle
says, “they suspected that the mention of blindness was an
allusion to themselves, or whether they were merely instigated by
the perversity of their temper, is uncertain; at all events, the
unfortunate Diderot, for having hazarded the opinion, was
arrested, and, without even a form of a trial, was confined in the
dungeon of the Vincennes.”
As to Yoltaire, the treatment of this one of the greatest
Frenchmen of the eighteenth century,* was not only a disgrace to
France, but to humanity itself. For an imaginary offence (said
to be composing a libel on Louis XIY.), which he never com-
mitted, without even a pretence of a trial or the smallest particle
of proof, he was thrown into the Bastille, and kept a prisoner
there for more than twelve months. Scarcely was ho relieved
when, at the instigation of the impudent, dissolute, and ignorant
nobleman (sicJ, Chevalier de Rohan Chabot, he was publicly
whipped in the streets of Paris, confined again for six months in the
Bastille, and ordered at the end of that time to leave the country.
This was because Voltaire had replied to the insolent query of
Chevalier Rohan, “ Who is that young man who talks so loud 1 ”
by the retort, “My lord, he is one who does not carry about a
great name, but wins respect for the one he has.” f Though he
had been granted permission to publish his work on Charles
XII., as soon as it was printed the history was forbidden to be
circulated. When he published his work called “ Philosophic
Letters,” it was ordered he should be again arrested, and that his
work should be burned by the common hangman.
Now, can it be wondered that, under such provocation, intellect
should rise against its persecutors 1 On the one hand were
power, wealth, tyranny, and ignorance, and on the other were a
keen sense of justice and the intellect of France. Intellect
arrayed itself first against the abuses of the Church, and then
* See my pamphlet “Voltaire, the Infidel.”
t Morley’s “Life of Voltaire,” p, 52.


against those of the State, and in the end the victory rested with
intellect. Macaulay thus speaks of these men, who were on the
side of liberty of thought:—“ They were men who, with all their
faults, moral and intellectual, sincerely and earnestly desired the
improvement of the condition of the human race; whose blood
boiled at the sight of cruelty and injustice ; who made manful
war, with every faculty which they possessed, on what they con-
sidered as abuses; and who on many signal occasions placed them-
selves gallantly between the powerful and the oppressed.
When an innocent man was broken on the wheel
at Toulouse—when a youth, guilty only of an indiscretion, was
beheaded at Abbeville—when a brave officer, borne down by public
injustice, was dragged, with a gag in his mouth, to die in the
Place de Greve—a voice instantly went forth from the banks of
Lake Leman which made itself heard from Moscow to Cadiz, and
which sentenced the unjust judges to the contempt and detestation
of all Europe.” *
Under the sting of persecution, the forces of intellect rallied,
and every department of inquiry, just prior to the Revolution,
became possessed by the ablest men. Science unfurled her white
wings to the breeze, and she sailed through the seas of eloquence
with her cargo of many discoveries. The condition of society
became changed; wealth and birth no longer held a monopoly of
respect, but were vanquished by the rivalry of the intellect of
man.
“The Hall of Science,” says Buckle, “is the temple of
democracy. Those who come to learn confess their own ignorance,
abrogate in some degree their own superiority, and begin to per-
ceive that the greatness of men has no connection with the
splendour of their titles or the dignity of their birth; that it is
not concerned with their quarterings, their escutcheons, their
descents, their dexter-chiefs, their sinister-chiefs, their chevrons,
their bends, their azures, their gules, and the other trumperies of
their heraldry; but that it depends upon the largeness of their
minds, the powers of their intellect, and the fulness of their
knowledge.”
These events were truly the precursors of the French Revo-
lution, and were such as rendered the Revolution possible.
Precisely to this extent was the Revolution the effect
of Infidelity ;it was aided by freedom of thought. As Annie
Besant most truthfully says—“ Free thought did aid in bringing
about the Revolution. It was one of the impelling causes—and
why ? Because it taught the people to use their brains ; because
it led them to think ; because it roused them to a consciousness of
* Essay on “Ranke’s History of the Popes,” p. 566.


their degradation, ,az)4 awoke the sense of shame. The free-
thinkers made freedom possible by unveiling her beauty to the
eyes of France, Their passionate cry for liberty—liberty of
thought, liberty of expression, liberty of action—was echoed back
from a thousand hearts,- t *. . But it is false—shamelessly
false—that the bloodshed of tihe Revolution was due to the free-
thought which made the Revolution possible. The bloodshed was
simply the reaping of the seed of misery sown broadcast by the
throne, by the aristocracy, by the church. The bloodshed was the
revenge of the suffering, cruel and brutal as was the oppression
which occasioned it.”
These historical facts you have chosen to forget, in order that
you may follow in the footsteps of those who are so well described
by the language of Burke, in his “ Letter to a Peer of Ireland on
the Penal Laws against Roman Catholics” : —“ From what I have
observed, it is pride, arrogance, and a spirit of domination, and
not a bigoted spirit of religion, that has caused and kept up these
oppressive statutes. I am sure I have known those who have
oppressed Papists in their civil rights exceedingly indulgent to them
in their religious ceremonies, and who really wished them to con-
tinue Catholics, in order to furnish pretences for oppression.
These men never saw a man (by converting) escape out of their
power but with grudging and regret.” And so it is with those
who slander the Infidels. They rejoice that there are such, in
order that they may gratify their propensity to abuse and injure
them ; and sorry lam to say it, but the evidence warrants me in
believing that you follow close upon their heels. Like those
obnoxious birds of carrion, such men soar high in the atmosphere,
that they may scent the foul and putrid evils of humanity,
pounce down upon them, and glut themselves to surfeiting;
and then, made sick by their loathsome food, they vomit their
abominable filth under the very eyes of the virtuous and the
pure. Having so emptied themselves, they charge virtue
with their own act, and lay their own evils at the door of the
innocent!
How truly this is the case with those who charge all
the crimes of the French Revolution to the freethinkers,
we may learn from the following comparisons of Herbert.
Spencer, in which the crimes you have mentioned and those of
Napoleon are contrasted. The comparisons are thus intro-
duced :
“ The bloodshed of the Revolution has been spoken of with
words of horror, and for those who wrought it there has been
unqualified hate. About the enormously greater bloodshed which
these wars of the Consulate and the Empire entailed, little or no
horror is expressed ; while the feeling towards the modern Attila
who was guilty of this bloodshed is shown by decorating rooms


with portraits and busts of him. See the beliefs which these
respective feelings imply :
“Over ten thousand deaths we
may fitly shudder and lament.
‘ ‘ As the ten thousand were slain
because of the tyrannies, cruelties,
and treacheries committed by them
or their class, their deaths are very
pitiable.
“The sufferings of the ten thou-
sand, and of their relatives, who
expiated their own misdeeds and the
misdeeds of their class, may fitly
form subjects for heartrending
stories and pathetic pictures.
“That despair, and the indigna-
tion of a betrayed people, brought
about this slaughter of ten thousand
makes the atrocity without pallia-
tion.”
‘ ‘ Two million deaths call for no
shuddering or lamentation.
“ As the two millions, innocent of
offence, were taken by force from
classes already oppressed and im-
poverished, the slaughter of them
need excite no pity.
“There is nothing heartrending
in the sufferings of the two millions
who died for no crimes of their own
<or their class ; nor is there anything
pathetic in the fattjs.of the families
throughout Europe,froin which the
two millions were taken.
“ That one vile man’s lust of
power was gratified* through the
deaths of the two millions greatly
palliates the sacrifice of them.”
To this, after some comments, he adds :—“ While the names of
the leading actors in the Reign of Terror are names of execration,
we speak of Napoleon as ‘ the Great,’ and Englishmen worship
him by visiting his tomb, and taking off their hats.” *
I think, rev. sir, if you admit the validity of the evidence I
have brought forward—and I do not see how it can be disputed,
based, as it is, upon the best of authorities f —you cannot fail to
perceive that you have done the men you mentioned a great
wrong. r
Voltaire, le sauveur des Colas; Thomas Paine, who had the
manliness to say, “ The world is my country—to do good my
religion ; ” and Chas. Bradlaugh, who in the midst of a torrent of
noble eloquence exclaimed, “ You ask, is Secularism an inspirer
of sympathy; will it tend to regenerate the world ; will it act as
a purifier of the lives of men; will it make a man fling himself in
the forlorn hope 1 Yes it will, and it has done so with me. Name
one struggle for liberty within the last twenty-five years in which
I have not engaged, one great reform for which I have not
* “ The Study of Sociology,” pp. 158, 159.
t My authorities for the facts connected with the French Revolution are
“Michelet,” p. 61 ; Lamartine’s “History of the Girondists,” Vol. 1., Book
1., secs. 5-23 ; “ Carlyle,” Vol. 1., Book 1., chap. ii.,p. 12, chap. iii., p. 14,
chap, iv., pp. 19, 20 ; Buckle’s “ History of Civilization,” Vol. 1., p. 484, Vol.
11., pp. 215, 224, 226, 231, 232, 233, 238, 239, 240, 241 ; Annie Besant’s
“ Six Lectures on the French Revolution,” pp. 14-22 ; Macaulay’s “ Essay
on Milton,” p. 19 ; “ Essay on Ranke,” p. 566 ; Morley’s “ Life of Voltaire,
pp. 334-346; Voltaire’s “Philosophical Dictionary,” and E. B. Hamley’a
“ Voltaire.”


laboured ? When your bishops were voting for an unjust war,
when your Christian Jingoes came with bludgeons in favour of
war into Hyde Park, when the clergy were silent, it was I, the
Secularist, who lifted up my voice for peace at the peril of my
life. It inspires us to try, because in the very inspiration, in the
trying, we have a happiness of which you can know nothing
. . . . We assail the fort of bigotry, of prejudice, of
ignorance; the fort held by those who call actions immoral because
they do not comprehend them; who denounce those who toil for
the greatest happiness of the community without trying to emulate
them; who invent, and then blame us for the invention; who take
our views from our antagonists, and not from ourselves ” *
—these men, sir, I repeat it, have done more good for the world
than all the Calvins, Luthers, and Melancthons that ever
lived,”
I have dwelt upon this point at some considerable length
because it is a point on which the clergy often dwell, and which
they are constantly turning to account as a whipper-in to their
churches. I now leave it to the judgment of our readers to con-
clude whether you or I have been the more just as to the facts
connected with these men and the French Revolution,
At a few pages further on in your pamphlet, I observe that,
following in the usual course of those who feel it incumbent
upon them to put down Infidelity at any price, you have allowed
your malignity to get the better of your knowledge, to altogether
usurp its place, or perhaps to be used because knowledge was
altogether wanting. You make the startling affirmation that the
teaching of Bradlaugh “ commends similar abominations” to
those recorded in the 38th chapter of Genesis. Name me a
work of Bradlaugh’s, or a single utterance of his , where he
commends anything so horrible. lam fairly acquainted with the
views held by the intrepid editor of the National Reformer , but I
never yet met with a single expression of his which would
warrant you in bringing against him so atrocious a charge. On
the contrary, Mr. Bradlaugh, throughout his career as a reformer,
has advocated a system of morality compatible with the highest
refinement and the purest virtue of both man and woman. I,
therefore, challenge you to point out where he has ever com-
mended the abominations or similar ones to those recorded in the
38th chapter of Genesis ! I insist that you shall support this
charge with the necessary evidence from Mr. Bradlaugh’s own
writings.
In continuation of the same injustice, you still further falsify,
either through ignorance or prejudice, the facts concerning him,
when you say that, for commending the abominations alluded to,
* Debate with Dr. M ‘Cann.


“ certain of his obscene works have been suppressed by law."
Name the works, sir 'I I suppose you are alluding to the little
work of Dr. Knowlton. If so, you should have mentioned the
fact, and have clearly pointed out that the work suppressed was
not Bradlaugh’s. Perhaps you did not know that the work was
not his, and that he was simply one of the publishers. Then I
answer, in such a case your ignorance is most culpable, for it is
employed as a potent weapon to the injury of a fellow being. If
you did know that the suppressed work was written by Charles
Knowlton, M.D., your guilt is all the deeper in saying it was a
production of Charles Bradlaugh. Charles Bradlaugh and Annie
Besant were, as I have just intimated, the publishers of the
work in question, but not the authors of it.
But why did they publish it 1 you ask. I will permit Mr.
Bradlaugh and Mrs. Besant to reply in their own words. In
their introduction to the prosecuted pamphlet, they say—“We
publish this pamphlet, honestly believing that on all questions
affecting the happiness of the people, whether they be theological,
political, or social, the fullest right of free discussion ought to he
maintained at all hazards. We do not personally endorse [mark
this] all that Dr, Knowlton says : his Philosophical Proem
seems to us full of philosophical mistakes, and, as neither of us
are doctors, we are not prepared to endorse his medical views ;
but—[now observe the reason for publication]—since progress
can only be made through discussion, and no discussion is
possible where differing opinions are suppressed, we el-aim the
right to publish all opinions, so that the public , enabled to see all
sides of the question , may have the materials for forming a sound
judgment *
The work was therefore published in the interests of free
discussion —in order to maintain the right to speak honestly and
freely on all subjects, whether theological, political, or social.
Without endorsing all that Dr. Knowlton said, it was the position
of Mr, Bradlaugh and Mrs. Besant that Dr. Knowlton had a right
to have his say.
It must not be forgotten, either, in judging the conduct of Mr.
Bradlaugh, that he did not publish the work for the first time.
In the preface to the edition published by him, he gives a brief
history of the work, in which it is stated that “ it is openly sold
and widely circulated in America at the present time.” It was
published in England about forty years ago by James Watson,
the radical reformer. It was afterwards printed and published
by Messrs. Holyoake and Co., by Mr. Austin Holyoake in
conjunction with Mr. Bradlaugh, and then by Mr. Charles Watts,
the successor of Mr. A. Holyoake. Mr. Watts purchased the
* My italics.


plates (with others) on the death of Mr. Watson, “ from Mrs.
Watson, and continued to advertise and sell it until December
23rd, 1876.” The pamphlet was then prosecuted, as published
by Mr. Watts, but the question of its legality or illegality was
not tried. “ A plea of guilty was put in by the publisher, and
the book, therefore, was not examined, nor was any judgment
passed upon it; no jury registered a verdict, and the judge stated
that he had not read the work.”
It was to test this question thoroughly that Mr. Bradlaugh
and Mrs. Besant resolved to re-publish the work, “On the 23rd
March they published the book, personally delivering the first
copies to the chief clerk, to the magistrates at Guildhall, to the
head officer of the city police, and to the solicitors for the city of
London, giving notice that on the 24th they would sell at a
certain place and hour. On that day, at four p.m., they began to
sell, sold 600 in the first twenty minutes, and have since sold, it
is said, 135,000 copies.”
I trust now, therefore, that you will be able to see that you
have done Mr. Bradlaugh a gross injustice, and that if you do not
frankly admit it in this case, that you will, at all events, carefully
guard against making the same mistake in the future. With
regard to the pamphlet itself there are various opinions, and.it is
not necessary here that I should hazard one of my own. A
quotation or two, however, may be serviceable to you as facts
which may somewhat temper your future expressions upon it.
Dr. Charles R. Drysdale, member of the Royal College • of.
Physicians of London, Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons ’of
England, Senior Physician to the Metropolitan Free Hospital,
late Physician to the North London Consumptive Hospital, and
Fellow of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical 'Society of London,
Physician to the Rescue Societies’ Lock Hospital, and Consulting
Physician to the Harrington General Dispensary, in his little
work, entitled “The Population Question,” says:—“As it may
be of interest to know what evidence was tendered by myself, as
a medical witness, in this case, I will put down briefly what I
said. Asked whether I had read the incriminated pamphlet 1
I replied, ‘ Yes, some twenty years ago. I had always considered
it an excellent little treatise, written by an able physician, and
competent, as well as excellent, man. Considering that it was
written forty years ago, when it is thought that people did not
know so much as we do—although I don’t believe we are so muUh
in advance of the men of those days—the writer must have been
a profound student of physiology, and well versed in the medical
science of his day.’ I added that, among my medical brethren in
London, Sir Henry Thompson, Mr. Erichsen, Dr. Hardwicke,
and Dr. Moi’ell Mackenzie seemed quite to agree with me in this.
In reply to a question by the Lord Chief Justice, as to whether


there was anything prurient in the work, I replied, ‘ Certainly
not. It is an excellent little book,’” &c.*
“ The Loi’d Chief Justice, in summing up, said that the prosecu-
tion was most ill-advised, and that there was not a word in the
pamphlet calculated to excite the passions.” f
The finding of the jury was as follows : —“ We are unanimously
of opinion that the book in question is calculated to deprave
public morals; but, at the same time, we entirely exonerate the
defendants from any corrupt motives in publishing it.”
You will note, therefore, that even the jury—doubtless consisting
chiefly of Christians—entirely exonerated “ the defendants from
any corrupt motives in publishing it.” It is to be hoped, then,
that when you next speak of the defendants in that trial, you will
not forget that, whilst the Lord Chief Justice summed up both
in favour of the book and its publishers, whilst some of the ablest
medical men gave their opinion to the same end, and whilst the
jury condemned the hook , all were unanimous in freeing the
characters of the defendants from the stain of corruption. It
was admitted, and voluntarily expressed by a panel of jurymen,
after a fair trial, in a court of justice, that Mr. Bradlaugh and
Mrs. Besant had no corrupt motives in doing what they did. I
beseech you once more to remember this whenever you speak of
Mr. Bradlaugh again.
Let me now instance another specimen as to the way in which
you answer my charges of misrepresentation:—“Your seventh
complaint is, that I charge you with teaching ‘mental, moral,
social, and spiritual chaos and anarchy.’ Well, if your letters do
not prove the charge, what do they prove 1 I will leave the
answer to those who may read the correspondence, in full confi-
dence as to what the answer will be, if they are honest and
unprejudiced.” I asked you to point out the paragraph where I
had taught such, and you have failed to do so, but you simply
refer me to the whole of my letters, and you ask if they
don’t prove what you have concluded so unfairly that they
do prove, without being able to point out the paragraphs which
support you—what is it they prove? I will tell you. They
prove that you have been guilty of misrepresentations and
untruths, and that when you are called upon to substantiate your
assertions, you reply by abusing me! The honest and unpre-
judiced, I am sure, will bear me out in this. ,
I could not help but smile at the simplicity you di?pl%y in your
attempt to cast discredit upon my assertion, “Npt .one of the
passages which you have quoted from his work (Dr, Child’s) are
peculiarly spiritualistic.” You seem to think you have answered
* “ The Population Question,” p. 82.
f Preface to Australian edition.


me, when you simply point out that the author of the work in
question was a Spiritualist, that it was published by a spiritual-
istic firm of printers, and that the spiritualistic journals and
leaders approved of its sentiments, generally speaking. Having
made another quotation or two you exclaim, “ Oh, yes; it is
Spii’itualism which is ‘ peculiarly ’ responsible for these ‘ doctrines
of devils,’ and permit me, then, to fling aside your preliminary
quibble, and to present you with the interesting fact that the
whole book is peculiarly spiritualistic ‘ beyond a doubt. ’” So
far the arguments in my last letter have not been touched. In
those arguments I showed, not by assertions, but by faithful
quotations from numerous authors, who were not Spiritualists,
that the views of Dr. Child were by no means original with or
peculiar to him. And how do you dispose of these numerous
authors from whose works I abundantly quoted to prove my
point? Why r by such subterfuge as this : “ Now, what have Ito
do in this argument with all the rubbish which you have strung
together about Pope, whom Christians do not claim as belonging
to them ; about Calvin, whom you do not quote, and entirely
misrepresent ; about Buckle, whose peculiar doctrines I am not
responsible for, nor have undertaken to discuss; about John
Stuart Mill, who was not a Christian in any sense, and from
whom you quote nothing; or about Max Muller, Stuart Glennie,
Herbert Spencer, or any other of the writers from whom you so
irrelevantly quote at such length 1 Simply nothing. None of
these, even if they all wrongly approved Dr. Child’s doctrine,
which they do not, could make it right if it were wrong.”
I did not say they could, but if all these men have fathered
expressions and opinions which are the same as those of Dr.
Child, they prove that the opinions of Dr. Child, which you
quoted, are not peculiar to him, or to Spiritualists, since they are
held by men who are not Spiritualists ! What have you got to
do with these men ? Why, you have got to prove, not to assert,
that they have not expressed the views which I quoted in my last
letter, or else to admit that I quoted them fairly and faithfully,
and that, consequently, the views of Dr. Child are not peculiarly
Spiritualistic, since both Christians and Atheists have avowed
them. To say you have “ simply nothing ” to do with them
is to say that you have simply nothing to do with those who
prove you to be guilty of misrepresentation, which is the most
cowardly way possible of backing out of your difficulty ! Did
any man ever hear of such an absurdity ? I say that the views
of Dr. Child are not “peculiarly ” spiritualistic, because a number
of authors who are not spiritualistic have expressed the same
things ; and I either refer you to the works, or the recognized
opinions of these men, but in the majority of cases quote the very
words of the authors to support my case, and you reply—What


have Ito do with these authors 1 Simply nothing ! All right;
your admission that you have nothing to do with these authors I
accept as a confession that you either cannot or will not con-
trovert my position, and that, whichever the case may be, you
have virtually left my position unassailed; and, however much
you may verbally deny it, you have therefore admitted that, so
far as you can prove to the contrary, Dr. Child’s views which you
quoted are not “ peculiarly ” spiritualistic !
But really I cannot help but laugh when I see how you
continue to row in the same boat. You deny that these authors
have expressed the opinions you quoted from Dr. Child, although
my quotations from their works supporting the fact were lying
before you, and then you add—“ Even if they did (express the
same views), it would in no way affect ray argument.” Even if
it were proved that the doctrines of Dr. Child are not pecu-
liarly spiritualistic, your argument would still be good—they are
“ peculiarly ” spiritualistic ! Should your argument be proven
most conclusively false , according to your view of it, it would
still be a good argument ! By this we can gather what kind of
arguments you consider the good ones !
But in the quotation which I have just made you deny by
inference that Pope was a Christian, you accuse me of not
having quoted Calvin, and, what is more serious still, of having
“ entirely misrepresented ” him.
With regard to Pope’s adhesion to Christianity, and being
claimed as a Christian by his Christian biographers, allow me
to refer you to Johnson’s “ Lives of the Poets,” from which I
quote the following : —“The religion in which he lived and died
was that of the Church of Rome, to which in his correspondence
with Racine he professes himself a sincere adherent.” * In the
edition of his essay, from which I quoted in my last letter,
published in the Clarendon Press Series, and edited by Mark
Pattison, 8.D., his religion is thus expressly stated : —“lt must
be remembered that Pope was a Catholic. Though he kept his
Nonconformity in the background, he had resisted all attempts
to induce him to forsake the faith of his father.! In the life of
him by Leslie Stephen, edited by John Morley, it is stated—
“ He called himself a true Catholic, though rather as respectably
sympathizing with the spirit of F6nelon than as holding to any
dogmatic system. The most dignified letter that he ever wrote
was in answer to a suggestion from Atterbury (1717) that he
might change his religion upon the death of his father. . . .
A similar statement appears in a letter to Swift, in 1729. ‘I
am of the religion of Erasmus, a Catholic. So I live, so shall I
* Johnson’s “ Lives of the Poets,” p. 418.
f Note 350, p. 110.


die, and hope one day to meet you, Bishop Atterbury, the
younger Craggs, Dr, Garth, Dean Berkeley, and Mr, Hutchison,
in that place to which God of his infinite mercy brings us and
everybody.’ ” * I think these authorities are sufficient to refute
your assertion that Pope is not claimed .by the Christians as
belonging to them. But perhaps you > mean that he is not
claimed by you and your clique <as belonging to you, in which
case I confess my authorities will-no t serve me. «. - .
I plead guilty to the charge of not quoting Calvin, since I was
under the impression that you, as a clergyman, would be suffi-
ciently familiar with his views, and with the views of those who
agree with him, to dispense with that necessity; but I must
certainly repudiate the charge that I entirely misrepresent him,
I intend to support my repudiation with the necessary proofs,
which shall be the difference between my repudiation and your
charge. I shall now, therefore, do what I omitted to do in my
last letter, for reasons which I have stated—namely, quote from
the very works of John Galvin himself—after I have again drawn
your attention to that portion of my last letter bearing upon this
point. I therein asked —“ But, further, is it not a fact that the
Calvinists, who are Christians, believe that God has fore-ordained
everything that happens, and that he has predestined some for
heaven and some for hell ? Reasoning from this standpoint,
surely what God has fore-ordained and predestined is right! ”
Now, in this you say I have “entirely” misrepresented Calvin,
Let us see :—“ The children being vitiated in their parent, con-
veyed the taint to the grandchildren ; in other words, corruption,
-commencing in Adam, is, by perpetual descent, conveyed from
those preceding to those coming after them. The cause of the
contagion is neither in the substance of the flesh nor the soul ;
hut Qod was pleased to ordain [italics mine] that those gifts which
ha had bestowed on the first man, that man should lose as well
for his descendants as for himself.”! „
Her 6 -is another quotation, a little stronger;—“ Because God,
of his mere good pleasure, electing some, passes by others, they
raise a plea against him. But if the fact is certain, what can
they gain by quarrelling with God? We teach nothing but what
experience proves to be true—viz., that God has: always been at
liberty to bestow his grace on whom he would. ” J
In the face of these passages, selected at random, can you have
the effrontery to maintain any further that I have misrepresented
Calvin'? If so, what will you say to the following?—“By
predestination we mean the eternal decree of God, by which he
* Life of Pope, in “English Men of Letters.” pp. 174, 175.
t “Institutes of Christian Religion,” Book 11., c. i., sec. v., p. 289.
t Ibid, Book 111., sec. i., p. 542.


ifletfernrined with himself whatever he wished to happen with
regard to every man. All are not created on equal terms, but
■some are pre-ordained to eternal life, others to eternal damnation ;
and, accordingly, as each has been created for one or other of these
ends , we say that he has been predestinated to life or to death. This
God has testified, not only in the case of single individuals, he
lias also given a specimen of it in the whole posterity of Abraham,
to make it plain that the future condition of each nation was
entirely at his disposal.”* [ltalics are mine in the above
quotations.]
Since you have disputed the facts which I mentioned in my
.last letter, and which I have now supported by the necessary
evidence, I will venture to draw your attention to a statement
made by the Rev. John Scott, M.A., Vicar of North Perriby, Ac.,
Ac. (as says the title page of his work), which not only brings
these doctrines home to Calvin, but to the other great stars who
figured in the Reformation. The opinion of CEeolampadius is
quoted on the subject thus ;—“ We cannot deny predestination,
and that it cannot fail is most certain; but what then ? Is God
unjust? Is he untrue?”! So you see that not only Calvin, but
CEeolampadius, was a believer in predestination.
But observe further :
“ It has been clearly established concerning three of the very
greatest reformers, Luther, Melancthon, and Zwingle (and we
know that many more thought with them) that, at an early
period, at least, of their course, they not only held those doctrines
of election and predestination which have subsequently- been
-denominated Calvinistic, but that they carried them to it’ length
almost unknown among ‘ modern Calvinists.’< ■
In a note to this the author says, “ Wicliffe also is Well known
to have gone far in the same line.”
Instead, therefore, of simply mentioning Calvin by virtue of
using the word “Calvinists,” I might with perfect-justice and
.accuracy have mentioned Luther, Melancthon, Zwingle, QCcolam-
padius, Wicliffe, and “ many more ” as holding the doctrine of
“ predestination,” and surely, I say again, what God has pre-
destinated must be right!
You object to my charge that the logical interpretation of
Paul’s teachings leads to the very doctrine of Dr. Child. Indulg-
ing in your favourite method of expression, you vociferate—
“ But you have dared to say, I must not attack your ‘ spiritual-
istic ’ Child, because the Apostle Paul taught the doctrine of
■* Whatever is, is right.’ You know that assertion to be totally
* “Institutes of Christian Religion,” Book 111., sec. v., p. 534,
t “ Calvin and the Swiss Reformation,’' c. vii., p. 250.
+. Ibid, pp. 266, 267.


false, for there is not a single passage in all his writings which
will bear such-an. interpretation.”
This language is certainly very strong, after I had indicated the
passage that I believed to bear the interpretation I gave. But
you endeavour to dispose both of my reference to and interpreta-
tion of the passage by the following device:—“ You refer to,
though you very cunningly did not exactly quote, his words in
Romans ix. 21, ‘Or hath not the potter a right over the clay,
from the same lump to make one part a vessel unto honour, and
another unto dishonour 1 ’ But continue the quotation to the next
verse, and note how applicable it is to you, ‘ What if God, willing
to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured
with much long-suffering vessels of wrath fitted unto destruction.”
Now I want you to remember that my argument for Paul’s
agreement with Child was based upon the position that Paul
teaches the doctrine of predestination ; that predestination means
that whether we be wicked or holy we are predestinated to be what
we are \ and that, if the doctrine be true, God having predestinated
us to be what we are, it must be right to be what we are, since I
do not suppose you will admit that what God does is wrong!
Then the whole point lies here—Does Paul teach the doctrine of
predestination 1 If he does, I shall have proved my position.
Then let us see if you are warranted by the facts in saying,
“ There is not a single passage in all his writings which will bear
such an interpretation,” and whether you have cleared away the
difficulty by adding another verse and applying it to the abuse
of me.
In order to understand the meaning of the verses you have
quoted, and that we may, as far as possible, learn to place upon
them the interpretation intended by their author, let us go back a
little and follow up the context. In verse 13 Paul says, “As
it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.” Paul
in the next verse defends this, and continues this defence in verse
15, “ For he saith unto Moses, 1 will have mercy on whom I will
have mercy [not according to merit or desert, you observe, but
simply as a matter of his arbitrary exercise of will], and I will
have compassion on whom I will have cdmpassion.” In the next
verse the point is expressed more definitely, “ So then it is not
for him that willeth nor of him that runneth, but of God that
showeth mercy.” The whole point, therefore, as to a man’s
salvation depends upon what God has decided upon • not by the
virtues of him that willeth or runneth, but of his own choice.
Still plainer does this become in verse 17, where this illustration
of it is given, “ For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even of this
same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my power
in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all the
earth. ” Surely this verse will bear the interpretation that


Pharaoh was “ raised up ” or predestinated to do what he did in
order that God might show his power ! But let us pfqceed. The
18th verse reads, “Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth.” Now Paul, or
whoever wrote this chapter, saw, as clearly as I see, that this was
nothing short of saying that we are what God makes us, and he
thus anticipates the very natural objection to sueh a doctrine :
“ Thou wilt say then unto me, why doth He yet find fault? For
who hath resisted his will ? ” Now observe his answer. He
does not forsake the position he has taken, or modify it in the
least. He does not show that he has been misunderstood, or that
the questioner had misinterpreted him. No 1 he even adds by
his reply to the force of what he has already said, and chides the
imaginary questioner for daring to impugn it. “ Nay, but, O
man, who art thou that repliest against God ? Shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, why hast thou made me tints ? ”
It is in continuation of this same line of argument that the verse
to whidh I referred occurs, and it immediately follows the one I
have just- quoted : “ Hath not the potter power over the clay, of
the same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto
dishonour?” Now, what can be plainer than that Paul here
compares man to the thing that is formed, and to a vessel made
by no will of its own out of a lump of clay. God is the potter,
and he can make whatever kind of vessel he pleaseth, and the
vessel that is formed hath no right whatever to say why hast
thou made me thus ? Nothing to my mind could be more con-
clusive than that Paul taught the doctrine of pre-ordination in
the passage to which I referred. I submit, furthermore, that
the verse which you have added does not weaken the argument
in the least. It is in fact simply a continuation of it, and, with
the addition of the following two verses, even adds to the strength
of it. I will quote them together : “ What if God, willing to
show his wrath, and to make his power known, endureth with
much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted (mark the word)
to destruction ; And that he might make known the riches of
his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had afore prepared
unto glory, even us, whom he hath called , not of the Jews only,
but of the Gentiles ! ”
I contend, therefore, that I am on this point also supported I>y
the evidence; but to show still further how reckless was your
assertion that not a single passage of Paul’s would bear the inter-
pretation I have thus adopted, I will quote one or two others.
In the Epistle which he writes to the Ephesians, the Ist chapter,
the 4th, sth, 11th verses, he thus positively expresses the doctrine
in question : —“ According as he hath chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without
blame before him in love : Having predestinated us unto the


adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the
good pleasure of his will. ... In whom also we have
obtained an inheritance, being ‘predestinated according to the
pui-pose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his
own will.” Surely these passages bear the interpretation I placed
upon them ! I will just give one or two more. They are from
Homans viii. 29, 30, 33 :—“ For whom he did foreknow, he also
did predestinate , to be conformed to the image o£-h|e Son, that he
might be the first-born among many brethren. Moreover, whom he
did predestbiate, them he also called; and whom he.called, them he
also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. .. .
Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect '] It is God that
justifieth.” I cannot conceive what Paul could have said to add
to the force of his expressions, and to show more certainly that
he taught the doctrine of predestination. I defy any man by the
use of fairness and honesty to escape from the conclusion that in
the above passages Paul most clearly teaches the doctrine disputed,
and that to that extent, therefore, he agrees with the position of
Dr. Child, viz., Everything happens by the will of God, and is
therefore on that account right.
Painful and tedious as it is, I am now obliged to correct another
of your misrepresentations. In my letter of 20th February I
reproved you for having stated you wex*e ashamed to quote from
Dr. Child’s book, whilst the book upon which your position is
based abounds with the filthy and the obscene. I quoted to you
from Genesis xxxviii. 8-10, requested you to read the whole chapter,
after which I suggested that you should ask yourself if Dr. Child
■ has advocated anything more horrible than the actual conduct of
the villain Judah. The daughters of Lot, the wives of Solomon,
and the adultery of David, I mentioned that I might ask you if Dr.
Child was any worse than any of these wretches? The slaughter of
the married women, and the sacrifice of thirty-two thousand virgins
to the brutal lusts of Jewish soldiers, I instanced, that I might
ask you—ls there anything more horrible in Dr. Child’s work
than this ? To which I added, “If there be, I should be thankful
if you would point it out.” I then went on to ask you “Is the
coarseness of Ezekiel anywhere surpassed by Dr. Child ? ” and I
finally concluded by asking you to find a passage in Dr. Child’s
book “ more abominably filthy ” than Jeremiah iii. 9. To these
questions you have given no answer, but by placing a passage out
of the order in which it occurred in my letter you make it appear
that I had instanced all these crimes and obscenities as com-
manded and sanctioned by God ! To this you reply at some
length, instead of replying to the points for the proofs of which
I introduced the quoted passages. I say the real point you have
left unassailed. It was this: You are ashamed to quote certain
passages in Dr. Child’s book, because they are obscene. If this


be true, does it not ill become you to say so, when the book upon
which you build your own faith contains passages much mord
obscene 1 Now, you have admitted the obscenity and criminality
of certain of the characters and passages mentioned, but you say
the criminal perpetrators therein were punished, or that a
command from God had been misunderstood; but the most
abominably filthy passage (that of Jeremiah iii. 9) you justify by
saying “Any candid reader will see that God, by the mouth of his
prophet, is reproving the people of Israel for their sins under the
appropriate figure of an adulterous wife, and especially foi*
idolatry.” Even so; I still have to ask you, is there anything
more abominably filthy in the whole of Dr. Child’s book ?
Cannot even the dullest see, therefore, that you have failed to
answer my charge—viz., that the Bible contains passages much
more obscene than the book, “Whatever Is, Is Right”? for
your justification of them by no means diminishes their
obscenity.
But, as I have remarked—and this is where you have misrepre-
sented me—you make it appear that I cited all the cases and
verses as God’s commands and sanctions, and on that assumption
you thus address me : —“ And yet you dare to quote this as an
instance of God having ‘ sanctioned and commanded every crime
which has disgraced humanity.’” In this you have quoted a
fragment of my letter, which occurs after I had instanced all the
cases under dispute as proof of the obscenity of the book from
which you preach. Having, as I thought, and, as it turns out,
correctly, proved that many portions of the Bible were most
undoubtedly more obscene than the passage you cited from Dr.
Child, I then went a step further and said : —“Every crime, sir,
which has disgraced humanity, I can point out to you [not I have
pointed out to you] as commanded and sanctioned by the God of
the Old Testament. Murder, rape, incest, theft, and lying are all
stamped with divine authority in the book on which your ortho-
doxy rests.” I said that I could, and now I will point out the
divine sanction and command for the crimes enumerated. I will
take them in the order given in my letter :
Murder. —“ And it came to pass that, at midnight, the Lord
smote all the first-born in the land of Egypt, from the first-born
of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the first-born of the
captive that was in the dungeon ; and all the first-born of cattle
[What had the poor cattle done to deserve being murdered?]
And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and
all the Egyptians ; and there was a great cry in Egypt, for there
was not a house where there was not one dead”*
* Exodus xii. 29, SO.


“ And it came to pass, by the way in the inn, that the Lord
met him and sought to kill him.”*
“ So the Lord our God delivered into our hands Og also, the
king of Bashan, and all his people ; and we smote him until none
was left to him remaining, . . . And we utterly destroyed
them, as we did unto Sihon, king of Heshbon, utterly destroying
the men, women, and children of every city,” f
“ Thus saith the Lord God of Israel: Put every man his sword
by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the
camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbour.” j
“ And the Lord thy God will put out those nations before thee
by little and little : thou mayest not consume them at once, lest
the beasts of the field increase upon thee.” §
“So Joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the
south, and of the vales, and of the springs, and all their kings :
he left none remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed,
as the Lord God of Israel commanded.”\\
“ And the Lord sent thee on a journey, and said—Go and
utterly destroy the sinners, the Amalekites, and fight against
them until they be consumed.” If
“ And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal.”|| ||
These are only a very few cases of command and sanction, and
if I had time I could fill a small volume with such passages.
However, you may see further instances in proof of my position
in Leviticus xx. 15-18, and, in fact, in the whole chapter, which
is full of murderous commands. In Numbers xv. 32-36, a man
is put to death for gathering sticks on a Sabbath. “And the
Lord said unto Moses, The man shall be surely put to death :
all the congregation shall stone him with stones Avithout the camp.
And all the congregation brought him without the camp, and
stoned him with stones, and he died; as the Lord commanded
Moses.” How much short of commanding murder does this
come 1 See how the Lord himself murdered Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, in Numbers xvi. 30. See the sanction of the Lord, in
the form of stopping a plague, given to the murder perpetrated
by Phineas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest,
Numbers xxv, 7, 8. See the command to “ utterly destroy”
certain peoples in Deuteronomy vii. 2. In Deuteronomy
xiii. 6-11, all who worship any other god than the villain Avho is
supposed to give the command are to be put to death ; even
should the heretic be “ the wife of thy bosom, thou shalt stone
* Exodus iv. 24.
|| Joshua x. 40.
f Deuteronomy iii. 3, 6.
X Exodus xxxii. 27.
§ Deuteronomy vii. 22,
If 1 Samuel xv. 18.
111| Ibid, verse 33.


her with stones that she die!” There is even the command
given in Deuteronomy xvii. to murder any man who will not
hearken unto the priest (see verse 12). Read the cruel and
murderous orders given in Deuteronomy xx., where the wholesale
destruction of human life is thus decreed—“ But of the cities of
these people which the Lord thy God doth give thee for an
inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that hreatheth" (verses
10-16). But I have given you quite sufficient now, I think, to
support my affirmation that murder is commanded and sanctioned
by the God of the Old Testament, although I have but cited the
very smallest fraction of the evidence which runs through the
whole of the Old Testament. I cannot refrain, however, from
quoting another verse, which is from the song of Moses, and is
spoken as the language of the Lord —“ I will make mine arrows
drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh; and that
with the blood of the slain and of the captives, from the
beginning of revenges upon the enemy.” *
Rape.— ln support of this charge I shall take Numbers xxxi.,
in order that I may examine your apology for it. In this chapter
the evidence is of the clearest kind that rape is at least sanctioned
by God. In verses 17 and 18 we read : —“Now, therefore, kill
every male among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath
known man by lying with him. But all the women children that
have not known a man by lying with him keep alive for your-
selves?' This, you infer, was not the command of the Lord, but
of Moses. Granted—but in verse 26 it is stated that “ the Lord
spake unto Moses ; ” and in the following verses we are informed
that he gave instructions for the division of the booty taken in
wax*. In verse 31 it is expressly said that “ Moses and Eleazar
the priest did as the Lord commanded Moses." Moses and Eleazar,
therefore, did as commanded by the Lord. And what did they
do 1 They divided the spoil : “ And the persons were sixteen
thousand, of which the Lord’s tribute was thirty and two persons.
And Moses gave the tribute which was the Lord’s heave-offering
unto Eleazar the priest, as the Lord commanded Moses?' If this
be not a sanction, nay, the proof of a command for the giving
away of young girls to lustful embraces, what is it 1 Listen to
your reply:—
“ It is only a portion of a dark and mysterious page of human
history, the destruction [and you might have added worse than
destruction] of the horribly wicked Midianites and Canaanites,
who filled the Promised Land with the foulest idolatries and
vices which had ever cursed the earth [excepting, you might have
said, those practised by the Jews themselves]. Ido not pretend
to solve all mysteries, as Spiritualists do [another libel and false-
* Deuteronomy xxxii. 42.


hood]. These events occurred more than thirty-three centuries?
ago, in a condition of human life, and under a dispensation of
Divine, government, entirely different to that under which we live
[I should think so, or the Fates deliver us!] Such deeds would
be wicked and wrong in our days; and we have far mightier
weapons against our foes than weapons of human warfare.
Possibly, this was one of the instances' where Moses did not-
rightly interpret the commands of God.”
Now I ask you for, and I defy you to bring, a single passage from
the whole of the Bible where the Lord corrects Moses for having'
made the mistake you suggest. Although' there are many a “Thus
saith the Lord,” and many apparent reports of conversations and
dialogues between Jehovah and Moses in the Pentateuch, there is
not one which accuses Moses of blundering, or that takes him to
task or reproves him in the slightest for having acted unto the
maids of Midian with such debauched barbarity.
You talk of the times being different then. The people were-
inferior to those of our day; and you admit that if these things
were committed in our times they would “ be wicked and wrong.”'
Granted—but was the Lord also inferior 1 Did he not know
better 1 Was he thfcn of opinion that it was right to violate the
virgin captives 1 Were the people worse when “ under a dispen-
sation of Divine government” than they are now under the
government of Sir Bryan O’Loghlen 1 What you say amounts to 1
this: —When God could talk to his people every day, and tell
them what they should and should not do, they were exceedingly
bad, but since God has left his people to their own resources they
have become vastly more virtuous.
Supposing you went amongst a tribe of savages, and found
them practising cannibalism and the crimes related in the chapter-
under review, would you say to those savages—Brothers, you do
well; and, as a mark of my approval of your conduct, I take the 1
most accomplished villain amongst you as my favourite, the
recipient of my commands and the executor of my decrees llf
you did, would you not be sanctioning and prolonging such vices T
If you would not, why give an apology which lays such a charge-'
at the feet of your Deity 1
The quotation you make from the 19th chapter of Matthew, ,
and the reference to it, and to Mark, chapter x., have no bearing
whatever on the case, for neither the Midianites nor their woeful
misfortunes are mentioned therein. It is therein stated that
because the men were hard-hearted, Moses “ suffered ” them to-
put away their wives, which seems to me very much like saying
that because the Jews were bad, Moses suffered them to be much
worse. “In the same way, then,” you argue, “ perhaps [I am-
pleased at the modest ‘ perhaps’] for the hardness of their hearts
[whose hearts—those of the Jews, or those of the Midiauites Ijj


Moses was permitted to give such commands as in the passage you
quote from Numbers; but it does not follow God approved such
deeds. For instance, God permits such vile systems as Spirit-
ualism, Mormonism, and Mohammedanism to exist; but he most
certainly does not approve them.’'
If God permitted the horrible cruelty and wickedness of the
Jews, why could he not tolerate a little of that of the Midianites?
Why exterminate one nation and honour another, when the
honoured nation, if there were any choice, was the worse of the
two ?
“God permits !” Why did he.,permit when he was in daily
communication Avith Moses; was constantly working miracles of
the most stupendous kind, and couM/ 1 either by his commands or
by a miracle, have prevented these execrable outrages ?
“It does not follow God approved such deeds.” Then find me
a passage where he condemned them. Let me haA'e no general
application of some-fine sentiment, but let me have the passages
where Moses was blamed or corrected for his savagery ! God
could come down on Sinai to give instruction to Moses how a kid
was to be killed, hoAv hair-oil was to be made, or how Aaron Avas
to cut his coat, but he said not a Avord about the evils done to the
Midianites, or to check the brutality of his children. For forty
days and forty nights' God 'talks Avith Moses, and gives minute
descriptions of fittings for a tabernacle, receipts for perfumery,
and dictates prescriptions ; but in all that period he never once
found time to tell Moses that Avhat he had done to the Midianites
was Avrong.
But why need I go to this extent to slioav you that your
limping apology, Avhich accounts for the evil by stating—
-Ist. That it is “only” a portion of a dark and mysterious-
page of human history.
2nd. Though wrong now it Avas right then, because it hap-
pened thirty-three centuries ago.
3rd. It Avas possibly a mistake of Moses.
4th, Because they were hard-hearted they were permitted to
do it—
is not only contradictory, but and absurd ? Have I
not already shown you that, in the division of the spoil and the
apportioning of the captive maidens, “ Moses and Eleazar the
priest did as the Lord commanded Moses?” My case is
therefore proved, and it is shoAvn that the God of the Old
Testament both sanctioned and commanded rape.
Incest. —The divine authority for this crime is found in the
fact that the book you call God’s Inspired Word contains
accounts of its committal by several notable Avorthies (if such
they may be called), without containing the necessary condemna-
tion of these criminals for this particular offence-. Since you


have apologized fox’ the shox’tcomings of Lot in this respect, let
us take his case first. It is given in the 19th chapter of
Genesis, commencing at the 30th verse. Lot’s two daughters
cause their father to drink wine, that they may lie with him and
presexwe his race. Now, I ask you for the passage where either
Lot or his two daughters are expressly reproved for this sin ? In
the whole of the Bible is Lot, or ax-e his daughters, mentioned in
connection with this crime as being either condemned or punished?
If so, where ? Give me the passage. You know, rev. sir, you
cannot. If ever they were either reproved or punished, the
account of it, which is of far greater importance than the record
of the offence, is not given ixx “ God’s inspired word,” and we are
left to conclude that the old man died in peace, without a sting
upon his conscience, or a pang of remorse upon his heart. His
daughters likewise disappear from our view, without a word of
correction either from the angels, who visited them at Sodom, or
from the Lord, who turned their mother into salt. All disappear
behind the curtain which the Bible uplifted to show us their vice,
but which it has dropped again without the scene of their
correction. Until we see the scene of correction given to them ,
no other conclusion is possible but that their offence received the
sanction of their deity.
“ On the contrary,” say you, “ it was the result, alas, of that
demoniac sin of intemperance, which Spiritualism does so much
to foster in every sense.” But surely Spiritualism did xxot foster
Lot’s intemperance ! He was xxot a Spiritualist, was he? You
must recollect he was such a favourite with his Lord, that two
angels had beexx especially sexxt to warn him of the impending
destruction of the city where he' iived. He and his daughters
were the only people worth saving out of the entire in-
habitants of two cities, if we except Mrs. Lot, who was justly
punished for the exex-cise of a feminine curiosity. Did not
God know that Lot was addicted to the demoniac sixx of intem-
perance ? Did he xxot know that if he was not, he would be ? Did
he not know that he and his two daughters would forget them-
selves ? If so, why did he save them ? More than all, why
did he kill Mrs. Lot, who, non-saline, would have saved her
salacious husbaxxd from his sin ? If God kxxew beforehand that
the sixx would be committed if he saved him and killed his
wife, by saving him and killing his wife had he not prepared the
way for the criixxe, and so far given his sanction to it ? Will it
be x-eplied, that God did xxot kxxow what was going to be the
coixsequence of his own acts? Hardly, I thixxk. Then we
cannot escape from the conclusion—God not only never corrected
them for their gross misdeed, but he gave the conditions which
rendered it possible, with the kixowledge that these conditions
would ultimate in its perpetration !


“ Oh ! ” but you say, “ God’s curse rested upon the offspring of
that sin, the Moabites and Ammonites.” And what kind of
justice do you call this 1 The sinners to go unpunished, but their
children to be cursed for ages ! The mistake in the punishment
you speak of is, that it alights on the wrong people. Had Lot and
his daughters been punished, there would have been some sense in
it; but to never say a word to them, and to afflict the poor
offspring generation after generation, does hot, to my mind, seem
fair. But point me out the passage where it is said that the
Ammonites and the Moabites received the “ many terrible judg-
ments of God” because of the incest of their parents ? You should
have pointed out such passages, if such exist, to support your
assertion; but, as is usual, where evidence is lacking, you think
assertion is good enough.
How, I am going to show you that the Bible gives altogether
other reasons for the “many terrible judgments of God” upon
these nations. In Deuteronomy xxiii. 3, 4 we learn “An
Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the
Lord; even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the
congregation of the Lord for ever.” Why 1 Because of the sin
of their parents'? Ho; but “because they met you not with
bread and with water in the way when ye came forth out of
Egypt, and because they hired against thee Balaam, the son of
Beor, of Pethor, of Mesopotamia, to curse thee.” See also
Hehemiah xiii. 1,2, where the same reason is given. Another
reason is given in Ezekiel xxv. 8-10:—“Thus saith the Lord
God : Because that Moab and Seir do say, Behold the house of
Judah is like unto all the heathen; therefore, behold, I
will open the side of Moab from the cities, from his cities
which are on the frontiers, the glory of the country, Beth-
jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Kiriathaim, unto the men of the
east, with the Ammonites, and will give them in possession,
that the Ammonites may not be remembered among the
nations.”
Yet another reason is given in Zephaniah ii. 9, 10 :—“ There-
fore as I live, saith the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Surely
Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah.
. . . This shall they have for their pride, because they have
reproached and magnified themselves against the people of the
Lord of Hosts.”
Are not these passages a proof that the “ many terrible judg-
ments of God ” were not for the sins of their parents 1 I think
they are ; and to make it clearer I quote to you the words of
Moses concerning the Moabites and Ammonites, befom4hey had
become so proud : —“ And the Lord said unto me, Distress not
the Moabites, neither contend with them in battle ; for I will not
give thee of their land for a possession, because I have given Ar


unto the children of Lot for a possession.”* “And when thou
comest nigh over against the children of Ammon, distress them not,
nor meddle with them, for I will not give thee of the land of the
children of Ammon any possession ; because I have given it unto
the children of Lot for a possession.”! This looks like punishing
them for being the children of Lot, under such revolting circum-
stances, doesn't it ? It seems to me to be more like rewarding
them.
I will not mention the like crime in Amnon, the son of David,
and in the villain Judah, recorded in the 38th chapter of
Genesis, because either they were punished or repentance followed,
but I will take now the case of Abraham. You will remember
that when he went down into Egypt he told his wife to say she
was his sister. IVenty-five years later he was travelling between
Kadesh and Shur. “ And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, she
is my sister. And Abimelech, king of Gerah, sent, and took
Sarah.” When she was restored to Abraham he made this
explanation: “And yet indeed she is my sister: she is the
daughter of my fathex*, but not the daughter of ray mother; and
she became my wife.” How do you explain this 1 If it be not
incest, what is it ?
Whilst upon this point, I would like also to ask you what you
think the receixt revisers of the Hew Testament meant when they
altered the text of 1 Cor. vii. 36, so as to read; —“ But if any
man thinketh that he behaveth himself unseemly to his virgin
dauylder if she be past the flower of her age, and if need so
requireth, let him do what he will; he sinneth xxot; let them
marry ” %
But is not the whole plan of salvation founded upon this sin I
Was not Mary one of the children of God 1 ? And was she not
overshadowed by God the Holy Ghost 1 If this seems blasphemous
to you, remexxxber, it is you, not I, who blaspheme, for you believe
it, and I don’t.
Theft. —l am not going to point out to you the wholesale
plundering perpetrated by the Jews in those bax’barous wars
related in the Old Testament, which was nothing else but thieving
on an extensive scale, and could only be justified among savages
by such maxims as “ Might makes right,” axxd “To the victors
belong the spoils.” I will content myself with the instructions
given by God himself to the Isi’aelites just prior to their departure
from Egypt;—“ But every woman shall borrow of her neighbour,
and of her that sojqurneth in her house, jewels of silver and
jewels of gold, and raiment, and ye shall put them upon your
sons and upon your daughters; and ye shall spoil the Egyptians .”£
* Deuteronomy ii. 9. + Ibid; 19. + Exodus in. 22:


How much short of theft is this 1 It is not only theft that is
commanded, but deception ; they were not only to spoil the
Egyptians, but they were to do it under false pretences.
Do you reply that the Bible is not translated rightly ? Then I
answer that that is the fault of the Christians ; and, whilst the
Bible remains as it is, I shall not cease to wage war against such
texts. If the Bible is not to your liking, alter it, by all means,
but do not blame us if we insist that as the verse stands in the
authorized version, which is in the hands of millions who do not
understand Hebrew, it is a direct command for theft and dissim-
ulation. We attack the version in the hands of the poor and
unlearned, which has been placed there, not by infidels, but by
Christians, and which receives the stamp of genuineness by being
read throughout the churches of Christendom Sunday after
Sunday. If it be a false version, if it be not correctly translated,
if it contain passages not in harmony with the original inspired
by God, why do the clergy put it forward as “ God’s inspired
word,” and insist that it is necessary for us to believe it in order
to be saved 1 This passage is in the Bible, and I maintain that,
as it stands, it fuljy supports my charge; and, as I did not
translate the passage, and as the clergy, through all these many
years, have not altered it, I do not see how we are to get out of
the fact that the God of the Old Testament commanded and
sanctioned theft.
“They only took what belonged to them,” I fancy I hear you
remark. Then why were they told to spoil the Egyptians 1 On
this point, however, I will quote to you the satire of Yoltaire :
“ In vain does the secretary, who has done me the honour of
writing to me in your name, assure me that you stole to the
amount of upwards of nine millions in gold coined or carved, to
go and set up your tabernacle in the desert. I maintain that you
carried off nothing but what lawfully belonged to you, reckoning
interest at forty per cent, (my italics), which was the lawful
rate.” *
Lying. — l am not at liberty here to refer to Paul again, nor to
quote the passage —“ And for this cause God shall send them
strong 'delusion,' that they should believe a lief etc.; for, although
the lying delusion is to come from God, and although Paul most
certainly defended lying under certain circumstances, I must
confine myself to the God of the Old Testament. I beg therefore
to refer you to 1 Kings xxii. 20-23 ;—“ And the Lord said, Who
shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up and fall at liamoth-
gilead 1 And one said on this manner, and another said on that
manner. And there came forth a spirit and stood before the
Lord, and said, I will persuade him. And the Lord said unto
* Philosophical Dictionary, Vol. 11., p. 99.


him, Wherewith 1 And he said, I will go forth and I will he a
lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Thou
shalt persuade him, and prevail also : go forth and do so.
Now, therefore, behold, the Lord hath put a lying spirit in the
mouth of all these thy prophets, and the Lord hath spoken evil
concerning thee.” What could be plainer and more direct than
this? “Lying” here is both sanctioned and commanded by the
Lord himself, who hath put a lying spirit in the mouths of Ahab’s
prophets. But perhaps the children of the prophets were
punished for it !
I think I have now fulfilled my promise, and shown you that
“ murder, rape, incest, theft, and lying are all stamped with
Divine authority in the Book on which your orthodoxy rests.” I
cannot leave this part of the subject, however, without showing
you that that horrible crime, slavery, is sanctioned and commanded
by the God of the Old Testament; and, not to unnecessarily
increase the length of this letter, I will content myself with one
quotation, though many passages might be cited. It is from
Leviticus xxv. 44-46 : —“ Both thy bondmen and thy bondmaids,
which thou shalt have, shall be of the heathen that are round
about you; of them shall ye buy bondmen and bondmaids.
Moreover, of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among
you, of them shall ye buy, and of their families that are with
you, which they begat in your land : and they shall he your
possession. And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your
children after you, to inherit them for a possession • and they shall
he your bondmen for ever.” Could anything be a greater evidence
of the barbarity of the J ews and their God than this 1
Polygamy * and the degradation of woman are made so
evidently certain and laudable in the Old Testament that I shall
not consume my timfe by drawing your attention to the fact and
supporting it by any quotations.
For the sake of tendering you, and those who may think with
you, a little information with regard to David, the “ man after
God’s own heart,” whom you have represented in your letter as
not only himself sorely punished, but whose punishment was
transmitted to his posterity, so as to become the “ ruin of his
family, the disintegrator of his kingdom,” and “ a curse to the
Jewish race,” I will pay a little attention to his case. You say
that because of David’s sin in the matter of Bathsheba, the wife
of Uriah, Nathan the prophet, in a message from God, showed
“ with what detestation he viewed, and with what severity he
punished, David for these very sins, on account of which he
said (2 Samuel xii. 10) —‘The sword shall never depart from
* “ Thus saith the Lord God of Israel .... I gave thee thy
master’s house, and thy master’s wives into thy bosom.”—2 Samuel xii. 7, 8.


thine house, because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the
wife of Uriah, the Hittite, to be thy wife.’ ” But why did you
not quote the next verse ? Methinks because therein it is mani-
fest that the physic was worse than the disease. In order to
punish David, the God (after whose heart David was) determined
to commit abominations , which were, according to his own
admission, much more revolting than that committed by David.
I will quote the 11th and 12th verses, that you may see for
yourself : —“ Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will raise up evil
against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives
before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbour, and he
shall lie with, thy ivives, in the sight of the sun. For thou didst
it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel , and before
the sun.” Truly this is killing crime with greater crime, and that,
too, with a vengeance !
But where is it afterwards recorded that the punishments
which you quoted, and tjiose which I have just quoted, came
on David for his sins ? It appears to me that the original plan
for punishment was altered, in consequence of David’s admission
that he had sinned; and, in the stead of these awful threats
being carried out, the only affliction he received was the death of
his child : —“And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against
the Lord. And Nathan said unto David, The Lord also hath put
away thy sin; thou shalt not die. Howbeit, because by this
deed thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die ”
(vv. 13, 14).
So much for the punishment, now for the repentance of David,
both of which you sum up in this form ; —“ God is shown to be
righteous and holy, hating sin, and punishing those who commit
it; yet mercifully [ls it mercifully forgiving, if, as you say,
God not only punished David, but his family, his kingdom, and
the Jewish race 1 If this be mercy, how do you define barbarity 1]
forgiving, as in David’s case, the truly penitent 1 ”
The truly penitent / So, in your estimation, the repentance of
David is an example of true penitence. Pray then afford me
your attention whilst I quote to you the Bible account of it. We
are informed that the child fell sick, having been struck by the
Lord :
“David therefore besought God for the child; and David fasted, and
went in and lay all night upon the earth. And the elders of his house
arose and went to him, to raise him up from the earth ; but he would not,
neither did he eat bread with them. And it came to pass, on the seventh
day, that the child died. And the servants of David feared to tell him
that the child was dead : for they said, Behold, while the child was yet
alive, we spake unto him, and he would not hearken unto our voice : how
will he then vex himself, if we tell him that the child is dead ? But when
David saw that his servants whispered, David perceived that the child was


m
dead : therefore David said unto his servants, Is the child dead ? Arid
they said, He is dead.”
I wish you now to observe the extent and depth of David’s
penitence :
“ Then David arose from the earth, and washed and anointed himself,
and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the Lord and
worshipped : then he came to his own house ; and when he required, they
set bread before him, and he did efet. Then said his servants unto him,
What thing is this that thou hast done ? thou didst fast and weep for the
child, while, it was alive ; but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and
eat bread. And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept :
for I said, Who can tell whether God will be gracious to me, that the child
may live? [This looks very much like repentance, I must say. Onfi
might, however, mistake it for selfish hypocrisy : ‘ While the child lives, I
may get the Lord to overlook everything, and not even to punish my child.
Anyhow, it’s worth trying for, so l’ll weep and fast.’] But, now he is dead*,
wherefore should I fast ? Can I bring him back again ? I shall go to him,
but he shall not return to me.” * x
This, then, was the- extent and nature of David’s repentance,
since we perceive in the next verse he was thoroughly recovered,
for “ David comforted Bathsheba his wife, and went in unto her:
and she bare a son, and called his name Solomon, and the Lord
loved him.”
And what shall we say of this David, when we find that, after
his adultery with Bathsheba, the murder of her husband, and the
above repentance , he sang, as reported in 2 Samuel xxii. :
“ . . . The Lord was my stay. He brought me forth also
into a large place : he delivered me because he delighted in me.
The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness : according
to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me. For I
have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed
from my God. For all his judgments were before me : and as
for his statutes, I did not depart from them. I was also upright
before him, and have kept 'myself from mine iniquity. There-
fore the Lord hath recompensed me according to my righteousness;
according to my cleanness in his eyesight.”
But, apart from the crimes we have been discussing, this self-
laudation of David conies but ill from a man who, on the bed of
death, had still sufficient barbarity left to issue the following
commands to Solomon, his son :
u Moreover, thou knowest what Joab, the son of Zeruiah, did
to me. . , . Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let
not his hoar head go down to the grave in peace.
“ And, behold, thou hast with thee Shimei, the son of Gera, a
Benjamite of Bahurim, which cursed me with a grievous curse in
* 2 Samuel xii. 16-23.


the dhy when I went to Mahanaim ; but he 'came down to meet
me at Jordan, and I sware to him by the Lord, saying, I will
not put thee to death with the sword.
“Now, therefore, hold him not guiltless, for thou art a wise
man, and knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him; but his
hoar head bring thou down to the grave wiih- blood ” (1 Kings
chap. ii. 5-9). i -
What a charitable farewell to the earth was this ! Never-
theless, “ David did that which was right in'the-eyes of the Lord,
and turned not aside from anything that he commanded him all
the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.”
(1 Kings xv. 5).
I will now pass to that portion of your letter which deals with
my charges of misquoting.
- Your apology for not underlining two words in one of your
quotations you designate as an accident, though you stand by the
result, and defend it by saying, “The sentiment is quite as
detestable with them ” (the italics). That may be your opinion ;
but I think my charge is proven, that, whether accidentally or
not, you have weakened and misrepresented the passage in Dr.
Child by not putting the words which he relied principally upon
in italics, as he had done.
Now, after I had quoted the entire passage verbatim et literatim ,
without a single alteration, yojx retort the charge of misrepresenta-
tion upon me simply because .L ask you a question upon it in my
own way. The question and the quotation I will place side by
side, so that you and the readers of this correspondence may
judge whether I have misrepresented and misquoted or not:—
The- quotafio/i,.wJilfh / gave in my
„/ letter:—
* “ Lucy, the courtesan, is led in
an avenue of happiness where her
inclinations immediately direct, with
the deeper longings of'her soul held
for a time in check ■; and her
sister Frances, the faithful wife and
mother, in another avenue of hap-
piness, where her inclinations lead. ”
My questions, based upon it :—
‘ ‘ But cannot you see that, in the
passage you have quoted to con-
demn, that Dr. Child has only stated
what must be, to all Christians even,
a self-evident truth ? ‘ Lucy fol-
lows where her inclinations imme-
diately direct,’ with ‘the deeper
longings of her soul held for a time
in check,’ therefore she is a courte-
san. Be kind enough to point out
to me where this is wrong ? ”
The quotation which I made, in full, is on the left hand, and in
the right-hand column I simply question you upon it, without
professing to quote the passage as Dr. Child gives it, although in
your letter you make it appear that I had palmed my question
off as a literal citation. Hence the following is only of a piece
with your other perversions : —“ But I must first require you to


omit the word * follows ’ after the word ‘ Lucy/ and to add there?
the important words which you have left out, namely, ‘ the
courtesan, is led in an avenue of happiness’—a much more
important omission than my italics.” It would not even be so if
I professed to be quoting his very words, whereas I was simply
quoting his meaning in another form !
Because I ventured upon asking you to point out where Dr.
Child’s statement was wrong, you abuse me by saying, “You
evidently approve the principle of prostitution, as Dr. Child
unquestionably does.” Pray, sir, is this a sample of your
Christian charity 1 Again let me inform you that Dr. Child does
not “ approve the principle of prostitution,” He accounts for it,
and gives to it what he believes its lawful place in the course of
Nature ; but he nowhere says he “ approves ” of it, but, on the
contrary, as I pointed out in my last letter, distinctly says :
“ Prostitution is an enemy to the good, the true, the beautiful—
that are the crowning excellencies of the material world.” I can
only, therefore, in the face of this fact, denounce your uncharitable
assertion as one of the grossest of libels.
You evade answering the question I asked of you by saying
that if I put the question in another way you would refer me to
the police, just as you now refer me to my wife ! But where is
Dr. Child’s statement wrong 1 Where has he stated an untruth 1
This question, malgre your abuse, you have left untouched.
Never mind to whom you will refer me ; let me have a straightfor-
ward answer to the question I asked you in my last letter, and
which I have just quoted in this, or admit like a man that you
cannot answer it. ,
Your way of answering my charges is altogether dishonestly
unique. You are charged with misquoting, and you reply ;
“ But, if any reader of this correspondence has access to this book
[Dr. Child’s], and will test your quotations [mine], he will find
them garbled and incorrect in every instance ” (my italics).
Now, this expression cannot be palmed off as “ accidental,” for I
notice you first had written “ in most instances,” but this being
apparently too weak for the willingness of your spirit to malign,
you have altered it to the quoted form, I repudiate your sweeping
charge, and challenge its substantiation. I venture to affirm that
I have in no single case quoted the author incorrectly, but that I
have in every instance taken his words to express his precise
meaning. I have nowhere weakened or strengthened his meaning
by any omissions or additions of my own, as you have done.
Although I may have dispensed with words and phrases before
and after the quotation containing his meaning, it has only been
because those words or phrases were not necessary to express the
meaning, but were either introductory or conjunctional. To
illustrate this let me take the passages which you have taken to


support your charge and compare them with the original, in
columns side by side. I will introduce the comparison by your
own support of your charge. “ Take for example that from page
19, where you say that Dr. Child writes, concerning prostitution,
‘ It is a condition of earthly degradation ’ —and there you stop
without completing the sentence , which continues— ‘ produced by
the destruction of the material world, not by soul comparisons.’
This is a daring piece of imposition ; for, further on, as I quoted,
he declares these ‘ distinctions ’ to be ‘ the fictitious destruction
of self-excellence.’ ” I am here accused of a daring imposition
because, having quoted the words by which prostitution is defined,
I did not also quote the words by which it was explained I My
point was the definition —not the reasons for, or explanations of, the
crime in question; and I maintain that I quoted the words that
defined it accurately and fairly, and that it would only have been
a waste of time and space to have quoted words which did not
alter the definition in the least, but were employed for another
purpose altogether. But now the comparison
Extractsfrom my letter of 20 th Feb-
ruary :
“ The,' (jrkne mentioned in the
passage yety said you were ashamed
to quote described :— ‘ It is
a condition of earthly degradation,’
and [‘ an .enemy to the good, the
true, the beautiful] —that are the
crowning excellencies of the material
world.’”
The full paragraph from Dr. Child's
book, p. 19;—
‘ ‘ What is prostitution ? It is a
condition of earthly degradation Imv
italics] produced by the distinct on i
of the material world, not by oul
comparisons. The degradation of re-
stitution is a phantom of material) m
that belongs to self-righteousneso ;
that is produced by the fictitious
distinctions of self-excellence. Pro-
stitution. so called, in reality is an
undisguised condition of life—an
open expression of the elements of
existence that are spontaneous and
natural, and that are antagonistic
to material glory. [And mark]
Prostitution is an enemy to the good,
the true, the beautiful—that are the
crowning excellencies of the material
world. ”
I now leave the reader to judge of the fairness of my
quotation.
You continue :—“ Again, your quotation from page 41 does not
even begin with a sentence, nor end one ; but is a mere distorted
clip from the middle of one, which is written regarding things
which are said to be ‘the legitimate offspring of Nature.’ it
begins with groans and sighs, and then takes in your clips, going
on to include, among other ‘legitimate’ things, ‘ten thousand
beliefs and anti-beliefs that agitate the religious and moral
world,’ &c. This is another case of garbling.”


Again I maintain that, for the point I wished you to notice, I
quoted the exact words, and no more. I did not misrepresent the
author in the slightest, as again the comparison will show :
Extract from my letter :—
‘ ‘ * The recognition of evil, its re-
sistance and condemnation,' among
other things [Mark this, ‘ among
other things ’], Dr. Child informs us,
‘ are the legitimate offspring of
Mature.’"
I have now given - the full passage,
did not do so before because it would
Quotation infgll :—
“ Groans and sighs, (Jie recognition
of evil, its resistance and condemna-
tion ; the consciousness of self-
excellence and the recognition of
error and sin in humanity, with the
unmeasured consequences of sadness
that follow; tep thousand beliefs
and anti-beliefs that agitate the
religious and moral world ; misery
and suffering, degradation and
poverty, riches, prosperity, virtue,
morals, and all the excellencies of
the earth —all these are the legiti-
mate offspring of Nature. Nature's
law runs through the whole. This
law is truth, existing in every
condition, and in all these varied
manifestations.” [My italics.]
and it will be seen that I
be a consumption of space
to no purpose, ' The parts I quoted expressed the rqeaiung of the
author exactly upon the point intended for you**- observation.
All readers of this correspondence must, therefore,- see how auda-
ciously unfair has been your imputation to' me of “garbling”
on this point.
You admit that you have disregarded the following caution of
Dr. Child: —“Now, reader, do not go away and say that this
book recommends murder.” In spite of this caution you still
insist that it does. Who' should know the better, you or Dr.
Child 1 Dr. Child, who wrote the book, and who certainly had
the courage of-his opinions—however erroneous they might be—
expressly wished to warn his readers against a conclusion that
w’Puld do him wrong, and he therefore informs us that he does not
recommend murder. If you insist you know what Dr. Child
mgant and taught better than he himself di(J, and that he meant
and taught exactly the opposite to what he said he did, you arp
cgrtainiy a njpre wonderful man than 1 thought. But, truly, tlie
wpys of the clergy and of Providence are mysterious !
I must, however, follow up your ipipqfations. Thus you con-
tinue : —“ Again,, your quotation from p. 166 is only a part of a
sentence, which closes with these words —‘ They (meaning crime
and punishment) are legitimate to that condition of life which
produces them.’ And on the same page he declares ‘ there is no
distinction of merit and demerit to -be instituted between , the


good man and the bad man’ —thus completely nullifying your
garbled quotation.” Let us see :
My quotation in Utter :■ —
“ Both crime and punishment are
links in the chain of Cause and
effect.” [My italics].
From Dr. Child in full :—
“Both crime and punishment are
links in the chain of cause and
effect; they are legitimate to. that
condition of life that produces
them.”
Now, where have I misrepresented or garbled Dr. Child in
this ? But in your eagerness to nullify my quotation you have
fallen into the very trap you had set for me. You have quoted
from the middle of a paragraph, and have not given its meaning
exactly. Thus :
Extinct from your letter :
“ And on the same page -.he de-
clares ‘there is -no distinction of
merit or demerit to be instituted
between the good man and the bad
man ’ —thus completely nullifying
your garbled quotation,”
Paragraph from Dr. Child's work in
0 full, p. 166:
‘ ‘ The deeper we look into the
causes of human actions, the nearer
we come to the conclusion that
there is no distinction of merit and
demerit to be instituted between
the good man and the had man, for
the same stern and unalterable
causes of Nature impel both to
action ; the same God of wisdom
has created both, and holds both in
his protecting hand of love. ”
Doesn’t this look a “ leetel ” like living in a glass house ?
“The quotation,” you proceed, “from p. 196 is not from Dr.
Child,” &c. “Again, at p. 197, the quotation ... is
from a letter of Miss Lizzie Doten’s.” “ Again, the words you
quote from p. 207 are not those of Dr. Child,” &c. Well, my dear
Mr. Dowie, I didn’t say they were. After I had quoted the para-
graph standing above, “ IJoth crime and punishment,” &c., I said
distinctly, “ The foregoing is from one of the notices, as are the
following,” viz., those just to. Where did you learn this
method of argument and fajr play 1 Surely not under the Scotch
professors. Will God punish your offspring for these your sinsj
Let us hope not.
I just want to return to a point that I did not notice in
passing, because I wanted to keep to the issue in hand. I desire
to show that, in the quotation you make from Dr. Child on p,
64, Dr. Child is perfectly orthodox, if we take the Bible utterances
for our standard. I will place the passages side by side, that you
may judge for yourself


Quotation 1 from Dr. Child, p. 64 :
“And the man we call a free
moral agent kills another man that
we call a free moral agent. This
deed we call evil. What is the
cause ? —Nature. What is Nature ?
—God. And is Nature wrong ?
Is God, the great mainspring of
nature, wicked ? . The
desires of men, and the inclinations
of men, from whence came they ?
From God direct and immediate.”
Add to these passages those
repented of the evil that he si
Extracts from the Bible :
“ Shall there be evil in a city, and
the Lord hath not done it ? ” *
‘ * I form the light and create dark-
ness : I make peace and create evil:
I, the Lord, do all these things. ” +
“And if the prophet be deceived
when he hath spoken a thing, 1, the
Lord, have deceived that prophet ,”
&c. J
“Man’s doings are of the Lord;
how can a man, then, understand
his own way ? ” |j
which inform us that “ the Lord
he would do unto them,” and
then set to work to abuse the Bible for containing these passages
in perfect agreement with the above utterances of Dr. Child. If
there be any difference between the two at all, it is that the
passages from the Bible more strongly and authoritatively main-
tain that the Lord is the creator of evil than dbes the passage
from Dr. Child you have held up for our abhorrence.
As to the passage being the identical defence which was made
by “ that cowardly and fiendish assassin of President Garfield,
Guiteau,” you must remember that Guiteau was neither a Free-
thinker nor a Spiritualist, but claimed to be a Christian inspired
by God to commit the deed.
I am at a loss to find a name which will justly designate your
dishonourable conduct in your attempt to escape from the charge
of-misquoting A. J. Davis. To that charge you thus reply :
“Now, I quoted with most perfect accuracy the only sentence I
gave from his hazy and cautious letter to Dr. Child, and, notwith-
standing his misty qualifying sentences, which you quote as my
condemnation, I am prepared to reaffirm that he does most fully
endorse the whole aim of Dr. Child’s book. I will prove that
these qualifications are valueless, in the light of his own writings.”
Are you not now convicted of having withheld what you are
pleased to call his “ misty qualifying sentences 1 ” True, what you
did quote was accurate, but it was not even half the truth that
A. J. Davis wished to express. Supposing I had to quote from
Acts xv. 24, “Ye must be circumcised,” and make it appear
that that was the command of the apostles. Supposing, then, that
you had to point out that I had not quoted the passage in full,
and had, therefore, misrepresented it—-for, completed, it would read
“ Forasmuch as we have heard that certain which went out from
us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying,
* Amos iii. 6.
t Isaiah xlv. 7.
J Ezekiel xiv. 9.
11 Proverbs xx. 24.


Ye must ,be circumcised, and keep the law : to whom we gave no
sitch commandment ” —should I have answered you by saying,
“ Now, I quoted with most perfect accuracy the only portion I
gave ? ” Would such an answer exculpate me from your charge ?
Should I not have misrepresented the verse? And this is
precisely what you have done. As I pointed out to you in my
last letter, whep you profess to give the opinion of an author by
his own words, you must quote the whole words which accurately
express that opinion; in other words, you must give those
sentences that the author himself relied upon to define his position
exactly. So long as it does not alter the meaning of the quoted
part, you can add or omit the context as it pleaseth you. But
if by isolating a passage from the foregoing and following
sentences you alter its -meaning in the slightest, you are to that
extent guilty of dishonest conduct. And this is just what
you have done, and what stands prpven against you. In my
quotations, if ever I omitted the context, it was because the
meaning of the quoted passage was in nowise modified by it, as
can be shown by a reference to the passages in every instance.
In your case, however, the context has been wilfully suppressed,
because, if quoted, it would be your own condemnation.
As soon as this is brought home to you, without a blush
upon your unmanly face you iterate, “ I will prove that these
qualifications are valueless, in the light of his own writings ; ”
which, to me, is saying simply this :—“I will prove that my mis-
quotation is of no consequence by making other misquotations
from the other works of Andrew Jackson Davis.”
If this letter had not already reached too great a length, I
would apply your own method of justification to the misquo-
tation I have just made from Acts—“Ye must be circumcised.”
It would be easy by making other misquotations to prove that
this was the positive teaching of the apostles. But I will
illustrate your dishonourable method by a shorter example. I
affirm that the New Testament teaches self-murder quite as
strongly as you say do A. J. Davis and Dr. Child. Do you
want my proofs ? Then here they are, after your own fashion ;
“ Then Judas . . . went and hanged himself.” This is in the
Bible, isn’t it ? Now observe this command : “Go and do thou
likewise.” * Now, both these passages being in the New Testament,
it follows, according to your logic, that every man is commanded
to go and hang himself. This is after the style by which the
clergy prove whatever they want, and which you have adopted
to make A. J. Davis and Dr. Child uphold what they only
explained, but did not justify. This you have done, too, against
the express utterances made to the contrary by these authors.
* Vide Matt, xxvii. 3-5 ; Luke x. 37.


For instance, to refresh jour memory again, Dr. Child says r—
“ Now, reader, do not go away and say that this book recom'-
mends murder” (pp. 71, 72). • *■
In spite of this, you insist that it does. • ‘ r
In the work of Andrew Jackson Davis from which you have
quoted, “ The History and Philosophy of Evil,” the authof-
expresses his conviction that the view that’ he takes is not
calculated to destroy individual responsibility, cripple efforts at
private reformation, or relax the moral power of philanthropists.
“Just the contrary,” says he, “is the effect. Let it be for
ever remembered that an explanation is not a justification ”
(pp. 75, 76).
This is precisely what you have not remembered throughout
your abusive tirade against him.
Space will not serve me, and time will not allow that I go
through all your fresh perversions; but, to show how your
additional quotations are only additional misrepresentations,,
verbally or otherwise, I will select a few of them for the purpose-
of comparison with the works you take them from.
Your quotation and comments.
“His. next is at p. 75, where he
says, * I hesitate not to affirm, once
for all, that ignorance is a negative
or passive fulcrum upon which the
intellectual lever of spiritual progress
acts with an almighty and universal
sweep.' His position, therefore, is,
that ignorance is the basis of pro-
gress, a doctrine which is most
certainly true of Spiritualism, since
its course is downward into utter
chaos and anarchy." [ltalics mine.]
Your quotation from and comments
on p. 109.
“Indeed, we have only to go a
little further to find it so defined;
for, on the same page, he writes :
* Evil is not a principle, is not a
devil, is not a fluid, is not a solid, is
not a sentiment, or a thing to be
blasphemed against and fought
down like a. wild beast; but,
quite otherwise [italics yours, which
you did not signify], these authori-
tative teachers have demonstrated
positively that what hen term
“evil” [your emphasis, not the
author’s] is but the temporary sub-
version of individual rights, the
incidental misdirection of local
forces, and the inversion of private
Extract from A. J. Davis, p. 70..
“ Sin is the child of evil; evil is
the child of error; error is the
child of ignorance ; ignorance is the
first condition of an immortal being
whose whole existence is eternally
to be swayed and regulated by the,
triple laws, Association, Progression *
and Development .” [My italics.]
The quotation in full.
“They have taught us very
graciously to perceive and believe
that evil is not a principle, is not a
devil, is not a fluid, is not a solid, is
not a sentiment, or a thing to be
blasphemed against and fought down
like- a wild beast; but, quite other-
wise, these authoritative teachers
have demonstrated positively that
what men term * evil,’ is but the
temporary subversion of individual
rights, the incidental misdirection
of local forces, and the inversion of
private faculties innately good ; all
of which, primarily, is traceable to
the early protracted night of human,
g-norance, and-is thence perpetuated.


faculties, innately •good.’ '[Again
your emphasis, without an indication
to that effect! ]. X)h ! this is a very
ideal of philosophy for every fiend
in hell and on earth. Evil is. not to.
be ‘fought against,’ for .it. is-
‘ innately good. ’ ”
through the unfolded generations of
all the after ages by tfie yit and
power of selfishness. . '/-'V And.
now, instead of indolently Weeping
as heretofore over past sorrows and
spilt milk, instead of fighting
Heaven by foolishly struggling with
present vicissitudes, as sirrsT, we lift
our brows and stand rfsflbt, with
arm and soul divinely prepared to
supplant little thoughts with great
ideas* to wisely control the con-
ditions of uncontrollable laws—in
short, to overcome evil with good,
the good with better, and the
better with best.”—“ History and
Philosophy of Evil," pp. 109-111.
How glaring your misrepresentation eff this passage is, can be
seen by the simplest man in the world. It is not “ evil” that is
said to ;Jje, “ innately good,” but “private faculties.” Private
faculties, are innately good, and evil is the inversion of them.
Let us continue the comparisons, however :
YtAir &c.
“ * The iihie cure of evil is the true
use of evil. ’ This is certainly a new
application Of saying ‘Set a
thief to catch a thief ; ’ it is setting
Satan to' cast out Satan—a very
likely business.”
“In his book, ‘ The Penetralia, ’
at p. 390, we are favoured with a
report of a spiritualistic
Convention,’, which passed fourteen
resolutions, the twelfth of which
reads thus, ‘Resolved—That “evil,"
so called, is not any transgression of
any law, either physical or moral,
&c.’ Can it be necessary to go
further in quotation ? Here is the
very key-note of Dr. Child’s * What-
ever is, is right, ’ since ‘ evil ’ is held
to be a transgression of no law,
either physical or moral: hence
everything we have been accustomed
to consider physically and morally
wrong is ‘ authoritatively ’ declared
to be lawful and right.”
Quotations m full.
“ ‘ Tht trdk cure of evil is the true
use of evil.' Do you wish to make
of yottr enemy a 1 friCnd? Then
become a friend to your enemy.
Do you wish to befriend permanently
an unfortunate acquaintance ? Then
study and act towards him so that
he may very soon realize an inde-
pendence ; because all false reliance
cultivated by you is future debility
stored up against you. Do you
sincerely pray to destroy evil and
banish human misery ? Then become
philosophical in your philanthropic
exertions.” — Ibid., p. 111.
“Twelfth. —Resolved: That
‘ evil, ’ so called, is not a transgres-
sion of any law, either physical or
moral; but that evil (and sin) arise
from internal conditions and from
external circumstances over which
individuals have no absolute con-
trol ; therefore that the Harmonial
Philosophy teaches universal charity
towards both the agents and the vic-
tims of crime, and points to the pro-
gressive improvement and harmon-
ization of those conditions and those
circumstances which mould and
influence the human character prior
as well as subsequent to the event
of birth.”— ‘‘ Penetralia," p. 396.


I will not consume the time of the reader of this correspondence
hy extending these comparisons, for enough has been done to
show your character as a controversialist. Did time and space
permit, I could make extracts from all the works you have called
into requisition, to show you and the public how unjustly you
have acted towards them. But I think I have done sufficient.
To show you, furthermore, how unfairly you have acted, even
supposing you to have quoted faultlessly throughout, in making
all Spiritualists and Freethinkers responsible for the utterances
of its leading authors, I am going to make a few quotations
from Christian authors, and then to hold you and all Christians
responsible for them. And I defy you to point out in the whole
range of Spiritualistic literature anything more injurious to
our happiness, more baneful in its effects, and more derogatory
to what has been called “ the goodness of God,” than the
following :
“ And therefore I fear not to affirm that it had bene the dutie
of the nobilitie, judges, rulers, and people of England, not only
to have resisted and againstanded Marie, that Jezebel whome
they call their queen, but also to have punished her to the death,
with all the sort of her idolatrous preestes, together with all
such as should have assisted her.”— Knox.*
“ This is the acme of faith, to believe that he is just who at
his own pleasure has made us doomed to damnation ; so that,
as Erasmus says, he seems to delight in the tortures of the
wretched, and to be more deserving ef hatred than of love. If by
any effort of reason I could conceive how God could be merciful
ami just, who shows so much anger and iniquity, there would
be no need for faith.” —Luther.
“ The human will is like a beast of burden. If God mounts
it, it wishes and goes as God wills; if Satan mounts it, it wishes
and goes as Satan wills. Nor can it choose the rider it would
prefer, or betake itself to him, but it is the riders who contend
for its possession.”— Luther.f [This even eclipses the position
of Dr Child, and absolutely destroys Free Will.]
“ Calvin declared that if Servetus came to Geneva, ‘ and his
influence could prevent it, he should not go away alive.’ ” J
“ I reverence it, because it is contemptible ; I adore it, because
it is absurd ; I believe it, because it is impossible.” —Tertullian.
“ Take away Hell and the Inspiration of the Bible, and you
take away all safeguards of morality.” —Dr. Pusey.
“ The giving up witchcraft is, in effect, giving up the Bible.”
Wesley’s Journal.
* Knox, “Appellation.” See Note to Lecky’s “ Europe,” vol. ii., p. 190.
t “ De Servo Arb.” part i., sec. 24.
X See “Calvin and the Swisslleformation,” p. 366.


“The godly wife shall applaud the justice Of the. Judge in
condemnation of her ungodly husband. The godly husband shall
say Amen to the damnation of her who lay in his bosom ! The
godly parents shall say hallelujah ! at the passing of the sentence
of their ungodly child. And the godly child shall from the heart
approve the damnation of his wicked parent who begot him, and
the mother who bore him.”— Rev. Thomas Boston. *
“ The rich man tormented in hell ‘lifted up his eyes ’ and saw
Lazarus in Abraham’s bosom, and to his entreaties ,for succour
and intercession Abraham had replied, ‘ Between us and you
there is a great gulf fixed.’ . . . Water boils at two hundred
and twelve degrees Fahrenheit, but it requires two thousand and
six hundred degrees to melt rocks. This, therefore, was the
minimum of the heat of hell, whose frontiers, therefore, lie
twenty-one miles below the surface of the earth. ... In
these eternal fires every limb and member of our., bodies, every
nerve, and muscle, and tendon, every part of us, in fire, over
which the sense of feeling predominates, would be for ever racked
and tortured, and yet never consumed.” —Rev. M. Walworth.
“No man should rejoice at weakness and diseases; but I
think we may have a,sort of gladness at boils and sores, because,
without them, Christ’s fingers, as a slain Lord, should never have
touched our skin,”— Rutherford.!
“ Tongue, lungs, and liver, bones and all, shall boil and fry in
a torturing fire.”— Rutherford.!
“ Nothing is more intolerably painful than suffering the violence
of fire enraged with brimstone; and hell is described by a lake of
fire and brimstone, in which the wicked are tormented. Whether
the fire be material or metaphorical, the reality and intenseness
of the torment is signified by it. But ordinary fire, though
mingled with the most torturing ingredients, is not an adequate
representation of it; for that is prepared by men, but the fire of
hell is prepared by the wrath of God for the devil and his angels.
The divine power is illustriously manifested in that terrible
preparation ; so that, as some have expressed it, if one of the
damned might pass from those flames into the fiercest flames here,
it were to exchange a torment for a refreshment,” —William
Bates, D.D.§
“ There Satan the first sinner lies,
And roars and bites his iron bands;
In vain the rebel tries to rise,
Crushed with the weight of both thy hands.”— Watts.
* “Four-fold State,” p. 336.
+ See Note to “ Buckle,” Vol. 111., p. 248.
! “ Religious Letters,” p. 17.
§ “The Four Last Things,” p. 394 (published in 1837).


I shall make no further comment on these quotations, but will
leave them to speak for themselves. ,
You conclude your letter with a personal attack upon the
private character of A. J, Davis. After having cited words as
his which he only quoted [see, for instance, your quotation from
“ Genesis and Ethics of Conjugal Love,” p. 40, commencing “ The
true plan of correcting the evils in social life, &c.” This A. J,
Davis quotes as the opinion of a good thinker ; you quote it as the
language of Davis himself}, you refer to his personal history,
recorded in his called “ The Magic Staff.” So
glaringly and malevolently have, you slandered A. J. Davis in
doing so, that I will simply content myself by asking all who
may chance to read this correspondence to go to the trouble to
turn to the book itself foe, a full and complete refutation of
your contemptible charges. Throughout this correspondence you
have seemed to glory in painting your opponents as the most
depraved and iniquitous of mortals. There is no colour too black,
no expression too strong, no epithet too severe to be applied to
them. You have placed them in a world of your own creation,
where the dark imaginings .of. your mind run riot, fiends gibe and
jeer, and the sky is overhung with the dismal clouds of moral
death and everlasting woe. Fallen to the lowest depths,
drowning in the dark waters of the hopeless sea, struggling in
the mire and mud—thus have you pictured and gloated over, as
you have seen, your foes. Deeper and deeper you have increased
the gloom, colder and colder you have made the night, wilder and
wilder have become your dreams, until at last, with wild eyes
glaring, with harsh voice shouting, and knuckles clasped, you
saw your victims drink the very dregs of misfortune, become
helpless to the buffeting of fiends, and perish amid the awful
thunders and curses of your deity. You have filled their veins
with a deadly poison, clothed them in the foulest rags of shame,
and exposed them to showers of virulent abuse. The world to
which you have confined them is never cheered by a smile of love,
never touched by the hand of charity, never brightened by a ray
of hope. Dark as the dismal dwellings of the dead, and clammy
as sepulchral walls, is the abiding-place of your enemies. From
the fabric of a disordered fancy you have woven the dark tapestry
of abuse, and you have thrown over the form of innocence the
dirty rags from the factory of your own brain. And all this, too,
you have done whilst professing to serve the cause of him who
forgave the woman taken in adultery, enjoined upon us to love
our enemies, and instituted the test of discipleship by our love
one for another !
I am not going to say that the Freethinkers and Spiritualists
are immaculate by any means; but I am going to say that, take
them man for man, they are better than the orthodox. And are


the clergy s<s wdft'dl-ously virtuous, so angelically pure, so spotless
and sanctified, that tl>e records of history and the voice of tradition
are silent t<s all but their virtues ? Alas ! the sacred robes of the
priests have oft beeli dipped in human blood, and the jewelled
casket of virgin innocence has been robbed and spoiled by their
licentious hands. They have fed on the fat of the earth whilst
making its people slaves, and they have talked of the blessings of
heaven whilst they have filled the world with woe.
Granted that Andrew Jackson Davis was bad, have there not
been Christians worse 1 Paint him as black as you like, strike
him as low as you please, even then, disfigured by your malice, he
was not a drunkard, like Noah and Lot; he had not a thousand
wives and concubines, as had King Solomon ; he was not as bad
as the adulterer David; he did not lend his wife to others, as
Abrahatn did; nor. did he turn the woman he had wronged, with
her child upon hef breast, to wander in the desert. None* of
these did hte. He did not even kill his daughter to fulfil a vow,
defraud his brother from his birthright, nor dance naked before
the Lord. Women with children he had not ripped up, slain a
thousand foes with the bone of a donkey, nor won a maid with
thirty flesh-bits of the gallant Philistines. You read not of him,
as we do df• the Levite in the 19th chapter of Judges, that
he exposed his wife to a lustful mob, Stfhd treated her so shame-
lessly that in the moftun'g she fell' dead ;, oh the door-step. No;
these are the records tlte Bible gives of its principal characters,
the favourites of a barbarous god, the chiefest stars that shine to
us from the dark night bf The Bible’s youth. These crimes and
characters live in the pages of the book you worship, and in com-
munion with them you spend your life. Shame* upon you, then,
whilst you inhabit such a shameless house, to scandalize your
neighbour !
I am not going to defend the shortcomings of anybody, but I do
most surely object to the priest of the kettle abusing the pan.
When your Bible is free from the sanctions of the vices and
crimes I have mentioned, then, and not till then, can you fairly
uphold it, whilst you denounce its antagonists.
As to the views of A. J. Davis on “ Marriage and Divorce,”
space only permits me to say that they are nobler and fairer than
those of the Bible. There certainly is much to change in our
marriage laws as they are at present, especially as administered
by the priests. Woman is not recognized as the equal of man in
her sphere; her position is not made that of a companion, but a
sort of queen of the servants, who pledges herself to love, honour,
and obey her would-be “ lord and master.” And, too, when a
man and a woman hate each other, the law, in my opinion, perpe-
trates a crime by compelling them to live together. Whatsoever
tends to add to the misery of the world is wrong—is immoral in


the truest sense. If, therefore, the Jaws of marriage and divoi’Ce
can be altered so as to add to the general happiness of mankind,
by all means let them be altered, and that, too, as speedily as
possible. “ The greatest happiness of the greatest number,” with
the least wrong possible to any, will be the aim and object of our
future reformers.
I have now completed my task, which has often been tedious
and wearisome, but which I have followed with an unflinching
resolution throughout, that I might answer every point in your
letter. I believe lam safe in saying—without a single exception
—I have left no stone unturned, but I have accomplished all that
I undertook, swelling this letter to its present bulk by the
abundance of proofs of my points. To the public, who may read
this correspondence, I leave the verdict, confident that my
labour will not have been in vain, whilst exposing your foibles,
denouncing your untruths, and showing the weakness of your
position. Good must come of it, for “ The truth is mighty, and
shall prevail.”
I would have liked much better to have defended Free-thought
than Spiritualism from your attacks; but since you chose to
ignore my challenge, and to attack me on Spiritualism, I made it
a point of honour to follow you, that I might show the public
that, whether Spiritualism be a fact or not, such clergy as you can
only misrepresent it, and do God service by abusing its advocates.
Whether the phenomena of Spiritualism are to be explained by
an appeal to another world, or to this, and this alone, I have not
discussed ; but I have shown that you have libelled its supporters,
perverted its philosophy, and misrepresented its literature.
With the proofs of these charges made manifest in the course of
my letter—
I remain, yours truly,
THOS. WALKER.
Walker, May and Co., 9 Macklllop-street, Melbourne.


LIST
ffllfOMS? UU-KKI.-S
W OKKS
THIN EDGE OF T&E WEDGE.
GREEN AND WALKER DEBATE.
STATE SCHOOLS AND THE BIBLE.
THOMAS PAINE, THE PATRIOT.
VOLTAIRE, THE INFIDEL.
LETTERS TO THE ORTHODOX.
THE JEWS AND GENTILES.
»
DE NATURA (A POEM).
THE LYCEUM ; OR, THE EDUCATION OF
THE CHILDREN OF LIBERALS.
THE CHURCH OF ROME.
OPEN LETTER TO SIR BRYAN O’LOGHLEN,
THE REFLECTOR, published in numbers.


s'
s'




*
