

PUBLIC EDUCATION.
SPEECH
THE HON. HENRY PARKES,
COLONIAL SECRETARY,
ON MOVING THAT THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS BILL BE BEAD A SECOND
TIME, IN THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY, SEPTEMBER 12, 1866.
SYDNEY:
SHERRIFF & DOWNING, 256 GEORGE STREET.
1866.




SPEECH.
nj /" /
4 r-70
On the Order of the Day being read by the Clerk,
Mr. PARKES rose and said : Mr. Speaker,—“ I beg to move
that the Public Schools Bill be now read a second time.” The
subject to which I desire to invite the attention of the House is,
as I think it will bo admitted on all hands, one of surpassing
importance. My best apology for undertaking to deal with it is,
that it is no act of individual presumption on my part, but a duty
that devolves upon the office I hold. In addressing myself to the
question, I am sincerely anxious to temper my own opinions with
the results of experience, and to meet the opinions of others with
consideration and respect. lam sensible of the many difficulties
which surround the question —that must surround it at all times—
and in view of those difficulties, the actual state of the country,
the necessities of the rising generation, and the duty incumbent
upon the Government to do something for the purpose of
extending instruction to those who now do not possess the
advantages of education—l have undertaken this duty. I am
equally sensible that I shall not be enabled to deal with it in a
manner that will be satisfactory to myself or to the public, unless
lam supported by the attention of honorable members. The
subject is one of such great importance that the attention which
might not be due to myself is, at all events, due to the matter
under notice; and, I trust that, in what I have to say, I shall
receive the indulgence of honorable members, and that they will
be prepared, as far as possible, to give me their attention, though
I may be compelled to detain them at greater length than is my
custom. I think it will be advisable, before going to the imme-
diate subject with which we have to deal, to glance at the
progress of education during the last half century in other parts
of the world. Up to the beginning of the present century,
education, such as is known by the term, “ Popular Education,”
had scarcely taken root in the civilised world. In our own
country, as we are all well aware, the most barbarous laws


existed. Men were tried for their lives, and condemned to the
forfeiture of their lives, for what are now considered almost
trivial offences; men were hanged for stealing a sheep,
and young girls were hanged for stealing a few yards
of calico from a shopkeeper’s counter. Yet, contempo-
raneous with these savage laws, statesmen held the
opinion that it was dangerous to instruct the people of the
country. That opinion prevailed in the mother country until a
comparatively recent period, and even now I believe men in the
position of magistrates, and others in authority, are still of
opinion, though they do not often express it, that it is dangerous
to diffuse education too widely among the people. If it be really
a duty to educate the whole people of a State, I think it must
follow that that duty devolves upon the Government of the State.
There are, I am aware, men of very considerable influence in the
present day who, though strong and zealous advocates of educa-
tion, yet maintain that the Government ought not to interfere in
the work, and that education ought to be left exclusively to
individual exertion. Now, unless it is assented to that it is the
duty of the Government to undertake this work of education, I
feel I shall have a very poor cause to bring before the House, and
I prefer stating the argument in support of the Government
undertaking what is called Popular Education, or in other words,
the education of the whole people, upon some higher authority
than my own. I shall therefore trouble the House with the
argument advanced by a man whose name is an authority in
all departments of knowledge, and especially a weighty authority
on this question of education. I will read what Lord Macaulay
urges to prove that it is the duty of Government to educate the
people. The short passage lam about to quote contains the gist
of his argument in support of the view that this duty devolves
upon the Government. Speaking in support of resolutions sub-
mitted to the House of Commons, he says:—
This, then, is my argument. It is the duty of Government to protect our
persons and property from danger. The gross ignorance of the common
people is a principal cause of danger to our persons and property. Therefore,
it is the duty of the Government to take care that the common people shall
not he grossly ignorant. And what is the alternative ? It is universally
allowed that, by some means, Government must protect our persons and
property. If you take away education, what means do you leave P You
leave means such as only necessity can justify—means which inflict a fearful


amount of pain, not only on tho guilty, but on the innocent who are connected
with the guilty. You leave guns and bayonets, stocks and whipping-posts,
treadmills, solitary cells, penal colonies, gibbets. See, then, how the case
stands. Here is an end which, as we all agree, Governments are bound to
attain. There are only two ways of attaining it. One of those ways is by
making men better, and wiser, and happier. The other way is by making
them infamous and miserable. Can it be doubted which we ought to prefer ?
Is it not strange, is it not almost incredible, that pious and benevolent men
should gravely propound the doctrine that the magistrate is bound to punish,
and at the same time bound not to teach ? To me it seems quite clear that
whoever has a right to hang has a right to educate. Can we think without
shame and remorse that more than half of those wretches who have been tied
up at Newgate in our time might have been living happily—that more than
half of those who are now in our gaols might have been enjoying liberty and
using that liberty well—that such a hell on earth as Norfolk Island need
never have existed, if we had expended in training honest men but a small
part of what we have expended in hunting and torturing rogues. I say
therefore, that the education of the people is not only a means, but tho best
means of attaining that which all allow to be a chief end of Government;
and, if this be so, it passes my faculties to understand how any man can
gravely contend that Government has nothing to do with the education of
the people.
It seems to me that the argument, thus briefly stated by this
celebrated man, is conclusive that it is the right and the duty of
the Government to take in hand the education of the people. I
have just said that the introduction of Popular Education belongs
as it were to the present century, and it is a reflection upon our
great country that this cause first took root and first began
to spread its luminous power in other countries of Europe than
Great Britain —for instance, in Prussia, Holland, and in the
northern nations of Norway and Denmark; in the last-named
State, of which so little is known, it took root and diffused its
influence among the people at a much earlier date than in our
own country, and has effected its work much more completely
than has been the case in Great Britain up to the present day.
In Denmark it may be said that the whole of the children of the
country are instructed. As far back as 1817, the population
being then 2,000,000, tho pupils were 278,500 against some
300,000 children at that age when children ordinarily go to school.
So far back as this, the proportion of uneducated children of the
age at which they usually go to school was exceedingly small.
In Holland, as we all know, one of the most complete systems,
probably the most complete system of Popular Education in the


wide world, came into existence at the beginning of this century,
and has been making steady progress up to the present day, till
it has, as it were, embraced the whole population. The state of
education in that country affords so much instruction to us, that
I beg to be permitted for a short time to bring it under the
special notice of honorable members. The largest portion of the
population of Holland are Calvinists, the next largest Catholics,
and the next Lutherans; but throughout this century the children
of all these churches in Holland have been educated in the same
schools. So far back as the great Education Law of 1806, it is
laid down that all disputable points of doctrine should be avoided
in the education imparted to these children, and that law, and the
famous Education Law adopted by Prussia in 1819, have been
spoken of by a distinguished French philosopher as the noblest
monuments of public education ever raised in the world.
Education there, had since then, been going on with almost unin-
terrupted harmony among the different religious sects, and indeed,
instead of differences widening any breach between these reli-
gious sects, a law was passed about three years ago amending the
great Education statute of 1806, so as to render the whole of the
education of Holland, both primary and secondary, of a purely
secular character. In 1806 the Government of the Netherlands
issued an address to the Heads of the various religious bodies,
inviting them to come forward and assist the Government, by
imparting religious instruction to the children, stating in plain
and fair terms that the Government intended specially to
exclude religious education by the teachers. They invited in
this express manner the Heads of the various denominations to
come forward and assist in the education of the children by
giving proper religious instruction. This invitation from the
Secretary of State, addressed to all the Synods of the Reformed
Church and to the Prelates of the Roman Catholic Church, runs
thus:—
The Secretary of State for the Home Department.
To all Synods of the Reformed Church, both Dutch and Walloon ; Consis-
tories of the Lutheran Church, Remonstrants and Mennonites, and
Prelates of the Roman Catholic Church.
Gentlemen, The great importance which the Government attaches to
primal y instruction in this Republic cannot have escaped your observation.
None of its duties are held by it in higher estimation. May the improved
establishments for education yield, under the Divine blessing, the fruits


which they seem to promise ! They will arrest the progress of immorality
in our native land, and the pure principles of Christian and social virtues will,
by their means, he implanted and nurtured in the hearts of future generations.
It cannot be doubted that such at least is the most ardent wish of Govern-
ment, and its chief aim in the improvement of the primary schools. In the
decree of the 3rd of April last, concerning primary schools, that intention is
made manifest by the clearest evidence. The school is not viewed as a means
of conveying useful knowledge only, but is established as a powerful auxiliary
in the improvement of morals.
Upon the same principle, the Government expects that you will give your
support and assistance to these educational establishments, and invites you,
by the present communication, to employ your powerful influence for that
end.
There is one especial part of the education of the young in which the
Government claims your co-operation, namely, their instruction in the
doctrines of the different communions.
You must be well aware that throughout the whole extent of our country
there has hitherto hardly existed a single school in which the master has
given a properly regulated religious education. Religious instruction in the
schools has gone no farther than to impress upon the memory of the children,
and make them repeat, the questions and answers in some catechism. There
was, however, no ground to expect more from the master, for several reasons.
Although? the Government indulges the hope that the newly established
schools will lead to the salutary result, that a regularly organized system of
instruction in the Christian religion, in so far as concerns the historical parts,
and Christian morals, will be gradually introduced; but in the present state
of things it does not consider itself entitled to impose an obligation upon the
masters to teach the doctrines of particular sects.
If Government has thought it necessary, on that account, to separate
instruction in particular doctrines entirely from ordinary teaching in the
school, it does not attach less importance to the duty of providing that the
children shall not be deprived of that instruction; and, therefore, having full
confidence in your good dispositions to promote these salutary ends, and the
welfare Of the young, Government has considered that it could adopt no
measure more effective than to address the different ecclesiastical bodies in
this Republic, and to invite you, as I do by this letter, to take upon yourselves
the whole religious instruction of the young, either by properly arranged
lessons in the catechism, or by any other means. I shall be glad to learn
what measures you may adopt, whether they are to be new, or the revival of
former methods.
As you will doubtless consider it important to communicate the contents of
this letter to the different ministers of the congregations within your several
jurisdictions, I request you to inform me what number of copies you wish to
have for that purpose; and I conclude with commending you to the protection
of the Most High.
(Signed) Hend. Van Stealen.


Now, the whole of the heads of the different religious denomi-
nations of Holland replied to this address of the Government
undertaking this duty. I will quote one of these replies—that
from the head of the Roman Catholic Church is in these terms :
Sir, —In reply to your communication of the 30th May last, which I had
the honor to receive on the 10th instant, I have the honor to state, that as
good schools cannot but produce the most desirable results in preparing the
young for the exercise, not only of social but of religious virtues, there cannot
be a doubt that ’all the ministers of the different religious communions in
general, and those of the Roman Catholic persuasion in particular, will attach
the highest interest to the measures which have been, or may hereafter be
taken by the Government for that object, and that they will consider it a
matter of duty to co-operate on their part, as far as it is possible for them to
do so.
I request that you will supply me with sixty copies of your letter, that I
may distribute them among the clergy of the Church to which I belong.
The Roman Catholic clergy will most willingly undertake to instruct the
children in the doctrines of their religion, and will teach them the catechism
in the churches on such days and at such hours as shall be considered best
suited to the circumstances of their respective parishes ; and I shall commu-
nicate on the subject with the priests who are under my jurisdiction. I em-
brace the present opportunity to take the liberty of calling the attention of
your Excellency to a circumstance deserving of notice.
Sunday is the only day, especially in rural districts, on which religious
instruction can be regularly given to the children of laborers and artizans;
but an abuse which becomes more and more prevalent, throws a great obstacle
in the way of the efforts of the clergy ; working on the Lord’s Day becoming
more and more general among all classes of the people. Artisans, of all
descriptions, frequently work in public on Sundays, and if notice be taken of
it, they excuse themselves by saying that a refusal on their part would be
followed by a loss of employment; others follow the example, and thus a
large number of children are cut off from religious instruction.
Now, as in all Christian communities, Sunday is consecrated to religious
instruction and religious duties, and most assuredly the clergy have ample
need of that day to teach the young, and especially the lower orders of the
people, it is to be wished that Government should adopt some effective mea-
sures to facilitate the duties of the clergy in this matter, and to eradicate the
evil I have just pointed out.
I pray you, Sir, if possible, to bring the subject under the paternal eye of
the Government, in order that it may be attended to.
I have, &c.,
J. Van Engelen, Chief Priest.
Mannsen, 13th June, 1806.
This occurred in the year 1806, and from that time to the present
this system of education, so happily established in Holland, has


gone on progressing from year to year, until, as I have said, it
has been completely emancipated from all sectarian impediments,
and now embraces the whole of the rising generation. I have
before me a work by an eminent man in the mother-country,
published only a few months ago, which gives some account of
the present state of education in Holland, and I will read a short
extract from this book, to confirm the statement I have just made.
It will be known to honorable members that the state of education
in Holland is perhaps better understood by the English people
than that of any other Continental nation. At different times
men of the very highest intellect and character have visited that
country to investigate the state of education there, whose valu-
able reports have explained it with lucidity and truthfulness to
every part of the world. The great naturalist, Cuvier, was
one; the great philosopher, Victor Cousin, another; the popular
writer, William Chambers, visited Holland for the same
purpose; and, later still, that eminent scholar, Mr. Matthew
Arnold, was despatched on the same errand by the Com-
mittee of the Privy Council. The opinions of these men
are widely known, and they place the education of that
country beyond all misconception or doubt, and with great
lucidity and truthfulness before the world. The Home
Secretary of State, in 1857, stated the principle of educa-
tion, as carried on in Holland, in these words : — u 1. Culture of
the social and Christian virtues; 2. No dogmatic teaching given
by masters ; 3. It respected all beliefs, and inculcated a spirit of
tolerance and charity.” Now, what I have said of the state of
education in Holland, so far, applies in a special manner to
primary education, to elementary instruction; the secondary
schools, including the universities, were reported by the dis-
tinguished men whose names I have mentioned as not in so
satisfactory a state. But in 1863 a law was passed so amending
the great law of 1806 as to apply the same principles to the
secondary schools, and at the present time the whole of the
education of that nation is secularised and entirely freed from
every sectarian incumbrance. I hold in my hand a book by Mr.
Grant Duff on Continental politics, published in the beginning
of the present year. This book explains, in a few words, the
nature, character, and condition of these secondary schools of
Holland ; and as the character of most of these schools, as they


are here classified, is new to the Australian public, and as they
seem at the same time to offer excellent models for our imitation,
I desire to read Mr. Grant Duff’s description of them. There
are four classes of these secondary schools :
The first, a school with a two years’ course for those who were to live by
some handicraft trade, or by agriculture, taking up their education at the
point where the primary school stops.
The second, a school for boys who desire a good, but not a learned educa-
tion. In this class are two divisions :
A. The school with a three years’ course.
B. The school with a five years’ course.
Thus we see how this graduated system of secondary schools is
carried out so as to fit every man for his calling, and to enable
him to apply his faculties in the best manner in performing the
special duties of his daily life. The writer proceeds :
The third, or Polytechnic school, which is intended for those who mean to
devote themselves to the higher walks of manufactures—engineering, archi-
tecture, and the like. The fourth, or Agricultural school, intended for those
who desire a thorough knowledge of that science, which, since the decline of
Dutch commerce in the last century, has made immense progress in Holland,
and is, now that Dutch commerce is reviving under the happy influence of
free trade, advancing alongside of it to new victories in the wide heaths
which occupy so much of the soil of the Netherlands, and contrast so pain-
fully with the riches of those districts of the country with which travellers
are most familiar. All these various schools are strictly superintended by
the Government, and—enthusiastically supported by an intelligent people—
are working admirably. We need hardly add that the whole system found
bitter opponents in the same section which is opposed to religious and to
political progress; nor need we mention that no attempt is made to discourage
private efforts for the establishment of other secondary schools on other
principles. As a matter of fact, many such exist, though few of them we
believe have much merit. It is only just to say that the stanchest and most
celebrated Conservatives in the Netherlands speak, as we know from personal
experience, with good-natured pity of the antique and barbarous system
which still disgraces our most famous schools.
The system of education in Prussia is very similar to the system
in Holland; but on the whole, I believe, it has not been so
successful. But in Prussia a few years ago, when the population
stood at 14,000,000, there were 22,910 schools and 27,575 teachers,
which gave one teacher to seventy-eight scholars. One very
important point for us to decide in this discussion is the number
of children who may be safely entrusted to the teaching of one
man. In the great kingdom of Prussia, with its 14,000,000 of
persons and 22,910 schools, the average was 78 children to every


teacher. There were at this time children from sto 15 years
of age, that is of the school age, 2,830,328, and of these 2,830,328
children there were 2,289,727 receiving instruction, leaving only
540,601 who were not attending school. At the present time,
according to this book on the state of the Continent, there are in
the Prussian army, of the power and prowess of which we have
lately had signal examples, only four recruits in every thousand
men who cannot read, write, and cipher. In the great empire
of France, education is very much behindhand. It is, I fear,
even worse upon the whole than it is in our own country, though
prodigious efforts have been made of late years in the cause of
Popular Education. The same principles of education as are in
operation in Holland and Prussia have been introduced into France,
and it is hoped that in a few years they will produce results, if not
altogether satisfactory, at least gratifying to every enlightened
mind. A few years ago there were 2,654,492 children attending
school in France, and there were at the same time 4,800,000, or
nearly double that number, who were receiving no education at
all. I now come to the mother-country, and I think that no
progress has been made in education in the mother-country
which ought to give us any feeling of satisfaction. I consider
that this Privy Council system—which I take leave to say is no
system at all—has proved to a great extent a notable failure. I
think I shall be able to show that it was only devised by the
eminent statesmen who brought it into existence, as a makeshift,
with the hope that in the course of a very little time something
like a general system would be brought forward, and receive the
sanction of Parliament, which would reach the whole of the
population ; and that this Privy Council scheme was never
intended to be anything more than a better machinery for
dispensing the Parliamentary grants devoted to education. Small
grants were given by the Imperial Parliament for the purposes
of education as far back as 1833, and these grants of money were
so small as to appear insignificant even beside the grants of
money devoted to the same purposes by the Parliament of this
country. These grants were handed over by the Treasury to
the school societies of the time, and expended without any
effective supervision, and without any real discretion in the
manner in which the sums were disbursed, and it was the
dissatisfaction arising from the improvident and uncontrolled


expenditure of these inefficient grants of money voted by Parlia-
ment which induced Lord John Russell and Lord Lausdowne to
originate the mode of disposing of the money by the Committee
of the Privy Council. The first grant, I think, by Parliament
for educational purposes, was moved by Lord Althorp in 1833,
when £20,000 was voted for England, and £IO,OOO for Scotland.
When it is borne in mind that this Legislature voted the mag-
nificent sum of £BO,OOO for public education this year, the early
English grants appear insignificant—l might almost say
trumpery —in connection with the educational necessities of the
United Kingdom. These grants, as I have just stated, were very
improvidently and unsatisfactorily expended. There was no
proper authority to expend them, there was no supervision exer-
cised over the expenditure, and the dissatisfaction felt by the
Government of the day led to the institution of the Committee
of the Privy Council on Education. At the time the first of these
votes was passed by the House of Commons, the population
of England amounted to 14,314,102, There were children in the
country from three to fifteen years of age, amounting to 4,294,230,
but the children who were then receiving instruction in England
did not amount to more than 1,276,947, leaving 3,017,283
between the ages of 3 and 15 without instruction of any kind.
The Committee of the Privy Council on Education began with a
comparatively small grant of money, but it went on progressing
every year in the magnitude of its grants till in the year 1849,
ten years afterwards, it reached £75,000, and it has since risen
to the sum of £840,000 ; but since the revised code was intro-
duced in 1861 the vote has been sensibly, though not to any
very great extent, decreased. That scheme was never intended
to supply the place of a general system of education, as
is amply proved in the evidence given by Earl Russell and other
eminent men who have been mixed up with the business of the
Committee of the Privy Council ever since it was instituted, before
a Committee of the House of Commons last year. Earl Russell
supposed that after no long period from 1839 some general system
of education would be submitted to Parliament, but the same
kind of difficulties which surround this question here have sur-
rounded it in England, and these difficulties proceed in the main
from the various Christian Churches. In England they proceed
in a large measure from the dissenting Protestant Churches. The


reason that no grand system of Popular Education has been
assented to by the Imperial Parliament, such as would reach the
whole of the children of the country is, that these various
Churches can never be prevailed upon to give their united assent
to any honest practicable system that the wit of man can invent
for the consideration of his fellow men. That this expenditure
of money—for I refuse to call it a system of education —this
irregular expenditure of the Parliamentary grants under the
supervision of the Committee of the Privy Council on Education
has not answered the pui’poses which a general system of
education should answer may be seen from one fact alone, —that
last year there were in England 11,000 parishes —after the expen-
diture of these Parliamentary grants had been going on from the
year 1839 under the supervision of the Committee of the Council
on Education, —there were 11,000 parishes, with 4,000,000 of
population, who had not derived one farthing’s benefit from these
grants. Now, I think there could be no more striking evidence
that England is still utterly destitute of any system of public
instruction for the people worthy of the name. She is utterly
destitute of any system at all, and this device of the institution
of the Committee of the Privy Council to expend the education
grants—though it may have been instrumental in improving the
quality of education, insuring more vigourous inspection, pro-
viding a better class of teachers, and] extending the advantages
of education to a much larger number of children —-has utterly
failed in meeting the wants of the rising generation of the mother
country.* Earl Russell, in his evidence before the Committee of
the House of Commons, clearly shows that, when he devised and
assented to the formation of the Committee of the Privy Council,
he only looked upon it as provisional. Mr. Lingen, the
secretary of the Committee of the Privy Council, whose name is,
perhaps, better known than any other connected with education
under the action of the Privy Council, shows in his evidence
that he considers the scheme only provisional. Earl Russell
says repeatedly, in his answers to various members of the
committee, that he always looked forward to the undertaking
of some large general system, and that sooner or later this large
general system must come into play before the wants of the
rising population of the mother country can be provided for. If
I did not fear trespassing on the time of the House, I should


like to read some of the evidence given before this Committee.
Earl Russell is asked by the Chairman, Sir John Pakington.
Where those large proportions foreseen by your Lordship at the time as
likely to be administered under the system which you then created for the
existing state of affairs ?
Lord Russell replied—
I cannot say that they were ; but the question arose, after a time, whether or
not it was desirable to go on with the system as then established, or to
attempt, by bringing a bill into Parliament, to apply a more general system
over the country. It was then on consideration thought impossible to carry a
bill for a more general system, and that it was better to go on with tho
existing system. Sir James Kay Shuttloworth, I remember, thought that
the expenditure under the present system might be carried on to three
millions or three millions and a half of money, and that in that way tho
education of the whole country might be provided for, but that was not tho
view, I think, of those who founded the Committee of Council.
When asked whether he would recommend the appointment of a
Minister of Education, he thus expresses his dissatisfaction with
the existing system :
May the Committee understand that your Lordship is not of opinion that
the establishment of a sole Minister of Public Instruction would be an
improvement upon the present system of administration ? I think that so
long as the present system continues, it would not be an improvement. If you
were to make a change, I think youjshould begin with establishing a new
system by Act of Parliament. And when you have done that, you might
find that a Minister for the sole i purpose of education was desirable, and
almost necessary.
This answer clearly shows that Earl Russell, who had more to do
than any other living statesman with the formation of the
Committee of the Privy Council, always contemplated that this
arrangement should be provisional only, and that some general
system should be organised afterwards.
When you speak of a change of system by Act of Parliament may I ask
what kind of change of system you are contemplating ? The sort of change
of system that I was contemplating is this: At present you give aid to those
who are willing to help themselves; that is to say, to those who arc willipg
to subscribe, and to the parents who are willing to pay for their children’s
schooling. The fetato comes in and says, we will help you with another
portion of your expenditurebut, supposing that the persons that are to found
the school do not care about the subject of education, and that the parents do
not care about their children being educated, they have nothing at all. That
is the cause of there being such a vast number of parishes as I see arc
mentioned in the report as not having any sufficient schools. If you alter
that system you must not be content with subscriptions from persons who are


willing to aid education; but you must certainly have a rate ; you could not
have a rate imposed generally upon the country without satisfying those who
are to pay the rate and the minds of the people in general,and the House of
Commons, that it was fair to all the religious bodies in the country, other-
wise you would have, as I have hoard it remarked with regard to the
question of a rate, the disturbance which there has been about Church rates.
These are very great difficulties which would have to be got over. Ido not
know that they will be got over in my time; but if they ever should be got
over, then I say that a Minister of Education would be desirable.
May I ask why you think a Minister of Education would be more desirable
in the event of a rating system being adopted, than it is now, to attend to all
the complicated questions which, under the existing system, come before that
department ? I think, in the first place, that education, as extended to the
whole country, and to nearly every parish in the country, would be far more
important; and in such a condition of things Parliament would look for the
responsibility of a single Minister.
Then your Lordship admits that the responsibility would be greater in the
case of a single Minister than it is under the present divided system of the
department ? I think it would be so.
Mr. Lingen, the Secretary to the Committee of Council, is asked:
Would you concur in the opinion that it is impossible for the advocates of
general education to rest content until some system reaches the whole of the
country ? I should have, I think, to answer that question rather at length if
I stated what are my views on the subject. It has always seemed to me that
the present system was adopted on the theory that the main part of the edu-
cation in this country would continue to be voluntarily maintained, and
almost in despair of arriving at any national and complete system. I have
always understood the idea of its framers to have been that it was possible
to improve a certain part of the education which was voluntarily maintained,
and so to create throughout the country a standard of education, and promote
a desire for education, the means being a very direct and a very minute
action on part of the Government. The system seems to me to be essentially
a provisional system, and good from that point of view; but its continuance
must depend very much upon the state of public opinion. I never expect to
see it become a complete and national system without (to say the least) great
modification.
While some of the continental nations have made such rapid and
commendable progress in Popular Education, those offshoots of
the mother-country across the Atlantic, the United States, have
also done a noble work in this cause. Without troubling the
House with more than a mere glance at the state of education in
America, I will briefly describe the condition of seven of those
States, taken almost at random. Some few years ago in Con-
necticut there were 1656 public schools, with 1787 teachers and
71,269 pupils. The population at the time amounted to 370,792


and the persons who could not read or write were only 4739, or
1£ per cent, of the whole population. In Kentucky there were
2234 schools, 2306 teachers, 71,429 pupils: the population was
982,405, of which 210,981 were slaves; the number of persons
who could not read and write was 66,689, or only 6f per cent,
of the population, notwithstanding this vast number of slaves.
In the state of Maine the number of schools was 4042, the
number of teachers 5540, the number of pupils 192,815; the
population was 583,169, and the number of persons who could
neither read nor write was only 6147, or one per cent, of the
whole population. In Massachusetts the number of public
schools was 3679, the number of teachers 4443, the number of
pupils 176,475, the population 994,514, and the number of
persons who could not read or write 27,539, or 2; t of the pop-
ulation. In New York the number of schools was 11,580, the
number of teachers 13,965, the number of pupils 676,221, the
population 3,097,394, and the number of persons who could
neither read nor write was 91,293, or 3 per cent, of the
population. In Virginia the number of schools was 2930,
teachers 2997, of pupils 67,353; the population was 1,421,661 of
which 472,528 were slaves, and the number of persons who could
neither read nor write was 77,005 or 5| per cent, of the whole
population. In Rhode Island the number of schools was 416,
of teachers 518, and of pupils 23,130 ; the population was 147,545,
and the number of persons who could neither read nor write was
3340 or 2\ per cent, of the population. There are some peculiar
features in connection with the public schools of the United
States; for instance, in many States large grants of the public
lands are made for educational purposes. In Missouri, in 1855,
the grants of land were 1,199,139 acres for Common Schools, and
23,040 acres for a University. In Mississippi, 837,584 acres of
land were granted for Common Schools, and 23,040 acies for a
University. In Boston there is a School Board consisting of
seventy-four members —the Mayor, President of Common Council,
and six persons elected from each Ward, two members being
elected each year and retaining office for three years. There is a
Superintendent of schools, who receives a salary of 2500 dollars,
and who has constantly to give his assistance to the School
Board. In 1855 the number of children between the ages
of five and fifteen, in Boston, was 29,092, and the number


of pupils 25,500, a comparatively small number of those
who were at a school age, not receiving instruction. I have gone
over this ground, because 1 think it must be of advantage to us
to see what has been done in this cause in other parts of the
world, and to compare our efforts with the efforts that have been
made by others, especially in those countries that are kindred to
our own. Passing from the United States to Canada, we find
magnificent provision made for the education of the people. In
1855, the public schools in Lower Canada were divided into
three classes—the superior, the secondary, and the primary; the
superior embracing universities and special schools; the
secondary consisting of colleges, academies, and convents for
girls; and the primary consisting of model schools and element-
ary schools. There were of the superior class 12 schools, with
54 teachers and 331 pupils; in the secondary class there were
140 schools, with 767 teachers, and 20,245 pupils; and of the
primary class there were 2,736 schools, with 2,850 teachers and
112,193 pupils. Then there were in Upper Canada 3,325
common schools, with 222,864 pupils, supported at an expense of
£224,818, and 65 grammar schools, with 3,726 pupils, the
expense of wdiich amounted to £13,535. There was one normal
school, with 124 pupils, the expense of which was £5,576,
Besides this, there were in Upper Canada at this time 179 muni-
cipal libraries, with 116,762 volumes of books in them, costing
£13,870. The total cost of education in Upper Canada in the
year 1855 was £288,998. The proportion of scholars to children
of school ages in the United States and Canada was —in Upper
Canada, 76 per cent.; in Lower Canada, 43 per cent.; in the
United States, 66 per cent.; and in the State of Maine, which
was the most highly educated State of the whole, 93 per cent.
Having thus cursorily glanced at the state of education in other
parts of the world, I will only delay honorable members for a
moment longer by enumerating the ratio of education in some of
the leading countries of the world. I have here a table showing
the proportion of scholars in the elementary schools to the whole
population of the respective countries : —Switzerland, 1 in 5;
Prussia, 1 in 6 ; Norway, 1 in 7 ; Denmark, 1 in 7 ; Austria, 1
in 10 ; Belgium, linll ; Prance, lin 17; Eoman States, lin
50 ; Portugal, 1 in 88 ; Eussia, lin 367; United States, lin
5; England, linll ; Scotland, linlo ; Ireland, lin 18. Now,


I think, if honorable members have done me the favor of
endeavoring to follow me in this dry enumeration of figures, they
must see that in many parts of the world education has made
much more rapid progress than in our own country. Notwith-
standing the great things which Englishmen have done, notwith-
standing the glory which surrounds the English name, notwith-
standing that the British nation has undoubtedly been the
pioneer of liberty in all parts of the world, still for some reason
or reasons which I do not pretend fully to explain, we have not
been the foremost in this great work of educating the people.
We have seen that Prussia, that the kingdom of Holland, and
that the United States are before us; and if wo were to judge
by the munificence of the grants in New South Wales in this
respect, our colony would appear to be in advance of the mother-
country ; and I think that on the whole this infant community
may be said to have addressed itself more effectually and in
a larger spirit to this work than the parent land has done.
We have at all events carried out education in something like a
systematic manner. We have raised large grants, and supplied
education of a valuable quality to many of the rising genera-
tion. I wish now, without detaining the House further, to speak
of our own colony. I find that in 1829, when the popidation of
New South Wales stood at 41,450, there were 54 schools in the
colony, with 2003 pupils, and the per centage of scholars to the
population was about 4f per cent. Ten years later, in 1839,
when the population stood at 114,386, there were 166 schools,
with 6790 scholars, giving about 6 per cent, of scholars to the
whole population. Ten years later still, in 1849, when the popu-
lation had risen to 246,299, there were 558 schools, with 25,682
scholars, giving 10 per cent, to the population. Ten years later,
in 1859, when the population stood at 336,572, there were 739
schools, with 32,840 scholars, giving 9| per cent. In 1864, when
the population had risen to 392,589, there were 1022 schools,
with 48,427 scholars, giving about 12 per cent, of scholars to
the population. In this country the public provision for educa-
tion was very limited until of late years. I find that in 1846
Mr. Robert Lowe, who has distinguished himself in the mother
country by his advocacy of Popular Education; for, whatever
may be said of that gentleman in other respects, he certainly
has been one of the ablest friends of this cause that ever ap-


peared before the public in the mother country. His great
abilities and experience have been devoted throughout his life to
promoting the education of the English people. In 1846, Mr.
Lowe moved the first resolution in favour of establishing a sys-
tem of education in this country, on what was known as Lord
Stanley’s national system; and, in the following year, the old
Legislative Council voted £2OOO for establishing what is now
known as the Board of National Education in this colony. This
Board consisted of the late Mr. William Sharp Macleay, Mr.
Plunkett, and Dr. Nicholson. In the same year, I think, the
Denominational School Board was organised by his Excellency
the Governor for the time being. The two Boards have gone on
progressing and receiving increased grants of public money
until last year, when the National Board had 386 schools open
with 18,126 pupils, and the Denominational Board 445, with
23,746 pupils. Last year there wore new schools opened by the
National Board to the extent of 44, and only four schools were
closed by that Board during the year. The pupils attending
the Denominational schools were 23,746 against 22,297 attending
schools in the previous year. The total cost of education for
last year was £134,858 ss. Id.—l mean the total amount as
supplemented from private sources. I his was expended in
the following manner: Orphan Schools, £7,500 ss. 4d.; Desti-
tute Children’s Asylum, £6,413 Bs. 7d. ; Denominational
Schools, £53,580 4s. lOd. ; National Schools, £49,927 18s. Id.;
University, £11,226 13s. 9d.; St. Paul’s College, £810; St.
John’s College, £500; and the Sydney Grammar School, £4,899
14s. 6d. The total cost in this colony for all purposes of
education was £134,858 ss. Id. It may be as well that I should
state to hon. members the particulars in the cases of the Uni-
versity, St. Paul’s College, St. John’s College, and the Sydney
Grammar School. I find that in the case of the University the
public grant was £SOOO, as we know, and the amount raised by
contributions, fees, and from other private sources was £6,226
13s. 9d., making £11,226 13s. 9d. ; and the number of scholars
was 43. St. Paul’s College received from the Government £650,
and from private sources £l6O, making £BIO, and the number ol
scholars was 8; St. John’s College received £SOO from the
Government, and nothing from private sources, and the number
of scholars was 10. The Sydney Grammar School received from the


public revenue £ISOO, and from private sources £3,399 14s. 6d.,
making a total of £4,899 14s. 6d., and the number of scholars
was 141. I have in my hand a decennial return of the number
of schools and scholars down to the close of last year, and I find
that within ten years we have nearly doubled the number of
children attending schools in this country. That certainly is a
gratifying result. It shows a rate of progress in the cause of
education amongst us which will bear favourable comparison
with the state of things in some other parts of the world. The
number of schools in this country last year was 1069, and the
number of children attending those schools was 53,453. Besides
this number of day schools, we had 35,556 children attending
Sunday schools. It is very satisfactory to learn that within seven
years the number of children attending the Sunday schools of
the country have more than doubled. In the year 1859, the
Sunday school scholars numbered only 16,590; at the close of
last year the number had risen to 35,566. The private schools
in the country numbered 443, with 10,331 pupils. The latest
estimate of the state of education as applied to the number of
children in the colony, I will now place before hon. members.
The children under fourteen of age in the country at the latest
date to which our statistics <?omo was 150,845. I invite the
special attention of hon. members to these facts. Of this number
there were attending school 53,452, leaving the enormous number
of 97,393 with no education whatever. This return comes down
to the close of last year. Making allowance for the increase of
population to the time I am speaking, it is very probable that in
this colony, at the present time, there are 100,000 of children
under fourteen years of age destitute of all instruction whatever !
I think, then, that I have made out a case for interference. If
we are here with a population little over 400,000, and if one
quarter of the whole are children in a state of moral destitution,
with no provision whatever for their instruction, I think it will
be admitted that I have unanswerably made out a case for
interference. I think the argument of Lord Macaulay shows
conclusively that it is the duty of the Government to interfere,
that it will not do to leave this matter to parental care, to private
charity, to the wise efforts of benevolent and enlightened indi-
viduals, but that it is the duty of the Government, on the
clearest grounds of statesmanship and political economy, to


make every effort possible to reach a larger number of
these destitute and neglected children. It requires little
from me to show that it is the sacred duty of this Assembly to
endeavour to arrive at this result apart from all other consider-
ations whatever ; that the importance of educating these children,
and rescuing them from possible ruin, rises immeasurably above
all subordinate objects. No higher duty can engage the ability of
Parliament than supplying these 100,000 unhappy children with
the means of instruction. That the necessity has been felt for a
number of years is well known to every hon. member who hears
me. For a number of years, effort after effort has been made by
succeeding Governments to deal with this question. So far back
as the year 1859, the hon. member for East Sydney (Mr. Cowper)
brought in a bill which, I understood at the time, was intended
to introduce the machinery of the Committee of the Privy
Council, which, however, it was found impossible to introduce into
this country. That bill was defeated. In the same year another
bill was framed, I believe by the hon. member for the Hastings,
to deal with this question. In 1862, Mr. Cowper again intro-
duced a bill into the Assembly to deal with the subject. That bill
provided that a Board of Education should be called into
existence, to consist of eleven persons, and I think from a hasty
glance over the measure that that was its most remarkable
feature. In the same year the Government of Victoria
dealt with this matter. Though they took from us our
National sj’stem and Denominational system, they found,
as we have found, that the two systems together were
at the same time expensive and ineffectual. They abo-
lished the two Boards, and constituted one system of schools
under the name of Common Schools. In 1864, Mr. Cowper
again introduced a bill, which any one acquainted with the
Common Schools Act of the sister colony will see at a glance was
mainly founded on the law of Victoria. In the same year the
hon. member for the Hastings (Mr. Forster) again prepared a
bill, which, however, I believe was never introduced. A bill was
also brought in by another lion, member (Mr. Sadleir), the fate
of which lam not acquainted with. It will be seen, therefore,
that there has been six or seven bills framed lor the purpose ol
dealing with this question. No other evidence is necessary to
show that it is one which Parliament has for a long time


considered it ought to deal with. The mere fact that scarcely a
year has been allowed to pass without an attempt to grapple with
this subject shows as completely as it could be shown that
dissatisfaction exists and is deeply felt, and that there is a wide-
spread desire to substitute for the two present systems some
system which will be more beneficial to the public. As I under-
stand the opinions of hon. members and the public, the disad-
vantages of the present system may be summarised thus:
(1) That education thus carried on is unnecessarily expensive;
(2) that it is, consequent on the very character of the system,
of an inferior quality; (3), that the present method of
carrying out public education is calculated to engender jealousies
and uncharitable feelings among the different sections of society ;
and (4), that it is in an alarming manner limited in its supply.
I have said that it is expensive, and I think I can very soon show
to the conviction of every honorable member who will attend to
me that it is unnecessarily expensive in a manner which ought
not to be permitted to continue. I have a return here of a large
number of the schools scattered over the colony, both National
and Denominational. This return has been prepared at great
trouble, and I believe it is in every case perfectly accurate. It
supplies information which cannot be obtained from any public
source, and perhaps on that account alone honorable members
will give me their attention. I find by this return that in a
district close to the city of Sydney, within an hour’s walk, there
are three schools supported at the public expense which contain
only an aggregate of 91 children. In another district, about
thirty miles from Sydney, I find three schools supported by the
public money, with separate teachers and machinery, and the
number of scholars in the three schools is only 73. Passing to
another district, I find two schools supported at the public
expense, with two systems of school apparatus and two teachers,
the two schools together containing 51 children. Passing on
again to a populous town, within two hours’ journey of Sydney,
I find three schools, supported at the public expense, where the
children number in all only 130. I find in another district two
schools, supported at the public expense, where the scholars
number 61. In another district 1 find two schools with 82 chil-
dren, in another two schools with 71 children. In another
district I find three schools, side by side as it were, supported at


the public expense, with separate school arrangements and
separate teachers, which only muster amongst the three 79 chil-
dren. In another district (an old township with a thriving
population) there are three schools, supported at the public
expense, which contain only 61 children. In another district (an
old settled town) there are two schools, which muster only 45
children between them. In another district, in a town, there are
side by side two schools, and the tAvo contain between them only
85 children! In another town, there are tAvo schools side by
side, which only contain 60 children. In another town two
schools side by side contain only 67 children. In another town
(and a large one for our country towns) there are tAvo schools
side by side, and they only contain 61 children. In another
district there are two schools close together, which only contain
94 children. In another district, little more than an hour s
journey from Sydney, there are three schools, supported at the
public expense, with separate systems of school apparatus , and
separate teachers-all of which the public money goes to provide
—which contain amongst the three only 101 children. In a
thriving town, which can well afford to educate all its oavu chil-
dren, there are three schools, supported at the public expense,
and containing between the three only 99 childion. In another
town there are two schools side by side, supported out of the
public money, which only contain betAveen them 58 children.
In another town there are two schools together, which only
contain 61 pupils; and in another there are two schools close
together, and supported out of the public revenue, but which
only contain between them 48 children.
Mr. Cummings : All out of the county of Cumberland?^
Mr. Parkes : I have reasons for not mentioning publicly the
names.
Mr. Macpherson : Very good reasons, no doubt.
Mr. Parkes : I have reasons why I must decline to mention
where these schools are, and I will mention those reasons by and
bye. The hon. member for Central Cumberland has his infir-
mities, and this is one of them, that he suspects everyone of
untruthfulness.
Mr. Macpherson ; I did not make that charge.
Mr. Parkes : If he or any other hon. member wishes to see
this return he can examine it, but at present I decline to mention


the localities, for reasons I shall not fail to state. In another
town —a town of great prosperity among the young rising towns,
there are two schools side by side that contain only 81 children.
In another town there are two schools with only 85 pupils; in
another there are two schools which together contain but 59
children; in another town there are two schools which contain
only 71 children; in another town there are two schools with
only 94 scholars ; in another there are two schools with only 54
children; and in another there are two schools which between
them contain only 43 scholars. I have hero only given a few of
the instances which are contained in this return, but these few
are sufficient to show the extravagant manner in which the
education grants so munificently voted by this House, have been
dispensed. I must state that this return extends only to a
portion of the schools, and the reason it does not extend to all is
simply the want of time in its preparation. As far as it extends,
it shows that the savings which might be effected in each case if
these schools were consolidated, so as to have only one teacher
to a sufficient number of pupils, would amount to over £7OOO.
The only way in which the difficulty is to be got over, is by
establishing schools under some condition or other that, so long
as they are supported out of the public revenue, shall leave one
school to do the work of education in a district without this
unnatural competition. If the Government is to undertake the
great duty and responsibility of educating the children of the
country, they must do it in a manner to be effectual, and to be
just to the taxpayers of the country —in a manner to be effectual
both in teaching as many children as possible and in providing
a quality of education as high as it can possibly be raised, and
at the same time so economising the funds as not to expend a
single shilling more than is 'necessary in this work. It must be
wrong, nay, positively sinful, to expend a single shilling unne-
cessarily upon educating 50,000 children so long as 100,000
children are destitute of education. It must be wrong to
administer the Parliamentary grants in a way that shall in any
respect interfere with the quality of education ; and it must be
wrong to administer them in a way that shall in any degree limit
and impede the progress of this education. Now, the causes that
lead to the existence of these small and inefficient schools —for it
must be borne in mind that every small school must be inefficient


—will suggest themselves to the minds of all hon.
The main cause of the multiplicity of small inefficient schools
is the unseemly contention amongst those members of society
who ought above all others to lend their efforts to promote har-
mony and goodwill amongst the people, I mean the clergy of the
various Churches. In this colony, as well as in the mother coun-
try, they are -the most inveterate, as they are the most powerful,
enemies that Popular Education has to fear. What is the spirit
calling into existence these small and inefficient schools, which
are swallowing up the beneficent education revenues of the
country ? Why, nothing but the petty desire of each religious
body to have a school of its own. If in a locality whore there is
only a sufficient number of children to form one good school the
clergy would exercise in a proper spirit that Christian charity
which they ought to be the first to inculcate, and consent to the
children being educated side by side, extravagance would be
avoided, and the means of education would be extended to a
number of other children who, whilst ministers of religion are
cavilling over a division of the spoils, are left to moral destitu-
tion —to the gaols, and, unfortunately, sometimes to the gallows.
With regard to some of the victims of capital punishment within
the last few r years, it cannot for a moment be doubted by anyone
Avho knows the country that, if education had been extended to
these unfortunate people, they might have been still alive, and,
as Lord Macaulay says, enjoying liberty, and using that liberty
well. We know that some of those young natives, led step by
step in crime till they forfeited their lives on the gallows, never
had the slightest chance of instruction—that there was no
helping hand extended to them, to point out the way in which
they should go. Unless the great object is kept steadily in
view, or should the disposition be still indulged to seek local
advantage by the establishment of two or three schools where
one is sufficient, our funds will still be wasted, and the cause of
education will still be sacrificed. Ido not believe that the
parents in this country have any serious objection to sending
their children to good schools, let them be of what character
otherwise they may be. Ido not believe these sectarian objec-
tions arise in the minds of the fathers and mothers of the
country, and I have a return in my hand which will conclusively
prove this. I have had prepared a return, showing the per


eentage of the denominations of the country to the entire popu-
lation, and another return showing the per eentage of children
belonging to those various denominations attending particular
schools. I find that the per eentage of the Church of England
is 45, that of Roman Catholics 28, Presbyterians a little over 9,
Wesleyans a little over 6, other denominations a little over 9;
and I find, looking to the National Schools of the country—
and I refer to them now only because they more nearly
resemble the schools that I think ought to be established
all over the country, and I say so advisedly—that parents of
all denominations do not object to send their children to
these schools. There is hardly a parent in the country,
belonging to whatever Church he may, that, if left to himself,
objects to send his child to these schools. Who then is it that
objects ? Who are they that interfere with the control of the
parent, and tear the child away from the education that the
parent would be glad to give to his child ? The children on the
rolls of the National Schools of the country four years ago stood
in these relations to the whole population of the country—there
were a little more than 41 per cent, of the children of the Church
of England; a little more than 20 per cent. Roman Catholics;
15£ per cent. Presbyterians; 'a little more than 15 per cent-
Wesleyans ; and a little more than 17 per cent, of the children of
other denominations. That was in 1862. In 1865 there were
41 per cent, of the Church of England, 21 per cent. Roman
Catholics (showing an increase in the number of Roman Catholic
children who entered these schools), 15 per cent. Presbyterians,
and 14 per cent. Wesleyans (showing a decrease of children of
this denomination). If we come to particular instances, the per
eentage will be more striking as showing the willingness on the
part of parents of all denominations to send their children where
they can receive the best education. I dare say some honorable
members will hardly credit it when I tell them that in one part
of the colony the per eentage of children of the Roman Catholic
Church attending the National Schools is larger than that of any
other denomination. In one of the country towns there is 60
per cent, of the children of the Roman Catholic Church attend-
ing the National School. In another town in the interior there
is 49 per cent., or nearly one half Roman Catholic children
attending a National School; and in another town in the


Southern district of considerable importance, the number of chil-
dren of the Eoman Catholic Church attending the National
School is 86 per cent.
Mr. Digram : Perhaps they are all Catholics there.
Mr. Paekes : Then why do they not go to a Roman Catholic
Denominational School? This supplies a conclusive argument
in support of the statement that if parents were left uninfluenced
to send their children where they could receive the best educa-
tion, they would not hesitate to send them to that school, though
they might assemble in connection with the children of other
denominations. I said that I would decline to name publicly any
of the particular localities to which I have alluded, and I will tell
you why. I did state publicly, only a few weeks ago, one or two
instances in which Eoman Catholic children were attending
National Schools, and immediately afterwards the parents were
compelled to withdraw those children, and only last week—l
have a document showing me —a large number of children were
forcibly taken from one of these schools, not by parents, but by
a power which I think ought not to be allowed to interfere. We are
here to pass laws to punish the offenders against society, and
what right have we to pass a law to take away liberty or life if
we do not adopt the necessary measures to instruct the rising
generation so that our laws may be understood. I now come to
the bill before the House. I must be permitted to say that in
the preparation of this bill no member of the Government has
sought to carry out his individual opinions or any theory of his;
but the intention of the Government has been, looking fairly at
the complications of the question, recognising the interests of
the great denominations of the country, and consulting even the
prejudices of the people, to meet the difficulty in the most
practical manner they could devise. I hope the House will favor
me with that attention which I must confess it has through a
somewhat wearisome time given me beyond my expectation,
while I go through the bill, and state the objects and intentions
with which it has been framed. The first clause provides for the
formation of a Council of Education, of which the Colonial
Secretary for the time being is to be ex-officio President. The
simple idea in this provision is to have a Minister of Education.
It has been felt that this education grant is now of such mag-
nitude, that the interests at stake are of such vital consequence


to tlie present generation and to posterity, that this magnificent
grant should no longer be administered without some person
being made responsible to Parliament. The idea is to supply
this responsibility without creating a new ministerial office. If
this bill should become law, the Colonial Secretary will be known
in this House as the Minister of Education, or as President of
the Council of Education, and in that capacity he will be respon-
sible to Parliament for the administration of the grant. That is
exclusively the intention of this provision. I then pass on to
clause 5, which provides the manner of the appointment of this
council. Whilst it appeared to the Government that no better
authority of appointment could be devised than that of the
Governor w T ith the advice of the Executive Council, it was felt
that it would be better to appoint members of this important
body for a fixed term. At present the members of the two
Boards are appointed, as is well known, for an indefinite period,
and if not removed by the same authority as that by which they
are oppointed, they remain members of the body for life. It was
thought an improvement to appoint members for a limited term,
and that term was fixed at four years. It was then thought that
it would still be an improvement upon this arrangement to have
the members retiring by rotation, so that whilst some were
periodically removed the body itself might be perpetually in
existence. It was considered also that a great convenience might,
arise from this mode of appointment. It is not beyond a probable'
case that, though all the members of this Council might be men
of standing, of good education, and in every way desirable*
persons, yet there might arise in society some person of such high,
ability and of such greater devotion to the cause of education,,
that it would be considered an acquisition to have this person,
a member of the Council Of course, no Government couldl
attempt the invidious and offensive course of removing any member
for the mere purpose of appointing another, however superior
that other might be ; but if members retire from their seats by
the operation of time, it will neither be invidious, offensive, noi
inconvenient to appoint any such person as I have supposed may
arise amongst us in place of some one retiring. This might be>
done in such a case without calling for severe criticism, and the'
Council might thus be invigorated by the infusion of the highest
talent and fitness that could be found in the country; so that, by


this system of rotatory retirement and appointment for a fixed
term, great advantages would arise, and no serious disadvantage
could possibly be feared, because, unless in such a case as I
have supposed, the members retiring would, as a matter of
course, be re-appointed. Then it is provided that no two of the
five members of the Council of Education shall be of one and the
same religious persuasion. I believe this is in the Common
Schools Act of Victoria, and I think it was a provision in the bill
introduced by Mr. Cowper ; and the object, I presume, is that
no undue denominational element should operate in the Council,
such as might withdraw from it public confidence. Of course, if
this provision be carried and it become part of the bill, the
Church of England, the Eoman Catholic Church, the Presby-
terian, and the Wesleyan will be represented, and there will be
some gentleman selected to represent the Congregational and
other religious denominations of the Protestant Church. The
6th clause gives to the Council the necessary powers to appoint
and remove teachers and inspectors, to expend the money voted
by Parliament, to establish and maintain Public Schools, to
frame rules for their own guidance, to train and examine
teachers, to examine scholars, and to provide for the discipline
to be enforced, and so on. I have read the petition pre-
sented by the hon. member for East Sydney (Mr. Hart), and
signed by a number of the Roman Catholic clergy ; and this
petition—l don’t know whether we are to understand the peti-
tioners as representing the Church—would render it utterly
impossible to carry out any scheme of public education. These
petitioners say plainly that the Denominational system of educa-
tion is the only system under which what they call their freedom
can be enjoyed. It would be absolutely impossible to carry out
in our limited community, with our limited revenue, and with
the vast number of children that we have to educate, any Deno-
minational system of education. These petitioners, for example,
want to have a Denominational training school for the education
of teachers, but in order to place all on equal terms it would be
necessary to have eight or ten such schools, for I imagine that
these Catholic clergymen would not arrogate to themselves the
right of training teachers for the Protestant denominations.
They take up this position, that we must have ten Training
Schools instead of one. It would therefore be impossible to


carry out the unreasonable views expressed in this petition.
Then these petitioners, and those who act with them, claim the
appointment of the teachers. Now, I should like to know how
any Parliament, chosen as this Parliament is, entrusted with full
and plenary powers in disposing of the revenue of the country,
could vote away the public money for education while the
teachers were appointed by the various religious denominations ?
Practically, in the Denominational schools that will be called
into existence under this bill, the clergy will have considerable
influence in the appointment of the teachers, because, as a
matter of course, if they recommend to the Council persons
suitable for teachers, the Council will, on being satisfied of their
competence, appoint them. The 7th clause gives the Council
of Education power to frame regulations; but these regula-
tions are not to have the force of law until they have been before
Parliament a whole month, during which time Parliament can
exercise a direct power of disallowance. I now come to the
soul of the measure, if it has a soul, in the Bth and 9th clauses.
The Bth clause provides that a “ Public School maybe estab-
lished in any locality where, after due inquiry, the Council of
Education shall be satisfied that there are at least forty children
who will regularly attend such school on its establishment.”
Now, by referring to the other clauses of the bill it will be seen
that this Public School is to be one in which secular education is
to be carried out during four hours every day; but provision is
made that clergymen, or other religious teachers, may attend and
instruct the children of any particular denomination in their own
religious doctrines. If the clergymen of this colony could rise
to the height of their duty, as they did in Holland, they would
see that the best system of religious instruction could be com-
bined with the most effective system of secular education that
this country can supply. But if they must have the sole control,
and have religious instruction carelessly imparted by the school-
master, they will simply exhibit themselves as stumbling blocks
in the way of education, as they have been times out of number
before. It must be apparent to the common sense of every hon.
member who hears me, and of every member of society out of
doors, that the only way in which we can provide education in
small thinly-peopled districts is by refusing our sanction to more
than one school. The consequence would bo, if we allowed more


than one school in a thinly populated district, that the money
voted by Parliament, no matter how large the grants, would be
insufficient to provide schools for the whole of the people of this
colony. If the clergy were bent upon carrying out the true
principles of Christianity—if a high sense of duty guided them
in their daily life, they would find sufficient tyne to attend the
schools, and to instruct the children in the faith of their fore-
fathers. But with a view of meeting the denominations as far
as possible, the next clause provides that they may have Denomi-
national schools wherever they can find children to support them.
When they can find forty children to form a school they may
have a teacher of their own persuasion, and they may then
remain themselves in the school and teach religion from morning
to evening, the only thing that the Government insists upon
being that the standard of secular instruction shall be as high
as in the other schools—that it shall be sound and efficient.
The 9th clause provides that “ it shall be lawful for the Council
of Education in any locality where a Public School may be
established which has in attendance thereat not less than eighty
children, to certify as a Denominational School any school situated
not more than five miles from such Public School, on such
Council being satisfied after due inquiry that there are at least
forty children in regular attendance at such school.” I have
shown that in Prussia, and in some other of the large States of
Europe, the average number of children allotted to a teacher
throughout the vast population is 70 in one case and 78 in
another, and so, in order to prevent the unnatural competition
that has been consuming our Education revenues, it is provided
that a second school shall not be established until the first has
reached a scale of numbers equal to the attendance of pupils in
the great countries of the Old World. What could be more
reasonable ? When these schools, to which all can have free
and equal admission, are filled up, if forty children belonging
to one denomination can be found in excess of the eighty in the
first school, the clergy can claim another school for them, and
this school will be to all intents and purposes a Denominational
school, the only condition insisted upon by the Government being
that the same course of secular instruction shall be taught, and
that it shall be under the same regulations and inspection. But
even the regulations will be modified to suit its denominational


character. The 10th clause provides fur the appointment of
teachers of the same religious persuasion as that of the Denom-
inational schools in which they will bo employed to teach. lam
told that some denominations, if they have a good teacher of
another denomination, do not care to part with him. So that
this clause is so*framed as to be put in force upon application
from the persons interested. The 11th clause provides that in
all Certified Denominational Schools the religious instuction shall
be left entirely under the control of the heads of the denomination
to which any such school may belong. The 12th clause is, as
far as lam aware, new in Australian legislation. It provides
that “in districts where, from the scattered state of the popula-
tion, or other causes, it is not practicable to establish a Public
School, the Council of Education may appoint itinerant teachers
under such regulations as may be framed by them for that
purpose.” lam told that in several districts in this colony, this
system of ambulatory teaching is carried on to a considerable
extent —and that its advantages are felt to be considerable. In
Norway, which is one of those northern nations which has paid
great attention to education, the population is thinly scattered
over wide mountainous districts, and the bulk of the children are
instructed by these itinerant teacher’s. This system, therefore,
is not new. In 1833, the population of Norway was 1,000,000,
and it had only 183 fixed schools, the pupils numbering 13,693 ;
but there were 1610 schools carried on by itinerant teachers,
and the children connected with them numbered 132,632.
This is an illustration of the successful working of this system of
ambulatory schools in thinly-populated districts, and will at once
set aside all objections to it. Looking at the state of our country,
and the similarity of many parts to the physical characteristics of
Norway, I think we may be able to reach some of the children
in this way that could not be reached in any other way. It will
be far better to afford them this imperfect means of instruction,
than to leave them to grow up totally uninstructed. I expect,
therefore, that not a single vote will bo recorded against this
provision. The next clause, the 13th, provides that—“ The
Council of Education shall establish a Training School for the
education of teachers both male and female, and shall prescribe
the course of studies and the examinations in such school, and the
teachers so educated shall be classified according to their attain-


merits and skill in teaching, -and shall receive Certificates of
Efficiency which shall entitle them to corresponding grades
in the school service.” I desire particularly to call hon.
members’ attention to the words “skill in teaching.” Mere
accomplishments, or aptitude in the acquisition of one branch of
knowledge will not be sufficient, but these teachers, in addition
to proficiency in general knowledge, must establish their “ skill
in teaching ” before they can obtain their Certificates of Efficiency.
I entirely endorse the opinion of Earl Eussell, that if we want
good schools we must have good teachers. You will not have
good scholars without good teachers, and there is no possible way
of raising up a body of efficient teachers except by some such
institution as this. The 14th clause is one upon which lam
aware there is much difference of opinion, and gentlemen entitled
to the highest consideration, who agree with me in other parts of
this bill, object to this clause. lam fully aware that much can
be said against it, but I also feel that much can be said for it.
The clause is as follows: —“ The salaries of teachers in all cases
shall be fixed and not supplemented by fees, shall be regulated
by the number of pupils, and shall be increased by every addition
of ten to the average attendance over a period of three months.”
Well, now it is objected to this clause—first, that the arrangement
of supplementing the salary by fees gives the teacher at once an
interest in promoting the progress of the school. It is said, that
he would never take the same amount of trouble to collect fees
if his own interest in them were removed, and the amount
received for education from this source would consequently fall
off. It is thought, moreover, that there would bo some risk in
remote districts of the fees being mis-appropriated. The Gov-
ernment, in considering this provision, were desirous of raising
as much as it was in their power to raise the social status of the
teacher. They think that his office is a high and noble office.
They think that his office is second to few in the community,
and that the person to whom you entrust the education of your
child should cultivate in himself as nice a sense of personal
honor as possible. They think he cannot stand in the
independent position which he might otherwise stand in, and
must resort to conduct inconsistent with a fine sense of honor
if he is paid by fees. It is known to be a fact, that if, as
is always the case, the parents of one portion of the children pay


regularly, and the parents of the other portion pay irregularly,
the teacher will insensibly, and perhaps not unnaturally, take
care of those children whose parents pay regularly, and regard
with disfavor those children whose parents do not pay regularly;
and thus two classes will rise up in the school, against which
mischievous contingency you can make no provision. It is thought,
then, that by giving him a fixed salary, you relieve him from this
invidious position. You, above all things, protect the unhappy
children from any neglectful treatment which might arise from
the conduct of their parents, and ensure their being received on
grounds of equality. It is thought that the teacher ought to be
placed in a position of greater personal independence, in a position
in which he may more consistently cultivate those feelings which
we think ought to actuate every teacher. Then we say that if
we make the increase of his salary dependent on the increase of
his school, we supply that stimulus which he lias now in connec-
tion with his fees. It is said that if you release the teacher from
the obligation of collecting these fees they will fall off, and thus
the State would be a loser. It is very probable the fees may
fall off, but if we secure to the teacher a better position—if we
protect the children from any treatment arising from the
manner in which the parents pay or do not pay—we say that the
amount of good that we obtain wall be altogether beyond any
falling-off in consequence of this arrangement. These are the
main view T s wdiich actuated the Government in the preparation of
this clause, and, after having listened to the objections consistently
and forcibly urged against it by some of the most distinguished
men in the country, we still think that our views are sound. The
next clause simply provides for a scale of fees to be paid by
children. Clause 16 provides that notwithstanding any regula-
tions that may be made for school fees, any children whose
parents neglect to pay the fees shall be received and educated.
It has been, and will probably be again alleged, that these
clauses are inconsistent, inasmuch as they provide for the pay-
ment of fees, and at the same time supply a loophole for evading
payment. The question again arises, what are the objects of
Parliament in making this provision for Public Education ? Is
it to compel the parents to pay school fees, or is it not to save
the children, and to make them useful members of society ? If
the primary object which arises above all others is to educate


the children, then I say that the mere payment of fees ought
not to be considered for a moment against the attainment of that
object. Because a drunken father or an ignorant mother neglects
to pay the fees Avhich he or she has engaged to pay, are their
children to be deprived of education and turned adrift ? It is said
that all parents will refuse or neglect to pay the fees ; but I say
that hon. members who will take this ground of objection
know nothing whatever of the character of the British
people. There is among the great masses of our countrymen
and countrywomen in the lower walks of life as fine a sense of
honour, as true an appreciation of their obligations, as great a
desire to occupy a position of respect and influence, as exists
amongst any other class of society; and I say that nine-tenths of
British fathers and British mothers who have once engaged to
pay these school-fees will no more think of classing themselves
with drunkards and worthless persons for the mere purpose of
evading payment than they would of forfeiting their right hands.
Amongst the respectable portion of the working-classes and the
tradesmen of this country, no person, or not one in a hundred,
will attempt to payment of these fees, simply because
this provision is made for children who have disreputable
parents. To escape the payment of these fees they would have
to class themselves with these worthless persons. They think as
much of their position, of their character, of their honour, as the
nobles in the old world, or the richest and most influential per-
sons in this, I feel, therefore, that these objections are perfectly
groundless, and that it will be found that the persons who
engage to pay these school-fees will pay them just as regularly
as if this provision did not exist. We provide education for a
class of children who require it most, because if any child
requires the intercession of the State, if any child has a claim
upon its bounty, it is the poor child whose parents neglect to
provide for him and refuse to pay the ordinary school-fees. We
thus provide, in the only manner in which it is possible, for
these children, who, if you deny them this; will have no other
means of education. To refuse this, you simply refuse to educate
the children who are placed in the most necessitous circum-
stances. You educate those whose parents are anxious to take
care of their precious intellect and develop it, but you refuse to
educate those children whose natural guardians desert them and


leave them to the fate of ignorance. I feel that the operation of
this provision will be beneficial, and that it will be followed by
none of those inconvenient consequences to which some honor-
able members seem to fear that it will lead. Clause 17 provides
that four hours in each day—two in the forenoon and two in the
afternoon—shall be set apart for secular education in Public
Schools. It goes on to provide that one hour shall be set apart
when the clergyman or other religious teacher of any denomina-
tion may visit the school and instruct the children belonging to
his religious communion in the faith in which it is desired that
those children should be trained. But there is a proviso to the
effect that if the clergymen do not avail themselves of this
hour, the precious time shall not be lost, but shall then be
devoted to the ordinary instruction of the school. The 18th
clause enacts that no applicant shall be refused admission
into any Public School on account of the religious persuasion of
such applicant or of either of his parents. I imagine that no
one will object to that. The 19th clause gives power to the
Council of Education to dispense with the attendance at the
training school, and with all examination, in the case of National
and Denominational school teachers now appointed, where it
may be expedient to retain these teachers in the school service;
so that, unless their removal is rendered necessary on the ground
of inefficiency, they will be retained, and will not be subjected to
the inconvenience ot passing the examinations. The next clause
provides for the creation, in any district where Public Schools
shall be established, of a Public School Board. There is a
departure from the existing plan in the creation of this Board.
At present the Education Boards appoint the local patrons on the
recommendation of the community where the schools are estab-
lished. This bill provides that they shall be appointed by the
Governor with the advice of the Executive Council, on the
nomination of the Council of Education. It is intended practically
that the persons whose names may be submitted by the commu-
nity where the school is established shall be appointed, on the
Council of Education being satisfied that they are proper persons.
It was thought that the appointment by the Executive Council
would give, as it were, something more of standing and authority
to the persons nominated than attaches to the present mode
of appointment. This was the only reason for the departure


from the present practice. lam aware that many excellent
persons are in favor of these local Boards being elected, but
lam not so sure that any process of popular election would be
so safe as the plan proposed. The next clause empowers the
Council to aid public buildings vested in it for Public School
purposes. The next clause after that provides that in the
establishment of new schools or in the certifying of Denomi-
national schools the intention of the Council shall be pub-
lished four consecutive times in the Gazette, the object being to
afford the public time to remonstrate, or to offer any objection to
the action proposed to be taken, I have now got to clause 23,
which gives power to the Council of Education to sell property
and reinvest the proceeds for the purposes of Public Schools.
The next clause simply provides for the due preparation of
annual reports. Clause 25 provides, in a more liberal spirit
than any other bill of the kind, that the whole of the schools
now existing shall be taken over and allowed twelve months to
conform to the provisions of the Act. In Victoria only six
months were allowed, and the schools there had to conform to
more stringent provisions. If by January, 1868, the schools do
not come up to the moderate minimum of forty pupils, they will
be dropped. The other two clauses simply fix the time for the
commencement of the Act, and define the short title. I think
that if this bill has the good fortune to receive the support of the
House and to become law, it will do much eventually towards
economising the Public School expenditure, and ensuring educa-
tion of a higher quality by reason of raising up, I hope, a class
of trained teachers to carry on this education. I have clearly
shown that it would extend the advantages of education to a far
greater number of the children of this country. I think that its
provisions are calculated, beyond the possibility of controversy,
to extend the advantages of education to thousands upon
thousands of children who, under the present system, receive no
education at all. I trust that the measure will be considered in
the same spirit in which it has been framed—with no desire to
carry out any pet theory, with no desire to overlook the predilec-
tions of large bodies of the people, but with an anxious and
sincere desire to administer the Parliamentary grants so as to
provide the largest amount of education, and education of the
highest quality that we can reach, to the largest number of the


children of this country. I now offer my apologies to the House
for the imperfect manner in which I have treated this question,
and, deeply sensible of the momentous interests involved in its
settlement, I submit it for your deliberations, not without
serious apprehension of the dangers to which it may be exposed
from an advocacy so weak as mine, but with perfect confi-
dence that it will receive justice at your hands. This cause can-
not suffer from the feebleness of my appeal; the voices of a hun-
dred thousand children appeal to you and implore you not to
allow any secondary consideration to impair your generous exer-
cise of power in saving them from neglect and ignorance. By
what you do now you may render a service that will be felt here -
after in the aspirations of a hundred thousand human lives —in
that unknown multitude arising in our midst, which have yet to
employ their faculties in moving the machinery of society, and
who, for good or evil, must connect the Present with the Future.
They will come after us, in the field and in the workshop, in the
school and in the Church, on the judgment-seat and within these
walls —a mighty wave of intelligence that must receive its temper
from you, but whose force you will not be here to control. I
leave with you this question, so pregnant with social consequences,
relying on your enlightened patriotism, to approach it in a tem-
perate spirit, to consider it dispassionately, and to ai’rive at a
decision upon it which shall inspire the people with renewed con-
fidence in the wisdom and integrity of Parliament.
Mr. Macpherson did not think the House ought to be called
upon suddenly to affirm or negative a bill involving so many
large and new principles as the one now before the House. He
thought time ought to be afforded for the country to speak
out boldly on the subject, and concluded by moving that the
debate be now adjourned to this day fortnight.
Mr. Samuel seconded the motion, which was put and carried.






JUST PUBLISHED
A NEW EDITION OF
THE GAZETTEER OE NEW SOUTH WALES.
Crown Bvo, cloth, Price 55., by Post ss. 6d.
WITH .A. NEW MA.F OE THE COLONY,
Compiled and enfraved expressly for the TVbr/c, and colored.
CONTENTS
The names and Situations of all the counties, with their principal towns, area, population, rate o f
mortality, and occasional notices of their peculiar features.
The Names of all the Towns and Tillages, distinguishing the Post Towns and those in which Courts of
Petty Sessions are held, and showing—
The county and police district in which each is situated.
The distance from Sydney, or from the principal tow in that part of the country.
The population according to the last Census.
The mean annual maximum and minimum temperature.
The annual fall of rain in all those places where a register is kept.
A Full Topographical Description of all the more important Mountains, Plains, Rivers, Creeks,
Rivulets, Bays, Inlets, Islands, and Headlands, with the distance of each from the nearest post town.
A Road Directory, showing—
The Main Roads, and the places through which they pass, with the distance and route from Sydney.
The Railway lines, so far as completed.
The Minor Roads maintained at the public expense, with all the other lines on which Her Majesty’s
mails arc conveyed, and distinguishing those lines on which they are carried on horseback from
those by coach.
An Alphabetical List of the Post Towns, with references to the roads on which they are situated,
showing—
Those places to which Book Parcels are conveyed by post.
Those places where Money Order Offices are established.
Those places to which the'Electric Telegraph Lines extend.
SHEBBIFF & DOWNING, Publishers, 356 George Street, Sydru


