

W„, . , - r . ■
■UklA\ 3 :
J*
C
. * k f ■
/
• . ... - :


-
t ‘
'


that at last we might complete the diagnosis of these minute yet
highly remarkable and not unimportant plantlets, although
Dr. Samuel Johnson, of last century’s literary celebrity, would
very likely have relegated them to the division of useless plants as
one of the two into which he would wish the vegetable kingdom
apportioned !
As an instance of particular interest in Australia, how very much
the nomenclature of plants may become complicated, the genus
Persoonia may be adduced ; its earliest name is Pentadactylon—
bestowed exactly a hundred years ago by Gaertner in his celebrated
carpologic work, the pluri-cotyledonar structure of the embryo
having already been then so cleverly found out—but subsequent
researches proved, that this criterion applied to but few of the
many species of that genus besides the primary one, irrespective
of the fact, that an embryonic note is so little observable. Thus
then Gaertner’s generic appellation was perhaps with injustice
discarded in favour of that of Persoonia ten years afterwards
established by Sir James Smith, who however missed to identify
it with Cavanille’s genus Linkia, published and figured a year
earlier. Undoubtedly Persoonia should be changed into Linkia ,
for although on chronologic reference the last mentioned name
will be found applied in 1805 also to Desfontainia, simply because
that genus is dedicated like Fontanesia to the same savant, yet
there is no valid reason for abolishing Delesseria, with a view of
keeping up a sole homage for Baron Benjamin de Lessert. Rules
of priority should also not be carried out injudiciously and
indiscriminately; therefore it would be vain to re-establish the
name Lomandra for the genus Xerotes , inasmuch as that
designation was founded on a fallacious observation, the supposed
marginal attenuation of the anthers referring only to the
rudimentary stamens of the pistillate flowers. Names in Natural
History whether of plants or animals, cannot be arbitrarily
retained in some instances and changed in other similar cases;
the rule must be uniform, and then only can it be just; but the
etymology may be unalterably faulty, or the oldest appellation
may rest on erroneous or misleading ideas or on wrong geographic
record, while on the other hand the eldest name, as in the instances
of Bassia and Stylidium may simply have been missed by a very
pardonable oversight.
Let us follow up some Australian data in this respect.
Limnanthemum stands in precisely the same relation to Villarsia
as Iponura aquatica to its other congeners. If Phebalium is to
be maintained, then Boronia, the next allied genus, needs to be
divided into two genera. If Euxolus is to be abolished, then
with Portulaca requires to be united Claytonia, a sub-genus of
Montia. Bassia has become restored recently also by Schweinfurth,


Ascherson and Baillon, for Salsolacese. Like Candollea it was
clearly and fully described ; both were also illustrated at once
by delineations and have indisputable rights of precedence. The
priority of Siehera among Composites renders the homonymous
genus among Umbelliferee superseded by Didiscus, a name
universally familiar to Botanists and to Horticulturists also for
the last 60 years. If the law of strict priority is not throughout
to be observed, it will be quite incomprehensible, by what code all
exceptions and deviations are to be admitted. In a case like
that of Gahnia against Cladium, the first dual name in the
former genus establishes the claim, though as a genus Cladium is
of a much earlier date ; their supposed distinctions in this case
are rendered invalid by Carex within the same complex ordinal.
Had the due restoration of such genera as Wilckia, Hyhanthus,
Bramia and Laxmannia been effected early in the century much
synonymy would have been obviated, and less hesitation existed
as to their recognition. In all this it must also be considered,
that a phytographic system is to serve for centuries, and not
merely to be in consonance with the traditions of a few
generations.
A curious intrication exists as regards the name of one of the
most common of our Senecios, which since 1803 passed as S.
australis; it has recently been ascertained that its description by
Willdenow is based on a variety of Senecio lautus from Hew
Zealand, where our plant does not occur, so that the formerly
current name has only the authority of A. Richard (Sert. Astrolab.
t. 39) from 1833 for it; but the plant constitutes the S. dryadeus
of Sieber, mentioned in 1826 by Sprengel (Syst. Veget. iii., 562).
This case is merely given to show what accuracy is required for
incontestable records in phytographic writings. Todea might well
be reabsorbed in Osmunda (perhaps with exception of the section
Leptopteris) in as much as 0. hipinnata effects the transit. (See
Hooker’s Filices Exoticie, t. 9.)
Now only remain some concluding remarks on ordinal affinities;
for but few of these characteristics are by themselves absolute,
not even that established already by Ray in reference to the
number of Cotyledons ; thus in Australia Ceratopliyllum, Nuytsia,
some Persoonias and Callitris have more than two cotyledons,
while they are undeveloped in Cuscuta. The linear sequence of
course is the only one available for practical descriptive purposes;
so that, even in the most careful systematic arrangement, it becomes
necessary to rely not too strictly on even main distinctive notes.
To vindicate therefore some of the changes ventured on in the
new publication, let us remember that numerous stamens occur in
the Tropic-Australian genus Distichostemon among Sapindacese,.
and in two species of the Asiatic genus Megacarpaja among


Crucifer* ; further that one Tasmanian species of Eriosternon has
normally tetramerous flowers, that one Indian congener of
Eugenia shows always scattered leaves, and that one New Zealand
species of Drosera has quite perigynous stamens.
In transferring Yinifer* to the vicinity of Rhamnace*, as
devised by Baillon, and more particularly to the proximity of
Araliace*, as simultaneously and independently recognized by
Planchon and myself, we have to consider the enlarging fruit as
placed superiorily merely through the small calyx remaining
stationary in its development, an analogous case being presented
by Exocarpos, thus far anomalous in the order of Santalace*. To
the altered position which Elatine*, Plumbagine*, Thyrnele*, and
Plantagine* have received, reference is made in my former writings.
Further alterations may hereafter yet be effected in the positions
of some of the orders and particularly also genera. Certainly
Ceratophyllum will have to be placed with ordinal rank between
Cabombe* and the Batrachium-section of Ranunculace*, as
indicated long ago by Asa Gray and quite recently carried out
by Engler, but on an interpretation of its floral organs, different
to that previously given to it. So also may Rajas perhaps need
a transfer to Hydrocharide*, its achlamydeous pistillate flowers
rendering the perigynism an impossibility, just as in the perhaps
halorageous Callitriche. Loranthace* and Proteace* are left
closely together; their near affinity is further demonstrated in
quite an unexpected manner by the pluricotyledonar embryo of
some of the Persoonias and of Nugtsia above alluded to, the
latter having three to four cotyledons, or according to Drummond,
several. (Hook., Journ. ii., 34, F.v.M., Fragm. vi'., 252). That
mere resemblance may however be deceptive, is shown by the
genus Jacksonia, the species of which on hurried inspection might
easily be taken for proteaceous plants. The flowers of Santa!ace*
so far as their floral envelope is concerned, might be compared to
those of such Rubiace*, which have a lobe-less calyx. In
assigning to Proteace* petals, as has been done in the more recent
writings of mine, we need not take our clue from comparisons
with Loranthace* alone, because the genera Acacia, Asterolasia and
Rhododendron, have in some or many species their calyx also
undeveloped; Anemone and Caltha, —-to speak only of genera
represented in Australia—are rather esepalous than apetalous,
Diplokena is also devoid of a calyx, and many other instances
might be referred to pertaining to this subject of systematology.
Laurine* are often far removed from Magnoliace* and Anonace*,.
but the aromatic properties, largely developed in these orders,
point already to near cognateness.
The unison of the epigynous with the perigynous main groups,
adhered to in later writings of mine, was* effected already as early


as 1823 by Achilla Richard (“ Histoire des medicamens, des
poisons et des alimens tirds du regne vegetal,” in two volumes).
Otherwise that work follows Jussieu’s system, only the portion
comprising the Apetalse rendering that natural system, as a whole
imperfect. But what has been cursorily explained in these pages
forms but few of the thousandfold proofs, how nature in its freedom
sportively overleaps the boundaries, by which systematists vainly
endeavour to narrow the endless and marvellous forms of its
organisms for strict literary arrangement or demarcation.
INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIAN FORAGE PLANTS, (Non-
Grasses) INCLUDING PLANTS INJURIOUS TO STOCK.
By J. H. Maiden, F.L.S., &c., Curator of the Technological
Museum, Sydney.
[Bead before the Royal Society of N.8.W., June 6, 1888. ]
Owing to the severity of the droughts, (and in some districts, the
competition of rabbits and other vermin) cattle and sheep in
Australia have at times to endeavour to preserve existence by
devouring any vegetable matter whatsoever. The plants therefore
eaten by stock embrace a very large number of species, but I have
confined myself in the following pages to references to the plants
usually eaten by them, either because they are abundant, or
readily withstand the drought, or because stock are very partial
to browsing upon them. The poisonous plants of course come
under different category. If I were to record the names of all
suspected poisonous plants, the list would be a very large one.
The observations of bushmen as to the poisonous nature of certain
plants, are not always to be relied on,* and the enquiry even to a
scientific man, is attended with much difficulty. In “ Plants
injurious to Stock,” (Bailey and Gordon), Govt. Printer, Brisbane,
will be found references to a number of suspected plants, but in
regard to many, the verdict of “not proven” must be entered.
* The allegation is from time to time made in the that
sometimes through ignorance, and sometimes as a matter of expediency,
squatters report that their sheep or cattle have fallen victims to poison-
weeds, when in reality they have perished from disease. Whatever the
-extent of this misrepresentation may be, it is an undoubted fact that
during the last few years, many instances of alleged poisoning by weeds
having been enquired into on the spot by a competent veterinarian, have
been proved to have been caused by disease.


See also “ Remarks on some indigenous shrubs of South
Australia suitable for culture as fodder.” (S. Dixon). Proc. R.
S. of S'.A., Vol. viii. See also a paper by the Rev. Dr. Woolls,
“On the Forage Plants indigenous in New South Wales.” [Proc.
Linn. Soc., A r .S. IF., vii., 310.)
Notes on the plants eaten (whether from inclination or necessity)
by stock, with good or bad results, the distribution of them,
together with any other particulars bearing upon their use as
fodder-plants, are much required, as the systematic recording of
such information is even yet (at least as far as Australia is
concerned) in its infancy. It is highly desirable to collect seeds
of each useful (or likely to be useful) fodder-plant, for experimental
cultivation, either with the view to its improvement under such
treatment, or with the view to acclimatise it in some other
country in which it is not indigenous or already introduced. A
careful system of exchange of this kind cannot but result in
benefit to the countries concerned.
1. Abrus precatorius, Linn., B. FI., ii., 270. Syn.: A.pauciforus,.
Desv.; A. squamulosus, E. Mey. N.O. Leguminosaj. The
pretty little red seeds with black spots are called “ Crabs’
Eyes,” and “ Jequirity Seeds.” Found in Queensland and
Northern Australia.
This plant is not sufficiently abundant in Australia to affect
stock to an appreciable extent, but it is interesting to observe
that the Cattle Plague Commission of India (1877) in their
Report, mentioned that a large number of the criminal cases of
cattle-poisoning are effected through the agency of the seeds of
this plant. More extended enquiry showed that this practice
was common throughout the greater part of India. (Dymock.)
2. Acacia aneurA, and other species, F. v. M., B. FI, ii., 402.
N.O. Leguminosie. “ Mulga,” forming the chief ingredients
of the scrub of that name. Found in all the Colonies except
Tasmania.
The leaves are eaten by stock. In the Technological Museum
are samples of wool from sheep fed exclusively on this shrub on
a station in Western Queensland. The wool is not of the first
quality, as might be expected, but it is very good. The following
are some of the particulars of the wool:
Wool of ewe hoggets (under 10 months’growth), average length
of staple 2f inches.
Wool of wether hoggets (12 months’ growth), average length
of staple 4 inches.
Wool of 4-tooth ewes (18 months’ growth), length of staple
6| inches.


3, Acacia DORATOXYLON,yi.C'mm.,B.FI.,ii., 4O3. N.O.Leguminosaj.
“Spear-wood,” a “Brigalow,” “Currawang” or “ Caariwan,”
“Hickory.” Found in all the Australian Colonies except
Tasmania and Western Australia.
The leaves are eaten by stock.
4. Acacia pendula, A. Cunn., B. FI, ii., 383. Syn.: A. leucophylla,
Lindl. N. O. Legurainosse. “Weeping or true Myall.”
Called “Boree” and “Balaar” by the aboriginals of the
Western Districts. Found in Hew South Wales and Queensland.
Stock are very fond of the leaves of this tree, especially in
seasons of drought, and for this reason, and because they eat
down the seedlings, it has almost become exterminated in parts
of the Colony.
5. Acacia salicina, Lindl., B. FL, vii., 367. Syn,: A. ligulata ,
A. Cunn. N. O. Leguminosie. “Native Willow,” and
“ Broughton Willow,” near the Broughton River (Northern
S. A.). Called “ Cooba ”or “ Koobah ”by the aboriginals of
Western New South Wales, and “Motherumba” by those
on the Castlereagh River, New South Wales. Found in all
the Colonies except Tasmania.
The leaves are eaten by stock. This is another tree which is
rapidly becoming scarce owing to the partiality of stock to it.
6. Albizzia basaltica, Benth., B. FL, ii., 422. Syn. : Acacia
basaltica, F. v. M. N. O. Leguminosse. “ Dead finish.”
Found in Queensland.
Cattle like the foliage of this tree.
7. Angopiiora intermedia, DC., B. FL, iii., 184. Syn. :
MetrosiderosJtoribunda, Smith. N.O. Myrtacea?. “ Narrow-
leaved Apple-tree.” Found in Victoria, New South Wales,
and Queensland.
8. Angopiiora subvelutina, F. v. M., B. FL, iii., 184. Syn. :
A. velutina, F. v. M. N. O. Myrtaceie. “ Broad-leaved
Apple-tree.” Found in New South Wales and Queensland.
The Rev. Dr. Woolls states that these “Apple-trees” are
sometimes cut down to keep cattle alive in dry seasons, as the
leaves are relished by them.
9. Albizzia lopiiantiia, Benth., B. FL, ii., 421. Syn. ; Acacia
lophantha, Willd. ; Mimosa distachya, Vent. ; M. eleyans,
Andr. N.O. Leguminosie. Found in Western Australia.
Cattle browse on the leaves of this tree. It is, however, of
rapid growth.


10. Apium leptopiiyllum. F. v. M., B. FL, hi., 372. Syn.;
FLelosciadium leptophyllum, DC. N.O. Umbel lif era?. “Wild
Parsley.” Found in Victoria, New South Wales, and
Queensland.
Occasionally eaten by stock. It is worthy of note that this
plant (in common with others cf the genus) is sometimes arid and
injurious when grown in damp soils. It is doubtless capable of
much improvement by careful cultivation. This plant is not
endemic in Australia.
11. Atalaya iiemiglauca, F.v.M., B. FI. i., 463. Syn.: Thouinia
hemiglauca, F.v.M. N.O. Sapindacete. “Cattle-bush,”
“ White-wood.” Found in South Australia, New South
Wales and Queensland.
The leaves of this tree are eaten by stock, the tree being
frequently felled for their use during seasons of drought.
12. Atriplex Billardieri, H00k.i.,8. FI, v., 180. A. eryatallinum
in Muell. Cens., p. 30. Syn. ;A. crystallina, Hook. f. ;
Obione Billiardieri , Moq. ; Theleophyton Billardieri , Moq.
N.O. Chenopodiaceie. A “ Salt-bush.” Several species of
this genus are indigenous in England, where they go by the
name of “ Orache.” Found in all the Colonies except
Queensland and Western Australia.
This herb vegetates solely in salty coast-sands, which, like
Cakile , it helps to bind, on the brink of tlrn ocean and exposed to
its spray. (Mueller.)
13. Atriplex campanulata, Benth., B. FI., v., 177. N. 0.
Chenopodiacea?. “Small Salt-bush.” Found in South
Australia, New South Wales and Queensland.
Salt-bushes are so appreciated by stock that in many parts of
the Colonies they are far less plentiful than they used to be.
Unless flock-masters can see their way clear to keep their sheep
<fec., in certain paddocks, while the vegetation in others is
endeavouring to recuperate, this kind of vegetation will continue
to diminish, to the detriment of the pastoral industry. Greedy
cropping of Salt-bush without any efforts at conservation is assuredly
“ killing the goose with the golden eggs.” An analysis of this
Salt-bush by Mr. W. A. Dixon, will be found Froc. Royal Society
W.S.TF, 1880, p. 133.
14. Atriplex halimoides, Bindley , B. FI., v., 178. Syn.; A.
Lindleyi, Moq,; A. injiata', F.v.M. N.O. Chenopodiacea 1 .
A “ Salt-bush.” Found in all the Colonies except Tasmania.


Found over the greater part of the saline desert-interior of
Australia, reaching the south and west coasts. A dwarf bush,
with its frequent companion A. holocarpum, F.v.M., among the
very best for salt-bush pasture. (Mueller.)
15. Atriplex nummularia, Lindley , B. FI., v., 170. N. O.
Chenopodiacete. “Old-man Salt-bush,” or “Cabbage Salt-
bush.” Found in all the Colonies except Western Australia
and Tasmania.
One of the tallest and most fattening pastoral salt-bushes ; also
highly recommended for cultivation as natural plants by close
occupation of the sheep and cattle runs, have largely disappeared,
and this useful bush is not found in many parts of Australia.
Sheep and cattle depastured on salt-bush country are said to
remain free of fluke and get cured of Diastoma disease and of
other allied ailments. (Mueller.)
An analysis by Mr. W. A. Dixon will be found Proc. Royal
Society , N.S.W., 1880, p. 133.
16. Atriplex semibaccata, R. Brown, B. FI., v., 175. N.O.
Chenopodiacefe. A “ Salt-bush.” Found in all the Colonies
except Tasmania.
A perennial herb much liked by sheep.
17. Atriplex spongiosa, F.v.M., B. FL, v., 179. Syn.: A.
semibaccata. Mog., non R. Br. N.O. Chenopodiaceae. Found
through a great part of Central Australia, extending to the
West Coast.
A useful salt-bush for culture.
18. Atriplex vesicaria, Reward, B. FL, v., 172. N. 0.
Chenopodiacese. A “ Salt-bush.” Found in the interior of
South-Eastern Australia, also in Central Australia and
Western Australia.
Perhaps the most fattening and most relished of all the dwarf
salt-bushes of Australia, holding out in the utmost extremes of
drought, and scorched even by the hottest winds. Its vast
abundance over extensive salt-bush plains of the Australian
interior, to the exclusion of almost every other bush except
A. halimoides, indicates the facility with which this species
disseminates itself. (Mueller.)
19. Avicennia officinalis, Linn., B. FL, v., 69. Syn. :A.
tomentosa, Jacq. N. O. Verbenacese. A “ Mangrove ” or
“ White Mangrove.” The “ Tchoonchee” of some Queensland


aboriginals, and the “ Tagon-tagon ” of those of Rockhampton
(Queensland), and “Egaie” of those of Cleveland Bay.
Found in all the Colonies (round the coast) except Tasmania.
The leaves of this tree are eaten by cattle, and are considered
very nutritious.
20. Barringtonia acutangula, Gaertn., B. FI., iii., 288. Syn.:
Stravadiurn ruhrum, DC. N. O. Myrtaceie. Found in
Northern Australia.
Brandis, (Forest Flora of India) states that the bark of this
tree, mixed with pulse and chaff, is given as cattle-fodder in India.
21. Boeriiaavia diffusa, Linn., B. FI., v., 277. Syn. :B.
pubescens, R. Br. ; B. procumbens, Roxb. N.O. Nyctaginese.
Called “ Goitcho ” by the natives of the Cloncurry River,
Northern Queensland. Found in all the Colonies except
Tasmania.
The Rev. Dr. Woolls points this out as a useful forage plant,
which, having a long tap-root, can withstand a considerable amount
of drought, whilst it affords pasture early in the season ere the
grasses are developed. This plant is not endemic in Australia.
It is a troublesome weed in some warm countries.
22. Bulbine bulbosa, Haw., B. FL, vii., 34. Syn. ; B. atcstralis
Spreng.; B. suavis, Lindl. ; B. Fraseri, Kunth ; B. Hookeri,
Kunth ; Anthericum bulbosum, R. Br.; A. semibarbatum,
Hook. N.O. Liliacem. “ Native Onion,” “ Native Leek.”
Found in all the Colonies except Western Australia.
Mr. W. N. Hutchison, Sheep Inspector, Warrego, Queensland,
reports of this plant : —“ Its effects on cattle, sheep and horses
are almost the same —continually lying down, rolling, terribly
scoured, mucous discharge from the nose of a green and yellowish
colour. Cattle survive the longest; sheep take some three days,
and horses will linger for a week.” In Plants injurious to Slock,
(Bailey and Gordon) two cases of poisoning are also instanced.
23. Bursaria spinosa, Cav., B. FI. i., 115. Syn. ; Itea spinosa,
Andr. N.O. Pittosporece. “ Native Box.” Found in all
the Colonies.
It is greedily eaten by sheep, but its thorny character preserves
it from extinction upon sheep-runs. It is variable in bulk, usually
a small shrub, in congenial localities it develops into a small tree.
24. Cassia eremopiiila (nemophila), A. Cunn., B. FL, ii., 287.
Syn. : C. canaliculata, R. Br. ; C. heteroloba, Lindl. N.O.
Leguminosse. Found in all the Colonies except Tasmania.
N—October 3, 1888.


Mr. S. Dixon states that both the pods and leaves of this plant
are eaten by stock.
25. Castanospermum australe, A. Cunn., B. FI. ii., 275. N.O.
Legurninoste. “ Moreton Bay Chestnut,” “ Bean-tree.” Called
“Bogum” and “Irtalie,” by the aboriginals. Found in
Northern New South Wales and Queensland.
Stockowners are destroying this tree owing to the belief that
cattle are poisoned through eating the seeds. They are however
quite harmless when cooked, and form, in fact, part of the diet of
the aborigines.
The Government Analyst of New South Wales has failed to
find an alkaloid or poisonous principle in the seeds, and suggests
that they may be injurious on account of their indigestibility.
(Report of Dept, of Mines, N.S. IF, 1886, p. 46). It is however,
to be borne in mind that the Leguminosse are emphatically a
poisonous Natural Order, although they yield some of the most
valuable foods of man and beast.
26. Casuarina stricta, Ait., B, FL, vi., 195. C. quadrivalvis in
Muell. Cens., p. 22. Syn, ; C. quadrivalvis, Labill. ; C.
macrocarpa, A. Cunn.; C. cristata, Miq.; C. Gunnii, Hook, f.
N.O. Casuarinem. “ Coast She-oak,” “ Swamp Oak,” “ River
Oak.” “ Worgnal ” of the aboriginals. Found in all the
Colonies except Queensland and Western Australia.
Mr. S. Dixon states that in Port Lincoln (S.A.), the fallen
catkins (male inflorescence), form the chief sustenance in winter
on much of the overstocked country.
The foliage is eagerly browsed upon by stock, and in cases of
drought these trees are pollarded for the cattle. Old bullock-
drivers say that cattle prefer the foliage of the female plant (i.e.
those plants with the fruit-cones) to that of the male. (J. E.
Brown.) Casuarina foliage has a pleasant acidulous taste, but it
contains a very large proportion of ligneous matter.
Mr S. Dixon (op. cit.) states that this tree is too sour to be
very useful to ewes rearing lambs, but if sheep had only enough
of it, the “ brack ” or tenderness of fibre, would often be prevented
in our finer wool districts, and much money saved by the increased
value a sound staple always commands.
27. Casuarina suberosa, Otto, et Dietr., B. FI., vi., 197. Syn.;
C. leptoclada, Miq. ; C. mcesta, F.v.M. N. O. Casuarinese.
“Erect She-oak,” “Forest Oak,” “Swamp Oak,” “River
Black-oak,” “ Shingle Oak,” “ Beef-wood.” “ Dahl-wah ”of
the aborigines. Found in all the Colonies except South
and Western Australia.


A very valuable fodder-tree; largely used and much valued in
the interior districts as food for stock during periods of drought.
The same remarks apply more or less to all species of Casuarina.
28. Cedrela Toona, Roxb., B. FI., i., 387. C. australis in Muell.
Cens., p. 9. Syn. : C. australis, F.v.M. N.O. Meliacete.
Ordinary “ Cedar.” Called “ Polai ” by the aboriginals of
northern New South Wales, “ Mumin ” or “Mugurpul” by
those about Brisbane, and “Woota” by those about Wide
Bay, Queensland. Found in New South Wales and Queensland.
The leaves are used to feed cattle in India. (Gamble.) It
should be observed however, that Baron Mueller differs from
Bentham in considering the Australian “Cedar” specifically
distinct from the “ Toon ”of India. In any case, the trees are so
closely related that any property possessed by the one is shared
by the other.
29. Claytonia polyandra, F.v.M., B. FI., i., 172. Syn .-.Talinum
polyandrum, Hook. N.O. Portulaceje. “Coonda” of the
aboriginals about Shark’s Bay, Western Australia. Found
in the interior of New South Wales, South, Western, and
Northern Australia.
Sheep can largely feed on this succulent shrub for a considerable
time without drinking water. (Mueller and Forrest, “ Plants
indigenous about Shark’s Ray, W.A.,” 1883). The same observation
is doubtless true of the other Claytonias, and also of the closely
related Portulaca oleracea, the common Purslane.
30. Chionantiius ramiflora, Roxb., B. FI., iv., 301. Mayepea
ramiflora, F.v.M. in Muell. Cens., p. 92. Syn.: C. effusiflora
F.v.M.; Linociera effusiflora, F.v.M.; L. ramiflora, DC.;
Mayepea ramiflora, F.v.M. N.O. Jasmines. Found in
Queensland.
The fruit of this plant is the food of the Jagged-tailed Bower-
bird (Frionodura Newtoniana). (Bailey.) This observation is
interesting, and is the more valuable in that the vegetable foods
of our indigenous fauna have very rarely been botanically
determined. This plant is not endemic in Australia.
31. Claytonia (Calandrinia) Balonnensis or balonensis, Lindl.,
B. FI, i., 172. N.O. Portuiacese. “ Munyeroo of natives of
South Australia. “ Periculia ”of natives of Central Australia.
{Fragm., x., 71.) Found in South Australia, New South
Wales and Queensland.
Mr. S. Dixon states that a large mob of cattle, destined to stock
• a Northern Territory run, travelled some 200 miles without a


drink, which would have been altogether impossible in the absence
of this succulent plant.
32. Conospermum Stcechadis, Endl ., B. FI., v., 375. Syn.: C.
sclerophyllum , Lindl. IST.O. Proteaceie. Found in Western
Australia and New South Wales.
33. Conospermum triplinervium, R. Brown , B. FI., v., 374. Syn.:
G. laniflorum, Endl., C. undulatum, Lindl. N.O. Proteaceie.
Found in Western Australia.
Baron Mueller suggests that these plants be tried on the worst
desert country, as all kinds of pasture animals browse with avidity
on the long, tender and downy flower-stalks and spikes, without
touching the foliage, thus not destroying the plant by close
cropping.
34. Cucumis trigonus, Roxb., B. FI., iii., 317. Syn.: C. pubescens
Hook.: C. jucundus, F.v.M.; C. picrocarpus, F.v.M. N.O.
Cucurbitacese. “ Boomarrah ” of the aboriginals of the
Cloncurry River, North Queensland. Found in New South
Wales, Queensland, Northern and Western Australia.
Stock are said to be very fond of this plant in the Western
districts of Queensland. (Bailey). Sir Thomas Mitchell speaks
of this plant covering a great area of ground, in one of his journeys
in western New South Wales.
35. Daucus braciiiatus, Sieb., B. FI., iii., 376. Syn.: Scandix
glochidiata, Labill. N.O. Umbelliferte. “Native Carrot.”
Found in all the Colonies.
Stock are very fond of this plant when young. Sheep thrive
wonderfully on it where it is plentiful. It is a small annual
herbaceous plant growing plentifully on sandhills and rich soil,
the seeds, locally termed “ carrot burrs,” are very injurious to wool,
the hooked spines, with which the seeds are armed, attaching
themselves to the fleece, rendering portions of it quite stiff and
rigid. The common carrot belongs of course to this genus, and
the fact that it is descended from an apparently worthless, weedy
plant, indicates that the present species is capable of much
improvement by cultivation. This plant is not endemic in
Australia.
36. Daviesia spp. N. O. Leguminosse. “ Hop-bush.” Found
chiefly in Western Australia, but also in New South Wales
and other Colonies.
Some of these shrubs are called “ hop-bushes ” on account of the
pleasant bitter principle which pervades them. Horses and cattle
are fond of browsing on them.


37. DodoNjEA lobulata, F.v.M., B. FL, i., 479. N.O. Sapindacese.
“ Hop-bush.” Found in Southern and Western Australia,
New South Wales and Victoria.
One of the best fodder shrubs in the Lachlan district of New
■South Wales. The seed pods in particular contain a very pleasant
bitter. There is no reason to suppose that this particular species
is preferred by stock to any other of the genus, only I have not
seen it recorded that sheep, cattle, &c., have actually been observed
to browse upon any other, with the exception of D. viscosa.
38. Eremophila longifolia, F.v.M., B. FL, v., 23. Syn. :
Stenochilus longifolius, R. Br. ; S. salicinus, Benth.; S.
pubijiorus, Benthara. N. O. Myoporineie. “ Emu-bush,”
“ Dogwood.” “ Berrigan ”of the natives. Found in all the
Colonies except Tasmania,
The leaves are greedily eaten by cattle and sheep. Observations
in regard to the effect on stock browsing upon plants belonging
to the Myoporinece are much needed, as statements hitherto made
in respect to them are not always reconcilable. Mr. S. Dixon
states that this tree is one of the first to be barked by rabbits.
39. Eremophila maculata, F. v. M., B. FL, v., 29. Syn. ;
Stenochilus maculatus, Ker.■ S, racemosus, End!.; S. curvipes
Benth. N. O. Myoporineae. Called “Native Fuchsia” in
parts of Queensland. Found in all the Colonies except
Tasmania.
This is considered poisonous by some, and by others a good
fodder-bush.
It does not appear to be dangerous to stock accustomed to eat
it, but to others, travelling stock particularly, Mr. Hutchison of
Warrego, (Q.) considers it to be deadly. The effects of this plant
are always worst after rain. It appears to be most dangerous
when in fruit. (Bailey & Gordon.)
40. Eremophila Mitciielli, Benth., B. FL, v., 21. N. O.
Myoporinese. “Rosewood” or “Sandalwood.” Found in
New South Wales and Queensland.
The leaves are eaten by stock. The seeds of several species are
eaten by Emus.
41. Eucalyptus corynocalyx, F.v.M., B. FL, iii., 218. Syn. :
E. cladocalyx, F.v.M. N.O. Myrtacese. “Sugar Gum.”
Found in South Australia.
The sweetish foliage of this tree is browsed upon by cattle and
sheep ; in this respect this Eucalypt may be classed with one other
— E. Gunnii. (J. E. Brown.)


42. Eucalyptus Gunnii, Hookerf, B. FI., iii., 246. Syn.: E.
ligustrina, Miq. ; E. acervula , Hook. f. N. O. Myrtacete.
“White Swamp Gum” or “ Cider Gum.” It possesses some
other vernacular names. Found in Tasmania, the extreme
south-eastern portion of South Australia, thence to Gippsland,
and into New South Wales as far as Berrima.
This tree also bears the name of the “ Sugar Gum,” because of
the sweetness of the leaves, which consequently are browsed upon
by stock. It is a common tree in Tasmania, where it is called
“Cider Gum,” as an excellent cider is made from the sap taken
from it in the spring-time.
43. Eucalyptus pauciflora, Sieb., B. FI., iii., 201. Syn.: E.
coriacea, A. Cunn., {the species name in B. FJ.); E. plebophylla
F.v.M.; E. submultiplinervis, Miq.; E. piperita var. paucijlora
DO., and E. procera,, Dehn. (perhaps). N. 0. Myrtaceaj.
“White Gum,” “Drooping Gum.” It is sometimes called
“ Mountain Ash.” It possesses other vernacular names..
Found in Tasmania, Victoria and New South Wales.
The leaves of this tree are very thick, and in dry seasons are-
eaten by cattle. (Woolls.)
Opossums have a predilection for the young foliage of this tree,
so that they often kill trees of this species.
44. Euphorbia Baill., B. FI., vi., 49. N. 0.
Euphorbiacese. Found in Northern Australia.
This plant is said to be a dangerous poison-herb to sheep. The
natural order is emphatically a poisonous one.
45. Euphorbia Drummondii, Boiss., B. FI., vi., 49. N. 0.
Euphorbiacese. Called “ Caustic creeper ”in Queensland.
Called “ Milk plant ” and “ Pox plant ” about Bourke. Found
throughout the Colonies.
This weed is unquestionably poisonous to sheep, and has recently
(Oct. 1887) been reported as having been fatal to a flock near
Bourke, N.S.W.
It has been observed that when eaten by sheep in the early
morning before the heat of the sun has dried it up, it is almost
certain to be fatal. It is seldom eaten except by travelling sheep,
and when grass is scarce. Its effect on sheep is curious. The
head swells to an enormous extent, being so heavy that the animal
cannot support it, and therefore drags it along the ground; the
ears get much swollen and suppurate. (Bailey & Gordon.)
Following is Mr. S. Dixon’s remarks on this plant:—“ A friend
of mine fed some old ewes on the undoubtedly poisonous E .


Drummondii , but could not kill them, although he had often lost
an odd sheep or two from poison, and no other known poisonous
plant exists on his property.”
46. Euphorbia eremopiiila, A. Cunn., B. FI., v., 52. Syn.:
E. deserticola, F.v.M. N.O. Euphorbiaceae. Found in all
the Colonies except Tasmania.
This plant should be perhaps placed in the “ Suspected ” list.
In the western interior some people say it is highly poisonous,
others, as usual, say that they have seen sheep eat it with not the
least injurious result. Mr. Bauerlen gathered a quantity of this
plant for the Technological Museum and appended the following
note : “ The plants I send I gathered in a horse-paddock. There
was plenty of evidence on the plants that horses or cattle browse
on it, but no injurious result is recorded at the station. ’
47. Ficus glomerata, Willd., B. FI., vi., 178. Syn. :F. vesca,
F.v.M.; Covellia glomerata, Miq. N.O. Urticeae. “Clustered
fig.” Found in Queensland and Northern Australia.
The leaves are used in India for cattle and Elephant fodder.
(Gamble, Manual of Indian Timbers.)
48. Flagellaria indica, Linn ., B. FL, vii., 10. N.O. Liliacese.
“Lawyer Vine.” Found in New South Wales, Queensland
and Northern Australia.
Leichhardt, Overland Journey to Port Essington, p. 424, speaks
of his bullocks feeding heartily upon this plant, particularly as
the country was most wretched, and the grass scanty and hard.
This plant is not endemic in Australia.
49. Flindersia maculosa, F.v.M., B. FI., i., 389. Flindersia
Strzeleckiana, F.v.M. ; Elceodendron maculosum, Lindl. ;
Strzeleckya dissosperma, F.v.M. N.O. Meliaceai. “ Spotted
tree,” “ Leopard tree.” Found in northern New South Wales
and Queensland.
During periods of drought sheep become exceedingly fond of this
tree, which they greedily devour, as well as the twigs up to the
size of a goose-quill, and hence the tree is in danger of extermination
as it has not the recuperative power of some trees.
50. Gastrolobium spp., especially G. ohovatum, Benth., G.
trilohum, Benth., G. spinosum, Benth..(syn. G. Preissii, Meissn.)
G. oxylobioides , Benth., G. calycinum, Benth., G. callistachys y
Meissn., (syn. G. lineare, Meissn.) G. bilobum, R. Br. ; B. FI.
ii., 101-7. N.O. Leguminosfe. Commonly known as
“ Poison bushes.” At the Blackwood River, according to


Oldfield G. calycinum is known as the “York Road Poison
bush.” Found in Western Australia.
These plants are dangerous to stock, and are hence called
“Poison-bushes.” Large numbers of cattle are lost annually in
Western Australia through eating them.
“ The finest and strongest animals are the first victims : a
difficulty of breathing is perceptible for a few minutes, when they
stagger, drop down, and all is over with them. After the death
of the animal the stomach assumes a brown colour ; and is tenderer
than it ought to be ; but it appears to me that the poison enters
the circulation, and altogether stops the action of the lungs and
heart.* The raw flesh poisons cats, and the blood, which is darker
than usual, dogs ; but the roasted or boiled flesh is eaten by the
natives and some of the settlers without their appearing to suffer
any inconvenience.” (Drummond, in Hooker’s Journal of Botany.)
“ The blossoms are also frequently eaten by animals, and are, I
think, the most poisonous part, for the greatest number of sheep
are lost from the poisonous effect of this plant at the period of its
inflorescence. When the seeds fall on the ground, the wild pigeons
greedily feed and fatten on them ; if the crops of these pigeons,
containing the seeds, be eaten by dogs, they die, yet the pigeons
themselves when dressed, are good food, and at that season are
eaten in large numbers by the settlers. Horses, so far as is known
are not effected by it, at least this is the prevailing opinion,
although it is disputed by some of the settlers.” (T. R. C. Walter,
in Pharm. Journ., vi.. 311.)
With sheep who have eaten the herb the best treatment has
been found to be to fold them, or shut them up in a close yard,
so closely packed that they can hardly move, and to keep them
thus without food for thirty-six hours. See an interesting account
in Pharm. Journ., vi., 311.
In the Flora Australiensis, a statement is quoted that G.
bilobum is the worst of the “ Poison shrubs.” Certainly some of
them render extensive tracts of country unoccupiable.
51. Gastrolobium grandiflorum, F.v.M., B. FI., ii., 103. N.O,
Leguminosie. “ Wall-flower or Desert Poison-bush. Found
in Queensland and Northern Australia.
With one exception, this is the only Gastrolobium out of
Western Australia, and it is the only Queensland one. Baron
Mueller identified this plant as having poisoned large numbers of
cattle and sheep on the Cape River, and at the sources of the
* See also an interesting account of some physiological experiments to
ascertain the nature of the poison. Pharm. Journ., vi., 312.


Burdekin and Flinders Rivers in 1863-4. He recommends frequent
burning off on the stony ridges it frequents with the view to its
suppression or eradication.
52. Geijera parviflora, Lindl., 8.F1.,i., 364. Syn .\ G.pendula,
Lindl. N.O. Rutaceae. “Wilga,” “Sheep-bush,” “Dogwood”
and “Willow.” Found in all the Colonies except Tasmania.
Mr. S. Dixon states that sheep only are particularly fond of
this bush, and it seems quite unaffected by droughts.
53. Geranium dissectum, Linn ., B. FI., i., 296. G. carolinianum
in Muell. Gens. p. 13. Syn.: G. pilosum, Forst.; G. parviflorum ,
Willd. ; G. philonothum, DC.; G. potentilloides , L’Her.; G.
australe , Nees; G. carolinianum , Linn. N.O. Geraniaceae.
“ Crowfoot,” “ Terrat ” of the aboriginals of the Coranderrk
Station Victoria. Found throughout the Colonies.
This plant is known and highly prized as a very superior
pasture herb. It is very plentiful during the spring time of good
seasons on the sandhills. The seeds—which ripen about the end
of September—are very injurious to sheep and wool, and, when
this plant is plentiful, often cause the death of numbers of sheep,
and if the shearing is late injure the wool to a very great extent.
The seeds, which have exceedingly sharp, hard, barbed points,
readily attach themselves to wool or the skins of sheep, whilst the
spiral shaft with the long crank attached gives the whole the action
of an auger worked by the movements of the animal or the action
of the winds. If the point of one of these seeds is struck lightly
into the sand on a windy day it will soon bury itself up to the
base : this is how the seeds are planted by nature. Injurious as
this plant is, it has its redeeming points, for it is one of our most
nutritious fodder plants, all kinds of stock being exceedingly fond
of it, and when cut in a green state and before the seeds mature
it makes excellent hay. This plant is not endemic in Australia.
54. Gompiiolobium uncinatum, A. Cunn., B. FI., ii., 46. N.O.
Leguminosae. Found in New South Wales.
This small shrub is noteworthy as being very hurtful to sheep
that may eat of it. (Treasury of Botany.)
South Australia is quoted {op. cit.) as its habitat, but this is a
mistake.
55. Gossypium Sturtii, F.v.M., B. FI., i., 222, Syn. : Sturtia
yossypioides, R. Br. N.O. Malvaceae. Found in South
Australia and New South* Wales.
This plant affords stock a good summer food. (Dixon.)


56. Heterodendron Desf., B. FI. i., 469. N.O.
Sapindacese. “ Emu Bush,” “ Jiggo ” and “ Behreging” are
aboriginal names. Found in all the Colonies except Tasmania.
The seeds which are dry, are eaten by emus. Mr. S. Dixon
states that both sheep and cattle feed greedily upon it.
57. Hibiscus heterophyllus, Vent., B. FI., i., 212. Syn. : H.
grandijlorus, Salisb. N.O. Malvaceae, “ Green Kurrajong.
“ Dtharang-gange ”is an aboriginal name. Found in New
South Wales and Queensland.
The leaves, branches and bark of this tree are greedily eaten by
cattle in winter. They are mucilaginous, in common with other
plants of this natural order.
58. Jacksonia scoparia var. macrocarpa, R. Br., B. FL, ii., 60.
J. cupulifera, in Muell. Cens., p. 34. Syn. ; J. cupulifera,
Meissn. N. 0. Leguminoste. “ Dogwood.” Found in
Western Australia.
Cattle and horses relish the foliage of this small tree amazingly.
(Mueller.)
59. Kochia aphylla, R. Br., B. FL, v., 188. Considered by
Baron Mueller to be a variety of K. villosa, (Muell. Cens. p.
30). N.O. Chenopodiacete. A Salt-bush. Found in all the
Colonies except Tasmania.
“ All kinds of stock are often largely dependent on it during
protracted droughts, and when neither grass nor hay are obtainable
I have known the whole bush chopped up and mixed with a little
corn, when it proved an excellent fodder for horses. One
drawback it has, its stems being very fibrous, and the older portions
indigestibly so, it is the principal cause of those bezoars or felted
knobs in the manipulus of the sheep, which in very protracted
droughts kill them by hundreds. When, however, the rains come,
and soft herbage is abundant, these bezoars either partially dissolve
or become covered with a shiny black coating, so that they
resemble a papier-mache ball.”
60. Kochia pyramidata, Bentham, B. FL, v., 186. N.O.
Chenopodiaceai. “ Blue-bush.” Found in South Australia,
Victoria, and New South Wales.
An analysis of this Salt-bush by Mr. W. A. Dixon is to be
found in Proc. Royal Society, N.S. IF., 1880, p. 133.
61. Kochia villosa, Lindl., B. FL, v., 186. Syn.: K.tomentosa,
F.v.M.; K. puhescens, Moq.; Maireana tomentosa, Moq. N.O.
Chenopodiacese. Found in all the Colonies except Tasmania.


A valuable, salt-bush which withstands a very high temperature.
But Mr. S. Dixon (op. cit.) states that this species is “ hateful ”
to stock. See K. aphylla.
62. Lotus australis, Andr., B. FI., ii., 188. Syn.: L. Icevigatus,
Benth.; L. albidus, Lodd. N.O. Leguminosaj. Found in all
the Colonies.
63. Lotus corniculatus, Linn. N.O. Leguminosae. Found in
all the Colonies except Western Australia and Queensland.
These plants are often reputed poisonous in Australia, which is
doubtless a mistake, as they make excellent fodder, and are
considered valuable ingredients in meadows and pastures. (Bailey.)
Doubtless this idea has arisen owing to the poisonous nature of
some leguminous bushes similar in leaf and habit. Baron Mueller
however states (Trans. R. S., Victoria, Yol. vi., 1861-4) that this
plant causes sheep to perish in some cases, in half-an-hour.
The most contrary evidence as to the effect of these plants on
stock is to hand from Western New South Wales.
“ I am inclined to believe that many leguminous plants reputed
to be poisonous are not really so, but that an excess of either
foliage or seeds eaten by a hungry animal throws off such an
abundance of gases, that “ hoove,” which is nothing more than an
excessive distension of the stomach, pressing against the diaphragm,
preventing the lungs from working, and the animal is really
strangled to death. To this cause I attribute all the deaths (and
they are very numerous) caused by Lotus australis var. Behrii ,
really an excellent fodder plant, akin to the Lucernes, but when
seeding, and especially after rain, if hungry sheep are allowed to
feed greedily upon it, they die by hundreds, while sheep in
confinement and fed solely upon it do not die, but actually thrive
as was shown some years since in Adelaide.” (S. Dixon, op. cit.)
64. Malvastrum spicatum, A. Gray, B. FI., i., 187. Syn.; Malva
spicata, Linn. ; M. ovata, Cav.; M. timorensis, DC.; M.
hrachystachya, F.v.M. N. O. Malvaceae. Found in South
Australia, New South Wales and Queensland.
Some squatters have considered this a valuable sheep-herb.
(Bailey.) This plant is not endemic in Australia.
65. Marsilea quadrifolia, Linn., B. FL, vii., 683. Syn. : M.
Brownii, A. Braun ; M. yngustifolia, R. Br.; M. hirsuta, R.
Br.; M. Drummondii, A. Braun. N.O. Marsiliaceae. “Clover
Fern.” Found in all the Colonies except Tasmania.


This plant is much relished by stock. It grows plentifully in
swamps and shallow pools of water. It is however better known
as yielding an unsatisfactory human-food in its spore-cases.
66. Myoporum deserti, A. Cunn ., B. FI., v., 5. Syn.: M. dulce,
Benth. ; M. striatum, A. Cunn.; M. patens, A. Cunn. ;M.
rugulosum, F.v.M. N.O. Myoporinea;. “ Ellangowan Poison
Bush ”of Queensland. “ Dogwood Poison-bush ”of New
South Wales. Found in all the Colonies except Tasmania.
This appears to be a well authenticated poison-bush, but
apparently only when in fruit. It is reported from Ellangowan,
Darling Downs, Queensland, and out of a flock of 7,000 sheep
passing Yandilla, (Q.) 500 succumbed to eating this plant.
(Bailey and Gordon.)
67. Myoporum platycarpum, R. Br., B. FI., v., 7. Syn.; Disoon
platycarpus, F.v.M. N.O. Myoporinese. “Dogwood,”
“ Sandalwood.” Found in all the Colonies except Victoria
and Queensland.
The leaves are eaten by stock, but not as far as I can learn, with
any evil effects. It is often felled for sheep in time of drought.
68. Nicotiana suaveolens, Lehm., B. FI., iv., 469. Syn. : W.
undulata, Vent. ; JV. Australasice, R. Br.; N. rotundifolia,
Lindl. ; N. fastigiata, Nees. N.O. Solanese. “ Native
Tobacco.” Found in all the Colonies except Tasmania.
This plant grows luxuriantly on the sand-hills in the Riverina
district (New South Wales) in good seasons. It used in the early
days of the Colony, and in the interior districts up to quite recent
years, to be manufactured into tobacco. It is readily eaten by
stock.
69, Pimelea UjEmatostaciiya, F. v. M., B. FI., vi., 22, N.O
Thymeleaj. Found in Queensland.
This very handsome plant might with advantage be introduced
into garden culture, but it is one of the worst of poisonous herbs,
and often causes the loss of hundreds of sheep, yet their lives
could perhaps be saved by slitting their ears soon after they had
eaten the herb. (Bailey.)
70. Pittosporum phillyßjEoides, DC., B. FI., i., 112. Syn,:
P. angustifolium, Lodd. N.O. Pittosporese. Called variously
“ Butter-bush,” “ Willow tree,” “ Native Willow,” and
“ Poison-berry tree.” Found in all the Colonies except
Tasmania.


In times of scarcity this tree is of great value, as it withstands
drought, and sheep and cattle browse upon its foliage. Stock are
so partial to it in the interior districts that it is in danger of
extermination in parts, and it is a tree which should be conserved.
71. Plantago varia, R. Br., B. FI., v., 139 (where see synonymy).
Syn. : P. debilis, Nees. N.O. Plantaginese. Found in all
the Colonies.
This plant is relished by stock. Speaking of an allied species
(P. lanceolata), an English writer observes : —•“ Its mucilaginous
leaves are relished by sheep, and, to a certain extent, by horses
and cattle, but it seldom answers as a crop, unless on very poor
land where little else will grow. It was generally sown with
clover, and this mixed crop is occasionally seen now on barren
soils; but there can be little doubt that the plantain is inferior
in produce, and probably in nutritive qualities, to many plants
that would grow equally well on the same land. Mingled with
grasses in permanent pasture, it may be beneficial in small
quantity, but tends, like all broad-leaved plants, to destroy the
more delicate herbage around it.”
72. Pomaderris racemosa, Rook., B. FI., i., 421. N.O. Rhamnese.
Found in all the Colonies except Western Australia and
Queensland.
The leaves when chewed or soaked are found to be slightly
mucilaginous; this explains the fondne'ss that stock have for this
plant. It always seems fresh and green, and stands stocking
well. (S, Dixon.)
73. Psoralea tenax, Lindl., B. FI., ii., 193. N.O. Leguminosae.
Found in New South Wales and Queensland.
Considered a good fodder by some. (Bailey.)
74. Pterigeron adscandens, Benth., B. FI., iii., 533. N.O.
Composite. Found in Queensland and Northern Australia.
Specimens of this plant have been frequently sent to Brisbane
as a poison herb. (Bailey.)
75. Rhogodia spp., B. FI., v., 151, etseq. N.O. Chenopodiace.
“ Salt-bushes.”
The plants are palatable to sheep and cattle on account of the
salt which they contain, nearly two ounces having been obtained
from two pounds of leaves ; and they are all more or less useful,
but the two following are perhaps best known.


76, Rhagodia Billardieri, R. Brown, B. FI., v., 152. Syn.;
R. baccata, Moq. ; R. Candolleana , Moq. ; Chenopodium
baccatum , Labill. N.O. Chenopodiacese. Found in all the
Colonies.
This is an important bush for binding moving sand on sea-shores.
(Mueller.) It is eaten by stock.
77. Rhagodia parabolica, R. Br., B. FL, v., 153. Syn. ; R.
reclinata, A. Cunn. N, 0. Chenopodiaceie. “ Salt-bush.”
Found in all the Colonies except Tasmania.
This plant is relished by stock.
78. Sarcostemma australe, R. Br., B. FL, iv., 328. N.O.
Asclepiadeae. Called “ Caustic Plant ” or “ Caustic Vine ”
in Queensland ; “ Gaoloowurrah ” by the aboriginals at Port
Darwin. Found in all the Colonies except Victoria and
Tasmania.
In the Warrego District, Queensland, a great number of fat
cattle have perished from eating this plant. The death of sheep
from eating it is also well authenticated. (Bailey & Gordon.)
Yet Mr. J. Dixon stated he had not known stock to touch this
plant till the summer of 1880-1, when the cattle on the eastern
plains of South Australia lived upon it, without water, for some
months of continued drought. (Proc. R.S., S.A., iv., 136.)
79. ScleroLjENA bicornis, Lindl., B. FL, v., 195. Bassia
bicornis in Muell. Cens., p. 30. This must not be confounded
with the Sapotaceous genus Bassia of Linn., which are
usually large trees. (Genera Flantarum, Benth. & Hook.,
ii., 658.) Syn. : Chenolea bicornis, (Vide Proc. R.S., 18801 ;
Kentropsis lanata, Moq. ; Anisacantha bicornis, F. v. M. ;
Bassia bicornis , F. v. M. N.O. Chenopodiaceae. “ Cotton-
bush.” Found in all the Colonies except Tasmania and
Western Australia.
[N.B. —In Mr. Dixon’s paper the name is given as Chenolea
bicornis. There is no such species. It is probably intended for
Sclerolcena bicornis .]
An analysis of this salt-bush by Mr. W, A. Dixon is in the
Proc. Royal Society, N.S.W., 1880, p. 133.
£O. Sesbania Pers., B. FL, ii., 212. Syn.
jEschynomene se&ban, Linn. N. O. Leguminosae. “ Ngeen-
jerry” of the aboriginals of the Cloncurry River (North
Queensland). Found in Northern Australia.
The leaves and branches are cut for cattle-fodder in India.
(Gamble.)


81. Sida riiombifolia, Linn., B. FI., i., 196. N.O. Malvaceae.
“ Common Sida weed,” “ Queensland hemp.” Called “ Paddy
Lucerne ” in the Clarence and Richmond River Districts of
New South Wales. It is often called “Native Lucerne” in
other parts of the Colony. Found in New South Wales to
Northern Australia.
It may not be generally known that the ripe carpels of this
weed often cause the death of fowls that feed on them, by the
sharp terminal arms of the carpels irritating the inside and
causing inflammation. (F. M. Bailey.)
The leaves are mucilaginous, as are also the tops, and cattle
are very fond of them. They are however unable to destroy the
plants, by reason of the very strong fibre in the stems.
82. Solanum eremophilum, F. v. M., B. FL, iv., 459. N.O.
Solanea?. Found in the interior of New South Wales and
South Australia.
Between Cobham and Mount Arrowsmith (New South Wales),
an old drover stated that he has repeatedly seen sheep and cattle
die after eating this pretty blue and purple plant.
83. Solanum simile, F. v. M., B. FL, iv., 448. Syn. : S.
laciniatum , var., R. Br. ; S. fasciculatum, F. v. M. N.O.
Solanacese. Found in all the Colonies except Tasmania and
Queensland.
Sheep feed on this plant. (Annie F. Richards, in Froc. R.S.,
S.A., iv., 136.)
84. Sterculia diversifolia, G. Don., B.FL, i., 229. Br achy chiton
populneum in Muell. Cens,, p. 15. Syn. : Brachychiton
populneum, R. Br.; Poecilodermis populnea, Schott. N.O.
Sterculiaceae. “ Kurrajong ” or “ Black Kurrajong.” The
“ Bottle-tree ” of Victoria. Found in Victoria, New South
Wales, and Queensland.
Cattle and sheep are fond of the leaves and branches, and in
some dry seasons have existed for long periods on scarcely
anything else. In parts of the Riverina (New South Wales) the
trees are cut down as required for this purpose. ( General Report,
Sydney International Exhibition, 1879.)
85. Swainsonia SPP., B. FL, ii., 216, et seq. N.O. Leguminosie.
Native Indigos.
These plants are reputed poisonous to stock. The active
principle does not appear to have been isolated, as it only exists
during certain stages of growth (.prior to flowering) of the plant,
and it seems to be decomposed on drying the plant. The real


nature of the poison will therefore probably remain undetermined
until such time as a chemist can work at the plant on the spot,
or take steps to receive a perfectly fresh supply of it.
86. Swainsonia gaglegifolia, B. Br., B. FL, ii., 217. Syn. : S.
Oshornii, Moore; Vida galegi/olia, Andr.; Coin tea galegifolia,
Sims. N.O. Leguminosse. “ Darling Pea.” “ Indigo Plant.”
Found in New South Wales and Queensland.
This is a dreaded plant from the great amount of loss it has
inflicted on stock-owners. Its effect on sheep is well known ;
they separate from the flock, wander about listlessly, and are
known to the shepherds as “ pea eaters,” or “ indigo eaters.”
When once a sheep takes to eating this plant it seldom or never
fattens, and may be said to be lost to its owner. The late
Mr. Charles Thorn, of Queensland, placed a lamb which had
become an “indigo eater” in a small paddock, where it refused
to eat grass. It however ate the indigo plant greedily, and
followed Mr. Thorn all over the paddock for some indigo he held
in his hand. At Taroom (Q.) horses were hobbled for the night
at a place where much of this plant was growing. On the
following morning they were exceptionally difficult to catch, and
it was observed how strange they appeared. Their eyes were
staring out of their heads, and they were prancing against trees
and stumps. The second day two out of nine died, and five
others had to be left at the camp. When driven they would
suddenly stop, turn round and round, and keep throwing up
their heads as if they had been hit under the jaw; they would
then fall, lie down for a while, rise, and repeat the agonizing
performance. On one station in the course of a few weeks, eight
head were shot, having injured themselves past all hope of
recovery. {Plants Injurious to Stock, Bailey and Gordon.)
The Rev. Dr. Woolls, however, points out (Froc. Linn. Soc.,
JV.S.W., vii., 315) that from .experiments made near Mudgee,
New South Wales, it does not appear that this species is
deleterious when eaten with other herbage.
87. Swainsonia Greyana, Lindl., B. FL, ii., 216. Syn. : S.
grandijiora , R. Br. N.O. Leguminosse. “Poison bush.”
Found in South Australia, Victoria, New South Wales, and
Queensland.
This plant is reported to cause madness, if not death itself, to
horses. The poison seems to act on the brain, for animals
affected by it obstinately refuse to cross even a small twig lying
in their path, probably imagining it to be a great log. Sometimes
the poor creatures attempt to climb trees, or commit other
eccentricities. (Woolls.) It is regarded with great horror on


the Darling, especially in dry seasons when other herbage fails.
Baron Mueller believes in the poisonous properties attributed to
this particular species. {Trans. R. V., Victoria , Yol. vi., 1861-4.)
It would appear to be very similar in its effects to the preceding-
species.
“ I may add that this plant is popularly supposed to produce a
sort of insanity, ending in some cases in death, in stock that feed
upon it. lam of opinion that this is incorrect • I have never
seen any stock actually feeding upon it, but I have seen horses
eat freely, without any evil effect, of another species of the same
genus (?) which grows plentifully on the black soil flats which are
at times inundated by the waters of the Darling. The Hon.
William Macleay, who has had large experience in a district
where this plant grows, informed me a few days ago that he also
was of opinion that it is not poisonous to stock.” (H. R. Whittel,
in Proc. Linn. Hoc., JV.S.W., ix., 179.) As testimony in regard
to the properties of S. Greyana this is a little vague, but I have
given it verbatim.
88. Tepiirosia purpurea, Pers., B. FI., ii., 209. Syn. : T.
piscatoria, Pers., and others. NO. Leguminosse. Found in
South Australia, New South Wales to Northern Australia.
These species possess properties deleterious to stock. The
latter was reported from the Flinders River, Queensland, as a
poison herb. (Bailey and Gordon.) T. rosea, F. v. M., is also
poisonous.
89. Trachymene australis, Benth., B. FI., iii., 349. Didiscus
jnlosus in Muell. Gens., p. 62. ibyn. : Didiscus pilosus,
Benth. ; D. anisocarpus, F. v. M. ; D. yrandis, F. v. M, ;
Dimetopia anisocarpa , Turcz. ; D. yrandis , Turcz. N.O.
Umbellifene. “ Wild Parsnip.” Found in all the Colonies.
Recently (December, 1887) the sudden death of numbers of
cattle in the vicinity of Dandenong, Victoria, was attributed to
their having eaten a plant known as the wild parsnip. Baron
Mueller pronounced specimens forwarded to him by the Chief
Inspector of Stock to belong to this species. Its action is so
powerful that no remedial measures seem to be of any avail. The
only way to destroy the plant is to pull it up by the roots and
burn it.
90. Trema aspera, Blurne, B. FI., vi., 158. (This, and other
species of Trema recorded by Bentham, are all united by
Baron Mueller under the typical T. cannabina, Lour. Vide
O-October 3, 1888.


Muell. Cens., p. 21.) Syn. : CeJtis aspera, Brong. ; Sponia
aspera, Planch. N.O. Urticea?. “ Peach-leaved poison bush,”
“ Elm,” “ Rough fig,” a “ Kurrajong.” Found in all the
Colonies except Souch and Western Australia.
This shrub is firmly believed by some to be poisonous. It is
likely very indigestible, as it produces an excellent strong fibre.
(Bailey.)
91. Trichodesma zeylanicum, R. Br., B. FI., iv,, 404. P.
zeylanica in Muell. Cens., p. 100. Syn. ; Pollichia zeylanica,
F. v. M. N.O. Boraginete. Found in all the Colonies
except Victoria and Tasmania.
Baron Mueller recommends this plant as a fodder herb, saying
that the dromedaries of Giles’ Exploring party (1873-4) were
found to be particularly partial to it. It is not endemic in
Australia.
92. Trigonella suavissuma, Bindley , B. FI., ii., 187. N.O.
Leguminoste. From its abundance in the neighbourhood of
Menindie it is often called “ Menindie Clover.” It is the
“ Australian Shamrock ” of Mitchell, and the “ Calomba ” of
the natives of the Darling. Found in the Interior of
Australia, from the Murray River and tributaries to the
vicinity of Shark’s Bay, Western Australia.
This perennial, fragrant, clover-like plant is a good pasture
herb. Sir Thomas Mitchell (Three Expeditions) speaks of it in
the highest manner as a forage plant on several occasions.
93. Ventilago viminalis, Hook., B. FI., i., 411. N.O. Rhamnete.
“Supple Jack.” “ Thandorah ” of the aboriginals of the
Cloncurry River (North Queensland). Found in South
Australia, New South Wales, and Queensland.
The leaves are eaten by stock.
94. Zizyphus jujuba, Lam., B. FL, i., 412. N.O. Rhamnete.
“ Jujube tree.” Found in Queensland.
The leaves are much valued for cattle-fodder in India. (Brandis.)


.
'
• .
' .
.
■. ■ ’* t :
,
■ ■


