

Pern P
Rei-Jc noua. pah S
Aivo
BOA //
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION.
IN MEMORY OF WILLIAM HENRY BARLOW,
Who Died on the 22nd of July, 1880, Aged 62 Tears,
SERMON
PREACHED BY THE
IR IE AT. I R. C O IST NT EBE E 3
IX THE
INDEPENDENT CHURCH, KEW,
On the Morning of Sunday, 2Sth July, 1880.
“Ami Israel sail unto Joseph, Behold I die; but God shall be with you, and bring
you again unto the land of your fathers.”
Gen. xlvii. 21.
£wtt«|HESE are Jacob’s words, and few meinHives have been
iMllni more chequered than Jacob’s was. Very early he was
required to leave his father’s house to go forth to a distant
u-hiww land, not knowing the things which should befal him
there. With a heart full of heaviness did he go forth, and many
of us here present this morning can fully sympathise with him as
'he went, for few things are more painful than to leave one’s native
land; to gaze for the last time upon its hills and its vales, upon its
churches and upon its spires; more than all, on thosearound whom our
holiest affections are entwined, with the burning consciousness that
we have looked our last look on thefriends and thescenesof our child-
hood and our youth. Fourteen years pass away, during the whole
of which Jacob was an exile from his native home, when he is
again brought in sight of its blue hills, its familiar fields, and its
cedar-crowned heights. He is reminded of all the years which have
passed away between his departure and his return, and now it is
that he exclaims “ I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies
and of all the truth which God hath showed unto me.” He is now
commanded to remove to Bethel, where many children are born unto
him. Famine, however appears in the land and again he removes
his dwelling-place, this time into Egypt, whither Joseph had been
sent before him. Seventeen years of comparative peace are now
spent by him in Egypt near to his beloved son Joseph. Many sore
calamities he had suffered in past years, by many tempests had he
been tossed, but he is now comforted with the prospect of a peaceful


haven in view, the haven of heaven, and he is here presented
to us on his dying couch. Surrounded by his children, rapt in the
spirit of prophecy, foretelling their future destiny, he is favoured
with a blissful vision of the happiness that awaits him, for it is now
that he exclaims, “ I have waited for Thy salvation, O Lord !” and
thus it is that the narrative before us closes—“ lamto be gathered
unto my people; bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in
the field of Ephron the Hittite, in the cave that is in the field of
Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which
Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite for a pos-
session of a burying place. There they buried Abraham and Sarah
his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there
I buried Leah.”
Jacob, my brethren, was honoured by God beyond most men, so
much so that the Most High condescended to associate Jacob’s
name with His own and to designate Himself as “ the God of
Jacob,” and you may remember that in the 46th Psalm we hear
its author exclaim, “ The Lord of Hosts is with us; the God of
Jacob is our refuge.”
We are called to-day to contemplate the scene of Jacob’s departure
as it is here presented to us. “And Israel said unto Joseph,
‘Behold I die.’” He had now arrived at the threshold of that
bourne whence no traveller returns. Some reach it by a short and
speedy course: early in life, like Abijah, are they called aAvay,
their sun goes down even before it is noon-day. But others, like
Jacob, do not reach it until their hair is silvered with age. There
is a time appointed for man upon the earth, —it was so with Jacob,
it is so with us. The busy world will move, as it moves on now,
while you and I are slumbering beneath the clods of the valley.
“The storm that shakes the wintry sky,
No more disturbs our calm repose,
Than summer’s evening’s latest sigh,
That sheds the rose.”
Now the first thought that occurs to us in the case of Jacob is
his dignified calmness in the hour of death. Life, from him, was
now slowly ebbing away, its weary wheels revolved slower and
slower, yet on the arrival of his son he acquires new strength, he
sits up on his bed with a dignity worthy of a great occasion, feeling
that as he could honour God by dying but once it became him to
finish his course well, so that in his case it may truly be said,
“ Nothing in his life became him like the leaving of it.” Such
was his calm and tranquil dignity. My brethren, lam sure that
for a dying saint to sit erect upon his bed in order that he may
testify to the faithfulness of God, and give instructions respecting
himself, respecting his children, respecting his family, presents a
picture of dignified calmness which has no parallel in human history.
And such is the scene which is presented to us here. “ One told
Jacob,‘Behold thy son Joseph cometh unto thee,’” and Israel
strengthened himself, and sat up upon his bed. Now as it was
with Jacob it should be with us. Not only should there be that
dignity and holy calmness, but we may well be excused if at such


a time there should be even heavenly rapture, for think what we
leave on the one hand, and what we are about to gain on the other !
For us it will be as if a man had spent all his life in a prison, a
prison situated in a splendid city, and as if suddenly the walls of
that prison (like those of Jericho) should fall to the ground and he
be immediately brought into affinity with scenes of grandeur and
beauty, of the existence of which he had not previously the most
distant knowledge. Now it will be thus with us. Here are we in
this body, pent, cribbed, cabined, confined like a bird prisoned in
its cage, but at length we fly out to our native skies. And think
of the associates whom we shall now meet, and with whom we shall
now mingle! What recognitions of those who have gone before
us ! And how is our happiness sustained by the continual accessions
which are made to the heavenly world, of those whom we knew
and loved upon earth ! For just as, when companies in fleets of
ships, which are destined to the same harbour, arrive at different
times, those who reach it first wait for the arrival of the rest, to
greet them with joyous congratulations, so will it be in the heavenly
world. First we shall be greeted on our arrival thither, and then
in turn will greet each new arrival with songs of rapturous grati-
tude and joy. Oh blessed day ! The day on which our largest
wishes will be consummated : when all that we have lost on earth
which is worthy of retaining will be given back to us again! Oh
day of Jubilee! when the ransomed of the Lord shall return to
Zion with songs—(with songs!)—and everlasting joy upon their
heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing
shall flee away. Such then in brief seem some of the materials for
dignified calmness like that of Jacob when we come to pass through
a similar crisis.
But in the next place I want you to observe Jacob’s dying testi-
mony here; you will find it in the 15th verse; “Israel blessed
Joseph and said ‘God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac
did walk, the God which led me all my life long unto this day,
the Angel which redeemed me from all evil.’” You perceive here,
brethren, that he leaves the world almost rejoicing in his God, first
you observe as the God of Providence, and then as the God
Grace. First he says, “The God who fed me all my life long,” or
more correctly as the words might be rendered “who has acted the
Shepherd towards me”—that is the idea —“ who has acted the
Shepherd towards me all my life long.” His meaning is, that the
Lord had been his Shepherd all his days and had kept him and had
led him all his life. And let us ever remember that while it
matters not through what channel our food or our comforts flow
to us, God is their Author, God their Giver. Second causes should
never be allowed to conceal from our view the Hand of God, who is
the Prime and the great First Cause of all our comforts and our joys.
Advanced Christians, as well as those of you who are younger,
I call upon you this morning, as you review all the way you have
been led in through your past life, to recognise the Divine Hand and
to say with good old Jacob, “ God, who hath fed me all my life long.
But secondly, Jacob recognises Jehovah as his Shepherd in things


spiritual, as well as in those that are temporal, as the God of Grace
as well as the God of Providence, for he goes on to speak of Him
as “ the Angel who hath redeemed me.” And here very beautifully
comes in the New Testament reference to this very scene, for says
the apostle, “ By faith, Jacob when dying worshipped, leaning upon
the top of his staff.”—“Fetch me”—he seems to say—“that
pilgrim staff’ of mine, that these hands may grasp it once more, so
that I may lean upon it once again !” Oh brethren, the wondrous
power of association ! Taking that staff in his hand he could say
as he gazed upon it, “ I see a hand you cannot see, I hear a voice
you cannot hear.” And there is a very beautiful reference to the
very same thing in the 32nd chapter of this Book and the tenth
verse, where he says, “ I am not worthy of the least of all the
mercies and of all the truth which thou hast showed unto thy ser-
vant, for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am
become two bands.” I want you to catch the idea here:—“ When
I went from home I had only my staff—nothing else ; I am now
returning to my home and lam come back with bands. I have
oxen, and asses, and flocks, and men-servants, and women-
servants.” This staff you perceive was, therefore, associated with
the pilgrim’s course, and had been his constant companion, which
he had carried with him and treasured, ever since the gloomy
day, when, as a fugitive, he fled from his father’s house; he clung
to it as the memorial of God’s loving kindness to him. He
carried it with him all the way to Egypt—l want you to
observe that—and now when for the last time he calls to mind,
as he does in the case before us that God is He who has fed him
all his life long, we see the aged patriarch stretching himself
upon his bed, but still leaning upon the top of his staff. So have
I seen a Christian, when finishing his course, call for his Bible (I
saw it not long since), and ask that those passages might be read
to him which he had underlined at different stages of his Christian
course, and each passage would serve the same purpose as Jacob’s
staff—that is, would recall the various interpositions of Provi-
dence and the grace of God towards him as he pursued his pilgrim
path from this world to that which is to come. Whom did Jacob
worship 1 Who is his God—the Angel of whom he here speaks 1
He himself tells us “He who hath redeemed me.” He leans
upon the staff of Providence, mark you, but he worships and
adores Him who is his Redeemer by grace. He had wrestled
once with that Angel at Jabbok, and now he beholds by faith the
same Angel, the Angel of the Covenant, appearing to him, and, if
necessary, appearing for him. And, dear brethren, what is all
this 1 What is it but Christ preached at Jacob’s bed 1 Christ,
the Angel of the Covenant, the last words upon his lips. Like his
father Abraham, he sees the day of Christ afar off, and is glad,
and the music of that name refreshes his soul in death. A dear
friend of mine, a minister at Soho, in London, named Rees, when
dying was visited by Dr. Leifchild, who said to him—“ Brother,
tell me what is your hope; tell me what is your hope, now, as a
dying man.” Just like Jacob, the dying saint raised himself upon


the bed, and endeavoured to sit up. With a face uplighted by
almost seraphic brightness he replied, “ Christ! Christ in the
divinity of His nature, Christ in the perfection of His atonement,
Christ in the prevalence of His intercession, Christ in the love of
His heart, and Christ in the power of His help, is the Rock upon
which I now stand, and let death do its worst.” And I am
reminded, in connection with this confession, of a very, very similar
one made by the Apostle ;—“ lam now ready to be offered (to be
poured out as an oblation), and the time of my departure is at
hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith—henceforth there is laid up for me a crown
of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give
me at that day.” My beloved friends, all of you, I charge you to
live such saintly lives now that the honour may be conferred upon
you (and it is an honour) to bear your testimony, when you come
to die, to God’s merciful and unchanging love, and the grace of
Christ, the Angel of the Covenant, in redeeming you from all
evil. Unspeakable is the blessing to finish life well, or, to use the
words of the great Apostle—“ to finish our course Avith joy.”
In the third place, let us consider Jacob’s ardent desire for the
salvation of God. You have the words here, “ I have waited for
Thy salvation, O Lord,” alluding pei’haps to the coming Messiah,
for (interrupting, you perceive, the prophetic strain in Avhich he
had been indulging) he suddenly exclaims, “ I have waited for Thy
salvation.” Now, my brethren, the sah r ation of all true believers
is the same in substance noAv as that of Jacob then, but it is
more clearly and more fully revealed to us than it Avas to him.
It consists of two parts, and takes place at tAvo different periods.
First it is a salvation immediately after the death of the body,
when the spirit, being released from the trammels of flesh and
sense, wings its flight to the world of spirits, there to join the
general assembly of the first-born and the redeemed Avho are
Avritten in heaven, and above all to be with Christ. And for this
salvation Ave wait, knoAving, as saith the Apostle writing to the
Corinthians, “ that whilst Ave are at home in the body we are
absent from the Lord,” “and Avilling rather to be absent from the
body, and to be present Avith the Lord.” But this is not all that
is included in that expressive word—saHation. The body, which
had become the temple of the Holy Ghost while here, is noAv in
ruins, mouldering in the grave, but it is to be repaired, to be
raised, in oi’der that it may be made like unto Christ’s glorious
body. As Joseph came out of the dungeon to be clothed with
purple and to sit upon the throne of Pharaoh, and as Peter had
his chains struck off in prison and was conducted by an angel to
his companions, so the bodies of all true believers Avill be brought
out of the prison-house of the graA e by the resurrection power of
Christ exerted upon them, to be robed in light and splendour and
to be conveyed by angels to their companions on high, to sit upon
thrones as assessors together with Christ at the Judgment Day.
This is the double salvation—first the salvation of the soul
immediately after death, and then the salvation of the body


re-united to the soul at the coming of the Lord for those who wait.
But what should be the character of our waiting? It should be
the waiting of faith and confident expectation. And what more
can we require, brethren, for the confirmation of our faith than
the fact of the indissoluble connection between Christ and His
people, and His own assurance that where He is, His people shall
also be? Will He, think you, be a Prince at last without His
subjects, a head without its members the body, a Redeemer
without His redeemed ones? What doubt, therefore, respecting
the certainty of this salvation should ever be permitted to lodge
in our minds? Let ours then be the waiting of faith. In the next
place it should be the waiting of preparation. We read in Holy
Scriptures of “ meetness to be made partakers of the inheritance
of the saints in light.” Now, this “ meetness ” for heaven should
be the great object which we have in view as long as we are
waiting here. Listen to the solemn charge of our blessed
Saviour in this respect where He says, “ Watch therefore, for ye
know not what hour your Lord doth come.” “ Watch therefore,
for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of Man
cometh.” And then, once more, it should be a cheerful waiting.
I hold that joy should ever be the predominating feeling in the
mind of a Christian. “ Rejoicing in hope,” says the Apostle, “of
the glory of God.” Thus let us cheerfully and joyfully wait for
our coming salvation, when, free from all imperfection both as
regards body and soul we shall be forever with the Lord.
But it is time (and perhaps more than time) to notice in the last
place the two predictions of the dying patriarch which you will
find in my text, “ Behold I die, but God will be with you.” May
not every Christian father thus address his children, especially if
they are treading in his steps and are walking as he walked ?
Many dying parents are anxious and troubled respecting their
families, and often have I heard them say, “ What will become of
my poor children when lam gone?” But strong faith, like that
of Jacob enables its possessor to say to them “ I die, but God will
take care of you. Make Him your Father, make Him your
Protector, make Him your Friend, make Him your all and we
shall meet, an unbroken band, before the Throne of God.”
The second prediction of the dying patriarch was that God
would bring his children into the land of their fathers. His
prediction was fulfilled when the Israelites under Joshua entered
the Promised Land. Now, as we know that that land was a fair
and beautiful type of the heavenly world, the spiritual import of
this prediction is that the land to which our fathers are gone
awaits us. They also are represented in Holy Scripture as wait-
ing for us. The separation is only for a little time, the goodly
land is before us, a land where sin shall never enter. Into that
world enter the good, the wise, and the holy of every land and
tongue. God grant that its attractions to us may become stronger
and stronger, and that we may aspire to join that happy throng so
beautifully and eloquently described in these words, “ They shall
hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun


light on them ; nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the
midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto
living fountains of waters; and God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes.” ....
Into that world another member of this spiritual community
has recently entered. Some points of analogy you have, I have
no doubt, traced, as I have proceeded with my subject, between
his course and that of Jacob. Our departed friend left his native
land and the scenes of his youth comparatively early in life, and
in the land which he had made his home (as in the case of Jacob)
children were born unto him. He became a Christian while yet a
youth, and although brought up in connexion with the established
Church of England, from conviction he became an Independent, and
never swerved from his principles to the day of his death. I have
enjoyed the privilege and profit of knowing him for twenty-eight
years both in New Zealand and here, but much more intimately
since he became a member of this Church about twelve years ago.
Since then he has entered most earnestly into almost e\ ery kind
of Church work, sometimes in office, sometimes out of office,
this mattered not to him if he could but serve his Master and
the Church by his influence and his talents, and his prayers. He
was ever the foremost to come to the help of the Lord, to extend
the knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus. Nor was his piety of
that kind which could be seen wholly of men. For many years
he conscientiously set apart one hour every Saturday evening for
prayer with me and one or two others, that being the time of
preparation because the Sabbath drew nigh. So that while
multitudes were wholly neglecting this hallowed season of pre-
paration, he was earnestly engaged in imploring a blessing to rest
upon his minister, upon the Church, upon its schools, upon the
young people of the congregation, and upon all the families who
are here connected in Christian fellowship. My brethren, many
sacred associations with Kew and its Church, will forever remain
indelibly engraven upon the tablet of my memory, bnt none are
more sacred—perhaps I should utter the words of truth and
soberness if I say none are so sacred—as those which are con-
nected with the Saturday evening devotional services. For how
often have we used the words together—words which I quote
from Jacob — 11 How dreadful is this place ! This is none other
but the house of God, and this is the gate of Heaven!” lam
not about to lift the veil and describe what our departed friend
was in the family, as a husband, as a father, and as a friend.
Suffice is it to say that those who knew him best, loved him best,
and the blank created by his removal is one which to them can
never in this life be supplied. Two years ago he was visited with
an obscure disease which caused him much pain and weakness. Still
as long as strength was granted, every Sunday his place yonder
was occupied, and he was regularly in that pew every Wednesday
evening. He knew the pain which vacant pews and vacant places
produce in the mind of every minister of Christ, and it formed
part of his religion to encourage those who minister in holy things.


Hence, whoever might be absent from the house of God, either
upon the Sabbath or on the Wednesday evening, he was not, being
always with us until disease prevented. During a long and pain-
ful illness he displayed unbroken submission to the Divine will,
not a murmuring word ever escaped his lips, nor (I firmly believe)
found a lodgment in his heart. He was kept in perfect peace,
with his mind stayed upon God. Gradually but steadily, however,
disease progressed in his frame, which had now become faint and
frail, and when satisfied that the closing scene could not be far off,
with amazing calmness (like Jacob) he gave instructions respect-
ing everything that he wished to be done, and like that good old
patriarch strengthened himself in his bed, spoke to his children
and to his family, and then in earnest prayer—a prayer which
never could be forgotten by those who heard it—bestowed his part-
ing benediction upon them all. The last few days he was seized
with terrible suffering of body, and at last the season of rest came.
Upon Thursday morning last his eye closed, and peacefully he fell
asleep in Jesus.
So fades a summer cloud away,
So sinks the gale when storms are o’er,
So gently shuts the eye of day,
So dies a wave along the shore.
Life’s labour done, as sinks the clay,
Light from its load the spirit flies ;
While heaven and earth combine to say
How blest the righteous when he dies.
Brethren! Brethren! do you not hear a voice saying to you this
morning, “ Blessed are those who die in the Lord from henceforth.
Yea, saith the Spirit, for they rest from their labours; and their
works do follow them?” Ye too, his children; ye too, his fellow-
members (who were so); ye too, who were accustomed to meet with
him in this sanctuary for so many years; I charge you see to it, that
that faith which so wonderfully supported him in his long illness,
that faith which upheld him in the hour of his death; I charge you,
see to it that that faith be yours, faith in Jesus. And if you have
not got it, make it the earnest prayer of your heart to-day that this
service shall not pass away without your imploring God for the faith,
that sustained him, to be yours, so that for you to live may be
Christ, and to die, gain. And then at last (oh! may God grant!)
—at last, as a Christian congregation, pastor, people, all may unite
in the anthem of eternity—“ Unto Him that loved us, and
washed us from our sins in His Own blood, and hath made us kings
and priests unto God and His Father: to Him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.”
Bones and Watt, Printers, 149 Little Collins-street West, Melbourne.
