





A PLEA
ON BEHALF OF THE
ABORIGINAL INHABITANTS
VICTORIA.
PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION.
1 856.


Since the following was prepared for the press, we have been
gratified by the appearance of a powerfully-written appeal on be-
half of the black-fellow, in the columns of the Argus. Much it
is the province of the Press to do in this cause. We hail this as
an earnest, and trust the matter once taken up will not be
allowed to drop, until the people have been stirred up to take
active measures for the benefit of the Aborigines.


A PLEA
ON BEHALF OP THE
ABORIGINAL INHABITANTS OF VICTORIA.
Dickens in one of his earliest writings, in sarcastic allusion to
the active sympathy which the English people are wont to extend
to benighted heathen at the uttermost ends of the earth, while
thousands on thousands of their own countrymen, in nearly as
lamentable a state of moral darkness are overlooked, introduces
to the notice of an imaginary scientific body—“ The Mudfog
Association”—a pair of “newly-invented spectacles which enable
the wearer to discover in very bright colors objects at a great
distance, and render him wholly blind to those immediately
before him.” Mr. Tickle, the inventor, stated to the Asso-
ciation—we are informed—that they were “ based strictly upon
the principle ofthe hum an eye.” The truth of Mr. Tickle’s re-
mark cannot but be admitted ; but we were at one time firmly
impressed with the opinion that it was only applicable to the
inhabitants of the British Isles, and that we in the Colonies were
remarkably free from all that kind of—humbug in short! In
fact, w'e thought it but a natural consequence of the superior
intelligence of most classes, and particularly the middle classes of
our population, who in passing from their own country to this,
and from one colony to another, and in mixing with such a
population as ours, have many opportunities of observation not
possessed by people at home, and learn to act and think for
themselves in matters in which at home people are generally
guided by others.
We are constrained, however, to admit that we have been
mistaken. Within the last few years we have seen undoubted
proofs that Mr. Tickle’s invention is made use of and appreciated


in Victoria. The same blindness to moral depravity at our own
door, and sensitiveness to it at a distance, here exists ; and it is
a question if it be not, here, under the circumstances, a far more
heinous sin than it is in England.
We observe, for instance, in a report of the financial condition
of a congregation in this Colony, the statement that they support a
“ Native Missionary Agent in India,” and a “Native Orphan Girl
at Madras.” The Deacons, in winding up their report, lay the flat-
tering unction to their soul that they have “ thus fulfilled in some
degree the Divine rule of “lookingnot on our own things merely,
but on the things of others also !” This certainly is looking on the
things of others, or in other words attending to other people’s
business, with a vengeance. Does it not carry absurdity on the
very face of it, that the aboriginal inhabitants of Victoria—the
few that remain—should be wholly uncared for—wholly over-
looked ?—while people are straining their eyes, or making use of
Mr. Tickle’s spectacles to enable them to take notice, of the
heathenism that exists in British India.
Again, when the Colony was considered in no small danger of
being overrun with Celestials, with what zeal and promptitude
was not a scheme originated, having for its object the “ Evange-
lization of the Chinese.” Men were found ready for the work,
and religious books printed in their own language were imported
for their benefit. We may naturally pause to ask—Have the
Chinese a claim on our sympathies superior to that of the
aborigines?—assuredly not: They are in a manner aggressors
in our territory.—W e are, to a certainty, intruders in the land
of the black-fellow. They come here from mercenary motives,
dig our gold, and take it out of the country. —We came to the
hunting grounds of the poor blacks from the same motives, and
a wondrous rich land it has proved to us ; although in the midst
of our wealth we seem to have forgotten their consequent im-
poverishment. The Chinese brought with them the most
disgusting and loathsome vices that can degrade humanity.
The worst vices of the black man are those we have taught him.
While we are thus—and in numberless other instances we


could cite—so anxious for the spiritual welfare of the natives of
other countries, what has been done for the poor aboriginal
inhabitants of our own ? Within the last five years we have
become a great and wealthy Colony, yet no one seems to have
been sufficiently impressed with the claim these people have upon
us, to originate any movement in their behalf. For many years
before gold was discovered —and we were even then a prosperous
community—little or nothing was done to ameliorate their con-
dition. We would not, be it observed, wish to lay undue blame
on any particular class—the blame lies on us all. It is useless
to say it is the province of the Government to look after the
blacks. An apathetic people will always make an indifferent
Government.
We must candidly confess, however, we are not sanguine in
our anticipations of the success of any measures for Christianizing
the aborigines. The experiment (whether properly conducted
or not, we cannot say) was unsuccessful when there were less
distracting influences to bear upon their minds than there are
now, or will be at any future period of our history. Besides,
there are few or no young native blacks now near town ; and it
would be a hard matter we are afraid, to make any satisfactory
impression on the minds of the grown up, after the course of
civilizing they have gone through. But, in Christian charity, we
would have them cared for, sheltered and fed, and removed where
strong waters would be beyond their reach, and where the influ-
ences that have mainly led to their present debauched condition,
would be unfelt.
Let us proceed seriatim to consider their claims upon us, and
to urge them upon the notice of our fellow-colonists.—
Firstly—We are in their territory, and have taken possession
of their lands, Did the reader ever attempt to argue with an
intelligent aborigine, the justifiableness of our occupation of
the country ? If he did, he would find it a very difficult matter
to answer some of his arguments. Indeed, he would likely be
not a little dissatisfied with some of his own ; and we doubt not,
but that he would feel in his conscience, that some “con-


sideration ” was due to the original proprietor of the soil, in
addition to that he has paid (the reader will observe we flatter
him, by presuming him to be a landowner) to “ Victoria, by the
Grace of God, &c., &c.,” whose “trusty and well-beloved”
Captain - General and Governor -in - Chief of the Colony of
Victoria and its Dependencies,” has signed away the land to
him. We do not for a moment mean to broach the opinion, that
our taking possession of their territory cannot be justified: we
merely wish to impress on the minds of our fellow-colonists that
we owe the poor aborigines something—more in fact than we can
ever pay them —for depriving them of their country.
How keenly alive is an Englishman to any encroachments on
what he considers his rights ! How loudly a Squatter can call
out for “ compensation ” when there is any danger of his boun-
daries being curtailed ! Did he ever think of compensating the
man, whose title to his run is as clear as the right of kings is
divine ? Let him answer.
Secondly—We have deprived them of their former mode of
subsistence. We have deprived them even of the means of
shelter, now that the trees near town are so much cut down ;
and they are so effeminated by the vices we have taught them,
that the shelter of the miamia, when procurable, is no longer
sufficient for their enervated bodies—as the fact of their dying
as they do, prematurely from colds and rheumatism, can testify.
When “ Shelter Sheds ” were talked of, no one ever thought of
suggesting an extra one or two, of very rough construction, near
town, for them. They must lie down, poor fellows, in some un-
finished building, or on the lee side of a fence, or in the watch-
house. We have deprived them, in short, of all they formerly
prized on earth.—We have even raised doubts in their minds as
to the happy hunting grounds above, they were wont to believe
in, without substituting for that belief a faith in Heaven.
In the third place—They are in a state of heathenism and
ignorance. This is too obvious to all of us to require to be en-
larged upon. Of a truth, if the claims of such a people are in
proportion to the extent of their moral darkness, it would be


difficult to point out a race with a higher title to the sympathy of
Christian nations.
In the fourth place—They arc at our very doors ; we meet
them in our path every day. We cannot pretend to be blind to
their wants. We speak without experience in these matters, but
to us it appears that the propinquity of the field of operation
would be of great advantage in the working of any mission,
because the operations could be better overlooked than they
would be, if it were at a distance. Practically, however, we know
that nothing militates more against the interests of the poor
black, than this very circumstance —his being amongst us. To
use the words of a writer whom we have before quoted a man,
by-the-bye, who seems thoroughly to appreciate the sort of
humbug we refer to—“He is not softened by distance and un-
familiarity—he is not a genuine foreign-grown savage he is the
ordinary home-made article.” Is this as it ought to be ? Will
we follow so closely in the footsteps of our fathers, after having
had so many opportunities of knowing better ?
Oh! inimitable Billy Gore, for ever departed from amongst
us, happily would it have been for thee, had thy natal star arisen
over the bleak and wintry coast of distant Patagonia. There thy
spiritual wants, if not supplied, would have been cared for. Men
earnest and good, would have risked their all—even life itself
to carry succour to the gates of the fastnesses of heathen ig-
norance, surrounding thy apt understanding, and trammelling thy
ready wit. Thy sayings instead of being drawn forth, to furnish
mirth to brutal and unsympathizing men in the public streets,
might have been related with much solemn importance, to eager
and credulous crowds, hanging on the words of the travelled
missionary, as he talked of the lands he had labored in, and the
works he had done. Many a smooth countenance might have
permitted a crease to steal over its rigidly decorous surface in the
way —although not much in the way either—of a smile, at the
mention of one of thy witty remarks \ and the dew on the spec-
tacles of elderly females, would have betokened their intense
interest in thee, when thy moral poverty was alluded to. Ihou


wert far too near us, Billy—far too often in our paths—to be an
interesting object for compassion of this kind. Of all that has been
brought hither by the white man, there fell to thy share but Rum
and Rheumatism, and these have led thee to thy premature grave.
Oh ! Harry—Oh ! Wurrijack—fast following in the footsteps
of Billy ! why saw ye first the light within the forest prime-
val, in the land we now call ours. In the South Sea are islands
almost without number, where thou wouldst have been taught the
story of the incomparable love of Him who planned and built the
City of Salvation, whose gates alike are open for the black man
and the white.
Oh ! Kitty, peerless in thine ugliness, in some of these islands
are stores of flannel to swathe the picanninies in, provided by
the anxious care of Christian ladies in a land 14,000 miles away;
yea, even it is said, pocket-handkerchiefs in abundance, to wipe
their dirty little noses with.
We will now proceed to the consideration of the question—
how the black-fellow’s condition is to be ameliorated ? Former
experiments as we said before have failed signally, and some
new system must be tried. The scheme we would suggest,
is as follows: —Let the whole of the blacks near the towns,
and in the populated districts, be removed to one of the islands
in the Straits, with a staff of Guardians or Protectors and
Teachers. They have little or no attachment to localities
no w, —we question if ever they had, and they would not
therefore feel their removal a hardship on that account. Their
restless roving disposition, and the difficulty of getting them to
apply their minds steadily for any length of time to one parti-
cular object is well known to us all. Even those on whom the
experiment of civilization has been most successful, have at
times a hankering after their original ways, some do occasionally
put off their European clothes, don their opossum skin, and dis-
appear with their former companions for a week or so at a time.
The difficulties which the former missionaries experienced from
this cause, would in a great measure be overcome in the scheme
under consideration. No traders or others would of course be


allowed to settle in, or visit the island, and the blacks would be
compelled to go for their meals at stated hours, and for rest at
night to the establishment of their Protectors, and the found-
ation of habits of regularity, which would be of infinite service
when their mental culture came to be attempted, would be laid.
The men would have no opportunities of procuring spirits, and
the women would be removed from that prostitution so fearfully
prevalent, so universal in fact amongst them.* We would be en-
abled by this scheme to clothe, feed, and shelter the black-fellow
in a better manner than could be accomplished here now, by any
system we could adopt, and three great obligations that we owe
him would thus, to the best of our ability, be paid. We would also
be enabled to guard him from the contagion of moral pollution,
and if he is ever to be taught, or Christianised, it will only be
when removed, in some such manner as we propose, from the evil
influences which have so degraded him.
We have not taken up our pen, however to bring this parti-
cular plan under notice, but simply to urge the claims of the
native blacks upon the public. We are not particularly attached
to this scheme, or to any scheme ; we were only led to propose
one in deference to the recognised rule, wdiich demands from any
one who objects to any existing system or arrangement, some
proposal as to how it is to be remedied. We would be glad to see
any scheme tried which would be likely to improve their moral
or social condition. It is said to be never too late to begin a
good work, but it will soon be too late, if we do not at once begin
—too late to testify to God, to them, and to the Christian world,
that we are impressed with the conviction we owe them some-
thing, for having deprived them of this fair land—our adopted
country —V ictoria.
* We do not believe there have been six births among the Aborigines,
in as many years, in the Western District of Victoria, unless in the very
remote parts of it; and there cannot be a doubt as to the cause.
Ylth March, 1856.


7Aff>
BlflLio
Fi4^oZ




y , r *
