

1870
A HISTORICAL REVIEW
of
NATIMUK AND DISTRICT
Compiled in connection with the
Back to Natimuk
Celebrations
April 5 to 12, 1947
1947


NATIMUK TALKIES
APRIL 5:
"DESPERATE JOURNEY"
(Not Suitable for General Exhibition).
ERROL FLYNN. RONALD REAGAN.
"Here Comes Happiness"
(General Exhibition)
MILDRED COLES. EDWARD NORRIS.
SPORTS; “POINTS ON ARROWS”
CARTOON : “ROBINSON CRUSOE JUNIOR”
WEST WIMMERA
GARAGE
NATIMUK
| IF YOU WANT CAR REPAIRS WHY NOT
| CALL OR RING VS
f
| Prompt Service. Workmanship Guaranteed.
| I. J. MAYS, Proprietor
| Phone 29.
i
E. H. HODGES S
NATIMUK
I
MANUFACTURER OF ALL CLASSES OF |
i
LEATHER AND CANVAS GOODS j
Sleep-out and Verandah Blinds at City Prices.
MEN’S BOOTS AND SHOES STOCKED
CAB CURTAINS AND HOODS MADE AND
RENOVATED
S. O’BRIEN AND
SON
BUTCHER, NATIMUK
Box 61. Phone 137.
THE MOST CONSISTENT SUPPLIER OF
YOUNG MEAT AT ANY TIME
TREAT YOURSELF TO THIS
TOOTHSOME MEAT
Phone 27.
Box 26.
MODERN REFRIGERATION


A HISTORICAL REVIEW
of
NATIMUK AND DISTRICT
Compiled in connection 'with the 9ack to c lSlatimuk
Celebrations
oApril 5 to 12, 1947
THE
PRESIDENT:
THE JOINT
HONORARY
SECRETARIES:
E. M. SMITH,
ESQ.
MESSRS.
FRANK AND ALLAN
LOCKWOOD.


Events on days during
SATURDAY, APRIL 5:
Arrival of Visitors.
Sporting Fixtures Tennis, Bawling,
Croquet.
■ ' Pictures in Mechanics’ Institute, 8 p.m.
SUNDAY, APRIL 6:
Back to Church.
Sacred Concept in MfecitiUilcs* Militate,
at 8.30 p.m.
MONDAY, APRIL 7:
12.30. Procession of Far* Machinery,
Fire Fighting Equipment, Decorated
Cars and Bicycles, etc., commences
from State School for Show Ground.
1.30. —‘Welcome to Visitors by Cr. C. D.
Hair, Shire President.
2 p.m.—Gymkhana In Show Ground.
TUESDAY, APRIL 8:
Day of Leisure. Visiting Friends.
Old Time Ball in Mechanics’ Hall, 8 p.nt.
A View of Natimuk Lake


WEDNESDAY, APRIL 9:
Motor Tour to Mount Arapiles and Nati-
muk Lake, cars leaving Post Office at
1.30 p.m. Picnic and afternoon tea.
at Lake at 3.30 p.m.
THURSDAY, APRIL 10:
Back to School. Fall in at 2 p.m.
Concert in Mechanics’ Hall at 8 pjn.
(Tickets available on Show Groutid
on Monday, 7th, at 4.30 p.m.)
FRIDAY, APRIL 11:
Arapiles Schools’ Sports in Show Grounds
commencing at 1 p.m.
SATURDAY, APRIL 12:
Sporting Fixtures Tennis, Bowling,
Croquet.
Pictures in Mechanics’ Institute, 8 p.m.
Major Mitchell’s Original Drawing of Mt. Arapiles
tMue/k to JuifltHfl/i'


L. J. HATELEY
Cash Grocer and Provision Merchant,
MAIN STREET, NATIMUK
PHONE 57 P. O. BOX 55
You a Hearty Welcome %ack
AGENT FOR
BERGER'S PAINTS
CROWN DAHLIA SEPARATORS
SEAFRESH SEAFOODS
CITY MUTUAL ASSURANCE LTD.
L. HUTCHESSON & SONS, UNDERTAKERS
H. B. CORBEN & SONS, MONUMENTAL CRAFTSMEN


HISTORICAL REVIEW
By A.W.L.
THE beginning and early development of the
Wimmera Plains of which Natimuk forms
a part was due to a venturesome band of
agriculturists who came from Mt. Gambler
and other parts of South Australia in the early
70’s. Many of the pioneers, who resented the
military trend in Germany, were repatriated to
the sister state by that grand colonist, Mr. Angus.
When the Wimmera land was thrown open for
selection these men, some with wives and young
children, drove across in primitive conveyances,
the trip taking several weeks. They camped at
Natimuk Lake and had to go to Hamilton to at-
tend the Land Board. They, on being allotted
selections, had to face the herculean task of fenc-
ing and getting the land ready for the growing of
wheat with a single-furrow plough, drawn by two
horses, with one man holding the plough and
another driving the horses.
It was a crude beginning, viewed from the
present method of tilling the soil with the use
of tractors and eight to ten-horse teams. Still,
those sturdy pioneers had the will to win, and
Wimmera wheat growers of to-day, and the State
as a whole, owe a deep debt of gratitude to the
original settlers for the magnificent heritage they
now enjoy. There were no 17-tyne cultivators or
lb ft. harvesters in the 70’s, no bulk handling of
wheat and no cartage contractors. The first wheat
crops were reaped with a sickle and threshed with
a flail, and the grain had to be carted over vicious
roads in a German pole waggon, drawn by a pair
of horses the 60 miles to Stawell, there to be sold
to a miller, some of the wheat being gristed for
the farmer’s yearly supply of flour. The trip there
and back occupied a week. It seems a long jour-
ney now in a motor car.
Then came some relief in the shape of the
stripper, winnower and horse-treader. To many
tins last-named implement was painful to look at.
with the horse compelled to keep its legs moving
or: the revolving rollers. Failing the horse the
winnower had to be turned by hand, a job in which
farmers’ wives lent a hand. Still, those original
settlers won through, but it was a hard struggle.
The amenities of life experienced now were prac-
tically non-existent, the only relaxation socially
being dancing and feather-picking. The careful,
industrious women-folk used to save the feathers,
and neighbors would gather at a farmhouse at
night and hand-strip feathers for pillows and
bf ds. It was such a tedious job that the young
people soon got tired of it. It is one of the lost
arts.
When the first settlement took place in 1871
the land around Natimuk was part of the Veotis
estate, leased from the Government by the Wil-
sons, who for some years conducted a point-to-
point steeplechase of several miles where the pres-
ent town of Natimuk stands. On one occasion
there were 20 horses in the race. 19 of which were
owned by the Wilsons. They were not too happy
about the settlers taking the best land. The Gov-
ernment charged £1 per acre for the wheat land,
and purchasers were given 10 years to pay. Many
were unable to meet the £32 a year—the selections
being 320 acres—and the term was extended to 20
years. Some of the land was subsequently sold as
high as £3O an acre. This figure was due to a run
cx good yields and prices, but was a boom price
and not maintained.
The development of the vase wheat-growing
Wimmera Plains belt is bound up almost solely
with the production of wheat, though the house-
wife played a magnificent part in making ends
meet in the production of butter and eggs, with
The first reaper was made
by James Ridley, of S.A.,
this machine having two
main wheels and being
propelled from behind by
two horses, the pole being
supported by two small
wheels. It was in charge
of two men, one to drive
and the other to operate
the machine.


I
I
I PHONE, NATIMUK 3.
j
P.O. BOX 53.
NATIONAL HOTEL,
NATIMUK
Meals and Accommodation Unsurpassed
ALL VEGETABLES, POULTRY AND DAIRY PRODUCE OUR OWN PRODUCTION
FAVOR US WITH A CALL, "YOU'LL BE BACK"
Our Constant Aim : “FIRST-CLASS SERVICE AND SATISFACTION. '
j Publican's Booth on Show Grounds on Easter Monday
ALAN R. SMITH, Licensed
Victualler


which the grocery and clothing bills were paid to
a great extent in times of lean harvest. Before
the advent of fallowing and superphosphate half
a century ago wheat yields were -generally from
two to four bags per acre, with wheat selling as
low as 1/6 per bushel. But notwithstanding the
variations In harvests and prices some of the orig-
inal settlers added to then- holdings, while most
of them left their properties to the second gener-
ation free of debt, a wonderful tribute to deter-
mination and industry.
The building of the railway to Natimuk East
ti the 90’s eased the long-distance carting of
wheat, as also did the establishing of a flour mill
by Bretag and Kuse In the year 1874. A few years
.after the railway through Natimuk East to Nor-
adjuha was constructed it was extended to Nati-
muk and Goroke.
Up till about 30 years ago the system of fin-
ancing the purchase of farm machinery from the
local foundry was promissory notes, which became
due on 4th March, which came to be known as
“Resurrection Day.” Half a century ago renewals
of the notes were common. A leading storekeeper
at the time adopted the system, but in a different
way. A reliable customer, who traded to the ex-
tent of say £5O a year, gave the storekeeper a p.n.
for that amount, which went against the overdraft
Et the Bank or permitted him to add to his stock.
Finance was tough in those days.
The names of some of the venturesome early
settlers occur to me, and many of their descend-
ants are still carrying on in the district —Frederick,
William and August. Gladigau, Heinrich and Fred.
Sudholz, Carl. Fred,, August, John, and Henry
Schmidt, Gottleib Klowss, James Webster, Ludwig
Lange, Westendorf, Charles Tollner, Fred. Pluck-
iichn, William Bretag, John Attenborough, Ernst
Boehm, Christian Levitzke, Ludwig Nichterlem,
John and William Brown, Wyatts, Smiths, Haius-
torfer, Spehers, Waltrowicz, Werner, Jas. Keyte.
As far as the town of Natimuk is concerned,
the most- serious setbacks it received were the
closing of Beard and Sisson’s foundry and the des-
truction by lire of Noske Bros.’ flourmill. The
foundry employed up to 30 men and the flourmill
about a dozen. .The efforts to establish factories
and a consolidated school in the town have so far
failed, but townspeople are still hopeful. The Pro-
gress Association and progressive townsmen are
stcceeding in their efforts to have new businesses
established.
The Progress Association deserves to be com-
mended lor organising the Back-to-Natimuk cele-
brations, which give former residents an oppor-
tunity to renew acquaintanceships and talk about
the days that are past. It is hoped that the As-
sociation will succeed in its effort to have rest
rooms erected in the town, in aid of which the
celebrations are being held.
The Modern Method
Om the farm of Mr. C. L. Sudholz, Natimuk, we see the modern method of taking off the wheat
harvest. Here we see three 10 ft. “Sunshine” harvesters at work.
HISTORICAL REVIEW I Continued)


R. M. McRAE
FTY. LTD.
General Merchants
Main Street, Natimuk
★★ ★ ★
Agents for;
ALADDIN LAMPS, TAUBMANS' PAINTS,
SEMCO NEEDLEWORK,
PATON'S AND BALDWIN'S KNITTING WOOLS,
YATES' RELIABLE SEEDS,
GOLDEN FLEECE OILS AND GREASES.
★★ ★ ★
Melray Store No. 141
Phone 18 Box 114


THE LODGES
NATIMUK MASONIC LODGE
■yHE history of the Lodge dates back to Decem-
ber 21, 1887, when an authority was signed
allowing the constituting of a Lodge.
Wor. Bro. P. Anderson was the first Worshipful
Master, with Bros. H. R. Kruger as S.W., G. Bray
J.W., C. Warn secretary, A. Bullock treasurer,
James Keyete S.D., A. E. Beard J.D., Thos. Lang
LG.
The first candidates were initiated on March
28, 1888, and at this meeting it was decided to
purchase the block of land where the present
Temple stands, from Mr. J. Carrick, who was lic-
ensee of the National Hotel, for £l5.
From 1887 to 1947 the following Brethren have
acted as Wor. Masters;—Bros. G. Letts, P. Ander-
son, C, Warn, A. Stewart, J. Naismith, Arthur
Smith, W. Giles, J. B. Sisson, H. C. Pinck, Jas.
Thyer, T. J. Nicholls, R. Sisson, T. Blight, A.
Barker. J. Dew (two years), A. Barker, A. Beard
jnr.. W. J. Sinclair, W. Treadwell, W. Richards,
Mcßae Stewart, H. Smith,
J. R. Mclntosh, L. Walker,
W. H. Rowley, J. Gillick, Eg.
Smith, J. C. Boyd, E. Shack-
ell, S. R. Smith, L. Lock, J.
H. McDonald, J. Hannan, P.
Treadwell, H. Randall, F.
Patterson, W. Smith, R.
Northfield, H. Plush, H.
Schunke. C. Billing, G. Graham, E. Tucker, C.
Eutchinson, Carmichael, H. Day, G. Dent, T.
Pitchford, Priestley, J. Smith, McLinden, T. Wil-
liams, W. Lawrence, W. Hickson, R. Abernethy, G.
Minne. F. Jones, P. Taylor and A. H. Maybery.
The Lodge owed a debt of gratitude to the
late Bro. Thos, James, who served as secretary for
30 years.
SERVED IN FORCES
Brethren who served in the 1914-18 war were
A G. Prance, W. Hutchinson, E. Murton, H. Plush,
H, Randall, W. Russell, H. A. Schunke, H. Smith,
S Smith and R. Timmins, and in the 1939-45 war
J W. Cameron, F. Grant, G. K. Cameron, H. Dris-
coll, E. W. Hughes, E. J. Thomson, G. Haynes, H.
Penny, R. Mcßae, V. Jackman, E. H. Randall, D.
Plush, J. Russell, S. Jost and J. Smith.
At the moment the membership totals 94, the
most distant one being Rev. Ivan Blake, Methodist
Mission, Nuisawa, Tananui.
The 1947 team is as follows:—W.M., Wor. Bro,
A H. Maybery; S.W., Bro. J. Russell; J.W., Bro. J.
C. Cameron; S.D., Bro. M. Russell; J.D., Bro. Stan.
Jones; 1.G., Bro. C. Forbes; Tyler, Bro. Cyril
Keyte; Chaplain, Bro. W. Smith; D.C., Bro. S.
Smith; Organist, Bro. H. Randall; Treasurer, Bro.
W. Hickson; Secretary, Bro. L. Hateley.
LOYALARAPILES LODGE
■yHE Loyal Arapiles Lodge, 1.0.0. F., No. 182, the
only Friendly Society branch operating in
Natimuk, was instituted in Natimuk on April 13,
1927, by the late Grand Secretary C. E. Wilson,
assisted by the Grand Treasurer, A. Turner.
A team from the Loyal Grampians Lodge, Hor-
sham, initiated twenty-four members, six of whom
are still active in the branch. The first elected
officers were; Noble Grand, Bro. E. T. McNamara;
Vice Grand, Bro. H. G. Hodges; Warden, Bro. W.
Forbes; Conductor, Bro. P. Clements; R.S.N.G.,
Bro. C. H. Weidner; L.S.V.G., Bro. K. Hodges;
R.S.V.G., Bro. E. A. Kirsopp; Inside Guardian,
Bro. F. A. Jory; Secretary, Bro. W. Meredith;
Treasurer, Bro. J. B. Henry; Trustees, Bros. L.
Whitfield, E. T. McNamara and W. J. Thompson;
D.D.G.M., Bro. A. Berry; Medical Officer, Dr. K.
A. Stephenson.
Prom its initial number of 24 the membership
has waxed and waned but over the twenty years
progress has been maintained until the present
time, when there are 76 names on the register.
A decision in 1938 to admit female members proved
highly successful in promoting the social life of
the Lodge. Several of the Sister members have
occupied the principal offices from time to time
and have carried out their duties most efficiently.
The Lodge, with its various benefits and pools for
insurance against sickness and hospital, has filled
a definite need in the community, and has paid
out hundreds of pounds in relief since its inception.
TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY
In May next the branch will suitably celebrate
ifc 20th anniversary, at which members of the
Grand Lodge executive will be present. Present
officers: N.G., Bro. S. R. Heard; V.G., Bro. R. W.
Lowe; J.P.G., Sist. T. J. Boehm; Warden, Bro.
O W. Sudholz; L.S.N.G., Bro. K. A. Brown;
R.S.V.G., Bro. R. W. Petrie; L.S.V.G., Bro.
F. A. Schurmann; 1.G., Sist. D. M. Murdoch; Sec-
retary, Bro. P. A. Jory; Treasurer, Bro. H. G. Hod-
ges; Trustees, Bros. C, H. Weidner, L. J. Hateley
and T. Whitfield: D.D.G.M., Bro. K. Hodges: Med-
ical Officer. Dr. B. Hutton-Jones.


For Quality and Service in Life Assurance
THE NATIONAL MUTUAL LIFE ASSOCIATION
OF AUSTRALASIA LIMITED
HEAD OFFICE: 395 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE
THE OLDEST AND LARGEST VICTORIAN LIFE OFFICE
NO SHAREHOLDERS CONDUCTED SOLELY FOR THE POLICYHOLDERS
POLICYHOLDERS’ ASSETS EXCEED £63,000,000
The National Mutual does not transact “Industrial” Assurance
District Inspector G. W. Lohrey
Natimuk Local Agent H. G. Hodges
I
i
i
\
\
j
i
i
i
i
j
j
3
i
MAKES BEAUTY
A LOVELY HABIT
Easy to make it a habit with
Elizabeth Arden's three famous
essentials. Cleanse, Tone,
Soothe with Ardena Cleansing
Cream, Skin Tonic and Velva
Cream or Orange Skin Cream.
~V
I ABQCI
%
2
V'A
R. A. LUDBROOK,
The Chemist mps- pkc.
Plione 359. P.O. Box 123. HORSHAM
A 135


NATIMUK A. AND P . SOCIETY
a meeting of the Natimuk Progress Society
held on May 14, 1877, it was decided on the
motion of Messrs. Keyte and Sisson that an Agric-
ultural Society be formed in Natimuk.
The name chosen was the Natimuk Agricul-
tural and Pastoral Society, and the member’s fee
was fixed at £l/1/ per annum. Messrs. James
Keyte and Willey were appointed president and
secretary tpro tem) respectively, Messrs. John Mc-
Clure and W. Bretag vice-presidents, and Mr. W.
McComas treasurer.
A;, a meeting on June 4, 1887, Mr. Edward
Jory accepted the ■ position of secretary and col-
lector at a remuneration of 5 per cent, on all
monies received. .The meeting decided not to hold
Official Opening of Gates at New Show Ground by Mr. K. G. McClure, senr.
Members of Committee and Members taken after Opening of Gates.
the first show in that year, the ground having to
be fenced. The initial exhibition was held in the
following year, on September 19.
As the Crown land on which the show was
held was inadequate, the Society purchased the
present ground of 14 acres from Mr. Aug. Gladigau
at £l5 per acre. It was part of the original selec-
tion of Mr. Fred. Schmidt.
The official opening of the gates at the new
ground was performed by the then president, Mr.
R G. McClure, on show day In September, 1920.
Bain fell all day. The ground, which is one of
the best in the Wimmera, with its spacious arena,
has become the venue for carnivals, football and
cricket, and, is a splendid asset to the town.
A complete list of presi-
dents is not available, but
those we can recall are
Messrs. John and Robert Mc-
Clure, Dr. Bird, Alf. Barker,
R. E, Sudholz, W. J. Sudholz,
Harry Sudholz, James Brown,
A. G. Sudholz, H. Cross, C. L.
Sudholz, Peter Scott, C. T.
Keyte, M. Perry, T. W. Jones,
Wm. Sudholz, and the pres-
ent president, Mr. E. M.
Smith. Messrs. R. Kiefel,
Thos. James and Harold
Cross were secretaries for
many years, the post being
now held by Mr. C. Weidner.
An outstanding feature at
Natimuk shows has always
been the women’s section,
especially cookery, which is
acclaimed as being unequall-
ed in the State.
While there still exists a
debt of £176 in the Building
Fund, the Society has a
•credit balance in the current
account of £lB4, and it has
been decided to merge the
two accounts, thus relieving
the trustees of their respon-
sibility. The finances have
in recent years been consid-
erably augmented by the
holding of gymkhanas. The
buildings large miscellane-
ous hall, fruit and publican’s
booths, secretary’s office, lun-
cheon shed and arena fence
—cost a big sum and com-
pare favorably with those on
any show ground in the
country.


HORSHAM BUTTER
FACTORY
SEND US YOUR CREAM
Or Advise Us and We Will Pick Up
WE PAY THE BEST PRICES IN THE WIMMERA
PIGS
Bought for Cash Live Weight Over the Scales at
Horsham Trucking Yards on Alternate Tuesdays
RABBITS
Bought at Ruling Prices
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION WRITE
HORSHAM BUTTER FACTORY
Or Ring Horsham 191 276


NATIMUK LAKE
QNE of the most progressive institutions in the
district is the Natimuk Swimming and life
Saving Club, which since its establishment in 1913
has done a great work in popularising the lake as
a picnic resort, having spent about £l5OO in pro-
viding bathing and picnic facilities.
Before the inception of the club the lake was
practically unknown to the outside public. The
magnificent jetty, engineered by Mr. Albert Klowss,
who gave his labor free, is a monument to his
skill and generosity. The large luncheon hall,
bathing sheds and 130 yards running track are a
tribute, not only to the club, but to splendid public
co-operation.
Covering an area of 800 acres, the lake, with
its gradually sloping sandy beach, is ideal for
swimming, where the majority of school children
have learnt the art.' School and church picnics
from all over the Wimmera are held at the lake.
The club intends carrying out other Improve-
ments, its only source of revenue being the annual
carnival and members' fees.
In 1931 6,000 young perch from Miga Lake
were liberated in the lake by Messrs. R. J. McClure
and A. W. Lockwood, the lake having gone dry the
previous year.
The club has endeavored without success ho
induce the Water Commission to prevent the lake
water dropping below a certain level to ensure an
ample supply for irrigation purpose. The potent-
ialities of the lake for the growing of vegetables
is unfortunately not recognised by the Commiss-
ion. In recent years the growing of tomatoes
around the lake has produced more wealth on
farms than any other kind of produce, including
wheat.
The club held its first carnival on the narrow
reserve about quarter of a mile north of the pres-
ent reserve, ana rerniissive occupancy of the later
site was obi a mod from the Lands Department.
The first carnival on the new reserve was held
on Ist Pebru *iu. 13t6, when Mr. A. W. Lockwood
was president and Mr. E. H. Hodges secretary.
Mr. lan Sudholz has been president during the
past three years, and Mr. P. Woolcock secretary.
Photo of Natimuk Lake, taken on Carnival Day some years ago.


NATIMUK STATE SCHOOL
Natimuk State School was established in
January, 1875, the original wooden structure
being still in use. The timber for the building was
cut to the right lengths in Geelong and transport-
ed to Natimuk in four horse-drawn waggons. The
teacher’s residence was built alongside the school,
but was later shifted to its present site. The
brick senior class room was then added. There
were 170 pupils on the roll the first year. The
first teacher was Mr. Wilson, who was followed
by Messrs. Nicholls, Brandt, Willey, Scholes, Dew,
Walker, Spowart, Refshauge, Kent, Benvenue,
Graham, Hennessy, Phelan, Woodhouse and Cam-
eron (the present teacher).
Almost simultaneously with the star-ting of the
State School, a night school was established for
the benefit of the settlers who had come from
South Australia and were anxious to improve their
education.
Many of the second generation of scholars
did well at this school, amongst whom are Surg-
eon-Captain Lionel Lockwood, Dr. Harold Dew,
Flying Doctor Clyde Fenton and Dr Frank Scholes.
The school won the A.N.A. prize for the best-
kept garden in 1907, 1909, 1911, 1934 and 1941.
The following is a list of scholarship and
merit certificate winners ;
Scholarships
1888 —Albert Scholes.
1897 —Prank V. G. Scholes.
1911—Ethel N. Sisson.
1913 — Lionel Lockwood.
1914 — Victor S. Spowart.
1923 —Joan Carstairs.
1939 Joyce Cameron.
1940 — Heather Kroschel.
1941 Winifred Weidner, Arthur Kirsopp.
1942 John Schmidt, Florence Taylor, Lorna Kro-
schel.
1943 Jeanette Hogart, Mona Sudholz, James Sud-
holz.
1944 Kenneth Petrie, Mavis Kuhne.
1946—Margaret Rogers.
Merit Certificates
1893 Ruth Scholes.
1894 — Nellie Scholes.
1895 — Martha Scholes.
1896 — Frank Scholes.
1899—Arthur Barker, Carl Rosel, Johannes Schok-
necht.
1901— Edith Corrigan, Gerhardt Schoknecht.
1902 — Harold Dew, Irene Tootell.
1803—Minnie Loughhead, Theodore Schoknecht,
Robert Tootell.
1904 Frieda Schurmann, Reginald Sisson, Arthur
Sullivan.
1905 — Harold Sisson.
1907—Aima Hill, Adolph Schurmann.
1903 —George Barker, Violet Sisson, Victor schur-
mann, Elizabeth Smye.
1909 — Viola Schurmann, Ethel Sisson.
1910— Lily Barker.
1911 — Dorothy Boyd, Mabel Schmidt, Olive Wat-
kins.
1912 Roy Barker, Walter Kubale, Florence Lar-
rad, Lionel Lockwood, Allan Petrie, William
Thompson.
1913 John Cross. Clyde Fenton, Max Lohe, Eric
Sisson.
1914 — George Woolmer.
1915 — Emily Kubale, Alexander Bilston, Winifred
Morrison, May Kiefel, Wallace Dubfcer.
1916 Freda Lockwood, Alice Bousfield, Emily
Beard, Annamarie Lohe, Eda Pfennig, Cecil
Beckwith, Stanley Twiddle, William Kubale,
Gustave Ekman, Frederick Hodges.
1917 Stella Schmidt, Doris Beckwith. Adelaide
Chenoweth, Walter Barker, Helen Spowart.
1918— Harold Beard, Bert Chenoweth, Victor Pet-
rie, Eileen Emmett, Reginald Bilston. Clar-
ence Boehm.
1919 Edna McLean, Clarence Beckwith, Hedwig
Pfennig, Eric Jory.
1920 Rupert Lockwood, Wolfgang Lohe, Ernest
Petrie, Kathleen McDonald, Frank Woolcock,
Philip Woolcock.
1821—Wilhelm Lohe, Hilda Schmidt, Catherine
Campion, Charles Weidner.
1922 — Leonard Beckwith, Talbot Beckwith, Phil.
Evans, Alice Schmidt.
1923 — Joan Carstairs, Florence Sudholz, Reginald
Jory,
1924 — John Field, Louis Schmidt,
1925 — Murray Graham, Victor Gust, John McDon-
ald, Neil Mcßae, Max Schurmann, Edward
Sudholz, Rachel Weidner.
1826 —Austin Carter, Keith Carter, Elsie Chenow-
eth, Hilda Hutchins, Verna Jones.
1927 —Dorothy Beard, Lily Brown, Ronald Cars-
tairs, Donald Forbes, May Hodges. Marjorie
Jory, Leslie Mantach, John Newton.
1923 —Daphne Hateley, John Henry, Allan Rosel,
Edith Stubbings.
1829 —Mavis Brown, Dulcle Hateley, Stanley Jones,
Rex Mcßae, John Rosel, Enid Schmid:. Joan
Tully.
1930 Douglas Lockwood, Campbell ODea, Phyllis
Patching, Alfred Schmidt.
1931 — Lance Cross, Ivan Hickson, Allan O'Dea,
Russell Petrie, Doris Schmidt, Edna Tame.
Kathleen Weidner,
1832 —Alice Brown, Valerie Woolmer. Ena Jory,
Lorna Kubale, Elsie Lange, Ena McDonald,
Karoid Bray, Roy Jones, Donald Mcßae, Max


Grant, Mervyn Hateley.
1933 — Edwin Tame, Angus Weidner, Albert Bray,
lan Leith, Alan Knight, Joyce Cross, Bern-
ard Leith, Prank Lockwood.
1934 — John O’Bryan, Fred Mancy, Winifred Ueb-
ergang, Sheila Bell, Lila Trotter, Evelyn
Grant, Marjorie Woolmer, Edgar Uebergang,
Lois Stephenson, Dorothy Jory, Thelma
Hateley, Keith Mcßae, Allan Lockwood.
IS3s—Marjorie Klowss, Gwenneth Pitchford, Wil-
liam Bell, Avis Jones, Vivian Boehm, Leslie
McClure, Robert Schumann, Joyclyn Leith,
Eunice Cross, Phyllis Stubbings.
1936 Noel Goodridge, Thelma Lange, Jean Cun-
ningham, Keith Brown, Robert Manson,
Mervyn Bray, Leon Grant, Reginald Dicker-
son, Gerhardt Ziersch, Geoffrey Sudholz,
Elva Schier, William Trotter.
1937 June Taylor, Luthilde Pritsch, Mavis Kor-
ber, Hilda Gust.
1938 — Ronald Schier, Harry Kroschel, Dawn Cross,
Raymond Jennings, Avis ' Hateley, Hazel
Brown. Marie Mancy.
1939 Thelma Boehm, Joy Cameron, Barbara Hog-
art, Greta Keyte, Raymond Smith, Eric
Werner, Allan Ziersch.
1940 Heather Kroschel, Gladys McClure, John
McClure, Evelyn McCristal, Beryl Smith,
Winifred Weidner, Keith Sudholz.
1941 Joyce Brown, John Schmidt, Mortimer
Stone, Florence Taylor, Keith Klowss, Neil
Hateley, June Haustorfer, Arthur Kirsopp,
Lorna Kroschel, Ivan Parish.
1942 Mervyn Brown, Alwyne Ferguson, Jeanette
Hogan, Hazel Shanaughan, Dorothy Smith,
Mona Sudholz, Elaine Wilkins, Trevor Fer-
guson.
1943 Juno Elmes, Shirley Wilkins, Gwenda Sud-
holz. Mavis Kuhne, Ray Ziersch, James Sud-
holz.
1944 — Heather Murray, Peter Schmidt, Allan
Smith, John Hogart, Kenneth Petrie, Wil-
fred O'Brien.
1945 Keith Hodges, Stanley Janetzki.
1946 — William Taylor, Lawrence Hamilton, Mar-
garet Rogers.
Teacher’s Residence, School and Garden, showing
Mr. J. C. Cameron (head teacher).
Picturesque Mount
Arapiles
m O other district in the West Wimmera can
compare with that of Natlmuk in the matter
of natural beauty spots. Mt. Arapiles possesses
outstanding physical features which help to re-
lieve the flatness of its surroundings, and has been,
aptly described as an “oasis of the plains.”
The Centenary Park Committee, of which Mr.
R. E. 'Sudholz is president and Mr .A. W. Lock-
wood secretary, has performed a national service
in having .tree planting
carried out in the Park,
where 500 trees are thriv-
ing. The Committee was
also instrumental in in-
ducing the Minister for
Lands at the time, Mr.
Lind, to have a tourist
road constructed to the
top of the mountain, the
work being carried out by
the Country Roads Board,
providing a picturesque
drive and a magnificent
Mr. E. E. Sudholz.
view of the Plains 20 miles eastward. Another
work of importance was the building of a luncheon
shed, and in 1936 the erection of artistic memorial
gates to mark the 100th anniversary of the dis-
covery of the Mount by Major Mitchell. At the
official opening of these gates 3,000 persons attend-
ed. As a pleasure resort in the spring It is in-
Opened in 1936 ...
Mt. Arapiles Memorial Gates, leading to
Centenary Park.
comparable in the Wimmera. The mountain
abounds in native flora, rarely seen in any other
part of Australia. Geologists who have visited
the place have found it to abound in rare speci-
mens. Those who are taking part In the Back-
to-Natimuk celebrations will find the motor trip
to the mountain very enjoyable.


PATRIOTIC INSTITUTIONS
SOLDIERS' WELFARE
COMMITTEE
pROM a public meeting held on October 10, 1940,
the Soldiers’ Welfare Committee was formed.
The conveners of that meeting were Messrs. J. C.
Cameron, H. E. Hasselbach and A. W. Lockwood.
The following committee was formed: Messrs. C.
T. Keyte (president), E. Knight (vice-president),
L. Hateley (secretary), K. Currie (treasurer), and
V. Erwin, H. Fenwick and S. Baird. Owing to de-
partures from the district S. Baird and K. Currie
were later replaced by H. Woolmer and F. Jory.
Nothing was discussed as to how long this com-
mittee should remain in office, but it was ascer-
tained from the conveners that it should act for
the duration. The principal duties were to ar-
range farewells, gifts, etc., and to receive and dis-
burse the funds of the committee. Annually a
report and balance sheet was presented to the sub-
scribers.
In all 102 different service personnel received
attention. However, at one time the number only
reached 84, that is to say, the maximum for the
one month was 84. To give an idea of the amount
received individually one of the original members
whose first canteen order was posted on 22/10/40
and the last on 29,-10/45, received £l3, besides
Xmas cakes.
Four Natimuk district soldiers lost their lives
during the 1939-45 war—Ptes. A. V. Scott, L. and
G. MoLachlan and Spr. Stan. McLean —and to the
relatives of these men the committee offered sin-
cere sympathy.
Of wounded men there were ¥. Bell, R. Cars-
tairs, W. C. Hood, R. Webb, T. Taylor and Jas.
Lowe; there may have been others. Every effort
was made for friends to contact them in different
hospitals.
Besides the sending of regular canteen orders,
parcels, etc,, cables were sent overseas when it was
known that one member was within vicinity of
another. Such were some of the duties the com-
mittee was able to carry out only with the help of
a generous public, who left no stone unturned in
seeing that local soldiers should have all that Nat-
imuk was able to afford.
The committee offered congratulation to mem-
bers who attained rank and distinguished conduct,
the two principal being Lt. R. J. Carstatrs and
Pte. E. A. tJebergang, Military Medal winners.
During the war the committee raised the sum
of £949/12/6, of which £6Bl/14/8 was spent on can-
teen orders, £54/17/3 on presentations and £B2/4/8
on cakes, cigarettes, etc.
R.S.L SUB-BRANCH
COBMED in 1919, the Sub-Branch had for its
first president and secretary Major H. G.
Carstatrs and Lieut. W. J. Corby. They carried
on until 1922 when the branch disbanded, mem-
bers transferring to Horsham, which proved unsat-
isfactory, and the branch at Natimuk was revived
in 1934, with Mr. J. R. Crossley as president and
Mr. Thos. Hennessy as secretary. Following the
latter’s death Mr, Thos. Pitchford took over the
secretaryship. Mr. Ward Cross was president in
1939 and Mr. Ern. Boehm in 1940, with Mr. Cars-
tairs secretary. Mr. G. Kirsopp was appointed
president and Mr. H. Hasselbach secretary in 1941,
and they infused new life into the organisation.
Mr. Carstairs was elected president of the
sub-branch in 1943, and after his demise Mr. Kir-
sopp again assumed office, which he retained until
the end of 1945. Mr. Crossley, who was secretary
in 1943, 1944 and 1945, was elected president In
1946 and again in 1947. Mr. Wallace Woolmer was
elected secretary in 1946, while Mr. Kirsopp took
over that office this year.
During the war every district soldier on leave
was entertained at a public social, when the grea-
ter part of the work was done by the Women’s
Auxiliary. A total of £420 was sent to patriotic
bodies during the war period.
Of the original 30 members of the sub-branch
only five remain. On Ist January, 1940, there
were 21 members, the figure at present being 63.
Forty-five members served in the 1939-45 war and
14 In the 14-18 conflict. At the outbreak of the
last war the branch had a credit balance of £l5,
and has at present a credit of £l4l.
Following the first war the branch purchased
the block of land adjoining the Mechanics’ Instit-
ute for the purpose of building rooms, which did
not materialise, but the proposal has been renewed.
RED CROSS SOCIETY
ONE0 NE of the most Important of the women’s or-
ganisations operating during both wars was
the Red Cross Society, and Natimuk, with which
Mitre was associated in the last war, played a big
part in the interests of servicemen, a fact borne
cut by the following figures of garments made
from March, 1940. to August, 1945: —Pyjamas, 600
pairs; shins, 480: socks. 2.380 pairs; knee caps, 150:
hot water bags, 150; scarves, 400; pullovers, 225;
face washers, 255; caps and helmets, 185; mittens,
235; bed socks, 45 pairs; knee rugs, 22; bed poc-
kets, 15; total, 5,142. The secretary, Mrs. V. P.
Erwin, cut out 500 garments, while other mem-
bers knitted up to 300 pairs of socks each.
The Natimuk branch and Mitre sub-branch


raised more than £l6OO from social functions, af-
ternoon teas, etc. They are still functioning,
though obviously not so active as during the war.
Miss E, M. Lange is president and Mrs. V. P. Erwin
secretary of the Natlmuk body, and Mrs. R. G. Mc-
Clure and Miss Kitty McClure president and sec-
retary at Mitre. Mrs. W. Schmidt gave valuable
help in the matter of packing garments at her
home. District soldiers were appreciative of the
comforts they received in the form of warm gar-
ments.
LADIES' AUXILIARY, R.S.L
THIS patriotic body was formed in May, 1942, and
was active in assisting by catering at all
E.S.L. functions and In many other ways. The
Auxiliary was responsible for having memorial
seats in honor of district soldiers who paid the
supreme sacrifice placed on the lawn at the Band
Rotunda, the money being raised chiefly from
goods sold at the Opportunity Shop, which was
conducted by the Auxiliary. Christmas treats for
children of service men were also held.
Miss N. Carstairs was first president and Mrs.
R. Crossley secretary. When Miss Carstairs joined
the A.A.M.W.S. Mrs. Hasselbach became president.
Through welcome home socials, balls, packing
of waste products, and other activities, the Aux-
iliary was responsible for distributing more than
£3OO to various patriotic bodies.
WELCOME HOME
COMMITTEE
A PUBLIC meeting convened by the Shire of
Araplles was held on August 23, 1945, when
it was agreed that a Welcome Home Committee
be formed, with the following as a committee:—
Messrs. J. Cameron, E. Knight, V. Erwin, L. L.
Smith, G. Kirsopp, H. Wade, C. Ellifson, R. Cross-
ley, W. Webb and R. J. McClure. This committee
me: after the public meeting and appointed Mr.
Wade chairman, Messrs. Crosssley and Erwin vice-
presidents, Mr. Knight treasurer, and Mr. Kirsopp
secretary.
At a subsequent meeting it was decided that
welcome home socials be tendered service men
and women, with a monster rally at the end of
the war. A Ladies’ Auxuliary was formed In Sep-
tember, 1945, with Mrs. W. Hickson president, Mrs.
E. Boehm vice-president, and Mrs. F. Lockwood
secretary. Within a month of the committee being
formed £l5O was collected or promised for presents
to soldiers, while by December 18 the sum had in-
creased to £230 and by March, 1946, to £5Ol. It
was agreed at a meeting on March 5, 1946, that a
Paddy's Market take place. By March 26 the re-
ceipts had reached the splendid total of £603. The
sum of £213 was raised from Paddy’s Market, which
Increased the total in hand or promised to £864.
At a subsequent meeting it was decided that
the presents to soldiers be of the value of approx-
imately £lO each, that they be made on Victory
Day and that the recipients have the option of
choosing a canteen of cutlery, gold wristlet watch,
or kit bag, rug and suit case. Victory Day was a
great day for Natimuk, and the public, headed by
the Welcome Home Committee, gave the returned
soldiers a truly magnificent welcome back to civ-
ilian life. Altogether, the Committee raised about
£9OC,
THE BANKS
The Colonial Bank
JHE two-storey structure, now occupied by Mr.
C. Weidner, was erected in 1876 by the Colon-
ial Bank, the original office of the institution hav-
ing been a wooden building (subsequently destroy-
ed by fire) situate near Lackmann’s butchery. The
Colonial Bank was taken over by the E. S. and A.
Bank, which ceased to exist when mergers of
Banks took place, the National Bank taking over
the business.
The National Bank
The National Bank of Australasia Ltd. first
extended its services and facilities to the residents
of Natimuk on the Ist October, 1889, when it open-
ed a branch in the local Masonic Hall. Later a
shop in the main street was converted for banking
use until 1908 when, as an indication of its confid-
ence in the future and solidarity of the Natimuk
district, the Bank erected the existing substantial
premises which were officially opened by Sir Wil-
liam Zeal, M.L.C., then Chairman of Directors of
the Bank. The branch manager at that time was-
Mr. H. H. Washington and many residents will no
doubt recall his name and personality and those
of the managers who succeeded him ; Wm. Gilles-
pie, C. Forshaw, James Pairlie, F. N. S. Bennett,
D. G. Mackay, L. P. O’Bryan, H. N. Fenwick and,
at present, C. S. Lowe.
For over a quarter of a century, an agency of
Natimuk branch has been conducted at Noradjuha.
Some Early Businesses
In the nineties a butter factory owned by
local shareholders operated opposite Woolmer’s
garage. G. T. Haase owned the bakery now con-
ducted by Reg. Jory, owners in between being H,
Tootell, Mrs. T. Sullivan, Carl Rose! and E. Jory.
James Fry and Co., wheat buyers and millers, con-
ducted business in the shop now occupied toy R.
Petrie. Early butcheries were run by H. P. Sud-
holz and R. G. McClure.


BUSH NURSING HOSPITAL
PUBLIC meeting held on June 7, 1933, Cr. R.
Crossley presiding, elected a committee for
the purpose cf starting a Bush Nursing Hospital
m the town. Dr. K. Stephenson outlined the con-
stitution and working of such an institution, and
a committee of 12 was formed in the following
proportions;—Natimuk 6, Grass Flat and Mitre 2
each and Noradjuha and Clear Lake 1 each. Those
elected to the committee were—Pastor Fritsch, Crs.
R. Crossley and C. Keyte, Messrs. A. Forbes, H.
Woolmer, T. J. McCredden and F. Treadwell, Mes-
dames E. Schurmann, E. M. Smith, P. McCredden
and C. Edmonds and Miss E. Lange. On June 9,
1933, the following office-bearers were elected —
President, Pastor Fritsch; vice-presidents, Mr. H.
Woolmer and Mrs. E. Schurmann; secretary and
treasurer, Mr. A. Forbes; woman member, Mrs.
E Smith.
The hospital was leased from Dr. Stephenson
and was in charge of Sister Hood, and was opened
as a Bush Nursing Hospital by Sister Robertson,
who took charge on June 21, 1933. On July 17 of
that year Sister Robertson left and Sister Neilson
took charge.
The official opening of the hospital was per-
formed by Sir James Barrett on October 12, and
he afterwards opened a fete in the Mechanics’ Hall.
In August, 1937, Dr. Stephenson left Natimuk,
and the hospital was without a resident doctor
until Dr. Snow commenced practice in 1939. Dur-
ing his stay an X-Ray outfit was placed in the
hospital. In May, 1940, the hospital was purchased
Group of Mothers at the Hospital on “Baby Day."
from Dr. Stephenson, and since then much equip-
ment has been added and a lot of improvements
made. The institution is being carried on as a
Centre, with Sister James in charge.
Mr. Forbes was secretary for only six months,
and Mr. K. Woolmer was appointed and carried
on in an honorary capacity until June last year.
The present officers are; President, Pastor Fischer;
vice-presidents, Messrs H. Hasselbach and J. Cam-
eron: secretary and treasurer, Mr. L. Hateley; com-
mittee. Messrs. H. Woolmer, K. Hodges, W. Bud-
ko1 *. E. Boehm, C. Weidner, W. Smith, Allan Lock-
wood and D. Hyde, and Mesdames E. Smith, F.
Jory and K. Hodges.
Membership of the Centre is £l/10/ per an-
num, which covers attention to member and his
wife and family. To date, 100 members have join-
ed this year. As many as 142 visits a month
have been made by the Sister-in-Charge. The
accompanying photograph depicts a group of
happy mothers on baby-weighing day. Consid-
erable financial assistance is received from the
Ladies' Auxiliary, who hand to the Centre approx-
imately £lOO a year.
Hospital Ladies 7 Auxiliary
■pHE Natimuk Bush Nursing Hospital owes a
great deal to the activities of the Ladies’
Auxiliary, which was formed at a public meeting
held in March, 1939, with Mrs. H. N. Fenwick
president and Miss Nancy Carstairs secretary, the
former holding office for three years, while the
latter also carried on for a lengthy period. Since
the Auxiliary was instituted it has raised £570 for
the hospital, the present credit balance being £75,
and has done fine work in assisting with the pro-
vision of hospital equipment.
Mrs. E. M. Smith (left) and Mrs. F. W. Lockwood
(right), president and secretary of the Auxiliary,
with Sister James.
MECHANICS" INSTITUTE
■J”HIS is one of the oldest public institutions in
the town, starling eff in an unpretentious
manner in the 70's or early 80’s with a two-roomed
library and reading room. A hall and ante-room
were subsequently added. At the beginning of
1900 the obsolete buildings were sold by tender at
the upset price of £75, the purchaser being Mr. A.
W. Lockwood, who had the ‘ front and rear por-
tions (now owned by the Misses Watkins) convert-
ed into a dwelling, while the hall section also be-
came a residence (owned by Mr. E. Huf).
The late Mr. J. Sudholz was largely instru-
mental in collecting sufficient money with which
to ensure the building of thje present hall, which


was erecited in 1908-09,, and officially opened on
December 16, 1909, the foundation stone being laid
by Mr. Carl Schmidt. : The builder was Mr. H.
Bousfield. It topk about 38 years to finally liquid-
ate the mortgage of £2OO on the building, which
was made, possible during the past three years by
the Happy Day Concert Party conducting several
entertainments under the managership of Mr. P.
Jory, who was last year’s president,
v The committee of the Institute is now faced
with the problem of enlarging the hall and build-
ing a supper room, which it is proposed to com-
bine with a club room for the local branch of the
Natimuk Mechanics’ Institute
R.S.L. The Institute and R.S.L. have been con-
ferring on this proposal for some time. The bio
box was recently enlarged for the Natimuk Talk-
ies at a cost of about £7O. The Library, which
is well stocked with books, is being placed at the
disposal of visitors during the Back-to-Natimuk
celebrations, and a visitors’ book for signing will
be on the table. This book should be handy for
future reference.
URBAN FIRE BRIGADE
mATIMUK Fire Frigade came into existence
during the latter part of the year 1890,
nearly 57 years ago. At that time it was purely
a voluntary town organisation, its operations being
financed largely from membership fees and do-
nations received from Insurance Companies, etc.
Unfortunately most of the early records of the
Brigade prior to 1904 are missing, but records are
available which give the information that the first
office-bearers were as follows: Captan, J. Carroll
(later drowned during a flood in Natimuk, 1892);
lieutenant, H. Sisson; treasurer, M. J. Dwyer; med-
ical officers, Drs. Weber and White; trustees, Mes-
srs. J. T. Nalsmith, W. Giles and R. Sisson; hon-
orary secretary, Rev. Thomas B. Reed, resident
Methodist minister at Natimuk at that time, and
only recently passed away in Melbourne.
It was not until ! early in ■ the year 1892 that
the Brigade became registered with a complement
of 15 firemen under the then newly-formed Coun-
try Firs Brigades Board, the Captain at that time
being Mr. G. ,T. Haase. Then followed Messrs.
J. Homden, J. Duncan, W. Jory, J. McLean (1913),
J. B. Henry (1914-33). Captain E. H. Hodges as-
sumed office in 1934 and is still in command.
During the 1914-18 World War the Brigade’s
strength was at a very low ebb due to enlistments,
and for a period no activity was shown and no
records were kept. Three members in R. Grohs,
E. Schufike and L. Cross lost their lives in this
struggle.
In World War 2 the Brigade had again an ex-
cellent record, and one that would be very diffi-
cult to equal. Prom the registered strength of 15
firemen at the outbreak of war, and from those
who joined later, there were 17 enlistments in
some branch cl the armed services, all of whom
returned to resume active duty with the Brigade.
During this difficult war period the places of
those who were in the services were capably filled
by recruits who were beyond military age and
who willingly responded to the call to fill the de-
pleted ranks, thereby maintaining lull strength
and efficiency.
Throughout the time of its existence the Bri-
gade has always endeavored to maintain a high
standard of service, and although in latter years
has not attained many honors on the competition
track, the general discipline and efficiency display-
ed at fires, etc., often being severely handicapped
through not having at its disposal modem fire-
fighting equipment, has been of a particularly
high nature. Two and a half years ago the C.F.
P.B. saw fit to provide a modern trailer motor
pump to assist matters, and this valuable piece
of apparatus has added greatly to the general
efficiency of the Brigade.
Just over two years ago C.F.8.8. was super-
seded by the newly-constituted Country Fire Au-
thority, which controls both Urban and Rural
Brigades, and as this body gradually assumes the
role it was brought into being for it is anticipated
more and better fire fighting equipment will be
provided the various brigades under its control.
The Fire Station, pump and some members of
the Brigade, with Captain E. Hodges third
from left.


NATIMUK PROGRESS
ASSOCIATION
FORMED IN 1886
•TPSIS Institution has had an intermittent exist-
ence, but during the periods of functioning
performed a great service to the community. In
November, 1886—60 years ago—it was established,
Mr. Edward Jory occupying the chair, who at the
next meeting a week later was elected president,
with Mr. Andrew Duncan vice-president, Mr. Wil-
ley secretary,, and Messrs. Carl Schmidt, John Mc-
Clure and John Kuse committeemen.
One of the first important movements initia-
ted was in April, 1887, when it was decided to con-
vene a public meeting with a view to forming an
Agricultural Society, and another was at the Sep-
tember meeting in 1888, when the Minister of
Justice was approached regarding the erection of
,a Court House, which was built two years later,
court proceedings having taken place in the Mech-
anics’ Institute. In June, 1890, a street tree plant-
ing scheme was started, but it was eventually sub-
stituted by the present plantations, and in August
of the same year an effort, which proved success-
ful, was made to have the State School enlarged.
Mr. Andrew Duncan followed Mr. Jory as pres-
ident in 1887 and carried on until 1899. Mr. Geo.
Antony was appointed secretary in 1909 and car-
ried on until August, 1912, when the Association
went into recess until July, 1917, when it was re-
vived, with Mr. E. Schumann president and Mr.
Antony secretary. Much was accomplished during
Mr. Antony’s regime, such as electric light, street
plantations, Soldiers’ Park (to establish which he
collected all the money). His resignation was ac-
cepted in October, 1918, on leaving for Sydney.
Mr. E. Schumann took his place as secretary, and
carried on for five years. Again the Association
went into recess and was not revived for 10 years—
in 1932, when Mr. H. Woolmer was elected presi-
dent and Mr. G. Kirsopp secretary. They acted
until 1943. A fresh constitution was adopted. At
the instigation of Mr. Lockwood it was decided
that an inspection be made with a view of having
a tourist road made over Mt. Arapiles and mem-
orial gates erected. Messrs. S. Sudholz and E.
Hodges were appointed president and secretary in
1943, and Mr. P. Lockwood secretary in 1944. Mr.
E. M. Smith was elected president in 1945. The
Association deserves to be congratulated in initiat-
ing the Back-to-Natimuk celebrations with a view
to having public rest rooms provided in the town.
SOME OF THE FIRST BUSINESSES opened
in Natimuk were those of Andrew. Duncan’s
smithy, W. Kubale’s foundry, H. Pinck’s saddlery,
Thos. Jelbart’s wheelwrighting, J. McLean’s sadd-
lery, Alex. Lyons’ smithy and R. Sisson’s and H.
Bousfleld’s timber yards.
THE WHEAT SILO
outstanding landmark, as well as a useful
means of handling the district’s wheat har-
vest, is the concrete silo, which was erected in
the railway yard and commenced operations on
December 5, 1940. It has a capacity of 110,000
bushels, and there are five bins. Two large bins
bold approximately 43,500 bushels each, the office
and engine bins 11,500 bushels each, and the Inter-
space bln 3,000 bushels.
The driving is done by a 25 horse-power motor,
current being supplied by the Natimuk Electric
Si pply. Beoeival hoppers are provided so that
both bulk and bagged wheat can be received. Ten
trucks can be loaded for dispatch by railway from
a siding running alongside the silo.
Deliveries this season totalled 298,500 bushels,
a record for the district. Approximately 168,000
bushels were dispatched by rail In 239 trucks. The
balance, 130,000 bushels, is still in storage. The
largest recelval in one day was on January 16,
amounting to 18,315 bushels. On January 30 and
February 7 20 trucks of 720 bushels each were
loaded each day.
It will be readily agreed from the foregoing
figures, supplied by the man-in-charge, Mr. H. P.
Cioss, that the silo serves a useful purpose in
handling wheat recelvals promptly.
45 YEARS IN BUSINESS
0»E of the early industries in Natimuk was that
of the firm of Messrs. J. and 0. E. Jelbart,
whose business was situated in Main Street oppo-
site the butcher’s shop conducted by Mr. Carl
Schmidt. These brothers carried on a shoeing
forge and also manufactured vehicles and colonial
ever.'.
About the year 1895 the business was taken
over by Mr. T. Jelbart, of Goroke, and the manu-
facture of “Eclipse” wool presses was added to
the activities of the business.
In 1902 the business was bought by Mr. H. C,
Woolmer, who conducted the business as a coach-
builder only, and built buggies, gigs and spring
carts, some of which are still to be seen in daily
use.
In June, 1908, Mr. Woolmer vacated the Main
Street premises and erected a coachbuilding shop
on the corner of Schmidt and Station Streets,
where he continued his business. In 1920 this
shop was pulled down and in its place a brick
building was erected. The coachbuilding business
was discontinued and Natlxnuk’s first motor garage
business was started in this building. Mr. Wool-
mer and his son still carry on, Mr. Woolmer there-
fore having been In business for 45 years.


NATIMUK’S CHURCHES
ST. PAUL'S LUTHERAN
CHURCH (U.E.L.C.A.)
J N the years 1871 and 1872 the brethren J. Boehm,
C. Speher, W. Stephan, E. Haustorfer, J.
Klowss and others left Mt. Gambier, where the
greater number of them belonged to Pastor Mel-
schel’s congregation, to settle in this district. First
services of the Word and Sacrament were given
by Pastor Schurmann, of Hochkirch, as at about
the same time members of his from the Portland
and Hochkirch districts settled at Vectis East. The
former brethren from Mt. Gambier decided to pur-
chase a piece of land from H. and N. Wilson, titled
as part of Crown Allotment A, Parish of Natimuk,
Ccunty of Lowan, for the erection of a Church,
Manse, School and teacher’s residence. The Com-
mittee elected by a conference on January 1, 1874,
•consisting of J. E. Boehm, W. Gladigau, C. Koenig,
F Huff and F. W. Sudholz, were to act as building
ctmmittee for the Church.
On February 15, 1874, it was decided to build
a Church 32 ft. long, 20 ft. wide, with 12 ft. walls.
Tenders for this were called and the tender of
Messrs. Bradwood and Fletcher for £25/10/ was
accepted, and the builders given until April 2nd of
tiiat year to finish the Church. After a call had
bi en sent Pastor Schoknecht arrived and the
■Church was dedicated by him on Easter Sunday,
1874. when he also held his first service in Natimuk.
The tender of W. Gladigau of £76 10/ for the
building of a house was accepted.
On July 5, 1874, W. Meyer and J. E. Boehm
were elected first Elders of the congregation.
In 1880 the Church was enlarged and in 1887
the Christian Day school was built, with S. G. Moi-
St. Paul’s Lutheran Church (C.E.L.C.A.)
W. J. Sudholz Memorial Gates, erected 1942
kentin as teacher.
From then on the Pastors who officiated and
the years were as follows: —
Pastor Kaibel (1891-99).
Pastor Lehner (1900-02).
Pastor Loehe (1902-22).
Pastor G. Doehler (1923-29).
Pastor W. Pritsch (1929-38).
Pastor Fischer (1938- ).
In the year 1922 a decision was made to sell
a further number of blocks of land to help the
financing of a new Manse. In the year 1923 the
Manse was completed and opened by Pastor Jer-
icho.
In the time of Pastor Doehler’s ministry a V.P.
Society was formed, and a new organ was pre-
sented to the Church. The Church Council was
also formed at about the same time. A baptismal
font was presented in 1928. In the time between
Pastor Doehler’s departure and Pastor Fritsch'.s
arrival the parish was served by Pastor H. Proeve.
During Pastor Fritsch’s ministry a lectern was
presented.
In August, 1942, the Sudholz memorial gates
were dedicated by Pastor Jericho. In the same
year the fence in front of the Church and Manse
was re-built with monies from the legacies of Mr.
and Mrs. W. J. Sudholz. The 70th Jubilee was
held in 1944.
Trustees during the years have been:—J.
Boehm, C. Schmidt. E. Haustorfer, F. W. Sudholz,
W. J. Sudholz, W. Werner, C. Stehn, C. A. Glad-
igau, B. Boehm, A. G. Sudholz, L. Lange. Present
trustees: C. A. Gladigau, A. G. Sudholz and L.
Lange.
Members of the Church Council are:—A. G.
Sudholz, I. C. Sudholz, L. Lange, F. W. Lockwood.
II Breuer, K. Uebergang, N. Schmidt, A. Klowss,
A. Schmidt L. Schier.


ST. PAUL'S LUTHERAN
CHURCH (E.L.S.A.)
pASTOR C. W. Schurmann, grandfather of the
Misses Schurmann, Natimuk, visited the dis-
trict in 1872-3 to make enquiries regarding the
forming of a congregation, and in 1874 Pastor C.
Srhocknecht, who had been a missionary in Cen-
St. Paul’s Lutheran Church (E.L.S.A.)
tral Australia, came to take the first service. He
served 30 years to 1904. The present Church was
built in 1889 and dedicated on December 28, 1890.
Pastor J. F. Noack was installed in 1905, and
has been the minister in charge ever since. The
50th Jubilee of the Church was held on January
5, 1941, Pastors O. Nichterlein and H. Noack offic-
iating.
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
early records of the source of the
Natimuk Presbyterian Church are not avail-
able it may be accepted as a fact that it was the
second church to be built in Natimuk. The ap-
proximate year of the erection of the church was
1877, two of the original trustees being the late
Mr. W. Brown, “Hillside,” and the late Mr. Robert
Houston. For the first 10 years of its existence it
was evidently a preaching place of a charge with
head-quarters at Horsham, and was ministered by
the Rev. Thos. Grey of that town. This charge
evidently covered a fairly large area of the Wim-
mera, as it necessitated the minister being absent
from home for a fortnight to encompass it.
Natimuk became a separate ordained charge
sometime in the late eighties, the first appointed
minister being the Rev. R. McCully, who was also
first to occupy the present Manse which was erect-
ed in 1889. The Rev. McCully’s ministry contin-
ued until the end of 1898, when he was succeeded
by the Rev. J. May, who officiated until 1901. The
church was then reduced to a home mission charge,
the size of which has fluctuated throughout the
years according to the movements of the rural
population, and has been ministered bv students
and preachers under the direction of the Home
Mission Board of the Church since that date.
The earliest records extant of the Church are
contained in a minute book commenced in 1892
and the following names, identifiable with the
early history of the town and district, are shown
as office-bearers : Minister, Rev. R. McCully; com-
mittee, Messrs. H. Scott, C. McCuish, W. Brown,
J. T. Naismlth, J. Anderson, G. T. Haase, E. Thyer,
J. Mackley, R. Houston, N. Houston, C. Wickbold,
W. Giles, J. Doull, J. Ramsay, K. McLean,. A. F.
McGregor, C. McComas (secretary) and Andrew
Duncan ttreasurer).
At the present time the preaching places of
the Charge are : Natimuk, Duchembegarra, Tooan
and Gymbowen. Missionary: Mr. J. McP. McKen-
zie. Board of Management; Messrs. E. S. Knight,
T. W. Jones, C. H. Weidner, G. R. Kirsopp, R. A.
Beckett, W. A. Sudholz, S. W. Jones, C. R. Heard,
J Cameron, C. Rogers, R. McClure, R. Calder and
lan Cameron. Secretary: P. A. Jory.
Presbyterian Church
ANGLICAN PARISH
•JHE earliest existing records of the Parish show
that the first service was held on 11th April,
1886, and was conducted by the Rev. Wm. Keith
Inles. The preacher took as his text Matthew
9 : 36. Sixty-five people were present.
On January 30, 1887, the Vicar commenced
services at Nurcoung and over fifty people were
present.
Congregations increased in numbers and when
in 1888 the Rev. H. J. Nalhouse took charge of the
Parish the number of people attending was over
fifty at each service.
The Rev. H. Herbert Barren was Vicar of the
Parish from 1888 until June 24, 1894, when the
Rev. H. E. Cooper inducted the Rev. J. Moody as
Vicar. During Vicar Barren’s ministry services
v/ere conducted by Mr. Pinck, Rev. E. Allanson and
Mr. McComas.
The wedding of Thomas Trotter and Jane
O’Flaherty was celebrated in a private house at
Natimuk on Bth July, 1886—this certificate is No. 1
in Church Registers. In the Baptismal Register


Emily Elizabeth (born 30th Sept., 1884) the child
of Henry James and Margaret Fort, of Mount Ar-
apiles, was baptised on August 22, 1885 —entry
number one.
The Rev. J. Moody was succeeded in 1899 by
the Rev. J. W. McComas and Rev. C. F. Seymour.
In 1900 the Rev. (now Canon) F. W. Coupe, be-
come the Vicar of the Parish and on June 9, 1903,
the Vicar conducted the first service at Arapiles.
The Parish then consisted of Mitre Lake, Nur-
St. Aidan’s Church of England
coung, Quantong, Gymbowen and Natimuk, and
v/f- frequently find entries In the Registers such
as—“ Two horses bogged . . . roads very bad . . .
unable to reach Mitre Lake.”
On June Bth, 1902, the Vicar conducted the
Thanksgiving Service for Peace in South Africa.
The Rev. W. J. Powney was Vicar of the Par-
ish from 1904-1912 and the Rev. Thomas Cole was
inducted in 1912. During Pr. Cole’s vicariate ser-
vices were commenced at Tooan (24th Jan. 1914)
and Noradjuha (7th March, 1914) and the service
at Toolondo was revived.
Space will not allow us to go into details of
the following years, when the various Vicars were:
1916-18—The Rev. Fr. W. Burville.
1919-22 —The Rev. Pr. B. Rowell.
1922-25—The Rev. Pr. P. Girdler.
1925-30—The Rev. Fr. W. Walters.
1930-34—The Rev. Pr. W. J. Tame (now
Vicar of Beaufort).
1934-36 —The Rev. Pr. A. L. Rivett (now
Canon of St. Amaud).
1936-39—The Rev. Fr. L. Howell (now
Vicar of Ararat).
1939-41—The Rev. Fr. J. Duffy (now
Vicar of Clunes). During this
Vicariate the Golden Jubilee of
St. Aldan’s, Natimuk, was cel-
ebrated. Pr. Howell revived the
service at Toolondo on March
28. 1938.
1941-43 —Mr. J. Guest (Reader in
Charge). During this period as
a war-time measure portion of
the Edenhope Parish, consisting
•of the centres Goroke, Mini-
may, Kamak, Miga Lake and
Neuarpurr, was attached to
Natimuk.
1943-45—The Rev. Fr. G. Thompson
(now Vicar of Hopetoun).
1945- —The Rev. Pr. H. C. Ezzy.
During the war years 1939-45 the Parish Priests
have been called upon to carry an extra burden,
but the response of the people has been magnifi-
cent. The Sacraments and Ministrations of the
Church have been taken to all the centres in all
weathers and over all sorts and conditions of roads.
As the worthy successor of the Apostles the Par-
is!. Priest as the Spiritual Father attends to the
needs of the family. During the last twelve
r onths a fortnightly (instead of a monthly) ser-
vice has been given to Gymbowen and Mitre and
a service has been re-commenced at Ozenkadnook
and Tooan.
ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH
"yHE first Mass in the Natimuk district was cele-
brated by Rev. Father O’Sullivan at the resi-
dence of James Fabian Ryan (now owned by his
gvandson, Mr. Joseph Hanan), on the Noradjuha
road, on July 8, 1876, and the second Mass at the
seme place on November 8, 1877, when two child-
ren were christened and the marriage of James
Loney and Agnes Ryan was celebrated. Alto-
gether Mass was said at Ryan’s about four times
till the congregation became too large to be con-
veniently accommodated, when a change was made
to the old Mechanics’ Institute in Natimuk.
Mr. and Mrs. John McPhee, with their six
cl ildren, drove in from the Wimmera River to the
first service, and on the way the mother from the
front seat prepared one of the girls for confession.
St. John’s Roman Catholic Church
n peating the answer “Any wilful thought, deed,
etc.” to the question “What is sin?” Others who
attended were Alex. McPhee, Daniel and Thos-
Murphy, of Quantong, with their wives and fam-
ily, James and Bridget Ryan and their children,
Joseph, Agnes, Mary and Julia, William and Mich-
ael Jackman (Clear Lake), Michael Ryan (Tooan),


with his sister, Mrs. Margaret Dent and her daugh-
ter Elizabeth (afterwards Mrs. A. Morrison), Loney
family and Mr.- and Mrs. Charles O’Connor (Wlm-
niera River). Mass at Ryan's was served by James
Ryan or Mr. Doherty, a school teacher fr6m Duch-
embegarra. » • ' u ‘
As a charge of 20/ or 30/ was made for the
use of the Mechanics’ Hall, Mass was said more
than once ih the dining room of Carrick’s National
Hotel,' and at the residence of Victor Fritz, a
Cftholic Bank manager at Natimuk. When the
rvw and enlarged Mechanics’ Hall was erected it,
as well as the State school, was used for Mass.
Such was the custom in the days of Fathers O’-
Sullivan, OFarrell and Barrett. After the arrival
o: Father Hogan Mass was celebrated monthly,
while at Noradjuha and Clear Lake stations
(meeting places for Mass) were held in the-Mech-
anics’ Hall and residence of Mr. William Jackman
respectively once or twice a year, and at Isaac
Burris’s, Mitre.
At a meeting convened by Father Hogan in
1887, after a canvass of all R.C. families bad been
made by Archibald McPhee, it was decided to build
a church in Natimuk, and to assist in raising funds
a bazaar and ball were held. On the fourth day
the bazaar was wound up with a sale of gifts. The
ball was a great success, tickets being half a
guinea each.. Mr. W, Meredith was M.C. The
supper . was held in a marquee outside the hall,
large enough to accommodate everyone at one sit-
ting. The turkey, fowl, ,ham, lamb, tea and cof-
fee—and something strong—were provided free.
When Father Hogan left on his drive to Horsham
with . all. the, money the people were concerned
thqt he might be robbed, but he laughed at their
feaj-s, cracked bis whip and was gone. The church
was. eventually fully paid for, a sports and race
meeting assisting. It was erected on land pur-
chased from Peter Mitchell, of Quantong, was built
by Lindsay and McDonald, of Goroke, completed
in September 1889 and
officially opened on
September 15 by Fath-
er Hogan. The func-
tion over, the congre-
gation adjourned to
Garrick’s hotel for din-
ner. Eight years after
the church was built a
disastrous cyclone In
1897. which did great
damage to Nhill, gave
the • building a danger-
ous- tilt. Eventually it
became unsafe and was
pulled down and re-
erected, Mr. Batcllfle,
storekeeper, helping to
the necessary
METHODIST CHURCH
A MEETING of the members of the Natimuk
Wesleyan, Church held on sth August, 1888,
was presided over by the late Rev. W. J. Pala-
mountatn, who was then stationed at Clear Lake.
Among‘the laymen associated With the Church in
those days were Messrs. Edward Jory, A.‘ Scholes,
Henry Too tell, Frank Bennett, Thomas Fort,
Joshua Moore, Morris and Thlstlethwaite, and
among the ladies were the ■wives of these men and
Mesdames Arnold and Hall.
At a meeting on 11th February, 1889, a site
for a church was selected and later “the corner
block nearest C. Schmidt’s butcher’s shop” was
purchased .
On 27th May of that year, at a meeting pre-
sided over by the late Rev. J, E. Thomas Green,
Mr. E. Jory moved “that in the opinion of this
meeting it is desirable to erect a church within
twelve months.” This was carried and subse-
quently the tender of Mr. W. Crowle to build the
church for £lB3/10/ was accepted. Trustees were
appointed, the original names being. ° >
Edward Jory, Stationer.
Albert Scholes, Schoolmaster.
Thomas Fort, Engine Driver.
Henry T. Tootell, Engine Fitter.
Frederick J. Fairweather, Carpenter.
George J. Harris, Parmer.
Harry Nettle, Schoolmaster.
Henry Hall, Blacksmith.
Francis T. Bennett, Wheelwright.
On 22nd July, 1890, the Rev. T. B. Reed open-
ed the Church. The large pulpit Bible used on
that occasion was presented by Mrs. A. Scholes
;.nd is still in use. Improvements to the building
have been made from time to time, the Ladies’
Guild taking an active part in this matter, while
gifts of books and various church furnishings form
a sacred link with members, both past and present.
Methodist Church


For some years from 1895 Natimuk was worked
from Horsham and then until 1922 it formed part
of the Noradjuha Circuit. In April of that year
Natimuk, Grass Flat, Mitre Lake, Quantong' and’
Norton Creek were separated from Noradjuha to
form a new circuit, a probationer, the Rev. C.
Chasten, being placed in charge.
By 1933 Natimuk attained full status and the
Conference of that year appointed an Ordained
Minister, the Rev. Robert W. Little, as its Superin-
tendent Minister.
At present the circuit comprises Natimuk,
Grass Flat, Mitre, Quantong and Wyn Wyn. At
Grass Flat the Rev. R. B. Roberts conducted the
fust service on 11th April, 1906. in the church
erected there. The trustees also purchased the
Norton building and removed it to the Grass Flat
property. Quantong has erected its own church
building. Regular services are held in the Mitre
Public Hall and Wyn Wyn State School and each
place has a history of progress and record of re-
ligious activity worthy of acknowledgment. The
Parsonage, a very fine residence, was erected in
1933.
List of Ministers in charge of Natimuk Circuit:
. 1922" T 3-—Rev. C. Chasten.
1923- —Rev. E. Thompson.
1924- Rev. R. Addinsall, L.Th.
1925- —Rev. E. Chancellor.
1926- Rev. E. G. Harris.
1927- Rev. G. T. Goldsmith.
1928- —Rev. W. Alexander.
1929- Rev. Robt. W. Ward, L.Th.
1930- Rev. D. A. C. Packett, L.Th.
1932- —Rev. F. T. Nankervis.
1933- Rev. Robt. W. Little, L.Th.
1936- —Revs. H. J. Gunnell and A. E.
Wellard.
1937- Rev. V. R. Hicks.
1940-3 —Rev, Stanley Humphrey.
1943-6 —Rev. R. J. Chadwick, BA., B.D.
1946 Rev. C. P. Murray.
SALVATION ARMY
piRST worked as an outpost from the Horsham
Corps in 1883, the Natimuk Salvation Army
was, on March 3rd, 1893, opened as a separate
Corps under the leadership of Capt. N. McGregor.
The following is a summary of dates of events and
the years during which various officers have been
stationed here: —
1898—Capt. Johanson.
July ’ 1899—Capt. Anstice. During this
term present Envoy Watts was
converted.
Jan., 1900 —Adjt. Mason.
July, 1906 —Adjt. Mason, assisted by Lieut.
Glanville.
Jan., 1909 —Capt. Olsen.
1912—Visit by Commissioner Hay.
1914—Lieut. Guthrie left to open Eden-
hope Corps.
Jan., 1915 —Capt. Hurst. New Year’s Day
picnic commenced.
Jan. 7th, 1915—Capt. J. Dusting, Lieut. J.
Smith.
August 17, 1915—New Hall opened at Nat-
imuk by Mrs. Commissioner Hay.
1916—Captain Lee.
Sept. 1917—Capt. Juantock, Lieut. Waller.
Nov. 20-26, 1917—Visit by D.Y.P.S., Adju-
tant Wellington.
1918— Lieut. Waller in charge, Lieut. Smith
assistant.
1919 Capt. Hallett. ' Visit by Horsham
-Band.
12th Sept., 1919 —Capt. Hilton.
1920 — Lieut. G. Sandells.
March, 1920—Adjt. Gould.
1921 Ensign Milne, Lieut. Brimblecomb.
1922 Capt. Palmer, Lieut. Collinsbaw.
1923 Capt. Reeves, Lieut. Makin.
1924 — Capt. Collinsbaw, Lieut. Pile.
1925 Capt. Potts,' P/Lieut. Blakey.
1926 Capt. Farley, Lieut. Bray.
1927 Capt. Down, Lieut. Hopkins.
1928 Capt. Watson, Lieut. Ling.
1929 Capt. Bartlett, Lieut. Jordan.
1930 Jordan, Lieut. T. Briggs.
1932 Capt. Newdick, Lieut. Collier.
1933 Capt. Clarke, P/Lieut. John.
1934 Capt. A. Millar, Capt. Smalley.
1935 Lieut. Jackson, P/Lleut. Kowdlck.
1936 — Capt. Jones, Lieut. Webster.
1937 Capt. Bouse, Lieut. Krochert.
1939 Capt. Whitney, Lieut. Stewart.
1940 Capt. Beasy, Lieut. Lucas.
Oct., 1940—Lieut. Lucas, Lieut. A. Watson.
1941 Capt. J. Munro Lieut. Sketcher.
1942 Lieut. Sketcher.
Nov., 1942—Lieut. Sheppard.
1943 Lieut. Jacobs, Capt. Sheppard.
1944 Lieut. Jacobs.
1945 Lieut. S. Miller.
April, 1945 —Capt. Christie.
1946 — Lieut. McEvoy.
Present Officer—Capt. Drummond.
Salvation Army Hall


SPORT IN NATIMUK
FOOTBALL
VICTORIA'S national winter game, since it was
first played in Natimuk, has always been pop-
ular and mostly of a high standard. According to
Mr. Harry Thompson, one of Natimuk’s oldest res-
idents, football was first enjoyed in the town in
about 1881 west of Mr. H. Cross’s residence in the
Lutheran Church paddock. Other places where
the game was played were on Mr. P. Schmidt’s
property, on Mr. John Schmidt’s property and on
the old show ground. In those days the team
would leave early on Saturday morning for a visit
to Goroke, for instance, play in the afternoon, have
a banquet at night, and return next day.
For many years the local club has been as-
sociated with the Central Wimmera League, and
has accounted for several premierships, the last
success being in 1940 under the captaincy of the
late Alf. Barnett. Premierships were also won in
1926 and 1928. Clubs to which Natimuk has been
opposed are Goroke, Tooan East, Noradjuha, Nur-
rabiel, Toolondo, Jung, Wonwondah, Dooen North,
Pimpinio, Laharum, Natimuk Lake, Mitre, Long-
erenong College, Horsham Seconds, Quantong and
Dimboola Seconds. Last year Natimuk reached
Natimuk Football Team, 1946, Runners Up
the grand final against Horsham Seconds, the lat-
ter being successful. Paddy Kennealy, who was a
clever player, coached the team who won the 1928
premiership when he was licensee of the National
Hotel. In the Mechanics’ Hall is an artistic silver
cup won in 1926. In other years pennants were
given.
In 1946 officials were: President, Mr. C. Braune:
secretary, Mr. Allan Lockwood; captain, Mr. A. A.
Weidner (until he sustained a broken leg, his
place being then taken by the vice-captain, Mr.
R. Jones); coach. Mr. E. Elmes.
The officials for 1947 elected at the recent an-
nual meeting arc: President, Mr. Fred. Sudholz :
secretary, Mr. Ray Smith ; coach, Mr. A. A. Weid-
ner : captain, to be elected at first match.
BOWLS
QUE to the enthusiasm of the late Mr. August
Schmidt, who initiated the proposal to have
a bowling green established in the town, a meet-
ing was held on August 22, 1922, to discuss the
matter of forming a Bowling Club. Messrs. A. G.
Sudholz, Aug. Schmidt, A. Siemering, A. Evans
and D. G. Mackay were appointed a committee.
At a meeting held on August 29 it was announced
that 34 prospective players had agreed to take a
£5 debenture each, and this splendid gesture re-
sulted in the Natimuk Bowling Club being formed,
with the following office-bearers: —President, Mr.
A G. Sudholz; secretary, Mr. A. Siemering; com-
mittee, Messrs. Alf .Schmidt, J. Henry and H. G.
Carstairs.
The site chosen for the green in September,
1922, was in the centre of Main Street opposite
the Lutheran Church, and after the area had been
fenced in an expert was engaged to lay out a 3-rink
green. Subsequently a privet hedge was planted
and when this was sufficiently high the iron fence
was removed. Electric light was installed in Jan-
uary, 1927, to enable night play.
In 1926-27 the club won the B Grade Pennant
Shield in the Wimmera Bowling Association com-
petition. During an Easter week members of the
club visited Ballarat and played against several
clubs of that city, and in the next Easter week
visited Hamilton, Port Fairy and Portland. On
another occasion a Natimuk rink soundly defeated
a crack four from Melbourne at Dimboola—33 to
IC.
Presidents of the club have been A. G. Sud-
holz, Alf. Schmidt, F. Dewar, R. Beckett, W. Kub-
ale, E. Boehm and E. Knight, and the secretaries
A. Siemering, H. Hodges, P. Grant, E. Knight, H.
Fenwick and G. Allan. The present president and
secretary are V, Erwin and C. Forbes respectively,
while the membership is 25.
View cf Natimuk Bowling Green


TENNIS
|N the 90’s, as far back as can be remembered,
tennis was played on private land facing the
back street at the rear of the Masonic Temple.
Early in the present century a move was made to
courts at the rear of Mr. Mat. Perry’s residence,
south of the railway line. In 1925, when Mr. H. G.
Carstairs was president, the club transferred to
the present site, three courts being put down dur-
ing 1926, those who were most active at that time
being H. G. Carstairs, R. Calder, P. Jory, A. L.
McArthur, G. Doehler, Wilson and others. No 4
court was added during the 1930-31 season, costing
£4O, and No. 5 court later.
An Ugly Man competition was conducted in
1936-37, and sufficient money was raised to enable
the enlarging of the club house. On the southern
side a hedge for shelter was planted and a buffalo
lawn established, enabling present players to en-
Tennis Courts at Natimuk
joy their sport under pleasant conditions. For
many years the driving force behind the club has
been the enthusiastic and capable secretary, Ted.
Elmes. The club has three teams in district com-
petitions—Reds and Blues in the Central Wimm-
era Association and the C team in the Horsham
Churches Association—and its annual tournament
on Eight Hours’ Day has always attracted players
from outside centres. The club’s teams have been
consistent winners of premierships.
This season’s president is Mr. C. W. (“John”)
Lackmann, and the secretary Mr. E. Elmes.
ANGLING
A T a public meeting held on August 3, 1931, it
was decided to form an Angling Club, the
first president and secretary being Messrs. R. J.
McClure and A. L. Petrie respectively. Pishing
competitions have been conducted since at the
Glenelg and Wlmmera rivers with varying suc-
cess, and the week-end trips are greatly enjoyed.
The present president is Mr, N. A. Kroschel and
secretary Mr. J. W. Kiefel.
CRICKET
-pHE records of the Natimuk Cricket Club go
back only to 1934. However, from exhaustive
enquiries made, it is fairly certain that cricket,
like football, was commenced in the town about
the year 1881, the first games being played where
the tennis courts now stand, and afterwards in the
Lutheran Church paddock. Various other pitches
were used, and the games in those days were not
played according to the exacting rules of today’s
cricket, but provided a lot of fun.
At about the turn of the century, when such
outsanding players as Harry Nettle, Brooks and
Butler Brothers (Mitre) were at their top, Nati-
muk were in a competition which included Sailors’
Home and Jung, the 30 miles trip to the former
place in a buggy occupying over three hours.
Some years later the Arapiles Association was
formed, and has for a long period been providing
excellent cricket, with Natimuk, Clear Lake. Too-
londo, Noradjuha, Tooan and Nurrabiel the pres-
ent contestants. Natimuk won the premiership
las; season (1945-46) under the captaincy of Frank
Woolcock, the previous win being registered in the
days of Tom Petersen in 1934-35. At time of writ-
ing this article the Natimuk team is engaged in
the 1946-47 final against Clear Lake, and has an
even chance of carrying off its second successive
premiership.
In 1934 the club laid a concrete pitch on the
show ground, this being made possible by a legacy
from a former great player and club stalwart, the
late Mr. W. J. Sudholz. The pitch was named
the W. J. Sudholz pitch.
Mr. lan Sudholz is the present president of
the club, Mr. Ron. Schier secretary and Mr. Allan
Lockwood captain.
1945-46 Premiership Cricket Team
GOLF
far as can be remembered the club's first' links
... were started early In the present century and
commenced where the tennis courts are situated,
crossed the Lutheran Church paddock and creek
at, the back of the school and into Mr. Schmidt’s
property. Some years later the hlt-off was in the


reserve west of the school residence, out on to
the road and along the Tooan road in Mr.
Schmidt’s farm, back over the railway line and
finishing on the reserve near the creek. The next
move was southerly along the creek 'and back
across Hoinka’s paddock.
The present links at Mt. Arapiles were offic-
ially opened on June 18, 1938, nearly 100 attend-
ing. At the invitation of Mr. C. H. Cross, presi-
dent, Mr. R. E. Sudholz drove the first ball. The
links, situate on the southern side of the Mount,
are wonderfully picturesque, their only drawback
being the distance of six miles from Natimuk.
t . Last year’s president was Mr. H. Hasselbach
and the secretary Mrs, W. Hickson.
RIFLE SHOOTING
-|~WS! present rifle club had its inception in 1926,
but some 30 years previously a club was in
existence in Natimuk under the captaincy of the
late Mr. H. Bousfield, and even before this it is
understood •rifle shooting was carried on in this
district.
In the late nineties and early part of this
century the range was situated parallel with the
south side of the railway line between Natimuk
and East Natimuk on the property now owned by
Mr. F. C. Uebergang, the stop butt being construc-
ted of wood and situated near the present town
water supply. The situation was not a safe one.
and after complaints had been made by nearby
residents of ricocheting bullets passing close to
their homes, the authorities at the time suspended
all practices thereon.
It was not until 1926 that the movement again
took life, and on this occasion members of the now
defunct 19th L.H. Regt., under the leadership of
the late Mr. H. G. Carstalrs, were largely instru-
mental for the initial organising. A site for the
range was chosen on the eastern slopes of Mt.
Arapiles. the mount itself acting as a natural stop-
buil. Practices can be carried out over all dist-
ances up to 840 yards, and it is generally considered
that it is probably one of the safest ranges in the
state insofar as small arms practice is concerned.
However, marksmen have to contend with the
many vagaries of the wind caused by the proximity
of the range to the mount, and this is not con-
ducive to high and consistent scoring.
The late Mr. G. T. Graham was the first cap-
tain, and Mr. G. W. Powell first secretary.
Since its inception the club has always main-
tained a virile course, having particular regard for
the novice, and weekly practices were generally
well patronised. A short time after the outbreak
of war in 1939 all practices were suspended, mem-
bers’ rifles impressed and the club placed into re-
cess by the military authorities. Many of the
members served in some branch of the armed
forces during the war. The club is still in a state
ci recess, but a recent inspection of the range by
an Inspecting Officer indicates that active prac-
tices may be resumed as soon as some minor re-
pairs are satisfactorily carried cat. . • ■
The present captain is -Mr. E. W. Meyer and
-.secretary Mr.- C. H. Weldner.
CROQUET
pROM the women’s aspect the croquet lawn,
which adjoins the bowling green, provides an
excellent, recreation and social service. It was
constructed shortly after the bowling green, -and
Mrs, M. Rosel was the first president and Mrs. K.
Newton the first secretary. Miss E. M. Lange gave
signal service to the club by acting as secretary
for 15 years. The present chief office-bearers are
Mrs. P. Grant president and Mrs. E, M. Smith
secretary. The croquet ladies have been very help-
ful to the bowlers in dispensing afternoon tea
when required, and a splendid spirit of harmony
and help have existed between the two institu-
tions since their formation. The Croquet Club
has neat buildings in the way of a luncheon pav-
ilion and an arbor for players to rest, the whole
surroundings of the lawn being attractive and
restful. The club has been generous in Its sup-
port of patriotic bodies. The late Mrs. H. G. Cars-
tairs did great work for the club in its early stage.
THE POST OFFICE
first Post Office was located- in
Mitchell’s store, and later in Carl Schmidt's
grain store, which adjoined the Church of Eng-
land Parish Hall, and was demolished and re-
erected on Schmidt’s farm on Natimuk Lake road.
The present brick Post Office was opened on 17th
July, 1890. The site on which it is built was pre-
viously occupied by the Police Station, which was
removed and re-erected, the building being sow
occupied by Mr. Hart. The accompanying photo-
graph shows the Post Office before it was re-mod-
elled. A photo, of the building in its present form
can be seen under the Band Rotunda article.
Names the editor can recall of those who have
been In charge of the Post Office are Misses Podger
and Tillotson, and Messrs. Fouracre, Waller, Mc-
Arthur, Pitchford, Wood and Baird (preser.T.


JOURNALISM IN NATIMUK
*|pHE imprint on the first issue of the “West Wlm-
mera Mail” on Saturday, January 29, 1887,
read —“Printed and published by Joseph Henry
Comfort for thp proprietors, Thomas Waghorn
Comyns and Joseph Henry Comfort at the office
ci the “West Wlmmera Mail.” Natimuk, in the
colony of Victoria.”
That was 60 years ago. or sixteen years after
the first settlers arrived. Shortly afterwards a
local company took over the journal, but did not
list long, disposing of the business to Mr. W. Giles,
Mr. A. W. Lockwood.
on account of floods, to a site near the
Mechanics’ Hall, and in 1944 to the present com-
modious brick premises. In January, 1938, to
meet the expansion of business, a linotype,
equipped with a modern electric melting pot and
driven by a half horse-power electric motor, was
installed, and in November of the same year a
double royal English-made wharfedale printing
who produced the paper
for eleven years, when he
sold to the present pro-
prietor in June, 1899.
The “Mail” was origin-
ally produced in what is
now the Church of Eng-
land Parish Hall. Mr.
Giles soon afterwards er-
ected a printing office in
front of Mr. Wilkins’ pri-
vate residence, which was
added to the office by Mr.
Lockwood, who eventually
had the office shifted
machine, driven by a 5 horse-power electric motor.
The jobber was replaced by a more up-to-date
nmehine. The plant, in respect to size of town, is
now one ef the most up-to-date in the country,
capable of turning out such fine work as this Back-
to-Natimuk souvenir. The “West Wimmera Mail”
is acclaimed, comparatively speaking, as one of
the best country papers in Australia, and has been
controlled for 47 years by the present proprietor,
with the help of his six sons for 40 years in suc-
cessive periods.
ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
U*HE supply of electricity was inaugurated in Nat-
imuk in March, 1927, and is in the hands of
the Natimuk Electric Supply, of which Mr. H. C.
Woolmer is proprietor.
The plant consists of a 52 h.p. Ruston and
Hornsby crude oil engine driving a 30 k.v.a. Heemaf
alternator and a 18 h.p. Ruston and Hornsby crude
cil engine driving a 15 k.v.a. Heemaf alternator.
The “Multiple Earth Neutral” system of distribu-
tion is used, and energy is supplied at 400/230
volts, 50 cycles, three phase a.o.
Electricity is used to provide heating and
power for the “West Wlmmera Mail” printing
office, and power for the Grain Elevators Board
wheat elevator, motor garages, butchers’ shops,
commercial and domestic refrigerators, radio sets
and household electrical appliances of all kinds.
Street lighting is provided, and the Bowling
and Croquet clubs are also equipped with electric
light for night play.
BEARD & SISSON’S FOUNDRY
foundry was opened in 1878 or ’79,
and developed into one of the larg-
est industries of its kind in Victoria, and
was carried on for more than 40 years
until mass production forced it into fin-
ancial difficulties. Patriotic citizens, de-
ploring the probability of such an indus-
try closing down, formed a local company,
with Dr. Bird as chairman of directors.
The company existed for only a year or
two. At peak periods the foundry employ-
ed 30 hands, and manufactured all kinds
of farm implements, from a wheelbarrow
to the Simplex harvester, its damp wea-
ther stripper, pictured here, being used
throughout the Wlmmera and Mallee.
The closing of the foundry was the
greatest industrial loss the town has
suffered.


m
iS*i
m
•r->x->
CURRENT
ACCOUNT
15 Commonserue Gi
en&my
The current account is now regarded as a modem everyday
necessity, not only for well-to-do people, but also for those ©I
moderate and small means. Its usefulness covers every field of
domestic, private, professional and business activity where pay-
ments are necessary.
The money In the account can be drawn by cheque at any
time thereby enabling payment to be made in the privacy of the
home instead of spending time waiting at cashiers’ desks. A
current account renders it unnecessary to keep large sums of
money in the house and thus the risk of loss by fire or theft are
avoided. And the cheque butts and passbook supplied by the
Bank provide a miniature book-keeping system.
In addition to these advantages the opening of the smallest
account with the National Bank brings to the customer the right
of participation in all the many services which the Bank
maintains.
Our nearest Branch will be pleased to supply details.
Tm NATIONAL BilK
of Australasia Limited
(Incorporated In Victoria)


MEMORIAL BAND ROTUNDA
a public meeting held in the Fire Brigade
Hall to discuss the best way to wind up the
affairs of the local Comforts Fund and other bodies
which collected money for soldiers during the First
World War, the above committee was formed.
At this meeting it was decided to erect a
Memorial in the shape of a Band Rotunda, and
that the committee consist of three townsmen and
two returned soldiers. This committee was in-
structed to supervise the building of the rotunda
and any other business concerning same.
The following were appointed to the commit-
tee: —Messrs. Jas. Fairley (president), A. W. Bock-
wood, G. T. Graham, H. G. Carstairs and J. E.
Eatcliffe (secretary).
The rotunda was duly erected at a cost of
£l5O, being completed about 1920-21. The follow-
ing improvements were also carried out —Cyclone
fence in front; ground around building levelled
and ploughed and planted with buffalo lawn grass;
copper memorial plate affixed to front of rotunda;
four water taps laid on to supply water lor the
lewns and length of hose and fittings supplied.
The rotunda since its erection has been paint-
ed on two occasions—in 1930 and 1939. Valuable
work was done by Mr. D. Dickerson in looking
after the watering of lawns for many years, and
later by Mr. L. Hateley.
Early records of the rotunda were destroyed
when Ratcliffe’s shop was burnt.
In 1945 an endeavor was made to hand the
affairs of the rotunda over to some permanent
body, but as yet no finality has been reached.
The Town's Centre
The above attractive Illustrations show Rotunda and Post Office, with the
original Colonial Bank. The Rotunda is regarded as the town’s Civic Centre,
and adjacent thereto it is proposed to erect Rest Rooms for the convenience
of the public generally, the Back-to-Natimuk celebrations being in aid of
that worthy cause.


Ballarat Bitter
Ballarat XXX Lager
Ballarat Stout
★★ ★ ★
Brewed by the
BALLARAT
BREWING CO. LTD.


THE FIRST STORE
IUjATIMUK’S first store was
~ opened by Messrs. Alex,
and David Mitchell in 1873
adjacent to the creek to Main
Street. Subsequently Messrs.
Nalsmtth and Hill took over
the business, and when Mr,
Naismith severed his connec-
tion it was carried on by Hill
and Co.
Mr. J. Wilson opened a
store in 1875, shortly after-
wards purchased by Mr. C.
Schurmann arid in recent
years was carried on by the
Misses Schurmann until they
sold to R. M. Mcßae Pty. Ltd.
last year.
Messrs. McWaters and
Smith, later acquired by
Messrs. McWaters and Kuse,
started the store near the
Court House (built in the
same year as the store in
1890). This store, demolish-
ed a few years ago, was sub-
sequently carried on by Mr.
John Crump, Mr. James Kir-
wood and Mr Everard Knight.
The late Mr. George Antony,
that paragon of citizenship,
more than 40 years ago took
over the drapery business of
Crump and Davey in prem-
ises now occupied by Mr, G.
Kirsopp.
THE FIRST
HOTEL
•J-HE Natimuk Hotel, now
cJellcensed and convert-
ed into flats, a solid struc-
ture of limestone, was built
by Mr. Heinrich Sudholz in
1876, the masonry work being
done by the late Mr. Webb
and his son Harry, of Grass
Flat. Not long afterwards
the National Hotel was built
by Mr. Hinneberg, who cut
the hardwood timber for the
two-storey structure in the
back yard of the hotel. This
hotel building, later occupied
by Mr Scheele, was complete-
ly destroyed by fire in July,
TOP—Natimuk’s first store, that of Messrs. A. and
D. Mitchell. CENTRE—Mr. J. Wilson’s General
store. LOWER—The National Hotel, erected soon
after the Natimuk Hotel, and destroyed by fire in
July, 1881. This was replaced by present building.


f
i
Hospital for Sick Cars
V. HUF’S
CENTRAL GARAGE
Main Street - - - - Natimuk
-
Local R.A.C.V. Service Station
WHEN YOUR CAR IS “RUN DOWN” WE WILL SOON HAVE IT “ON ITS
WHEELS” AGAIN.
I
|
| OUR OXY-WELDING WILL QUICKLY “HEAL” ALL “BREAKAGES.”
j
I Honest Work at Lowest Prices
\ QUICK REPAIR SERVICE FOR THOSE RETURNING
j TO THE CELEBRATIONS BY CAR
Phone 22.
Residence 102.


THE FIRST HOTEL (Continued)
1891, and was replaced by a brewery for Mr Scheele
with the present commodious brick building. Lic-
ensees of the hotel have in the last 50 years been
Messrs. Thos. Blight, Ratcliffe, H. Potter, Nitschke,
Kennealy, O’Dea, Whelan, Byron and A. R. Smith
(the present licensee).
During the occupancy of the hotel by Mr. M.
Whelan the licence of the Natimuk Hotel was
surrendered. Licensees of this hotel had been
Messrs. H. Sudholz, J. B. Sisson, Mrs. Rosel, J.
Newton, J. Donovan, Stan. Davis and M. Waltho.
JANE DUFF MEMORIAL
JN honor of Jane Duff, known as “the bush her-
oine,” the memorial here illustrated was erec-
ted on the Sheepwash'Reserve abutting the Nati-
muk-Goroke road in 1935 from portion of the
money raised (£125) by public subscription, chiefly
by Victorian State School children. The cost of
the Memorial was £57/16/. Mr. A. W. Lockwood
was president and Mr. H. G. Hodges secretary to
the Memorial Committee, which was inaugurated
in 1929.
The story of “The Babes in the Wood” is an
epic of Australian bush history, and will never
die. In the winter of 1864, the three Duff child-
ren, whose parents were employed on Sprlnghill
estate —now owned by Mr. Crick—lsaac (9 years),
Jane (71) and Frank (4) were sent to gather
broom to sweep the earthen floor. They set off in
high spirits, but, wandering into unfamiliar scrub,
were lost. They shouted and cooed in vain. They
were without food or water, alone in the scrub
and lost. It was then that the greatness of the
very young Australian girl revealed itself in heroic
fashion, for .with sisterly and human love she
guarded her little brother, wrapping her coat
around him and sleeping close to him to keep him
warm. This went on for eight days and nine
nights until the three black trackers —King Rich-
ard, Jerry and Fred—whose services were not en-
listed until five days after the children were lost,
found the wanderers lying in silence on the
■ ground. For weeks the children hung between
life and death.
Reading of the story, Sir Phillip Dalzlel, an
English nobleman, sent to the Duffs a piece of
beautiful marble statuary, depicting “The Babes
in the Wood.”
Of the £125 raised, £4B was spent in providing
Jane Duff with comforts in the last few years of
her life and £2B on a headstone, unveiled on March
12, 1943, over her grave in the Horsham cemetery.
THE FLOUR MILL
A FLOUR MILL was established by Messrs. Bre-
tag and Kuse in the year 1874, and was taken
over by Messrs. R. and A. Barker, who in 1906 sold
the business to Noske Bros., who had the building
removed to the site of the present bulk store In
that and the following year. Mr. Dunstan, of Bal-
larat, was the contractor for removing and re-
erecting, while Mr. J. Cross, head miller at War-
racknabeal, was engaged in supervising the mill-
wrighting, he remaining as manager. Mr. Steve
Powell was the first head miller. When the mill
resumed grinding its capacity was seven sacks an
hour, but this was subsequently increased to a
ton.
In 1910 an explosion occurred, which blew the
engine to pieces, and Mr. Harold Cross was de-
puted to go to Warrnambool for another engine.
The tragic burning of the mill from combus-
tion occurred in January, 1920, and an idea of the
loss the town suffered may be gained from the fact
that in the previous year the mill paid £4,000 in
wages. Only the chimney stack remained. Spas-
modic attempts have been made to restore the
valuable industry, one by farmers to form a local
company, but unfortunately without success, as
the district produces milling wheat equal to any-
thing in the world. The Progress Association has
endeavored to induce flour milling companies to
open a mill, but so far the effort has not succeed-
ed. It Is an Industry which would pay handsome
dividends.


Central Radio and Battery Service
(Prop. C. H. WEIDNER)
MAIN STREET NAT IMU K
ALL MAKES AND TYPES OF RADIO RECEIVERS SERVICED
We Take a Pride in Our Work, and Undertake to Give You Satisfaction
Valves and All Types of RADIO BATTERIES Stocked, As Well As All
Other Accessories For Your Receiver.
. BATTERY CHARGING UNDER OWN PERSONAL SUPERVISION
District Representative for
Healing Golden Voice, As tor and Tasma Receivers
AN UNSURPASSED AND GENUINE AFTER SERVICE GIVEN WITH ALL RECEIVERS
Phone 87 P.O. Box 10
REASONS FOR SHOPPING AT LANGLANDS
A good place to shop at Is Langlands,
They were first when they started the town;
They are still first in value and service,
A tradition that’s been handed down.
For service in every Department
Where bargains are found by the score.
Right out on its own, stands one place alone,
Its LANGLANDS the Quality store.
Drapery, furnishings, foodstuffs galore
I find I can purchase at Langlands big store;
The fashions are chic, the stock up to date,
The service the best to be found in the state.
In days when each shilling’s a treasure
Shop at Langlands, they’ll give you good measure.
Their display’s a delight, their prices are right
While their Service makes shopping a pleasure.
LANGLANDS’ Past 98 Years of Service Is Your Best GUARANTEE OF SATISFACTION
ESTABLISHED 1849-Nearly 100 Years OLD
J. LANGLANDS & SONS PTY. LTD. - - HORSHAM


1884-JORY’S NEWSAGENCY-1947
FRANK A. JORY, Prop.
Greetings to Old Friends
take pride in the fact that in serving oar friends of Natimuk and District for over 60
years, we have shared with them their prosperities and their reverses, their joys and their
sorrows. The present proprietor, the fourth member of the family to conduct the business,
takes this opportunity of thanking both old and new friends for past and present support,
assuring them that it will be always his endeavor to maintain that harmonious relationship
with clients which has been traditionally established over the years.
c. w. uckmann
PREMIER BUTCHERY
MAIN STREET, NAT IMU K
Where Only the Best Quality, Is Supplied
at Lowest Prices.
FEESH SMAIA, GOODS ALWAYS ON HAND
Orders Called for and Delivered.
Phone 28.
P.O. Box 20.
This
SOUVENIR BOOKLET
Was Wholly Set Up and
Printed at
the Office of the
"WEST WIMMERA MAIL"
MAIN STREET, NATIMUK


NATIMUK TALKIES
APRIL 12:
"NIGHT IN PARADISE"
(Technicolor).
(Not Suitable for General Exhibition).
MERLE OBERON. TURHAN BEY.
THOMAS GOMEZ.
"Allergic to Love"
(General Exhibition)
MARTHA O’DRISCOLL. NOAH BEERY.
DAVID BRUCE.
NOVELTY : “ANIMAL TRICKS”
NEWS.
G. R. KIRSOPP
"Kia-Ora" Cafe, Natimuk
FRESH FRUIT AND VEGETABLES,
CONFECTIONERY
A Large Assortment of Fresh Fruit Always
on Hand.
Confectionery of all kinds carried in stock.
Small Goods in Season.
SENNITT’S ICE CREAM
Polar Pies and Dixies in all Flavors Stocked
in Frigidaire.
Satisfaction Guaranteed Civility and
Courtesy at all times.
Box 4.
Phone 132.
!
i
i
i
i
i
f
i
i
i
I
j
i
j
i
i
i
i
i
I
j
I
W. G. HICKSON
GENERAL BLACKSMITH
ALL CLASSES OF BLACKSMITHING
AT REASONABLE CHARGES
Repairs of All Kinds.
A TRIAL CONFIDENTLY SOLICITED
MAIN STREET, NATIMUK
Phone 33. Box 54.
j
I
f
I
i
i
i
I
I
NATIMUK BAKERY
MAIN STREET, NATIMUK
R. H. JORY, Prop.
BAKER, PASTRYCOOK AND
CONFECTIONER
Orders by Train Receive Prompt Attention.
Superior Bread and Smallgoods on Hand.
Birthday, Xmas and Wedding Cakes Made
to Order.
Phone 21. P.O. Box 30.


R. W. PETRIE
MAIN STREET, NAT I ML) K
HEALING CYCLES CALTEX OILS
CALTEX KEROSENE AND PETROL WILL
BE STOCKED AS FROM MARCH 31
Box 75.
Phone 120.
V. P. ERWIN
General Agent, NATIMUK
Representing:
COMMONWEALTH EGG BOARD.
WM. ANGLISS & COY., Egg Floor and Cream
Depoc.
C. E. CLEMENTS AND COY., Oat, Grain and
Fodder Merchants, Melbourne.
SCHUTT AND BARRIE, Hay and Chaff Mer-
chants, West Footscray.
STATE ACCIDENT INSURANCE OFFICE,
Melbourne.
SECRETARY, LOCAL WAR AGRICULTURAL
COMMITTEE. Natimuk.
Licensed to Buy Hide, Skins, Wool, Tallow
Highest Cash Prices.
A TRIAL SOLICITED
Box 83. Phone 114. Res. 44.
J. W. KIEFEL
Hairdresser, Tobacconist
and Stationer
NATIMUK
A Large Assortment of Royal Doulton,
Choice Glassware and Fancy Goods.
ALL SPORTING GOODS IN SEASON
Phone 20. 1 Box 3.
“DULCETTE”
CAFE
D. J. WEIDNER, Proprietress
FIRST CLASS SERVICE AND ATTENTION
Specialising in Afternoon Teas
CATERING IN ALL ITS BRANCHES
EVERYTHING HOME-MADE
Phone 87. Box 10.


NATIMUK MOTOR
GARAGE
Established 1920
H. C. WOOLMER,
Proprietor
BE THRIFTY!
HAVE YOUR SHOES REPAIRED
BEFORE THEY LOSE THEIR SHAPE
Bring them to:
! O’HARA AND
SON
BOOT REPAIRERS
\
MAIN STREET, NATIMUK
W. A. WOOLMER
Authorised RADIOLA
Distributor
SALES AND SERVICE
—*
RADIOLA RECEIVERS PRICED PROM
£l6/12/6
Radio and Car Batteries Re-Charged.
ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES SOLD
AND REPAIRED
Phone No. 5.
After Hours No. 117.
L. H. SCHIER
AND SON ,
BUILDING CONTRACTORS
Painters and House
Renovators
Telephone S 3.
Box 40.
NATIMUK
