

ath
ppm
Colonial and Indian Exhibition,
1886.
HOW TO SETTLE
THE LAND IN THE COLONY
QUEENSLAND.
By Authority of the Executive Commissioners in Queensland.
LONDON:
WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, Limited,
•printers anti Pufilisfjtrs to tfjr Hoga! GTontmtssian,
13, CHARING CROSS, S.W., and at THE EXHIBITION.


HOW TO SETTLE ON THE LAND IN THE
COLONY OP QUEENSLAND.
HOW TO GET A FARM IN THE COLONY OP
QUEENSLAND.
At the present time, 1886, there are 416,646,946 acres of land in
Queensland which belong to the Crown. The greater part of these
are leased in the form of extensive runs or blocks, commonly called
squattages, to tenants, who simply use them for grazing sheep and
cattle. The Parliament of the colony, during the Session of 1884,
passed a Land Act which resumed one-half of each of these squatting
runs in all but the extreme west and northern portions of the colony.
The object of this resumption was to encourage closer settlement by
resident pastoral tenants, and by freehold farmers. This paper will
point out to the emigrant from Europe sufficient of the provisions
of this Land Act to instruct him how to get Land; what area he can
lease; what area he can purchase; the price he will have to pay, and
conditions he will have to comply with.
The wide range of choice the Act affords is apparent when it is
stated that the emigrant can lease for thirty years tenure 2500
acres, and, up to 20,000 acres of grazing land; or he can lease for
fifty years, with the option of purchasing after ten years occupancy,
a farm of from 320 acres up to 1280 acres; or he can take a farm of
not more than 160 acres, and obtain a freehold deed for it in five
years’ time, by paying only 6d. per acre per year.
HOW A LEASEHOLD OR GRAZING FARM CAN
BE GOT.
Prom time to time certain large tracts of country are proclaimed
Areas open for selection. This is always publicly proclaimed one
month prior to any selections being allotted. These areas are always
surveyed into lots of various sizes (due regard being observed as to
whether the land is only suitable for grazing purposes or for cultiva-
tion) ; proper roads are left for easy access, and so are reserves for
future public use.
The proclamation always states whether the land is called an
Agricultural Area or a Grazing Area. If agricultural, then the
greatest amount that can be selected shall not exceed 1280 acres by one
applicant; nor shall a less quantity than 320 acres be taken. If it is


not an agricultural area, then it is a grazing area, and the quantity
that can be selected shall not be less than 2560 acres, nor more
than 20,000 acres. The annual rent to be paid for each lot is stated
in the proclamation; this, in the case of agricultural land, is never
less than threepence per acre, and in the case of grazing lands, not
less than three farthings per acre. At the same time it is always
stated at what price the tenant has the option of purchase of agri-
cultural land according to conditions stated in another paragraph.
Maps of these areas are always exhibited at the local land office,
and at the Land Office at Brisbane ; and at these offices any informa-
tion is willingly given to inquirers.
Any person can select land who is over 18 years of age, except
married women not having judicial separation ; but a woman protect-
ing her own property can select. An application form is given to the
inquirer at the Land Office, and he then states upon it which lot he
applies for, and at the same time lodges the amount of the first year’s
rent, and the survey fee. The owner of the first application lodged
gets the land; but if two or more applicants are at the office at
the same time, then the right of application is decided by lot. In
due time the applicant gets notice that his application has been
accepted, and he receives a license to occupy the land. This license
is not transferable.
The conditions upon which this license is granted are as follow:
In the case of Grazing farms, the selector must, within three years,
enclose the land with a good and substantial fence. Iti the case of
Agricultural farms, the selector must, within five years, either enclose
the land with a good substantial fence, or make improvements on the
land equal to the cost of such a fence, Havi ag effected these improve-
ments the selector applies for his certificate of having done so, and an
inspector is sent to report upon them, and if the report is favourable
the Land Board grant the certificate, and the selector is entitled far
his Lease.
The gpnditions of the lease are: —•
The term of the lease shall in the case of an Agricultural farm be'
fifty (50) years, and in the case of a grazing farm be thirty (30)
years.
The annual rent of either class of farm shall, for the first ten years,
be the rent specified by the Proclamation declaring the land open for
selection. The rent for each period of five years afterwards shall be
determined by the Land Board.
If the rent is not paid upon the day it is due (31st March), then
the lease is forfeited; but forfeiture can be set aside if a fine of fifteen
per centum is paid, in addition to the amount due, within ninety days.
If not paid by then, the lease is absolutely forfeited.
The lessee shall occupy the land continuously and hand fide during
the term of the lease ; but he can, if he like, appoint some other person
to reside for him, and every such appointment of bailiff shall bo


registered at the Lands Office, otherwise the appointment wdll not be
recognised.
In the case of a Grazing farm, the lessee shall keep the land fenced
during the whole term of lease.
HOW A FREEHOLD OF 1280 ACRES CAN BE GOT.
The selector of any holding in an Agricultural area can purchase
his land after having himself resided upon it for ten (10) years, includ-
ing the application for purchase, and after having duly complied with
the other conditions. The purchase money is that announced by the
Proclamation which declared the land open for selection. If not
purchased within the first twelve years, then the money to be paid is
somewhat greater. In case of the death of the lessee, then the resi-
dence of someone beneficially interested is sufficient for compliance
with that clause requiring personal residence. It must be remembered
that under this clause no one can select and make freehold a greater
area than 1280-acres. If not made freehold, then the lease of these
agricultural farms extends to 50 years.
HOW A FARM OF 160 ACRES CAN BE GOT.
There are in the Land Act special provisions for acquiring freeholds in
the case of holdings not exceeding 160 acres and after personal occupa-
tion. They are these: —The selector must expend ten (10) shillings
per acre in substantial improvements upon the land, and must reside
personally bond fide on the land continuously for five years. Then if he
has duly paid the rent he is entitled to get his deeds of the land. The
price he will have to pay will only be half-a-crown per acre altogether
—that is, if the sum he has paid in rent has not amounted to 2s. 6d.
per acre during the five years; then he must pay up sufficient to
make it so ; but if his rent has been classed higher than 6d. per acre
so that during the five years of residence he has paid more than
half-a-crown per acre, then the overplus is refunded to him.
It will thus be seen that the farmer who will be content with 160
acres or less, and intends to make it his home, can, by this liberal
Land Act, obtain such a farm by paying the small sum of 6d. per
acre per year for only five years ! Only first-class farming land is
surveyed into these small areas, so that the selector is certain to have
•obtained land of the very best quality in the district. The expendi-
ture of ten shillings per acre required is no more than any settler
must perforce spend in putting up his hut, yards, out-sheds, fences,
•etc. A settler need not confine all his personal work to his own land.
.He can work for wages elsewhere on adjoining plantations or farms,
take contracts for supplying timber, or cartage, etc.; but he must have
his bond fide house on the selection. If his wife and family do not
reside there, then he must return to his home to sleep so frequently
that there can be no possible loophole for any one to say he has not
■used his land as his homestead.


It will thus be seen that the immigrant into Queensland actually
requires no capital to select one of these small farms, provided he
does so in a neighbourhood where he can get work to live by, so
as to obtain money to spend upon his farm. The climate of Queens-
land is so genial that the first twelve months may safely and
healthily be passed in a tent, or in the roughest of bark while
at odd times a bettor one is being built.
There are clauses in the Land Act which in some cases allow of
satisfaction before survey has taken place, but these the settler can
better understand after a residence in the colony.
3 1508 02086055 2
