

6io
Catbebral Church of St Hnbrew,
S^bnep.
jforrn of Service
to be useb on tbe occasion of tbe
Dedication of memorial Cablets
in memorg of
Cbe Rt. Rep. Samuel Edward SHarsden, D.D.,
Ifirst Bisbop of JBatburst, tH.S.IiGU, wbo fell asleep
Istb October, 1912,
anb of
Albert Bytbesea lUeigall, C.m.6., m.A.,
Xag Canon of this Catbebral for 30 gears anb Ibeabmaster of
tbe Sgbneg Grammar School, wbo fell asleep 20tb tfeb., 1912,
anb of
Cbe Rep. CUilliatn Rough,
Canon of this Catbebral anb IRector of St* tube’s, ’Kanbwicfc,
wbo fell asleep 27tb Bpril, 1913.
IClcbncsbap, lotb 3ulp, 1914.


©rbet of ©ffice.
Sentences. Confession. Absolution. Lord’s
\'ersicles.
Psalm Jxxxiv
Quam dilecta
O bow amiable are Thy dwellings,” etc.—Gloria
Lesson; St. John v., 24-30.
Deus Misereatur.
After the Third Collect this Hymn;
On the Resurrection morning
Soul and body meet again;
.No more sorrow, no more weeping,
no more pain!
Here awhile they must be parted,
And the flesh its Sabbath keep,
Waiting in a holy stillness,
wrapt in sleep.
For a while the tired body
Lies with feet toward the morn;
Till the last and brightest Easter
day be born.
But the soul in contemplation
Utters earnest prayer and strong
Bursting at the Resurrection
into song.
Soul and body reunited
Thenceforth nothing shall divide,
Waking xxp in Chx-ist’s own likeness,
satisfied.
Oh! the beauty, Oh! the gladness
Of that Resurrection day,
Which shall not through endless ages
pass away!
On that happy Easter morning
All the graves their dead restore;
Father, sister, child, and mother,
meet once more.
To that brightest of all meetings
Bring us, Jesxx Christ, at last;
By Thy Cross, through death and judgment
holding fast.
Address—His Grace the Archbishop


During the singing of these two stanzas, the Archbishop
(with such of the clergy as are robed) will proceed to the north
aisle of the Chancel.
How bright these glorious spirits shine!
Whence all their white array ?
How came they to the blissful seats
Of everlasting day?
bo, these are they from sufferings great,
Who came to realms of light.
And in the blood of Christ have wash’d
Those robes that shine so bright.
Then the Archbishop will unveil the first Tablet, saying:—
“To the glory of God, and in memory of Samuel Edward MaRS-
DEN, D.D., first Bishop of Bathurst, I unveil this Tablet, erected to
commemorate the holy life and saintly labours of his episcopate.”
During the singing of this stanza, the procession will lead to
the north aisle of the Nave.
Now with triumphal palms they stand
Before the throne on high,
And serve the God they love amidst
The glories of the sky.
Then the Archbishop will unveil the second Tablet, saying:
“To the glory of God, and in memory of ALBERT BYTHESEA
Weigall, C.M.G., M.A., Lay Canon of this Cathedral for 36 years, and
Head Master of the Sydney Grammar School, 1 unveil this Tablet,
erected to commemorate his saintly example and faithful labours.”
During the singing of these two stanzas, the Archbishop will
be led to the south aisle of the Nave,
Hunger and thirst are felt no more,
Nor suns with scorching ray ;
God is their Sun, Whose cheering beams
Diffuse eternal day.
The Lamb which dwells amidst the throne
Shall o’er them still preside;
Feed them with nourishment divine,
And all their footsteps guide.


Then the Archbishop will unveil the third Tablet, saving
“To the glory of God and in memory of WILLIAM HOUGH, Canon of
this Cathedral and Rector of St. Jude’s Church, Randwick, I unveil
this Tablet, erected to commemorate his holy life and saintly labours.”
The last two stanzas of the Hymn will be sung as the Choir
and the Clergy move to their places on the Chancel.
’Midst pastures green He’ll lead His flock
Where living streams appear;
And God the Lord from every eye
Shall wipe off every tear.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
The God Whom we adore.
Be glory, as it was, is now.
And shall be evermore.—Amen.
The Archbishop will then offer the following Dedicatory
Prayer :
O Gracious God, Whom truly to know is life eternal, and Whose
service is perfect freedom, we humbly pray Thee to receive with Thy
favour the dedication of these memorial tablets to Thy honour and
glory, and in grateful recollection of Thy faithful servants whom they
commemorate. We thank Thee for Thy Grace manifested in them, and
we beseech Thee that with them, and all Thy servants departed this life
in Thy faith and fear, we may be partakers of Thy Heavenly Kingdom,
for Jesus Christ’s sake, our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen,
BENEDICTION
NUNC DIMITT IS
