

AjM CI ENT AND J^ODER^
OR
By
f *
JOSE f H SYJiES.
SEVENTH EDITION
(with an Appendix#)
%
" *"' ' 1 - »T>"»?» * W * — w r y*y » » »yr »r^.»-
•*‘ ■* ■■ » ***■ *>£» ■««»i» -. .
PRICE OjSTS SHILLING.




ANCIENT AND MODERN
fHALLIG
OR SEX-WORSJ-llf
Those who take up this little book in the hope of finding
smut in it, or a pandering to depraved and vicious tastes, will
be disappointed. I intend to speak the truth and to use
very plain language, but such as is calculated to rouse
passion and lead to the committal of vice and crime My
object is no more improper than that of the doctor who
writes books on Anatomy and Physiology. 1 aim at
improving the world by knowledge.
The subject of this tract is a very peculiar one, hardly
ever noticed by leading writers ; and yet it is the key to
most religious mysteries; and it sheds more light uponreiigioii
itself than almost any other fact in man’s history. No doubt
some writers have found in Phallic Worship more than the
facts will warrant, and they have strained every word and
symbol to support their views. But because some have
done that it does not follow that this ancient and only
Catholic or universal religion may not be legitimately
employed to clear up some of the secrets of so called
revelation and to explain some of the symbols and usages of
the churches past and present.
No doubt many will regard this essay of mine with horror
not only because it exposes religion, but more especially for
exposing to public gaze, so to speak, certain portions of our
common human nature, which decency bids us hide
and hypocrisy ignore. In a word, my reader, Phallic
Worship signifies sex-worship, or the worship of the private


members of man and -woman. At first sight it seeiftS
impossible that such things could ever have been worshipped ;
and yet no fact in human history is better attested ; and
certainly, as I hope to show, no worship could ever have
been more natural, more philosophical, more inevitable, than
Sex-worship. Pray do not be incredulous until you have
weighed well the facts, and do not turn aside in disgust
from a subject the best of our forefathers considered
perfectly innocent. The evil may be in him who thinks it,
and not in the ancient worshippers ; and we may be no
whit better than our predecessors, although we are expected
to wear the cloak of modesty.
Reader, look at a little child. Is there in nature
anything more interesting, more innocent, more.attractive,
more wonderful ? There is a new living being that only
requires to grow up like the rest of us, and be in turn
father or mother of similar human beings. Fatljer and
mother ! What are those words 1 They are amongst the
dearest and most sacred of all words in human languages.
And yet that relationship is founded in and upon what ?
Custom and prudery forbid you to say. The father is a
male, the mother a female. They differ in sex. The male
has one organ, the female another. Those correspond, the
one is the complement of the other The male organ
consists of the penis, the two testicles or balls, and the
internal vessels containing the semen or seed necessary to the
production of young. And that seed is real seed, a vital
secretion, and seen under the microscope is perceived to be
full of life, or of living things, moving in a me st astonishing
fashion. The penis or most prominent part of the male
organ is always limp and soft in childhood ; in adult males
it has the power to erect and straighten itself out and
become extremely rigid.
The female organ is a tube with an oval aperture,
roughly the same shape as an eye. At the inner end
of the tube is the womb properly so-called, a hollow pear-
shaped organ ; and in this the young being starts life and
comes to pre-natal maturity. The ovaries or rgg-producing
organs are placed beside it, and they produce in all
mammals eggs as real as those of hens, but much smaller,


In the human female they are so minute that 200 of them
'"hie by side in a straight line or row would not reach more
than an inch or so.
Now it is absolutely necessary that those organs should
unite, and that the seed of the male should reach the egg of
the female, before the relationship of father, mother and
child can exist. Imagine then a' fruitful union of the two,
and in about nine months, if all goes well, there is another
being born, a child—the greatest wonder in the world !
Now, my young readers of either sex, which of you is
the worse for reading that 1 I pity the one that is. As for
you, you ancient sinners and hoary-headed hypocrites, I
have nothing to say to you—honest words would be lost
upon you.
But let us return. What a wonder is that baby that is
just arrived ! Physiology and embryology have explained
much ; but the mystery, the wonder, is deep as ever. And
so is the wonder of all that leads to it. Love ! What a
wond rful flame is love, the dominating force of life.
Nothing so completely absorbs man or woman. How
poetic ! How holy, if anything is such ! And how
generous ! Ihe man or woman that never felt it is to be
pitied, while they who love without response must spend
the most wretched of lives. But though love is the noblest
fi one a man or woman may ever feel, it is associated with
and founded upon the distinction of sex—and the very organs
that prudery teaches us are low and disgusting ! There is
some hing wrong—either nature has produced organs she
ou Jit to destroy, and irresistibly prompts to their mutual
an 1 most disgusting employment, or else religious and social
ca it has perverted the best instincts of our race. Either
people should do what they may to avoid being differently
sexed, and men and women should never behave as such, or
else the horrible cant that now sways society should come
to an end.
But if a child is so great a wonder to us with all the
science of modern times to break the spell of the mystery,
what must such an advent have been amongst our distant
fathers! Imagine the magnificent wonder of an ancient
man, who yearly saw the Sun impregnating the earth, and


universal nature teeming with new life ! His flocks, herds,
cattle, prompted by one gran:! impulse, increase' and
multiply ; and he himself feels the same grand passion and
also multiplies his kind ! Love, to him, is a god—some god,
Eros , Cupid , prompts to multiplication, and this god must
be worshipped. The highest pleasure and the highest profit
alike compel him to worship. Had you and I, my reader,
lived a few thousand years ago, we must have done as our
contemporaries did—worshipped most devoutly the very
things, the parts of our own bodies, or, rather, their symbols,
which we cannot now openly mention without embarrass-
ment or shame! Strange is it not 1 But absolutely true.
My first noted introduction to Phallic worship took place
in South Shields some eleven or twelve years ago. I went
there to see a friend ; and in connection with the new Free
Library, they were just preparing and arranging a
Museum, Among the articles for the secret chamber of the
Museum (all museums nearly have secret parts not open to
the general public, more’s the pity !) was a real Phallos, the
very image of the male member in its rigid condition, wrought
in freestone, and about two or three feet long. This had
just been dug up on the site of an ancient Roman camp. And
that in itself would have been sufficient to raise more than a
suspicion that the Romans, less than 2000 years ago, were
addicted to this worship.
In coming out from England we landed at Naples, and
rev. Mr Brown (Baptist, of Dunedin) and myself went to
the Museum. We entered the room from which ladies are
excluded, and there saw lamps and ornaments and other
articles from Pompeii worked to the shape of the male
organ, etc. There is a book in the Melbourne Public
Library (Musee Secret) a French work, which gives pictures
and letterpress descriptions of some of them, and also of
other objects of ancient art The book, at least the volume,
to which I refer, is kept from the public and may not be had,
except on special application to the librarian. This masculine
and prudish monopoly of such articles and books requires
resistance, and may take a generation yet to destroy. There
is much said about the gross immorality of the people in
tpcient Pompeii ; but probably an average Romish priest


who studies Dens' Theology or Sanchez’ and other works,
will have in his imagination and at his beck, if he is not at their
beck, more pictures of vice and crime, and far more varied
ones, than all the bad people in Pompeii ever had !
The god Mutunus or Mutinus, among the Romans, like
Priapos, among the Greeks, was worshipped in gardens to
ensure fruitfulness. The statue was placed in the garden or
in some public place, of a man’s figure down to
the hips, and below that an inverted pyramid with its apex in
the ground. The organ of fruitfulness was erect, and women
(in Gruter’s “ Inscriptions ”) are seen bringing garlands and
hanging them upon that organ ; an act of worship designed
to secure fiuitfulness either to the garden or to themselves
or to both.
Priapos is par excellence the god of this worship. His
statues and statuettes are generally monsters of deformity, as
we should say. The secret part is the most prominent, and
of greater size than all the rest of the body, showing plainly
that that was the part especially and exclusively worshipped.
And here we may as well see sober truth as seek for things
which may disgust. There is in vegetable and animal life
one most remarkable law, namely, that Nature urges on the
development of both animal and plant until the power of
reproduction has been attained, and as soon as young persons
reach that stage the great desire of life is to reproduce, or
at least, to perform the acts calculated to effect reproduction.
For a time this continues, and Nature does her uttermost
to make the young most attractive to each other. But the
breeding period is no sooner over than Nature loses all care
for the individual ; female beauty and manly vigor both
decline ; and in a brief period individuals are flung aside as no
longer of any use in Nature’s economy. And this shows
that so far as Nature is concerned, man and woman, like all
plants and animals, are of no use except as breeding agents.
Nature cares (so to speak) only for the race, and for the
individual only eo far as he is useful to the race. And in
this view of the case, our distant sires were quite logical to
seize upon a universal fact as the object of their worship,
and to paint and sculpture And worship the sex’ 1 Tl] Wfgang a, 7
the most important things in existence ,


I remember to have read many years ago, I think m
Wesley’s Original Sin , that the most respectable ladies in
ancient Rome wore the god Priapus suspended fre m their
necks, just as ladies and priests wear crosses now. The
writer mentions it as an exhibition of depravity , but it
was nothing of the kind. ') he Roman ladies who did that
were neither better nor worse than ladies who wear the
cross ; and the cross, as we shall see, is nothing more nor
less than Priapus in a modified form. Not that I suppose
ladies or gentlemen to-day know what the cross signifies,
for if they did custom would forbid them to wear it
openly.
In ancient Greece the Dionysia were festivals held in
honor of Dionysus or Bacchus, and were most soli mn acts of
worship. The people marched in processions,, shouting,
Io Bacche! etc. A number of persons carried sacred
vessels, one filled with water. A select company of noble
virgins carried golden baskets filled with all sorts of fruits,
symbolising their own future fruitfulness. They also
carried serpents that crept out and in the baskets, or circled
round their arms \ and the serpent was the emblem of the
male organ. Behind the young ladies marched young men
crowned with ivy and violets and their faces covered with
other flowers. They carried long poles, on the tops of which
were phalloi or plain images of the male organ. I need not
point out the significance of their following the girls in the
procession. Behind these came other men ( ithyphalloi)
dressed in women’s clothes, wearing gloves of flowers, and
acting like drunken fellows. Others again carried tire
liknon or van. This was a winnowing fan, say some ; or it
may have been a cradle. If so, we need inquire no further,
as the meaning is evident. Bacchus, they say, was rocked
in a liknon. The whole procession was highly symbolic of
the union of the sexes and the grand result The womb in
front ; the male organ that makes the womb fruitful
following behind, and the liknon or cradle to hold and rock
the child that was to spring from the mutual embrace. Only
prudes can be disgusted with what was pure dramatic
symbolism of the grandest facts in Nature. And the ancient
(iyeeks and others after all, far nobler and more moral


than priest-ridden, priest-corrupted Europe and her colonies'.
This worship of the generative powers of nature was once
world-wide ; no nation escaped it; and however much
disguised it may be, it still forms the basis of every existing
religion. In India to-day the Lingam and Yoni are most
prominent symbols in the worship of the people. The
Lingam is the nfale organ, the Yoni the female, ifheseare
sculptured, sometimes united, at others, asunder, and set
up in temples and public places to be worshipped. The god
Siva or Shiva is worshipped as the male power, and his wife
Sakti as the female or e. Siva is also represented with an
eye in his forehead, the longer axis being up and down. It is
not an eye that is signified, but the Yoni or female vessel.
Shiva is often figured under the emblem of a bull, and that
is significant. The bull is one of the most precious of
animals, and the father of the herd. Shiva is worshipped
in two characters, as god of destruction and also of
regeneration or resurrection, the destroyer and restorer of all
things.
In the bible we sonefims find women in deep distress
praying for children. The women in India do so too, but
they pray practically, and actually go, in the most reverent
manner, and sit upon the sculptured Lingam, their dress being
removed, so that their persons shall come into literal con-
tact with it; and this is devoutly done in the hope of
having offspring. Mohamrmdan women wall kiss the private
member of a living idiot or saint for similar reasons, and
Egyptian women treat the sculptured phalloi in the same
manner. Among the Druses of Mount Lebanon, it is
said, the ladies kiss the private member of the old Sheik
once a year.
Three Tiundred years ago at Bourgdun, near Bourges, in
France, Priapus was still worshipped under the name of St.
Guerlichon, who was represented with his member of enor-
mous size. Barren women spent nine days at his shrine. The
saint s image was laid horizontally, and each day women
laid themselves upon him. Nor was this all, for it was the
custom for the women to scrape the member in question
(the statue was of, stone), and put the dust in a little water.
This mixture formed a miraculous draught, and was drunk


tv them in the hope of offspring ! Here is a passage
quoted by Mr. Westropp from a work published no longer
ago than 1797 “At the further end of the port of Brest,
beyond the fortification, there was a small chapel, and in
this chapel was a statue honored with the name of san.t
If decency permitted me to describe Priapus with his
attributes, I should depict that statue. Barren women, or
those who feared to be so, went to this statue, and alter
having scraped what 1 dare not mention, and having drun
the powder infused in a glass of water from a fountain, they
took their departure, with the hope of becoming fruitfu .
Down to the end of last century, at Isneria, near Naples,
Saints Cosmo and Damiano were worshipped, by young girls
anxious for husbands, and by barren women, by placing on
their altars wax figures of the male organ. _
These are mere specimens of this worship which might be
supplied in great numbers. The ancient countries were full
of it, in fact, it was the religion of the world. It is still
found in full blossom in Africa, Polynesia, Japan, India ;
and its remnants will be discovered about Christendom even
in the present day.
This worship gave rise to symbols, and those at first were
merely natural objects. Tall and pointed stones were regarded
as symbols of the male organ, and natural holes in stones,
of the female. Jacob slept upon a stone, and erected and
©fled it next morning as a bethel or house of god. That was
entirely an act of phallic worship. The god of the Jews is
several times called a rock , as no doubt he was, the rock
that symbolised the generating force and organ in Nature.
Jesus is called the chief corner stone, a rock of offence or
stumbling ; and that may have a phallic meaning,
especially as believers are called “ living stones.” d all a. d
straight trees, especially the palm, were also symbols « f the
male organ. And this may be the reason why the palm was
regarded as sacred, and its branches carried m processions
by° Jews and Christians. The serpent espec ally was a
symbol of the Phallos, and it has been worshipped m every
land. Moses set up a brazen one in the w lderness ; and
that one was a type of Christ or Christ himself, as we may
discover. The orescent moon, from its rounded shape, was


the emblem or symbol of the female organ, and so wi as the
barleycorn in its oval shape and its furrow. i>olh these
natural objects are, and were, sacred, because they are
shaped like the mouth of the female organ. The shamrock or
three-leaved clover was a symbol of the male, the two
testicles, and the membrum virile ; while the eye was a
euphemistic term and emblem of the female part.
But the most important symbols of the sexual gods were
the artificial ones. In many cases the organs themselves
were sculptured or painted in their natural conditions, and
the worshippers were not ashamed. In Denon s Egypt you i
find the gods sculptured with the organ erect and often
extremely prominent. One Phallos in Egypt and another
in Syria were each 120 cubits, or 180 feet long. A devotee
climbed to the top of the latter at the half-yearly festival
and there spent seven days at his devotions. Ihere
can be no doubt that Simeon Stylites and other “ pillar
saints ” of the Christian church were mere imitators ot the
ancient worshippers, mere survivals indeed of phallic
worship, and so serving as links between that ancient
religion and Christianity. .
The most important symbol of this worship is and was
the cross. Most people in Christian countries fancy that
the cross is a Christian symbol representing the crucifixion
of Jesus. The fact is, it was nearly as ancient at the alleged
date of Jesus as it is now. The period that has elapsed
since the pretended birth of Jesus is extremely small com-
pared with the time that passed away previously ; and during
much of that period the cross was a symbol of the most
revered charac er. Even the gospels unconsciously confirm
the fact that this symbol was an anc : ent one. Many years
a<r o l was start'ed and perlurlnd (I was then profoundly
ortho ox) in reading the text “ Let him take up his cross
and follow me (Mat. XVI 24, Mark VIII. 84, X 21, Luke
IX 23). The reader will readily perceive that -Jesus could
not then be referring to ITs own cross, for he was not yet
cruc’fied, nor did the disciples expect he ever would be ;
they had nev r associated him with the felon’s cross. How
then could they understand these texts 1 The cross refened
fcp in these tacts was not the crucifixion-cross, but


another ; not the cross of death, hut the cross of life. The
male organ is a cros«, or threefold bud/, the trinity in
Pen r S Wlth the tWO testicles forming a cross not
hke the ordinary one worn by priests and by women.
LhJ a i dI T m anCle ] nt , Kome Wore Lhe f,a ural cross in its
natural shape ; and the crosses worn to-day are nothin*
more nor less than Pnapus slightly modified. AVe need not
Usurprised, however, for we shall most likely find Priapus
and .Jesus both one—and both the male or<mn 1
Ihe cross referred to in the aoovM t, xt °was the cross of
the monk, or the crutch, a long walking stick with a piece on
the top. To be sure, the sense has been perverted in modern
times, and the prevailing notion attached to taking un the
cross is that of bearing a load far too heavy for one’s
strength. But_ the ancient monks had quite other ideas,
other ideas, for they worshipped the Phallos.
, ,T aS a startlm » fact to the Spanish missionaries to find
that the cross had travelled to America before them, and
that in Mexico, Peru and other lands it was treated as a
sacred emblem, and as devoutly worshipped by the
Indians ” as they called them, as it was by themselves !
Ibis fairly appalled them ; and they rushed to the only
conclusion possible to such benighted wretches, viz., that
the devil (the most useful being that ever lived, surely !)
had gone to America and there caricature.) their holy religion
and its most sacred symbol. The worst of it is that this
caricaturing took place all over the world, thousands of
years before Christ and Christianity were dreamt of. The
cross has been from the most remote periods, and
amongst all tribes and peoples, a most sacred religious
emblem, the virtues of which were always as great and
wonderful as those of the cross amongst Mediaeval Christians.
Perhaps more money, labour, skill and devotion have been
expended in setting forth the cross than any other and all
o er symbols whatsoever. It has been painted, sculptured
carved, embroidered, embodied in architecture, in every
conceivable style, in every sort of stone, wood, metal,
and m sizes the most gigantic and the most minute.’
Almost all the ancient temples of India are in the form
pt the cross, whether hewn out in the solid rock or built ug>


in laborious and co«tiy fashion ; and in this chris tuns are
but imitators —their churches are cross-shaped, cross-
ornamented. But with them it is not original—nothing in
their religion is original, exoei t its persecuting sp lit. In all
this expensive and beautiful work of ancient times the
one idea was to s-1 forth, to illustrate, to adore the one
o-reat mystery of life and the organs that gave origin to new
living beings. The Christians all unconsciously perpetuate
this 'ancient w< rship under the ridiculous notion that it is
a new revelatmn from heaven ! Absurdity could not
possibly extend itself fa’ther. Of all people, Christians
seem to know least of antiquit'es and mythology. Their
superstition blinds them, and they verily “ worship they
know not what.”
Kings and bishops have rods or staffs of office, the one a
sceptre, the other a crozier. No doubt those are phallic
emblems of the male kind, and that is one reason why
women, as a rule, have been excluded from kingly and
priestly offices. Mercury or Hermes, the ancient Wokd or
messenger of the gods, the model and prototype of Jesus,
carried a rod or caduceus, with serpents so twined round it
as to form the figure of a cross and also of the male organ.
Statues of this god, like the crucifix of later times, were
place 1 at the cross roads ; and each statue had an erect and
prominent Phallos. Mercury being the conductor of souls,
as Jesus was later, became also the guide of travellers, a
finger-post at the cross roads. Travellers in gratitude flung
a stone near the font of the statue, and in time the sacred
cairn so raised became considerable, and the intersection of
the roads were regarded as sacred. Christianity in this case
reversed the idea and rendered those crossings unholy, and
there, in those spots devoted to the devd, they 'Mined
suicides ! We may see a closer connection between Mercury
as guide of souls and travellers and Mercury as a phallic
deity as we proceed
And the Yoni or Kfeis, the female organ, was not less
frequently sculptured, carved, painted, embroidered than
the Lingam or Phallos. The extent to which this is seen
in Chrstian art is wonderful ; a id yet it may never have
been suspected had we not the remains of ancient art and


the pagan symbols of other nations as the key to the
mystery \\ hether the priests have lost the key is doubtful;
although one may more than suspect the Jesuits to be quite
enlightened upon the nature of their religion. That most
clergymen have not the remotest idea of all this is, lam
fully persuaded, a fact. Few of them have either sufficient
learning or penetration to understand what it is they preach
and practice. For my part, long after I had grown out of
theology, I was still a complete stranger to this secret
doctrine and never suspected what I am now revealing to
the multitude. Indeed, it took some time to convince
myself that there was anything else than suspicion in the
theory ; but the overwhelming light of *ruth at length left
no doubt at all upon the subject.
The arch is a symbol of the womb, not originally designed
tor it, most likely ; but soon adopted and adapted to suit
the purpose. Doors and grottoes or caves, for obvious
reasons, served the same purpose. The exit from the
womb was the path, the door, of life. The door or way
ol lire was so all-important that primitive men saw its emblem
everywhere ; and it was the emblem more than the natural
object that they worshipped.
Churches are built so as to combine both Phallos and
vteis the cross and the boat. Every church has a nave
and the nave signifies boat or ship ; and the ship is not only
hollow but is also shaped ovally like the Yoni. The churches
were not accidents of architecture. They embodied some
great truth or dogma ; and as we see in the combination of
cross and ship, of pillars and arches, columns and flamboyant
windows the grand truth architecturally embodied in a
cathedral or other real church is the great truth that lies at
the foundation of human life-that the race of mankind is
sustained and perpetuated by the union of male and female
those who feel disgust thereat are themselves more
disgusting, while they who worship the mystery render
themselves ridiculous.
Ihe ark of the covenant, amongst the Jews, was but a
Lingam and \om symbol. Boxes cf this nature were
common in pagan worship. The box or ark was the Yoni
or the womb, and the shekinah that dwelt upon it, over-


shadowed by the cherubg, was no doubt the Phallos. _ This
was the mystery. A lamp of seven branches burnt in the
Jewish tabernacle, and so did one before god Priapus. The
dress of the Jewish priests was highly symbolic of this worship ;
they were anointed or oiled as the Phallos always was ; they
Were circumcised, a purely Phallic practice. They must be
sexually perfect, as must also the rams and bulls they offered
in sacrifice ; they placed cakes of shew-bread daily on the
holy table, as other Phallic worshippers did ; and, most
important of all, Jehovah is again and again described as the
opener of the womb the giver of fruitfulness to cattle and
women ! This sets the matter finally at rest, ana shows to
demonstration that the lord god of the old testament was the
game as Bacchus, or Adonis, or Priapus, @r Shiva, or Osiris
eta., etc. There cannot be the least doubt that the opener or
the* womb is the male organ ; and that is Jehovah, the
fountain of fruitfulness. The bible is very explicit upon this
matter. Other proofs will appear as we proceed.
The oval wherever found in ancient art, is a symbol of
the Yoni. Often it is drawn with a child or even a man in it.
The aureole or sacred oval abounds in Christian art ; it
surrounds images and p'ctures of Jesus, of Mary, of saints, of
gods, and angels, souls of the dead, etc. It is even found
with a man in it on the cover of the “ Keligious Tract
Society’s ” publications, although I am sure the founders and
promoters of that society have no idea of its significance.
Were they told, it might mantle their faces with a blush.
Those who wish to see the use christians have made of the
oval may gain information from Didron’s Christian Icono-
graphy.
But the symbols and emblems of the sexual organs, once
used in worship, became sacred ; sacred things always possess
some mysterious virtue, some hidden power, some force
which only faith recognises. The hidden power may be
available to ward off danger, or to cure disease, as well as to
secure some unknown blessing. So the symbols and
emblems became amulets and protectors against evil.
In ancient times to look upon the female part vu
sufficient to cure all evil, and this superstition continued until
quite recently. Apropos of this, a story is told by th«


ancient pagans of Demeter the great goddess. She had lost
er daughter Proserpine who had been stolen away by Pluto
” ri :n '° ,h :, regi " r ‘, s J heiow - S
S" , a the WOrld 1,1 q uest of her, but in vain.
She called at the cottage of Baucis, and she tried every art
to relieve he goddess of her distress, but in vain. She
named disconsolate. Baucis thereupon exhibited her
secret parts to the goddess and this not only threw her into
W S ;i ?t C , Uredher entirel y of her distress. The myth
'Vh: US nd r loUS and not ov ' erdfine w ith
decorum The goddess is the earth, her lost daughter was
the fruitfulness of Nature, which autumn and winter stole
away, leaving the earth disconsolate and despairing But
the womb is the fountain of life, the tomb whence the
resurrected life will issue ; and when the earth goddess sees
the w°mb S he hughs for joy to think that what she had
lost would soon be restored.
so ß the d r enCy ih ender l t r he eigU ° f natnre and
bo the shape, the symbol is substituted. Anything in the
nroffr WIH not only brin S B°od luck but also
p otection to the owner; the amulet is both the fount of life
:hl a, “rjrw wd -, wi, ° has not «■« w
", " W to the door o£ a stable, or driven into the
threshes.d, or fastened even to the walls of a house ? I have
tTd^Tr 6 t lnStanCeS r. inMelbOUrneof fastened
asked /- g /IT®? Lu . t hy a horSP!shoe 1 Who has not
or krm ' off P ° Wer t 0 brin S S ood luck
tha ,' witches dots not lie in the iron nor in the fact
that a horse lias worn the shoe. The article is shaped like
the fountain of life, and the source of every blessing the
womb; and therefore it protects and blesses the owner. °I S it
not strange that the old superstition should have so W
survived the less of its signification?
By an easy transition the ancient worshippers passed from
one extieme to a-ot/er. The fount of life must be all-
poweiful for good-and also for evil. The eye was the
s } mbo of that fount; and itself or its shape or artificial
symbo! could t.ot only protect its owner from evil, but also
fliet pil ufon an enemy. Herein, as I venture to think,
arose the supeust tcon of the “evil-eye,” and its blighting


DOWCT a power that might he exerted to the injury or even
Cd, of the viclim by merely looking upon him. We
have something similar in the case of the old testament god
i , 1 rtpnpd ibe womb but also closed it; not only
offspur" but also inflicted barrenness upon women and
upon cattle. Read the stories of Abraham in Eg^ and at
the court of Abimelech (Genesis XII., 10--0. A •)
Sneakin® of the horseslv e reminds me of another
protector against witches, and that is, one or more pebbles
with °nat holes through them, hung *
the house door. I have sten several of those amulets m y
eari"but not of late years Their meamng rs exactly
the same, as the natural hole wdi show.
In many ancient symbols you find the oval or the circle
with” dot in the middle to indicate the muon of th.
Lingam and Yoni, the male and female or S an ®;. F
All that I have yet said is, in a sense, pr For
the Jew and the Christian the most important part remains ;
I musTnow turn to the bible to show how
book is saturated with this Sex-worship ; and I shall be sur
p r ised if Ido not clear np a few mysteries n that ancient
work which the commentators either ihr °Y
criminal perversity have stumbled over and misrepiesentea
?or many P hundrecG of years. The reader will see if this is
not the most perfect exposure of revelation the woild h s
yet received. 1 I will take the bible an it stands and se
the incidents seriatim, book by look ; although irs we 1 for
the reader to remember that I am not at all l.kely to
exhanst the subject k that lhe bible gods were
k “ j female or else Adam and Eve could not have
been made like them. If the creator be one, as the orthodox
then he must have been I k. B.ahma androgynou
or hermophredite, that is, possessing loth sixs.
much (if any) strain ng, the verb baici, to <-. « » ( '
mi-ht be translated begot or produced sexual). - 1
* i Phallic Iho sci pent is an.
temptation scene is # decidedly gallic, xr l
emblem of the male organ, a very approp .ate one too. I e
tpmnts the woman. The tree of knowledge is the same
organ, knowledge of good and evil. And how appropnate


the phrase ! It is very ungallant, no doubt, to represent the
woman as making the first advances to Adam, and this shows
that the tale was written by priests who have generally
represented the union of the sexes to be extremely sinful
except under their divine blessing ! Indeed, to represent
the fall of man to consist of the first union of the first
human pair, as the tale really does, shows the venom of
priestcraft. The covering up as shameful of the organs
m question after the deed, the degradation of the
“ serpent,” and the curse pronounced upon the woman, all
show the priestly animus which claims to command or to
forbid the pairing of the sexes.
3. One of the. most instructive and unmistakeable
rhall.c incidents in the bible is the story of the Flood.
The reader should at once dismiss all idea of a literal
explanation. The flood never happened, Noah is a myth,
the ark symbolic of the Yoni. Let us redact. Time is a
sweeping,, oase ess flood, drowning everything that has life.
It is universal; its sweep is irresistible, and all living
things gradually succumb to it. Well, will not this flood
sweep the earth clean of human beings, animals, and even
acted by the ark, that is the womb. In it is deposited seed
the seed of all living things; there the seed is warmed and
protected, sheltered from the sweep of the flood • there it
germinates and produces young; and 10, and behold, in
spite of time s pitiless flood, the world’s inhabitants grow
more, numerous ; and all through the Ark, that floats above
the tide, the womb that renews the face of nature and pours
out a new generation for the one that is swept away. The
rainbow has the same signification as the Ark; it images
and symbolises the womb; it is set in the cloud, and its
promise is (not as a mere rainbow, but as the womb
symbolised) that seed time and harvest shall remain as long
as the world endures ! 6
How beautiful this deluge story becomes when thus
understood, and how pathetically it sets forth the grand
lough common truth that “ one generation passeth away,
a.uj behold another comelh.” Of course the details about
sin, giants, sous and daughters of gpd and man, Noah and


his fiamily, are all “ machinery ” and padding elaborated so
as to hide the truth from all except the initiated and
the studious And here it should be especially impressed
upon the reader, that ancient re’igious books were really not
written to enlighten people but to deceive, and the priests
have gained enormously more by the fr'se lights they have
hung out, the pretended revelations they have given,
than they could have won by keeping silenc-\ By refusing
to meet the popular demand for information, they might
have wrecked their order ; by the pretence of revelation
they have kept the reality to themselves and at the same
time satisfied their dupes by a counterfeit.
4. Abram or Abraham is the strong father, the vigorous
begetter, whose offspring are a multitude like the sand of the
sea. This cannot be said of any one man, but it is true of
the Phallos, of Priapus or of the generalised organ which
begets all living things. Such was Abraham, father of the
faithful, personified and the hero of romance ; but still his
name shows the meaning of the myth. His circumcision
confirms that view. And—here let me explain. Every one
knows that the end of a little boy’s member is covered with
wrinkly folds of skin, the prepuce, or according to the bible,
“ the foreskin.” When a Jewish boy is eight days old, a
golden pin is run slanting through this skin, and the upper
portion is cut off by drawing a knife along the back of the pin
slanting downwards and forwards. This makes a triangularcut
in the folds and leaves the glans, or head of the penis, exposed.
The wound heals, but the skin never grows again.* No doubt
circumcision was both a religious rite and a caste mark.
There can be no doubt the severed skin was really a sacrifice
to Priapus or Jehovah ; and at the same time a sort of
freemasonary was established amongst those who were thus
mutilated. But the reflection remains that members of such
a caste could never recognise each other without such an
*1 am told by Jews that this description of the operation is not
correct. I read it in Jahn’s Biblical Antiquities , I think, 25 years
ago. lam now told that the foreskin is gathered up, held by an
instrument, while the scurf skin is cut away, and then the real skin
is caught in the fingers, torn and folded back, the operator snoring
the blood, *


exposure as decency forbids. Of course, if r,:ij one finds
possible to believe that any supernatural being, any god, would
make people as they are, and then order them to be mutilated
as described, it w >uld be useless to argue the case with him.
There is an incident in the “ life ” of Abraham very
significant in this connection. In Genesis xxiv, Abraham
extorts an oath from his steward, and bids him put his “ hand
under his thigh !” The steward does so, and thus swears.
“Under the thigh” is a euphemism for “upon the male
organ.” And this mode of swearing must have been
anciently very common, for the Romans called the two balls of
the privates testiculi , or little witnesses, and we still retain the
name, testicles. There can be no doubt here. Those
amongst whom such oaths arose and were practised must
have been phallic worshippers, and amongst the rest were the
bible writeis.
5. Jacob’s case must not be omitted. After nis ladder-
dream “ he took the stone lie had slept upon and set it up for
a pillar and poured oil on the top of it.” (Genesis XXVIIT,
19.) This is precisely what the pagans did to the statue of
Hermes or Mercury by the road side—they anointed it with
oil So they did to pillars, or Baitulia or Bethels, god
•tones. Arnobius, a heathen convert to Christianity
(About A. L). 300) says, “Whenever I espied an anointed
stone, and one bedaubed witlx olive-oil, as if some person
resided in it, I worshipped it,” &c. There can be no doubt,
I fancy, that the oiling or anointing of such stones really
symbolised the male seed for which the organ is remarkable.
And I assume without being able to prove that the
“ anointing ” so often mentioned in the bible as applied to
priests and kings had none but a phallic significance. And
what shall we say of Messiah 1 He is plainly the Phallos ;
the anointed one, the Christ! There seems no room for
doubc upon this point. We know as well as we can know
any speculative or historical negative, that Jesus did not
literally live and act as the new testament describes. Only
custom or childish credulity can regard his “ history ” as
real. We must therefore look for some other meaning. It
will be as well to postpone the full consideration of the
Messiah till a later step and then deal with it in detail,


It is evident by the way that Jacob’s worship of th«
pillar was orthodox at the time Genesis was written, for
god sends him back to that pillar to perform his vow. (See
Gen. XXXV.) And even now again he sets up a pillar of
stone and pours a drink offering upon it and also oil. (r.
14). This is unmistakeable phallic worship in honor of
Israel’s God.
6. Jacob’s frick to get parti-coloured cattle (Gen. XXX,
37-43) was evidently a phallic act of superstition. And
Jacob’s rod, so-called, used by conjurors and water-finders,
is nothing else than a phallic symbol.
7. The rod of Moses which desolated Egypt, divided the
sea, drew water from the rock, was the Phallos, as i's
changing itself into a serpent shows. So was the staff of
Aaron that budded and bore almonds. Almonds are of t lie
yoni shape and symbolical. The serpent on a pole or
ftauro-s, setup by Moses was a Phallos, Mercury’s Cadiicpus,
or rod with the serpents twining round it. The sight of
this was of equal efficacy with what Baucis showed
Demeter—at was the emblem both of life and of health.
8. The ark was captured by the Philistines, and it pro-
duced the most tremendous results among them. It gave
them the secret disease, and they renounced it. It was sent
back to Israel, and at Beth Shemesh it destroyed
over 50,000 people (!) who dared to look at it ; it killed
Uzzah who piously tried to steady it on the cart, and when
it was brought to Zion, David danced naked before it, as was
the custom in those days—his only dress b |j ing an ephod, a
symbolic sexual garment. And this stamps the orthodox
lsraelitish religion as phallic worship.
9. This is confirmed by the conduct of Solomon who
erected two pillars, Jachin and Boaz (2 Chronicles, 111, 17)
before his temple, and those were Pliall c symbols, as are
the spires and crosses of churches now. But we have the
clearest evidence that the Jewish and Christian i\ ligion
was and is phallic worship.
Adonis is unquestionably a phallic god, as well as a
sun-god. Adonis is the same with Osiris, with Dionysus,


by Ezekiel, but we must remember that the bible is by no
means uniform in its worship and religion. It probably
embraces almost every species of religion ever known, and
changes of custom are plentiful enough in its pages.
Ezekiel saw the women weeping for Tam muz or Adonis, at
the door of the temple. Whatever Ezekiel may have felt
about it, this was evidently the established worship of
Judah at that time, and nad always been. The rods of
Moses and Aaron already mentioned, the practices of the
patriarchs, the serpent in the wilderness, the ark and
Solomon’s two pillars, all show that. The reformers in
process of time knocked off the grosser features of the
worship, but all its essential elements remained, and
continue up to the present day.
I have said that Adonis was the solar god, the phallic
god. But Adonis was the god of the Jews. Adon, or
Adoni, or Adonai is frequently applied to the Jewish god.
It was the Phoenician god, and Adonis is but the Greek form
of it. In Joshua lIT, we find reference to “ the ark of the
covenant of Adon (lord) of the whole earth ” {verse II), and
“ the ark of Jehovah Adon of all the earth {v. 13). There can
be no doubt here. Jehovah and Adon are the same god.
There is a curious mingling up of divine nmnes in Malachi
111, 1. “And Adon, whom ye seek, shalf suddenly come
to his temple, even the messenger of the co\enant, whom ye
delight in : behold, he shall come, saith Jehovah Sabaoth.”
This angel or messenger is the fire-god, sitting and purifying
by fire. He is the delightful one, the bright sun that
dispels darkness and winter and creates the world anew ;he
is the sun of power or strength rising with “ healing in his
wings ” (Mai. IY. 2). The winged sun is quite common in
Egyptian sculptures, and here is a reference to it This
angel or messenger is generally understood to be Jesus, and
rightly so. And Adon ha Berith , Adon of the covenant, is
the Baal-Berith or covenant Baal (Judges, YIII, 33. IX.
4). It was only the name the reformers of Israel and
Judah changed; religious quarrels have all been over
names not realities—except when wealth or power has been
the bone of contention. Baal was unquestionably the


phall 'c god. And Baal and Adon and Jehovah are but three
names for one god.
THE LOGOS.
10. In former days nothing gave me greater pleasure than
to brood over and study the logos doctrine of the gospel
according to John. Perhaps no young divinity student
ever spent more time or thought over that than I did ; the
thing fascinated me. I often preached on it and expounded
it in the simplest language possible ; and although a chapter
from a book of Logic could not have been more dry, the people
used to listen with profound attention. I discovered, after
studying it for years, that I knew nothing about it. In
fact, none are so ignorant of the bible as those who under-
take to expound it in the pulpit. It is marvellous how
shallow pulpit talk generally is, and how narrow is the
track along which the ordinary preacher creeps. It is
equally marvellous what a summer of light has for me been
shed upon the bible within the past ten or twelve years.
And in that light let us see if we may not understand the
real meaning of the Logos.
John’s gospel says “ In the beginning was the word, and
the word was with god, and the word was god.” The Greek
term there translated word is logos. Whether logos is
rightly translated word does not now matter. I have my
doubts as to whether it is a Greek term at all—whether it
is not a term borrowed from an older language, and
accidentally resembling logos (word), has been mistaken for
that. Be that as it may, we must try to find out the sense
of the term. Most people hold that Logos, Word and
Christ are all one. Possibly. But how shall we under-
stand it ? The Word was in the beginning, was with god,
and was god. orthodox say, god the father, and god the
son are one and the same god ; two persons, but one god.
There may be more sense in that than at first sight appears ;
and if I can show a favor to the orthodox by exhibiting
wisdom where they show only folly and confusion, they
should not hate me, should they 1
(1). The Ophites or serpent-worshippers, a sect of early
Christians, held the Logos to have been the serpent which
tempted Eve, and also the serpent rod of Moses, the serpent


lifted up in the wilderness, and also the same with DraCd_
the northern astronc mical constellation. And time In r< tics
were quite correct They evidently held an older creed
than that which 1» came afterwards known as orthodoxy.
They were not heieticß—the real heretics are the ortl odox
themselves, who put false, strained and absurd meanings
upon religious language, and thus wrest the scripture to their
own hurt.
(2) The Naassenians, another set of heretics so-calkd used
to teach that there is a “ happy nature, concealed yet
manifesting itself, the kingdom of heaven to be sought for
within a man ” (See Luke, xvii, 21). And respecting this
“ happy nature” they quote a passage from the very ancient
Gospel of Thomas, which, like many quotations from other
sources by the “fathers,” is not in the Gospel of Thomas as
now extant. The text is this :—“ He who seeks me will
find me in childien from seven years old; for there
concealed, I shall in the fourteenth age be made manifest.”
Hippocrates had taught the same docrine partly when he
said, “ A child < f seven is half a father.” Children of 14
arrive at puberty, or attain the power of becoming parents ;
and this hidden yet manifested power is. say the
Naasenians, the meltable and mystical Logos or Word or
Christ.
'I his seems a most rational explanation. The kingdom of
heaven is unquestionably the rule of the spring and summer
sun. He is the great Male, the principle of reproduction,
that gives life to his spouse the earth, that transfuses through
nature that mysterious power of germination and growth ;
that rouses animals by the power of love, and so fills ti e
earth with “ newness of life.” This no doubt is the kingdom
ot heaven, the Log< s or Word, with god, god himself, the
begetter or maker or parent (both parents often, as we shall
see) of all that exists. >
(3) Those ancient Christians also identified the Logos or
Jesus with Mercury, god’s interpreter and messenger, ihe
raiser of the dead and creator and conductor of souls. Both
Justin Martyr and Tertullian go very near to identifying
the two—as everyone must who knows how to use the
Phallic key to unlock the ancient mysteries. Another


slight, though extremely significant point of identity ia
this : Mercury was a noted thief, the Master Thief, who
did things so slyly that nobody ever saw him till it was too
late. Several texts of scripture assure us Christ shall come
as a thief. “ The day of the lord so cometh as a thief in the
night ”(1 Thess. v, 2). The same is asserted in 2 Peter,
111, 10. Jesus speaks for himself in Rev. 111, 3. “ I will
come on thee as a thief.” Again, xvi., 15, “ Behold, I come
as a thief.” This language applied to Christ by a
Freethinker would constitute an act of rank blasphemy ;
and I suppose I am guilty of that awful crime insomuch
as I have quoted what he says of himself. But, anyway, if
Mercury was the boss thief for taking in a few, what must
Jesus be to deceive the whole world, as we are assured he
will do, by stealing upon them like a thief, and robbing
them of life and all they possess 1
Jesus is not only Mercury, he is also Priapus, and possibly
Yenus into the bargain. We shall see. Jesus is generally
called the “ saviour of the world.” Well, that is the title of
Priapus, as shown by an ancient gem. And what more
appropriate title could be given this god ? As the ark or
womb preserves the seed of each new generation, so does the
Phallos or male organ produce and impart the precious
seed to the ark. Thus the world is saved from destruction
and the races of animals continued. It may at first appear
disgusting to view things in this light, but it is only
prejudice that begets the disgust. The undeniable fact
still remains ; .and one fact in nature is or may be as sacred
as another.
11. The cross has already been referred to and exp’ained.
In Egypt and other lands from times the most remote the
cross v\as regarded as the tree of life, the healer, the great
physician, the key of the tomb, the power and instrument
of resurrect on ! How fond and vain the hope that dead
people will rise to life again ! But look at the resurrection
as the ancients regarded it, and all becomes plain and
feasible. 1. It is not the dead who will rise, but new
beings. One generation passes away and another comes.
The new generation is the progeny ot the Lingam and Yoni.
This is the only resurrection. 2. In most great creels of


the ancient world metempsychosis or transmigration played
an important part. The individual who lives to-day, lived in
former days, his births and deaths have been innumerable,
and must be so in future. He dies in one form, he rises in
some other. .He is “changed he puts off the “ old man,”
he puts on the new, and this continues till he is absorbed
into the great sun, the fount of life, or the sun-spiritual and
mystical, the etherialised sun, whose representative and
outward symbol is the sun that we daily see. The
resurrection, then, is but the reproduction of what is and
has been, the renewal, the re-generation of all things, the
Pangenesis, the consummation of all things, the flux of
matter and force, and the marvellous repetition of their
phenomena.
12. And now let us look at this once more. It is not any
particular man’s organ that the ancients worshipped, nor
that of any particular woman. The Lingam and Yoni
worshipped were and are the generalised abstract organs
of nature. Just as we say the horse, the man or man,
meaning the horse-kind, the man-kind ; as we say the
woman, meaning the woman sex; as we say the hand or
the head, signifying no particular hand ©r head ; as we
speak ©f parentage, or the father, the son, the mother, the
daughter, the parent, the child, and use a host of similar
expressions, not to set forth individual things, but as
abstract words or phrases to denote the general run of
those things and relations, so Phallos and Kteis, Lingam and
Yoni, are general and abstract terms to set forth the great
facts of reproduction.
The sun was regarded as the great Male, and the earth
his wife The sun was born yearly, in or just after the
depth of winter ; he passed through childhood and youth,
and at spring-time, that is, resurrection-time, he filled the
earth with life and beauty—all was changed ; the old came
back again in the new. The grass and leaves and flowers
and fruits all returned, old yet new. And the animals
experienced the same resurrection. There you see in each
generation the looks and traits of the old ; the features and
characters you have been long familiar with, that you saw
die 1 Why, here they are again 1 Young and vigorous as


when you firstknew them. They have been tended l ;it >8
tee off sou! back in a new body ; .to «$
through some mysleru.ua F oce f ’ d Tllia was bot)l ,b„
thp womb and been bmn again. . . ,
St a?
rffir ctr'rct
knew no persecution, until Christianity rose as ate -y
“Lefutl^kT g l t . tl ‘S7stn r th:ti:Torn''on e DeC F en ; l ; er
rs™e rst
“hat revives. «I and my Ito
saviour everlasting father/’ Thosebible
Phallic-creed 6 toother light they are Jl™
tbp Ph alios the opener of the womb, which was regarded as
£ grav“deras Purgatory, where dead souls urn u go
the process o£ preparation for the new We. n a ]>te
. And now a wore upon the crn thonlg is but
and most glorious, and the cross was its symbol. The suns
head and rays attached to the cress show its meaning. The
five marks or wounds are but the Tom sym os, e .gore
of the female organ roughly drawn The crucifix I s°y
uhastly now. but formerly pleasant, is the emllim of
the resurrection. It is a dead man upon a cross, upon the
“■ AAri-


And lorn will produce a substitute, k new man i'ri
the room of the dead. The piercing of the side
with the spear and the resultant water and blood
mixture can have but one meaning, the rupture of the
hymen and the mingled flow. Jesus was both the male and
female united in one, the androgynous deity. He bears the
marks of both sexes, as does Shiva, as did Venus, Bacchus
and other gods. His disciples were to be eunuchs, deprived
that is, of their testicles, of their power to be fathers, and
thus rendered as much like women as possible. f J he celibate
priests of Rome are but sham-eunuchs who impose upon
t a j ff® by P rofessin S a chastity they do not observe.
And Mary the mother of god—who is Mary f She is the
womb, the female element symbolised as a woman. Not
any particular womb ; but the womb in genera], the everlast-
ing female. This explains how she is ever mother, ever
wife, ever betrothed and ever virgin. Gmeration after
generation the womb is repeated, renewed, is in all possible
states, virginity, matrimony, gestation, motherhood.
The universal female is called Pallas (that is Phallos)
D.ana, Venus, Sacti, Cybele, Isis, Mary. They are all
the same. Isis, though wife and mother, could boast, “No
man hath lifted my veil,” that is, that no male Lad had
intercourse with her. That was true and not true, in the
sense explained. Women are born, grow to maturity
perform their natural functions, decay and die ; but the
woman ever remains, fresh and young, still virgin, as long as
the race remains. Mary is Noah’s Ark, the crescent Moon,
the rainbow, the ark of the covenant, the fruitful earth
Pandora’s box, the teeming source of all evil, and yet the
fount of Hope.
The Jewish temple, like those of other nations, had its
secret chamber, its holy of holies.. Bef re this the
mystic veil, which none but the priest dared lift, and that
but once a year. When Jesus died, says the author of
liebrews, he entered within the veil, passed through the
heavens; and a gospel writer says that at that very crisis
when Jesus expired, the veil of the temple was rent in twain
from the top to the bottom. What is this but the rupture
Of the hymen, the membrane that guards the way to the


womb in the virgin 1 This is ruptured m the first sexual
congress when the virgin becomes a w man ; it is luptmeu
by the strong Phallos of the male, god the father, god the
son the opener of the womb But he expires or droops and
lost s for a time his strength in the operation, m undergoing
his “passion”—although quite sure to rise again at no
distant date. The tale regarded literally is stamped with
absurdity. Jesus did not live and die as describe d, n
woven veil of a temple was torn as he died ; no saints rose
from the grave in honor of the deed ; no earthquake took
place ; no & darkening of the Sun. AH those expressions are
but symbolical of the Sun’s action upon the earth ; and the
drama represents it under the figure or allegory of a man
and woman in the spasms and blissful agony of a sexu
holy ghost—wliat is that 1 Holy wind—that
subtle force that fructifies the earth and makes the gnus
and herbs to sprout and grow, that fills a 1 animals «it lithe
sexual desire ; that “dove-like, sat brooding over the dark
abyss, >.nd made it pregnant” ; that came upon Mary ; and
descended upon the disciples at Pentecost in tongues or
Ph The 1 of theology, religion, revelation and
worship stand before us as a consistent whole when viewed
in the light of Sex-worship. This is the key to the great
“ mystery of godliness ; god manifested in flesh, exhibit-
ing his-power in the production of young. He who has
this key may unlock every religious dogma or practice.
Without this the world must remain m darkness, respect-
ing religion, as dense as that whhk enshrouds the priests
themselves.


APPENDIX.
My task is done. I have given a brief exposition of Sex-
worship and its bearing upon Christianity. Now the reader
understands the mysteries of the faith better than those do
who preach it. You now see the meaning of the trinity in
unity, the eternal father, the fatherhood of god and the god-
head of eternal fatherhood ; you see the meaning of the son
and the holy ghost, and perceive how all these may be one,
the reproductive energy of nature, the parent and child, the
cause and effect. The meaning of the virgin and her son is
clear, and so is that of the resurrection. The “ Branch”
mentioned by Zechariah is Jesus the Phallos ; the “ desire of
all nations,” the fascinum, as the Romans called the male
organ. This worship was universal and still continues wide-
spread. It has resulted in wholesale debauchery of the
grossest kinds, and also in total abstinence from sexual
intercourse, m one case nations have worshipped the Sex-
gods by wholesale sexual indulgence ; in others, the devotees
have sacrificed the dearest parts of their nature to those
deities. The priests and people of Israel sacrificed their fore-
skin, as already explained ; the Gralli, or priests of Cybele,
sacrificed their test.oies to their goddess, as Jesus commanded
all who were able to sacrifice theirs to him (Matt, xix, 10-12.)
The Romish priests effect a compromise, they keep their
organs intact, but pretend not to use them. Let those believe
it who can and who do not know their history.
One more point may be mentioned, and that is, that the
word used fur saint in the Hebrew bible also signifies &
prostitute (and even much worse), male or female. And it
shows that there was a t me when phallic worship in its very
worst forms was the orthodox practice in Israel. Although
infiy afterwards somewhat reformed their religion, they left
quite enough to show its real nature.
•Serpent warship has been mentioned. I may aJJ


this worship too has been universal. And there can be no
doubt it is essentially phallic. As before said, the serpent is
an emblem of the male organ. The charmers all the world
over knew how to handle the serpent so as to straighten it
out like the erect Phallos. The serpent with its tail in its
mouth is the well-known emblem of immortality (not eter-
nity, as usually said), because it symbolises the union of male
and female, which renders the race, if not the individual, im-
mortal.
After reading the story of the religious snake dances per-
formed by the Moquis in Arizona ( see “ The Snake Dance of
the Moquis , fyc., by John G. Bourke , 1884 ), I have come to
the conclusion that we have all been upon the wrong scent
respecting the promise that Jesus made to his disciples, viz.,
that they should “ take up serpents ” (Mark xvi, 17). I had
always supposed it meant that they should lift them to kill
them. Probably it means snake-charming that they
should lift them with impunity as part of their religious
practices.
There is not much in this either way, although it is worthy
of note. There is much deeper significance in a biblical
story I forgot to insert in its proper place. Moses com-
mands the Israelites to “ kill every male among the little
ones, and kill every woman that hath known man by lying
with him. But all the women children that have not known
man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves.” I need
not point out here the rude and indecent examination those
girls must have undergone to decide whether they were to live
or die. But the main proof lies in this, 32,000 girls were
thus saved for the saints, and the lord’s tribute of those were
thirty-two (Numbers xxxi). This confirms the view that
Jehovah, Jao, Baal, Moloch—all one and the same—was the
phallic god. There can be no doubt at all that all religions
which have vestal virgins, nuns, and other women exclu-
sively devoted to religious acts, are phallic. It is this that
gives the exaggerated value that divines set upon chas-
tity. Chastity, carried to extreme, is unnatural, and could
not have been suggested by ideas of purity. But the virgins
and nuns are devoted to the Phallos, the male god ; they
are his mistresses or concubines ; and, of course, usually fall


an easy prey to the priest, who after all is the veritable phallic
god of most religions.
Whoever will examine the prayers and hymns, the Catho-
hcs address to Mary, will soon perceive that they are but
•11 / y Veiled IOVe so . nnets and ad( Jresses. And the same
will hold good respecting the hymns and addresses the nuns
to Jesus. The whole is phallic worship. And
were I sufficiently familiar with millinery terms, I would show
that the dress of the priests, both Romish and English is
highly symbolic of the same things. Their main dresses
when “got up” for their vicious theatricals, are all designed
to symbolise, by their shape and cut, either the male or female
organ The same is true of the ways in which the priests
hold their lingers and thumbs in “ blessing” the people—they
make the shape of the male and the female vessels.
But I must stay my hand. The subj ct is extensive
enough for a large book of several volumes ; and I must not
attempt to expound it further at prtsent.
Let those who disagree with this exposure of Christianity
put something better in its place.


JMOTES AND ADDITIONS.
It is now well nigh four years since this pamphlet was
published ; and I have thought a few fragmentary additions
might be made to the present edition.
Even Christian writers make some concessions to the views
expressed in the pamphlet. The Rev. John P. Lundy,
in Monumental Christianity, London 1889, speaks thus of a
crescent-shaped Sidonian galley. The crescent is simply the
image of the young moon, regarded by all Oriental nations as
the universal mother, and therefore it is a symbol of the
female attribute of fecundity. It is the yoni of the Hindus,
as we have seen ; the symbol of the corrupt Mohammedan
power, of Isis and Juno ; and of the Virgin Mary, who in her
assumption, is sometimes seen with the crescent moon under
her feet, like Juno. The ship of Isis was crescent-shaped,
having the ark or shrine of god in the middle ....
and it was customary to carry it in solemn processions, as a
sacred symbol of preservation .... Sometimes the
ark was represented in the shape of a huge fish, or the pre-
server, and called Cetus .... We learn from Spencer,
&c that not only the Egyptians, but also the
Greeks and Romans had their cistae or sacred boxes, in which
precious images of the gods, or other mysterious symbols
were kept, as significant of life and its preservation. The
cist a mystica of the Bacchic rites contained the most direct
allusion to the great Progenitor of mankind ; when it was not
the god himself, it was the virile part of him ; but sometimes
a basket of early fruit or of seed-corn was substituted. This
basket of wicker work, as a memorial of the ark of Noah, or of


Moses, thus containing seed, is significant of the preservation
of vegetable life ; and the box containing the.phallus would be
equally significant of the preservation of human life . . .
In one of the ancient Pagan representations of the Baccha-
nalia, we see two of these wicker baskets with the lids partly
open and a serpent within each one of them ; and a huge
phallus is carried on the shoulder of one of the priests, while
a nude woman is standing directly over one of the
baskets.
. . . . Referring to a coin showing a dolphin, a box
and a tree, the dolphin having a naked man upon it, Lundy
says,, there is no mistaking the meaning here. This mystic
tree is the great generator of life ; the box is the womb of
nature; and the dolphin is the preserver and Saviour (pp.
307-9-)
Lundy is wrong. The dolphin is euphemistic for woman,
and the man above is in the very act of copulation.
Referring to antiquities brought from Cyprus lately, Mr.
Lundy speaks of the phallic cross, as seen on the breast of
the Egyptian Pan ; and to those old Pagans the phallic
emblems and the cross-like figures which they placed in the
tombs of . their beloved dead, had the signification of the
power which would restore their life (page 324). On the next
page he presents a cut showing “ phallic emblems ” on a
Christian tomb. He speaks of conical stones sometimes still
placed at the entrance to our grave-yards, and says, “phallic
emblems have been found in some of the ancient Christian
cemeteries.”
. All. this is very acceptable, coming as it does from a
Christian advocate. It tends to show that I have not strained
my facts or misrepresented them in my pamphlet.
Even so far back as 1816 Dr. George Stanley Faber fully
admits the ancient and almost universal prevalence of phallic
worship, in Syria, Egypt, Palestine, Britain, Ireland, India,
&c.
“The phallic superstition is founded essentially on the


family idea. Capt. R. Burton recognised this truth, when he
asserted that ‘ amongst all barbarians whose primal want is
progeny, we observe a greater or less development of the
phallic worship.’ This view, however, is imperfect. There
must have been something more than a mere desire for pro-
geny to lead primitive man to view the generative process
with the peculiar feelings embodied in the superstition. We
are in fact, here taken to the root of all religions—awe at the
mysterious and unknown .... There is nothing more
mysterious than the phenomena of generation, and nothing
more important than the final result of the generative act.
Reflection on this result would naturally cause that which
led to it to be invested with a certain degree of superstitious
significance. The feeling engendered would have a double
object, as it had a double origin—wonder at the phenomenon
itself sa d a perception of the value of its consequences. The
former, which is the most simple, would lead to a veneration
for the organs, whose operation conduced to the phenomena,
hence the superstitious practices connected with the phallus
and the yoni among primitive people. In this, moreover, we
have the explanation of numerous curious facts observed
among Eastern nations. Such is the respect shown by
women for the generative organs of derwishes and fakirs.”
(Serpent Worship,by Staniland Wake, London 1888, pp, 9-10).
This author refers the wedding-ring to phallic worship. Cir-
cumcision, too, of course. He refers this barbarous practice to
an older one, when captives were emasculated. No doubt
the excised testicles were sacrificed to the phallic god, and so
of course circumcision was performed in honor of the same
god. There cannot be a doubt that Jehovah was the phallic
god, considering that he was Adonis, received the worship
offered in circumcision, and is called the womb-opener.
Wake regards the serpent as symbolising life present and im-
mortal, and quotes an author thus :—“ The snake is the sym-
bol of the Phallus.” “ The Sun, the invigorating power of
nature, has ever, I believe, been considered to represent the
same idea, not necessarily obscene, but the great mystery of
nature, the life transmitted from generation to generation


. . . . life out of death, life everlasting” (pp. 27-28).
Mr. Wake thinks Hermes or Mercury the same god with
Priapus. If so, this is another evidence that Jesus is the
Phallic god, for Mercury and Jesus were undoubtedly one.
There is one note i feel bound to pen, and that is this :
We see in two branches of the Christian church the two
great branches of Sex-worship embodied as a foremost prin-
ciple. The Catholics have made Mary, that is, the womb
or the Yoni, their chief deity; they worship the female side
of Nature. The Unitarians, at the opposite pole of Christian
sentiment, worship Priapus, the Phallus, or the Lingam.
Nothing is more common with the Unitarians than the
“ Fatherhood of god,” or the “ Divine Fatherhood.” Here
we find them worshipping the imaginary god who is supposed
to beget all things, the Phallus, in fact.
In reality, the Unitarians and the Catholics worship the
two sex-principles. Destroy or ignore the difference of sex
amongst animals, exclude all thought of the sex organs, and
the worship of the Mother by the Catholics, the Father by
the Unitarians, loses all its significance—you take away from
them all the point, the sense, the rationality of their worship,
you leave them nothing but absolutely senseless and inex-
plicable dreams. The other sects are quite as bad in their
degree; they are all phallic-worshippers; or worshippers
respectively of the bull and of the cow, the male and
female.
Some will be sure to contend that the worship has at least
become purified and etherialised as seen amongst Catholics
and Unitarians. That may be doubted. The Catholics are
at least as gross in their worship as it is possible for civilised
men to be. Some of their female saints have declared that
they have been copulated with Christ; and can we doubt
that the males think the same of Mary ? Nothing more gross
could be conceived amongst people of any pretence to decency
than the marriage ceremony by which girls are made nuns or
brides of Christ. And it cannot be pretended that the wor-
ship of Mary the Yoni is any more modpst.


Here are a ew details. The girls are presented to the priest,
who quest v ns each apart by herself as to whether she has
preserved her carnal integrity: he espouses them to Christ
(say, he is the bawd or procurer for Christ alias the
priests!).
“ Will you persevere in your purpose of holy virginity ? ”
inquires the priest.
“ We will,” reply the girls.
“ Dost thou,” says he to each separately, “ promise ever to
keep thy virginity ? ”
‘* I do,” says she.
The fellow prays—“ Let them .... keep, alike
with undefiled body and mind, that which is given to be
mystically understood by it ... . ready ....
. . . . to enter .... into the nuptials of everlast-
ing felicity.”
There is a rhapsody in praise of virginity, that offering to
god, and the struggles of the girls are eulogised by which
they have won victories “over the enticements and stimulants
of the flesh!” God is praised for giving the heroic girls
victory over the flesh, custom, the stimulants of their time of
life ! He gives them fortitude in the terrible struggle against
the law of nature, it seems.
God is also thanked that out of the fountain of his bounti-
fumess there should exist souls so sublime, as to loathe the
sexual junction of a man and woman, and earnestly desire the
sacrament of marriage, and yet not imitate what is done in
the marriage state, but love what is denoted thereby.
Blessed virginity .... rivals *• the integrity of angels
and has devoted herself to the bridal chamber and the bed
of him who is the spouse of perpetual virginity ! ” Each girl
says she will admit no lover but Christ. Then the priest
chants to them—“ Come, my beloved, to be wedded.” He
tells them they must preserve their virginity untouched,
undefiled, and keep patience. They surely need patience,
wedded as they are to a husband with so many millions of


wives ! The priest rolls those luscious, amorous words upon
his tongue, and again bids them continue uncorrupted, un-
violated, unstained . . . . “so that when about to enter
the bedchamber of your spouse .... he may discover
in you nothing noisome, nothing filthy, nothing hidden,” for
Jesus and the priests are awfully particular, evidently. (I
have selected these items from Romish Offices , &c., by rev.
M. W. Foy ; London, 1856.)
Do what they will, religious people cannot escape the sex
worship. Even in renouncing the pleasures of sexual inter-
course, they take leave in language that shows the subject
reigns in their imaginations. They renounce a god and
goddess, that take the most tremendous vengeance—in social,
secret crimes and vices, and in a maddened imagination.
Nature is safe to follow ; religion the reverse.
As for Unitarianism, it seems to have refined away its part
of the old phallic worship until nothing but an empty name
is left. God the bachelor is their father ! but they never think
themselves illegitimate on that account. The ancient wor-
shippers had at least the decency to marry their deities before
permitting them f.o copulate ; the modern Christians of most
sects seem to rfjoice in a great bachelor father ; and do not
seem to feel the necessity for getting him decently married,
or for their own legitimisation ! This shows the blinding
effects of ancient ideas preserved as sacred ones merely
because ancient.
Priapus, we have saidj was the god of increase, of fruitful-
ness, of fruitfulness in fend, in cattle, sheep, and in human
beings. Eve obtained her first-born from the lord ; Sarah,
Hannah and Elizabeth obtained children from the same
quarter after long seasons of barrenness. And here we find
Priapus and Jehovah to be one and the same god. The
lord could smite with barrenness or make the barren fruitful.
So great was his power that he could give Sarah a son in ex-
treme old age and when her husband too had become impotent
(Gen. xviii., 12; Rom. iv. 18,19). Nothing can be more plainly
taught than tlr-t Priapus, Phallus or Jehovah can produce
children undeE any circumstances* and can refuse them,


no matter how favorable the conditions may appear to be.
John the Baptizer said god could “ even of these stones raise
up children unto Abraham.”
Now as the bible god gave increase, or withheld it, to
womqjti, to animals, to fields ; as he was essentially the god
of multiplication and fruitfulness, there can be no question as
to who or as to what god he really was. Jehovah was god
the Father in the strict sense of the word. He was Priapus
or Phallus.
And the god of increase was also the god of the resurrec-
tion, as Osiris, Adonis and others. The chief attribute of
Jesus is, perhaps, that of resurrecting power. He, like
Priapus, is the Saviour ; and the resurrection and the life.
And this confirms what I have advanceed in the body of the
pamphlet, namely, that Jesus is the Phallus.
I do not know that Christianity is any worse for being Sex-
Worship ; nor is it any worse for being purely human instead
of “ heavenly and divine.” The fact that Jesus forbad sexu-
al indulgence is no proof that he was not the Phallus, for Phal-
lic worship has ever taken two opposite sides, the side of
wholesale licentiousness, and the side of absolute self-denial.
And strange as it may appear, both parties were fully per-
suaded that they were devoting themselves to their god.
When the ancient votaries of Venus and of Priapus gave
themselves up to unrestrained and shameless indulgence they
supposed they were doing honor to the Lingam and Yoni,
the Male and Female facts of Nature. And when people of
an ascetic turn preserved their chastity intact they reserved
the use of their members for the god and goddess whose ser-
vants they were. Hence both wholsale and unlimited in-
dulgence, on the one hand, and absolute abstinence, on theother
hand, have been in all ages, both of Paganism and Chris-
tianity, regarded as the height or perfection of piety or of
holiness. The love of the deities, or godliness, prompted both
the one and the other.
A priest of Cybele, the Syrian goddess, would cut off his pri-
vate member as part of the public worship, having pre-


viously worked himself up to a pit us fury and stripped him-
self naked. With his amputated member in Ins hand, a
young priest, after doing the oe<.d, would run round the
city, naked as he was, and drop the handful in any house he
chose. And the occupants would give him a complete suit
of woman’s apparel, ornaments and all.
Burton says Every street in Whydah, the capital of Da-
homy, is adorned with images of Priapus. Be says he
might have collected a donkey load of Phalli. The Phallus
is regularly anointed with palm oil (as Jacob’s Phallic stone-
pillow was); and this oil drips into a vessel below; and the
would-be mother prays to it to be made fruitful. There are also
female gods set up, and their sex-parts are as pominent mo-
portionately as those of Priapus, and are worshipped pretty
much the same.
To be born again is to pass the second time through the
yoni or mouth of the womb (vagina); or one may pass
through something having its shape, such as a hole in a stone,
artificial or natural, or through the split stem of a tree. In
each case anc'ent superstition declared great good was ob-
tained, the person was thus regenerated. Not long since, in
England itself, sickly children were treated in this way for
a cure. Stupid as the practice may be, it is a survival of
that worship which world-over regarded the womb as the
fountain of all blessings, life, health, recovery from sickness,
resurrection from the dead.
A Brahmin that had, as was supposed, polluted himself
by contact with foreigners, was compelled to submit to
be dragged through an image of the Yoni, and thus be born
again.
Respecting the act of Abraham’s steward in swearing
with his hand on his master’s penis, it may be mentioned
that the Arabs still swear their most solemn oaths with their
hands on their own privates. An Egyptian, arrested as a
spy, by the French in Egypt, about ioo years ago, finding
no other oath would avaii, uncovered himself, caught hold of
his private part, and swore he was no spy. In ancient
Wales a woman who expected to be believed, when she


charged a man with forcibly violating her, was required to
place her right hand upon the relics of the saints and
grasp the private member of the man with the other, and thus
swear to his identity.
Roman brides piously seated themselves upon the mem-
ber of Priapus, in hopes of children, as Hindoo women
do now upon the Lingam. Others say it was intended to be
an offering of the first familiarity to the god, thus placing
him before their husbands. Is not this a part of the ancient
custom, once probably world-wide, for priest, or lord or
king to have the flower of every newly married woman ?
In Mexico and Central America the two organs were wor-
shipped in union, as in India &c.
Priapus, in. Provence, in France, was turned by the priests
into St. Foutin, and worshipped just as before. And, in a
chapel of St. near Brest there was a kind of
miraculous Phallus. The Phallus was a wooden beam that
passed entirely through the Saint’s body. The women would
rasp the end and swallow the dust in hopes of offspring ; and
thus the organ would wear away. But it miraculously re-
frained from growing shorter, for the priest would give
the other end a blow with a hammer and force it forward
again.
A large Phallus existed at Orange (Europe), covered with
leather and with the testicles complete. The Protestants
destroyed it, publicly burnt it, in fact, when they took the
city in the 16th century.
Down to 1700 Priapus with his organ nearly as large
as his body, was carried in the Catholic processions at
Naples.
The English Maypole has its fellow) is a Phallus;
and the girls who went to the woods on May day in
honor it it, returned, for the most part, without their maiden-
head.
Just as life is passed on from father to child, and thus the
mystic flame kept burning from generation to generation, so


are light and fire passed from torch to torch ; and no doubt
fire was worshipped on this account, and the fire-drill re-
garded with reverence as a symbol of the Phallus. Both Phal-
lus and drill keep the fire burning.
I may close by summing up the points of Phallic worship
in the bible :
1. The Trees of Life and of Knowledge were undoubted
Phallic emblems, and both denoted the Male member. The
so-called Fall of man is an allegory of a human pair losing
their innocence by sexual intercourse. The very curse of
child-bearing upon the woman, of sweating labour upon the
man, shows that.
2. The Ark and Rainbow, and Ark of the Covenant are all
Phallic.
3. Covenant itself is Phallic; it is the Covenant between
Male and Female.
4. Sarah’s son in her old age has been mentioned.
5. Jacob’s Beth-el, or stone which he anointed, has also
been noted.
6. The first-born offered to the lord, as Father-Phallus,
speaks for itself.
7. The Brazen Serpent was undoubtedly Phallic, and its
worship quite orthodox, until Reformers made it other-
wise.
8. Jehovah, Baal and Adonis were all one god, and all
decidedly Phallic.
9. Solomon’s temple was what we should call a pagan or
heathen one, as may be shown thus: it was built by foreigners
and idolaters ; had Phallic pillars in front; cherubs, &c.,
within. It had chambers and accommodation for Male and
Female Saints, Kedeshim and Kedeshoth, holy ones, holy Pros-
titutes. It is inconceivable that Saints, and Male and Female
Prostitutes, should be called in the bible by the same name,
if their wor.-hip had not been orthodox. All these things
were quite as much mixed up with Jehovah’s worship as any


("Ofl-rer goTs. "Men and women, all the world over, iKProfti-
tuted themselves to Phailus or Priapus, and gave the hire tjj
the priests This was done religiously, and from religious
mmotives.
I need not go farther at present, though I may at some
future time. My work does not pretend to be exhaustive. jjfc
uiis designed to awaken thought and inquiry.


