

THE NATIONAL LIBRARY AT A GLANCE


EXTERIOR
The plan provides for a podium containing two basement levels. On this podium
there is a central block of five storeys to be flanked by two three-storey buildings
in the future. The podium is to provide the general bookstack area which
measures 640 ft. by 530 ft. at two levels of about 7 1 /a acres each. The Roman
Travertine-clad first stage is surrounded by a 70ft. colonnade sheathed in white
Italian Carrara marble.
The podium walls are of trachyte from Bowral, N.S.W. The podium paving is
Norwegian slate, while the entrance steps are of South Australian granite. The
balustrade cappings consist of imperial black polished Mudgee granite. The
window frames are of bronze and the roof copper.
FOYER
Six internal marble-clad columns of white Carrara marble are in the spacious
entrance foyer and run through two floors to support the mezzanine gallery
which can be used for exhibitions. Further exhibition space is provided on each
side of the foyer subdivided by vertical timber screens of Queensland black bean.
The entrance floor is of golden Wombeyan marble and the staircase of white
Greek Pentelic marble.
MAIN STAIRWAY
The impressive balcony face is of green Tinos marble, the stairwall is of green
Italian slate and the foyer walls are of Travertine marble.
TAPESTRIES
M. Mathieu Mategot was commissioned by the National Library Council to design
three 17ft. high by 10ft. wide tapestries to hang above the main entrance. A
fourth smaller tapestry hangs in the readers' lounge.
COLOURED GLASS
Melbourne born Leonard French, winner of the Blake Prize and the Sir John
Sulman Prize was engaged to produce 16 coloured glass windows, each one lift.
6in. high by 4ft. Sin. wide. They are situated each side of the entrance foyer in
the exhibition area on the ground floor.


SCULPTURE
The bas-relief over the entrance doors is in beaten copper and was designed and
executed by the Australian sculptor Tom Bass. It is 70ft. long and 6ft. high. Its
free flowing lines are in contrast to the severely disciplined columns. The words
“ark", “sun" and "tree", written in cuneiform, are the basis of the design.
GENERAL REFERENCE ROOM
The General Reference Room is 168 ft. long by 38ft. wide. It has several reading
areas recessed down one side in the form of carrels overlooking Lake Burley
Griffin. Sound absorbing materials have been used in conjunction with wall panels
of Tasmanian oak at each end and black bean on the sides. This quiet
environment is maintained by the carpeted floor.
FERGUSON ROOM
This room, named in honour of Sir John Ferguson, author of the definitive
Bibliography of Australia and one of the Library's donors, is situated on the first
floor. Panelling and shelving are in Western Australia jarrah.
ORIENTAL STUDIES ROOM
This room is situated on the third floor. The walls are panelled in a buff-coloured
grass paper in between battens of bleached coachwood. The ceiling is in similar
timber with a penciled treatment.
CONFERENCE ROOM
The oak-panelled conference room on the fourth floor is a versatile room capable
of seating 56 for conferences and up to 130 when seated in rows. The ceiling
features rows of recessed domes for acoustical purposes, with spherical light
fittings in each.
THEATRE
The theatre underneath the foyer seats 300 people. Regular lectures will be held
here and there will be daily screenings of films from the Library's collections.
The Executives' Offices, including the National Librarian's, are timbered in
Tasmanian oak treated to give a pleasing colour effect.


Union Offset Co. Pty. Limited, 20 Pirie St., Fyshwick, Canberra
