

SIX DAYS
ON THE
MOUNTAINS
OF
COWLEY.




SIX DAYS
ON THE
MOUNTAINS
OF
COWLEY
BY JOHN GALE.


Reprinted (by request) from a series of
papers first published in Feb., 1875.
FRATTA.
Page 35 faces page 39.
Page 38 faces page 34.
On page 109 for “Absalom. ’’ read Jona-
than.


SIX DAYS ON THE MOUNTAINS
OF COWLEY.
The Start.
About three years ago. news was brought
in from Brindabellu, the most •westerly-
station in the high mountainous country
lying between the Upper Murrumbidgee
and the watershed of the Tumut, that a
stupendous waterfall had been discovered
on a tributary of the Cotter by two diggers
whilst prospecting for gold. Various des-
criptions were given by those who retailed
the account of the discoverers, no two of
them agreeing, either as to the exact
locality or the topography of the region
where this great sight was to be seen. But
all agreed as to the almost inaccessible
nature of the country surrounding, and
stated that, so far as was known by othe 1 s
who had penetrated to within a few miles
of the neighbourhood of the newly-diw-
covei ed waterfall, it could be only bv a
alow and tedious process that the country
beyond the points frequented by the otdin


ary bushmen resident on the Min i umbidgeo
could be explored.
News of the discovery was first published
in this journal, and subsequently copied
into the principal newspapers of the colony,
attracting considetable attention at the
time.
Some time afterwards I happened to meet
an old man (since deceased) who was one
of the party who discovered the waterfall;
from him I obtained a sufficiently graphic
account of the discovery to satisfy mo that
it was well worth inspection, both for its
own sake and for the purpose- of giving to
the public a detailed account of it. Others,
besides mysolf, became anxious to visit the
fall, and a time was duly fixed fur carrying
our purpose into effect. But when tho
period arrived it was found impracticable
to fulfil our intention ; and again and again
dates were appointed fur the projected
excursion, each time with tho like result.
Something invariably occurred to fiustrate
our design.
Thus matters went on until the recent
drought necessitated, on the part of holders
of pastoral leases on the high table lauds
forming the principal sources of the Mui-
mmbidgec, Tumut, Cotter, and Goodra-
digbec Rivers, the removal of their stock
from the districts visited by the drought to
those well-grassed and abundantly-watered
regions. Mr. John McDonald, of Ura-
yana, one of my personal friends, and


from whom and his excellent wife and
family I have on several occasions received
much kindness when on minor excursions,
had, like others, removed his sheep and
cattle to the mountains, and it was there-
fore considered a very favourable occasion,
whilst this otherwise unoccupied country
was now tenanted by those in charge of
stock, for visiting not only the waterfall
but the beautiful stalactite caves of Coola-
man Plains.
Monday, the loth February, was fixed
as the day of departure from Urayarra for
our long-projected excursion. Several
Quo obey an, residents who formerly had
been very enthusiastic volunteers for the
trip, now found excuse for staying at home.
Indeed, the drought having broken up, and
very rainy and unsettled weather prevail-
ing, there was not an over-bright promise
of an enjoyable excursion. This circum-
stance, however, presented to the minds of
some of us all the stronger argument for
proceeding on the trip. The raiii having
set in, accompanied by such genial warmth
as fostered an unusually rapid growth of
herbage in the lower districts; and the
change of weather having assumed a less
propitious character on the high tablelands
of Monaro, where snow had already made
its appearance; stock-owners who had
been driven to the latter regions only a
short time before to fall back on the
luxuriant grass there growing for their


famishing stock, now. apprehensive of
inclement weather, were beginning to
make preparations for a return to their
wonted pastures, and already had some of
them despatched their cattle homewards.
Should we now lose this opportunity for
carrying out oar long-cherished plans, so
favourable a one might not again occur for
years to come.
It was under this conviction, then, that
in the midst of heavy rain, Mr. A. Mc-
Donald of Olenburn. who had sheep at
Coolaman, and I, who so ardently desired
to know something of the ierro inc'ign<t<x of
the county of Cowley, described by the
surveyors on the official maps as “inaccess-
able country," sot out on Saturday, 13th
February, for TJrayarra. Drenched to the
akin in parts, we reached the beautiful
homestead of Tarralumla, the residence
and property of Augustus Gibbes, Esip,
J.P., late that afternoon, where we con-
sidered it advisable to remain for the night,
and prosecute our journey on the following
morning, rather than run any risk by
travelling further that evening. Mr.
Gibbes received us with his characteristic
hospitality, and after a pleasant evening's
chat we retired to rest.
The morning dawned with indications of
more favourable weather than fell to our
lot on the previous day; and shortly after
breakfast we took our leave of Mr. Gibbes,
and passing through his magnificent run —


a delta of land formed by the gradual
approach of th« Murrumbidgee and Mo-
longlo Rivers to their confluence about ten
miles below Ta'raluinla, and not to be
equalled for abundance and excellence of
pasturage in nil the district—reached the
Urayana punt shortly after noon.
Here wo loft our buggy in charge of the
pcntniftH, who kindly rendered us every
assistance iu hia power, and ferrying ua
over, sent his little boy across the ford in
charge of our hot'ses and luggage. Landed
in the county of Cowley, a short ride of
four miles brought us to Urayarra, where
we were made heaitily welcome and spent
a very pleasant Sabbath evening.
Prayers at the Station.
The scattered population of our remote
squiittag«s are not often privileged with
the visit of a. clergyman. However, we
were agreeably surprised to learn as soon
as we arrived that the Rev. P. O. Smith,
of Canberra, was to preach there that
evening. Shortly before six o’clock Mr.
Smith made his appearance, and then the
squatter’s parlour was converted for the
occasion into a church. A. large edition
of the book of common prayer, aurl the
" big ha* Bible” wore placed at the head of
the table, where the minister took his
stand, and a congregation of twenty or
thirty persons, gathered from a radius of
five or six miles joined heartily in the


beautiful service of the Church of Tingland,
The sermon was evangelical, pi. nn, aml
practical, and the service lucked only one
feature to render it as delightful as public
worship could be under the cn cuin<tuncee
—there was no psalmody from beginning
to end.
After public worship came supper, which
was partaken of by several of the neigh-
bours who had some miles to tiavel, and
shortly after that again the whole e-tnblidi -
merit retired to rest, with the inlcntmu ui
rising early in order to facilitate our
Start for the Mountains.
Monday broke with a lowering sky. Tbs
high ranges to the westward were partly
obscured with fleecy clouds—harbingers oi
coming rain. But our minds were made
up. Wo had uot t» availed so far to bo
deterred by a passing shower, 01 even a
wet day. Hr. Smith, too, intending to
visit a family back in the mountains, was
as anxious to pursue his way as ever we
were—he in the pursuit of his sacred
vocation ;we on pleasure bent. Nothing
daunted by the threatening aspect of the
morning, Miss Sarah, one of the daughters
of our hospitable guest, bad resolved to
accompany us (her uncle being one of our
party) at least as far as Brindabella. Wo
had gone only a mile or two before the
rain came down in earnest Mr, tjmlth
and I rode on ahead, followed at some


.distance by Mr. McDonald aud hia niece.
Orr conversation was on the sceptical
tendency of the present age; but it was
abruptly cut short by a halt to unstrap the
macintoshes from our saddles, and cover
ourselves from the pelting stonu. Be*
mounting, we pursued our way through a
tortuous glen, in the course of half a mile
crossing a mountain stieam four or five
times. Ascending a little knell, we found
wo had far outstripped our companions;
and hesitating whether it would not be
prudent on the account to leturn to
Urayarra, 1 drew up under shelter of the
barrel of a huge tree, and leaving Mr.
Smith to pursue his way. awaited the
arrival of my fellow-tourists. In a short
time they made their appearance, and Miss
McDonald having, with tho characteristic
coui age i>f Australian ladies, expressed
her determination to proceed, we wended
our way along slippery sidolings, and
through deep gullies, till another hour's
ride brought us to the mountain homestead
of Mr. John Blundell.
Pastoral Bush Labours.
I had forgotten to state, that some miles
ou the Urayarra side of Mount Corea, at
the foot of one of whose spurs nestled the
solitary homestead of tho good man just
named, we met him and his brother driving
a few head of cattle towaids tho river,
Tho clergyman therefore, so far as the


master of the house was concerned, would
make his visit in vain. Hut this was of
small moment, compared with the privilege
which a pastoral call would confer on the
family, for mother and children (with the
exception of the eldest boy, who sometimes
accompanied his father on the roads in hie
capacity as a carrier) seldom saw nr travel-
led beyond the circumscribed horizon which
girts their home iu the quiet and lonely
glen; and consequently never miugWl
with their nearest neighbour* —those of
Urayarra—for religious or social purposes.
One may therefore reasonably suppose that
the clergyman's periodical visit would be
hailed with delight by such persons as
Mrs. Blundell and her isolated little ones,
and doubtless it is ever so, as the sequel
will show.
"When our party came in sight, of Mount
Coree and the glen where stands the home-
ly dwelling of the Blundells, the rain hud
somewhat abated, and although our route
lay up a mountain track leaving the Blun-
dells’ homestead somewhat to the left, Miss
McDonald, with true womanly thoughtful-
ness and sympathy, suggested that wo
should make a call on Mrs. Blundell, whose
only opportunities of intercourse with her
own sex were on those rare occasions when
a lady chanced to pass that way. Of
course we offered no objection to the
generous proposal, especially when we
found that such events were as precious


and rare as angels’ visits. Drawing off to
the right with the intention of acquiescing
in the tady’a proposal, and when about
twenty yards from the door of the house,
not an individual being visible, though
there were a houseful of children, the first
thing that arrested my attention was the
utterance in clear and distinct tones of the
familiar but sublime sentences of the
Lord’s Prayer. We halted until the Bene-
diction bi ought the devotional services to
an end, when Mrs. Blundell came to the
door to welcome her guests. Leaving the
two ladies at the threshhold deeply engaged
m one of those half-whispered, half-audible
conversations peculiar to the gentler sex,
in which earnestness and merriment alter-
nate. I went inside, and for half an hour
or so listened with unabated interest to the
catechetical instruction imparted by the
clergyman to three or four hardy little
fellows who stood around their instructor
with wondering eyes and quaint gestures,
listening attentively and answering at
random a series of simple questions on the
first principles of religious truth. . Droll
indeed were some of the speculative answers
elicited, and amusing in the extreme was
their precocious promptitude,. Who, with
a thought for his country’s future, could
look on a scene like this without feeling
grateful and proud that in this unostenta-
tious, plodding, earnest way, our colonial
clergy daily pursue their arduous toils, at


times and under difficulties little thought
of by those who ain too fond of sneering
at or underrating their services ? Here,
in these comparatively untaught boys, the
patriot recognises the fathers of a sturdy
race of mountaineers which in future
generations will people those very wilds.
How important, then, in view of this,
becomes the task of moulding aright their
plastic minds, and giving a bias to tbeir
thoughts which must servo them for good
all their lives through ! Well would it bo
if every isolated family throughout the
land were periodically visited and instruc-
ted as that forming the subject of our
present remarks.
Up The Mountains.
Having a long and difficult journey before
us, we took our leave of Mrs. Blundell,
who appeared to he a woman endowed with
mind and manners superior to most of her
•class, and remounting our horses pursued
onr way up the mountains, Our journey
lay along the track originally cleared by
Mr. John McDonald himself as the most
direct route toKiandra, in the days when
the unri saxra fames of the Alpine regions
and the Snowy River had reached its high-
est pitch. I was told that from the summit
of the range w© were now ascending an
expansive view of the country on the
eastern side of the Murrumbidgee was to
he obtained. The undulating plains and


mountain seen at y interspersed, which form,
one of the most charming features of the
picture-quo county of Murray ; the beauti-
ful homestead of Dnutioon, the residence
of Geo. Campbell, Esq. ; the fine country
church of St. John Baptist at Canberra;
Cungahleen, the pretty residence of W.
Davis, Esq., J.P. ; Mount Ansley; tho
ranges surrounding the town of Quean*
beyan (the smoke of which is visible, but
not the town which nestles too cosily in
the low-lying amphitheatre forming its
site); Mount Jerrabomberra; and away
in the eastern background the hold and
rugged peaks of Jiugera and Tindevra
Mountains —all discernible to the familiar
eye; whilst to the north - west was also
visible the vast elevated forest laud lying
in the direction of Yass and Gunning. To
me it was a sore disappointment, however,
to find that, by reason of a dense fog which
thickened as we ascended the range, my
eyes were not, in the upward journey at
least, to feast upon the splendid panoramic
view embracing the localities named.
Threading our way for fully five miles in
one almost unbroken ascent, through a
thick scrub, rendered dismal in the extreme
by the lavages of a recent bush fire, we
found ourselves at Lee’s Spring, which
lay not twenty yards to , our left
from the road. We had rather too much
water —for it had rained heavily for the
greater part of the way, and our clothing


was saturated—to rende* it necessary to
dismount for a drink: although Mr. Mc-
Donald observed at the time that a slice of
Brindabella beef and a cup of tea would
net have been unwelcome just then. This
spring is the first water the traveller comes
to after leaving Condore; and appears to
be the source of one of the many invalu-
able perennial streams to be found in the
high mountain regions we had now at-
tained. The water does nut find its way to
sunlight at Lee’s Spring by any oozing,
lazy, horizontal, or down-trickling method,
but gushes right up a foot or more from a
fissure in the rock—clear as crystal, cold
as ice, and with a vigour, in winter and
summer alike, worthy of a tributary to the
waters of the ever-flowing Murrumbidgee.
A Pioneer’s Marked Tree.
Some two miles or more beyond Lee’s
Spring we reached a comparatively stony
flat, where stunted white gums were the
only timber growing, and a fair picking of
young grass became a welcome substitute
for the dense scrub and undergrowth pre-
dominating along the ascent. The fog was
still as heavy as ever; and occasionally
smart showers fell. I was sorry; for this,
I was informed, was the plateau from which
the extensive landscape to the east and
north was visible. From us, however, every-
thing was completely obscured; nor could
I, except from the fact of our having al


most without a break been for the last
two hours climbing a steep gradient, pos-
sibly tell that we were on such an altitude.
To the west an awfully deep gorge lay,
right under our feet as it were ; but to me
it might as well have been a dead level or
anoth t alpine height, for the evidence of
any of the senses was unequal to
the realisation which lay before us. Some-
where in this neighbourhood (but now per-
haps deposed by the recent bush fires
which had devastated the whole country we
w* re travelling through; for we failed to
find it), stood until lately a tree wilh an
inch auger-hole perforating its trunk. For
forty years or more this remarkable tree
had stood, to bear witness of the fact that
an oldbushman, who for many years sub-
sequently kept a public house at Murrura-
bah River) on the Sydney road
below Goulburn, had without guide or
compass made his way from the high table
lands of Monaro in a direct line over this
all-but impenetrable country to the settled
countries of Murray and Argyle. Such an
undertaking indicated that marvellous in-
stinct and indomitable courage so frequent-
ly evinced by pioneer settlers of Australia.
We had now gained our highest altitude,
and following the old track still, we wended
our way towards
Brindabella.
From the elevated point last described to


Brindahella station must bo a distance of
six or. seven miles. Our way led over
ridges and down gradual mountain slopes,
tolerably well-grassed and forming part of
the ' Messrs. Franklin Bios.' run. It was
still mining, although the mists bail rolled
up into fleecy clouds, revealing bold and
lofty mountain scenery, beggaring descrip-
tion, but rendered still more sublimely
picturesque by those very cloud* skimming
around, above, and beneath the highest
peaks. Another feature of special interest,
lending variety to the view, were the rich
brown, red, and amber hues with which
immense tracks of the surrounding country
were tinged by their being subjected to
the heat of bush fires. Feasting our eyes
on the ever-changing scenery which overv
turn of the road presented, suddenly we
came in view of the Goodradigbee River,
winding its serpentine course down through
a deep ravine many hundred feet below,
On its hanks we saw a stubble-field, the
first indication of human habitation met
with since leaving Comlore ; and a liitle to
the left the fencing of an ordinary bush
paddock. These were the home-paddocks
of Brindabella. Descending a gradient so
steep that Mr, McDonald preferred to dis-
mount and lead his horse, we zig-zagged
our way into the valley beneath, and cros-
sing a mountain stream—a tributary of the
river flowing’at our right—we cantered, for
the first time since we left the previous


homestead, over a little rise, down on to a
flat, and crossing the river a limpid,
pebbly torrent—we entered the slip-rails of
the hush paddock, and alter re-crossing the
river, another short canter brought us in
view of the house.
We were received with true hospitality
by the throe brothers who own and manage
the estate; ami our welcome Wag all the
more appreciable from the attentions be-
stowed upon us by the lady of the house,
one only of the three brothers being mar-
ri»d. Ihy clothes and a good meal dis-
pelled all the discomforts of the day’s
travel, and we were at once at home with
our new friends.
There wax no change for tho hotter in
weather for tue remainder of the day, a
drizzling rain, with slight intermissions
continued till nightfall, before which how-
ever. Mr. (rfiorge Franklin and I, accom-
panied by a young man employed on the
station, made a short excursion duck-shoot-
ing. with but small results. Still, the ex-
cursion gave me a better opportunity of
viewing the surrounding sceneiy.
I had always pictured Brindabella in my
mind’s eye, as a homestead on elevated
ground—a mountain slope overlooking au
expansive view. But one is seldom correct
in one’s anticipations of the character and
appearance of places or persons as yet un-
seen. Nor was I, in my ideal of this re-
mote and lonely station. The old Brinda


bella bouse —a respectable-looking build-
ing, about a mile higher up the river than
the new habitation—l found to be far more
piettily situated, and boasting greater pre-
tensions to architectural tare, than the
new house. Both stand on the eastern
river-bank, and instead of commanding
the extensive landscape I bad imagined,
aie altogether shut in by lofty, rugged
ranges and mountains to the east and west*
while the gorge through which tb** rivei
flows its main direction almost south
to north — is so tortuous that one has a
more circumscribed prospect in that direc-
tion than in that limited by the ranges con-
fining the river to its narrow bed.
Life at Brindabella
Must be very monotonous, even for the
men on the station. How much note so
for the lady of the house I They may
range the mountains iu quest of cattle, at-
tend to the cultivation of what land there
is in the neighbourhood of the homestead,
and to innumerable matters out of doors
which demand overseeing and manipulation.
And so day by day passes away. But as
for the lady whose lonely lot is cast in this
outpost of occupied territory, one cannot
see how she is at all times to avoid the ex-
perience of a depressing sense of solitude
during the long hours when the sterner
members of he? household are in the field
or on the mountains. It is true a rosy,


chubby bubyboy, not yet twelve months
old. must occupy much of her time and
attention; but baby is asleep and
household duties are discharged Low
wearily thj time must pass; what a sense
of loneliness must oppress her when she
reflects that she is separated fiom her sex
hv miles of intervening mountains and
streams, All honour to the woman who so
heroically followed her husband to the soli-
tude of his mountain-home; and who eo
cheerfully, and with such constancy, lights
his dwelling with her gladsome presence.
It was a Main of thought something like
the foregoing, which prompted me to re-
mark to the unmarried members of the
firm, that for their sister’s sake, but much
more so for tneir own, they ought to follow
the example of their married brother. Hut
th’U-c wu< a good deal of truth in the re-
joinder of one of them. “ I would marry
if I could; but it Dn’t easy to find a wo-
man willing to make her home in three
wild parts.”
As at the previous place of call the mix-
tress of the house was glad to receive a
visit from a lady, so here the arrival of Miss
McDonald was a pleasant season for Mr*.
Franklin, and her joy was heightened con-
siderably when she found that her lady
visitor intended to remain a guest in the
house until our return from Coolaman.
After nightfall the rain deoeuded in tor-
rents, and throughout the night continued


with little or do abatement. At daylight
the weather looked very unpropitious,
White fleecy clouds obscured the mountain
tops, or floated half way down their sides
portending a further down-pour. Until
after breakfast a drizzling misty ram con-
tinued ; and accompanied by the two un-
married brothers we set out in the midst of
it for the high table lands which formed
our destination. For neat ly five miles our
way lay up the valley of the Goodiudigbee,
whose tortuous waters, swol.en consider-
ably by the rains of the previous twenty
four hours, we crossed four or five times in
that distance. A couple of miles from the
homestead, our new companions took us a
short way into the mountains to show us to
the east of the
The Cold-Field, a Remarkable
Stone Wall
a monument of the patient perseverance
of a solitary digger, who a few years ago
spent many mouths in the locality prospect-
ing fur gold. A couple of diggers well-
known in Uueanbeyan (North ami Thomas)
had previously done well at Brindabella
working on a small patch which proved to
be very payable ground. After they left,
a man named Bowerbank came to the
neighbourhood and without the assistance
of a mate (meanwhile leading the life of a
hermit in the mountains) undertook the
difficult work of bringing water from a
distant part of a mountain down into


North ami Thomas’s old race by means of
a stonewall, carried along the almost per-
pendicular sides of the mountain for a dis-
tance, as we paced it, of about two hundred
yards. The work, we were told, occupied
over four mouths. In places it had to be
carried as high as ten feet, w’hile in others
it rose only eighteen inches or so above the
natural level of the ground.
The patient constructor of this really
stupendous undertaking encountered sev-
eral difficulties in the prosecution of his
wonderful task, such as carrying his race
over gaps and other inequalities which
obstructed his course, and the ingenuitv
displayed to surmount these difficulties
was as admirable as indescribable. Elie
extension of North and Thomas’s race by
the means mentioned was an improvement
on a method of theirs, which consisted of
bringing water from another source over a
cieek which ran beneath Bowerbank’s bv
moHUs of flaming, and which was liable to
be destroyed by a lise of the creek.
Bowerbank was an eccentric and reticent
man, but there is every reason to believe
that ho was well paid for his pains; for
there was a considerable quantity of gold
in the ground worked. ti;st by North and
Thomas, and afterwards by himself, as
will be seen when 1 state that after they
all abandoned the ground a “fossickor”
passing that way took out in the couise of
a week £l2 worth of gold from the aban


doned sluicing ground. On the roadside
the stripping and prospecting shafts are
still visible-one of the hitter in particular,
which, after descending upwards of 80 foot,
they were obliged to abandon fur want of
menus to keep down the water. The
W. B. Clarke in his works speaks highly
of this locality a-i a cold-beaiing region;
and there is very little doubt that if ma-
chinery could be conveyed to this gold field
to enable minors to cai ry out the project of
deep-sinking, rich deposits would be dis-
covered. A little farther on we parsed a
very old prospecting shaft, which I was
told Mr. Clarke mentions in his works, as
having drawn hie attention whilst en route
to Eiandra at the outbreak of that gold
field. The almost inaccessible nature of
the country about and beyond Bvindahella
must be assigned as the reason why better
trial has not yet been given to this evi-
dently auriferous country.
The Last Stage Upwards.
Leaving the diggings, and shortly after-
wards the river, we took a south-westerly
course, crossing Goolaman Greek and other
streams; now ascending sharp spurs of
mountainous land; then down into small
alluvial flats. By aud by the track brought
us close under an almost perpendicular
range, many hundred feet high from the
level whence we first came in view of it.
Over the top of this range, which appeared


to be table land, coming from the direction
of 'Broken '.’art in the Tumut district,
leaped file waters of a creek, at that time
swo'h'ii !>v the recent rain, and wit.ha rush
and a n*ar went splashing and dashing and
crashing—to use the language of a poet
laureate—down into a gorge some hundred
feet again Wow our level into the valley
of the Co'diinmn Creek. The foaming
tnnent was just visible here and there
tlnoug!) openings amongst the trees; the
approach to it seamed too formidable an
undertaking to essay ju-t then ; but from
the booming sound and the rising mists
which indurated its course, I should sup-
pos" it ju-t then a sight wmth seeing, if
imt «o when in drier seasons the volume of
water would be less. Early in the after-
noon wo reached a grassy piece of forest
land known as the Wombat Ground. From
this spot Idamrmd Hill. « conical peak a
shoit distance to the south-east, was visible,
and other high ground, the first of the
elevated regions just before us subject at
all seasons of the year to snow. To these
high table lands theie were two roads —the
one the old dray track leading over the
mountains, aud the other a more circuitous
direction, because a more gradual ascent
(but impassable for drays), leading up a
guhy to the same destination. In a couple
of hours we had gained our highest eleva-
tion, and although not at our goal, were
ip an entirely new region from that we had


hitherto passed through, as regards climate,
productions, scenery, and everything else
which gives character to locality.
Peppercorn Hill
Is the name given to the first portion of
the elevated country within thoso snowy
regions known as the Australian Alps.
The table lands of Monaro might be said
to begin here; the altitude being more
than four thousand feet above the level of
the sea. The plateau we had now reached
has received its name from a remarkable
shrub growing there in groat abundance
called the peppei-corn tree, which I shall
describe in its proper place. The chief
fame of Peppercorn Hill is derived from
its being the principal
Source of the Murrumbidgee.
Here, gushing up with a vigour character-
istic of all the springs in these paits, rises
he water of the hoary old river whoso
name is so prominently associated with
early Australian exploration and settlement
—the Murrumbidgee, which, if not vying
with its rival the Murray fur precedence in
point of commercial importance, claims
that distinction as being longer known to
Europeans and possessing a greater variety
of natural and historical features. A
rippling streamlet, clear as crystal and
cold as ice itself, a lady or a child can skip
over its narrow channel, a few inches deep,
without damping the feet. But soon after,


scores, hundreds of rills, from the head o
the Long Plain to the north-east and the
rugged country to the south and south-
west, contribute their quota to the parent
stream, which swells in volume with every
mile of its progress, till ere it has reached
its third or fourth mile a horseman finds
the water to his saddle-girths, and the
finest hunter or stock-horse to be found
would try in vain to leap its breadth.
Even here it teems with life—certainly not
that of the huge codfish or princely bream,
but while myriads of minnows dart in
shoals through its rapid waters, its banks
and swampy margins swarm with crayfish,
and are the habitat of flocks of waiter-fowl.
One is struck with wonder at the rapid
flow of the liver on the almost level plains.
In attempting to for 1 one would be almost,
if not-ceitainiv. oirried off one’s legs. On
the afternoon of our arrival at Long Plain
(the station of Mr. John McDonald! that
gentleman and I rode out for an hour or
two, and although we went no lower down
than three or four miles below the principal
source of the liver, we found it widening
and deepening, and increasing in its im-
petus to a remarkable extent. One’s won-
der however ceases, after a more thoiough
examination of the surrounding country,
which is literally a land of springs. Every
hollow in the undulating plains has its
water-spring; as I said of that mentioned
on our upward journey, not a lazy, trick -


ling dole, but a sparkling, boiling. over-
flowing rush of water as charming and
beautiful to behold, as it is cool and re-
freshing to drink. Considering the myriad
crystal springs which feed the -parent
stream just after leaving its principal
source; the loveliness and grahdeilr of the
extensive plains through which it first finds
its way; the rugged mountains, deep
ravines, and gloomy gorges which charac-
terise its course immediately afterwards,
and continue to do so for scores of miles
through what are known as the districts of
the Upper Murrumhidgee; and, fed ere
this by several considerable rivers, the
broadening expanse of navigable water-
front Oundagar to its junction with tbe
Murray, known as the Lower Munu nbid-
gee districts; well might a recent tourist
speak, even of the lower portion which be
saw, as La belle riviere, but how much
more to had he seen the sublimely pictur-
esque scenery of the Murrumbidgee within
the mountainous districts. To view the
Murrumbidgee at Tharwa, within fifteen
miles of Queanbeyan, one would scarcely
credit that itt principal source would be
found within forty miles, as the crow flies
of that locality. And yet so it is, albeit
the river traverses more than two hundred
miles before it pours its volume of water
over the wide and sandy river bed at
Tharwa Ford. For a distance of about
twenty miles the Murrumbidgee flows in a


southerly direction, but from what is known
as the South Ann, iji the county of Wal-
lace, it pursues an easterly course, and
after travelling in that direction for about
fifty miles, turns northwards in a parallel
line with the waters of its source at Pep-
percorn Hill. In a north-westerly course
the river now follows its mean direction for
the remainder of its length, till absorbed
by the Murray.
The Tumut, Oondradigboe, and Cotter
Rivers take their rise all in the same
locality; so that Peppercorn Hill and Long
Plain may be regiudcd as the grand source
of the liver-eystem of a large extent of
our southern territory.
Climate.
Such an altitude as that we had now
attained might well be supposed to intro-
duce the traveller to a climate differing
widely from that of the lower lands oh
this side of the Mumimbidgoe. and in the
lesser mountains tu the Cowley side of the
river. And indeed nothing is more strik-
ing than the change of temperature there
met with. In an earlier portion of these
papers I alluded to a fall of snow which
had occurred here j.ist before our arrival,
and which lay white on the mountains for
some hours of the day succeeding. This
was m> extraordinary occurrence, for the
whole of these regions are subject at all
seasons of the year to snow; and in the
hottest days of sumnn'i, the evenings and


nights are cold enough to render fire
necessary to personal comfcrt. Those of
our paity acquainted with the highlands
of Scotland said the temperature strongly
reminded them of that of the latter coun-
try.
If. in the month of February, when we
experience some of our hottest weather, the
temperature of these alpinu regions was
so much lower, the natural interrogation
is—What must the depth of winter be in
such a locality? Those of my readers
acquainted with Iviaudia, which lies less
than twenty miles south of the locality I
am now describing, can form a tolerably
correct idea of the climate of Long Plain.
For five or six months of the year it IPs
deep under a covering of snow—so deep as
to be a peril to life of man or beast, It is
this fact which prevents, under piesmit
circumstances, the uninterrupted occupa-
tion of the country, although the time will
come when the ever-increasing population
of Australia will contrive to settle perma-
nently even on Long Plain, whoso winters
are said to bo no severer than those of the
north of Scotland.
Adventures in the Snow.
Many tales are told of adventure in the
suow-mautled regions of Long Plain and
'Joolaman in earlier days. On Old Poola-
roau Plain, for m-tance, stand yet the
massive corner and other posts of a stock -


raid forty years old 01 more, connected
with which there is a story told, whose
details lam unable to procure, but one of
its incidents alone will suffice to illustrate
the severity of the alpine winters. Mr.
(jeorge Palmer, one of the pioneer settlers
nf the county of Murray, allured to Old
I'oolaman Plain by the wealth of its pas-
tures and waters as viewed in the mild and
temporal > summer season of these regions,
resolved to winter there—or, at least, that
his cattle should, in charge of two nr three
stockmen. Old Oonlaman Plain lies at an
altitud" of two hundred feet or mure lower
than Long Plain and is consequently less
liable to those heavy falls of snow for
which the latter plain is notable. Here,
on a piece of rising ground with a gentle
fall sloping away in cvoiy direction from
it, stood the pioneer squatter’s stockyard.
The winter I allude to was unusually
severe, and the snowstorms unprecedented-
ly heavy. To preserve the fine herd of
cattle iti their charge, they were yarded
bv the stockmen every night. At length
the snow gathered to such a depth on the
plain that the cattle could no longer roam,
and the men, expecting to be helplessly
snowed in, as a last tesort for themselves
and their charge, let down the rails of the
yard to give the famishing beasts n chance
of escape or of finding feed, and ns best
they could made their own way to the
lower altitudes for th' l preservation of th<-ir


Urea. As soon as it was possible to return
to their deserted post, a search -was insti-
tuted, hut beyond a few carcases lying
here and there the herd was never traced ;
they had wandered and perished. I have
not heard that anyone has since that event
aver attempted to winter in this (at that
season of the year) by nature inhospitable
country.*
1 may be permitted to record another
incident illustrative of an alpine winter.
Many years since the foregoing event, an
old man who lived at, or had to travel in
the direction of Yaouk (a district of lower
altitude, to the south-east of Poolatnan
and Long Plain) to reach his home, was
detained by the snow at Bnndaholla. He
was, however, extremely uneasy, as the
snow continued to deepen on the ground
even there, lest his stock should perish.
To reach his homestead be had to go by
way of Peppercorn Hill and the plains
last named; and so intense became his
anxiety for the safety of his stock that no
persuasion nr remonstrance availed to de-
tain him with the hospitable fatnilv who
then sheltered him. He knew that his
own family were snowed in. “ They have
plenty to eat, and I don't fear for them.”
(said the old man ; whose solicitude for his
* In tho present day there are several homesteads in
the neighbourhood of" Coolaman and Long Plain -whose
occupants brave the severity of the alpine winters ont
on those exposed situations, though not unfrequently
they are snowed in for days together during tho sever-
cstwintera.


homed stock was excited as much by pity
at their exposed and famishing condition,
us ty a natural concern for his own loss in
the event of thair death); “ but my poor,
poor cattle, they'll peri-h if I can't get
hornet" look after ‘hem ” And in tho
midst of a blinding snow-storm, over fifty
tniies of mountains and plains, who-o
features wera entirely obliterated by many
feet—pet haps fathoms—of snow, still in-
creasing in depth 1 , the brave old settler set
out on his perilous and apparently hopeless
journey. The Brindabella people naturally
expected his return ere nightfall, believing
it impossible for him to proceed. But the
i.id traveller made no appearance; and
next 1 morning some of the young men set
out to ascertain his fate. Following the
old man’s tracks, with d.fficulty they made
their war to th« Wombat Ground; and
ascending the rising countiy smith of that,
there lay indubitable evidence that so far
he hmt got on bravely and right. The
snow drifts were deepening as f hey pro-
ceeded. But there wer« the tracks. The
deeply broken surface plainly indicated
with what a struggle the horse had so far
ploughed his way with his rider on his
buck, but with the stirrup-irons also trail-
in'; in the snow. Farther on, the animal
had evidently become unable to make
headway beneath his rider’s weight; for
the indomitable old traveller had got off,
and leading his horse, the stirrup-irons


trailing as before along the surface of the
snow, he still trudged on. His friends
could follow him no longer. It was satis-
factory to them that he was steering
straight for his home, which destination,
it was afterwards ascertained, he reached
in safety ; but whether in time to rescue
his cuttle from the perils he himself had
braved I did not aeoertaiu.
For five or six months in the year, with
occasional intermissions, deep snow covers
the ground and severe frosts prevail; and
even throughout the summer season the
nights are at times quite cold ; but the
glorious sunshine, bracing atmosphere, and
Clear blue sky of summer days up here
must be very delightful, judging from the
sample which we had during our brief
sojourn. No better sanatorium can all
Australia furnish for invalids from its
lower and more northern regions than these
elevated plains.
Vegetation.
Though possessed of but an imperfect
knowledge of botany, the observant trav-
eller cannot fail to notice several remark-
able features in the vegetation of the high
table lands lam now describing. Indeed,
all through the mountainous district below
—in the valley of the Cotter and Geodra-
digbee, and their tributaries—there are
many flowers, plants, shrubs, and trees
altogether different from the flora of


Murray County; and many of them pos-
sessing sufficient merit to entitle them to a
place in our gardens and shrubberies. I
gathered seeds and berries of some varie-
ties. with the hope of introducing them
into rav own garden.
One shrub in particular filled me with
admiration. It was an evergreen, of
bushy-habit, from three to four feet high;
its leaves, in their regularity, brightness,
and structure, bearing close resemblance
to one of our handsomest varieties of
magnolia. Its flower was small, but its
chief hearty, m my opinion, lay in its
clusters of berries —green, golden, and
scarlet, on the same; plant at one time,
their colours varying ■ with the degress of
their ripeness. ;
In the va'llevs of the tributaries of the
Cotter, we found also a very line specimen
of geebuug growing in great abundance in
the dense and almost impenetrable scrub
abounding there. The fruit was large as a
smalt plum, round as a marble, of a pale
giean or yellow tinge, and quite fleshy and
palatable. It was rather late iu the season,
and the greater pottion of the crop (or the
hu.-ks rather) lay beneath the trees, the
fruit having been devoured by birds. The
trees which bore this fruit were many of
them as large as middle-aged peach or
cherry trees. Vines and creepers—one of
the former, not much larger than whip-
cord, caught me under the chin and was so


tough that, had I been unab'e to free my-
self from it, it would have dragged me
from my horse, —mosses mid ferns, and a
multitude of minute*- botanical specimens,
present quite a study to the lover of the
science.
It is not generally known that the cedar
ie lo be found here and there in the moun-
tains west and south of the Muirnmbidgee.
We saw a few specimens, and not far from
Urayarra there is said to be a small clump
of very fine cedars of sufficient bulk to
yield a large quantity of limber,
I have spoken of the peppercorn tree—
the shrub from which the mountain where
the Mimumbidgee has its source deiives
its name. lu former times this shrub was
renowned amongst the blacks for its me-
dicinal properties. It well deserves its
name. The shrub bears a narrow, blight
green leaf (not much unlike one variety of
colonial hickory) with clusters of small
berries closely resembling the pepper-corn
of commerce. The leaf is as pungent as
pepper, while the berry is in iei.lity more
so; so that, if eaten green, it would ex-
tremely irritate, if not blister the mouth.
Whether the many virtues the aboriginals
ascribed to it were real nr imaginary, I
leave the reader to guess; but that it
possesses wonderful curative efficacy in
colds and chills may be gathered from the
fact, that a few days before our arrival at
Long Plain, the proprietor of the station


was suffering from a severe cold and in-
fluenza. A decoction of peppercorn leaves
was made, which he drank as tea Before
retiring to rest for the night. Presently t
profuse perspiration set in. ami increased,
to such an extent that when lie fell asleep
a couple of watchers had to sit by his bed-
side through the night, lest the patient by
tossing aside his bedclothes should expose
hitns©|f to the chilly night air. and thus
biing on a relapse of his cold more serious
than his first attack. The effect of the
treatment was marvellous ; for on his
awaking early next morning, after an
unbmken. heavy sleep throughout the
night, he was in perfect health ami
strength. I brought home several seedling
peppercorn plants. <mo or two of which are
thriving well in pots indoors.
A small ahrt b was pointed out to me as
a ten-tree. I tasted it. and found it to
possess, bat rather weakly, tfieiue, the
essence of our tea of commerce, The
stockmen occasionally make the familiar
“pot of tea” of this shrub, and say it is
a very good substitute for that supplied as
part of their rations.
Vegetation.
One great peculiarity I noticed in the
vicinity of the numerous springs to which
I have referred, lallude to the moss bed-.
These strange objects the traveller would
at flist take to be the treacherous usings


of bogs or quagmire.-}; and when one's
foot ia set ou them, the first impression is
that one is about to be swallowed up alive.
Instead of this, however, sudden fear gives
place to the delightful sensation one feels
on finding oneself standing on a grassy
lawn or velvet-pile carpet. liven a horse
finds the firmest footing on these moss-
hillocks. The moss itself is of a good
staple, yellowish-green in colour, and when
dried makes a better material for stuffing
beds and mattiasses than flax or son • weed ;
indeed, it is scarcely inferior to feathers,
always retaining its elasticity to a wonder-
ful degree. If nearer to market there
would doubtless be a large demand for it
as a beddiug material.
The high table lands cannot boast such
variety or beauty of flowers as are found
111 the mountains and valleys below. The
most noticable feature in the flmal pro-
ductions up hero is that they are, if not
entirely so. nearly all of the varieties com-
monly known as the everlasting daisy or
immortelle and the bachelor's button, Of
the former, which are crisp and dry when
in full bloom, there is first a large gulden
variety, much larger and more showy than
its kindred flower, growing on the rocky
banks of the Murrumbiclgee in the Qua.m-
beyau district. The Little Peppercorn
Plain and Long Plain wore literally covered
with these in broad patches aci es in extent,
as if Flora vied with the geological strata


beneath, in the auriferous regions n little
beyond, in displaying her treasures of gold.
A large everlasting daisy with white petals
ami purple corona was also to he found
here and there ; and a smaller white variety
in very thick and extensive dusters.
The timber of these regions is principally
a stunted white gum and mountain ash;
but I saw on Coolaman Main in addition
to these a fringe of sallies, very similar to
the myall and boroe fringes of the plains
in the salt-bush country.
But in the eyes of those who prize the
high table lands of this portion of Monaro
as valuable pastoral reserves—the salvation
of their docks and herds in seasons of
drought—all that I have described under
this head must be regarded as insignificant
in comparison with the rich and succulent
grasses here abounding. In a land of
springs and rive'-s, *.nd with a climate so
temperate, drought is altogether unknown.
Whilst other portions of Australia are
subject to the desolating influences of
alternating Hoods ami droughts this, in
these lespects, highly-favoured country
enjoys immunity from both scourges.
From Victoria and New Wales to its
northern boundary flocks and herds find
hero, when they would perish elsewhere,
abundance of nourishing feed, and I
should think the carrying capacity of the
runs far higher than that of any other
pastoral district in Australia.


Before entering upon an account nf oar
visit to the stalactite caves of Coolaman
Plain, or describing our adventures th*re
and subsequently in search of the latelj'-
disoovered waterfall near the Cotter River.
I shall devote an article to some further
remarks having reference to the peculiari-
ties and capabilities of the country gener-
ally at and surrounding Long Plain.
Once beyond the thickly-timbered moun-
tains, and in view of the open plains, rich
in herbage and abounding with water, the
first impression which struck me was, that
despite all that has been said in reference
to the severity and length of the winters
up hero, such vast tracts of magnificent
land would not always be a mere pastoral
reserve, occupied only in seasons of ex-
treme drought; and for the long inter-
vening periods when the countiy below
enjoyed more favourable seasons, aban-
doned to
Wild Horses.
These pests are extremely numerous,
devour grass enough to maintain large
flocks of sheep and herds of cattle. In
various directions across the plains and
through the timbered country their paths,
like ordinary cattle-tracks, form a com-
plete network, leading to favourite feeding-
grounds, watering places, or crossings ovei
the creeks and rivers. When the country
is unoccupied they roam undisturbed over
the mountains and plains, in herds of


score* and hundreds, sleek and fat, now
feeding, ti"W basking in the sunshine or
reposing in the t-hade, and anon snorting,
neighing, and gambolling in the exuber-
ance of their spirits. Yet in the winter
season presenting conditions the very
opposite of these ; for driven by the deep-
lying snow from the plains, they seek the
retirement of the scrub, and rapidly falling
off m condition, eke out a miserable sub-
sistence by browsing the tops of such
shrubs as remain above the surface of the
snow. It has been remarked that, as the
wild cattle of the mountainous country
below never intrude on the high tablelands,
which they seem to leave as the undis-
puted domain of the wild horses; so the
latter, trying the winter, nevet
venture down off the table binds and
the adjacent high-lying woodlands. They
are rarely se-n in large numbers helcw the
Wombat Ground, or even noith of Dia-
mond Hill. But, nevertheless, when sheep
and cattle invade their domain, these use-
less brutes retire into the most unfre-
quented mountains bv day, descending to
the plains t» feed when the invaders are
quietly ruminating in yards or folds. At
break of day they may he seen trooping
off to their mountain fastnesses, as if con-
scious of their danger from man, or their
weakness and inability to sustain their
claim to the herbage of the plains when
the lord of creation asserts his right to the


same for the use and enjoyment of the
tractable animals which content themselves
in his possession and under his control.
As a proof of the extent to which the
plains are infested bv wild horses it may
he mentioned that in certain spots their
ordure lies in prodigious heaps, -more than
enough to fill the largest horse or bullock
dray. I was very much amused by the
relation of a remark made by one of the
old shepherds to his employer on returning
home one evening with his flock shortly
after he came there. The large heaps of
horse dung referred to had arrested his
attention. “ I see, sii,” said he, -‘that
there has been a power o’ duffing up here;
for all over the plain 1 see where they have
been emptying the pauuches.” And in-
deed at first sight there is a resemblance in
these heaps of manure to the contents of
cattle-paunches, as seen in the vicinity of
killing yards. Had a new-chum made
such a remark, there -would have been
little or no wonder; but for an old hand,
ot thirty or forty years’ standing in the
colony, not to discover at a glance the
difference between horse-dung and cattle-
dung, or to observe that there were no
signs of cattle in the neighbourhood, was
really inexcusable.
Although there are very few wild horses
to be found in the mountains immediate y
below Long Plain, towards the Cotter and
Murrumbidgee, yet they are very immr ous


farther hack to wards Tom orroma and Tumut
distm t; and av> ry good living is some-
times made in shooting them for their
hides. And they are of very little use for
aught else. The stockmen say of the
generality of such asaie eaughtaud broken
in, which i- sometimes done, that they are
all very well for a short distance, but if
you ride one of them on a greater journey
than fourteen or fifteen miles, you must be
prepared to can y your saddle after that
distance.
There is no better sport to a young Aus-
tralian bu-hman, next to kangaroo cours-
ing, than hunting the wild horse. A son
of the gentleman who accompanied me
from Quean hey an on this excursion—one
of the finest young men in the district —
had just before our arrival at Long Plain
displayed a feat of horsemanship in cap-
turing a wi d horse, seldom if ever equalled
for skill and daring. With others, he
started and gave chase to a herd of horses.
Over the plains for miles the pursuit con-
tinued, across river, creeks, and swumps,
till at length a handsome grey horse, more
overburdened with fat than the rest of his
herd, began to show signs of fatigue.
Singling him out from the others, his
pursuer essayed his capture. But how was
this to he done, without yards, fences, or
other ordinary appliances ? A lasso would
have been better than nothing—better than
any means at possible'command just theu.


Gaining ou his prize, however, until sft
length it became a neck and neck race,
faking off his waist-bolt ho placed it over
his captive’s nock, and then led him at bis
will. Others coming to hi* assistance, the
horse was next roped and secured to a tree
lor the night. In three days the wild horse
was compelled to carry a pack to Urayarra,
where he was turned into the paddocks in
hobbles; but bis fetlocks being badly cut
with these they were removed, when all
the untracitableuess of his natuie returned,
and yarded with difficulty, any attempt to
approach him up to the time I left, was
resented by a vigorous striking out with
both bis fore feet.
Ou a high timbered ridge lying between
Long Plain and Old Coolaman Plain there
are the remains of an old trapping yard
for wild horses. Stretching away farther
than the eye could reach, and diverging
east and south, ran two wing fences. Once
driven between these a herd, or portion of
herd of hoi&es wore safe. Dashing ou
ward towards the point of convergence the
bewildered brutes found theintelvcs ulti-
mately between the two high fences, in a
kind of crush, and thence into high yards,
which contained eveiy convenience for
drafting, &c. This trap was erected by
the Messrs. O’iiourke many yearc ago, and
I understand they used then, when the
horses were of a better stamn than their
degenerate descendants of the present day,


to draft out the superior ones and take
them to market where they obtained fair
remunerative prices for them. Of course,
every generation of wild horses becomes
worse and worse, until at length there is
scarcely anything to befoundamong-t tiiem
better than more weeds. Their only value
now is on account uf their hides, for which,
as I have already said, they are frequently
hunted, and if for no other purpose than
getting rid cf them, squatters whose runs
are infested with them should offer a pre-
mium for evety tail.
Snakes
Are uncommonly’ numerous in the locality
of Diamond Hill, Peppercorn Hill, and
Long Plain, bat less so on Coolaman Plain,
<phere there is less water. We killed sev-
eral. In fact it is positively dangeious to
travel ou loot through the grass and
swamps on account of them. They aie
chiefly of the species known as the tiger
snake, and an ugly-looking dull black
variety, different from the black snake in
the settled districts.
Bees
Also are everywhere to be met with. To
me this was jio matter fur surprise, having
observed for some years past that the
majority of vagrant swarms seen Hying
through the air make for the south-west.
A bees’ nest had been taken a few days
before our arrival, and honey formed our


dessert after dinner whilst there. One
peculiarity I observed in this alpine honey
is worth recording. In consistency it was
neaily liquid as water, and in taste and
colour it resembled molasses. I attributed
this to the fact that so far as I could see,
the chief honey-pi oilucing plant here was
the deep yellow everlasting daisv already
mentioned. I never met with honey s<>
dark and inferior in flavour.
That in course of time the whole of this
fine country —licb and well watered as the
Plains of Joidun in the days of Abraham
and Lot—will be occupied by an agricul-
tural and pastoral population I cannot for
a moment entertain any doubt. Nowhere
in Australia is there a finer soil. The sod
turned up by the spade or ploughshare
reveals loam of a rich chocalate-brown of
good depth, and easily brought into a fine
state of tilth. Per agricultural purposes,
this is the best of soil. There can be no
doubt but that the quick-growing varieties
of wheat would thrive here. If sown be-
fore the snow set in in the early part of
the winter, and nursed by its warm mantle
till spring, it would rapidly come to per-
fection early in the ensuing summer. In
fact, barley and rye, and any other cereal
usually grown in the highlands of Scot-
land, as well as turnips and other cattlo-
feedmg roots, may be grown here despite
the severity of winter; for the summer is
long enough for any such purpose, and the


absence of dry winds andseasons of drought
would render the raising of all suitable
crops a matter unattended by risk. As for
horned stock, without which no Farm would
bo complete. other* besides rnysolf are of
opinion that the black long-haired cattle of
the highlands of Scotland, if introduced
hem, would prove exactly adapted to the
climate. And as regards protection from
snow, what is t<> prevent the building of
snow-sheds and the feeding of stock there-
under during winter time, as is doi e else-
where !' Rootcropa and dry fodder could of
coii'so be provided for winter consumption.
A well-known squatter iu one of the
neighbouring districts is enthusiastic on
the practicability of occupying this terri-
tory with live stock throughout winter,
provided due precaution be taken for their
protection. He had bis stock up there at
the time of our visit; and was seriously
contemplating the making of arrange-
ments for introducing black Scotch cattle,
and wintering there with them, *
1 repeat, that as our Australian popula-
tion increases, and the territory elswhere
becomes occupied, people fioin this, and
Tumut, and Monaro districts will finally
take up and farm and cultivate the rich
lands for miles around the principal source
of the Murmmhidgee. Ido not eav it un-
kindly, but the squatter must by and by.
* Considerable herds of this variety of cattle me
being depastured hereabout* now, ami *taml the
winter* well.


as a matter of course, sun ender his tenure
of these magnificent lands to the sous of
the soil, and ere long alpine pioneers will
bo found found breaking up the turf of
these beautiful plains and clearing the rich
lands of the adjacent bush, and there suc-
cessfully waging war with Old Winter
on his very thione; and where now the
wild horse holds almost indisputed sway,
and the squatter but occasionally falls back
for temporary grass and water, happy
homesteads will spring up, and domestic
comfort and profitable industry will reign
supreme.
Immediately on our arrival at Long
Plain—an event which was scarcely looked
for, seeing that for several days previously
the heavy and continuous rains had been
such as to lead to the impression that
nothing but urgent business would induce
anyone to travel —preparations wore made
•for a visit on a grand scale to the
Caves of Coolamon Plains.
My projected visit had been talked of for
some weeks, and it was decided that when-
ever 1 came a large party should be in
readiness to proceed on the subterranean
exploit which was to form one of the two great
objects of my trip. Messengers were con-
sequently sent off at onco to the neigh-
bouring station at Coolamon, to apprise
those in charge that the following day
(Wednesday) was fixed for the excursion ;
and from. Coolamon, again, a message was


conveyed he a mote distant station to some
gentleman there who were to form members
of the party.
At the station where we remained for the
night, sundry preparations were being car-
ried on up to a late hour such as the
mannfactuiing of torches and candles, and
collecting fouls for operations in the caves.
Some of us. however, repaired to rest,
leaving two of our number to complete ar-
rangements, while an old Scotch shephoid
amused them with performances on the
bagpipes, interspersed with sundry stories.
One of these was of a certain Scotch piper
who once upon a time went into a cave
with his pipes, playing a well-known Scotch
air, and was never seen alive again; but
ever afterwards the sound of his bagpipes
wailed through the cavern to the self-same
tune, down to this very day. With similar
stories of the exploits of brownies and
faiiics of the olden times 'every part and
parcel of which the old man religions!}'
believed' he beguik-d the weary hours till
loug past midnight, when I had the satis-
faction of heating them all turn in.
Starting for the Caves.
The previous day closed with eivry
symptom of a favourable change in the
weather; and Wednesday morning dawned
clear and bright, although the air was cool
enough to reader fire an agreeable accom-
paniment at breakfast. Soon after that


important business was transncli-d, we were
in our saddles—half-a-dozen of ns. Our
way led over undulating plains,
crystal streams, upthrough a b*-lt of timber,
and on by the old trapping-yard alluded to
before. Shortly after passing this point,
the wooded uplands we w«’r© now in were
exchanged for a sudden and shaip descent ;
and down several hundred feet below lay
Old Goolamon Plain. It whs here the late
Mr. G - . Palmer lost his fine he'd of cattle,
which perished in the snow mmy rears ago T
as already stated. We came <1 iwn light
upon the old stockyard dill standing, and,
what is more astonishing, where are yet
to be seen the deeply worn cuttle.hacks, in
shape resembling a figure eight, which the
famished brutes made by a long continued
and circuitous tramp over the sain-* gr mud,
before (as soon as the snow began to thaw)
they finally and irrecoverably strayed
away. This plain is very extensive, formed
of undulating ground, wellgmssed and
abundantly watered—a large creek flow-
ing through it, besides containing springs
and gilghi holes, from which fatter circum-
stance, probably, it derived its mime—
"jolnmon being the aboriginal word for a
large water vessel which these gilghies
somewhat resemble iu shape.
We followed for a while the course of the
main creek, which seemed to be atributaiv
or the source of the Goodradigboe River,
and then ascending some ri?ing ground


shortly rnme upon the molt extensivelime-
stone pinins known as I'oolamon.
The view from here is sublime. Many
miles nwHv stretch the open plains singu-
larly dotted with patches of bare flat lime-
stone. looking in the distance like so many
flock* of sheep camped during the heat of
the day. Fo'lowing the plain along in the
direct'on of the waterflow, vast cliffs and
gorges appear in view indescribably grand.
More distant towards the east tow-
ers aV.ve all other mountain heights
Mount Murray, a well-defined monn
tain named after the late President
of the Legislative Council, who in
the earlier times occupied some land in the
neighbourhood. Umiberi and other notable
mountains nroalso visible from the locality
we were tone travelling over. The scenery
of Coo'nmon i.* fur more beautiful and
sublime than any I had beheld in my
journey.
We reached Mr. De Solis's station about
half-past ten in morning. Mr. W. F. De
Sails (our late representative) was at home
and welcomed us heartily. In a cluster of
sallies a tarpaulin formed the temporary
homestead; a large tire horned at a fallen
log; sndd.es, bridles, horse-shoes, anil
sundry other useful nicknaoks hung in the
trees mound; a wild horse’s hide was
pegged out on the ground close by ; and a
stately native-companion, perfectly domes-
ticated, fraternised with everyone about


the place, without respect to peiso;is. Thi*
handsome bird, the captive of but a week
or two—if captive it bo called, while
having leave and license to wander a* it
chose —was so attached toa'.l hands on the
station, that it frequently followed the
stockmen some distance from home, and
went to meet them mi their return.
Ooolamon stt-tion was the place of general
rendezvous; and hero consequently we
awaited the arrival of the rest of the party.
Mr, Do Salis’s first inquiry, ami naturally
so, was for political news.
Shut out from the World
fr>r weeks together, he hail heard nothing
of the change which had taken place in
political affairs. The defeat of Mr. I’arkes’s
Ministry; the difficulty for a while ex-
perienced by the Governor in finding some
one to form a new Cabinet; and the
ultimate sending for Mr Robertson and
his success in forming a Ministry, and the
members who composed it, were all the
freshest of news to our host, to whom at
that time a few old newspapers (which I
felt sorry we had not with ua to place at
his disposal) would have been a decided
treat. It is only under such circumstances
that one can form a proper estimate of the
periodical press.
In talking politics and kiudied gossip we
whiled away the time till the arrival of the
expected reinforcements, when after a


ha«ty lunch we were again all in the saddle
—a merry party of thirteen—and half an
hoar’s ride brought us to
The First Cave.
The entrance to this is situated at the
side of a creek, which at this point runs
through a deep valley whoso sides aro com-
posed alternately of high cliffs and pre-
cipitous grassy slopes. Descending one of
the latter by a winding course, to render
our progress easier, we were presently at
the cave's month which is on a level with
the creek, and is in fact the outlet of a
subterranean tiibutary to the main creek.
Our horses were soon unsaddled and left to
graze in the neighbourhood, and in a brief
time, everyone furnished with a light, and
some carrying implements which it was
expected might be found necessary for use.
we scrambled over the rocks which impeded
our course and were in a large chamber
which forms the entrance-hall to the won-
derful apartments, vaults, and passages
further in.
The Haunted Cave.
Not more than three years ago the re-
mains of a large-sized man were found in
the mouth of one of the Coolamaii caves,
and further iu, those of a smaller person,
supposed to be a woman. An imprest was
held, which resulted in a finding that the
remains were those of a man and woman
who bad travelled together as hawkers.


[The common belief was that a double
murder had been committed, aud the re-
mains hidden where they were found. Hut
there was no conclusive proof adduced.]
That particular cave has ever since been
known as the “ Murderer’s Cave," and
superstitions stockmen and boundary riders
believe it to be haunted; and indeed the
same impression exists as to all the otlmr
caves. I was not much surprised, there-
fore, to hear from some of the men and
hoys in our party such exclamations as
“ Look out for the hairy man,” “ Take emo
of the ghost," etc., etc.
It was resolved that, before staying to
examine its wonders, we should pursue our
way to the extreme end of the long and
principal passage of the cave, and inspect
more carefully on our return. The floor of
this passage is the bed of a creek, and in
parts contained an uncomfortable depth of
water. With more or less difficulty we
threaded our way for some considerable
distance, when the leaders of the party
came to a sudden halt, with a cry of—
“ Hark I what’s that?”
One moment sufficed to silence the cla-
mour of a dozen tongues ; and the next
filled with evident alarm the breasts of
those who just before had so flippantly
talked of ghosts and goblins. It was no
imaginary sound which came wailing
through the cavorn—a gurgling scream, a


■woird cry and a deep n oan Wended. Was
it the wind? Not a Wrath of air was
afloat, and bad ft hunicano raped without,
!*■ could not have stirred in the [east degree
the close atmosphere of that great cavern.
The SM-mda which struck upon cur ems
were f"<i 'avious and complicated for that,
even hid it been possible for the storm to
stir thor-e subterranean depths. To my
mind ir seemed more like the screams of
bagpipes gurgling up from the waters of a
flood; but probably that idea arose fiom
the story told by the old Scotch shepherd
on the pinions evening. Some of the
partv were for retreating ; others seemingly
more uiave were for proceeding to investi-
gate the cause of the Unearthly sounds
still reverberating through the cave. Num-
bers inspire coinage even it: timid and
craven bieasts. So it was resolved that the
cause of the mysterious sounds should be
sought for. They seemed to arise a hun-
dred yards or more ahead. Presently we
came upon a chaip turn in the passage.
The sound was still far in the distance. We
had all crowded together, everyone eager
in his anxiety to di'cnver the cause of the
party’s discomfiture. Just as our lights
flashed around the angle a splendid ledge
of stulamite was revealed, white as snow
and glistening like diamonds. But. did
our eyes deceive us ? Did the fantastical
stnney shapes, created by the dripping
waters of ages, aided by out excited imng


inations, resolve themselves info ghostly
form, or was it
A Veritable Spectre
crouching there ? Everyone started back-
wards at the sight; some oven seemed
petrified themselves, ft surely could be
nothing else than » curious stalamite for-'
motion in human shape, the folds of whose
snow-white raiment were formed <>f grace-
ful foliated limestone. And vet there was
the long, flowing, flaxen bean), with cor-
responding shaggy loots, the jria mg eves,
the firmly set mouth, ai.d the hands with
clenched fingers resting on the breast.
Those eyes, fixed upon us, as if amazed at
our temerity, and resolving upon inflicting
condign punishment lor our intrusion,
seemed to flash back the light of our many
torches Perhaps after all they wore only
sparkling crystals set in lifeless stone. But
was it the smoke-clouds from our lights,
or did that mouth and those nostrils in
reality breathe forth fumes and vapour?
Our attitudes just then would have been a
study for a painter. The younger ones
slunk behind ; the boldest spirits amongst
us stood their ground, it is true, but stood as
if in breathless awe. One or two of the party
had been in the cave more than once before,
and had net confronted this horrible vision,
nor even beard the still-continuing doleful
sounds ivhich contributed so much to the
horror of the moment. One, braver than


the vest, ventured closer to the spectre—if
spectre it was—sitting so passive on that
glistening ledge and forming, as it were,
part ami parcel of the same ; and with Lie
light raided high over his head intrepidly
inspected the apparition, from whose
nostiils and mouth the vapour seemed to
stieam in thicker clouds. There could be
no mistake.
If ever there was a butvo and dauntless
heart in the world, that heart was possessed
by Albert as proved by his awe-
stricken but firm behaviour in that trying
moment, as he stood face to face with what
evidently was a living form, hideous as it
was.
A deep guttoral moan uttered by the ap-
parition extorted the cry from more than
one. “Brain him I - ’ and simultaneously
Steve Grady seized a stone and was about
to hurl it at the spectre’s head. I caught
his arm ; for I was not satisfied but that,
whatever it was. it must bo flesh and blood.
Just as I seised Steve’s ami and checked
his murderous aim, there was a general
shout; for the spectre had arisen from his
seat, and leaping in amongst the crowd,
filled the place with steamy clouds, which
arose from his long flowing garment, issued
in volumes from his nr uth and nostrils,
and was scattered fiom the palms of his
hands. The lights were nearly all extin-
guished and the utmost alarm and confu-
sion prevailed.


Every mystery has its -solution. Those
who are familiar with ghostly lore, know
full well that even the most awful appari-
tions or thrilling adventures resolve them-
selves into some simple affair or owe their
origin to natural and commonplace caa-ea.
In the earlier numbers, published many
years age, iff Chambers's Tracts for the
People, there may be found some capital
ghost stories illustrative of the above
remarks. It remains, therefore, for me to
proceed with
The Solution
of the extraordinary adventure recorded
above.
The denouement with which that ghost
story concluded, was, in short, that of one
of the beet concerted tricks which ever
came under my notice. It was concocted
at the fireside at Long Plain station on the
previous evening. Two or three only,
besides the originators, were in the secret;
and its object was to try the effect of an
apparition upon the nerves and courage of
those of our party who were not in the
secret. Never was there a better get-up
for the role of aghust; and really startling
and supernatural as the effect was, under a
partial failure of the plan, it would, but
for one untoward circumstance, have been
one of the best practical jokes upon record
—though a rather risky one.
The ghost-trick having been resolved
upon, preparations were next undertaken


for putting ir into practice. The old hut-
keepe 1 's chunter, with which he had be-
guiled the previous hours, was in the first
place laid under contiibrition. That in-
st' was to perform an important part
iu the trick; and consequently several
expeiim“iit-were tried in wder tn extract
from it ivtfain hideous sounds most ap-
proved a* those supposed to
emannte from the spirit-worid. Then old
ropes were teased into hempen fibre, white
cloths W’ re in requisition, and the flour-
bug itself taxed for a portion of its con-
tents to complete the paraphernalia of a
spectre. As for the intended plan of
operations, all that was left to the party
who were to carry out the ghost trick.
In the morning they accompanied us ns
far as Old Cool*...an, where th»\v left tis
for the direct mute to the cave, having first
used eveiv precaution to ensure secrecy,
and obtained from u* a ,dedge that in the
event of violence being offered to them by
any of the affrighted members of the
party, we would interpose to protect them.
Just as wh were parting, a horseman Was
discerned crossing the plain in the direction
the ghost-pwsonatore wcre;ibouttopnrsu«.
This caused some further deliberation. If
he should prove to be one of the party
about to vkit the cave, as he must inevi-
tably see our two comradestnaking straight
for the direction, the (heat would he de-
tected. But the next moment a flock of


sheep was noticed in close proximity to thn
stranger, who was then discovered to be
one of Mr. DeSalis’a shepherds—“a Quean ~
beyan fellow,” who would knew nothing of
our ghost party ; “and,” add'd our spokes-
man, “when you get up to him. just say to
him. ‘mate, docs Mr. DeSafis want any
boundary tiders or stockmen 'f ’ and he’ll
never suspect your intentions ”
With tho intorchunye of a familiar - ‘st»
long.” we made for Mr. DoSwlis's camp,
and (hoy for the cave.
All that transpired at the firmer place
and by the mam body of 'be excursionists
until they confronted the spectre in the
cave, my readers are a'ready conversant
with; and it now remains for me to state,
by way of explanation, that when the
ghost paity'arrived at thu entrance to the
cave, their first caio was to secure their
horses at some distance out of sight, so
that on the arrival of the main bodv of
excursionists nothing .should present itself
to lead to the suspicion that anyone was in
the neighbourhood. All this faithfully
performed, they entered the cave with all
their ghostly appliances. One stationed
himself in the extreme end of the ca\e,
and plunging his chanter under water
nearly'to its reed, produced the gurgling
scream which first attracted the notice of
the party, The other, hating completed
his fixings, seated himself at the angle of
the passage before described, and thus both


patiently awaited the advent of the rest ot
the party.
The unexpected delay occasioned at the
place of getieial rendezvous was, however,
well mgb the cause of reudeiing the whole
scheme abortive. Weary of waiting for
upwards of an hour in their respective
positions in that damp and dark cavern,
Us occupants, expecting the arrival of the
party by a route which would have rendered
the cave’s mouth invisible to them until
close up ni it, sillied forth to relieve their
muuutony by a glimpse of daylight. I'ut,
unluckily, just at the moment of then-
ariivui at Uio enhance of the cave, the
whom body oi their comrades appeared on
tne heights over against them. Of couise
they instantly retreated, fearing they had
been detected, and the consequent frustra-
tion of their plot, which, nevertheless, they
resolved u]Jon carrying out as well as under
the circumstances they could.
It was a must fortunate circumstance, as
we afterwards ascertained, that the indi-
viduals at the cave’s mouth were seen by
only two of three of the party; and they,
having called the attention of some of us
who wore already in the secret to the fact,
divining that some practical joke was being
carried out, wisely held their peace, except
when entering the first chamber of the
cave giving utterance tn such exclamations
ns previously recorded.


Although. therefore, some of the party
were prepared for something of the sort,
there were others who were in utter ignor-
ance of any trick concocted for their sur-
prise. sTet even those who were in the
secret, myself amongst the number, had
not the slightest idea of the details or
locality of the surprise. With all our
previous knowledge, we shaied to some
extent the excitement and thrill of horror
produced by the cheat. In such a place —
deep in the caverns of the earth, and sur-
rounded by a gloom dark as the shades of
death —that which elsewhere would have
been perhaps a clumsy attempt, bordering
on the ridiculous, here seemed to assume
the sublime and to merge into the realities
of the spirit world itself.
But when the climax was reached—when
the spectre leaped forth from the throne of
stalagmite pillars and drapery—when
“ The bravest of them a’ ”
(though he was not exactly a Macgregov)
seized the spectre by his beard, and tore
away both that and his shaggy locks, and
a dozen excited fellows began to discover
the trick, the scene was most grotesque.
As he threw off his robes and with his face
still whitened with the contents of the
fiour-bag (with which also he had tilled his
nostrils, mouth, hands and raiment, and,
previously enveloped himself in apparent
vapour), I was forcibly reminded of the


■conducin'! verse of an old nautical song—
“ Tom Tfick’s Ghost”—sang many years
ago by some theatrical star at Drury Lane
Theatre
Thew off his winding-abeet he tbrow'd
And by bis trousers, Tom T bnow'd ;
TTe wasn’t dead, but come to mesa;
So there's an end as you may guess.
For then* stood our friend the ghost, who
bad .pined with us in the merry laugh
which succeeded the consternation.
As at. instance of the success of the plot
—somewhat marred as it was by the un-
timely appi aiance of the chief actors at the
mouth of the cave —I accosted Steve Grady
to ascertain whether he really meant to
hurl the heavy stone (which he held in bis
hand at the time I arrested his arm' at the
spectre’s head. I said—
Did jou leally mean to throw that stone,
Steve?—l did, indeed; I’d a’ dashed the
creature's brains out if you hadn’t caught
my arm.
Didn’t you know who it, was?—Well, 1
saw the two men go into the cave ; but 1
never thought that ugly monster was one
of them, I thought it was some big brute
or other.
Well. Steve, it well that I seized your
arm, or there might have been man-
slaughter,
I’d a’ throw’d the atone anyway, was the
candid young boundary-rider's reply.


Albert MeCullam, I ought lo say, wa?
armed with a revolver, ami had his hand
upon it in his hip pocket, but Mr. J. Mc-
Donald was ready to prevent hi* using it,
had the attempt been made. It was ho
who so courageously approached the spectie,
us described before. Ho was amongst the
numbei of the uninitiated: and both his.
aud the self-possession i>f others in like
ignorance with himself, inu®t really be put
down to the score of true courage ; they
afterwards averred, that they hud not the
least idea of any trick bmng plm'-d. Tbes©
brave fellows may after this be safely
trusted in any position of sndd-n danger
or alarm. They will never suffer through
want of firmness of mind aud self posses-
sion.*
As soon as our first excitement was over,
we were joined by the other conspiiator,
who had returned from hi* more remote
station with the broken chanter in his baud,
with which he had contributed his share to
the exciting adventure just concluded.
I have perhaps been too prolix in this
solution of the mystery of the haunted
cave; for which I must crave the readers’
indulgence.
* Sumo few years offer this Albert Mrt'iillara per-
ished of thirst, with two others, in a futile attempt to
muke Cooper's Creek by crossing a waterless tract of
country TO miles in length.


Interior of the Caves.
It is with difficulty that access is gained
to the first cave. Picking our way over a
mass ot broken rocks and entering a nar-
row opening, we found ourselves standing
in a spacious chamber with a lofty roof.
There was nothing of special interest here.
But approaching a dark passage further in,
and which was reached bv a somewhat
difficult ascent, we first met with a number
of hollow cavities in the roc a, in form like
bowls, and varying in size and capacity.
They all contained water, and more or less
rounded pebbles - both basins and pebb'es
having evident y owed their peculiar forms
to the action ot the water which at times
flows through the principal passage of the
cave in great volume Before proceeding
far the stalactite formations begin to show
themselves. Depending fiom the loof of
the main passage, which at intervals rises
to a great height, are hundreds of inverted
cones, from a few inches to many feet in
length. These are very beautiful, being
white as snow and tapering gracefully like
icicles. Many of them are divided and
branched, smaller points mining put from
a principal formation like fingers from a
hand. Some formations again adhere to
the side walls. These are generally not so
white, but partake of a rich sulphur hue,
and assume most extraordinary shapes,
baffling description. Some of them strongly
resemble honeycombs as seen in a bethiie,


others assume designs as it' sculptured by
the hand of man. O'her fonimtious were
white and smooth as polished marble, some
sparkling with gem-liko lustre, some re-
sembled molten wax poured over the rocks
to which it clung and remaining there
fixed in the most grotesque and fantastical
shapes; others, masses of coral formation
branching off in every direction. While
exploring the main passage we were en-
raptured with its wonderful objects, every
individual or cluster of which presented
some novelty or charm possessed by no
otheis. This passage extends at least
three-quarters of a mile, judging by the
fact that it took twelve minutes of brisk
walking to go from end to end. At one
time this main passage extended much
farther arid was never thoroughly explored,
owing to the presence of foul air. At the
distance above named the roof has fallen
in and barred all further progress, but here
we came upon a cavity, how deep we had
no means of ascertaining, containing water.
It had all the appearance of a well, and
was the main source of the creek which
runs through the principal passage,
although it was not overflowing at the time
of our visit. We threw several stones
down into the water, and from the deep
booming sound produced, it seemed to be
of very great depth. Besides the principal
passage there were chambers branching off
on both sides, several of which with more


or less difficulty wo explored and found
them all of a v«mv interesting character.
On >omo high lodges nr galleries there
were mas-ive stalagmite pillars beautifully
crusted with a kind of fretwork,
In some of the chambers we found more
.basins resembling those at the enhance of
the cave. Thin- were filled with Water ami
contained in addition balls of sparkling
ciystals and highly-polished pebbles.
Leaving this cave we saddled up, and
proceeded further. One way still led
across and down the plain in the direction
of the creek, which sometimes ran through
yawning chasms of rock a hundred feet in
height or more, and in other parts deep
valleys whose steep sides were clothed with
verdure. In the course of half an hour
we dismounted, partook of lunch, and
descending an almost pcipendicular bole
were in
The Second Cave.
This, though mote difficult to explore
than the first, was by far the more inter-
esting. Its passages were more numerous
and its formations were more cmi-uis and
beautiful. Had we not a reiiahlo guide it
would have been uusaf-* to venture as far
as we did through its gloomy caverns and
intricate passages, which in places wore so
low as to necessitate our lying at full
length and dragging mn selves along in
that posture for many yards together, to


the great peril of broken heads and shins - ,
from which several of us suffered.
At one time our guide outsMipped us
and we lost him for a while altogether.
Pursuing our way with difficuhv for what
seemed a weary distance suddenly
found mirselyes iu a magnificent chamber.
Its floor was not more than twelve or
fourteen feet in diameter, but fully thirty
feet high, and formed a perfect hollow
cone, reminding one of being within a
lofty spire or gigantic belfry. The walls
were yellowish white and smooth as marble,
and, strange as it may appear not a single
stalactite bung from the r<>of. or stalagmite
rose from the ground. The remarkable
absence of these gave this lofty chamber
the appearance of being the wotk of man
rather than that of the gieat Architect
himself. We sang two or three airs, in-
cluding the National Anthem, bore, and
the effect was grand indeed.
Breaking up of the Party.
As soon as we joined those of our com-
rades who, for various reasons, preferred
to remain outside, whilst only a few of us
explored the second cave, wo prepared to
depart to our various quarters. Whilst
some, however, were smoking their pines,
three or four of us clambered over the
grand pile of rocks in which lay the caves
we had just emerged from to survey the
surrounding scenery. Presently


An Awful Chasm
lay at our feet, at whose run the
Cotter River, which derives its source not
far away. From the water’s edge the
rooks rose perpendicularly on either side
for at-least one bundled and fifty feet, and
as we ventured out on a narrow ledge
whence we could take the best view of this
yawning gulf below, it became too apparent
that a false step, a giddiness of the head,
or a e.ight push, r.uet be attended with
instant destruction. Our movements
therefore were made with the utmost
precaution-, : and indeed, although I was
not the most venturesome of the party, I
felt only too glad, and breathed again with
freedom, when I regained a safer footing
some distance buck. I only regretted that
the declining hour of the day rendered it
impracticable to stay longer either for the
purpose of entering other caves, (of which
there are five in the neighbourhood'! or
viewing more of the bold and rugged
landscape sceueiy surrounding us on every
band. The lover ,of the sublime und
beautiful in nature could spend a fortnight
on this one plain, and then depart unac-
quainted with many of its most interesting
features.
Returning, to our companions, we
mounted our hoses and rode westward
with the rays of the declining sun stream-
ing over the plains and dazzling our eyes.
We now foimed a strong party of fifteen


mounted men, and cantering onwards for
about half-a-mile, we came down into the
valley of the principal creek. Here we
separated with reciprocal expressions of
good-will, nine of the party tiling off to
the south up a broad slope covered with a
lovely carpeting of grass, whilst our wing,
comprising the remaining six,, crossed the
creek, and gained the high land by means
of a wild horse tiack leading up to the
ridge of a great pile of rocks.
Shoitly afterwards we descended into
another valley, and came suddenly in front
of the base of a mass of towering
Rock Resembling a Fortification
on a gigantic scale. Its abrupt perpen-
dicular columns seemed to frown down
upon a gloomy pool of water at its base.
This poor appeared to be as deep as the
rock was high, was ten or twelve yatds in
diameter, and was fed from its own inter-
nal springs ; for while the creek leading to
it contained but a trickling stream, imme-
diately below the rock-pool the creek
suddenly assumed the proportions ot a
rivulet. This rock had been an object of
interest to others before our advent, for on
One of the branches of a sapling growing
on the margin of the pool we found a
sardine tin hanging. Taking it down we
saw inscribed on its bottom —
w. Fane De Salis,
John White,
Cuppacumbalong,
1860.


Nine years later another visitor's attention
had been attracted to the interesting tablet;
for on one of its sid s it bore the inscrip-
tion—
P. O’Rourke,
Curranuoi ambla,
1868.
At the request of my companions, I added
on another of its sides
J. Gale and Party,
1875.
We then replaced the tin where we found
it and left the locality.
A Remarkable Landslip.
Oonsidering the number and extent of
the caves already discovered on t ’oolaman
Plain, and the formation of the country,
there can be very little doubt that the
entire plain atamnds with subterranean
caverns, the greater number of which have
no outlet. Li proof of this I may adduce
the following extraordinary sight which
we came upon in the course of our home-
ward jonrnev. On an elevated and level
portion of the plain we met with a largo
depression of the surf,me, per fectly ciicular,
from three to fair chains in diameter, ami
in its centre (which formed a shaft) about a
chain and a half in depth. It presented
the appearance of. an immense funnel, with
sides so steep that a descent could only be
accomplished by sliding or rolling.- At the
bottom and in its shaft lay the remains of


a wild horse which had evidently been
incautiously feeding too near the edge or
down its precipitous sides and missing his
footing had rolled into the yawning shaft,
which thus became his grave. The appear-
ance of tho place was that of the extinct
crater of a volcano; or. as I rather incline
to believe, the funnel-shaped hollow owed
its origin to the falling in of the roof of a
subterranean cave, as has already been
noticed in the case of that we first entered.
It was night before we reached our
quarters, where we passed a pleasant hour
or two, recounting to the shepherds and
others not of our party the incidents of
the day. The old hut beeper bore the
news of the breaking of his chanter reed
with greater resignation than we antici-
pated. And, after ai ranging our plans for
the morrow, we retired to rest.
Starting for the Waterfalls.
On Thursday morning, William Reid and
I set out on an excursion to the waterfalls
about which so much had been said. For
various reasons we could prevail on no one
else to accompany us. In fact those who
knew anything of the country we proposed
to explore anticipated the difficulties we
should have to cope with, and shrank from
the undertaking. However, I bad faith in
my sole companion, who was an experi-
enced bushmau and then supposed to be
the only living person who had seen the
stependous sight we were in quest of.


From the table lands our di’-ect. routs
lay through the Himberi mountains, but
as it was believed thht the obstacles *•<> be
ertritiounted in that direction wdre so’great
that in point of time we should be losers,
w> i esolveil to take the beaten trank by
way of Diamond Hill and the Wombat
t?ri and, nnd then by a detohr eastward
bve'r the Gnodradigbee Diver and up the
Hrindaboffa range gain the goal of bur
ainbitib n.
So sanguine was mv’companion of mak-
ing'short wort'of it—-<»# reaching the Falls
without anj' blunder or delay, and getting
back to BrmadbeHa Station in one day, that
he deemed it superfluous to take unv extra
clothing, blankets, or mateiials for calnp-
ing out; and acting upon hts advice, I
earned nothing beyond my breechloader
fowling piece and a dozen cartridges, with
an overcoat Strapped before me, aftd he
nothing mote than the clothes he wore,
and a small piece of thin damper cake
about enough dor a moderate lunch for two.
Nothing worth recording occurred until
we left the beaten tiuckto muie for the
mountains and thence to the Falls.
“ Do you sbe that bare patch o’f rock on
that highest peak afcay in the 'clouds to the
north?''' said my'companion.
“ I do." I replied.
“We must first make that point, which
we reach at one o’clock” [lt was now
twenty minutes to eleven} “ and from there


half-an-hour’s travelling will bring us to
the Falls.”
We were now in very rugged country,
rounding the sides of precipitous hills,
down at whose bases, meandering through
deep gorges and over a golden pebbly bed,
ran the Ooodradigbee Biver, clear as crys-
tal, except at short intervals, where, broken
in its descent over miniature falls and
rapids, it changed into snowy foam, now
see'hing like a cauldron, and anon babbling
like a group of children out at play.
To reach the bare patch on the highest
mountain visible to the north, we bad to
travel towards every point of the compass
for a while. Presently, however, we fol-
lowed the course of the river around the
base of a sugarloaf mountain using from
the basin of a vast hollow formed by a
lotty semi-circular range, at tho northern
end of which we again saw the patch of
rock, which to us had now become the
pole-star of our movements. Here we
crossed the river, and ascending tho spur
of the great range at a gradient of one in
two, our work of difficulty began in earn-
est, Shortly the sugarloaf which had
towered high over head began to show its
green and treeless summit beneath our
loet. fho bare patch of rock was no longer
visible, but taking the sugarloaf as our
laud mark, and keeping still on the crown
of the ascending ridge, we toiled onwards
and upwaids. In many places we found


our progress seriously impeded by the
almost innumerable burrows of wombats,
and by the increasing quantity of fallen
timber which lay strewn in every direction
us the result of a recent bush firs. In
parts it became impossible from these com-
bined cause-* tn ride, and we had to dis-
mount ami lea I our horses.
Mr. Hold's prediction proved coirect to a
minute, though it struck me us more by
guess th.ui by exactness of calculation.
It was nne o'clock and we stood with our
panting steeds, almost breathless <>ui selves,
on the spot which a few hours before we
saw penetrating the clouds.
From this elevated point we hail a mag-
nificent view of the valley below through
which the liver wo hid crossed threaded
its way. the chief object of interest being
the Brindabella homestead some two or
three miles to the west.
After horses and riders had regained
breath, we began our descent on theeastern
slopes of the range Presently the timber
became thicki-r and the undergrowth so
much so as t:> lender t-i<• veiling both slow
and tedious. If my mute hud been correct
before in his calculations a* to our progress,
he was sadly at fault now. Half an hour,
one hour, two hours had passed, and wo
were still but a comparatively short dis-
tance down the steep sides of that scrubby
jange. If there was a waterfall anywhere


in the neighbourhood. it mh<t yet bn fiir
away down in the unities below us.
As yet the only object of interest tf> me
in this region win the splendid
timbei which abounded. The trees were
all of immense height ant girth, anil
straight ns the masts of a man-of-war:
and I could not hut expedience a feeling of
regret that such valuable materia! should
flourish and decay there for ages without
tho remotest chance of its being ntili-ed.
The soil, in every other respect, was quite
barren, and strange indeed it appeared to
me that whib it produced such tine timber
it nourished scarcely a blade of grass.
At two o’clock we came in view of a
small clear grassy flat, not more than two
or three acres in extent, in the midst of
which was a shallow lagoon Here it was
suggested by Mr. R id that we should
hobble out our hoises, partake of our
lunch, and proceed on foot through the
scrub to the Kalis, which he was certain
Wei’s not more than a mile distant, Com-
ing to the lagoon to diink we found the
water shallow and muddy with cattle tracks
abounding. This flat was evidently the
resort of
A Mob of Wild Cattle
who found in the surrounding scrub a safe
retreat from their pursuers when disturbed
(which it was apparent they but rarely
were) by the approach of arm. as they had
just been by our appearance. As yet we


had not caught sight of them, hut we
heaid them crashing through the scrub iu
an adjacent gully, in their haste to escape
from our vicinity.
('oiwdering the late hour of the dar.
Hud the work which lay before us, we now
began to regret that we had not made
provision tor contingencies. As a prudent
measure we judged it needful to divide our
lunch into halves, reserving one for a later
hour, and contenting ourselves withashort
allowance and a chink of clean water from
a deep hoof-piint which we found near the
muddy lagoon.
We now started on foot for the Palls.
Our way led up the gully, whore we heard
tlie crash of the cattle, and over a ridge,
beyond which my mate said lay the Water-
fall Creek. The disturbed cattle had not
gone far, for stalled afresh by our approach
we heaid them still passing fhiough the
scrub, and Mr. Ibid said he caught a
glimpse cf them. In our excitement we
forgot the main object of our excursion,
ami pursued the fleeting herd. My . om-
panioa had outstrip] ed me, but a shrill
clear whistle revealed his whereabouts, and
I hastened to join him. Presently I e.-pied
him standing on a rock and beckoning me
to approach. When 1 stood alongside of
him he in a whisper drew my attention to
the upraised heads of five fine beasts peer-
ing over the scrub about twenty yards
below, Oue was that of a large-framed


bullock, the others were those of cows.
Although they failed to discover us by the
aid of their vision, their keen sense of
smell enabled them to detect danger or foes
near at hand. They sniffed the air, lowed,
and in other ways exhibited great uneasi-
ness.
“ Shall I shoot P ” asked my companion
in a whisper.
“No,” I responded; “that bullock is
somebody’s property; and if the cows are
unbranded, they or their offspring may be
of value to someone yet, and it can do us
no good to kill one.”
Little did I suspect that ere the following
morning I should equally wth ray com-
panion regret the advice I had given.
“ Now if you will go down quietly to
the right,” said he, “ I’ll get below them
on the left and start them up to you so that
you cau get a good look at them.”
I took up my position behind the rock
against an opening where the cattle must
pass if successfully turned I had not
long to wait before a volley of snortiugs
and a crashing of the scrub intimate 1 the
approach of the cattle. The next moment
three handsome cows—one spotted, and
two red ones—dashed by me within ten or
twelve feet at a furious gallop, which whs
increased in speed when I stepped out of
my hiding place, and showed raj self.
Sleek and fat were the handsome animals,
and would hive fetched six pounds sterling


apiece in any saleyard in the Southern
districts. But they had never seen a yard
or felt a rope or brand, and in such a
country as that where we found them, no
human stratagem could capture them.
When joined by mv companion, he told
me that the b-g bullork and one of the
cows had go ,o off down the range, and
having given over the pursuit, we set out
to reach th“ Pads. But it was evident
that in indulging our curiosity to get a
good view ol the wild cattle, we had got
Out of Our Latitude;
and in a va,'t region of tangled scrub and
giant trees it was no easy matter to take
our bearings. It was become overcast and
threatened rain, so we had nothing but the
“lay of the coun.rv,” as old bushmen call
it, to guide ns. After wandering nearly
an hour, Mr. Ki 1 proposed, to leave me
where I was. and endeavour to ascertain
our whereabouts, He left me the gun, and
was away just half an hour, when he came
back with the humj'iating confession that
for the present we were hopelessly astray
and had better make th° best of opr way
back to our hprses, camp for the night, and
set out afresh for the Falls in thp qwrnjng,
I suggested that circumstanced as we
Wpre we h a d better abandon opr project,
and while daylight lasted make the best of
our way back to Brindabeila.
“ That will never do. ’ retorted he. “Do


stay for the nii/ht; I’ll mate you as com-
fortable p. 9 I can. I don’t care for any-
thing to eat ; yon can have what damper in
left. I won’t hurt till to-morrow.”
“Yon are veiy genemiis. ” I remarked,
“ but let ue first find our wmv back to thu
camp, and then we’ll decide whut course to
adopt.”
“ Oh, let us rough it for to-night, any-
way ; a fellow will never hour the last of
it, if we don’t find the Fulls; and nobody
will believe me, now old Fletcher is dead,
that I ever saw them.”
Without giving a decided answer, we
trudged our way back to our horses. The
sun was obscured. Hut it was evidently
getting late in the afternoon ; and to make
the matter worse, we had some difficulty
in finding our camp. We had gone far too
hii'h up the range, but getting out on to a
spur we espied our destination far below
like an oasis in a desert.
Making the best of our way down we
experienced a kind of relief at being once
more sure of our whereabouts. Our
horses were safe, but beginning to enter-
tain a doubt as to the possibility of getting
out of that great wilderness before dark, t
made a viitue of necessity, and consented
to remain where we were for the night-
Mr. Eeid was highly gratified with my
decision.
“ Mow then,” said he, while you are
picking out a good camp, making a fire.


and arranging matters lor tie night, I’ll
catch one of the horses, and vide off to the
Kalis. 3y making sure of the way to-
night, we'll lose uo time in the morning.”
Having caught and saddled hia horse, he
set off at a canter, and proceeding in the
direction we had first taken, was presently
out of sight.
Preparing to Camp.
Left to myself, I looked around for a
sheltered spot, for it more than, ever threat-
ened to be a stormy night. Having selec-
ted the vicinity of a great log with plenty
of good firewood lying around, I cleared a
grassy patch fer our beds, to which I
brought my saddle for a pillow, the bit of
damper we had left, and the remaining
trifles which composed our meagre outfit.
In the morning I had thoughtfully put two
or three matches into my waistcoat pocket
(neither my companion nor myself being
smokers), supposing wo might possibly
have a use for them; but on taking them
out preparatory to kindling afire, I found
that they bad by some means or other—
most likely by my own profuse perspiration
—became softened through moisture. It
was evident none of them would ignite
until dried, if they did then, What was I
to do? Under any circumstances, with
insufficient food and clothing, and without
shelter, the night would be miserable
enough; but by how much would our dis-
comfort be augmented without fire and


under a pelting rain ! Whilst thus reflect-
ing, my fingers were mechanically fumb-
ling the comers of my vest, which had
previously done duty on many fishing and
shooting excursions; and to my inexpres-
sible delight. I turned out from the fluff
collected in the corners of one of the poc-
kets a vesta worn to fibres, but still hav-
ing a good solid dry head of phosphorus.
It was my only chance, and I looked upon
it as a special providence. With a piece of
newspaper and a few dry twigs and leaves,
as kindling, material, I could calculate
with certainty on having a fire. Nor was
I disappointed. in a few minutes the
flames rose high over the big log against
which I had built my fuel, and threw a
ruddy glare on every surrounding object.
Whilst making the foregoing prepara-
tions, I was very thirsty and I need
scarcely add, very hungry too. I con-
scientiously abstained from tasting or even
touching or looking at our meagre dole o|
damper. But on crossing the flat for ano-
ther drink at the hoof-prim where we had
before allayed our thirst, I noticed at a
short distance what appeared to be earth
recently thrown up. Supposing it to be a
wombat burrow, 1 thought it strange that
its occupant should select a swampy flat for
its abode, and went to examine the place.
To my surprise I found it to be
A Prospector’s Shaft.
and wondered at the pluck and enterprise


that led even hardy diggers to penetrate
such country in quest of gold. It was a
very old shaft, judging by the hard and
settled appearance of the clay thrown out,
and the moss and grass which clung to its
sides. But a more curious discovery yet
awaited mo. Old as the shaft was, the
heap of clay stilt retained a sharp and
well-defined bootpriut, in which even the
nails were distinctly marked. Apparently a
lengthened season of dry weather had suc-
ceeded the sinking of this shaft, and the
clay showing the prospector’s footprint had
bocomed so baked that succeeding rains
had failed to obliterate it. The discovery,
however, possessed another interesting fea-
ture —tome just then of more practical
worth. The shaft was within a foot of its
margin full of clear, sweet water; so with-
out troubling myself further about the
tiny reservoir I was going to when I made
this new discovery, I slaked my thirst, and
returned to the tire.
Strange Sounds—Wombats.
With nightfall there arose on every side
strange discordant sounds, such as I had
not heard before in all my experience of
more thin twenty years of bush life in
Australia. The most prominent was that
of a hoarse gobbling or grunting, which I
credited to the wombats’ account. As we
came along we saw that formerly those
animals had been very numerous in the
unfrequented country wo had travelled.


The entire surface of the bush had been
broken up for miles with their burrows,
which are exceedingly dangerous to horse-
men, who sometimes come to grief through
thoir horaee trippiug over or into the gap-
ing cavities.
Old busbmen are very fond of telling
exaggerated tales and adventures in coun-
try infested by wombats, principally of
horse and rider being swallowed up in these
burrows. As a sample, my companion re-
lated the following : An old stockman
being left behind by his party whilst cattle-
hunting iu a wombat country, thus ac-
counted for his absence : “ I was follow-
ing hard after you, when Old Bally (the
horse he was riding) went wallop into a
big wombat hole. For a time I couldn’t
tell how or where I got in, and I had to
ride around several times before I could
find the way out; and then you were too
far ahead for me to pull you up!” Of
course no Australian bushman would for a
moment credit such a story; but many of
these burrows are ample enough for a
large-sized man to crawl, if not walk, into,
and at the entrance of some of thorn, a
man might sit on horseback without being
seen.
Formerly the abongineshunted the wom-
bat for food, its flesh being, by blacks and
whites alike who have tasted it, esteemed a
great delicacy. The general method of
capturing the animal, is as follows: —A


blaobfellow enters the barrow, the roof of
which he strikes as he progresses. His com-
panions ahoTe-grouiui listen for the sound
and by that means follow its direction.
When the animal is reached at the end of
his burrow a certain signal is made, where-
upon they dig down and effect a capture,
the wombat being prevented from making
his exit by the blackfellow who has pur-
sued him.
It is generally believed that this peculiar
beast, which has many characteristics in
common with the pig, and when full grown
attains the size and weight of a respectable
porker, is fast dying out, and will ero long
be numbered with other extinct Australian
animals. A disease seems to be carrying
off Che wombat in great numbers. Al-
though a very shy animal, it is occasion-
ally met with, hurrying to its gaping bur-
row on the least alarm. Wo had not tho
good fortune to see a specimen, but at
several of their burrows we saw earth and
footprints so fiesh as to lead us to the con-
clusion that they were at woik when wo
surprised thorn. But rare as it is to see a
living wombat, it is rarer still to see a
healthy specimen most of them being
mangy and almost hairless.
As to the various sounds, when my com-
panion returned, I ascertained that I was
right in my conjecture as to that which
was uttered by tho wombats; but as for
the other's, consisted of screams in


various tones and strange gutteral noises,
neither he nor I could divine what crea-
tures uttered them. With the nocturnal
•sounds made by bears, opossums, native
dogs and cats, flying squirrels, &c., &c.,
we were well acquainted, and none we there
listened to resembled these.
I stood by my camp-fire, experiencing a
strange sense of solitude, which however
was considoiably alleviated by the novel
chorus of discordant sounds which en-
gaged my attention just then; my only
anxiety being as to whether Eeid would find
the locality be was in quest of, or, if suc-
ceeding, be able to retrace his way to the
camp. To assist bis safe return 1 kept up
a blazing fire, and by and by to my great
relief I heard the clatter of his horse's
hoofs over the stony ridge which lay in the
direction he had gone. He brought with
him the tidings that he had so far found
the way to the Falls as to have reached a
point of recognition on the way thither—
an old blacks’ camp; and that consequent-
ly wo should be able in the morning to
pursue our way without doubt or embar-
rassment.
Short Allowance.
Our movements in the morning being
determined on, we sat for a while by our
blazing log, and partook of a scanty meal.
The portion of damper left from the pre-
vious meal, certainly not more than four
ounces in weight was equally divided, and


one half laid by for the morning. The
remaining portion being again divided into
equal parts, we made the best of our scanty
supper, which would have been all the
better, small as it was, with an accompany-
ing pot of tea.
Constructing a "Humpy.”
The next shift we were put to was to
provide some sort of shelter from the rain,
which >till threatened to descend ere long in
torrents. Our beat resource was to use the
strips of rotten bark which had fallen from
a neighbouring dead tree. They were so
rotten as to be scarcely able to bear their
own weight; and the biggest of thorn was
not more than twelve or fifteen inches in
width. We stood them however in a lean-
ing position against the large trunk of the
fallen tree at one end of which we had
kindled our fire. As long as the rain kept
off ?re preferred to steep on the grassy spot
wo bad cleared outside. After a short nap
however, a fow heavy drops of rain warned
us to fly to our “ humpy,” which after all
proved but
Miserable Quarters.
With our saddles fixed at one end for pil-
lows and the saddle-clotbsfor mattrasses, we
contrived to squeeze ourselves beneath this
apology for a shelter and compose ourselves
to sleep before the heaviest rain descended,
For a while all was snug enough; but at
length a trickling stream of water descend


ing on my left eyelid naturally enough dis-
turbed my repose. My companion was
awakened by a like intrusion. But as ne-
cessity is the mother of invention, so our
ingenuity was equal to the emergency.
Taking the saddle cloths from beneath us
we laid them over the leaks and once more
were tolerably dry. My position was next
to and partly under the log. Presently I
was again awakened from a deep sleep by a
note of warning from ray companion. lie
had crawled out to make up the fire, which
he found’was feeding on a limb that acted
as a prop to the fallen trunk we had utilised
for fire and for shelter, and which as soon
as burnt through would have given way
and let the massive trunk down upon us as
we slept. When I saw how perilous my
position was, I instantly cleared out, pre-
ferring the consequences of exposure to the
drenching rain to the risk of being crushed
under a ponderous log.
After this discovery, which occurred be-
tween one and two o’clock in the morning,
we loitered by our camp firo in the rain,
anxiously watching the first dawn of day.
The gogobberas (great king-fisher, or
laughing-jackass of the colonist) were ring-
ing forth their matins, when, with scarcely
light enough to discern the outlines of the
principal objects surrounding us, wo sot out
in search of oar horses.
Carrying our scanty allowance with us,
sodden as_it was in the wet hag which con


tained it, we took out seats in the saddle at
5 a.m.. and once more set out for tho
Falls.
We made our way without much diffi-
culty to the
Old Blacks'Camp
my companion had mentioned on the previ-
ous owning. It was a strange locality
even for an aboriginals’ camping ground.
The spot was v->ry stony, and the large
boulders had thn appearance of having boon
placed when* they wre for use a< seats or
benches. Tho surrounding trees were all
dead, and bore the marks of tomahawks
used in stripping bark. As immediately
hey on d this the country was all but im-
penetrable even to a blackfellow, I formed
an opinion that tho place (which bore the
appearance of having been desortedfor half
a century) had been selected as a refuge
from hostile or invading tribes, or that
it was a retreat occupied only on occasions
when the tribe visited the wombat country
for tho purpose of feeding on its flesh.
We managed with great difficulty tn ride
a' short distance further when we were ob-
liged to dismount and securing our horses,
pursue the remainder of our way on foot.
Labouring Under Difficulties.
To dismount and leave our horses became
a matter not of choice but of necessity;
and in a tangled scrub, with vines, thorny
aud other shrubs, and prostrate barrels of


giant trees obstructing our progress:, and
even our view, in every direction, tho risk
of abandoning our steeds for a time was so
great, that we felt reluctant to adopt such
a course. Should we secure the animals to
a tree and once make our way any distance
from them, so great was the sameness of
the dense bush, whichever way we turned,
that there would be very little hops of
retracing our steps to the unfortunate
animals—more unfortunate than ourselves;
for we could on foot make our way bark to
tho nearest settlement; but they, securely
fastened, must famish of starvation. Look-
ing around, however, wo discovered near
at hand the head of a gully leading, clown
into the main creek, which my companion
said was not a quarter of a mile bedew.
This was an infallible guide for the re-
covery of our horses if secured here; which
we lost no time in doing.
Now began a work of toil,.,which none
could imagine but those who have boon in
similar circumstances. The scrub was so
thick that our horses were not visible at
less than twice their length from us. The
average height of this dense undergrowth
was about ten feet. The pelting rain of
the previous night had given place to a
drizzling Scotch mist, which made this
scrub wetter by far than a good heavy
shower would. Consequently, although
wet above the knees before, from coming
into contact with the scrub whilst on horse


back, we had not far ponotratod the tangled
mass before we wore drenched to the skin,
notwithstanding that I wore a stout over-
coat. But if wo found the undergrowth a
serious obstruction, there wero other im-
pediments conspiring to effectually bar our
progress, and with a guide loss resolute
than mine, I should easily have been per-
suaded to abandon the undertaking alto-
gether. I have spoken of the immense
trees which studded the forest. So many
of these, decayed by age or destroyed by
fire, lay prostrate in every direction, that
in addition to the work of wriggling our
way through the scrub, we were incessantly
clambering over huge logs breast high with
sixty feet or more of barrel without a single
limb. Some of these were so rotten that
on mounting them our feet sank into their
hollow cores. Others again were entirely
buried beneath rank grass, sedge, and ferns,
and over these we frequently stumbled.
Long before reaching the main creek our
clothes were almost in shreds, and our
shins covered with scratches and bruises
which remained for days. The descent was
very abrupt, and the gully more broken
and rugged as we descended, which neces-
sitated a continual crossing and recrossing
from sioe to side. At length we reached
the bottom whore the gully opened out
into a small flat through which ran the
main creek, or as wo named it Waterfall
Creek. I looked at my watch ; it was just


7.15a,m. The distance we had travelled-
on foot was certainly not half a-mile ; and
it had taken us about an hour and a hall
to accomplish the journey. Lees than
another mile of much easier travelling
brought us to tho scene to behold which
we had endured such hardship, fatigue,
and privation. Mr. Reid led the way over
a pilo of boulders which obstructed the
view; I followed, carrying the mouthful
of food which it had boon determined the
night before should be eaten at the goal of
our adventure.
The Waterfalls.
The descriptions previously given to me
of this stupendous sight were pretty accu-
rate. Our first view was taken from a high
flat rock. Looking eastwards, with our
back to the creek we had traversed, the
view was bounded about a mile distant by
the eastern range of the Cotter River, which,
flowed between that and another high
range parallel with it, but of course nearer
to us. This western range of tho river
terminated in a long spur forming the
south-eastern margin of Waterfall Creek)
near its confluence with the Cotter. The
foreground of this view was a vast amphi-
theatre half a mile in diameter and at least
twelve hundred feet below the rock on
which we stood. The trees, which we sup-
posed to be a® large or larger than those
which grew where we stood, appeared like
saplings; but far above them, and yet so


far beneath us as to appear quite small, a
majestic eagle soared ; while the seething
water of the creek, after having travelled
From its sources which well
3u die,tarn on the feJl;
From its fountains
In the mountains
Its rills anil its gills :
Through moss a ail through brake,
alter the manner of that atLodore, immor-
talized by Southey in bis well-known rhy-
ming lines—meandered through the vale
beneath like a silver ribbon, so diminutive?
did it seem from the great distance at which
we beheld it. In all my travels i never but
once in my life saw anything like it; and
that was when, standing with 'a party of
tourists on the heights of Wyncliff in
Monmouthshire, we saw, beyond the ciaaaic
ruins of Tintern Abbey the beautiful river
Wye threading its way -through the vale
beneath at a distance which reduced the
broad navigable stream to tho apparent di-
mensions of-a mill-race, Those who have
visited-the lovely vale of Tintern and its
principal objects and places of interest will
be able to form a very correct idea of the
sublime mid imposing landscape which .ay
at our feet, beyond the Falls themselves.
Of. these it remains foi me to speuk more
particularly.
; We spent some time in selecting a spot
whence to obtain the best possible view,
in the course of which my companion, with
a nerve possessed by not one in a thousand,
climbed an overhanging tree and looked


down the yawning precipice, the bottom of
which, however, was still obstructed from
view by shelving rocks. In compliance
with the law of self-preservation I declined
an invitition to accompany him to his
perilous perch. It was but a sapling ; and
standing in the forks of its slender bran-
ches, he literally overhung the frightful
abyss. Even if the frail support was
strong enough for two, my nerves were not
sufficiently strong to render it prudent for
me to clamber out to the position occupied
by him.
I Incrk—my brain begins to sw'n ;
'Tis in the ai*:, it pleas'!* him—
He chooses it the r, ,thor.
Smiling at my want of nerve, he re-
turned to my side. We stood where wo
judged the best view could be obtained.
To our left, finding its way over a rocky
bed, the water of the creek came to the
point of its descent. For a short distance
it glided down over a ledge of rock at so
steep a gradient as to render it impossible
to obtain a footing even had the rook been
dry instead of being covered with a gr n
coating of treacherous slime. Then there
was a small cascade of twenty feet or more;
and again a rapid, and a short distance
below that again a great rock rising from
the centre of the watercourse, as if to im-
pede its progress. But in vain, for dividing
on either side of its would-be obstructor,
it dashes onwards,


Amongst crags in its flurry
Hiitor-s^oittT, hurry-scmxy,
Till in its rapid race
' >n which it is bent
It leaches the place
Of its deep descent.
That point commences several hundred fret
below, where it seems to take a final leap.
But of that it is not possible to speak with,
authority, as we decided not to adventure
down into the amphitheatre—a feat which
would occupy, with the returning journey,
best part of the day—being already well-
nigh exhausted, and without sufficient food
to impart the necessary strength, I much
regretted our decision, prudent as it was
under the circumstances; for it appeared to
us that the finest and only full view of the
Fall could be obtained from below. Until
lost to view from where we stood the cas-
cade was bounded on its opposite side by a
bold and magnificent pile of rock rising
perpendicularly, and of an elevation of
about two hundred and fifty feet, reminding
one of a lofty and impregnable fortress
erected on a bluff. StiU we may presume
that from the last visible point (to quote
again from the laureate’s poem) for many
hundred feet below
The cataract strong
Plunges along,
Sti iking and raging,
As ii' a war waging
Its cavern* and recks among:
Kising and leaping,
Sinking and ci.-eping,
Swelling and sweeping,
Showering and springing,
ifh iug and flinging,
"Writhing and wringing,
Eddying'and whisking,


Spouting and frisking,
Turning and twisting
Around and around,
With endless rebound;
Smiting and fighting,
A gi'rbt to delight in,
Confounding, astounding,
Di; ng and deafening the ear ■with its sound.
Collecting, projecting,
Recoding and speeding.
And shocking and rocking,
And dariing und parting,
And threading and spreading,
And whizzing and hissing,
And dripping and skipping,
And hitting and split ting,
And shining and twining,
And rattling and battling,
And snaking and quaking,
And pouring and roaring.
And waving and raving,
And tossing and croc.dng,
And flowing and going,
And running and stunning,
And foaming and roaming,
And dinning and spinning
And dropping and hopping,
And working and jeiTf.c'r,
And gurgling and strvgghng.
And heaving and deal i.g,
And moac'pg and gron ing,
And gli.teiing and frittering,
And gathering and feathering,
And whitening and brightening,
, And quivering and shivering,
And hurrying ai.d skurrying,
Anil thundering and floundering!
Dlvid’rg and gliding and sliding.
And falling and brawling and sprawling,
And driving and riving and striving,
And spriuldiug and twinkling and wrinkling.
And sounding and hounding and rounding,
And bubbling and troubling and doubling,
And grumbling and rumbling and tumbling.
And chattering and battering and shattering;
Retreating and Iruti’jg and meeting and sheeting,
Belaying and straying and playing and spurring,
Advancing and prancing and glancing and dancing.
Recoiling, tunaoibng, and toiling nod Itoiling,
And glepm’ng and sUeamirgand steanrng and beaming
Ana rushing and flushing and brushing and gushing,
A ud flapping and rapping and dapping and slapping,
And curling and whirling and purling sod twirling.
And thumping andphunpingaedbuTTpingand jumping,
And dashing and fashing end splashing and clashing:
A nil so never endin'', but always descending,
Sound and motions for ever and ever are blending.


This sublime and awful scene required but
a corresponding volume of water to make
it, if it does nut already, deserve to rank
amongst the most famous falls in the world,
as the reader will concede from the follow-
ing observations and examples!
The Greatest Waterfalls of the World
owe their ce'ebrity to one or more of these
features, namely, their height, their
breadth, and their volume of water. The
most famous are not the highest, tho
characteristic to which they owe their
renown being the vast body of water
which descends over them. Thus the
Niagara Falls on the Canadian side are
only 154 feet high, but are 600 yards
broad ; the Victoria Falls of Livingstone
on the Zambesi Elver are only 100 feet
deep, bat 1000 yards wide. Of those
which owe their fame chiefly to their
stupendous height, the grandest are the
Oreo Falls at Monte Rosa 240 feet m
height; Gavamie (Pyrenees) 1400 feet;
Btarback (Switzerland) 1000 feet; and
MaaneUnm (Norway) 1)40 feet. Thus,
allowing our rout'h estimate to he exces-
sive, the ('otter Falls are certainly entitled
to be regarded in point of height as amongst
the loftiest in the known world. In ordin-
ary seasons tho waters of only a moderate
stream descend over them ; but there were
evidences in the water-worn rocks and
drift and debris lodged high and dry when


we visited the spot that there are times
when a mighty volume of water contributes
an additional feature of grandeur to this
remarkable sight.
Having satiated our mental appetite
with the sight which lay before us, wo sat
down and divided our last morsel of
damper, the moiety of each being about
the size of a man’s throe fingers—but a
poor pittance for the breakfast of two men
already exhausted with fatigue and fasting
for the previous twenty-four hours.
We then retraced our way to thr horses,
which, by a like process id difficulty and
danger to that described in the account of
our approaching the Fulls, we reached
about ten o’clock, having since five a.m.
travelled not more than three miles.
The rain had ceased by the time we had
regained our seats in the saddle, and after
having passed our camping ground of the
previous night, we soon got into more open
country, through which wo trudged in
single file, my mate leading the way. For
the greater part, the country had recently
been ravaged by fire, which, while it ren-
dered our progress easier, left its gloptny
and desolate impress in every direction,
Nowhere was there a sign of life —neither
bird nor quadruped was to be seen lor
many miles of pur progress-
Abortive Contrivances.
About midday we entered upon a more
difficult country, and approaching a creek


where there «as a little ‘‘ burnt feed. 71 we
resolved to spell our horses, and as it was
very cold, kindle a five for our own com-
fort. Here I drew from my pocket the
greater portion of my share of our morn-
ing’s breakfast, which being at the time
unable to eat, I bad quietly put by without
saying a word on the subject to my com-
panion. We were both n ery hungry, and
had been for the last hour expatiating on
the virtues of toast and coffee, steaks, ham
and eggs, and many other of the common
necessaries of life —too often under-valued
by those whose daily wants are supplied
with wonted regularity. When I displayed
my tempting morsel, and accounted for its
possession, Mr. Reid protested against a
further division, hut I as strongly insisted
upon bis partaking of it, share and share
alike. In order to make the most of it, he
proposed that, while 1 was endeavouring to
kindle a fire with ttio damp matches still in
my possession, ho should set out with the
gun in search of a wallaby or anything
else which might come in his way. The
idea of grilled wallaby cutlet-i. minus salt
or other seasonings, was too tempting for
me to raise an objection to the proposal;
so while he was absent, I used my best
endeavours to kindle afire. But a thick
fog having succeeded the rain, everything
was damp—not a fibre of bark or leaf
could I find dry enough for kindling. I
took out my pocket knife, and iu an


attempt to pare some dry chips from the
centre of a hit of stick, unfortunately
broke off the blade abort at the handle.
Tearing some leaves from my pocket-book,
and drying the heads of the three matches
which I had carefully preserved 'which I
did by holding them for some minutes
against my warm skin inside my vest) I
ventured to ignite them by 7 friction against
the chaoing of ray watch. They smoked,
they cracked, one aftsr another, and one
head actually lighted and fell into my lap.
Quick as thought I applied the paper, and
had a flame. But. alas! all the other
material was too damp; I failed to get a
fire. There was a little phosphorus on the
two remaining matches, which 1 kneaded
together, and was patiently drying it in
my bosom with a view to another effort,
having already spent about an hour in my
previous endeavours, when a vcico arrested
my attention
“ Have you no fire yet P”
I looked up; it was my companion,
standing on the rising ground above me,
with the gun in his hand.
“ No,” I replied ; “all my endeavours
so far have been in vain. Hid jou find
any gamo ?”
“ I haven't seen a living creature as big
as a tomtit; so you needn’t trouble about a
fire.”
A Strange Discovery.
Wo ate our last drank from the


stream which ran at our feet, and th«n,
whilst saddling up, were somewhat surpri-
sed to discover several trees of the, largest
dimensions, felled so as to afford a tolerablv
clear passage across the stream. It was
the first evidence we had that anyone had
ever been in the country we had traversed
since we left our camp. Our curiosity was
aroused- Those trees wore never cut down
for their timber, valuable as it was; for
even supposing there were none nearer to
any settler’s homestead, it was in a place
out of which it could never be hauled. But
the trees had never even been utilised on
the spot, and bad evidently been cut down
years ago. The labour of cutting them
down was too much like work to suppose
they were cut down fox* mere idleness, as
the shepherd-boy will sometimes fell a sap-
ling. We should have crossed the creek at
the opening made by this unaccountable
labour, only, imagining that our direction
lay more to the right, we went down about
a hundred yards below to a point where the
creek ran between two perpendicular banks
before effecting a crossing. Here was nno -
ther gigantic tree felled tike the others. It
was about five feet in diameter. Mr. Reid
had passed on the upper side of it, leaving
the tree on his right hand. I took the lower
side having the fallen tree on my left band.
Hero my curiosity and suspicion were fur-
ther aroused by the discovery of a structure
which at first sight had the appearance of


a pigstye built on the woll-knoWn plan of
crossed logs. Thrbe of its lugs were oli
this principle, atid the fourth was formed of
the Fallen log referred to. Large boulders,
some of which it woiild take two dr three
men to lift, lay on the tbp Idgs and 6h the
big tnlnb. It had all beeti under fire ; abd
within the enclosure there *efe o‘ther large
stones and the ashes of Sheets of bark with
which the bUilditig had evidently befen
roofed. I called my companion’s attbhticiU
fb the Contrivance, and Sought from hint d
solution of the mystery* After a Closer ex-
amination of the place and its surroundings
he expressed the opinidri that it had been
A Bushrangers' Fort.
And iidW We SaW the meaning of the foiled
timbet Which tret attracted but attention.
Some years ago a party ofbuSh bangers,
headed by OSO Collins, had committed eef i-
ral depredations on the stations of the'
■Webbs, McDonalds and others on the Wes-
tern side of the Murrumbidgee, and Werd
traced by the police and civilians to withih
a few miles of the locality we weie then iih
where, owing to the denseness of the scrub
and from other causes the impebetrableness
of the country, the chase was abandoned.
Their booty consisted largely of rations—
two bags of Sour, and proportionate quail-'
titles of tda dnd sugar, as well as clothing,
firearms, ammunition, add saddlery. Be-
fore abandoning the Search* the party found


a iloserted. camp, and fiance cdhcluded that
they had cleared out of that part of the
eduntry. But it would appear from our
discovery, that finding thetrisdlves hotly
pursued, they had fled to the locality dis-
covered by us, and which was So formed by
nature as to assist them materially in con-
structing a fortress whoreih three or fdiit
men could, if disco veil'd, sliccfeslfully de-
fend themselves against a intibh larger
number for a very long time ; for they had
Water within hand’s teach, and provisions
and ammunition enough lot all their wants.
To approach them within aufch a place tfould
be certain death; while volley after vdlley
might be fired at their Stronghold with
little or no chaneb of taking dffebt: But
further, from the fact that my companion
passed within a couple of ttf the place
without discovering it, the chancel Were
that any pursuing party, naturally making
for the crossing made above, would altoge-
ther fail to discover the hidden place of de-
fence in which the depredators lay.
We subsequently learnt that for a whole
year Collins and his party camped in this
very place, where, being in possession of a
couple of sets of diggers’ tools, they worked
undisturbed as gold diggers. Possibly the
prospecting shart which I discovered at our
previous camp was one sunk by them.
They obtained payable gold, and after hav-
ing exhausted their provisions, planted both
aims and tools in i hollow aht-bed close by


and made the best of their way out of the
district.
This nows was communicated to the
Webbs and McDonalds by a young man
who afterwards met with Collins on the
Lower Lachlan, when he was shearing.
Collins said he had given over his lawless
life and gave full information respecting
their hidden life in the gully, and the dis-
posal of their accoutrements. In vain was
the young man pressed to give such infor-
mation as would lead to the enforcement o£
the warrant forCollins’s apprehension, which
had long been taken out, be entertaining
with too many others of hie class, the fool-
ish impression that to furnish such inform-
ation is all in one with the conduct of a
common mercenary informer. The conse-
quence is that Collins has never since been
tracked.
The Messrs. Webb and McDonald, to
whom we mentioned the discovery we bad
made, said that since the young man gave
them the information from the Lower
Lachlan, they have frequently searched for
Collins’s hiding-place, with a view to the
recovery of the arms and tools.
We were too interested in the fortress
even to notice the contiguity of an ant-
hillock, which, had we then possessed the
necessary information, we certainly should
have looked for.
Mr. Reid promised our friends that he


would oue day endeavour to guide them to
the spot,
Throe or four miles below the bushrang-
ers’ stronghold we came on other signs of
human presence. At the junction of a
small mountain creek with a larger stream,
were the- forks and ridge-pole of a tent, and
alongside these a diggers’prospecting shaft.
They all appeared to be of comparatively
recent m igiri. A tree close by was marked
with another set of initials which I
have forgotten. The spot we subsequently
learned was where a settler living near
XJmyarra had lately been prospecting for
gold. On crossing the creek we saw ano-
ther tree marked “J.W., Jan. 3, 1873.”
The Messrs. Webb told us when narrating
this circtiinstance that this was their fur-
thest point of penetration; and that some
years before marking the tree, the search
party out after the bushrangers had at the
same point given over their pursuit. They
asked us if we noticed the broken barrel of
a gun standing against a tree. We did not.
But our informant told us that here they
found several things that the bushrangers
had left behind them, the broken gun-bar-
rel included, which they placed in the posi-
tion described. It was
Another of the Bushrangers' Camps.
Immediately after ascending some rising
ground our route lay in a transverse direc-
tion across the deep spurs and ndges head-
ing into the Cotter River, aud following the


course of that stream, which ran at our
right hand. Here we once more encoun-
tered difficulties which rendered travelling
tedious iu the extreme. The declivities aud
ascents were not only very steep, but the
tangled scrub became almost as dense as
that in the neighbourhood of the Falls.
Some of the creeks we crossed were com-
pletely hidden from view by the finest
Groves of Ferns
I ever saw. As we rode under their spread-
ing fronds we were as completely. roofed us
if sheltered beneath a skilfully thatched
arbour, and the sky was quite obscured
from view. I would fain have lingered
here for hours, so charming wore these
lovely spots; but ignorance of the charac-
ter of the country we had yet to traverse,
and the conviction that our only chance of
escaping the miseries of a second night's
camping, intensified by the absence of tire
and food, counterbalanced all desire to in-
dulge our taste for the beautiful in nature.
Moreover, my companion’s horse began to
show signs of fatigue in so far as that he
could no longer carry his rider up the tan-
gled, log-obstructed, precipitous sides of
the gullies we were continually ascending
and descending. So he bod to dismount
and lead the poor brute while I applied the
necessary propelling power behind.
In passing through this region of matted
scrub, growing beneath a forest of mighty
trees, whose interlacing limbs so far obscu


red the light as to cast a sombre gloom on
all surrounding objects, I was struck with
the singular absence of animal life, Save
that now and thon we started from the lofty
branches overhead a handsome bird of the
parrot family nearly as large as a white
cockatoo, with an olive-coloured body and
scarlet head, scarcely another of the fea-
thered tribe did we meet with ; nor was
there bn the ground beneath us any sign of
wombat, wallaby, or other quadruped. The
occasional scream of the large bird referred
to, and the crashing caused by'our progress,
were the only sounds which invaded that
seemingly forsaken Wvrito'iy.
By and by we once more, to our great
relief, got into a region )ately Cleared by
tire. Here, if the beautiful arid Wild were
transformed into blackness and desolation,
We could, byway of compensation, mate
moie satisfactory progress. But what was
most remarkable was that notwithstanding
the total devastation caused by the devour-
ing element, the air was vocal with the
sounds of birds, chiefly
The Beautiful Lyre-Bird
or ‘'pheasant” of the colonists. We heard
their mocking notes on every hand, and my
mate yielded to the temptation to get a shot
at one or two. The well-known shyness of
this bird lenders it most difficult to get
within range of it; but my companion
brought one down nevertheless at a very
longdistance. It was a hen, and so the


much-coveted tail, which adorns the male
bird only, became no part of his reward.
But the game was in fine condition, and we
were almost hungry enough to devour it
uncooked. As an instance of the mocking
powers of the lyre-bird I may state that
whilst engaged, just after Mr. Reid brought
down his bird, in pursuit of another, my
attention was called to a grey magpie ut-
tering his familiar ckuck-a-iwee in a neigh-
bouring tree. Chtick-a-twee, with the reg-
ularity of an echo, arose from the bare,
black-burnt ground near at band, and
within reach of my breech-loader. It re-
quired a practised ear to detect the natural
from the imitated notes. There was but
one magpie within sight perched on a
scorched stringy-bark tree close at hand;
beneath the ground was clear and bare,
though black as cinders, as far as the eye
could reach, and yet certainly within a
hundred yards the magpie’s cry was met
with a cleverly-imitated chnc?c~a-fwce, as
often as he repeated it. Accustomed to
field sports, I have a keen eye, yet failed
to discover the imitator, though carefully
scanning the locality on every side from
the log which hid me from view. That it
was a lyre-bird I had no doubt; and at
length, fearing that Mr. Reid’s patience
might be worn out waiting for mo, he hav-
ing gone ahead in another direction, I gave
over the search, threw the gun across my
arm, and left my hiding-place, when to my


surprise a handsorae-plumagod male lyre*
bird, which had all the time been parched
on a log within seventy yards of me
(be being of course as black as the log he
occupied), started along the prostrate bole,
jumped down behind it, and was out of
sight in much quicker time than it takes
mo to describe his movements. I had read
much of the mocking powers of the lyre-
bird, but never heard so capital a speci-
men.
We had now gained tbo ridge of a seem-
ingly interminable range leading towards
the confluence of the Cotter with the Mur-
rumbidgee River. As far as the eye could
reach, and, as we discovered subsequently,
for many a mile beyond, one groat bush
fire had left its gloomy impress all around.
Grass, shrubs, and trees had all alike been
destroyed and blackened. We began tn
perceive our whereabouts. To our left
Mount Coree (mentioned in the earlier
chapters) and behind that again the Boo-
gong Mountains rose high above every
other land-mark, whilst rearer at hand we
recognised the high range up which the
track from Urayarra to Brindabella leads.
An Aboriginal Feast.
In connection with tbeßoogongs—a name
given by the aborigines to a mountain
tract of country west of the Upper Mur-
.mmbidgee, on account of the presence there
in prodigious numbeiT, at a certain season
of the year, of the larvae of a giant mo.h


of the same name —may be mentioned here,
for the information of those who may be
ignorant of the fact, that, when the abori-
ginal natives were numerous in those parts,
it was their yearly custom to migrate to
the Boogong Mountains (leaving their wo-
men and children to take care of them-
selves), for the purpose of feastiug during
the season on the larvae. However starved,
lean and miserable their condition before
going up to their yearly feast, the blacks
always returned sleek and fat, and altoge-
ther in prime condition. I have known
several old settlers who have tried the ex-
periment of eating these boogong larvae,
after roasting them on the coals, and th«y
pronounce them to be a great-delicacy, with
a flavour resembling that of a roasted
chestnut.
We travelled the long range of which I
spoke for several miles at a slight gradient
upwards, observing as we proceeded a wide
valley opening out on our right hand hut
far beneath us. Beyond that agrin was
visible a chain of mountains on tho western
side of tho Murvumbidgoo below the con-
fluence of the Cotter with that river. Right
before us at a distance of -seven <>r eight
miles we saw cleared land, which we recog-
nised as YarialUmla homestead. By this
time all anxiety as to making comfortable
quarters for the coming night hud subsided,
it was only a question of time when we
should once more be amongst our friends,


and with tho means at hand to supply the
clamorous demands which nature had
been so long and so increasingly pressing.
We had looked tor some time on the
right hand and on the left tor a place of
descent from our elevated position. We
iongod to exchange the dreary gloom of
this burnt-out region for the verdure and
foliage which below presented such a wel-
come contrast, But as yet we had found
no point of deviation. At length we were
brought to a complete standstill. Our gra-
dual ascent led ns to the summit of a lofty
and precipitous mountain. We had no al-
ternative but to retrace our steps, or dis
mounting force our jaded horses mltM vo ■
lens over the declivity. I'hie we did; one
place necessitating a leap down over thiee
or four feet of rock, with no other footing
below than the loose stones which lay at an
angle so steep as scarcely to retain their
stationary position. Of course formed and
horses there were lots of stumbling and
eliding, and when leading the horses by the
bridle reins, it required net a little vigil-
ance to escape an unpleasant if not dan-
gerous collision with the poor animals,
Gradually we got on to better ground, and
at length found ourselves in a well grassed
and well- atered valley—altogether a-dif-
ferent country from unything we hud seen
since we left Coulamon Plains.
A b’am of working bullocks grazing
contentedly nearby, celled forth from my


mate the amusing exclamation : —“ Thank
“ God, we are once more
“In a Christian Land I”
Neither of us was so weak and hungry
as to he beyond enjoying a good joko ; and
Mr. lleid laughed heartily when I asked
him if they were a sample of the inhabi-
tants, or whether they were not in point of
fact more negatively virtuous than many
who bear the Christian name.
An old sheep-station was the next sign
of human habitation; but the occupants
had long since deserted the abode, as indi-
cated by the unbarked roof and a few rotten
pelts hanging on a sapling close by.
Some distance further on a well-appoin-
ted sheep-station, with yaids, foot-rotting
troughs, small paddock, and snug hut gave
hope of means at hand for
Appeasing the Cravings of Hunger.
Arrived at the slip-panel we cooeyedand
called “ Mick.” again and again; but all
in vain, for Mick Flanagan, the shepherd,
was out with his sheep. My mate dis-
mounted and {in'ctmtas non hahei legem)
with primitive burglarious appliances effec-
ted an entrance. Oh! the thought of
corn beef or mutton and damper! My
mouth literally watered as T sat on my
saddle impatient for an ample dole. Away
with all thought of more refined viands.
After a two days' fast who would care for
anything in preference to an Australian


shepherd's wholesome fare ? Mr, Reid
made his appearance after a few minutes’
delay with nothing in his hands, but with
a woefully elongated face.
“ There's not a bit of cooked victuals in
the hut—only a little flour and raw beef.”
“Go and search again,” I imploringly
retorted.
He went, and this time returned with a
fistful of ration sugar. It was the only
eatable line of rations in the place. Was
ever sugar so sweet or so strengthening ?
I thought of Absalom whan he tasted the
dripping honey whilst pursuing his father’s
foes, and felt that the penalty of our trans-
gression was at any rate less than that
which threatened the royal offender. Open
confession is good for the soul ; and if this
meets Mick’s eye, I hope the circumstances
of the case will be taken into consideration
and operate to prevent the taking out of a
warrant and all its unpleasant conse-
quences.
In another hour we were at Urayaira,
and treated with the hospitality for which
that homestead is famous. A henrtv sup-
per and a long night’s rest compensated tor
all our sufferings.
Next day, accompanied by Mr. A. Mc-
Donald, we rode to the river, exchanged the
saddle for tho buggy, and that evening we
were safe at home.
I shall never forgot the strange impres-
sion of diminutiveness which our Mount


Ausley, the Black Hill, Jerrabomberra, ami
the comparatively high ranges intersecting
the County of Murray created on my mind
on first seeing them after a week’s sojourn
amongst the loftier mountains of Cowley.
[concluded,]
FALLICK, GALE AND CO., PIfINTEE, HQL'EASBEV Ah'.
