

THE CHINESE
AND
THE SEAMEN’S STRIKE;
A LECTURE
Delivered in the Pitt Street Congregational Church, on Sunday,
December 8, 1878,
BY THE
REV. J. JEFFERIS, LL,B.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
SYDNEY:
FOSTER AND FAIRFAX, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
Melbourne : —M. L. Hutchinson.
Adelaide: —E. S. Wigg and Son. Brisbane: —Gordon and Gotch.
PRICE SISLPEISrCS.




IST O T E
I have been asked to consent to the publication of this lecture
on the ground that it may contribute to a juster estimate
of our relations with the Chinese. What appears to me
especially needed, just now, is the circulation of trustworthy
views regarding the character of the race which must hereafter
so greatly affect the fortunes of Australia. There are grievous
apprehensions about them, amounting in some cases almost to
panic. Real service will be rendered to the public by anyone
who succeeds in allaying these fears.
“The Retreat,” Newtown,
December 9, 1878.


THE CHINESE
THE SEAMEN’S STRIKE.
LECTURE by the Rev. J. JEFEERIS, LL.B.
Luke xii, 13-15. —“ And one of the company said unto Him,
Master, speak to my brother, that he divide the inheritance with
me. And He said unto him, Man, who made me a judge or a
divider over you ? And He said unto them, take heed and beware
of covetousness, for a mans life consisteth not in the abundance of
the things which he possesseth.”
It sounds harsh. If Christ be not a redresser of grievances, if men
cannot go to Him when suffering under oppression or wrong-doing,
and win from His lips a righteous judgment, and from His acts a
righteous deliverance, is He the sort of Christ we need and long for ?
Certainly men go to God in every age with cries similar to that
which issued from this man’s lips, and as certainly men do not get
the kind of answer they expect. If indeed you take a narrow
partial view, you may discover cases in which Divine interference
seems to be very plainly shown. Through some calamity falling upon
the wicked —sickness, death, a sudden reversal of circumstances,
justice after a poetical fashion appears to be administered. The
despot is degraded, the prisoner is set at liberty, the riches of the
wicked are seen to be laid up for the just. But if you take in the
whole round of human life, you will not find it to be so certain.
Innumerable are the prayers that ascend to the ears of the Lord of
the Sabbaoth, and yet how many seem to remain unanswered. The
poor continue to suffer from “ the rich man’s contumely,” as well as
from “the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune.” The widow’s
tears fall to the earth, and the orphan’s cry rises to the Heavens,
and yet neither from Heaven nor upon earth comes the deliverance
that is sought.


What then ? Shall we think that God does not hear, that Christ
will not answer, and that life must be spent without hope of the
intervention of Heaven ? Hay ! I for one, though I look not for such
special providences as many require, do yet cling to the belief that
God in Christ is a hearer and answerer of prayer, that no tear of a
trustful mourner is spilt upon the ground, that no wave of true-
hearted supplication breaks and dies upon the shore of an eternal
silence. But whether God hears and answers, is one question, and
how He hears and answers is another.
The request made to Christ by the portionless brother is repeated
in our day by contending parties in Society. Appeal is made to
Christianity for swift and speedy arbitrament, and many are ready to
cast off their allegiance to it, if the decision is not in accordance with
their own wishes. But now see how Christ dealt with these quarrelling
brothers. “ The inheritance is mine,” says one, “ the law has given it
into my possession.” “ But it is not right, law or no law,” says the
other, “on what pretence of justice am I defrauded P” I will appeal
to this Prophet of the Lord. Is He not a Chancellor of the Court of
Equity, the Court expressly intended by the Judge of all the earth to
righten legal wrongs ? “ Master, speak to my brother, that he divide
the inheritance with me.” But Christ refused to decide. I do not
think He would have decided if both had agreed to submit to His
arbitration. He answers curtly—“ Man, who made me a judge or a
divider over you ?” Do you think he was indifferent to the welfare
of these brothers ? Such a supposition would be a slander. The
aim of His reply was to make them understand that it was not His
province to determine whether this or that particular case was right
or wrong. He, the Prophet of the Lord, came to announce the
principles of eternal right, to declare the law of God, which is of
perpetual obligation. And so He merely said, knowing well whence
came these wars and fightings—and He said it to the brothers and to
all, “ Take heed and beware of covetousness. For a man’s life
consisteth not in the abundance of things that he possesseth.”
I am very sure that this is the way fer teachers of Christianity
to act when such appeals come before them as are made to-day.
There is nothing in their office, nothing in the Book on which their
teachings are founded, to justify them in deciding on particular
questions, save in so far as these may demand the calm assertion of
the Divine law. The minister of religion who is the mere champion
of a class is not a worthy follower of Him who came as the deliverer
of the world.
Let me apply this to the subject on which I have to speak to
you to-night. The Seamen’s Strike is primarily a quarrel between


the seamen and the owners of the ships in which they usually sail.
These shipowners, in no sense infringing the law, have yet acted in
such a way that the seamen conceive they are being dealt with
unjustly. Out of mere greed, it is said, labour of a confessedly
lower order is being employed, for the express purpose of diminishing
the rate of wages, and with the result of driving British seamen from
British ships. On the other hand it is declared that this employment
of another race is rendered necessary by the exigencies of commerce,
that without it our trade with the East must be abandoned, that
instead of setting aside British seamen it will increase their number
and give them a higher status. Now, what should I—if it be my
duty as a minister of religion to speak on this question—what should
I say ? That this side is wrong, or that side ; that this concession or
that ought to be made ; that the men have no right to strike, nor the
masters to lock out ? No, I will not. I refuse to identify myself
with either side. lam no judge, no arbitrator, no partisan. The
actual dispute itself ought to be settled, must be settled, without the
direct intervention of ministers of religion. Are we, then, who are
the appointed teachers of our people in the highest of all moralities
and the most binding of all duties—who boast that the precepts of
our Master bear upon all the work and all the relations of life—are
we then to retreat into a cowardly silence when some practical issue is
to be determined, about which many are eagerly seeking to know
what is true and right ? A thousand times no. Eeligion surely
cannot be worth much if she cannot teach how the crises of life are
to be met.
All great controversies that stir the public mind contain in them,
besides that which is local and particular, some great general princi-
ples which affect society at large, and which ai’e approved or con-
demned by the Word of God. The dispute between the ship-owners
and seamen of this port of Sydney involves matters of the highest
moment, principles of the deepest meaning. The controversy is not
really between a certain number of seamen and their employers. It
is between Englishmen as a race and the Chinese as a race, between
Europeans and Asiatics. It is the battle between the West and the
East, the same which of old was fought out at Marathon and Salamis,
and which has been waging ever since, with a hundred nations taking
part in it, down to this last conflict between the British and the Af-
ghans. In San Francisco and Sydney it does not, indeed, assume
the character of actual war ;• but we know from the riots in America,
and from the semi-riots last week in Sydney, that these race-hatreds
are ready at any time to break forth in blood.
Now, let us understand, we Australian Englishmen who are pre-


sent in this assembly to-night, that this grave question touching our
relations and our duties to the Eastern races, with whom we are
brought into such close personal contact, is not going to be settled by
the decisions of a company, or of a handful of seamen. Let terms be
agreed to, a truce hollow or genuine be made between the employers
andemployed, let the Chinese be expelled from certain ships or expelled
from all, this will in no wise determine the great,' question at issue.
Sydney cannot settle it. Australia cannot settle it. It will tax all the
energies and all the wisdom of the Empire at large. We may, indeed,
contribute our part towards its solution. We may, by all the various
agencies happily at our command, educate and elevate public opinion.
We may, by partial temporary legislation, without prejudicing Impe-
rial action, meet dangers and contingencies as they arise. We may
give a tone and tendency to the decisions hereafter to be made, and
that ought soon to be made. But let us not think that, either in our
Legislative Chambers, or in Hyde Park public meetings, we are going
to settle the grave and complicated questions between the race of
Englishmen and the race of Chinese touching the colonisation of this
great Continent of Australia.
To-night I offer you what aid I can towards the fair consideration
of this important subject. My point of view is, of course, that of the
minister of religion. I shall not speak as a politician, nor as a politi-
cal economist, nor even as a patriot in the narrow sense. I am set
for the defence of the Glospel, which is the true charter of liberty; for
the heralding of the teachings of my Master, who is the one deliverer
of the world. In Christ there is neither Jew nor Greek, neither
barbarian nor civilised, neither bond nor free. If my opinions differ
from your own, concede to me fullest liberty of thought and expres-
sion, and do me the justice to believe that I have endeavoured to
free my mind from every prejudice in a matter that so nearly con-
cerns the welfare of Britain and of the world.
I propose to marshal my thoughts under three several headings
and to discuss with you—l. The mission of the English race ; 2. The
policy of England towards other races; 3. The Chinese and our
relations to them in Australia.
I. The mission of the English race.
We believe in a Divine intent manifest in the history of men
The peoples who have risen to power, and have wielded mighty and
enduring influence over their fellows, have been appointed by Grod to
do special work in relation to humanity at large. Grreece taught the
world wisdom. Eome gave it laws. The Jews were the custodians
of Divine revelation. Mohammed was the hammer of Grod to destroy


the brutal paganisms of Western Asia. And England has her mission,
already beginning to show itself upon the pages of history. Slowly,
during twelve long centuries, the English race has won and consoli-
dated the liberties of the people. Bit by bit, against the tyranny of
Norman kings, and the oppression of Tudor kings, and the treachery
of Stuart kings, bit by bit freedom has been wrested or bought.
Just as the Jewish race was educated by God for a thousand years,
in order that through it salvation might be successfully proclaimed to
the entire race, so has the English nation been educated, in order that
by its means personal liberty—social and political—might be preached
throughout the world. See how this new Gospel, the direct product
in chief of the teachings of Christ, has been set forth in the sight and
hearing of men. Look at our greatest colony—the United States, at
the Dominion of Canada, at the new nations that are springing into
being in Australasia. Never, in all the times of old, has true freedom
been so honorably displayed; never before have order and progress
been joined to individual liberty in the government of great peoples.
England is the teacher and leader of the nations. The dynastic
changes that have taken place during the last thirty years in Euro-
pean States, and the social upheavings which are taking place now, are
the result of an ardent desire to win that civil and constitutional
freedom that we enjoy. And the mission of England is the mission
of all the colonies of England. We plant the tree of liberty on every
soil. Wherever a British community is founded it becomes the centre
of radiating forces, which affect all surrounding peoples within the
sphere of its influence. The destiny of the British people is to work
itself out upon all continents and among all races. It has to
proclaim liberty to the captives, the opening of the prison to them
that are bound. Freedom of thought, of speech, of teaching, of wor-
ship, this is the new evangel which it is the mission of England to
herald to the world. Perish the thought that we are to be guided by
mere Imperial instincts; that British influence and British interests
alone are to be regarded ; that what we are to aim at alone is the
consolidation of our empire and the extending of our power. The
work we have to do is two-fold in its character. We have to settle
and organise commonwealths, in which our own people shall grow up
orderly, free, virtuous, and religious. And we have to tame the
ferocity of savages, and rule over the older communities which neces-
sarily become subject to our control, and penetrate the ancient civilis-
ations by our teaching and example. A proud notion some of you
will say. Ay! proud enough. But I pray God to smite the crown
of empire from our brow, and humble our glory in the dust, as soon
as we begin, like many that have gone before us, to live for ourselves
alone.


11. The policy of England towards other races.
But now let us see how this mission is being fulfilled. What
has this Christian England of ours done, what is it doing in regard to
other races with which it comes in contact ? Look back upon our past
up to the time when our history opens. Britons, Homans, Saxons,
Danes, Normans, they are all united to form the English people.
Since the 13th century, when our nation really began to be, it has
.absorbed into itself by families and by whole communities those from
every European state who sought to escape the grinding tyranny of
their kings. We are essentially a mixed people with our sympathies
broadening towards others. To go no further back than this present
century, Waterloo was fought, not for glory, not for territory, but for
the recovery of Christendom. Who is not proud of the name of
Englishman since for pure humanity we paid down £20,000,000 to set
free every slave within our borders. Is India cited ? We gained our
sovreignty from no lust of power, nay, almost against our will. If
our conduct has not been above reproach, the national conscience has
sought unceasingly to regulate the government of Hindostan. We
are ruling India for the good of the people of India, honestly striving
to give them freedom and peace ; not treating them as a conquered
and subject race, but as our fellow subjects living with us under equal
laws. It is this human feeling that gives us our power of colonization,
and that has enabled us to win such hold upon the races to whom wo
have come. Among the Hindoos and Mussulmen of India, among
the Buddhists of Ceylon, among the Chinese of Hongkong and
Labuan and Singapore, among the negroes of the West Indies and
Western Africa, among the Kaffirs, and Hottentots, and Bechuanas of
Southern Africa, among the thousand isles of the Pacific, the English
are known and honoured for fairness, for justice, for generosity.
There may be instances too numerous of individual oppression and
wrong doing, but the English Government, which represents the
English mind and the English heart, is known to be an assertor of
rights and a redresser of wrongs in the case of the poorest and
weakest of the subject races that are under our flag. I will not
now enquire how much of this cosmopolitan feeling, this brotherhood
of humanity, is due to the teachings of Christ, but I will venture to
assert that the sentiment once applauded for its novelty in a Homan
theatre, “ Homo sum, humani nihil a me alienam puto. “ I am a
man, nothing that concerns men is a matter of indifference to me,” is
a sentiment that finds expression in all the outdoings of our national
life.
111. The Chinese and our relations to them in Australia.
Theory and mere sentiment do not hold their own in the presence
of overwhelmingly adverse facts. Whatever may be the mission and


the policy of England, it is said we are confronted here in Australia
by the most imminent peril if we continue to deal with the Chinese
as we have been wont to deal with other races. Let me summarise the
objections that are made against equal and unrestricted intercourse
between Australia and China. The Chinese are sure to come, if
allowed to come, in such vast numbers that Australia will be more
Asiatic than European. As they come now, to live for a time but not
to settle, their labour is no profit to the community. Since they are
able to subsist on a pittance that would not supply an Englishman
with food, to say nothing of his home and family, they undersell all
European labour, and will eventually drive it from the market. As a
race, they are addicted to the foulest vices, and they practise the
most hideous immoralities. Their mode of herding together is a
source of the greatest danger to the health of our cities. They ignore
or defy our judicial and municipial institutions, governing themselves
by means of secret societies which would constitute a great peril to
the commonwealth if they were among us in large numbers.
Now, charges like these must be fairly considered, even if urged,
as, alas! they have been, with unreasonable clamour. Ido myself
regard this Chinese Question as the most important one that has ever
yet been broached in Australia. We Englishmen have left our
English homes that we might found communities of an English sort
in these southern lands. In no small degree we have succeeded. The
civil and social and home life that we rejoiced in in the mother land
have been reproduced here. We are laying the foundation of nations
which we fondly think will be after the pattern of the old country,
perhaps even more nearly approaching that of an ideal state. But in
the midst of our rejoicing we are startled by terrible apprehensions.
Men of an alien race who have visited our shores have become enamoured
of the land. They would like to come in and possess it. They belong
to the most numerous and prolific people that have ever lived on the
earth. They have multiplied until they have filled up to overflowing
the great East of Asia between India and Japan. They are pressing
hard on their frontiers on every side. They are crossing the mighty
mountain barriers between their western provinces and Burmah.
They are ascending into the great plateaus of Thibet, and are making
themselves masters of Turkestan. They have passed the great desert
of Gobi, and have conquered the great and fertile region on the
banks of the Amoor. Southward they have crossed the sea into the
thousand islands of the Malayan Archipelago. They have formed
flourishing communities in Singapore and Penang, in Java and
Malacca, and a hundred other places. And we know how they have
begun to invade by thousands the western States of America, and the


northern and eastern coasts of Australia. Now, what shall we do in
the presence of these facts, and in view of our own future ? Shall we
let things drift ? Under any circumstances, then, our ideal Australia
will vanish, and if the charges against the character of the Chinese he
true it will be no fitting home for English men and English women.
But, before considering the probabilities of our own future, let us
enquire into the history and character of this Mongol race. The
charges brought against them are serious enough. I have looked
carefully into this matter for years. I have consulted standard
authorities, and corresponded with China itself; and during my resi-
dence in Sydney have made myself acquainted with their national
habits. There are many things I do not like. The physique of the
Chinaman is unpleasant to an Englishman. The sallow complexion,
high cheek bones, oblique eyes, hairless chin, and generally retreating
forehead which mark the Mongol in any part of the world, are
perhaps as contrary to our standard of beauty in the human face
divine as the physiogonomy of any race. But beauty is partly a
matter of use, and beauty of soul may look out of a Chinaman’s eyes
as well as out of a Europeans. As to their habits, they differ from
our own, and in many respects are unpleasant. But we have to judge
them by a higher standard than appearance and habits. The religion
of the Chinese I do not find brought into question. His most virulent
adversary in Sydney does not bring it as a charge against him that he
worships Lao-tze, or is content with the atheism of Confucius, or the
nothingness of Buddha. It is in the region of morals that he is most
fiercely attacked. He is held up to the execration of men as a monster
cankered to the core of his being by vices the most abhorrent to
our human nature. Is this true P Can the indictment be sustained
by facts P As a representation of the average Chinese character, I
believe it to be false, I know it to be false —false utterly. I cry shame
upon the Englishmen—if they be Englishmen—who in a way so un-
manly have defrauded the stranger within our gates, and with him the
nation to which he belongs. Let me cite the testimony of Sir Walter
Medhurst, formerly British Consul at Shanghai. It dates no further
back than September last. In the course of an indignant protest
against the wanton defamation of the Chinese nation in the United
States and Australia, he says, after admitting the existence of crimes
and vices : —“ But all these blots and blisters upon society are in
China, as elsewhere, the exception and not the rule, and they are apt
to attract the observation of the superficial traveller and bookmaker,
while he shuts his eyes to or purposely ignores the back ground of the
picture, where may be seen the Chinaman as he is at home, an
intelligent, patient, hardworking, frugal, temperate, domestic, peace-


loving, law-abiding creature. Let me cite another testimony that I
regard of equal value, that of a fellow student of mine, who resided
for fourteen years in Canton. Of all my college mates there was no
one like him for sound judgment and the calm expression of truth.
Writing to me in April of last year, he says : —“ Tell me about the
Chinese in your Colony P One thing I beg of you as a matter of
personal friendship, try yourself to surmount all prejudice against the
Chinese. lam vexed in my spirit because of the things I read in the
papers and sometimes hear from returned colonists, revealing a degree
of antipathy against the Chinese race which I am certain is as un-
deserved as it is hateful. John Chinaman is ugly to our eyes, I know
that. But live among them, and their sense of ugliness wears away.
Their habits are in some respects dirty and disgusting to us. Still,
after all deductions, the Chinese are a respectable people, worthy of
respect, comparing not altogether unfavorably with other races,
inferior in some respects, superior in others. lam indignant at the
indiscriminate abuse poured upon them by the Anglo-Saxon race.”
A leading French writer says : —“Agriculture to the Chinese is more
than a calling, it is almost a religion. No country is cultivated with
so much care, or perhaps with more success. It does not contain a
square inch of waste ground.” Does that look like immorality ?
Again he says : —“ China is the land in which primary instruction is
most widely spread. Schools are found even in the smallest hamlets,
whose rustics deprive themselves of some of their gains in oi’der to
pay a schoolmaster. It is very seldom you meet with an entirely un-
educated Chinese. The workmen and peasants are capable of writing
their own letters, reading the Government bills and proclamations and
making notes of their daily business.” Are these the accompaniments
of immorality ? But I will put it in another way. If there is one
thing more than another upon which the Almighty has stamped the
burning brand of His displeasure it is indulgence in vice. Profligacy
and debauchery corrupt and destroy both the individual and the
nation. The command to “ increase and multiply ”is a Divine
command, but only the virtuous can obey it. The curse of barrenness
has ever fallen upon the nation that transgresses upon a wide scale the
laws of temperance and chastity. And here is a people compared
with whom we are but of yesterday. For 3,000 years (some think for
5,000 years) they have been possessed of a high degree of civilization.
When our British ancestors clothed themselves in blue paint, and
lived on the acorns and nuts of the primeval forest, the Chinese were
in possession of a refined and cultivated literature, and boasted
no mean proficiency in the arts and sciences. 500 years before
Christ the sage Confucius delivered to his countrymen a series


of books which abound with precepts of a pure morality. Take
one of these precepts, “If you wish for good agriculture, be of
pure morals.” And Sir Walter Medhurst says they regard the
writings of the sages as Englishmen do the Bible. Here is a people
contemporary with Egypt and Babylon, that have lived through all
the vicissitudes of nations and the destruction of empires, and that
are found to-day dwelling in a thousand cities, and numbering in their
multitude one-fourth of the people of the globe. Immorality ? Ho !
my English brother. Thou must find some other reason for thine
antipathy and thy hatred than is contained in this slander of a whole
people, else we shall consider thee not only cowardly, but very
ignorant and very foolish.
And yet, with all this, our chief difficulty remains. The very
virtues of the Chinese may prove more dangerous to us than their
vices. We want English civilization, English institutions, English
social life, dominant and predominant in Australia. If they come to
us in great numbers while these are in their formative stage, it will
be with results most unhappy to our future. That they must come
eventually, I for one believe. We are upon a continent capable of
supporting untold millions, and the half of it is unsuitable for
Europeans. From the 26th parallel of South latitude northwards, the
whole breadth of Australia, save in a few uplands, will furnish no
true homes for the English race. Shall we hold it as the dog holds
the manger, snarling at the ox ? Our traditions and our temper, our
G-overnment and our Bible, alike forbid it. But this Australia, from
Palmerston to Melbourne, and from the N. W. Cape to Moreton Bay,
must be ruled by English power and shaped by English thought.
The Asiatic races that hereafter will settle must become assimilated
to the nobler and more progressive civilization of the English people.
Now, in order to secure this, we are bound, I think, at this stage of our
national life, to limit and regulate their coming. In the interests of
humanity, in the interests of Englishmen—aye ! in the interests of
Chinese themselves, who are hereafter to be incorporated with us, we
need wise legislation, endorsed by the supreme legislature of the
Empire, to restrain the influx of the Asiatic races.
It belongs to the politician, and not to the religious teacher to
devise methods for effecting this, but I may be allowed to make one
or two suggestions. A Government that in its immigration system —
and voluntary as well as assisted immigration, ought to be the object
of its care—a Government that disregards family life, not only allows
the coming of a multitude of vagrants, but lends its sanction to
grievous immorality. If Chinese men come, Chinese women must
come too. In all cases the passenger trade between our ports and


those of China should be regulated like that from England and the
rest of Europe. The merchants of Hongkong and Singapore must
not be allowed to ship cargoes of human beings as if they were cattle
or sheep. Double the cost of the passage, by necessary sanitary
measures, and you prevent three out of four from taking it. The secret
associations among the Chinese ought to be sternly prohibited here
as it is in China itself. Yery many come as the result of their action,
and continue slaves to their fellow-countrymen on British soil. The
opium traffic ahould be placed under severe restriction. This would
render Australia less inviting to those who have come under the
power of that deadly drug. If the Chinese do not contribute to the
revenues of the country in the same proportion as others, they should
be taxed to, at least, an equal amount. Above all, the Lodging
House Act ought to be enforced upon Chinese as upon Europeans.
This would increase the cost of living, and render necessary an increase
of wage.
But whatever we do, let us do it like men, like English men, like
Christian men. Turanian, Semitic, Aryan, we are all one. “He
hath made of one blood all nations of men to dwell on all the face of
the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed and the
bounds of their habitation.” Humanity is one in Adam. Humanity
will be one in Christ.
Printed by Foster and Fairfax, at No. 13 Bridge Street, Sydney.






The working men of Sydney seem to view with
considerable anxiety the recent influx of Chinese to
the colony, and the anti-Chinese movement is about
to be revived in order to bring pressure to bear on
the Legislature to pass a restrictive law against
extensive Mongolian immigration. On Saturday
evening a mass meeting was held at the Haymarket.
Mr. Henry Brown was in the chair, and after ex-
plaining the object of the meeting he introduced Mr.
M‘Lean, J.P., who moved the following resolution:-
“That this meeting is of opinion that no future
Chinese Bill will be acceptable to the working
men of this colony which has not for its
leading feature an annual tax of .£lO per
head on every Chinaman resident in New South
Wales, whether from China, Hongkong, Singapore,
or elsewher-, or whether a British subject or not;
and that a committee of five members of the Political
Reform Union be appointed to draw up a petition
embodying the above resolution, to be submitted to
a monster meeting at Bathurst-street column, on
Wednesday evening, with a view of the ultimate
presentation to the Legislative Assembly, that a bill
to that effect might be at once brought in by the
Government, and become law.” Mr. Shipway
seconded the resolution; and, after several other
persons had addressed the meeting, the resolution
was carried unanimously.
Though the weather on Monday was decidedly in-
auspicious for alfresco oratory, the coterie of'indi-
viduals calling themselves the Working Men’s
Defence Association gathered together at the
Bathurst-street Column. Of course Mr. Martin
Guest presided, and of course he made one very long-
speech and several short ones. The proceedings
were conducted with the exemplary order charac-
teristic of this body, only two of the audience being-
locked up for riotous behaviour and about 20 threat-
ened with similar treatment. Prom these results
a general idea may be entertained that the audience
did not lack animation. The object of the meeting
was to revive the Chinese agitation, of which the
Defence Association claim to be the origi- ia + ors
The chairman made reference to the Chinese now
quarantined, and expressed the most profound rem-Hr-
that the Chinese Bill had been thrownZt
Upper House. _ Mr. West made a speech on “the-
irresponsible nincompoops,” or persons otherwise-
known as the members of the Upper House Mr
Brown’s duty was to urge upon the assemblage and
t^ e uYT 1 u ng v m ? n ° f S -T, d r y generally the necessity
of totally abstaining from Chlusse rotten vege-
tables, At about this stage, when the chairman was-
threatening to get tne authority to “come down” om
the riotous part of the meeting, the rain came dowm
on all, and so heavily that the whole assemblage-
promiscuously madq qf for yerandahs and othlm
places of shelter Tcw/w i Coimt, JrtwnJ
lCl*+ f !9£o
