





AN ESSAY
ON THE
SECRET SPRINGS
PRIMARY PRINCIPLES
OP
p Actions.
BY J. COXHEAD.
“ Turn a new leaf, and stronger read in man ”
Young,
“ The kingdom of God is within you.”
Luke.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY E. MASON, 62 YORK STREET.
Opposite the Wesleyan Church,


PREFACE TO THE READER.
Dear Feiend,
In offering this small treatise to the public, I humbly
hope that it will by the blessing of God, in some degree contri-
bute to the spiritual benefit of immortal souls. One soul is
worth more than ten thousand worlds, and should but one
soul be induced to turn, “from darkness to light, from sin to
holiness, and from the power of Satan to God,” bj perusing
its contents, I shall be amply compensated; angels in heaven
will rejoice, and the name of God will be glorified.
I crave not the phantom of applause for anything I
have done, can, or shall do; but I earnestly entreat all you into
whose hands this little book may fall, to think deeply and seri-
ously of the state of your own soul, and unreservedly surrender
your heart to God, “ the father of the spirits of all
from whom alone cometh “every good and perfect gift,” and
diligently “ search the Scriptures,” decidedly resolved to take
the Word of God as being the only rule of your faith and
practice. The truth of God endureth for ever. His Word is
truth, and it is “ sweeter then honey,” and “ stronger than
a lion.” The Gospel is truth, and “it is the power of God
to salvation to every one that believeth.” Let Jesus Christ be
your “ Lord and Master,” through every future period of your
existence, then “ eternal life,” and “ pleasures for evermore ”
shall be your portion in “the world to come,”
Praying that God our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,
may bless every section of the Christian Church throughout
our Island and throughout the world, and “ pour out of His
Holy Spirit upon all flesh,” and tendering mine unworthy
thanksgivings to the glory of His Holy Name.
I remain,
Tours most respectively in the Lord,
JOHN COXHEAI).


FEEFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
Christian Friends,
As man is an object of the Divine regard of Him
whose love and wisdom is infinite and everlasting cer-
tainty, man is, and ever should he, a subject of our
warmest respects and estimation of good will for the
present and future welfare and happiness of his existence.
In whatever capacity we view man, we look
upon him as an object not to he despised. The
fact of his existence by creation, his preservation by the
Father of Spirits of all flesh, the care of God’s providence,
over him and towards him renders him an object of
our highest contemplation and study.
His ®rigin, his nature, his organization, and cap-
abilities, as coming from the hands of his creator and
maker, presents him to our affections as akin to ourselves.
If we consider him relative to his interior gifts and
qualifications, his mental powers, the faculties of his mind
saying nothing of the vital forces and activities of his soul,
the study of such a subject cannot fail of being truly inter-
esting, if not highly beneficial. All man’s powers and facul-
ties are from the All-wise Giver of all that is good and true.
The innumerable things contained in the one visible
form of man i. e., the human form, cannot be duly appre.
dated unless we are disposed to make some little effort our.
Selves to think over some few of the many things which enter
into the substantial formation of so admirable a form of
created existence.
That man does exist cannot be denied.—That he was
created cannot be eontroverted.—That Infinite love in union


with Infinite wisdom, in concert Joined, to make man, is evident
from the revealed will of God Jehoviah in the Book of Genesis.
No one has ever proved the withdrawal of God from the
least of his creatures, from the commencement of the first
created form of existence.
It may he that many are too reluctant to investigate
their own faculties, capabilities, and powers of mind ; but that
should not deter others from entering into the most scruti"
nizing investigation of their own possessions, either of mind
or body.
All science, all knowledge, all wisdom, all love, and
all faith, all good, and all evil, and all life —either natural or
spiritual—relative to the spirit and soul of man, and so to of
the mind, is from spiritual causes.
Without going farther into the subject respecting th»
inward powers with which all are gifted, allow me to say that
this essay was published in England 23 years since, and is now
republished by request of friends. Its diction is nearly as
before ; but the preface is altered to the intent that it might
]ead inquirers after knowledge and science more and more
into a virtuous knowledge of themselves, which will be a first
step to a true knowledge of Jesus Christ our only God, whom
to know is eternal life.
Yours in kind regards,
J. COXHEAD,
Greek Cottage, Boundary-street,
Kedfern,
Sydney, August, 1869.


THE ESSAY.
!•—There are such things as h»man actions in
existence. This proposition requires but little or no
argumentation to prove its solidity, it being evident
before the eyes of every spectator, therefore I shall
not rob you of your time, in trying to prove what
needs no proof at all; but I shall just observe, that
human actions are indispensably necessary for the
existence and perpetuity of human society, yet at the
same time there are many unnecssary actions per-
petrated, To enumerate all the actions of one
family, or all the actions of the inhabitants of one
village, town, city, or nation, is altogether impos-
sible, saying nothing of all the actions of all the
inhabitants of this world. The actions of one single
member of human society, from his birth to his death,
are past numbering, even by the wisest mathmati-
cian or philosopher. Man is an active being—is
benefited by action, and without action he could not
long exist or subsist. It is pleasant and profitable,
for every man tOj be actively and usefully employed
It should be every man’s study to be active in hig
calling, office, rank, or station, in the sphere
in which he moves either in the lower or higher


classes of human society. All men, women,
and children are useful in their proper places
The poor are useful to the rich and the rich
are useful to poor. What would the poor do
without the rich to pay them wages for work, and
what would the rich do without the poor to giv»
them their work for money? Cannot you see
that the rich pay the poor for their work, and the
poor give their work for money? Then ought not
the rich to love the poor, and the poor to honour the
rich ? If there are any men that are not useful
something is out of order, some link in the chain of
human society is broken, and wants to be repaired.
If all were in their own proper place, then all would
move together in society, ia delightful harmony,
similar to thousands of movements in one beautiful
piece of machinery.
ll.—All human actions proceed from a certain
origin. It is not at all unwise, nor unprofitable to any
man to try to find out the secret springs of the
human mind, and behold in clear light, the origin
of human actions. It would be well for every man
to find out the origin of action, for if action be
wrong, the spring of action must be wrong also. If
file effect be evil the cause must be evil, and to produce
an alteration in the effect there must be an alteration
in the cause. Action will never be what it should be
until the spring of action be, what it ought to be.
Action cannot exist without an existing cause. There


is in action, the end, cause , and effect ; or the purpose,
accomplishing, and the thing accomplished ; or the
willing, doing, and the thing done. The end is tn
the cause, and the cause is in the effect, and the
effect contains in itself, the end and the cause. Let
any man examine his own mind, and he will see,
that before he performs an action he has the end in
view, then he contrives the cause, and the action be-
comes completed. All human actions proceed from
the human mind. The origin of all human action
is not in the body, from the body, but in the mind,
and action proceeds from the mind by the body.
Before the Great Western Railway from London to
Bristol was completed, the end existed in some per-
son’s mind, the cause was put into operation, many
hands were employed, and the Railway was ulti-
mately made. Before writing these remarks, they
existed in my mind, and, had I been deprived
of my mind, my body of itself never could have
written it, and the same may be said of all
actions that are performed in this world, by all its
inhabitants. If some do not know that such is the
case, that does not alter the truth of these remarks.
What person of sound mind can disprove the truth
of the above assertions ? Is.it not well known, that
if cause be taken from effect, the effect will cease,
and without cause effect cannot exist. Then the
certain origin of human actions, is in the human
mind, and not out of it, but really exists within it.
111. —All human actions may be retraced to


first principles in the human mind. All action* or’
exterior things of the mind, proceed from first prin-
ciples or interiors, and not contrairiwise. T© re.
trace the actions of the human mind to first prin-
ciples, we must find out the situation of the min ( l
itself, and must understand something of its motions
and workings. I’o illustrate this idea, if you were
desirous to retrace the blood found at the extremities
of your fingers to its source of circulation, you must
hare recourse to the heart, whence all the blood in
your body is propelled and circulated through every
part of the human system. If you determine to re-
search the millions of particles of light that sur-
round our world in atmospheric air, you must
retrace it through its degrees and modifications
to the orb of light itself, then you will find
out its centre or the source from whence it
proceeds, the Sun being the source of the natural
light of this earth. The seat of all human
actions is in the human mind, the human mind is
situated in the human brain, and the brain is situated
jn the human head, and the head is the principal part
of the human body. The mind is the most wonderful
part of a human being, and “it is the mind that
makes the man,” and it is the real, substantial man.
for without the mind, man would not be man. The
head being the chiefest part of the body, a man
would rather lose one arm or one leg than any part of
his head. All the five senses that appear in the body


are centered in the head, or rather in the mind, in the
brain within the head. The brains are the organs
of the mind, the mind is the soul, and the soul is a
real spiritual substance. Having noticed the situa-
tion of the mind, an interogatory sentence may be
interwoven. How is it possible for any person to
give a full description of any other person’s character
by examining the external part of the head, seeing
that there are innumerable things within the brains
that hand can never feel ? If you saw a blind man
feeling round the outsides of a house to find out the
pictures, furniture, and grandeur of the inside, what
would you think of him ? The springs of motion in
the mind can never he discovered by making exter-
nal experiments ; because the principal activities
are the inmost cr most interior things of the human
mind, the greatest beauties and powers are the in-
most. It has been asserted that affection is the re-
sult of thought; but such an assertion is incorrect;
for affection is prior to thought, and what is prior
cannot he a result of what is posterior. Many have
retraced human actions to thought, and there they
have stopped, and have not been able to form'any
other idea of the mind, than as of something like
air or wind ; hut that is no reason why others should
proceed no farther, neither is it any proof that fur-
ther discoveries cannot he made. To come to the
point in hand; you know that words and actions
proceed from thoughts, and thoughts proceed from


perceptions, and perceptions from the affections of
the mind. According as the mind is affected, so it
perceives and thinks ; and affection is excited by in_
flux from natural objects, and also from the spiritual
world; for without an influx from the spiritual
world we could not exist in this life one moment
of time; every person is under the influence of a bad
spirit or a good one, during his abode in the present
life, and also affected by extraneuons objects. A
natural world cannot exist without a spiritual world.
All visible things, as created by God, are the forms
of things spiritual and shadows of things eternal.
TV.—There are three degrees of the human mind.
A knowledge of these degrees must be of great
service to any thinking man, or to any person
employed in the cultivation of the mind. The mind
is formed for the acquisition of knowledge, and there
arc many knowledges in existence, and what can be
done in any calling or station without knowledge or
wisdom ? By knowledge man can make his way
across the watery deep in opposition to wind and
tide ; by knowledge he can outstrip, in speed, the
swiftest of the animal creation; by knowledge he
ean make water, air, and fire subservient to his
purposes, and the most beneficial knowledge that he
can obtain is a knowledge of himself and a know-
ledge of God in Jesus Christ, whom to know is
eternal life. Therefore, that man may know some-
thing of his own mind, and of the different degrees


of the mind, a description of them shall be given in
the next section ; but in this I shall only notice that
there are three degrees in the mind, and to what
they may be compared. There are then three
degrees to the human mind ; the inferior degree, the
middle degree, and the superior degree, and yet,
these three degrees taken together, form but one
mind. In each degree there are an infinite variety
of shades of character and quality, so that the old
proverb stands good, “ many men of many minds.”
No two minds are exactly alike, but there is in
every mind a similarity. The degrees of the
human mind, may be compared to three stories in
a house, yet these three stories are but one house.
They may also be compared to the three regions of
the atmosphere, the lower, middle, and upper region,
these regions altogether form but one. It may not
be amiss to call the three degrees, the three regions
or mansions of the mind. One more comparison,
and I shall proceed to describe these three degrees.
They may be compared to the three natural kingdoms
the mineral, the vegetable, and animal kingdoms,
yet these kingdoms taken together form but one
kingdom.
. —What these three degrees are. In giving a
description of the three degrees of the human mind,
I shall just remark, that there is as great a variation
from one extremity to the other extremity of these
degrees, as there is in the variation of heat and light


from the equinox to the poles, or from the centre of
the globe to its circumference. The three degrees
are, the natural, the rational, and the spiritual, and
these three degrees form but one mind. It is by
the admission of truths into the mind that the
%
powers of the mind are opened and expanded, what
is false has a direct tendency to close up and contract
the internal parts of the mind and darken the un-
derstanding. The several degrees of the human
mind are not all open at once, neither are they ever
all open in every person; for some live and die in
great ignorance and darkness, they are destroyed for
lack of knowledge. The different degrees or regions
of the human mind are opened, and unfolded, and
expanded in successive gradation. The first or
natural degree is like the appearance of a rose bud ;
the second, or rational degree, is like the real full
bud; but the third, or spiritual degree, is like the
beautiful ro«e in full blossom. Some persons are
in only their natural mind, others are in both the
natural and rational, or natural-rational, and these
are more intelligent and more wise than those who
are in only the natural or outer region of the mind.
Others are in their spiritual mind, and at the same
time in their rational and natural, but such are
governed from the superior or spiritual region of the
mind, and they more sensibly discern the things of
the rational and natural degrees of the human mind.
A man in only his natural mind, is like a person


standing on a tower, viewing things by starlight ;
a person in the rational degree, is like a man standing
on the same tower by moonlight, looking at the
distant landscape ; but a man in the spiritual degree
of his mind is like a person standing on the same
tower in a fine clear day, he has nothing to obstruct
his sight; a person cannot discern spiritual things
unless such person be raised into the spiritual regions
of the mind ; for spiritual things are only spiritually
discerned, and spiritual things are foolishness to the
natural man, the mind being the real man. Any
person who is sincere before God, and who loves
truth for truth’s sake, may be raised into the superior
region of the mind, and be blessed with heavenly
and divine wisdom. A person in his natural mind
may be compared to a man riding on a donkey; a
person in his rational mind to one upon a mule ; and
a person in bis spiritual mind to a man riding on a
fine blood horse. Again, a person in his natural
mind may be compared to a foot passenger; a person
in his rational mind to one riding on a stage coach ;
and a person in his spiritual mind to a man travelling
by railway.
Vl.—All human actions proceed from two prin-
cipal faculties of the human mind or soul. The
powers and faculties of the human mind are wonder-
ful, and the powers of those faculties increase and
multiply by their cultivation and exercise. By


exercise those powers and faculties become matured,
and yet no limits can be placed to their increase and
progress; for an increase of knowledge and wisdom
will be attainable as long as those powers shall con-
tinue to exist, and that will be through life and to
all eternity. The memory itself is something won-
derful, inasmuch as it will contain thousands of
myriads of things, and carry them for years without
being weary. But the two grand principal faculties
of the soul call for our most attentive consideration,
a knowledge of these two faculties is highly bene-
ficial, inasmuch as it may lead to a better use of
them, or it may lead us to more highly appreciate
them, because we shall see more of their value.
These two faculties, then, are the will and the
understanding. To illustrate the subject in hand,
relative to the will and the understanding of the
human mind, it will not be at all improper to refer you
to their correspondents in the human body. In the
human body are situated two grand organs of life,
and without these two organs the body could not
exist, for were the body deprived of either, it would
instantly die. These two grand organs of the life
of the body are the heart and the lungs ; the heart
for the circulation of the blood, and the lungs for
respiration. The heart, by means of the arteries,
propels the blood throughout all the human body,
and what returns, returns by means of the veins.
There are two ventricles to the human heart, the


right and left, and the left propels the blood to th e
extremities or ultimates of the body, it returns into
the right ventricle, its course is then directed through
the lungs into the left ventricle of the heart for circu-
lation. In its passage through the lungs it is puri-
fied, impure particles are sent off, and pure particles
are added to preserve the blood in a healthy state ;
from this you may see how necessary fresh air is in
order that health may be promoted and preserved.
The heart corresponds to the will, and the lungs to
the understanding, and the heart and will act to-
gether by correspondence, so also do the lungs with
the understanding. An act of the will under the
influence of fear will cause a palpitation of the heart,
and an act of the understanding will cause a sigh,
by which the lungs become inflated. The will and
the understanding then, are the two principal and
noble faculties of the human mind, and they are the
two grand faculties, from whence all human actions
proceed. In order that the mind may know how to
act, it is necessary that it be enlightened, and it is a
blessing that none are left without some degree of
light. All light of mind comes from the “fountain
of light,” and Jesus Christ is “ the true light, which
enlighteneth every man that cometh into the world.”
Vll.—There are four principles which excite the
mind to action. It is generally acknowledged that
man acts from principle, and indeed man cannot act


without it: but it is not so generally known what
the secret principles are which excite the mind to
action, therefore something shall he said in this
article respecting the principles by which the mind
is set in motion ; the motion of the mind is perpetual.
It has been often sounded in our ears that some
people are of a had principle, and others of a good
principle; but sufficient distinction has not been
always made between bad and good principles to
enable us to form a correct idea of each; but our
ideas of principles have been jumbled together into a
confused heap. For the better arrangement of our
ideas and thoughts concerning first principles of the
mind, those principles shall be classed under four
first moving principles, and all other principles must
be in subjection, as secondary principles, to one or
other of the first principles, the first must take the
lead. The four first principles belong to the will
and the understanding, and from principle the will
and the understanding act in conjunction with each
other; the will cannot act without the understand-
ing, nor the understanding without the will. The
will and understanding act together in each of the
three degrees of the human mind. The will principle,
is the inmost faculty of the mind, and flows into the
understanding, and the understanding flows into the
will, and thus conjunction is affected and action
performed. Sometimes the will and understanding
act contrary to the judgment of the understanding*


and when such is the case a secret sentence of con-
demnation is past upon the mind, and it feels
conscious of having acted contrary to love and
wisdom. Of the four principles that excite the
mind to action, it may he said that two are inferior
principles, and two are superior principles, and the
two inferior ones can be subjugated by the two
superior ones, and made subservient to the two
superiors. Two may be called the elder, belonging
to the natural part, and two the younger, relating to
the new man, the two inferior ones are the elder,
and the two superior the younger, and “the elder
shall serve the younger.” Of the will and the
understanding, I remark that the will is inmost, and
■should be in full subjection to the light of truth in
the understanding, although the will being the in-
most principle of the mind, yet it is under the
government of the truth in the understanding. The
•will should obey the voice of the understanding in
what is good and true, as a virtuous wife would th e
voice of a wise husband. Man could not act from
principle without a will, nor without an understand-
ing. Deprive man of will, and action at once ceases*
take away his understanding, and man does not know
how to act. Indeed he could not act, and no person
should act at what he does not understand, but first
try to obtain an understanding of what he intends to
perform. If you take will and understanding from


man,, you take away the man, and nothing is left
hut a man’s body.
Till.—What those four chief principles of action
are. Every man should have some knowledge of
the principles by which he is excited to action ; every
man being moved by first principles, it must be a
wise and beneficial enquiry to find out the nature
and quality of such principles. If we remain igno-
rant of the first principles of action we are liable to
be under the influence of principles which are
destructive of our happiness and peace; but if we
have a knowledge of the secret springs of the human
mind, and of the first principles of action, it will
impart power to our minds to overcome evil princi-
ples by means of principles which are good. All
things in the human mind proceed in successive and
simultaneous order, from first principles to last, or
from primaries to ultimates. The four leading and
governing principles that actuate the human mind
are dissimilar in their nature, yet they can act in
subordination and conjunction with each other, or
on the other hand, in opposition to each other. The
four first principles are these—the love of self, the
love of the world, the love of God, and the love of
our neighbour. To these four principles may be
traced all the actions of all the human family. The
word fire in Scripture is significant of love, and this
is why love appears to warm the heart or inflame


the soui. Those who are governed by the love of
the Lord and the love of their neighbour, are under
the influence of good and truth ; but those who are
led by the love of the world and the love of self, are
under the influence of what is evil and false. The
former is heavenly love, and the latter is infernal
love; one is comforting, the other tormenting. If
the mind be governed by the love of God and tho
love of the neighbour, what is evil and false is over-
come ; but if the mind be governed by evil and false,
violence is done to good and truth by being pressed
into the service of evil and false. Hypocrites will
try to cover over their evil and false principles of
mind by clothing themselves with truths from tho
Word of God, but by so doing they murder tho
truths of heaven
IX. —The effects of these four principles. As
certain as there is in existence a cause , a corres-
ponding effect will be produced by that cause ; an
effect cannot effect itself, but every effect is effected
by its effective cause. One singular cause will effect
a thousand things, and a thousand to that. This is
visible in vegetation; a single seed will produce a
plant that will live for years and produce myriads
of seeds and plants, which, in time, would produce
enough to cover every spot of land on this globe. A
single leak would sink a man-of-war with hundreds
of men and thousands of things and articles on board.


Putting a Bunyan to jail might cause him to write
a book which, ultimately, may be translated into all
languages and overspread the world. The birth of
one prince may cause a nation to wonder and rejoice
and ultimately involve a nation in ruin. One little
cause may touch a cord that will vibrate through
“ ages yet untold.” To show a few of the effects of
the before-mentioned four first principles, I entreat
you to consider :
X. —First, the effects of the love of the world.
Find out a man principled in the love of the world,
and you will find out a worldly-minded person, one
that is governed by the love of the world. Such a
one loves the world and loves the things of the world,
he craves and longs for worldly goods like a child
for the breast. Such a one loves his silver, his
gold, his houses and lands with all his heart, and is
never better pleased than when he is adding to and
and increasing his possessions. The principle by
which he is governed is his ruling love, and that
principle being the love of the world, the world is
in his affections, his affections give birth to percep-
tions, perceptions to thoughts, and thoughts to words
and actions. Whatever such a person may be
engaged in, he thinks nothing good or profitable that
does not augment his possessions in the world. Let
such a person suffer loss, the loss of a fine horse, or
fat sheep or bullock, or let one acre of his beloved


land be swallowed up by an earthquake, and see
what a blow it gives to his affections; then look at
its effects, he thinks, weeps, mourns, and laments
more for the loss he has sustained than he rejoices
for all he has left and is in possession of; but while
he thinks so intensely on what he has lost he thinks
he has nothing. Seeing the person in such a state of
sorrow one would almost suppose that he was either
famished, ruined, or lost. Try to alleviate his grief
and comfort his mind by telling him that he ought
to be thankful to God for what he still has in his
possession and he will be displeased with you. But
tell him that you will give him a thousand pounds
to compensate his loss and you relieve his mind at
once, joy beams up in his countenance, he becomes
pacified and delighted. If this love were not
checked or held in restraint by the all-wise dispen-
sations of providence, it would hurry on its possessor
to inconceivable lengths, and the man would ulti-
mately be lost. It has sometimes happened as a
consequent result and certain effect of this principle,
viz , the love of the world, that in a case of disap-
pointment,, or in case of an awful foreboding calamity,
that the person governed by such a principle has
committed suicide. Such a principle unrestrained,
is, in every sense of the word, spiritual insanity.
Xl.—Secondly, look at the principle of self-love
in its effects. That every person should so love


himself as to act with all due care and prudence to
preserve himself in cases of temporal and spiritual
danger cannot be rationally denied; but that a
person should be principally governed by the love of
self can be questioned and its absurdity demonstrated.
The connection of each individual in human society
shows us at once that it is improperly imprudent for
any person to be governed and controlled by self-
love ; for when that is the case in proportion as
the person is governed by such a principle; he
hates and despises others, and if he can secure his
own profit and prosperity, he becomes indifferent
about the profit and prosperity of others Under the
influence of such a principle he almost fancies that
the world, with all its inhabitants, were made to be
submissive to him, and he would be highly gratified
if all would honour him as being their superior ; he
almost fancies himself a god. If, at any time, such
a person should manifest benevolence, as doubtless
sometimes he will and do good to others, his doing is
done that that benevolence or good may return by
re-action to himself either in applause, honour, or
adoration. The essence of self-love is in all his
actions, and all his actions become selfish by partak-
ing of the essence of such a principle. To tract' the
working of this principle in all its possessors and in
all cases would require a thousand volumes of more
than a thousand pages each. Then let it suffice for
every person that understands to endeavour to trace


out its workings in his own mind and actions. A
person principled in self-love, and governed by it,
is often thrown into trouble and agitation of mind.
If his plans are rejected or his schemes defeated he
considers himself to be injured, and is ready, on all
occasions, to be avenged on his enemy; On this
principle duels are fought and other acts of outrage
and violence committed. It gives birth in the mind
to envy, malice, hatred, revenge, and, if not
restrained, it breaks out into adultry, murder, and
other base and awful crimes. It gives existence to
tyranny and oppression, and oftentimes it has broken
out into bloodshed and slaughter. Cities have been
involved in ruins because a little point of honour was
at stake. If this principle were not restrained by
civil, moral, and religious laws the world would
soon be one general slaughter house. But gratitude
is due to the Divine Being that those laws are in
existence, for good laws are the bonds of a society,
nation, or kingdom.
Xll.—Thirdly, look at the principle of the love
of God in its effects. This is the most noble and
profitable principle that can excite the human mind
to action. In the Lord our God is centred all that
is kind, good, and true, lovely and of good report.
All beauty, excellency, and glory centre in him.
He is the fountain of all love, and wisdom, and life .
All love, wisdom, and life, in all existing things


inanimate and animate, and in all rational and intel-
ligent beings, the wicked as well as the righteoust
proceedetb from the Lord as one general centre ; but
love, wisdom, and life become varied and dissimilar
only according to its recipients and subjects. And
it is felt and enjoyed in the human mind according
as the mind turns to or from the Lord. The mind
of man is capable of turning toward or fro ward. It
can be in a state of willingness or unwillingness,
power is given to obey or disobey ; if it were not so
no man would be a free agent, and then no flesh
could be saved. The mind of a person being towards
the Lord, such person is said to be looking to the
Lord, then the love of God is felt, and such a person
is in his proper element or glory, when filled with
love to his Creator, Redeemer, and Saviour; and in
such a state of mind the Bible is loved above all
other books, the truths of heaven become sweet and
refreshing to the soul. This principle leads a man
to love all that comes from God, it bears up the mind
under the trials of life, and it imparts Christian con-
tentment to the mind in all and every station. If
this principle was more generally possessed we
should have more contentment and less complaining,
more comfort and less torment; for [perfect love
casteth out that fear which hath torment. The love
of God in its effects is most excellent, it teaches us
to lisp in accents soft and mild, “ Thy will be done.’* -


Our will being subject to the will of God, ultimately
leads to eternal life and felicity in the heavens.
XIII. —Fourthly, look at the principle of
the love of our neighbour in its effects. This
principle is of heavenly birth and stands
inseperably connected with the principle of the
love of God ; for if the love of our neighbour
be taken from the love of God, “the vital spark of
heavenly flame,” the fire of divine love is at once
quenched and no longer exists in the mind. To love
our neighbour as we ought, we must be principled in
the love of the Lord our God, or else our love toward
our neighbour will no longer be pure, but it will be
selfish, and we shall be loving ourselves in our
neighbour instead of loving our neighbour purely on
account of the good existing in him. When man
loves God, he is principled in love towards his neigh-
bour, and in loving his neighbour he does not love
him for the sake of his person but for the sake of the
good qualities which he possesses ; the good in the
person is considered his neighbour, and not the per-
son separate from good. There are not many persons
but what have some good of some description within
them ; most people possess some good quality of
either domestic, social, civil, moral, or spiritual
good. A man principled in love to God and in love
to his neighbour is willing to serve his neighbour in
all cases of necessity, and not only willing to do good


service to his neighbour but he actually does it; for
such a principle of love leads him to devise means,
invent plans, and adopt measures to promote the
good of his neighbour generally. In all that such a
person does the essence of his ruling love exists, and
while principled in such love he cannot, for truth’s
sake, seek to harm his neighbour, but seeks to do
him all the possible good that lies in his power. In
some cases he exposes himself to extreme danger to
rescue his neighbour, and will even endanger his
own life to save the life of his neighbour; at such
times the person loves his neighbour better than he
does himself. Love to God and love to our neigh-
bour are the two grand living principles on which
the religion of Jesus Christ is suspended. “On
these two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets” and the whole Scripture might be ex-
plained or understood on these two principles, but
on no other. Those two principles are bolder than
lions, they are swifter than eagles, pleasant and
lovely in their lives, and in their death they are not
divided; for if one dies then dieth the other also.
XIY.—AII human actions to be accounted for
from first principles. Man is an accountable being
and is responsible for all his actions and accountable
in God’s sight for all his works from interior or first
principles. The idea of accountability is stamped
npon the mind in childhood, and at an early period


of his existence he is capable of obeying or disobey-
ing fis parents. The idea of responsibility and
accountability is also fostered in the mind during all
the process and progress of education, and if man
•were not an accountable being he never could ho
educated ; while receiving instructions he is under
tutors and governors whom he is capable of obeying
or disobeying ; if man could not obey he never could
disobey. The idea of accountability is matured in
the mind through every stage of human life, and
even to old age man is capable of obeying or dis-
obeying the laws of his country and the laws of his
God. We are accountable to the laws of our
country outwardly, and are liable to punishment if
we transgress ; but, respecting Divine laws, we are
accountable inwardly, for “ God requireth truth in
the inward parts.” Before the Lord our God we
are accountable for all the secret springs of action
for all the secret workings of the heart. Our real
character in the sight of an omnipresent and
omniscient being (and such is the Lord our God),
is such as it is in first principles, and not such as it
may appear outwardly to men, but such as it is
inwardly in the secret recesses of the soul. “If I
regard iniquity in my heart the Lord will not hear
me,’ and we are held in important responsibility
every moment of our wakeful existence while in this
world. Our day of probation, with the possibility


of salvation, continues during our abode in this state
of existence; but death is the terminus, and then
every man takes his departure into the world of
spirits, and is ultimately received into heaven, or
falls into hell, where the states of all are unchange-
ably and eternally confined within the limits of
heaven’s comfort or hell’s torment. Every man
shall be judged according to his deeds and finally
rewarded according to his works ; his secret works,
his inward principles, purposes, motives and inten-
tions, will determine his destiny in the spiritual
world. The scrutinizing eye of omniscience passes,
with divine velocity, through the secret recesses of
the human mind, and the secrets of every man’s
heart, or will and understanding, shall be disclosed
—from him can no secret thing be hid. To con-
clude ;—Two of the four principles which excite the
mind to action, mentioned above, Nos. 8,9, 10, 11,
12, and 13 are hereditary evils, and into those evils
every man is born, viz.:—the love of self and the
love of the world. The other two principles are
implanted or given by God. God has given all men
power to repent and turn to him, and he freely
gives those two heavenly principles —the love of
God and the love of our neighbour—to every man
who is willing to receive them, sincerely asks for
them, and seeks to obtain them. Our Lord Jesus
Christ is God—God is love—he is loving to every


man, and he hateth nothing that he has made. He
became Incarnate, died to redeem the world,
defeated all the powers of hell, rose again from the
dead, passed into the heavens, and is become “ the
Saviour of all men, especially of them which be-
lieve. ’ Believe the l Vordof God, believe in Christ,
live a holy life, and may the blessing of the Father,
Son, and Spirit be with you all, Amen.
“ To love, and know in man
Is boundless appetite, and boundless pow’r;
And these demonstrate boundless objects too.
Objects, powers, appetites, heav’n suits in all:
Nor, nature thro’, e’er violates this sweet,
Eternal concord, on her tuneful string,”
“ Say, know’st thou what is this? Or what art thou ?
Know’st thou the importance of a soul immortal ?
Behold this midnight glory : worlds on worlds!
Amazing pomp! Redouble this amaze !
Ten thousand add; and twice ten thousand more ;
Then weigh the whole ; one soul outweighs them all.
And call th’ astonishing magnificence
Of unintelligent creation, poor.”
•“ And art thou shock’d at mysteries ?


The greatest, Thou.”
“If, then, that double death should prove thy lot,
Blame not the bowels of the Deity ”
But blame thyself eternally.
Young.
If fifty times you read me o’er
You'll love to read me fifty more. — The Bihlb.
Note. —It is earnestly requested by the author that this
essay be not printed or published by any party without his
consent.
J. COXHEAD.


INDEX FOR THE ESSAY.
SECOND EDITION.
The Activity of Man. Section 1
The Origin of Human Actions .. ~ .. .. „ 2
Actions Proceed from First Principles
Three Distinguishing Degrees of Mind in Every
Man .. .. „ 4
The Three Degrees Described „ 5
The Two Governing Faculties of the Mind .. „ 6
Principle which Excite Man to Action .... „ 7
Four Chief Principles Noticed it „ S
The Effects of Leading Principles „ 0
Effects of the Love of the World if Allowed to rule „ 10
The Evil Effects of Self-love when it Governs Man „ 11
The Good Effects of the Noblest Principle of
Action ». .. „ 12
The Blessed Result of Loving our Neighbour „ 13
Every Man Responsible and Accountable for his
own Actions, and that from first Principles
of Action „ 14


J. L. G. Bererton, M,D„
Turkish Hatlis
Rev. T. Griffiths, Sydney
Mrs. E. Hamley, Melbourne
Rev. J. Barton, Kingston
Mr. W. Wilcox, Botany Road
Rev. Piddington, Cloav-
land-street
Mrs. Melne, Sydney
Mrs. Goold, Botany Road
Miss Rose
Mr. E. Coxhead, Redfern
J. Berrimans, Chippen-
dale
„ O’Riely, M.D., Botany
Road
~ R. Gatley, Emnore
~ Oates, Waterloo
„ Vandenbrook, Waterloo
~ Hocking, Waterloo
„ Williams, Waterloo
„ Jones, Stanmore
„ Clark, Waterloo
„ Oxenham, Waterloo
„ Shyne, Sydney
~ M. W. Green, Evangalist
~ J. K. Coxhead, Balmain
~ Holladay, Balmain
„ Kempt, Botany Road
„ Eady, York-street south
„ J. Davis, York-st, south
SUBSCRIBER’S NAMES.
H. Sanders
Miss J. Coxhead, Sydney
Rev. J. Sharp, Woolloomoo-
loo
Mrs. Claxton, Shelharbour
„ Spence, Botany Road
Mr. Palmer, Pleasant-street.
Redfern
„ Scholes, Sydney.
„ S. A. Coxhead, Redfern
„ John Coxhead, Redfern
„ J. Coxhead, Sydney
„ T. Williams, Judge-st
„ R. Leary, Botany Road
„ J. L. Small, Do.
~ F. Hill Bemish, Can-
terbury
„ Wearne, George-street,
Redfern
„ W. Keith, Woolloomoo-
„ Philpot, Waterloo
~ Penny, Glebe
„ J. Garner, Marrickville
„ T. Davis, Captain
„ J. Church, Steward
„ Melne, Surry Hills
„ S. S. Goold, Botany Road
„ C. Heydon, Chippen-
dale




