

Authorized by the State W\r Council
and the Lord Mayor of Melbourne
elboume
Proceeds in aid of
Red Cross Society






GEN. W. H. FETHERSTON. D.G.M.S.
BRIG.-GEN. R. E. WILLIAMS.
Acting State Commandant


LT.-COL. HONMAN, O.C.
COL. CUSCADEN, P.M.O.


No. 5 AUSTRALIAN GENERAL HOSPITAL
LieUT.-Col. Honman, Officer Commanding.
rp . ~i'rn===XCD:.. . >■— *C
FOREWORD
The Proceeds from the Sale of this Illustrated Description of the first Mihlar}) Hospital (A.I.F)
founded in Victoria will be devoted to the Red Cross Society.
The Compiler (Warrant Officer F. C. Hawker) acknowledges gratefully the valuable and generous
assistance given to him in his pleasant task by Mr. T. Green and the Melba Studios, who have supplied the
negatives: the Melb. Photo. Engraving Co. (Mr. A. Lyall, Manager), who have engraved the blocks used
for illustration; and the Specialty Press Propy. Ltd., who have set up, printed, and bound this book.
F. C. H.




THE EVOLUTION OF A MILITARY HOSPITAL.
HERE was no Military Hospital in existence in Victoria at the beginning of the war,
except a small Hospital at Queenscliff, for the accommodation of the Permanent
Artillery at the Heads. When the necessity for establishing one arose, opportunity
was taken to make use of the Police Hospital, which had just been nearly completed,
but was unoccupied, on the St. Kilda Road. Its accommodation was limited to about
40 beds, with an operating theatre, and this building formed the nucleus of the present
Base Hospital, or No. 5 A.G.H. (Australian General Hospital), containing accom-
modation for over 600 patients, and in March, 1915, the first patients were admitted.
The staff was not a large one. Matron Barton and seven nurses reported for
duty at that date, the only medical officer being Captain Meade. It was soon found
that the main building was not large enough to accommodate the influx of patients, and
tents had to be used awaiting the erection of more permanent buildings. The Quarter-Master at this time
was Lieut, Greene
There was a good deal of strain upon the staff at this time, and the absence of gas and hot water
service and telephones added to their work and troubles. Cooking was done in the present offices.




The first overseas patients arrived by the "Kvarra" on the 13th March, 1915, and in May,
the pressure upon the aceommodalion by the influx of patients front the different Camps increased
by an epidemic of measles, and other infectious diseases, the old building of the Immigrants Home, now
designated as Wards 12 and 12a, was converted into an Infectious Ward and later
as a Cerebro-Spinal Meningitis Ward, until accommodation was provided for this disease at the A 1 red Hospital
I thVprelre increased, tents had to be provided temporarily until the pavilion huts were erected m the upper
nortion of the grounds. At its start the grounds were a rough unmade paddock. , ~
In July 1915, the stable buildings belonging to the Police Department were converted into Wards 16
17, IS. 19. 20, providing accommodation for 400 patients, but even this accommodation was bar *'
tor in August, 1915, an acute Influenza Epidemic made the pressure very great, as many as 80 and 90 case
being 1 admitted daily from the Camps, and the work was made additionally severe by many members of
the Staff being prostrated by the epidemic. . Q . a • Meade the Officer
As the work increased, it was found necessary to increase the Sta . P ’ ,
r zT t the start was succeeded by Lt.-Col. Steele; later on to be followed respectively by Lt.-Col.
STi 1 Vance, and Lt.-Col. Honman in April. 1916. who still remains in
charge; and associated with these officers were a large number of the leading Physicians and Surgeons of *e
Melbourne Hospitals, who had the immediate care of the patients, assisted by a large number J
Residents who from time to time have been drafted abroad for active service. w
Of 'the original Staff very few remain. Matron Barton being the first Head, to be followed by Matron
Cornwall, who, after one period of active service ab.oad, has since gone away—both of these ladies ave


Back Row —Captains De Lacy, Grieve, Stewart, McCutcheon ; Lieut. Burnell, W. O. Hawker.
Front Row—Capt. Trewhella, Sister Moreland, Lieut.-Col Honman, O C, Matron Cornwall, Major Catchlove.


received the Royal Red Cross decoration in recognition of their services, and of the Staff under them. The
Nursing Staff, like the Junior Medical Staff, has from time to time been drafted abroad, as the demand for
them increased: and it has become the practice now to use the Base Hospital as a training ground for Medical
Officers, Nurses and Orderlies for service abroad.
A well-equipped Hospital must necessarily have many departments, and as the need arose these have been
gradually added, and owing to the foresight of Col. Cuscaden, the Principal Medical Officer of the Third
Military District, Victoria, assisted by the co-operation of the different Officers Commanding, the Base Hospital
is able to meet with any demands made upon it for clinical work for the relief of Invalided Soldiers.
Its central position has led to many demands being made upon it. The State War Council uses it
daily and hourly for the admission and treatment of discharged soldiers, where the sickness is the result of their
military service. Review cases of pensioned soldiers are seen here in co-operation with the Pension Boards,
and it is essentially the Hospital for all cases of sickness arising in Camps, and for soldiers on leave.
Besides its own activities as a Hospital, there are others devoted to the well-being of the patients and
the Staff.
Ever since the Hospital opened the Chaplains of the different Denominations have faithfully ministered
to the sick and wounded. Not only have the spiritual needs of the men been attended to, but gifts of flowers
and delicacies have been distributed amongst the men by a devoted band of workers, and a Sunday Morning
Church Parade has been thoroughly appreciated.
A special feature, too, for the comfort of the men, has been the supply of dainties to relieve the monotony




Of Hospital diet by the Red Cross Kitchen Workers; it is difficult to speak in too high a term ol these
The depot of the Red Cross Society at the Base Hospital has supplied over 8,000 discharged soldiers
with clothing and all underclothing, and is under the competent supervision of the committee, consisting o
Mrs. Brett, Mrs. Winter, Mrs. Alston, Mrs. Dodds, Mrs. Pullen, and Mrs. Tuckett.
The Red Cross Volunteer Motor Corps arranges trips for the returned invalided and convalescen
soldiers on Saturdays and Sundays under the able command of Mr. Wm. Pearson the Hon Secretary.
The SRS (Soldiers’ Refreshment Stall, under the able management of Mesdames A. Deakm and
McMillan) was established to provide refreshments for the benefit of the Returned Wounded Soldiers who
were outpatients at the Hospital, and who often had weary waits, men from the Camps, motor drivers, orderlies,
and all soldiers who had need of it. Nearly 2.000 men a week are served and. there is only one governing
rule “everything of the best, and plenty of it.” At the fixed tariff of one penny, as much as he wants
is served to each comer. All the work is done voluntarily by a band of women, who are proud to be allowed
to join. The workers average ten a day, and they do all the work of making sandwiches, puddings or
soup and tea, coffee, and cocoa, and also attend to the cleaning of the stall. The letters S.R.S. have been used by
the men to apply to the workers, whom they call the “Serve you Right Sisters.” The place is known to the men
under many names—“ The penny de cafe”—or the “Dug Out” being the best known. The Penny de
Cafe first saw light in very humble quarters. A bell tent, with a smoky kerosene stove was all the
equipment they could find,” but very quickly the value of the cafe was proved beyond doubt and to-day there
stands the complete little stall. The S.R.S. is not only a feeding place, but a place of refuge-a place




of rest—where a man knows he may find a ready and sympathetic listener for his woes and joys alike.
Therefore there are many watching friends who are willing and ready to give help when it is needed. A small
fund of money is set aside called the Soldiers’ Aid, and from this men are helped when the need is urgent,
either with a loan, or if necessary with a straight-out gift. This little fund has lightened many a load. There
is no creaking of machinery or red tape. A woman gives all her time, and sympathy, and is easily approached
by those in need. It is interesting to see the women at work cutting bread and spreading it with butter,
preparing meat, eggs, &c., for sandwiches, with a quiet breathless haste and precision that gives them the
appearance of being small parts of a large effective machine—a machine that is doing work as effective in its
way as any of the other machines of war.
But who can measure the activities of those who desire to help the sick soldiers—where could you
stop. The number of cots bearing labels of all those districts who have endowed them—bear witness to
some of them. Flowers sent to brighten the wards, gifts often without names —little gifts of appreciation of
the worth of the men are showered daily upon the Hospital. Could the donors but know the gratitude with
which they are received —and the comfort they give. The Boy Scouts must not be forgotten either. How
they work at menial tasks. Their bright faces lighten up the gloom and depression of the men in the wards;
their ardent young hearts in their desire to help—how gladly would they be nearer the Front—leave no duty,
however irksome, undone.
The day’s work of the Hospital begins early. In the winter the orderlies parade at 6.43—the roll is
called—the orders of the day read out and the staff distributed for the daily work; some for the Cook House
—the most important branch of the Hospital—the Operating Theatres, some for the wards and the different




departments of the Hospital. Then the wardsmaids take a hand, for however willing a man may be,
scrubbing and cleaning are not the prerogative of the male sex —and wardsmaids, since General Fetherston,
the head of the Medical Services in Australia, wisely introduced them to do the cleaning of the Hospitals,
have this duty to do, and by 9 o’clock the wards are cleaned, scrubbed, and ready for the visits of the
Medical Officer. Then comes the visit of the M.O. and an inspection of each patient, the Ward Sister
accompanying him with the night report, and the charts and history of the patients, and to note any symptoms
for the visiting Surgeons and Physicians. The Visiting Surgeon is then received, and the cases for operation
for the next day are put on the list for preparation, or for further investigation. It may be a request for
some work to be done at the Laboratory, or an X-Ray examination, or for teeth to be seen to, or the
eyes to be examined, or a report wanted from the skin specialist, or the nose and throat specialist—this is
noted and the patient is sent along to these departments. This is all routine work carried on in any Hospital,
but the military side is quite another matter, and here red tape comes in; and why not? Red Tape is a
necessity if records are to be kept of every man in the Hospital; and how are these men admitted?—through
the Transport Office—that is, the distributing centre of the Hospital: it is open day and night. A record is
kept of every patient who is treated there. It may be trivial, or it may be of the most urgent character. The
Orderly M.O. of the day, whose turn of duty lasts for 24 hours, sees everyone. He may mark “Treated,”
or he may admit them. In Transport Office is a chart showing how many beds are vacant in every ward—
and as every bed is filled it is marked off. Then transport takes him down to the wards with his papers
which may or may not accompany him. If he is on leave, none are available. The Ward Sergeant and
Sisters receive him and his records are made up and a copy of them sent into the office within an hour, and the




Ward Medical Officer is informed, and if he is off duty, the Medical Officer of the day takes on his respon-
sibilities during his absence. If the case is an urgent one the Visiting M.O. is informed, and if the case is
on the danger list, his relatives are informed. If a batch of returned soldiers come in—from their boat
cases are taken in a different transport, and as they are in most cases convalescent, they are sent
to larger wards to await decision whether further treatment and investigation are necessary or whether they
should be boarded and discharged to civil life. There are many cases, however, sent from Camp—sent solely
down for special treatment. Well that is a simple matter. The eye cases are seen to by Major Webster;
the ear and throat cases by Major Foster; and the skin cases by Major Lawrence, and are sent
back to Camp or not, as the severity of the case requires. But there are cases that require very different
procedure, those suspicious cases of meningitis or other infectious diseases and special methods that
experience has evolved, have to be adopted. Infectious diseases are a source of danger to everyone—military
or civilian. Cases of diphtheria and scarlet fever are always cropping up, to be speedily dealt with by
sending them to Fairfield Infectious Diseases’ Hospital, but there are other cases on the border line to be
considered. Well, there is an Isolation Ward to deal with these, until the disease has developed its nature.
But it is another matter with influenza and catarrhal cases, for with meningitis always threatening the troops,
special methods of treatment are required, and isolation in special ward is necessary.
❖ *>




In the early days, cases of meningitis were placed for a time in the ordinary medical wards, but after
a short lime they were treated in a separate ward from other patients till arrangements were made for then
treatment in special wards at the Alfred Hospital. i-r ,l : nd i a , er
Other infectious and contagious diseases were sent-measles to Glenroy, scarlet fever, diphtheria, and later,
menin SYSTEMATIC ATTEMPT TO STAMP Out MENINGITIS.—In the early part of 1916 it was decided to
take steps to deal with the menace, and the following directions were laid down:—
AH suspicious cases were to be sent to Isolation Ward for observation all febrile catarrhal cases -re to
have their throats swabbed on reporting, and swabs sent for examination to Laboratory. They we o
admitted to Ward 12, which was placed under isolation and the rules of isolation rigidly enforced. Ley
patient’s throat was to be swabbed till two successive negatives were obtained. ,
Also that any case in Hospital which showed a rise of temperature without obvious cause was to be
transferred to Ward 12, and kept till diagnosis was established. . rv u ' „
Ward 12a was used as a Convalescent Ward for patients from Ward 12. and also as a Discharging
WarcUor Isolationjnd Wann2. observation from their admission until they were fit for
can best be ullderstood when ft is stated that not a single case of meningitis
or dangerous exanthenes has been discovered since the procedure was inaugurated in the General Wards
Treatment of Malaria and Cases of Bilharzia.—For the last six months all cases of malaria
in the 3rd Military District have been sent to No. 5 A G.H. for treatment and all cases of Nile Fever have
been admitted for observation and research work carried on by Major (Professor) C erry a a ora or
N °’ The Out-Patients’ Theatre is now chiefly used for specialists’ operations, though occasionally minor opera-
tions are still done there.




The multifarious detail of the clerical side of the hospital is the registrar’s special care; he directs and
supervises a competent staff of trained men and women, who work in offices situated in the administrative block
of lhe s^r bu “7 dmission o( pa[ients has been touc hed upon, but they have to be discharged. These are
presented before the Officer-Commanding with the recommendation of the Medical Officer as to their
unfitted {m service> and a nl along to the D.H.Q to be discharged. Some
require further treatment, and are sent to the Convalescent Hospital to await it; and the majority are sent to
Convalescent Hospital until they are fit for duty. But all these cases have to be l ° o *
office so that the respective camps can be informed of the decision arrived at. But the day is a busy one
until about 5 o’clock in the evening when the work slackens off. and unless some urgent cases arrn [®*
until the following morning. It is often asked of the staff why so many are employed in
looking after so few patients. If a number varying from 600 to 200 can be called few, the fact is obvious
but not often recognised, that a patient is sick 24 hours in the day, and that relief is necessary amongst the
staff, h e f^ e h " C o y at ' S aa ] n £f; Specialist Department, with its attached operating theatre, is under the supervision
of Maior Webster and Major Lawrence and Major Bryan Foster. ,
Here are treated all eye, ear, nose, throat, and skin cases sent from Camps, and also many returned
soldiers. Major Foster has charge of the ear, nose and throat patients, while Major Lawrence has charge o
the skin patients. Major Webster the eye patients. , iy/f l ioia wa c the
The attendance of ear, nose, and throat cases alone has exceeded 60 per day. March, 191 b, was th
busies. monT The attendance of all cases totalled 1,128. In May, 1917, the attendance was 790.
and operations performed numbered 46. The dressing station, where patients not requiring admission receive
attention to slighter injuries, is responsible for 250 dressings per month.




MASSAGE.
Since the tncep.ton of the Army Massage Reser.e Corps on 10th November '916. 1.0001 patients have
received massage treatment, and fully 75 % have returned to the occupation which they filled before the war,
and most of the 25 % are employed at lighter duties, or return to the Front. Altogether, this means
30 000 treatments have been given. At present there are 72 massage cases daily, 3h receiving Talkrman
treatment (hot air and electric light baths) or stiff joints and rheumatic conditions Palate at pmsen
receiving electrical treatment number 45, including ionisation, galvanic, Faradic and high frequency treat .
The ionisation treatment has proved most beneficial in rheumatism, sciatica and goat conditions lorn.
medicSc "s also of great use in cases where the patient has received muscle scar due to shrapnel wounds.
High frequency is used mostly in cases of shell shock, and neurotic conditions with excellent results
Reaction, of Degeneration are taken out in this department m cases where the nerve is involved. It
determines whether suturing of the nerve is necessary.
Electric and needle spray baths are under course of construction.
X-RAY DEPARTMENT.
Shortly after the inception of the Hospital, the X-Ray Department was instituted, and commenced opera-
tions about the middle of August. 1915. A. this time the wounded were -turning from G.M, -
increasing numbers, and the department was taxed to its utmost to cope wi h the work. 1« _
obtaining equipment greatly hindered its operations, and it was not until well into 1916 that the Stall caugh.
up with the ™* . dit was necessary to increase the accommodation, and from one room it has now
enlarged to fir. and needs further extension. The excessive incidence of the work was relieved about the
middle of 1916 by the opening of No. 11 A.G.H. at Caulfield. • .
About 7,000 examinations and treatments have been made since the commencement. The patie ,
beside? returned men, come from the Camps of the whole of the 3rd Military District, and a large n.mber of




cases are referred by the State War Council. The work covers every branch of Radiology, including
radiography, localisation, opaque meal and all types of radioscopy. The department has been of great
assistance to the Dental Hospital in clearing up doubtful teeth condition, and treatment has been applied m
numerous skin diseases, and in some types of tumours.
PATHOLOGICAL LABORATORY
The Laboratory commenced work on April 27th, 1916, with a staff of one Medical Officer in charge,
and has worked and developed steadily from then to the present time. The Staff has also grown to meet the
requirements, until now it consists of a M.O. in charge, and a highly-trained Staff Sergeant, a partly trained
Corporal, and one Orderly. Its record for examinations of specimens of all kinds stands at over 1 3,000.
The building was designed and supervised by Dr. R. J. Bull, Bacteriologist of the Melbourne University,
so that an important requirement, viz., suitable rooms, was assured.
Captain Watson, having returned from Egypt in January, 1916, was instructed by Colonel Cuscaden,
the P.M.O. of the 3rd M.D., in the beginning of March to take charge of this Department for the use of
the Hospital, and also to deal with the bacteriology of “Cerebro-Spinal Meningitis,” which it was feared would
become epidemic again in the winter.
The difficulties were —(1) The obtaining of sufficient suitable modern apparatus; (2) the obtaining of
trained assistance; (3) the co-ordination of these necessities in quickest possible time.
Most of the apparatus we had been accustomed to work with previously was of German and Austrian
origin—Microscopes, apparatus for blood work, all scientific glassware, and aniline dyes, used for bacterio-
logical specimens, and even the grease pencils for marking the glass.
Some of this material was available at advanced prices, but for the most part substitutes had to be found.
It was found possible to have some apparatus made locally, and this was done whenever possible with success.
Before the equipment was delivered the first case of meningitis for the year occurred at Broadmeadows,
and the contacts had to be swabbed, and their cultures examined. This was done at the University
Laboratory.




By the time our apparatus was unpacked cases had occurred at Ballarat and Seymour—and soon after-
drdFromßthed n g o nW ards it was a daily struggle to complete our equipment and deal with the day’s work. The
more elaborate cultural methods of detecting meningococcus carriers had to be early abandoned, and even
then the bulk of work was more than the original staff—Captain Watson and an Orderly—could cope with.
Captain Mackay was attached as assistant, and relieved the strain On two occasions instructions were
given to take swabs of a whole Camp—first the Domain, and later Ballarat.
However, it was necessary to have a permanent trained if the Laboratory was o b «“ rae e ® ’
and after some difficulty Mr. W. E. Ellis, a man with many years experience, was appointed to the Laboratory
as Staff Sergeant. mc-nr\TOADV
as ouiu DISPENSARY.
Whilst Lt.-Col. Steele was O.C. of this Hospital, the Dispensary was re-organised, and owing to his
assistance, and to the Registrar (Major Berry), this very important part of the Hospital was brought up to
high standard. During August and September, 1915, whilst epidemics of measles influenza, and cerebrc-spina
meningitis were raging, over 200 prescriptions were dispensed each day by the staff. In spite ofa■ 8
difficulty experienced by wholesale druggists ,n obtaining synthetic chemicals, supplies o hs Hospital
maintained arrangements having been made well ahead, to cope with all eventuahti . P Y<
besides providing for all medicines for the patients in Hospital, also supplies medicines to out pa .ents (eye, ear
and skin specialists' treatment) to members of the permanent Staff and their families, and to the State War Council
ex-members of the A.1.F., &c. On an average 2,000 prescriptions per month are dispensed.
DENTAL.
In September, 1915, Captain (then Lieut.) E. F. Greenwood was appointed as a Dental Specialist to
attend at No. 5 A.G.H. when required.




Later in June, 1916, a Dental Surgery was built in the Hospital grounds and well equipped. A Dental
Laboratory, for the making of artificial dentures, splints for fractures, &c., was also attached. In November,
1916, owing to pressure of work and overcrowding, two very fine buildings were erected in the Domain grounds
on the opposite side of St. Kilda Road. One of these buildings is used as a Dental Surgery, and is equipped
with every convenience for the expeditious carrying out of conservative dentistry for the men now in Camp, as
well as returned soldiers requiring dental attention. Captain Greenwood, who is still in charge, has been
ably assisted, at first by about a dozen Dentists called up from the Dental Reserve for part time, and
latterly by full-time Dental Officers. From January to the middle of June this year 3,587 patients have
passed through this Department.
The Mechanical Laboratory is a large, well-lighted room, equipped with electric power lathes and a gas
water heater, &c., and is under the supervision of W. O. Glennie.
Here about 13 Staff Sergeants and Orderlies are kept constantly employed making artificial dentures for
the men at the various Camps in the 3rd Military District.
From January to the middle of June this year 1,264 dentures have been made in the Laboratory for men
at various Camps.
POST OFFICE.
Attached to this Hospital is a Post and Telegraph Office, where the men may avail themselves of every
facility connected with the Post Office.
One of the rules of the Hospital is that, every man coming in as a patient has his pay banked for him.
This is banked at the Post Office, which is also an Agency of the Commonwealth Bank, the men being
allowed 3/- per fortnight for incidental expenses. This method in many cases is the forerunner of banking
accounts for men who probably have never had money in a bank previously. The letters are delivered by a
member of the Staff, and the Office is conducted by a Postmaster supplied by the P.M.G.’s Department.












Cut (in tins), Flake,
or Mixture.
Also in Plug form.
Havelock Tobacco
Australia’s National Smoke
flfln the crowded city street, by the
camp fire—the never failing
friend of every man who smokes
—a cool tobacco with a flavour
famed throughout a continent.




" The Invisible Bi-Focal Lens,” for
distance and reading in one pair of
glasses —no visible lines, no ridge, no
cement.
The Master Lens for all Purposes.
" Sir William Crooke’s Glass,” the
Scientific Tinted Glass, which destroys
the ultraviolet and other harmful rays.
Consultation Free.
’Phone 4250 Wind, for Appointments.
In attendance Week days till 6 p.m.
Fridays 10 p m. Saturdays 1 p.m.
AUSTRALIAN MILITARY HOSPITALS”
Contractor Commonwealth Government
" OPTICIAN,
FOR
Eyeglasses and Spectacles
Optical Establishment and Most Up-to-Date Testing
Parlors in Prahran.
The Only Purely
E. ALBERT CARTER, D.O. (By Diploma)
OPHTHALMIC AND SCIENTIFIC OPTICIAN
(Australian Representative of the A.0.A.)
By Special Appointment to the M.U.1.0.0.F., A.N.A., A.W.A., etc.
225 CHAPEL ST, PRAHRAN
In Vestibule, next Empress Theatre
If suffering from headache or eyestrain it will pay you to call.




PHOTOS OF SUPREME EXCELLENCE
ARE THE WORK OF
The Melba Studios
101 SWANSTON STREET
Opp. Melbourne Town Hall
Always get the best —
it is always the cheapest
and most satisfactory.
Ring up Tel 2523
Central and ap-
pointment. c E - carter,
Manager.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATION TO SOLDIERS
ENLARGEMENTS ENLARGEMENTS
ICI OF ICI If the original picture is good, the enlargement will be as iri OF ir/
I QOI good; if it is not good or if it is bad, we will improve it. crAI P\II7DC
Photographs in all the best processes, from 10/6 per doz. t,T'O
The Photographs in this Souvenir were taken by Melba Studios




Make Myers Your Shopping Centre
WELCOME—whenever you are in the City— to come in and look round at your
leisure. We invite you to feel that this Store—with its fifty well stocked sections,
its two acres of floor space, its hundreds of courteous assistants is YOUR Store,
here for YOUR comfort, YOUR convenience, and for the fulfilment of YOUR
highest shopping ideals.
WELCOME to the facilities so freely provided for your use-writing tables, rest
and reading rooms, the creche (with its trained nurse and assistant), the lavatories,
telephones, tea rooms, open-air roof garden, with music, etc.
WELCOME—ALWAYS—AT MYER’S ! And whether you live
in the nearest suburb or in the uttermost corner of the State,
the same satisfactory service and keen prices, always —whether
you stand in front of our counters or send your order by post.
314-320 BOURKE STREET, MELBOURNE




The Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited
If
The Nurse’s Policy
Provides; —
(1) A sum payable at the end of a term of 15
or 20 years.
(2) Or a sum payable in the event of earlier
death.
(3) Weekly compensation for Accident and
Specified Sicknesses.
Offers the Most Liberal Contract
at Minimum Rates of Premium
Some Special Features
Total Funds at 31/12/16 - - £4,369,960
Total Income for 1916 - - £793,295
Ordinary Life Assurance, Accident and Sickness
Assurance, and Industrial Assurance Transacted.
Principal Office :
419-421 Collins Street, Melbourne
JAMES PULLAR, P.F.A., A.1.A., F.S.S., Secretary and Actuary.
C. E. MELVILLE, Manager. A. G. MELVILLE, Sub-Manager.




ELECTRICITY FOR THE HOME
Put an increased
value on your
Fiouse by having it
installed witFi
Electricity.
If you want to know more about it, and are thinking of having
your house electrified, Call, Write or Phone Central 8654
dward Bridget clean atmosphere,
clean ceilings and
ELECTRICAL EXPERT S’ c“nc°i
127 Queen Street, Melbourne an< T ,e ' v '
Who will advise you as to the best way of fitting and
lighting your premises and the cost of same.
Only the Best Material Used and First Class Workmen Employed—All Work Guaranteed
IFie wliole of the FJectrical Installation of this Hospital Fias been carried out since its inception by Edward Bridger.




jniiiiii mil The Dominant Quality
Ililllllllillllllllllilllilllllli'Q
of tone, touch, and durability of the Wertheim has earned
the admiration of discerning music lovers; has placed the
/I •
Australian Piano
as the artistic leader in many homes, colleges, Conserve-
toriums of Music, convents, etc., where intrinsic merit
governs the choice.
Catalogue Free on receipt of postcard. Inspect the new models on view at
Wertheim Central Showrooms
294-296 Bourke Street, Melbourne
FACTORY—-Bendigo Street, Richmond (occupying a site of five acres)
Q " ' V, " ' ■ 11 . '■ , ' ■' .. : , , . ' ■ ■ ,




A good complexion is only obtained by cleansing the skin, not
by blocking up the pores with cosmetics.
| Kitchen’s Medicated Soap
is a highly refined Toilet Soap composed of
specially selected medicinal ingredients which impart
a healthful stimulating activity to the skin, at the
same time keeping it soft, clear, and white.
1/ Buys a generous
/- sized tablet that
I wears to a wafer.
J. KITCHEN & SONS Pty. Ltd.




BALL & WELCH
Red Cross Goods
A full and complete range
of all goods required for
Red Cross purposes always
kept on hand, including :
Dressings, Bandage Cloths,
Flannels, Towels, Nurses’
Aprons, Surgeons’ Overalls,
Calicoes and Linens, Ab-
sorbent Wadding, Hoyle’s
Hairline Prints and Matron
Cloths forNurses’Uniforms,
Plain and Check Zephyr,
Nurses’ Complete Outfits,
including Shoes, Wools, etc.
PTY. LTD
GENERAL FAMILY DRAPERS
BOOT AND SHOE IMPORTERS
TAILORS AND OUTFITTERS
FURNITURE AND CARPET
WAREHOUSEMEN
It will be a pleasure to sub-
mit samples on application.
FLINDERS STREET, MELBOURNE
180-188




JOHN DYNON & SONS
CHINA, GLASS, AND «■
EARTHENWARE MERCHANTS
Contractors to Victorian Government and Railways
406 8C 408 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne
Telephone No. 201 And 399 to 403 Little Lonsdale Street, Melbourne Also at LONDON
Murray Street, Perth




OUR SOLDIERS EAT AND ENJOY
NESTLES
MILK AND NUT MILK
CHOCOLATE
sd„ iod., and 1/6 Per Tablet




GAS BATH-HEATERS
Hot water comforts can be enjoyed at any hour if
a Gas Bath Heater is in the house. However early
you rise, the bath is always just right; however
late you retire, you can always have a hot bath before
going to bed. Can you any longer deny yourself this
advantage ?
Call and Inspect, or Write for Booklet.
The “Rapid” Heater
METROPOLITAN GAS COMPANY
196 FLINDERS STREET




$$ ' "m '
High Class Pastrycooks, Caterers
of Pure Foods of Every Description
MELBOURNE & SYDNEY
73-77 SWANSTON ST., Tel. 7204
Fish and Grill Rooms and
Tea Rooms
28-30 ELIZABETH ST., Tel. 6344
Cafe and Tea Rooms
Banquets, Dinners, Weddings, Smoke Socials
especially Catered for
Open from 8 till 11.30 for Theatre Patrons
399 ELIZABETH ST.
233 ELIZABETH ST.
Tea Rooms only
Tea Rooms only
Factory: LEICESTER ST., CARLTON
681 BOURKE ST.
Tel. 6431
Shop only




THE STORE OF STORES
Where everything
is the best
by actual test
for YOUR SUPPLIES
is the " MUTUAL." Every effort of the establishment is directed
towards making permanent friends of our customers by supplying the
right goods at the right price, and in a courteous and obliging
manner, seeking to be of real service in every way.
If there is anything in a name, " Mutual" stands for satisfaction to
both sides, and our trading motto is: "WE are not satisfied unless
YOU are."
Whatever you may need to eat, drink and wear, or for the comfort
of your home, you will find here in the quality which satisfies and
at a reasonable price.
No obligation to purchase is entailed by inspection- we are pleased
to have you call at any time and see our departmental displays.
THE MUTUAL
OPP. FLINDERS STREET STATION
MELBOURNE




r eaa/3bo^
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiHi
Summer
Excursions
By Rail, or in combina-
tion with Coaches,
Motors or Steamers, to
the Seaside, Mountains,
Lakes and Caves.
(AUSTRALIA)
FOR
The Holiday Maker
The Health Seeker
or
The Home Maker
Winter
Excursions
To favorite Seaside
Resorts and the lovely
Gippsland Lakes.
All the Year Round
Excursions to Victoria’s
Mountain Playground
BOOKLETS, MAPS, PLANS, and
The Buffalo
Plateau
ACCOMMODATION GUIDES Free
Magnificent
Sporting Facilities
on application personally or by letter
to The General Passenger and Freight
Agent, Victorian Railways, Spencer
Street, or
Shooting, Fishing, Boating,
Bathing, etc.
I (government tourist bureau
I Collins & Swanston Sts., Melbourne
Superb Scenery, Splendid Sport, and
First Class Accommodation.
iiiiniiiiiiiiiiijiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii


