







NO
Cross, no Crown:
Or feveral Sober
REASONS
Against
Hat-Honour, T i tular -Respects ,You to a
sigle Person, with the Appareland
Recreations of the Times:
Being inconsistant with Scripture, Reason, and the
Practice as well of the best Heathens., as the holy Men
and Women of all Generations; and consequently
santastick, impertiment and sinfull.
With Sixty Eight Testimonies of the most famous Persons,
of both former and latter Ages for further consirmation.
In Desence of the poor despised Quakers, against
the Practice and Objections of their Adversaries.
BY W. Penn j.
An bunmhle Disciple, and patient Bearer of the
Cross of Fesus.
But Mordecai bemed nor Adam where art thou Gen.3. 9.
In like manor the women adern themselve in Modest Apparal, nor
with brodered hair, &c.I Tim.2.9. thy Law is my Meditation all
the day, Psal. 119, 97.
Printed in the Year, 1669.


To my Ancient Friends F.S. E.B. H.S.
J.C. I.N. A.L. M.L. T.C
MY Friends , As you were particularly in
my thoughts upon the writing of thefe
fliects 5 fo is it not lefs my defire to make
you particular in their publication.
Many have been die Objc&ions with which
you frequently have befetme on this account, but
not with that (need's I hope their Anfwers will
have with you. My matter,ftile and method (peak
not the leaft premeditation or fingularity,but that
•fimplicity and truth which plainly fliow the affe»
ftiouate fincerity of my heart, and beft willies for
your true happinefs, that from Defendants of vain,
foolifhj, proud and wanton Cuftoms* which exerts
cife the minds of men and women below the ex-
cellencies of Immortality (the higheft end of their
Creation) you may become Difiiples of that felll
denying who firft brought that greif fdici-
ty to light, and gladly Sacrifice your all, H but
your reafonable iervice, in order to fo glorious a
Reward*
By whatfoever is dear, I would befcech you to
relinquilh that very ‘vanity tf vanitiu 5 I mean,
thofe FaOiionsJleafiireSjand that whole variety of
h ■% Con-


Con variation which make up the Life andfatis-
fa&ion of the Age, and are thole earthy impedi-
ments that clog your Souls flight to more dibit me
and Heavenly contemplations : they were of old
fumni’d into three heads, the iuji of the the
Inji of and the pride of hfe f which arc the
off-fpring of the World, and not of the Father,
Rcfleft upon the incertainty of your lives, the
Immortality of your Souls, and that Eternal ftafe
they muft be fcntcnc’d to; bur above all, be you
intreated to eye that. Divine Principle engrafted
on your minds, in all its holy, meek, and felf-dc-
nying inftrudions j that being moftly -cxercifed
thereby,you may be wean'd from all the glittering
■Follies of the World ' (which only weak and for-
did fpirirs pleale themfelvcs withal) and icnlibly
experiment the inexprcffible delights and ravish-
ments of Soul,which arc the infcparable compani-
ons offucli retirements. By which you may be
lead into that temperance, piety and fclf-dcnial,
tliatfvil! render you lo many noble Witm'llcs, a-*
gainft the folly,luft,and grots intemperance of the
Age, and unqueftionably entitle you to Hpnor,
■Glory, Immortality and Eternal Life, then which,
as there can be nothing more truly excellent } lb,
not any thing more carndlly dciir’d on your ac-
count by Tour true Friend^
W. P.
The Epijile,


Th e Preface.
THe Bufinefs of this Preface, is to reqoeft of r»Ve
Reader two tilings for his own fake., which 1 have
fo much the left reafon to doubt of being granted,
as it would (ho w him very dedicate of charity, who wil-
fully would be fo injurious to himfelf: The fir ft is. That
he would be very Serious, remembring, that he who deipi-
fech what he does not know, befpeaks himfelf a fool $
as well as chat he is injoya’d to try all things, though only
obliged to believe what is good The Subjed is ferious,
lor, it is the blelled Crofs of Chriftj the work it is defigned
lor is ferious, ! for kts the Crucifixion of the vain, wanton
'and fleihly app rites of worldly men $ and if the Reader
be fo too, I qudlion not but the juft Principle (to which I
make my appeal) will juftifie me, and it become infirumen-
tal to his convincement ; but if he fhall demean himfelf with
crittical and frothy jefts, I can only fay the greater fhall be
ills condemnation • yet let him remember, that it is the
ptirpofeof this Difcourfe to prove what jefhs.Chnft hath
laid 5 namely that for every idle word he (peaks, he fhall
render an account in the day of Judgment*
The next thing Ihave toask, is, that he would he Im-
partial for he that reads, and makes his prejudic’d coo-
ftrudions mine = or ieeras to (light the Subject, Book, or.
Matter, becaufe he dill efpedTs the Author or his Opinions
in other points, may give diffident evidence of his own
weaknefs, but not difeover mure, fiuce there is not any
thing left becomes an equal Chriftian temper, then to ift
terpret ill, of that which means not fo, and to love or h tte
things by names, and for their Authors fake ?, a pradice
A 5 not


not more wretched then common: Nay, s tis the Dodfrisie
life and Application of too many to learn people to hate o-
thers Principles in order to deteft their perfons, and fo from
an Opinion-difference bring it into a perfonal one, from
whence flows all the malice and bitternefs that reign
among ft thofe who are called Chriftians 5 but if this Reader
be fuch a one, he is either an ill Teacher, or very ill taught ~
lonely have to tell him, that as Inch pre-opinion prevents
all clear and certain examination of things, (by which he
is at a lofs about his own faith and other mens) fo if he
would be benefited by this Difcourfe 5 if he would read
the character and condemnation of a wicked world ; and if
he would be truly inform’d of chat Life and Convei fatiora
which are according to godlines,and give entrance after time
fiiallend, into the endlefs Joys of an Eternal Glorious Reft
and Habitation in the Heavens, let him be let him
be impartial: And may that Almighty Power, which
railed jefus from the Dead, quicken his mind, and raife
his affeddons to the knowledge and pofleflion of Immorta-
lity • which as it is the whole requital I defire for my exceed-
ing love and earned: defires for the reformation of an incein-
pe rate and voluptuous World, to the Self-denying Life,
and Innocence of Holy Jefus ; fo fliall it be a matter of re-
joycuig to all the Faithful!*
"That the Errors of the Prcfs are not the is to be
fuppofed ; and therefore he reafombly is to be excepted from
the charge of them.
•to
the Preface*


The Contents.
CHAP. I.
Sixteen Reafonsagainft Bat-Honour? and Titular-re-
(fsßs. That they are inconftftant with the nature of
Honour, Honour is in the mind-, and expreft by real
ferviee to God or Men , ‘the Bat no exprtftion of Honour 5
'Titles > the Scriptures condemn them. The Effects of Pride
and Vanity, No advantage to men and women . Contrary to
the heft Times 5 the heft Men? andfever al Authors,
CHAP. 11.
IfPVehii Reafons again ft Youto a Single Perfon. That its
contrary to the ground of ad Speech, Meet nonfence ...
Condemned of all Languages,, Brought in by fame proud
Popes and Kings, Contrary to their Prayers, Teftimonies-
from Learned Authors of ancient and modern times*
CHAP. 111.
’’’Jp Hirtecn Beafons bgainfithe Vanity of Apparel? and com-
mon Recreations? Plea fares and Converfation of thcfe,
times. That they are deftmftive of their Infiitution. Sin
brought chathing 's and lofs of true Divine Pleasure?falfe
pleasure. That they are contrary to the Example of the
holy Generations : That the) are pofttively forbids Thai'
the f,are inconfiftant with the. Nature of Chrift’s Co-pet
and Religion, The Effects of pride and Wontonnefs?,
deftruCtiveof Labour, Induftry? Health, Body and Soul 5,
they enfmre the affections? divert the Soul from Heaven-
ly and Eternal Delights they are the more fernitiom.
hccaufe they feem more imoceht then grower evils ■? the?
occafton. Debts , Poverty? Worldly-mindcdnefs , and all
ffillpt-


F&lif •, that if fuch Vanity and Expense were hindered ’
Debts could be paid, the Poor and Fat her lefs provided
for , and the Nation enriched , othermfe nothing hut Wrath
and Vengeance come from God on fuch doings, obf eft tens
anfmred. The true ChrifHm Life vindicated from fuch
wanton Inventions, andiuf full. Vanities* Several weigh-
ty Teftimoniesofthe mofi famous Perf&ns for Piety, Power,
and Learnings as well living as dyings both Heathens and'
■€ hrjftians of Ancient and Modem times, as m intire eoa~
frmation of 'this Difcomfe, to the Cmvißim {if poJPible)
of others, as well as Vindication of the Innocent Quakers*
With a Calf to whomfoeverit full come*
Several Tejiimonies*
Of Hat Honour.
1 Luther,
2 Calvin, , v v
3 Marlbrar,
4 Jerome,
5 Paulinas,
'■ \ .
yCffiufabon. ; -y
OfToutoa jingle
Perfon*
8 Luther,
9 Erafmus, ,
n Spanilb ? 1
0 ;
11 Lipfiu« 5
12 Howel.
Of Apparel.
13 Solon.
14 Hippias,
15 Gymnofopbift?,
1 6 Bamburacii,
Gynaecofmi & )
7 Gynxconomi, \
18 Cornelia,
Ancient 7
■*Heatheni*y.
20 Gregory,
21 Jerome,
22 Meraorancy.
Of Recreations.
23 Gbilon,
„ Bias & I
4 Stilpo, J
2$ Anaxagoras,
26Tbemiiocles 9
27 Socrates,
28 Plato,
29 Antifthcnes,
30 Ariftotle,
31 Clicoraachus& 7
Epaminondas, f
32 Phocion,
33 Mandamus,
34 Hipparchia*
35 QuintiSlian,
Tercollian, ;
. ,Chryfoft6tn'/ Y
36 Thcophilaa, ?
Gregory Naz.}
37 Ambrofe,
58 Auguftine,
Polybius,
The Concents,


Page,
Line*
Errors.
Co.rreAed,
5
6
counts
■count*fi
7
requiring
required
S
4
[ubftantia/i
SI
35
Fsmpim ■■■
Fompeim
IZ
,31
for in fo doing
in fo doing
14
14
about ■
above
17
8
Fans
. Forks
18
, 7
dlfcujfed
difuid
2$
mm if ordinary trades
iverf man of an ordinary trade
19
19
tifid
fortified
30
35
Wg k M
we fay-it ss
Polybius* }
Ctcero s C
Livios 9 f
Tacitus* }
40 Machiavcl*
41 Cardoti,
43 Beilonius,
43. Onselius*
Clemens 1
Romans, JT
Council ofl
45 Carthage, J
46 Gradan,
47 Waldettfcs,
48" Paulinas*
4.9 . Acacfuso
Aged md dying T'g-
JHmomgSo
51 Ignatius,
5 2 Iraemus,
55 .Juftin Martyr
54Chryfoftom,
$$ Charks-t&e fifi-h,
56 Sir Phil. Sidney*
|7 Seer. WaSfingham,
3 8 Sir J, Mafo%
%9 Sir H 0 Wmon,
60 ZWBacoo,,,
61 Dr. Donne*, ■
62 Selden,.
63 -Grotius, v
64 Salmadasj, ■
6$ Mazarene,
66 Prims Henry.
C mshfm*
67 Philo Judarus,
£8 Eufebius PamphilL
Of thg Christian Life 1 md that the being contented with few
mi ufiug thm fVorld ae if we fed it k’tbe true Chr if tan State*
md Life 5. md that the Exercife* Vanity, Curkfity and wholeCon°
mrfmon of this Age are inconfiftmt with the Spirit md Nature of
tvmChriftimky.
Many Errors md Improprieties have efcaped the 'Preft,
which are aoi to he charged upon she Author 5 iheiea-
dieft prefent Colle&ion followeth.
(A) . Page,
Tgfimmiieit


Page*
20
24
Line.
29
■
Errors,
which
fud
what
faith
g
26'
‘ 7
25
17
meant
mark^
37
5©
they fo far are fnch , fitch are [0 far from
heart hearts
gt
wjf
»
9
26
the marriage bed
on
marriage beds
35 ■
14
:B2>
2>
Latudinarian
to the
Latitndinarian
with the
12
Heathen
Heathens
38
.1$.
( right Chrifiian
he right Chrifiians
39
12
he a ttfie C hriflian or Difcipk
hi true ChrifHms or BL
35
Fleafum
Pimfure (feipse.t
40
15
which '
wish
42
46
<6
13
38
are me
Aleman,
u mi
Aleman
16
to fectiritj
to the fecurity
57
38
innumerably
■■ innumerable
A •
60
31,.
Aem earnings
deer earnings
6%
17
overcome
overcame
70
S3
without thy(df
. with thjfdf
.'.fr-
17
fagm ■
Pagan
iz
29
shaft '
'tkefi
H
37
which
1#
to murder m Bmtkd ■ ' 7® they m Bmmd Prm&
Prims thmt§ oh] him
then to mmfh&r him
95
19
®r
mi
97
-4
■ ■ pMii
fhmM
. 9 r
1 6
\ w
Mfi
102
19
And this Nations men
And more ft for
so
Ikrly ft far
this Natkm
105
28
Fmfhilim
FsmpbiB
|S
Country life
Contrary life ■
104
24
cmvsrfatms.
touverfitim
2 5 -
4
mi
109
7
fgmn
again
SI®
if
fnwm
frown
N O


NO
Cross no Crown:
Or a few sober
REASONS
Proposed gainst those srequent Ceremo-
nies of
CAP-HONOUR, &c.
CHAP. I.
To the unredeemed (of all Ranks and
Qualities) from the vain Cu-
stoms of a wicked world .
Reader, wfarher them Nights iiw
m*<kmrn <*.|cf:Sr-g Smk s one clww^ld
7 ie b « w d«k Cnfioms- --of
r t that iapo mlgfitH pafi as nodi-
.ftcrnd ter rear of bearing Sts* Crofs* or
elk a r avountc to Nam*M prid®* and ctouci rfofe Tefti-
mmm^ bur i fedip fmgmiarkf *l© Tfc« haeh.JDiv-ne Love
r 10 ***«*?** of taTiw*, and. a &»fe.
roll W "neisagamlt lie Pride aed jKlaitetirt ©f tfii®
generated World, m wfekli iti« §y§ ©| Wmvtf tet,
fi■, ; " mi
Jali. 3*1 .si®


snd all forts of impiety hath got to fo gr< at an head, and
lived fo long uncontrolled, that it bath impudence
enough so teat m its Darknefh Light, and call its accurfcd
Offspring by the Names die to an other Nature, the
more eafily to deceive s And truly, fo very blind, and
infenfible are moft, of what fpiric they are, and ignorani
of the meek and Self denying fife of holy Jefus, (whole
Mime they profess) that to call each other Rabbi or M-fa-
fierh to bow, to greet with f Altering titles, and do their
Fellow-Creamm Homage i to [pend time and spate tvgmtijk
their wanton minds \ [the Cuiioms of the Gentiles that
knew not God] with them fignifie no more then Civil* fj 9
good Breeding, Decency, Recreation,
Othat men would con Oder, fince there are but two Spi-
rits, ( good or evil, that a<Ss them to all things) which
, really of them it is that doth ending the World to thefe
men-plealing Cufloms ? And whether it be Nicodemm or
Mordecai [ tfl tke that doth befriend the deipifed Qua*
kers] which makes thee afhamed to own that openly,in.
conversion with the World, which the true Light hath
made vanity and fin to thee in fee ret ? Or if thou art a
Difpifer, cell me, I prethee, which eledd thou think thy
mockery, .anger and contempt dothmoflrefembie, proud
Baman or JHor deed f My Friend, know that none hath
ken more prodigal and .expenfiye i-n'thofc vanities
(call’d Civilifies) then-my fell’s and could 1 have cover-
ed my Conscience under the fitlhions nf the World,
truly I had found & fheltcr from thofe fhowO'S of II
proach chat, have fallen-fo heavily upon me?, hut had-
I: (with Jofefh ). conform’d mFgppts, if.had
ianedagain.fi my, God,-.and left my peace; nor
I have thee chink is is an' Bat % -T-fy*, or B.ajmmt, na-
kedly in themielyes; or,that we would beget any Form
inconfifiant with Sincerity and Truth [there’s but too
ffloch of tfaatj -b«t, the vain .minds ©f
men do put ypon.thfjrr.'j who mufl :h ft rift and ermifiii]
cooftrains m coxefiifie,, 4 feverely, againft them .- And
sljisknow froathe .infallible feice.ofdir Eternal Spinr*.
( That


That which requires diofe Cuftoms, begets fear to leave
thermpSeadsfor them,and is difpleafed if doc a fed and paid
to them, is thefpint of Pride and Flattery in the ground
(though Cuftotn or gencrofity may have abated its firength
in lofii-e) and this being di(covered by the Light that sow
Hake? from Heaven among the difpifed Quakers, need-
(itaces them eo this TcOimony, -and my ft If as one of
them, and for them, lor a reproof to die unfaithful!,
fwho would walk undifeemedi chough convinced to the
contra it) and for an aSlayto the proud Defpifers, who
'fcornusas s people guilty of aflfe&adon, and Angulari-
ty , from die Eternal God who is great amongft us 9
and Oil tits way so root up everj flant that hu right hand
hath not Planted, do I declare that this is but tht Ssed®{ .
exalted Lucifer • yea, that wmton nature that mnfi h
jikgdy and crucified* and that it may appear what its laid
co be, let thefe enfuingferious Reafons have thy Confe-
deration, which were mod Sy given me from che Lords in
i!m£ time, when as my condefeention to thofe things
would have been purchased at almoft any rate *, Co, the
certain fence I had of their contrariety to the meek and
felPtoying Life of holy Jefus, requiring esy ileady and
faicbfoll Teiliiaooy againft them, as Guefts char are for*
bidden the Heavenly Kingdom chat is now once more ap-
pearing to the Sons of men, into which whatsoever defiles
can never enter,
Slxum Res>fsm whs €df*Bmmr % snd Tituhr M*
-fpe&s ari neither B@mm net Krffeiit*
Rmfm h
BEctufc true Honour is from- God, and confifts in a
■ virtuous efteem for the only fake of heretic, mani-
fefted in a real fevice, and aftual benefit both to God .
and Mankind, and erne Civility in the right ordering of
mms Afieftions and Adidns % but if is Hats, JSows, or.
B a . , .Ticks*
tevif.io.
■if,
l Sam. »•


Titles, then are the mod profane and dcboift the moft
civil* fincc moft expert in thofe vain Ceremonies, which is
’ impoffible.
Ruftn 11.
real Honour is a laftaniial rhing manifefled
by obedience, which therefore cannot Hand in invent-
ed Geftures, and moft deformed Cringings, after mens
wanton Invention, or in any flitddow void of the thing
it felf, which it moll receflarily do, in Cafe the Cere-
mony of the Hat be an honour or refpeft.
Rufon 111.
Becaufe no man can honour and di(honour «man un-
der that Honour) but its well known what grudges, ill-
will, animofities and bitter hatred reigns in the beam of
fuch Hat-Honourers at the time of their falfe refpeA's.
' '■ »=J RttfMlV.’ • .u . '
Becaufe Honour prefer!) afetnds, not deft ends, yet thej
Hat is ne'er as frcqucnly off to equals, and inferioars,
as toSuperiours.
1 ■. • I i.i;i■ ‘ I
- leAjon V- ■’ nsb.'jiii
If pulling off a Hat, or Title, were to pay. honour;
wbofo vile, who fo wretched, who fo envious that could
not honour ? But this is to make honour (as fuperOiti-
ous men do Religion) to confiftin feme external appear.-,
ance*,'which may plcafe, butneyet profit anyf where-'
fore, it cannot be cbnfeered'atof tbe naturoof trueho-
nour, which is a vertnous Befpe&to what is vertaous,
dcraonßrated by Tome fubflamiaigood.
‘ Jtesfcn VI,
Honour waa from the beginning, but Hats, and raofi.
Titles, hefe of late} therefore there was true Honour
before Hats or Titles, and Coofequently true Honour
ftands not therein.
-f Reafon
pf.<o, 4 j
iri.jj.ij,
i j
Prov.j itf.
Ch, 11.8.
P«J». 11.
i 6.
Cb.l y.jj.
and a 6, i.
8.


Jeafi/t VII. i
" if Honour confifts in fucb-Jike Ceremonies,
then will it fellow that they are moft capable of (hew*
iiig Honours, who perform it moft exadiy according to
the mode or falhion, by which means man bath nor the
Meafurc of-the true Hoik .nr from tba )uft Principle
in himfclf i bur the fsmaflick- dancing Wider* of the
Times, wherefore many give much money to have theta
children learn their honours, (filflv fo called i) and what
doth this but totally exclude the poor Country People,
who though riwy//s»,T*77,go to yUfoiet,yn,ia*U things
obey rbeir Juftku, Loml-LurM, JnstlHrs y and Mufitrs,
(carte ufte their or tbofit Ceremonies 5 hut if they
do, they are cftcemed by a Court Crittic\ fo ill-favoured,
as only fit remakes jeft,or be laugh’d at i but what fober
pan will not deem their oieikna beyond the others vuuir
tj and hjfeetifit.
ai> . i Re*fc» VIII.
Real Honour conGft* not in a Hat, Bow, or Title, be-
cboie all thefe things arc purchafeable by money j_for
which reatbn how many Schools, aad perfon* are there
in the Land to whoa Youth is generally fcnc to be educa-
ted in thole vain fafhtons, whilft ignorant of the honour
that Is of Codj whereby their minds are allured to vifi-
ble things that petifti, and infleadof rtmmlning thtirCre-
ttor, are butted about Toys and Fopperies and fometimes
So much worfe as to co(t rbentfelves a dilinberiting, and
tbeir indiftreet Parcncs' grief and mifery all tbeic
dayes.
Jteafvt IX,
True H 6 *tu r Hand* not in tbefs Pnlhions, becaufcthey
bad their rife fince Honour, and have been brought forth
by the Spirit that captivated from God, and ltd men and
women
Bed. 11.


I Jobs 2.
if, r 6.
James i. i f
7,8,9,10.
Jude IS.
women to pleafe die tuft of v the eye, the loft of the flefli,
and the pride and flattery of life, both in themfeives and
others, and which are ufed either to pleafe themfeives,
or for fear of others, or becaufe others do ie„ or out of
{haine, or fear of being reproached, or with defign to
flatter Superiors, equals, or inferiours, from whom fome'
profit may be expend; all which is- contrary 10 the na-
ture of true Honour that- comes from God, and oncly
is paid by a good eihm in the mind, (howri by feme real
fcrviceeo God, or godly men y yet if fsdi honour were to
be paid, fince perfonsareef divers ranks, it will be reqoi-
fine, that fome Law or diredUon be givem how low to
bow, pull off the Hat,&c. fince to give more then is due
is.amabufeof Honour 5 but would not tliefe be ridicalons,
as tis to ufe them at all ?
JUafm X.
We cannot efleem pulling off Hats, Bows or Titles to
be real Honours, becaufe facts like Ceremonies have been
prohibited by God, and his fervants in days pall * neither
did the holy Men of old refped mens perfons, as may
be ken in the cafe of the Jfrmiim * wno though other
Nations bad many Lords, arid raafiy Gods, yet one
their God> and him only .mhfttfey tew -lined, and reve-
rence bis holy NVrhc. ' •'
; Mmfo XI,
. This made MrikedH ’(Whb flands a Reprefentlve for
the Jew and Circuracifion’iii! heart )"■ rattier ekpofe both'
his own, and whole Nations life to Hamans rage, and
Cruelty, {whom the Ling had fo much honoured, as to
require all in his Court to pay him homage) then gratiiSie
the Nations Cuilom, in bowing to the Lings Favourite,
fo batcfullare 7 vicious men and vain cuftoms to the pi-
ous andiiricercv ■
Rtafm
Match. io.
1*526,17.
3L l| ke 22.
2 16,17.
Rom 2,
»*» i 9.
iißii.j s.


■ Riafim XIL
les .manifeft from the Cafe of die Centurion in Ch rift
time, who made not the honour and refpeflt due to him
from his Sou Idler s So eonfift in Hats, Gcftum, or vain
Ceremonies, but in the ready execution of his Com-
mands, as when tie fa id so me s Go, and he gmth 5, and to
another, Do thk% and be doth it nor is sc prasi fed now
amongft Sooldiers, (as being an effeminate Guftom, un-
worthy of Mafculine Gravity,) yet are they obedient®
and truly honour their Officers.
Riafm XIIL
The very praAife of familiar greeting, with (hew of
refoeft Co-each others perfons, wasfo feverdy reprehend-
ed by the Lord Jsfm Chrift, that he mahyts it a mark, of the
Apfiacj and wkkgdnsfs of that Age, of fi great fhttQ of
fvofefeon \ for he gives it in charge to his Difciples, that
they ihonld Beware of thofe that love fdmtamm , md to
kc tailed Mafier of mm ; a mark of honour
in chofo times, tic* for he that tagreauji among ym fiaShe
your Sermm 9 faff he. u hit Foimers : md ca/i mmm Ma~
fter* ma? pMf • and James as cxpreOy enjoyns
the fame My Brethren, Se met many Mafigrs, knowing
that we fh&h receive the greater condemnation •, by which
it is apparent,* that the true Oifdplei of Chrift were noc
coaflumeLurdihip, nor Superiority, aswis fht Guftom
of the Heathens 5 but that they ftould knowa pdigtous
community, and live asServants to each others neceffities,
acknowledging' but one God, one Lord, on© Lm-gimr %
■ and but one Mafler, even Jefas Chrift, who is God owe
all; neither hath it been ufed among many Nations to
give great Titles, or call Magiftrates by other names then
what they ever had $ as particularly amongft the Romans,
namely, Smus, Vdmm , Cato, Marallm, keiph, Fnmpim,
Cicero,&c. In Scipture, Adam, (though Lord of the
whole World) Cain, A hi, Mnwh, Noah, Abraham, Lot,
. Mofts, Ghrifi ftfm, Mmvh&wi Mark, , Lnke, Jojyt t Fmh
Fmr %
Matth.Sv
$, CO I2'
Luk.7 Sv
7, S,i?o
Mat. aj,
<. tO 5 2 rf
Maik is.
58*
Luk. is.
43’ , ,
J oh.? • 44*
Jam. 3.
lfe.33* tu
plat. Fn.
vie. Rom.


Peter , Jdmefi &c. nor i* it common, or pertinent in
Greek or Latine Authori, to mention, or quote the
Names of any, but as Already inftanced \ as Irenoru,
Tertullitn, fufti", 1 Mtxondtr, C infant ire, JufUnioom,
Adaximioiao, Theidofiue, Jenm, Sormrd, Luther , Son
rania, Colvin, Bt*o, (in tins, Vijfiu, Amirolim and the
like i yet doth not this in the Icift duoimth or detract ft om
their reputation; or difeover the 1 lead dif-refpeftor tn-
.cwility m ary to mention their names a* thus exprrfled,
finceits r.hepr>sue of all Writers do oar Engltfh
Hiftorie-., hetirew our Ancedon with thofe vain and fa*
perfluous Titlts, which arc common in theft dayes, and
without which men Ate teputed rude. And iO-bred,
much contrary, to the Example and Precepts of Chfift
fus, who eiiewhere cells the Jews that the reafm nhj Aej
did not believe in hit meok, 4"d Jelf-denjiog Mcjftgi, war,
becaufe if their rtf living honour out of Mother*
c- Reaft»' XIV-
. ‘-i i ; *
• God is declared to be no Refpefter ofPerfont, hut m they
far him, ond work. Righteoufntfs, and ftmet condemns
fuch who hold tit toith of the Lord ffjiu Cbrifi, the Lord
»f Gltrj, withtefpeSof Forfont-, telling them that they
.muftjrot tfeeft MjiManfiT bit gujeloothing, rich o tire, or
outward afprtrtnee ;• ricither reieil the poor, or fee the riek
' obovt hiw, for th*t, God badchofen the pm of thm tferld
rich-i* Faith » and that if ovjfai or hftp the whole
l ow, omi.yet foil in thitof refpeßing mens perfinf , hr it
guilty of. til v wherefore all fuch flattering Titles, (a* to
tail men wh it ihey are notj) and fond Ceremonies©! the
Hat, Ac. to a mortal peefon, and that for any external
conllderation we utterly deny 5 and as becomes the Chil-
dren and Servants of the only true God, wcihall not,
we cannot reverence, refpeft, or bow totbeperfons of
men, nor give flattering Titles, lead as EUhu fays, for in
jo doing out Adafer would/oon t*t>e us twaj
Rtofeo
Joh. ( J. 44.
»Sim 14.
»4-
ASi 10
*7 3*.
Ephef.tf.j.
C l 3 cj.
Jim. 1, i,
j,ro 11.
Job )».xa.


Midfm XV. ■ ,
fdn 9 who would have paid homage m the. Angel chat
had communicated thofe Mylkries to hiia, was forbid-'
dcn s faying, I am thy much' kfi Osould
we to mortal men.
, Mdfm XVL
from what hath been (aid of the Nmm of
trm Honour % and thhfdfe Honour, and from whaE Scrip-
rars Reafon* and Example do afford, as well as from the
Infallible fence we have of the corrupt ground end na-
ture of thefevain Refpeds, fond Ceremonies, and titular
in obedience to the God whom we ferve, we
utterly difclaim thole Cuffomi, as the off-fpring of Pride t
Vanity, Flattery 9 Luft t &c* which have fo univcrfalSy
reigned over the Earth, and are the cuftonras of the Naci-
lions in their fallen and degenerate ftate, from which we
are redeem'd* and therefore live Wicneffes againft all fads
(pra&ices) as knowing its not for us to be conformable to
the falhions of the world which psfs may, hut transform'd m
the renewing of our mindes, that wg may do his wiii 9 and abide
for swtr*
The Tefiimntes &f Ancient and Modern Writers*
TO which lee me add a Teftimony or two from the
Writings of former times, is what through the
prejudice thac*s received againff us in thefe*. may be of
greater moment, and raorefuccefsfoll ; Marlorat. out of
Luther anil Calvin, upon the remarkable paffage of the
Apoftlc?4»9»,gives as the fence thofe primitive Reformers
had of Kefpeß to Ptrfons, in thefe words. * 9 v*«. 4 To re-
* fped perfons (here) is to have regard to the outward
s habitsiid garb } the Apoftle fignifics that fuch refpefting
4 of perfons is fo contrary to true Faith,-, that they are al-
together inconllßanc % but if the pomp, and other
a worldly regards prevail and weaken whac is of Chrift, its
' a ' . . afigrs
Rev, as,,
8.9.
Rofu.it.**'
i Cor. 7*..
?!•
i Per. i, ■:
M* ,
Motloumt
of Luther
and Calv*


a (ign of a decaying Faith. * yea, fo great is the glory and
‘.'fplcndor of*Chrift in a pious Sous v-that.aU the glories of
®ifie 'world have no.-charms, no. beauty in'c.Omparifoii' of
‘that unto one fo religion fly ■ ihcl ined s the Apbftle makech
a ?u’ch refpedin'g of per fens to be* repugnant to die
•LIGHT within them, iofomucfo as they who follow
3 thofe prsftifes are condemned from within theraiclves 5
*fo that fallacy ought to' -be'the reafon s or motive, of
‘all outward Refped, and that none is to he honoured
*lipon any account but holinds But if fo, cfouhclefs
thofe Nufries of fantaftick. Crtngtrsantfck Vmang~Ma~
fieri, and flattering tewpmzmmll be of very little repu-
but-I toll add to tfecfe the .Admonition or a
learned Writer, called a Father, who lived about 1100
yearsfincej of great efteem both with Pfotcftancs and
Papifts i namely, Jerome, who writing to a noble Ma-
tron Ceiantu , direffing her how £0 live in die 01 id ft o i her
profperity and honors, aenoflgft many other Religious
thus:. Heed not thy Nobility, nor Ist
1 that Be a reafonfor the to take place of any j : ef tens' not thofe
' of a meaner extraßion to be thy infer hurt, for '-our Religion
admits of m refpeff of perfons t nor doth it induce m to re-
puts mm from any external condition, but from their inward
frame and difpofition of minds it is hereby that we pronounce
men noble or baje f with God, mt to fefpg'finls to be free, attd
to exceff in vet me is to be noble $ God hath chofem the mean and
contemptible of this world whereby to humble the great ones ;
be fide s it u a folly for any to hafi hk Gentility finee 'all are
sfuaily ejhem’dby God 5 the ranfom of the poor and rich eofl
C hfifi an if ml' expense of Blood ; mru it material in what
efiate amanis hm, the New Creature hah no difiinßmst
lift if- we will forget how ws all defended from one Father t
we ought at kafi perpetually to n member that we have hit
emSammr, • But fines I am ingaged againft slide fond and
frothy Cuftoms, (the proper ene&rand delights Of vain
and proud' minds/ for me yet add one much more memo*
rabid:palTage, as kis related by’thr famous Gafmbdn in
his Difconrfe of' Vfimd Cxflm s where he briefly reports
what
fmm E- ,
pifi. ad Ce-
lam. Jnt.
tyer.
m\ ,
: Cmfsh- of
41 fe and
Coft'orHj, 1


whstptft between Sutfkim Severm and Paulinm Bifhop
of Nola •„ {'but.Tuch a one as gave ail to redeem Captives)
he brings it in thuLsr ‘f|e isjioc counted a civil man now,
6 of late years amongtliis, who thinks it much, or refufetb
4 to fub (bribe bynfe}f|»«vaxit, thoegh it fee so his equal
* or inferiour, yet Sulftim Severn was once (harply chid
4 by PatUinm for fubferibing fiimfdf his SE R VAN T
* in a Letter of hh, faying, T alee heed hereafter how thou .
* being from a Servant called into Liberty, doll fubferibe
® thy fclf Servant unco one who is r.hy -Brother t and Fel*
‘ kw-Sermm j foi it is a pnfuSflatterj % not a teJfimmjMf
* humiluj to pay thofe honours cq, a san 3 and ’a fiooer,
, * which are due to the one Lord, ms -Adfafier, and one God*
This was thi fence tbofs times had of the Cuftoms and
Fafhions fo much now reputed amongft people shat call
themfelves Chriftians, aedtheir Sacceflbrs- ft was then a
Sin* ftis now ap Accomplishment: 5 ft was then Flattery, ftw
iiqw RdpcA 5 .ftwas then fit to Nfeverdy reproved, and
now (aks ! )Itis £0 deferve fevere reprove not to afe it 1
0 nionftrous vanity / O grofs impiety / bow much
( alas! ) how deeply have thofe who ire called Cbriftians
revolted. from the, pSainnefs of the primitive dayes, and
pcaQifes of holy-men and women in former Ages /. v and-,
are become degenerated into the loole,- vainy- proud and
wanton, Gottorns of the-World, that knows not God,, . £O.
whom -nfe hath made chefs, things (condemned .by the
Scripture, Rfiafpn, and Example.) almoft natural v and fo
1 afenlible are they of theirhad etfefts, that they : not oncly
peefift to. praftifs. thepi*. iaippcfentiy f»k§d for ,|kr%
and as timpiouily make ayefyinochof,.|hof€ t who cannot
imtnicatc them. , I (ball proceed to what remains yet fur*
ther to be proved, agsioil thofe other Cuftoms, chenoe
conforming wbereonto makes : os fo much tbe/.Sfcqnh
bling-block and foolifhnefsof this meonhderate and wan-
ton Age.
C a
CHAP,


CHAP. II.
T welve Reasons for Thou, not You
to a single Person.
Rufin L
-•*w*o RDS ar®butis fomany marlsfet and
m*/ m / Employ’d for necclfary intelligible mcdl-
: W W anas, or it roans whereby men may «-
. - pref? their minds atid conceptions to each
'■ other, from whence comes Society and Commerce. •
Medfm-lh
■ Though the World fee divided:lnto many Nations*
which/or the;moil part have'fingly a 'peculiar Language*
Speech or Dialed*- yet hate they ever concurred in the
fame numbers tad perfons, as the Kasx or ground of all
Arithmetical diftmsion In matters* and proper fignifica-
tionof their mmds : as forinltance,- lim: $ Thmhwjt,
areof the fingularUumber, importing hut one s
whether inthe firff 3 f€Conci,or third, perfon ; alfo.^t? h?f $
T*-:Ufa t J &hiy'Uvti - : wltich atre' ufthe-piiiral numbers fee*-
caife In each Is implied more then one * r which undeniable
Gmomacical'-Rule might be enough to fotlsfie any thar
have not; forgot their Accidence * for if Thonhve 'he fin*
and- Tmiomh pkrd * ■ and if Tkmlmt Jtgnifrsbu t
#Ms ; and mmf not»proper ro fay Thm-~-
'U? tmtom*- man f or why not
l-bvis iot.Wi : and We hvs Isiftetd of Move f • doubt* 1
jefceheftflaev though moll improper and ridiculous*
Midfm 111. ...; ; ■-
Bectufe there is nor another word extant in any Lan-
guage cochftinguiifa betwixt one and maoyj lingular and
.ploftL
Msdfoß


Miafm IV.;
If. ic.be improper or uncivil fpeech, as tearniedhy this
and ignorant Age* flow comes it chat KmmA®*
thm fhouid be of fuchefieem in all your Schools and
Univcrficies tb»t ufe no other ? •
" ’ ! ■ ... mfi» y.%. , ;
Is it not very abfurd that Children ftoold be whips ae
School for miffing Thm{of'T®st % ©r as having mzdefitlfe
Latins if they place one number for,; another and yet
that we muft be (if not-whlptJ: Ci«M’4 €rac
preached. and laugh'd at, when weufo the, it®?. prof mtfJoi-.
■fpcech ? • ‘ . , ■■ ,
Reafm VI, ■_
It is neither improper, nor uncivil, but the contrary,
becaufc uftd in all Languages,: Speeches and Dialeds,
'through all Asw v as for example,: Icyvas Gods Language
when he.full fpakc to Adam, called the Bekrew $ aifo the,
Eg}}**** l s S&domitan* Gatraxite* the AJfjria» 9 the €4dem%
It was the, Language .-of ■ AMafutrits* who : 127
Rmmmcs 1 ’twas SqhUoiu \ !o%wf| , d|.ther@ #
extant of all the Oritmal - 1
and evidence the matter:,
Tatters, MnfcQVim*,
Spaniards, ■Gtrmam r -Ppkmans. r
pants* Jfijht £eonifi, Wdci? i foM ivided jE)Ule&?«.:
Ofo numerous)' well as ,weef Engk&d*.
word;tO'fi : gnifie'C?j#r foetal fl*YA 9 theft
Thmiot. .'(but! Qne % and Tmi or ‘(neverjefft diea) Tm i
by which its evident that Thm js.no iifftart, nor
per, but the only fit and abfolute word for co be ufed in
all Languages to a fingic perform Becaufe otherwife all
Septenceii .Speeches and .D/coiffes : ;m||f.'hie.fery ambigu-
ops,jß^Cfirqiiaj^nd.equivocal. .if a Jury*orJ:udge,pof,
npunceaVerdi&or Sentence;, ( , threc:hcing,at : ihe Bar,tip‘».
cm three: difieringi occasions) lm arc guilty, and codie 1
' . or
Gen.t.l6*
chap. 3,9,
Gcn„ aa,
■ 19, ch.i4c'
xi. and
chip. »o.
x King, 19,
pi.
Jcr.13.11.
Hof. 11.
chap.tf.jo.
Dan, a.
16. 27*


or innoeens*and difclwgedi who knows what tiiey mean,
whether but one, of bat c;w<V yoi if aft three i and in ail
common difcourfe it holds the fame $ nor can this be a-
' voided- but by Gircomftances s mi many unnecefiary cir-
cuffllocucions.) and as the preventing of this was doubt-
|gfs the iirft Reafon for icsinftitunon , fo cannot that
he jufily difcdfed till the Rcafon be foil removed, which
can never he whiift. two are in theworld-
',‘ ■ • '■■ mfm Yll. ' ''■ „ ;
■ Besaafe is was firft; afcrifeed in way of b lottery to frond
Fopss md instating the’ Heathen hmmgs to
their gods 9 thereby- "afcribtag-a plural-honour* as if one
Pope had been made of many Gods, and one Emperor of
many men 1 for which .reafon Jm (onlf to be ufed s©
esaay) became firft to be fpoken to one,
; ; . ; •... :„ . $ Vlll.® , ■ 1 ■ ■■ ■.
■ : ; Sippofitsg- Tq» > to; b 'proper Ho u "frme f yell ‘ not to
commonperfons--* forii&ajly hWEdift, ’Which runs, wp
Wiß'tmd %yymre„ is In conjunction with bis Councils
"hot Irs not cuftouiary nor proper for private Perfons to
: write. We will’kid'Riffdni and therefore You to fueh is
; an afeufoof the word" |ayedt birtbifo
hath 'fieHwif $ (QtMan(imr% 'Sir fcnd
were originally names only sifed -co Ms Srtobgr 9
and their Wiws% both mWrmcgmid''Mnglmdi yet now the
Plowman in 'frame isealled a MonneUrf and - his wife a
• Madam* ’aodfoen of-ordinary Trades* 111 Gittes of E»£t
iimd, i-SirP and bis wife* Dame or MiftteTsy foyprevaSeM
hath Pride dirf Flattery been In all Ages, - as Moweß relates'
p : bis Difcourfe of fmie* - - ■ ’
- ■■■•.- • ■- c. .■. Medfm, SXi : v-.-^
- Mor carl Caidmi fafially broiiglte Co fiiftifie thefe) W
of any force y for tho«g|i it may lave-"power In fame'
common mattecs, in the way of Commerce atnohgft men,-
y«ccan it never '-make dial fence which in it fdf is - not fev
any
Bomft
Hiftory of
fyaftte,


any. mote then to make a " H&rfi s Cow $ Gt'me Jf«a, .
Thoufaud* ~ : s /.
iteafin .X..-: ~,,,
Becaafe Cuftom precedes'that Authority which give*
life to any irofoication (as coming .from Cuftom.) but this,
proceeded Cuftom, therefore not warrantable to b€ ai~
cered by any Authority fo-'infenpur, Eoics own., '
Miafml Xf 0: '
If Thou be improper or uncivil, its to indite and ac-
eufe Godhimfdf, all the holy Fathers and Chrifi
Jf/w, im Ap(H eS) the Primitive Saints, and ail/Lan*
gadget throughout the F/orld^ which were gooff impudent., ' ;
■;■ ' ; , Meafm "XI.L .
~ It (hould .not therefore be, urged upon us, becaufe it is
athpft extravagant piece of pride & impudence in a mortal
man to require or expe& from ;his Feliow*€reatiire more
civil expreflipns, or -,grfltt£u& tersnij ■. then lie is wont, to
give the Immortal-. God s arid* Great-Creator, in ail his
worfhip to him 5 n.ry, but doth it not teach them to ofe .
it to one, fince the contrary implies plurality of Gods ?
why notthen a plurallity of nice ?.but were, wenot fo welt
tilled with Arguments in our-.Defence rV.Certam we ; acr *
that die Spirit of God fecks not thefe nor Ti-
tles, muchlefs pleads for them, or would .be wroth.with
any that confdenticmlly refufe to give, them §, but that this
vain Generation is guilty in all thefc refpe&'.isbuc too
vam Wo rds t mofi hjperboUcd , E spKeo'm t grofi Mmtimh a rid
'plain Lyes do men md-/wrmen f,pewi minus. -.tirn't in f
'Ah, my Friends/ whence fetch you thefe Examples?
what Chapter, and what Verfe of all the Writings of the
holy men of God warrants thefe things’; 1 Is Chrift yque
example herein, whole Name you pretend to bear ; or
thole *Saints of old, that had forfaken the refpeft'.of
Perftwis, and telinquithed the Cuftpnis 9 Fafhions, Ho-
. nowt


Jsm. s. i,
?,4> S»
<*» 7,8,3-
i Pec, 5.4,
5-
nour and Glory of the Worlds which fade arid pa fs away*
whole qualifications lay not in.external Gefturcs, Comple-
ments, &c. but in a meek and quiet Spirit, adorned with
temperance, vertue, modefty, gravity, patiedce a which
were tokens of true honour, and oneiy badges of refpeft
and nobility in thole Chriftian times ? O no s bat is it not
to expofeour (elves both to your contempt and fury, that
we iramitace them therein: And are not Romances $ Fiajs 9
Lampoons, Poets, Montebaukt, Pidlert, and fudi like E uf-
fanly convention that which moft delights you ? for had
you the Spirit of Chriftianity indeed s how could you
confume your time in Co many linnecdXary ,Vifti s Flap
and FafHmety In Complement s t Courtships, fam’i Storks,
Flatteries* and' what net, which never was the Cliriftiao
way of livings but the pajHmes, of the Heathens that kpew
mt God ? Qb, were your minds transformed and had
you known what it were to have been born again, to take
up the Cpofs, and live therein, thefe things (which fo
much ipieafe the wanton fenfoaf nature) mould find - no
place : This is not feekjug the'things that are above, to have
the heart fit thm on things that arg hkwi Thk u mt working
out Salvation with (gar and trembling : This is not crying
with EUh%, I fysow not to give flattering tkks so men, m
fi doing mf Maker wmli fim take me a way i This is not
to' deny that feifijb fan- that wm&d delight it felf in worldly
pleafteres, invented by men to graft fie the bsfi of people % not
toforfakg she fajhiom of the world, which fafs away, laying
sip for a mors enduring Subfiance , and Eternal Inheritance
in the Heavens, which fimll never pafs awaj , Well, ray
Friends,, what ever you chink, your Plea of Cttfiom will
findc no Pleaac the Dreadfull Tribunal § and this Spirir s
fegaioft which W ccilifi© s ihall then appear to be wfsaswe
le i» a
Rom. i ip.
to the end®
i Tim'S.
(5®
Col. 5. i>
Phil.£.l2"
JobftoM
L«k 9- *3*
Wht. so.
17.4 8 *
Mir. Bo§4.
Heb. an.
CHAP.


the Tefthnonies .of federal Writers «*
JVtkr $ the grand Reformer, whole Savings were Ora-
cits with the Age he lived in, and of m iefs Reputati-
on now with many, was fo far from condemning our plain
Speech, that in his Ludm he (pons himfclf with a You to
a Single Perfon, as a moft ridiculous and impertinent Cu«
flora 5, viz,. Magifler vos es tram * which is juft as good
fence as to fay ,Mjr Mafien 3 thou art angry fit what die you
will that can be ridiculoufly abfurd,.
Erafmm, a Learned man, and then whom I know not
any, we may fo properly defer the matter too* not only
mocks fo impertinent a Speech, but bellows a whole Dil-
courfe upon its Refutation, plainly manifdling, that its
impoffible to preferve Numbers, if the only mark
for two be us'd to esprefs one, as that the original of k
was Flattery 5 and paticularly.
In Spain, who knows mol: how contumclous it is.amoug
ebc manly People to fpeak in the, plural number to a finglc
jperfon 5 whole gravity and conhancy do’s not a little con*
dernn thefooliih* fancaflick andinconltant humor of our
pretended Reformed Country.
A maugre all contradi&ion, proves that the
ancient Romms alwayes Tbou’d andThee’d their Senders
sad Emfenrs *, and further affirmed, that there was no
fnch thing as Cap-Homuf t or Titular-Refpefts amongfl
them# ,
And to conclude, Howe I in his HHlory of France 9 gives
os an ingenious Account of Its original j where fie
not only aflbres us, that anciently the Pcafant Thud the
King, bat that Pride and Flattery firft put inferiours up®
on paying a plural RefpeA to the tingle perfon of every
Superiour, and Superiors upon receiving* and at the
laft requiring it *, and though we had not the pra&ice of
God and men, to fo undeniably juftifie our plain Expreffi-
©ns; yet lines we are perfwaded chat its original was from a
pas-.
Luther
i“r-
°£er'#
■
co!k%
f pa n,
Upf,
va. vofc
fj ow< fflfir
of Bfsmi.


partial RcfpeS 3 and meet Flattery, we cannot in Coofcienee
gradfie chem 9 nor ufe ie? and however we may be fenfur'cl as
Angular by ehofe ioofe & airy minds* chat through the con-
tinual etijoynoenc. of earthly pi'feafures, have foil the weigh-
ty, (olid and heavenly fence of things, yet Hoc to us whom
God Alraighcy has convinced by his Eternal Spirits of the
folly.andevUof fuch-courfe;, and brought into afpiricaa!
discerning of che nature and ground of fetch with
efidr ‘defences, they appear to fee im its of Pride and
Flattery, and we dare not run into chofe vain compliances
to .earthly minds; but having been iincerdy aftefted with
the reproofs of loftraSion, and our minds brought into
t watchful! fubjedion to the righteous Law of Jefus, we
cannot conform am feives to the Fafhions of the World
that pafsf away, knowing affufedly that for every idle
w&rd men they flail give an ascomt in the day of fptdg*
mens. ■■ ■■
And therefore* I would befeech all people to he emu*
oils how - they reproach iis.on this occafion | but rattier
that they would ferioufly weigh in chenifelves* whether it
he the fpirit of the World or of the Father that is fo
angry with oar honeft s plain and harmlefs and thee 5
that fo every Plant that 'Qodhioqfelf hath not planted may
’•be rooted out ;
CHAR


CHAP. III.
Several Sober Reasons urg’d against the Vain Apparel
and usual Recreations of the Age (as Gold Siver
Embroyderies , Pearls, precious Stones, Lockets
Rings , Pendents breaded and curl’d Locks, Pain.
tin g Patching, Laces, Points , Ribands, unneces-
sary change of Cloths superslous Provision out
of state costly and useless Attendence Rich
Furnitures, Plays, Parts, Musbery and Spring-
Gardens, Treats, Balls,Masks, Cards, Dice ,
Bowls , Che s s, medies, Poess, Riddles,
Drollery , Vain and unnecessary Visus, &c.) by
which they are proved inconsic tent with a Cbri-
stian life, and very destractive of all civil society.
Rea fan i.
BEcaufe Sin brought the firft Coat: if there hid beets no
{in, there had been no need of Apparel 5 'twas Adam
and £w’s fall, that made them firft feek a Covering 5 They
were met naked, mi knew no [hams; but after TranTgreflion
they were afham’d to be longer naked : Innocence was once
the only covering, but that being Joft, Neccflity pur them to
feek a worfe ; Ah hlejfed time, when‘Purity, not Ignorance,,
freed them from fsech fhifts I Since therefore fin brought fhamc,
and flume ftood firft in need of covering, how impudently
ftumdefs arc thofc, who pride and pkafe themfelvcs in the
P ■ curiofity
Q (Ht , jjj,.
'■*' s ‘
chap*


curioSity of Apparel j Is it not ail one, as for a man that had
loft his Nofc by a foul diftemper, to take pains to fet out a
falfe one in fuch fhape and fplendor, as Should give but the
greater occasion for all to gaze upon him ; And to tell them he
had Soft it, for fear they Should think he had not ? but would
a wife man be more in love with a falfe Nofc, though of a
Diamond, than his own ? furely no ; And Shall People, pre-
tending to be Chriftians, Shew So much love for Cloaths, as
to lnnocence the fitft covering? doth it not Shew at
what coft of time and money People are at, to fet off their
Shame with the greateft Shew of folly? Is it not to delight in the
effedt of that caufc, for which they rather Should lament ? If
a Thief were to wear a halter about bis neck his whole life for
a punishment, would it be his diferetion, or his folly, to be
choice of it? or Should it not rather put him to open Shame ?
and if inftead of regaining Innocence, when proffer’d him,he
ihould perfift to pride himfelf in his badge of Impiety, would
It not be efteem’d the greateft folly and impudence } -why this
it the very cafe of the vain fafhlon-mongers of this fhamslef Age:
yet will they be Chrlflians,Judges In ifeUgion, Saints,what not f
G mifcrable & wretched (fate indeed ! Who arefo blinded by
the luß of the eye, the luß of theftefh , and pride of lift, as to call
ihame decency, and to be curious and expensive about that,
which therefore Shews them to be but the more remote from
that Innocence which never needed it; and not only are they
grown in love with thefe vanities, and thereby exprefs how
far they arc wide from primitive Innocence, but its notorious
how many faShions have been, and arc invented on purpofe to>
excite to that luft, which-doth put them at greater diftance
from that harmlefs Slate, and more enhave their minds to
ihatneful concupifence.
Nor is it other wife with Recreations, for thefe areneerly
knitted • Man was made a
his pleafme Rood in his duty , and his duty in obeying GofS, which
was to love, fear, adore , and ferve him ; and in uSing the Crea-
tion with true temperance, and godly indifference; His hap-
ptnefs vvas in the mind, and his mind in God ; His error was
;to leave that residence, and .let his eyes abroad to gaze on
-Apples*


Applet. If the Recreations of. the age were as pleifant and
neceftary as they are faid and made to be • unhappy then was
Adam, and Eve, that never knew them: But had they never
fell,and the world been tainted by that folly and difobedience;
men had never.known the neceflity, or ufc of the moft inno-
cent of thefe things : Sin gave them birth as it did the other ;
the mind being gone into the world, and turn’d out from the
prefence of God ( by difobedience, and love to vßible fading
things) In which only trmpleafure can conftfl ; then it was that
men were at work to invent pleafure to themfelves, to put far.
away the evil day, to eat the fat of the flock. , to in
Bowls, to anoint themfelves with the chief perfumes, to fretch
themfelves upon their teds of Ivory, to chaunt to the found of the '
Viol) and invent unto themfelves Infiruments of Mufc\ like Da-
vid, not heeding or remembnng the afjliffiions and captivity of poor
Jofeph j him they had wickedly fold ; Innocency quite ba-
mfhed, and fhame Toon began to grow a cuftom, till they are
grown Ihamclefs in the imitation; and its now not Ids a
fliame to approach primitive Innocence by modeft plainnefs,
then it was matter of .ftiame to Adam that he loft it, and be-
came forc’d to tack Figg- leaves for a covering. Wherefore
in vain do men and women deck themfelves with fpecious
pretences to Religion, and flatter their miferable fouls with
the fair titles of Chriftian, innocent, good, vtrtuom, and the like>
whiift this vanity and impudent folly raigns ; So, to you all
from the Eternal God I am bound to declare, you mock,God,
and deceive jour feives ; fuch intemperance of mind after the
very badge of flramc and fin, and fad confequences of t ran ft.
grefting God’s Law, mu ft be denied, and you know youi
1 elves more nearly approach’d to primitive Purity, heavenly-
mindednefs, and Innocence, before you ever can be rightly
intitl’d to what you only now ulurp; for none but thofe who are
led by the Spirit of God, are the Children of God, which guides
into all temperance and meeknef r.
Ufa/, 2.
This Age is juftly repiovable, becaufe the very enS of their
D z flirt
Amos 6-, f l
4
Rom.i 4' i|


ftrft Inftitution is grofly perverted; the utmoft femes that
Cloachs originally were dcfigaed for, when fin had ftripc them
of their native Innocence and great fimplicity, was to cover
their flume ; therefore plain and modeft : next, to fence out
cold, therefore fubftantial: Laftly, to differ Sexes, and
therefore diftinguifliing; fo that then meet necdflty provok’d
to Cloathing, now pride and vain curiofity : In former times
fome benefit obliged, but now wantonnefs and picafure t
they minded them for covering , but now that’s the leaft
part j their greedy eyes mu ft be provided with gaudy fuper-
fluities, m if they made their deaths for triming • and as the
■left [erviceable part, only for the fake of other curioflties that mufi
he tacked upon them) although they neither cover fhame y fence from
■cold) nor diflinguifh /exes , hut figmlly difplay their wantonyfanta-
full-fed y minds. Then the beft of Recreations was to
fcrve God, be juft, follow their vocations, mind their flocks,
do good, exercife their bodies in fuch practices as might be
futable to gravity, temperance, and virtue ; which now is ex-
tended to almoft dvery folly that carries any mark below open
and fcandalous filth (detefted of the very Acfors when they
have done it) fo much are mtn degenerated from Adam in his
■difohediencs ; fo much more confident and artificial are they
grown in all Impieties ; yea, their minds through cuflom are
become fo very infenfible of the inconvenience that attends
the like follies, that what was once mecr neceffity, a badge
of fhame, at beft, but a meet remedy j is now the delight,
■pleafure, and recreation of the Age : How ignoble is it, bow
ignominious, and unworthy of a reafonabSe Creature ? That
which is indued with underfunding fit to contemplate immortality ,
■and made an affociate for God and Angels , fhould mind a little
■dusty a few fhamcfulraggs , inventions of meet folly , tojes fo apifh
■and entertainments , [d dull 'and earthy, that a Rattle ,
■a Baby, a Hobby-horfc, a Top, are by no means fo . foollfh in a
Jimple Child , nor unworthy his thoughts • as that the like inven*
tions fhould exercife the noble mind of man and Image of the great
Creator of Heaven and Earth : This the very Heathens of old
bad fo dear a profped: of, that they detefted all fuch foolery,*
looking-.typon cuxbfity cf Appard,, and that variety of He-
(Cr.eatio.ns


creations now in voge and eftimation with Chriftians, to be
deftru&ivcof allgood; as what more eafily ftole away the
minds of People, into wantonnefs, idlcncfs, effeminacy;
and made them only companions for the Bead that perifhes;
witnefs thofe famous men, Socrates, Plato , Arijlidesy Cato
Epittetus, &c* who plac’d true honour, and facisfadtion in
nothing below Virtue and Immortality : Nay, fuch are the
remains of Innocence amongft fomc Moors and Indians to our
times, that they not only Traffique in a naked pollute ; but if
a ftranger call’d a Chriffian, fling out a filthy word, it’s cu-
flomary with them, by way of Moral, to bring him water to
purge his mouth ; how much do the like virtuous and reason-
able Inftances accufe the People called Chriftians, of groffe
folly and intemperance ? O that Men and Women would
once be fo charitable to tbemfelves, as to remember whence
they, came, what they are doing, and to what they mufl re-
turn that more noble, more virtuous, more rational, and
heavenly things, may be the matters of their pleafurc and fa-
tisfaddon • that they would once be perfwaded to believe,
how io confidant the folly, vanity, and coavcrfation they are
moftly exercifed in, really are with the true Nobility of g
rcafonable Soul.s and let that juft Principle which taught the
Heathens, teach them, left it be found more tollerable for
Heathens, than fuch Chadians, in the day of account j For if
their ruder notions, and more impesfedf fenfe of things,
could yet difeover fo much vanity • if their Light condemn’d
it, and they in obedience thereunto, difus’d it, it behoveth
Chriftians much more; Chrift came not to extinguifli, .no,
but to improve that Knowledge; and they who think they
need do lefs now than before,had need to adf better than they
think- We therefore hence conclude, That the fashi-
ons and recreations now in repute arc very abufive of iheir
•firft Inttitudon, if ever they had any • and that the inconve-
niencies that have attended them, as wantonnefs
pride, rejpeli of-perfo ns, (witnefs a Plume of Feathers, ox
a hce Coat in a Countrey-VilUge, nay, almoft any where j
what firring ? what feraping? what bowing-? though perhaps
iiebe.aHigh-way-manj .rotten in body, and foul too) with
- -.the


the reft of the like fruit*,--we in confident with the'Duty, l
Re a (on., and true Satisfa&ion of men ; and abfolutely dc-
firudive of Wifdom, Knowledge, Manhood,
Induftry, and whatfoevet may render men truly noble, and
truly goodj as will more largely be difcourfcd in its place, -
%'*f- 3v
Thefc things which have been hitherto condemn'd, hive
never been the convcrfation nor pra&ice of the Holy Men
and Women of old times, whom the Scriptures recommend
for Holy Examples, worthy of imitation. Abraham) Ifaac,
and Jacob, were plain men, and Princes, as Grafters are over
their families, and their flocks • ■ they were not foJlicU
tons of the vanities fo much lived in by the People of this
Generation ; for in all things they f leafed God by Faith : the
fiid: his Fathers houfe, Kindred, and Countrey • A true
Type or Figure of that Self-denial all muft know that would
have Abraham to their Father: They muft not think to live
in thofe pleafures, faftiions, and cuftoms they arc call’d to
leave; no, but on the contrary, part with all, in hopes of the
recompence of Reward, and that better Countrey which is eter~
, nal in the Heavens, The Prophets were generally poor Mecha-
nicks; one & Shepherd, another a Herdfman, &c. they often
cryed out upon the full-fed wanton Ifraelites, to repent, to
fear and dread the Living God, to fovfake the fins and vani-
ties they liv’d in; but never imitated them. John Bjptlfb,
the Me Wenger of the Lord, who was fanUifiei in his Mothers
) womb , Preach’d his Embaflie to the World, in a Coat of Ca-
mels hair, a rough and homely garment; nor can it be con-
ceiv’d that Jefus Chrirt himfdf was much better Apparell’d,
who was a man of poor Friends? and of great plainnefs, in-
fo much that it was ufual in a way of derirton to fay, Is not
this Jefus the Son of Jofepb, a Carpenter ? ■ And this Jefus
tells his followers,That as for fofe Raiment, gorgious Apparel,
and Delicacies, they were for Kings Courts j implying, That
He and his followers were not to mind thofe things ; but
Teems plainly thereby to exprefs the great difference that is
betwixt
Hen.iz.i*').
’
Amos 7, 14,
*y.
Lu'ks-t'ip
Mat.}, i,i)
5)4» ‘
Mark:
I'uk.'?' ay.


betwixt the lovers of the fafhionssnd cuftoms of the world, 1
and thofe whom he hath chofcn out of it. And he not only
came m-that mean and manner himfelf, thereby
to data the pride of ; fkfh, but therein to become exemplary
to his followers of what a fdf-denyieg life they mud lead if
they would be true Difciples: Nay, he further leaves it with
them in a Parable, that it might make the deeper impreflfion,
to the end that they might fee how inconfident the pompous
worldly-pleafing life is,with theKingdomhe came to eftabiifb
and call men to the poffdlion of • And that is the remarkable
dory of Dives, who is reprefented (1) As a Rich man , next
a Voluptuous man, in hie rich Apparel, his many Dijhes? and his
Packs ef Doggs ,• And ladly, An uncharitable'man , or one who
was too much concern d bow to pleafe thelnfi oj the eye , the luFt of
the fiefh , and the pride of Life , and to fare/umptmujly every day 9
ever to take companion of poor Lazarus at his Gate j no, his Dogs
were more pitiful, andkind than he : But the doom of this Jolly
man, this great -Dives, we read to be ever lading torments;
and that of Lazarm, eternal joy with Abraham , Ifaac, and
Jacob in the Kingdom of God. In diort, Lazarus Was a good
man, the other a great man 1 the one poor and temperate, the
other rich and voluptuous; too many of them are alive $
9 Twere well if his doom might awaken them to Repentance, Not
were the Apoftles the immediate Meffengers of the Lord Jcfus
Chrift, other then poor men, one a Fijher-man, another <*
Tent-maker? and he that was of the greated (though not the
fconefted) employment, was aCujiomer (perhaps Tome Waiter,
mi the like) therefore its very unlikely that any of; them,
■were followers of the faihions of the world • nay, they were
fo fat from if, that, .as became the followers of they
jiv’d poor,aff iQed fdf-denysng lives,bidding thcChmches to walk,
as they had them for examples .5, and to (hut up this particular,
they give this pathetical account of the Holy Women in for-
mer times, as an inducement for all to do the fame t name-
ily, .Tbit • fir ft they did abftain from Gold , Silver, breaded Hair ,
fine Apparel? or f&ch like and next,that their Adornment was a
meek, and quiet Spirit , and the hidden man of the hearty which
me of great.pm it with .the Tor d.: That fmh mlm
Luk'-x/C i-p.,
f<? th.S:Srd o
ABs 18. %
2, 3.
Jvh.13.tf*
,i Con. 4. p,
1 O, I -I j I 2, :i
13,14.
TbiL$.tyu
1 Pet,2. 22.
.10.
•i


In pie a fare, are dead whilft they live j for that the Cares and Fleam
fares of this life, defray the feed of the Kingdom, and
quite hinder all progref in the hidden and divine life. So that
we find the Holy men and Women of former times were not
aecuftotn’d to thefc ple&fures, and vain recreations ; bat ha-
ving their minds fee on things above, fought another King-
dom* which conflfts in Righteoufnefl, peaces and joy in the Holy
Spirit ; who having chained a good report, are enter’d into their
eternal reft: therefore their Works follow, and praife them in the
Gates .
4*
Next, That both fuch Apparel and Plcaftrres are not only
with reprehended in Scriptures, but are contrary to
pofitive Injundions and Precepts. It was theground of that
lamentable MefTige by the Prophet Ifalah, to the People of
Ifraelj eJMoreover, the Lord faid , Becaufe the Daughters of
Zion are haughty, and walk with (iretehed-forth necks, and wan-
ton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinckfing
with their feet 5 therefore the Lord willfmlte with a fcab, the
crown of the head of the Daughters of Zion, and the Lord will
1 dlfcover their fecret parts ; in that day the Lord will take away the
bravery of their tinckjing Ornaments, and their Cauls ( or Net-
works in the Hebrew ) and their round Lyres like the fJJVLoon §
the Chains, and the Bracelets, and the jpangled Ornaments • the
r Bonnets , and the ornaments of the Legs , and the Head-bands, and
the Tablets, and the Ear-Rings ; the Rings, and Nofe- Jewels •
' the changeable fults of Apparel, and the tJMantles, and the
Wkimples, and the Crijping Pins ; the Glajfes, and the fine Lin-
ntn, and the Hoods , and the Hails : And it (hall come to pafl, that
inftead of fweet [metis, 'there, (hall be'a fttncki and inftead of a
Girdle, a Rent t, and inftead of wtU-fet Hair, Baldnefs ; and In-
ftead of a Stomacher, a girding of Sack: doth, and Burning inflead
of Seamy : Thy men fhall fall by the Sword, and thy mighty in the
War ; And her Gates fhall lament and mourn, and (he being defo-
late, fhdl fit upon the ground. Behold ! O vain and fooiUh In-
habitants of England, your folly and your doom : You Ex-
change-mongers, who live by the like vanities i is not the
like
i Tim <y.6.
jL^.8.14.
JJeh* 1
14,1
■Chaf. 4» p.
to. 14° *3;
![<*■s. i6,to
the end-
The very
■praUlce and
garb) And
mean % And
vanity of thu
Agefbeing 04
liable to the
Wrath of
God-


like your trade? your profit, your pradEce, and your pletd
furs ? yet read the Prophet Ezekiel's vifion of miferable Tyre f
whatpunifhtnent her pride and pleafurcs brought upon her 5
And Wongft many other circumftances, thefe tie Come,
Theft were thy Merchants tn all forts of things , In bins Cloaths,
m<l broydered Work. > rind in Chefs.of rich jApparei, Emeraulds %
Purple, fine Linnsn, Coral , and Agate, Spices, with all precious
Stones and Gold:, Horfes, Chariots, &€, for which hear part of
her doom , Thy Riches, and thy Fairs, thy Merchandife, and all
thy Company which is in the mldfi of thee, (load fall into the mid ft
of the Sea, in the day of thy rttine ; and the Inhabitants of
Jfles fhali be afiomfhed at thee, and their Merchants- fioall hifi at
thee, thou- fhalc be a t err our, and fhali be no more*
Thus hath God declar'd his dirpleafure againft the Gimofity
and vain Cuftoms of this wanton World : Yet further the
Prophet Zsphaniah goes ; for thus he fpeaks, And it fhali come
to pafi, in the day of the Lord’s Sacrifice, That 1 will punlfh the
Princes, and the Kings Children, and all fetch m are cloath'd with
firange Apparel* Of how evil Confequence was it in thofe
times, for the greatefl men to give themfelves the liberty of
following the vain Cuftoms of other Nations ; or offering to
change the ufual End of Cloaths or Apparcljto graufic foolifli
Curiofity ; who went to place a Satisfa&ion in that which did
not deferve their Care ; and to make a meet Neceflicy mat«
ter of Pieafure, that rather fhould put in mind offihame*
This did the Lord Jehus Chrift exprefly charge his Difd-
ples not to be careful about • intimating that fuch as were,
could not be his Difciples for fayes he. Take no care what
you fhould eat, nor what you fhould drinks, neither wherewithal
fhallyou be clothed, ( for after all thefe things do the Gentiles
feek ) f or ) ofir Heavenly Father knoweth that you have need of all
thefe things \ but the Kingdom ofGod,and bis Righ *
teoufnefi, and all thefe things fhali be added unto you: Under
which of Eating, and Drinking, and Apparel, he comprehends
all External matters whatsoever ; and Co much appears is
well bcctufe that they are oppofed to the Kingdom of God-and
his Kfghteoufnefi, which are invifihle and Heavenly things as
that thofe very matters he injoyns them not to be careful t-
E boot
th
whole chap*
Zepki*t*
3 2 »33-


bout, ire the moft neceffary, and the moft innocent; if then
in fuch cafes, theminds of his Difciples are not to be felici-
tous, much lefs in foolifh, fuperfluous ; idle to
gradfie the carnal appetites, and minds of men ; fo certain it
is,that thofc who live therein are none of his followers, but
the Gentiles ; and as he elfewhere fayes, the Nations of the
i World,who know not CjodAi now then the diftingui (Ling meant
between the Difciples of Jefus, and thofe of the World, is.
That one minds the things of Heaven, and God’s Kingdom
that (landsin Right eoufneff Reace, and Joy in the Holy Ghoft ;
Joeing not careful of External matters (even the moft Innocent
andNeceffary.) And that the others, mind Eating, Drink-
ing, Apparel, and the Affairs of the World, with the Lulls,
Pieafurcs, Profits, Honours, and the like ; be you untreated
for your Souls Cake, O Inhabitants of England, to be ferious 5
to reHs<St a while upon your fclves ; what care and coft are
•you at, of time and money, about foolifli, nay vicious things,
fo far arc you degenerated from the primitive Chriftian life ;
What haying and felling, what dealing and chaffering, what wri-
ting and pofiing,what toyl and labour,what noife,hurry, hujile, and
•gonfufion 5 what jludy, what little confplracys and over-
what eating, drinking, vanity of Apparel, moft ridiculous ‘Re-
creations | infhort, what rljing early, going to bed late, expence
■of precious time is there about things that perijh ? View the
Streets, Shops, Exchanges, Piayes, Parks, Taverns,
Alc-houfes, &c. and is not the World , this fading
World, writ upon every face ? Say not within your feives.
How other wife Ibould men live, and the World fubfift ? (the
common, though impertinent obje&ion) there is enough for
all, let feme content themfelves with lefts-; a few things plain
and decent, ferve to a Chriftian life : ’Tis Luß, Pride, A-
varies, that thruft men upon fuch folly ; had God’s Kingdom
the exercite of their minds, thefe peddling entertainments
fhould have but little of their time, or thoughts.
This Self-denying Dodhinc, was confirm’d, and enforc’d
by the Apoftlcs in their Example, as we have already fiiewn •
and in their Precepts too, as we fthall yet evince in thofe two
.moft .remarkable pafiagei oi fanl tvkßeter, where they not
only
34a-35a
tm, 14*17.


oaly tell us what fhould be done, but alfo interpret what
fhould be deny’d and avoided. In like manner I wlB that
Women Adorn xhemfelves in modeß Apparel } ( what’s that ? )
with fhamtfafinefi and fobriety, not with brotdergd Hair,or Gold,
or Pearls, or cofily Array, (then thife are immodeft) bm (which
be comet h Women prefeffing godUntfs) with good worlds , abfolutc-
ly implying, that thofe who Attire themielves with Gold, Sil~
•vgr, broldered Hair, Pearls, cofily Array, or the like, cannot be
she Women prof effing godline fs ; making thofe very things to be
contrary to modefty, and what’s good ; and confequemly that
they are evil, and unbecoming Women profciTlng Godlinefs„
To which Peter joy ns another Precept, after the like fort;
viz. Whofe Adorning, let it not be that omward Adorning, of plai-
ting the Hair , and of wearing of Gold, or of putting on Apparel;
(what then ? ) but let it be the hidden man of. the heart, in that
which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek, and quiet
Spirit, which, is in the fight of Cjod of great price • and as an in-
ducement, he adds, For after this manner, in the old time , the
Holy Women, who fo trufied in God, Adorned themfelves • which
doth not only intimate, that both Holy Women were fo Ador-
ned, and that it behove* 'fuch as would be Holy, and truft
in the Holy God to be fo Adorned ; but aifo that they whoufed
thofe forbidden Ornaments, were the Women and People in all
Ages, that ( for all their talk ) were not Holy, mr did truß in
Cjod : They fo far are fuch from milling in God, that the A-
poftle Paul exprefly fayes, That they who live in pleafures, are
dead (to God) whilß they live. And fayes James, They that
live wantonly on Earth, [lay the Juß : They'farther enjoyn’d.
That ChrilVians fhould have their Converfation in Heaven, and
their minds fixed on things above • walkhonefily as in the day, not
in Rioting and Drunkeunefs, not in Chambrlng and Wamonnefs
not in Envy and Strife 5 let not Fornication Uncleamefs, or Co - ,
vetoufnefs be once named amongß you • neither Flhhtnefs, mr
fdalifh talking or jefi'wg, which are not convenient, but rather
giving of thanks ; And let no corrupt Communication proceed out
of your mouib, but that which is good, to the ufe of edifying, that
it may mimfier Grace unto the Hearers: But put ye on the Lord
JefuS Ohrid, and make no provifion for the fieJh, to fulfil the defire
H V. thereof-
i Tim t 2* jfi\
10,.
x
i Tm,ts
6.
f
Ephef.tp.n
Phii.s.2.(
Co I. $,1)2
4-
Rom, 13,
*4* ■.; :
£;A.j. 2 j
Epb> 4.15
1 Rom t i 2


phefpio,.
ph.ip r,
, j y, 16,
thereof> And, grieve not the Holy Sprit ; (intimating fuck
Gonverfatioq doth ) bm beyi followers of God as dear Children
not as Fool's , but as Wife ; redeeming the time
becaufethe dayes are evil, Meafurc your halves hereby, O yon
Inhabitants of the Land, who think your felves wrong’d if
not accounted Chriftians; fee what proportion your Life and
Spirit bear with thefe moft Holy and Self-denying Precepts
tnd Examples. Well, my Friends , my Soul mourns for you ; I
have been with you % and among you ; your Life and Pafeime are
not fe rangers to my Obfervation ; and with Companion, yea, unex-
prejfeble pity I bewail your folly • O that you would be wife ! O
that the juSt Principe in your Jelves were heard! O that Eterni-
ty had time to plead a little with you! Why (hould your Beds, your
ClajfeSj your Cloaths, your Loves, your Playes, your Parks, your
"Treats , your Recreations, ( poor peiifhing toyes) have all your
Souls, your Time, your Care, your Purfe, and Confederation ? Be
ye admomjhedy 1 befeech you in the Name of the Living God, by
me that fame of you know hath had hu fhare,and confequently time,
to know how little the like vanities conduce to true and follld hap-
ptnefs ; No, my Friends, God Almighty knows (and would God
you would believe and follow me) they end in fhame and farrow.
Faithful is that moft Holy One, who hath determin’d, That
, every c Man and Woman fh all,reap, what they fow • and will not
trouble , anguifh , and difsppointment, be a fad and dreadful Har-
veft for you to reap, for all your mifpent time about fuperflui-
tieg;, and vain recreations ? %etiu then , grieve not the Holy
Spirit in your felves ; Redeem precious abufed time; frequent fuch
Converfation m manifefl the fame: So fhall you follow the Ex-
amples, and keep the Precepts of Jefus Chnft, and all his
followers,.; For hitherto, we have plainly dcmocftiated that
no fuch way of Living, as is in requeft amongft you of the,
tmd, ever was, or can be truly Chiiftkn*
p
Been fe the be ft of Recreations is to do good, and all
Ghriftian cuftoms Jfhould be to adt with temperance, and for
fome good and beneficial end j. which more or lefs may be in
every
u>6, 4, y,
7,8,p,
w 0 2, p 6,
9*
il.3.20


every Asion • at Icaft no fuch evil! Confequences to attend ;
as for inftance, If Men and Women would be diligent to follow
their nfjpefiive Callings, frequent the Affemhlies of Religious Peo-
pley vijitjober Neighbors to begdified y and wicked ones to reform
them ; to he careful in the Tuition of their Children , exemplary
to their Servants, relieve the Neceffitous, fee the Sic\ y admini-
'fier to their diftempers , and indifpofitions, endeavour a-
fnongsh their Neighbours ; Alfo to fiudy moderately fuch com-
mendable and profit able Arts y as Navigation y Aruhmetick,
Geometry ? Husbandry) Medicine ; to read the best reputed Hi-
fiories of ancient timesto Spin , Sow, ICnit y Weave, Garden, or
the like Houfe-wife and hone ft Employments (the practice of the
greatest and nobleft Matrons and Youth among the very Hea-
thens;) helping others, who for want, are unable to keep Servants
to eafe them in their necejfary affairs • often , and private retire-
ments from all Worldly Enjoyments ; fecret, and ftcady Meditati-
ons on the Divine Life, and Heavenly Inheritance ; which to
leave undone, and profecute other things under the notion of
Pleafures, is accurfed Luft y and damnable Impiety : Befides,
it is mod vain in any to objedt, That they can’t do thefe al-
ways s, and therefore why mayn’t they ufc thefe common di-
versions ? For I ssk> What would fuch beat? what would
they do? and, what would they have? They that have
Trades, have not time enough to do the half of what hath
been recommended ; And as for thofe who have nothing to
do, [and indeed do nothing iwhich is worfe) but fin,which if
word of all] here is variety of pleafant, of profitable, nay,
of very honourable Employments, andDivcrfionsfor them:
Such can with great delight fit at a Play a Ball, a Mafque, at
Cards y Dice, Drinking, Revelling , FeafHng, and the
like, an entire day; ycs> turn night into day, and invert
the very Order of thcCreatton to their Lufts,& were it nor for
Eating and Sleeping, it would be pad a doubt, whether they
would ever find a time to ceafe from thofe vain,, and finful
paftimes, till;the hafty Calls of Death, fhould fumtnon their.
Appearance in another World , yet do they think it inroller-
able, and notpoffible for any to fit fo long ac a profitable., oi
Heavenly Exsrcifs : But how do thefe think to pafs then vad
Eccrnltf
i Pet.r. 15',
Hch. i o. 2,
i Pet.A, p■ ;
IO t I I.
Eph. <5. 4, ro
11.
Mat.2f.s6y
37-
Plnl,z. 4.
Chap, 4* 8.
24,
Pfal, I* a.
65~6. up.
s 43'
jhms 6. 3:
tO*.
Ecck[,xt£


Ecclef. l x.j.
Eternity away ? m the Tree fMs Jo It Ijes: Let none de-
ceive thcmfelves,. nor mock their immortal Souls, with a
pleafanc, but moft falfe, and pernitious dream, that they Fhall
be chang’d by an irrefiftible and gain-faying Power, juft when,
their Sculs take farewel of their Bodies; No,no, my Friends,
What you have Sowen-, that [hall yon Reap ; if Vanity, Folly,
viiible Delights, fading Plcafurcs, no better Bull you ever
reap than Corruptions, Sorrow,, and the woful Aoguiftiof Ex-
ternal Difappointments: But alas! what’s the reafon that the
Cry is fo common, mu ft we alwayes dote on thefc things ?.
A/Vhy, moft certainly it is this, becaufe they know not what
is the Joy, and Peace, of alwayes fpeaking, and sifting as in
the prefence of the moft Holy God ; they pals Tuch vain un-
derloadings, darkned with the glories and pleafures of the
Godd of this World, whofe Religion is [0 many mumbled, or
ignorantlj-devout-faid Words , m they teach Parrats ; for if they
were of thofe whofe heart are fet on things above, and whofe
treafure was in Heaven, there would their minds inhabit;
and their pleafure conftantly be j and fuch who call that a
burden, and feek to be refrelbed by other viiible Delights,
a Play, a Morrke-dance, a Pmchanello, a Ball, a
Cards, Dice , or the like ; I boldly affirm, not only never
knew the Divine Excellency of God, and Truth., but there-
in declare thecnfelves moft unfit for them in another World;
for how polTibly can they be delighted to an Eternity of
years and Ages, with that Satisfaction which is fo tedious and
iikfome for fo trifling a time as thirty or forty years ? as that
for a fupply of Recreation to their minds, the little toyes and
fopperies of this pciifhing World muft be brought into pra-
iftice, and requeft; Surely thofe who are to reckon for every
.idle Word, muft notufe Sports to pafsaway that time, which
they are commanded diligently to Redeem, confidering no
lefs work is to be done then making their Calling and Eleifti-
on lure; nor ftudy Recreations to their vain minds, and
fpend the greateft part of Dayes, and Months, and Years
therein, not allowing a quarter of that time towards the great
concernment of their Lives and Souls, for which that time
was given them ; there’s but little need to drive away that
by
Gal. 6 4,5,
6,7,8,p.
Phil. $.6,7.
Bph, 4. 18,
ip,2o.
Mat. i 8,
P*
Pom, 10.2.
A fat, 12.31?.
■i 0 »
. PfiJ, 2.10,
'oU 4.5 * ■


by foolifli divcrtifements, which flyes away' ib fwiftly of Its
felf; and when once gone, is never to be recalled j Playes 9
Parkjf Batts,
will be a very invallid Plea for any other purpofe chan their
Condemnation ( who are taken, and delighted with rhern ) at
the Revelation of the Right com Judgment: Omy Friends,
Thefe never were invented, nor employ’d, but by that
mind which had firft lolt the Joy, and ravifhing Delights of
God’s Holy Prefence , fo that we conclude, Firll, That of
thofe many excelent employments already mentioned,as wor-
thy to difpoffefs fuch minds as are inclin’d to the vanities of
their other recreations,there is (lore enough of time, not only
to take up their (pare hours,but double fo much, and that with
great delight, diverfion, and profit, both to thcmfelves and o-
thers, ( were they but once weaned from vain and fruitlefs
fopperies, and did they but consider how great the Satisfacti-
on, and how certain the Rewards.are which attend this, and
the other Life, for fuch univerfal Benefits, and virtuous Ex-
amples.) The fecondconciuhon is> That my Reafon can be
difplcafing, nor the banifhing thefe vanities from their doting
minds, ungrateful to none but fuch as know not what it is to
walk with God, to prepare for an eternal Manfion, to hive
the mind exercifed on Heavenly, and good things, to follow
the examples of the Holy Men and Women of former hap-
py Ages, that know not Chrift’s Dj&rine, Life, Death, Re-
furredlion, but only have their minds fafined to thefkfli,,
and by the objedH of it are allured, deceived, and miferably
ruined j and that laftly defpife Heaven, and the Joyes that
arc not fecn (though Eternal) for a few perifhing trifles that
they do fee, though they are determin’d to pafs away • Bow
thefe are baptized with thrift Into ■hie Holy Ltfe> cruel Suffer-
ings i (hameful Deaths and raifed with him to Immortal
'Heavenly Meditations a Divine new Llfe s that fhoulcL be daily
(not bahllng formal words ) but growing In the knowledge of Hea-
venly Myftenes i and ad even unto the meafure of the
fiature of Jefm Cbriß , the great Example of alb: How, I fay,
thefe refemble fuels mofi nccelfaty Chtittlan.qualifications,
and
x 4,'
s>6)7? tophe
17.
■i Cor.
G at. 3.2,7, v;
Col. 2. I2 (5
IS-
'Efbt ;1,2


and what'fhare they have therein/let the juft Principle m
their own Conferences (if not quite fmothered) declare*
Reaf, 6.
Next, Such Attires and Pa dimes, do not only Oiew the
exceeding worldiinefsof Peoples inclinations} and their ve-
ry great ignorance of the Divine Jo yes, but by imitating
thefe fa/liions, and frequenting thefe places} and diverfions,
not only much good is omitted, but a certain door is opened
for much evil to be committed ; as fir ft, Precious time (that
were worth a world in a dying bed) is loft ; Money, that might
be employ’d for fome general good, vainly expended ; P4ea«
fure is taken inmeer fhame ; Lufts are gratify’d ; the Minds
of People alienated from Heavenly things, and exercis’d a~
bout meet folly • Pride taken in deaths, fir B given to cover
mkednefij whereby the Creature is negleded, and the Noble
Creation of God disregarded, and men become acceptable,
by their Trims, and the A-la-mode-nefs of their Dreis, and
Appaid j from whence rtfped to Perfons fo naturally does
a life, that to deny it, is to affirm the Sun Thines not at noon
day j nothing being more notorious, than the Cringing, Sera •
ftngj and CMadomlng of Perfons, according to the
gaudinefs of their Attire ; which is moft deteftable to God,
and fo abfolurely forbidden in the Scriptures, that to do it, is
to incur the breach of the whole Law, and confcquently the
punishment thereof. Next, What great holes do the like
piadices make in men’s Eftatcs?how are their vocations neg-
leded ? young Women deluded? the Marriage-bed invaded ?
Contentions, and Family Animoficic* begotten ? partings of
Man and Wife ? disinheriting of Children? difmiffing of
Servants ? On the other hand, Servants made Oaves, Chil-
dren difregatded, Wives defpifed, and Oumefully abufed
through the intemperance of their Husbands, which either
puts them upon the fame extravigance; or laying fuch cruel
injufiice to heart, pine away all their dayes in grief and mi-
feryj But above all thofc wretched Inventions, tbeP%-
klWftSy.
,
•'C ’ 5 ■ 0 * 5
fam,2. i,2,
3 ?4j S> 6)7)
p „


houfes, like fo many heliijh Seminaries, are the moil: pemid-
oufly conducing to thefe fad and miferabie ends; where little
befide frothy, wanton, if not diredly obfcene and profane
humours are represented, which are of notorious ill confer
quencc in the minds of mold (efpecially the youth) that fre-
quent them. Next, idle, deboyft, and impioufly unclean
Stagers, are encourag’d, and maintain'd ( then which fearedy
a greater abomination can be thought on, of that rank of Im-
pieties, as will anon particularly be ftiown, and that no-
thing but the great pleafure People take therein, could blind
their eyes from feeing.) And iaftly, the grand indifpofition
of mind to folid, ferious, and heavenly employments, by the
almoft continual, as well as fcemiogly pkafant rumination '
of thefe various adventures they had lately been entertain’d
with, which in the more youthful, can never bit acnifs to en-
jßsmc, and animate their boy ling and aiery Conftitutionsjand
in the reft of the common Recreations of Balls, Mafques,-
T reats, Cards , Dice, Cheeky &c. there are the like 6pportu r ■
nities to promote the like evils. And yet farther too; how
many diforders, quarrels, Animoficies, nay,Murder it felf, as
well as expence of Eftatcs, and precious time, have been the,
immediate confequences of the like Recreations and Pia-
£kices ? In (hon, Thefe were the wayesof the Gentiles that
knew not God, but never the pradfice of them that feared'
him ; nay, the more Noble amongft the Heathens themrelves, :
namely, Anaxagoras, Socrates, Plato, Antijlhines, Ariftides, 3
Cato, Tally, Epittettu, Seneca, &c. have left their difgaft to the
like vanities upon Uncord, as odiom, and dejlruUlve, not only of the
honour of the Immortal God, bat of all good Order and Govern-
ment, as leading into loofenefs, idlsnefs, ignorance , and effeminacy
the grand Cankers, and bane of all States and Empires: But fuch ;
is the Latudinarian impudence of this Age, that they Cano-
nize themfelvcs for Saints, if not guilty of every Ts(ewgate~
filthy and kennel-impiety , and fo the pretended innocency of
thefe things fteals away their minds into the ufe of them> and
their great delight in themnay, it gives them confidence to
plead for them, and by no means will they think the contrary*
but why ? beemfe it is a liberty that feeds tbeflefb, and
F gratifies.
Pfal. 4.
12. 2-
jch.tf.l3
Eccleft 2*. I
2*
Eph. 4. 17®
21,22,2^
HtH* -


gratifies the luftful eye, and pallate of poor Mortality,where*
fore they chink it a laudable condition to be in equality to the
Bead:, that eats, and drinks but what his nature doth require,
the number’s very foUll of Rich] fo very exorbitant
are men and women, in this prefent Age : for either they do
believe their Aftions depend upon their own will, fo as that
they may do what they pleafe, without accounting for it 5 or
clfe at heft, that not to be ftaln’d with the vileft wickednefs,
if matter of great boafting [and indeed it is fo in a time when
nothing is too wicked to be done] But certainly it is a fign of
great and univerfal Impiety in a Land, when not to he guilty
of jlnS) the very Heathen loath, is to be virtuous • yes, and Chrl-
filan too,& that to no [null degree of Reputation , Nay, but Is it
not to be greatly blinded, that thofe we call Infidels , fhould
deteft thofe pra&ices as infamous, which People that call
themfelves Chriftians cannot, or will not fee to be fuch, but
guild them over with the fair Titles of Ornament, Decency, Re-
creation, and the like ? Well, my Friends, if there were no
God, no Heaven 3 no Hell,no holy Examples, no Jcfus Chrift,
In Crofs, D:>£Hne, Death, and Refurrcction to be conform’d
' unto, yet would Charity to the Poor , Help to the Needy , Peace a~
ntongTt Neighbours, HI Jits to the Care of the wlddow and
Fatherlefi, with the refi of thofe Temporal good Offices, already
• repeated , be a nobler Employment , and much more necejfary,as well
as worthy of your diligence > and pains : Nor indeed is it to be
• conceived, that the way to Glory, is enclos’d and fmooth’d
with fuch variety of carnal Pleafures ; no, alas! Cottvl Eliott)
• a wounded-Spirit, a broken Hearts regenerated Mlnd> in a word,
Immortality would then prove as mecr fi&ions as feme make
them, and others therefore think them, if the like pva&ifes
- are not for ever to be extingnifh’d, and expell'd all Ohriffian
focicty • for I affirm,That to one who internally knows God,
and hath a fenfe of his bleflfcd Prefence, all fuch Recreati-
ons are death j yea, more dangeroufly evil, and more apt to
Real away the mind from its Heavenly excrcife than groffer
Impieties ; for they are fo big,they are plainly feen ; fo dirty
they are cafily detefted* which Education, and common Tem-
perance, as well as Confutation in many,teach them to abhor;
and
6,?,
s>9-
Job 24. 12.
Ffa, 10 $.22.
Prov.l 8. 14
PjW. yi. 17,
Mat,<y.^.
5. ay.
R0m.2,7.
Pfal. 40,8.
Pm/. 13.21.
l ßom.?, 22.
1.13,
f4> *
Rom.i.2s 3
.i£, 27, f 9
li*


and if they ftiould be committed, they carry with them a
proportionable convi&ion : but thefe pretended Innocents,
thefe fuppofed harmelefs Satisfa&ions are more furprifing,
more fatal, more dcftru&lvc ; for as they eafily gain an ad-
midion of their fenfes, fo the more they pretend to Innocen-
cy, the more do they fecure the minds of People in the com-
mon ufe of them 3 till they become fo infcnfible of their evil
Confequences, that with & mighty confidence they can plead
for them*
Bur, as this is plainly not to deny themfelves, but on the
contrary, to employ thefe vain Inventions of carnal Men and
Women, to gratifie the defire of the Eye, the dejire of the Flefh }
and the pride of Life ; all which, exerdfe the mind below the
divine and only true Pleafure, (or elfe tell me what do. )
So, Be it known to fuch, That the Heavenly Life, and Chri-
ftian Joycs are of another kind, (as hath already been ex-
prefs’d) nay, that the true Difciples of the Lord Chrift muft
be hereunto crucified, as to Obje&s and Enjoyments that st»
tradi downwards, and that their affedions fhould be fo rais’d
to a mote fublime and fpiritual Convcrfation, as to ufe this
World, even in its moft innocent enjoyments,as if they us’d
it not; but if they take pleafure in any thing below, it (hall
be in fomeof thofe good Offices before-mention’d, whereby
a benefit may redound in fome refped, in which God is ho-
nour’d over all vifible things, the Nuion reliev’d, the Go-
vernment better’d, themfelvcs rendred exemplary of good,
and thereby juftly intituled to prefent Happinefs, a Tweet Me-
morial with Pofterity, and to a feat at his Right hand, where
there are Joyes and P leaf tires for ever j than which, there can be
nothing more honourable, nothing more certain, world with-
out end*
JPeaf. 7,
There fhould be no vanity of Apparel,nor Recreations,com-
mon amongft thofe who would be Chriflians indeed, beemfe
both that which Invented them , delights to have them, and pleads
fo Jhongly for them) u inconfftent with the trtte Spirit of Chri-
F 2 fiianity j
Eph. 1 3. is
Job 1. 4.
2.7.3 81
3P.
1 J oh, 2.1^
i6 r ij.
Joh*j6.7*
Pfal. $.12.
Vjd.^x
2p*
Pro.v, 10.
Afa r. 14.
Pfa, 16.1
Luk.> t6.i
xSjip.
Ch.16.2q
Ch. 17 . 15
x^i/.


la.ptf.3. 11.
ftek'.lt* 24,
Rom. 8. 18.
12.
te^.12.1,2,
(llanlty ; no? doth the very nature of the Chrlflian Religion admit
ofthefe things ,
For therefore was it that Immortality and Eternal Life was
thereby brought to light, that Mortality, and all the plea-
sures of it, in which the world lives, might be forgone, and
relinquished; and for that reafon iris that nothing lefs than
immenfe Rewards, and eternal Manfions are pro mi fed, but
that Men and Women, might therefore be encourag’d wil-
lingly toforfake the vanity, and fleShly fatisfadfions of the
World, and encounter with boldnefs the fliame sndfufferinog
, they tnufl expert to receive at the hand of (it may be) thetr
ncareft, and otherwife dearefl Intimates, and Relations.
For if the Ghriflian Religion had admitted the Poffefliots
of this World in any other fenfe, than the Ample and naked
ufeof thofe Creatures really given of God for the neceflity
and convenience of the whole Creation ; forinftancc, Did
it allow ail that Prlde> Vunity, Curiofity, Pomp, Exchange of
&Apparel, Honours, Preferments, Fafhions, and the Cuftomary
Recreations , with what ever may delight and gr at I fie their fenfes ;
Then, what need of a dally Crojs f a felf-denying Life ? word-
ing out Salvation with fear and trembling :? feeing the thlnes
that are above ? having the Treafur.e , and heart in Heaven ?
I*o idle talking, no vain jeftlng , but fearing,- and meditating all
the day long , undergoing all reproach , fcorn, hard ufage, bitter
mocklngs , and cruel deaths ? What need thefc things.? and why
fhould they be expeded in order to that, glorious Immortali-
ty, and eternal Crown ? if the Vanity, Pride, Expence
Idlenefs, Concuplfcencc, Envy,Malice, and whole manner of
living among the called Chiiftians,. were allow’d ? No cer-
tainly, but as the Lord Jefus Chrift well knew in what foollfk
/trifles, and vain pleafures (as well as grofler impieties) the
minds of Mm and Women were fixed, and how much they
were degenerated from the Heavenly principle of Life, into
a covetous feeking after the enjoyments of this p-rifhin®
World, ( pay, inventing daily new ones, to gratifie their
Lulls) Co 'did he not lefs foreleg the difficulty that all would
have to relinquish, and forfake them, at bis call; and with
What great imwlliingaefs they would take their leave, arid be
'Weaned
9' 2 s'
fhi1.2. 12.
?fi/. 3- r ? 2.
*pb-S 4»y-
-*fat.ll2, t.
fah 28.14.
fa. 1
‘.^18.23.
si>. IC. 32.


weaned from them 1 wherefore as inducements thereunto, he
did not (peak unto them in the Language of the Law, as that
they fbould have an Earthly Canaan, great Dignities, a nu-
merous lifue, a long Life, and the like ; no, lather the contra-
ry ( at leill to take thefe things as they fhould fall ) but he
fpeaks to them in a higher drain, namely. That he ajfures
them of a Kingdom, and a Crown that are Immortal , that nei-
ther Time, Cruelty , Death , Grave, nor Hell, with alt its inflru-
ments, (hall ever be able to difappoint, or take away from.thoje who
fhould believe , and obey him ; further. That they fhould be taken
into that neer Ahance of loving Friends, yea,the intimate divine
%glation of dear Brethren, and Co-heirs with him of all Coeleflial
Happineff and gloriom Immortality ’, wherefore, if it be record-
ed, That thofewho heard not Moles, were to die, much more they
who refufe to hear , and obey , the Precepts of this great and Eter-
nal Rewarder of All that diligently feek. and follow him.
And therefore it was that he was pleated to give us, in his
own Example,* tali of what his Difdples muft expedi to drink
more deeply of; namely, The Cup of Seif -deny al, cruel Tryals,
and moB bitter Affl' Elions : He came not to Confecrate a way
to the Eternal R.eli> through Gold and Silver-, Ribbons, Laces,
Points, Perfumes, coflly Cloatbs, curious Trim's, exaEl Dreffes,
rich Jewels, pleafant Recreations, Vlay's, P arks, Treats, Bads,
Mafyues, Revels, Romances, Love-fongs, flattering “Sonnets, and
the like Paftimc of the World : No, no, alas! but by for-
faking all fuch kind of entertainments; yea, and fotne-
times more lawful enjoyments too, and chearfully undergo-
ing the iofs of all on the one hand, and the Reproach, Igno-
miny, andthe tnoft hateful Pertecutions from ungodly men
on the other ; alas he needed never to have wanted fuch va-
riety of worldly Pleafures.. had they'been futable to the work
:he came to do; for he was tempted (as are his followers)
with no lefs bait than all the Gloryes of the World ( how-
ever Sitan ly’djin faying they were his to give:) bat he that
Commanded his followers to feek, another Countrey , and to lay
up Lreafure in the Heavens, and therefore charg’d, them never
to be much inquifitive about mist they Jhould Eat, Drinks, or
put on 1 because, faith he, after thefle things the Gentiles ( that
d^now
2O.
Ch.l2. J 2.
C7j.22.2p, '
CW. 1.1 5 ,
i 77*/. a,
Hch.\2.2%
Jam.i.c . ■;
joh.itj, 14
Rem.%. 17.
Heb. 2. j. I.
Hi I?. 12. %,
I?.
Ch. \t, 6.
1 Pro. 2,. 21
Luk- 12.29
1 Tiw.f.tf.
Mat.lp.2p
28325?.
Lu1^.6.22.
Joh.if.2Oj
Mat. y.Sjfj
,10.
L»h. 12. 35
33, 34) 3-
3 f>.
Mat.. 6.. ip.
20.
3?
5 2 -33*
1 I 7
7j' B jP,
11.,


'Markjd. 3 l.
& 39.
know not God) dofeek', (and Ghriftians that pretend to know
him too) hut having Food and %aiment s therewith to be content;
He, I fay, that enjoyn'd thisDodrine, and led that Holy and
Heavenly Example, even the Lord Jefus Chrift, bid them
that would be his Dilciples, to take tip the fame Crofi 7 and to foU
tow Him. .
Wherefore who will be true Chilians, muft not think to
Beer another Courfe, nor to drink of another Cup then hath
the Captain of their Salvation done before them; no, for *ti*
the very queftion be asked James 3 and John, the Sons of Ze~
hedge of old, when they delired to fit at his right, and left
hand, in his Kingdom, Can you fir ft drinks of the Cup lam to
drinks of ? and be baptized with the Baptifw lamto he baptized
withal ? otherwife no Difciples,no Ghriftians. Whoever they
are, that would come to Chrift, and be a right Chriflian,muli
readily abandon every delight, that would fteal away the affc-
dions of the mind, and exerdfc it, from the Divine Prin-
ciple of Life, and freely write a Bill of Divorce for every
beloved vanity (for all undcr thc Sun of Rightcoufneftis To.)
OhjeEi. i. But fome are ready to objed,(who will not want
Scripture for their lufls, although it evidently be mifapply’d)
fay they, Kingdom of Cod /lands not in Meats 3 mr in Vrinkj 3
nor in Apparel 3 tfrc,
Anfw. Right j therefore it is that we Band out of them*'
But fuvely you have the leailßeafori of any to objed this to
us, who make thofc things fo neceflfary, as our not Confor-
ming to them, doth render us obnoxious to your Reproach j
Which how Chriftian, or refembling it if the Right eoufnefi.
Peace, and Joy 3 in which the Heavenly Kingdom flands 3 let the
juft Principle in your own Conferences determine \ our Con-
vention Bands in Temperance, and that Bands in Right eou[~
»?/, by which we have obtain’d that Kingdom, your latitude,
and exccfs have no (hare, nor intreft in.
If none therefore can be true Difcip]cs,but they that come
to bear the Daily Croft, and thatftnonc bear the Croft but
thole who follow the example of the Lord Jefus Chrift through
his
10,
I
,6. ■


his Baptifm of Afflidfions, Tryals, and Temptations.* and
that none are fo baptiz’d with him, but thofe whofe minds are
retired from the vanities in which the generality of the world
lives, and become obedient to the ffoly Light, and Divine
Grace, with which they have been enlightned from on high,
and thereby are daily exercis’d to the crucifying of every con-
trary Affcdion, and bringing of Immortality to light ; If
none are true Difcipks but fuch, ( as mod undoubtedly they
arc not) then let the People of thefe dayes, a little foberly ,
re&s&upon themfelves, and conclude, that none who live
and delight in thefe vain Cuftoms, and this un-Chrift-like
Converfation, can be a true Chriftian,or Difciple of Crudffd
JeJpui for other wife, how would it be a Crofs > or the Ctiri-
ftian life 3 matrer of difficulty, and reproach ? No, the off wee <
■of the Cr of would [oon ceafe, which is the Power of (fod to them
that believej for the fubduing of every luft 3 and vanity, and
■bringing the Creature into an holy fubjedlion of mind to the
heavenly will of it’s Creator; for therefore has it been faid,
That Jefus Chtift was and is manifefted, that by his Holy,
Self-denying Life and Dosrine, he might put a baffle upon
the proud minds of men, and by the Immortality he brought
and daily brings to light, he might ftain the Glory of their
mortal Refts and Plcafures, that having their minds weaned
therefrom, and being as crucify’d thereunto, they might Jeek.
mother C ohm trey, and obtain an Everlafing Inheritance : for the
things that are are Temporal (thofe they were, and all ate
to be redeem’d from) but the things that are not are Eter-
nal ; thofe they and all are to be brought to, and have
their Afk&ions chiefly fixt upon.
Wherefore a true Difciple of the Lord Jefus Chrift, is to
have his mind fo converfant about heavenly things. That the
things of thin World maybe usd mif they were not ; and that ha-
ving fuch things as are ntceffary and convenient , therewith to be
content, without the ftipcrftuity of the World, whereby the
fleafures that,in the time of Ignorance** was taken in the C ujloms
■and Fafhims of the World-) .might more abundantly be- f apply d in
the bidden and Heavenly 'Life 5 for unlefs there be an abiding in
Chriß , it will be impojplle to bring forth that much fruit which
ht
Phil. 3.1:0.
I Pet. 4. 13,
77;. 2. n,
12, 13.
JWj. I •
6. <£.
6V. 2.20.
C7>.y. 24.
14.
2 T im> i. loi
Gk/. 15. 11
1 C0r.1.17,
18. ‘
F'erf.i'j 28
2p.
Beh, 4. x } 2
3, to 12.
2 (fV.4, 1;’
xB.
Col.s' 3;4|
Job.
8.


7,8.
I Jah.Z. 4.
he requires at the hands of his followers, and.wherein his Father
is glorify’’d: But as its cleats fuch as live in the Vanities,
Pkafures, Recreations, and 'Lulls of the Worlds abide not
in him, neither know bim 2 ( for they that know him t depart from
Iniquity) fo is their abiding and delighting in thofe bewitch-
ing follies, the very reafon why they are fo ignorant, and in-
fcaliblc of him, that continually /lands knocking at the doors of
their hearts , in whom they ought to abide, and whofe Divine
Power they fhouid know to be the Crofs, on which every be-
loved Luft, and alluring Vanity fhouid be flain,and crucify clj
that they might feel the Heavenly Life to fpring, and them-
felves quickncd thereby, to feck the things that are above •
that when Chrifl (hall appear, they might appear with him in glo~
ry % who is over Ml, Cod bk/fedfor ever. Amen.
%eaf 8.
Next, Thofe Cuftoms and Fafhions, which that great va-
riety of Pkafurc, which is the common Attire, and Conver-
fation of the Times, do eminently obftrud the Retirement of
Peoples minds to that they may behold the Glory’s
of another kinds X mean Immortality ; and inftead of fearing
their Creator in the dayes of their youth, ( and feeking the
Kingdom of God firft, expecting the Addition of fuch other
things as may be neceffary and convenient, according to the
Injun&ionsof God, and the Lord JeCus Chrift ) as foon as
they can do any thing, Pride, Faulty, and that Converfation,
which is mo ft delightful to the Flefh , becomes their mo ft plea/tng
Entertainments j all which do but exceedingly beget lullful
Conceptions, and enflame to inordinate Thoughts, wanton
Difcourfes, hfeivious Treats, if not at laft to wicked Ani-
ons, fond Abfurdides, and Rrange Impoffibißties, fetch’d
from fuch occaftons continually haunting their minds; To
whom it’s tedious, and offeofive to fpeak of Heaven, or ano-
ther Life ; bid them refieft upon their ABlons, mt grieve the
Holy Spirit ; conjider &f an Eternal Doom, prepare for Judgment:
and the beft Return that’s ufual is reproachful Jcfts, profane
Repartees, if sot dried blows I their thoughts are othcr-
wayes
Rev 3,a0.
P/rf/.80,i8.
CoL 3.1,2,
34*
Rom.q.^'
Fcdef 1 2. x.
l>uk'i2.29 i
50,51.
zcclefpS.
i 7'im.z.l6,
41,22* .
er.i%. s B,
9,20.
er> 2o.lo. ,


wiyes cirploy’d 3 their Mornings are too ikon for them to
fmooth) to paint % to patch) to head, to curie, to gum } to fancier ,
and othsrmfe to attire and adorn themfelves ; whilft their After-
noons as commonly are befpoke for Vifits and for Play’sphere
their ufual Entertainment is fame ftories fetch’d from the more
approved Romances. Some ftrange Adventures) fame pajjionate
jimours, Unkind Refufes, grand Impediments, tedious Addrejfes,
ntifer able DifappointmentS)Voonderf(il Surprises, unexpected Ren-
counters, and meeting of fuppofed dead Lovers, bloody Duels ,
languishing Voices > £ echoing from feditary C/roves, over-heard
mournful Complaint $) deepjetch’d Sighs fent from wilde Defarts,
Intrigues manag’d with unheard-of and whilß all
things feem at the great eft diftance y then are dead People alive,
enemies Friends, itjpatr turn’d to Enjoyment, and all their Im- .
pafftbilities reconcil’d; things that never were) are not) nor ever '
jhall) or can becomes to paft. And, as if Men 8c Women were .
too flow to anfwcr the loofe fuggeftions of corrupt nature,
or were too intent on more divine fpcculadons,and heavenly
AffairSjtbey have all that it’s poflible for the tnoft extravagant
Wits to invent, of not only exprefs Lyes, but grand improba-
bilities, if notimpoffibilitics to very nature,on purpofe to ex-
cite their minds to thofe refpc&ivc paffions, and fo intoxicate
their giddy fancies with fweiling nothings (but aicry
is not only confumc Time, effeminate their Natures, debate
their Rcafon, and fet them on work to reduce the-fe things
to practice, and make each adventure theirs by imitation ;
but if difappointed, (as who can otberwife expc& from fuch
vaniihing fantafpas) the prefent remedy is latitude to the
greateft vice : and yet thefe are fomcof their raoft innocent
Recreations,which are no better then tbzt fubtilDevtl, ensna-
ring People by fuch ftratagems, as may be moft agreeable to their
weakpeft , and in a more infenftble manner maftering their Affe~
Elions, by Entertainments moft taking to- their Senfes : In fuch
occafions, 'tis their hearts breed vanity, and their Eyes turn
interpreters to their Thoughts,and that their Looks do wbif-
per the fccret infltmations of their intemperate minds, wan-
dring fo long abroad, till their lafdvious a&ingf bring night
home, and load their Minds and Reputations with luft and in-
Q fa my •
• Tit, 2. 3> 4
'S',
> EphA- 3,4
■ 1 Tim, 4.2
2 »4*
Pfai. 12,2,
Eeclef. z, 1
11.17. ', ;
Chap, 6,s.
Pfa1 ,58.3.
7/4.5'. 18.
7/4.41.25?.
Chap. $9’ 3
4*
‘Prov.?, it
I'l, 13 j I
!4,^28.


Joh.z.iS,
famy; here is the end of all their fafliions sad recreations, t<&
gratifie the lafl of the Eye , the hfl of the Flefh , and the pride of
Life . . Qoatbs that were given to cover flume, now want a
coveting, being fbameful ; and that which was an effedt of
fin, and fliouid remember men of loft innoccncy, they pride
and glory in. • it’s made the pleafure of thefe times, but ’twas
the enforc’d needfuy of thofe; and that very convention,
tbebundreth part of which? coft them the lofs of Paradice,
is now the agreeable Recreation and heft Accomplishment
of the times; for as ’twas Adam s fault to Seek a fatisfadHoa
to himfelf, other than what he was created in, which did con-
flft of continual Obedience to., and Communion with hrs
Maker; foit is the exercife, pleafure, and perfection of the
Age? to have their minds roving abroad, and diverting them-
fc,lves in [pending the greateft portion of their time in the
variety of invented vanities, which is fo far from the end of
their creation, namely, a Divine Life, that ’cis to have the
greateft curioftty and care about vifible toyes, for which they
never were created. Were the pleafurcsof the Age true and
foUid, Adam and Eve. were miferablc in their Innoccncy,who
knew them not; but as kvm once their happinefs not to
-know them in any degree? fo is it theirs that know Chiift in-
deed, to be, by his eternal Power and quickning Spirit, re-
deem’d and raifed to Innocency again, which ftate of Im-
mortality is yet a myftcry to thofe who live, and have pleafure in
their curiom Turn's, rich and changeable Apparel ? mchy of Dreji 0
invention and imitation of Fajhtons , cojHj Aclirements , mincing
Gates, wanton Looks, Romances,‘Plays, Treats , Balls, Leafs,
and the whole fonts of that praUtce, and converfation in Yecjtteft:;
. for as thefe had never been, if man had (hid at home with his
Creator, and given the intire exercife of his mind to the
noble ends of his creation-; fo certain it is, that the ufe of
thefe vanities, are not' only a fign that Men and Women are
yet-ignorant of their true Reft and Pleafure, but it greatly
obftructs and hinders the retirement of their minds, and fe-
rrous enquiry after thofe things that arc Eternal. Q.that ther*
fhould be [o match mife,clutter ? invention , traffqae, dL
dljgemeyTmnSy and vstft expense of time, mLpjime, to pka[e,.an4
Agmifiet
qen. 2.15.
Gen.3.6,7.
feelef 12,1
yfc#.2.25.
'•Ol. 2,13.
> Pet . i.
>•
k 18.
fit. 2. n?
J Tim. i$ . 6
tW.y.y.:
%t.7,i7 3
h'»-
’Up- 1 2,. 23.


gratifie poor perlfhing Mortality', and that the Soul,the very Image .
ef Divinity it [elf, to whofe authority and fervice the Body ( but ,
<ss// Creation was given, to be regulated
byit,fhould have fo little of their Confederation : What! O what 1
more pregnant Inftances, and evident Tokens esn be given,
That ’cis the Body, the Senfes, the Cafe, a little fee[h and bone
Covered with skin, the toyes, fopperies, and very vanities of thi*
mortal Life, and perijhing world,that pleafe, that take, that gain
them, on which they dote, and never have too much time, love,
nor money, to befeow upon them : Thus are their minds employ’d
and become fo vain in their imagination?, and dark in their
undeiftandings, that they not only believe them innocent, but
perfwade them/'elves they are good Ckriftians all this while, and ;
to rebuke them is vvorfe than Here fee ; thus arc they Grangers
to Che hidden Life, thus are they diverted from all ferious
examination of themfeives f and a little by rote babble with a 1
forc'd z,ial of an half hours task, of other men's words, they have ,
nothing to do with, is made fuff dent ( and are no more their,
ftates, or tc leaft their intention (as their works iliew ) than .
twas the young man’s in the Gofpd, thatfaid he would go,and
did not ; But alas ! Why ? Oh ! there are other guefts j what '
are they ? Pharamond, Cleopatra, Cajfandra, a Play, a
Ball, an idle flattering Vifet, the P the Gallant,the Exchange,
the Treat ; in a word, the World: - thefe 6 Stay, thefe Cali, thefe
are Importunate, thefe they Attend, thefe are their moft fa-
miliar Aflbciates; thus are their hearts captivated from the
Divine and Heavenly Exercife 3 nay, from fetch external Af-
fairs, as immediately concern Tome benefit to themfeives, or
needy Neighbours; pleafing themfeives with the received
Jdaa’s of thofc toyes and fopperies, into their loofe and aiery
minds , and if not in all things to imitate them, through po-
verty; yet as much as may be in fome refpeds, and at Taft
s to dote upon them, be taken with thsm, and willingly fuffer
their Thoughts to be hurried away by them All which great-
, |y indifpofc thcmlnds, and diftfaft the Souls of People from
the Divine Life and Principle of the Holy Jefus; but as it
hath been often faid, 'more cfpedally the younger fort, to
whom the like div.ertifnienw of gaudy Clomhs, Romances, and
G 2. Amor&m
. I d.2<5
Mark, 8. 3';
i Car. <?. i :
Job
I fa. 40.4.
1 p«.i. 24
Lulf.%* 14,
•
Rom. 1. ip*
to the end,
Prov. I.ly
3°.
chap, lo,l 7
chap. I 2. t«.
chap.iS.i%
Ifa.yß, 1,2
3, to 10.
J*r. 16. ip
20,21.
CJJT/#. 21.
2p, 3°.
2 Tim. 3.4
Tit.l.3,
Mat.6,27*,
/p.jP4-
Jer. 2. y.
Eccleft Jt.i


Ammnm Flaps ; (where their Inclinations being predated,
with what is fo very futable to them, they become thereby
excited (it may be) to more vanity' than ever they
have thought upon;) which are incomparably dearer to them
than all that can be faid of God's Fear, a retired Life, eternal
Rewards and fops unjpeakable, and full of Glory : So Vain, fo
blind, and fo very infcnfible are Men and Women, of what
truly makes a Difciple of Chrift; O that they would ponder oi *
thefe things, and watch (out of all thefe vanities) for the coming
of the Lord,left being unprepared, and taken up with other Guefts,
they enter not into ha EverUJHng %ejß I
Reafpn p,.
to?. 13,1x5
$,p } to .14*
That which further maoifcfts the unlawfulnefs of thefe nu-
merous Fashions and Recreation*, is, That they are either
the inventions of vain, idle, and wanton minds, to gratifie
their own feudalities, and raife the like wicked curiofity in
others, to imitate the fame, by which nothing but luft and
fully are promoted ; or the contrivances of indigent and im-
poverish cl Wits, who make it the next way for their main-
tenance ; in both which rcfpe&s, Ind upon both which con-
siderations, they ought to be detefted; for the firft, m that it
were to liccnfe ex-prefs Impiety; for the latter.,. becaufc i|
would be to countenance fo wretched a way of livelihood
and confcquemly divert from-more lawful, more fcrviceable-
and more neceffary employments ; That fucb Perfons arc
both the inventers and adlors of all thefe follies, cannot be
difficult to demonfttate : Alas! Coulddt poifibjy be, That
one from PalijUna flaould bring u» Father Adam's Girdle] and
old Mother Eves Apron to he fhewen f What laughing, what
iecrisg, what mocking of their Grandfather’s and Grandams
homely fafbion would there be? furely their Taylet would
find but little cuftome, although we hear 'twos God hlmfelf
that made th&m Coats of Skins :■ The like may be asked of all
the other vanities, concerning the Holy Men and Women
through all the generations of Holy Writ’; How many peers
sf Ribiond, Feathers,, Lmerßrnds, and the like, had Adam
m
■frti&zr.


in Fardife , or out of it ? What rich EmbroydcrSjSilks,Points,
gcc. bad Abel, Enoch, Noah, and good old- Abraham ? Did
Eve, Sarahj Sufanna, Elizabeth) and the r t rg in faMary, ufc to
Curie, Pouder, Pummatum, Patch, Paine, wear falfe Locks
of ftrangc colours, rich Points, Trimmings, lac’d Gowns,
embtoyder’d Pctcecoats, Shooes and Slip-flaps, lac’d with-
Silk or Silver lace, and ruffl’d like Pigeons-fea, with fever &!•
yards, if not pieces of Ribbonds ? How many Piayes did fefm*
Chrifl and his Apaflles recreate thcmfclvcs at ? What Poets,
Romances, Comedies, and the like,- did thefc Holy Men and
Women make, or ufe to pafs away their time withal ? 1 know
they bid all redeem their time, to avoid foolijh talking, vain '
jtfting, prophane babblings and fabulous (lories ; as what increafe
t&more mgodltnefl s and rather to watch, to work. Salvation
with fear and trembling, to flee foolifh and youthful lufls ( by ‘
name) and to fallow righteoufnefs , peace, goodnefs, love, charity y
and to mind the things that art above, as they would have honour, ‘
glory, immonality, and eternal life'. But if I vyerc ask’d; \
Whence came they then ? I could quickly anCwcr, From the :
Gentiles that kpew not God j ( for fomc amongft them detefled
them, as will be (hewn) they were the Pleafurcs of an effc~ (
minate Sardanapalm , a fantaflick Miracles, a Comical
flophanes, a Prodigal Charaxus, a Luxurious Ariflippm ; and
the pra&ifes of fuch Women, as the infamous Clytemneflra,
the painted Jezabel, the laCcivious Campafle, the immoddi
*J*oflhumia, the coflly Corinthian Libidinofa, the mail- im-
pudent Flora, the wanton Egyptian Cleopatra, and moft infi-
liable Mejfallna j PerTons,wh6(e memory have flunk through
all Ages, and carry with them a perpetual rot y thefc, and not
the Holy Self-denying Men and Women, in ancient times*
were devoted to the like Recrcationsjand vain delights • nay,
the more fober of the very Heathens themfelves (and that
upon a Principle of great virtue, (as is by ail' confefs’d)
teftad the like folly and wanton pradficcs ; there’s none of
them to be found in Plata nor in Senecas Works • Pythagoras,
Socrates,. Phocion, Zeno, &c. accuftom’d not themfelv-cS' to
thefe entertainments • The virtuous Penelope, the eh aft L«-
m.tia x . tfaeg Cornelia,, and mod eft • P amta, with many 0-
, tbeti,
Eph.y.l x,
ir 4j h *s>
16.
2 Tim.2‘l6,
22
Mat.2s, rj.
chap.o.6. fa
Vhil.2. 12,
1 3 .
Col.fa 1,2, $
Rom.z. 6,7 *


thers, could find themfelvcs employment enough* imoiigft
their Children, Servants, and Neighbors 5 they (though
Nobles, next their Devotion ) delighted moft in Spinning,
Weavings Gardening, Needlework, , and fuch like good Houfe~
wifery,and commendable entertainments; who (though called
Heathcns)expres c d much more Chrijiiamty in all their a&ions,
than do the wanton foolifh People of this Age, that notwith-
ftanding will be called Chriftlans, But> above all,You Plaj~
mongers, whence think you,«me your fo paffionately beloved
Comxdies, then which, as there is not any one divenion that’s
more pernitious • fo not one more in efteem and diligently
frequented ; Why> I will tell you, Their great Grand-fathes
was an Heathen, and that of the word; fort ; his Name was
Eficharmm ; *tis true, he is called a PhUofofher , or s tover of
Wifdom • but he was only fo by name, and no more one in
reality than the Commdians of thefe times are Chrifllans ■ and
, that’s not at all. ’Tis reported of him by Suidas, a Greek Hi-
ftorian, that he was the fir ft man who invented Comosdies, and
by the help of one Phormtu , he made aifo fifty Fables, (or if
you will Ljes.) But would you know his Country, and the
rcafon of his invention ? the fir ft was Syracuse, the chief City
of Sifity, .famous for the infamy of many Tyrants , to pleafe
and graft fie the lufts of Come, of whom (which is the fecond)
be fee his wits to work : And don’t you think this a moft in-
famous original ? and is it lefs in any to imitate,or juftifie the
fame, fines the more fober Heathens have themfelvcs con-
demned them ? nay, is it not moft abominable, when fuch as
call tbemfdves Cbriftians, do both imitate and juftifie the like
inventions ? Nor had the melancholy Tragedies abetter pa-
rentage ; namely, one Thejpis, an Athenian Poet; to whom
they alfo do aferibe the original of that impudent cuflotn of
fainting faces, and the counterfeit, or refrefentation of other fer~
fans, by change of habits, humours &c. all which are now fo
much inure and reputation with the great Ones of the times;
To thefe, let me add that Poetical Amro foe, whom an inor-
dinate paflion of Love firft mnfponcd ro thofe Poetical rap-
tures of admiration • (indeed fordid effeminacy, if not Ido-
ls try) they call \Cittx Akman, or AI sin a % ( a 'Lydian, and an
Heathen)
Wide Suldai*
f ? lds Prod,


Heathen) he exceedingly in Love with a young Woman
of his own Country, is Laid to have been the firft perfon that
gave the World a fight of that kind of folly, namely, Love-
dories and Verfcswhich hath been fo diligently imitated by
almoft all Nations ever iince.
: .Ob]eU.2, I know that Come will fay, But we have many Co-
mcedies and Tragedies? that are onpurpofe to reprehend Tice, from,
whence we learn many commendable things.
■ Anfw, And truly, though it’s fhameful, yet many have been
wont for want of flume, or undemanding, or both, to return
me this for an fiver; Now I readily Hull confefs that Twas the
■next remedy amongfi the Heathens againft the common Vice,
t-o thofe more grave and moral Ledlures of their Phllofophers;
•of which number I dull inftaoce two ; Euripides, whom.
Saida* calls a learned Tragical Poet ; and Bupolis, whom the
fame Hlftorian calls a Comical Poet: the fir ft was a man fo chaff, s
(and therefore fo unlike thofe of our dayes, that he was called
■pinroyvvht, or one that hated Women ; (that is, wanton ones)
for otherwife he waif twice Married.) The other he chandlers
asa moft fevere rcpscbendcr-of faults ,* from which I gather,
that their defign was not to feed the idle hz y fancies of Peo-
ple • but fince, by the means of ioofe wits, the People had
been debauch’d, their work was to reclaim them $ and this
appears the rather from the. description given, as alfo that
Euripides was fuppos’d to have been torn in pieces by wanton
Women ; which doubtlcfs was for declaring and decrying
their impudence : and the other being (lain in the Battel be-
twixt the Athenians and ‘Lacedemonians , was fo regreted, that
.a Law was made, never after fitch Poets fhould be allow’d to
bear Arms; doubtlefs, becaufe in lohng him, they Jofi a'Re-,
;prover of Vice ; fo that the end of the approved Comedians
mdTragideans of thofe times, was but to reform the People 5
:ind that not fo much by that rational and argumentative way
f ufual with their PhUofophsrs ) as by (harp jeers, fevere -re*
fkffiiom) and rend ring their vicious addons fo fhameful, ri-
4iculpus 3 and d-eteSable,. asfoi reputations fake they might
* mot


not longer be guilty of the like j which is bat the very next
expedient before xwbip, or Brldewel. Now if you that plead
for fuch representations, will be contented to be accounted
Heathens,* nd thole of the more diffolute and wicked fort too,
we (hall acknowledge you, that fuch Comcedies and Tragedies,
may be Serviceable ; but for (hame abufc not the Name of
Chrlß fo impudently as to call your fdves Chriftians, whofc
lulls are fo ftrong,as that you are forc’d to ufc the neccftities
of meer Heathens to repel them : Is this your love to Jefus ?
your reverence to the Scriptures, that are able to make the man
of God perfed ? Is all your prattle about Ordinances , Sacra-
ments, Chrifliamty, and the like, come to this ? that at laft
you mu ft betake your Selves to fuch Inftruders as were by the
Sober Heathens appointed to reclaim the moft vicious of the
People that were amongft them; and fuch Remedies too,as be-
low which is nothing but corporal punifhment. This is fo far
from Chrijiianity, that many thoufands of the Noble Heathens,
Men and Women, were better taught, and better difpos’d :
7 hey found out more Heavenly contemplations, and fubjeßs of an
Eternal nature to meditate upon. Nay, fo far did they out-
ftrip the beft of the'common Chrijlians of thefe times? that
they not only were exemplary of good in their grave and fober
Converfation i but for the publick benefit, they ioftituted the
Xfjnacofmi, or twenty men, that they (hould ma\e it their bufinefi
so obferve the peoples apparel and Behaviour t, that if any were
found immodefi, and to demean themfelves loofely , they had full
authority to pmifh them. But the cafe is alter’d j ’cis puoifti-
able to reprove fuch ; yes, it’s matter of the greateft con-
tumely and reproach : nay* fo impudent are fome grown in
their Impieties, as that they merrily can fport thcmfclvcs with
amcer mockagc of Such religious Per Sons ; and not only
manifeft a great negled of Piety, and a fevere Life> by their
own loofncfs; but their cxtream-contempt of it, by rendring
k ridiculous through Comicalabufiventers on Stages:
which, how dangerous it is, and apt to make Religion of little
worth ; befides the demosftrttion of this age ; let us re-
member, that Arifiophanes had not a better way to bring the
reputation of Socmssin queftion with the People j who greatly
reverenc'd


teverencM him for his grave and virtuous Life and Doßrine ;
thibbyhistbuftve rcprefcntadons of him in a Play, which
made the aiery, wanton, tinflable croud rather to part with So-
crates in earneft, than Socrates in jeft. Nor can a better res-
fon be given why the poor Quakers are made fo much the
fcbm of men, then becaufeof their feverereprehenfibns of
ftamd vanity ; and their felf-denying Converfation atnldft
fo great intemperance in all worldly fatisfa&ions: yet can
ftfch Libertines, all,this while, firut and fwell for Chriftisns •
but we muft be JLeretickh Seducers, Deceivers, and what not ?
O blindnefs ! O Pharifaicai hypoGrifie ! as if tharfuchwere
Judges of .Religion ; or that ’t-were polTible for them to have
a light of true Religion, or really to be Religious; whilst
darkyid in their underfundings, by the Godd of the pleafmes of
this fVorld, and their minds fo exercis'd by external enjoyments*,
and the variety of worldly delights ; No, In the Name of the
Everlajiing God, you and deceive your fouls • the wrath
and vengeance of the Almighty is againft you all, vahilfi in that
fpirlt and condition ; in vain are all your babbles, and fet perform-
ances • (fod Eternal laughs you to [corn • his anger is kindling be-
caufe ef'-theft things Wherefore be ye warned to temperance*
and Repent. Beftdes, thefe Perfons are not only wicked,
loofe, and vain, who both invent and a& thefe things ; but,
by your great delight in their inventions, you incouragc them
therein, and hinder them from more honeft, and more fer-
•viceable employments | for, whaVis the rcafon that moft
Commodities are held at fuch exccflive rates ? but becaufc
Labour is fo very dear • and why is it fo ? but becaufc foma-
|iy hands ate otherwife beftowed, even about the very vanity of
all vanities. Nay, how common is it with thefe mercenary
procurers to Peoples folly, that when their Purfes begin to
grow empty, they ftiall prefect them With a new, and pre-
tended more convenient' Fafhion, and that'perhaps before
the former coftly Habits fhall have done half their fet vice,
which either mud be given away, or new vampt in the Cut
moft A-la-mode ; O infamous, yet frequent folly I I know
I am coming to encounter the moft phufible ObjcsSMon they
arc us’d to urge when driven to a pinch j namely*'
H Objeft,


Object, 9. Bat Bow (hall tko(e many Families whofe
■livelihood u by [mb Trades f as the like Fajhkns and Recreations
do which yon [0 earnejlly decry ?
I tnfwer, It is a bad Argument to plead for the
CommiiTton of the Jeaft evil, that never fo great a good may
come of it t If you and they have made Wickcdnefs your
Pleafure, and your Profitj be ye content that it fhould be
your grief and punifihmentytill the one can learn to be with-
out (uch vanity, and that the others havc found out more ho-
ncft employments : ’Tis the vanity of the few great ones, that
makes fo much toy le for the many [mall | and the great excefi'
of the one, occafions the great labour of the other ; Would
men learn to be contented with few things, fuchas are nc-
ccflary and convenient (the Chrifiiin life ) all things might
be at a cheaper rate, and men might live for little. If the
Landlords had lefs luft to fatisfie, the Tennants might have
kfs Rent to pay, and turn from poor to rich, whereby they
might be able to find morehoneft and domeftique employ-
ments for their Children, than turning fhifters, and living by
their Wits 3 (which is but a better word for their fins.) And if
the Report of the more intelligent Husbandry be credible,
Lands arc generally improveablc, ten in twenty ; and were
there more hands about more lawful and ferviceable Manu-
factures, they would be cheaper, and greater vent might be
made, by which a benefit ftiould redound to the World in ge-
neral; nay, the burden lyes the heavier upon the laborious*
Countrey, that fo many hands and (boulders (as the luff
Caterers of the Cities) fhould be wanting. If men never
think themfeiVes rich enough, they may never mifs of trouble
and employment; but tbofe who can take the primitive
Rate,;and God's Creation for their Model, maylearn with a
little to be contented, as knowing that defires after Wealth,
do not only prevent or defiroy the true Faith, but that when
got,encrcafe trouble alfo. In is no evil to repent of evil,
but that can never be in maintaining what they fhould repent
of.. It is abad Argument to avoid temperance, or jufiifierbe.
contrary,
%■ 6 t
h»s.
See Elith’il
•Bmhndrj.
It Tim.6* p )
jo..


becaufe otherwife the Avoirs and Invented df ttj
would want a fincc to feed them is to nurfe the
Caufe inftcad of ftarving it • let fuch of thofe Vanity-huck-
fters as have got fuflicicnr, be contented to retreat, and fpend
it more honeftly than they got it; And fuch as really are
poor, be rather hc/pt by charity to better Callings, which were
more prudent, nay Chrifiian, than to buy foolifli toyes and
fopperies: Publick Work-houfes would be effeduai Rome*
dies to all thefe lazy diftempers, with mors Profit and a better
Confciencc ; therefore it is we cannot, we dare not (quart
out Converfation by the World’s ; no, but by our exceeding
plainncfs toteftific againft fuch extravagant vanity; and by
our grave and fteady Life to manifeft our diflike on God’s be-
half, to fuch intemperance and wanton curiofity; yea, to de-
ny our fclves what otherwife perhaps we lawfully could ufe
with true indiffcicncy, becaufe of that great abufe amongft
the generality. I know that fome are ready farther to objsd*
Objed. 4. Hath God given us thefe Enjoyments on purpafe to
4amnmifweufethemf
Anfw- But to fuch miferablc, pooffilly fouls (who would
father charge the moft High and; Holy 1 God with the inven-
tion and creation of their dirty 'Vanities, then want a Plea to
juftific their own pradice, not knowing how for jhame, or
par, or Uve , to throw them off. ) I Anfwsr, That what God
made was good, and what the bleffed ; Lord jefus Chrift en- 1
joyti’d, or gave us in his moft Heavenly Example, is to be
obferved, believed, and ihdifpenfably to be obeyed; but in<
the whole Catalogue the Scriptures give of both, I never
found the Attires, Recreations, and way of Living, fo much
in requeft with the called Chrifiians of thefe times. No cer-
tainly, God created man an holy, mfe^faber^grave, and reafon-
able Creature , fit to Govern the World, and himfelf 3 to
whom only aDivinity,& an Eternal God-head,became the fit
objed both of his Rcafon and hisPlcafure ; all External En-
'joyments, adminiftring no farther fatisfadion then as us’d for
neccflity and meet convenience ; with this provifo too, That
H 2, ' the
Anfmn
Gen. 1.3 1.
Maf.j.ch.C
B.
Xtfi^.B.l4.,
chap.l2.2i
29, 30,«
38.


the Almighty ms to be feenfaad fenhbfy enjoy’d, and-reve*
fenc’d in every one ; but how very wide the Chriftians of
thefe times arefrom this Primitive loftitution, is not difficult
re determine,, although they make fuch loud pretentions to
thatmoft Holy j[efus,_ who not only gave the World a certain
Evidence,of a happy Reftoration in E x^m pk>6.at pre»*
mi fed affiftance to all that would follow him* and, therefore-
hath fo leverely enjoyn’d no iefs on all, as..theyiwpuld.-be,c-
verlaftingly Caved ; but whether the minds- of- men and wo-
men ire.not as profoundly involv’d in all exccfs and vanity,
as thofe who know him not any farther than by hear-fay ? and
whether, they being thus, binifbcd the Prefence of the Lord
by their- greedy feeking the things that are below, and there-
by having loft the tafte of that divinc.Pleafurej (hey have not
feigned to themfelves an imaginary pleafure,, to (mother
Conference, and pafs their lime without that anguifh and
trouble, which are rheconfequencesof (in; that fo they might
be at eafeand fccarity ? let the truly fober, yea, their own
Confciences,declare;?■ \ ' : j ’
Adams temptation is feprefented'by an Apple, thereby ia>
timating the great influence external objedh (as they exceed
in carry with them upop-our fenfes • fo; that uaiefs-.
the mind keep yyajclt, ;fo-.:pr,ey a len tand ,i-n a
manner,.inchantiti.g.'.'ere : yi fs“jf©.they are
reprclentcdj.that fpr-oneto efeapej being cn»-
fnai’d j ancthe fbalt- necd be trap’d, ,ro eaft
fo thick a vail of darknefsoyer ffecymind,that mot only it ffiall
with pleafure continue in iff-ffitiers to luft and vanity bujt
proudly cenfure. fu ch as; r efufs ;-£o p formlty.ta- the Lame,;, and
fttongly plead for tbcm.af ; feiyice ; sble; a&d 'CO'nv-etiteht • that
ftrange do periLbing objetSLs raife in {hole minds,
where way is.made, and entertainments given to them*-. But
Chrift Jefus is manifefted in us, and- hath given umo us an
underftandingof him that is true, and unto All, ; fuch a pro-,
ppition-of .his good Spirit as might fuffiee, would they obey
it,, to redeem their minds from that captivity,they, have been
in to Jufts and vanities, and intirefy ranfom them from the
dominion of. alLvifiblc. objc&t?,, and whatfoever may gratifies
thj; :
frCor, so.
k l *
foh'%. *2.
jhap^ij.6,
1^.17.20.
|^f&v2 a 8*
Gen.3.6.
442.
' Work?* I-
-3> 34? 3h
4*. sk'
!»7,8.
f}ap,s,zo.


the dtfire of the Eyel the Fle[h,and the proud Llfe,thi t the; might
h regenerated In their minds, changed in their affections, and.
have their whole hearts fit on things that are above, where moth
nor rufi can never pafi, nor enter to harm , or defiroy.
But ’lis a manifeft fign of what mould and make thofc per-,
fons are, who pradiCc and plead for fuch Egipiian fiumtfal
rags • Its more to be feared, they either never knew, or have
forgot, the humble, plain, meek, holy, S;lf-denying, and ex-
emplary Life, which the eternal Spirit fan<Mes all obedi-
ent-hearts unto j yea, it’s indubitable, that cither fuch«l-
-wa.yes have been ignorant, or elfc that they have loft light of
that °ood Land 3 that heavenly Country, and blcffed inheri-
tance they once have had feme glimmering profpea of; O
that they would but with-draw a while, fit-down, weigh, and
confidet with themfclves where they are, and whole woik
and will-they are doing, that they would once believe the
Pevilhath not a ftratagem more pernicious to their iaicnor-
wl Souls than this-of exercifing their minds in the foolifh fa-
fbions, and wanton recreations of thetimes; great and grofs
Impieties beget a deteftttion in the opinion of= fober educa-
tion common temperance and reputation;; and therefore
fines the Devil rightly fees fuch things have no fucccfs with
many, it is his next (and fataU’ft) projea to find Tome other
entertainments that carry ids of infection in their looks,
though more of fecurity, bccaufc more of pleasure in their
enjoyment, onpurpofe to bufie and an eft the minds of fuch
from a diligent fcarch and enquiry after thofe matters, which
secefiaiily concern, their eternal peace, that being ignorant
of the heavenly Life, they may not be induced to prcls, after
it; but beingonly-formally Religious according to the tradi-
tions and precepts of others, proceed to their common plea-
sures, and find so check therefrom ; (their Religion and Con-
vocation for the moft part agreeing well together,) whereby an
improvement in the knowledge of God , a going on from grace to
grace, a growing in the tmafme of the fiat are of Jejm Chr tji
h'mfilf u not known, but as u was in the beginning at Seven,
fo is it-at feventy ; nay, not fo innocent,unitfs by reafin of the old
bavin?) Old Men are twice Children, Oh! the Myfteiy of
J 1 * Godiincfs,
1 Thef.pt $
Gal. 12.2 y
25,24,25-.'
Efh.<y. 8,9;
ic,xi,isV
1 6,
Eph.6. t,2 r
ld,i7 s V<3i|
Epki i 6
V 7» l 8 )
20.
C j*p. 4. 1
2 3*
2 if


Godlinefs, the heavenly Life, tad true ChriftUais another
thing ; wherefore we conlude, that as the defign of the Devil
(where he cannot involve and draw into grofs fin) is to bufi-e,
delight, and allure the minds of men and wotnen by more-
feetning-innocent entertainments, on purpofc that he may
more ealily fccarc them from minding their duty and pro-,
grefs in the knowledge of, and obedience to the only true
God, which is eternal Life r and thereby employ their minds
from heavenly and eternal Meditations j fo are thofc who
would be delivered from thofc fnates, to mind the holy, juft,
grave, and fdf* denying Teachings of God's Grace and Spirit in
thewfelves, that they may rejeX, and for ever abandon
the like vanity and evil, and by a reformed Conversion
, condemn the World of its Intemperance , fo will the true
Difciplc-foip be obtain’d; for otherwife, not only fclf pre-
judice redounds, but many other enormous Confluences
and pernicious EifeXs : ’Tis to encourage fuch impious per-
sons to continue and proceed in the like Trades of feeding
the Peoples lufts, and thereby to make themfelvcs partakers
of their Plagues, befides their own proper punifhmcnt, who
by continual frefh dcfircs to the like curiofities, and that way
of fpending time and eftatc, induce them to fpend more time
in ftudying how to abufc time; nay, in hopes of farther gain*
tempt and provoke thofc Caterers to all inordinate dcfircs,
and luftful appetites, to invent and furnifb them with more
provifion of the fort, left through their pinching and fmall
allowances, thofe Prodigals fhotdd call their Fathers houfe ta
mind ; for whatfoever any think more pleafant halts , alluring
objeUS) grateful entertainments, cunning emljfaries, acceptable
Sermons, injinmting LeUures, takjng Orators ; the crafty De-
vil has not, nor ever had by,which to entice, and enfnare the
minds of People, and totally to divert them from heavenly
refleXions, and divine meditations, than the great excefs of
vain Attire and that variety of Recreations fo much in repute
in thefc times, and Which we have hitherto foreafonably
condemned.
Xeaf,lo*
foh.l7' 3.
i.
Iy*s* I<s ‘
pV.2.ir,i2


Meaf. ip.
But fhould thefc things be as indifferent, as they are prov’d
pernidoufly unlawful ( for I never yet heard any advance
their plea beyond the bounds of meer indiffercncy) yet fo
great is their abcife, fo univerfil the fad effeds thereof, like
to aa tnfe&ion, that therefore ought they to be rejected of
all, cfpecially thofe, whofe fobriety hath preferv’d them on
this fide of that exccfs, or whofe judgments (chough them-
feives be guilty ) fuggeft the inconvenicncy of fuch Intem-
perance : For what’s an indifferent thing, bm that which may
be doKCy or left undone .? granting, I fay, this were the cafe,
yet doth both Reafon and Religion teach,, that when they are
us’d with fuch an extraordinary appetite, as to relinquifh
them, would be a con tradition to their dr fires, and an abate
of their fatisfa&ion j they have exceeded the bounds of mcer
indiffercncy, and arc thereby rendred no lefs than neceffary •
which being a violation to the very nature of the things
thcmfelves, a perfed abufe enters, and confcqaently are no
longer to be confidct’d in the rank of things limply indiffer-
ent, but unlawful. Now* that the whole Exchange of vanities
againft which I have fo carnefily contended, are generally a-
bufed, by the cxccfs of almoft all ages, fexes, and qualities of
People, will be confcfs’d by many who yet decline not to be
conformable thcmfelves • and to whom,as I have underftood,-
it only feems lawful, bccaufc (fay they) the abufe of others
fhould be no Argument rshy we fhould not ufe them But to
fuch I anfwer, ( for God Almighty knows I feek the tern pe-
tal and eternal happinefs ■of all ) That they have quite for-
got, or will not remember, they have acknowledg’d thefc
things to be but of an indifferent nature. If fo 5 (as undoub-
tedly men in their wits (and for others we are not concern’d)
nay, vanity- never urg’d more) I, fay, there can be nothing
more deer, than lines, they acknowledge their great abufe°
that they are wholly to be forgone and relinquilh’d j - for ffnee
they may as well be let alone as done at any time, furely they
then of duty (houid-belet alone.when the ufc of them is an a-
betting


Phil. $-17,
bitting the general excels, & a mcer exciting others to con-
tinue in their abufe, bccaufe they find pcifons reputed fobcr,
to imitate them,or otherwife to give them an Example j in-
cepts are not half [o forceable <u Examples. Nay, every one
that pretends to ferioufnefs, ought to iufpedl himfelf, as ha-
ving bin too forward to help on the excefs, & can nevermake
too much hafte out of thofe inconvenicncics, that by his for-
mer example he encourag’d many to, and that by a new one
he may put a feafonable check upon the Intemperance of mo-
thers. A wife Parent ever with-draws thofe objedfs, how-
ever innocent in themfelves, which are too prevalent upon
the weak fenfes of his Children, on purpofe that they might
be wean’d. And’ds as frequent with men,to bend a crooked
ftick as much the contrary way, that they might (heighten it
at laft. Thofc that have more fobriety than others, fliould not
forget their ftcwardfhips, and exercifc that gift of God to
fecurity of their neighbors ; ’twas wardering Gain that rudely
aikld the Lord] PV(U he his Brothers Keeper ? For every man is
neceffarily obliged thereto, and therefore fhould be fo wife,
as to deny himfelf the ufe of tuck indifferent enjoyments, as
cannot be us’d by him, without too manifeft an encourage-
ment to his neighbors folly. God hath fufficiently excited
men to what is faid; for, in the cafe of the Brazen Seipent,
which was an heavenly Infiitution, and Type of Chuff, He
with great dijpleafure enjoynd it (hould be broke to pieces > becaufe
they were too fond and'doting upon it j yes, the very Groves them*
felves, however pleafant for feit nation, beautiful for their walk}
.and trees, waft be cut down ; and why ? only bccaufe they had
been abufed to Idolatrous ufe?. %/ind what’s an Idol,but that
which the mind puts an over-ejiiwate, or value upon f None can
benefit themfelves fo much fay an indifferent thing, as not
1 rather to prevent an Injury to others by not ufing that liber-
ty. If thofe things were convenient in themfelves ( which
is a ftep nearer neceffiry, than meer indifference ) yet when
by xircumftances they become prejudicial, fuch convenicncy
it felf ought to be put up, much more what’s but indifferent
fhouid be deny’d, People are not to weigh their private fa-
lEMions; more than a publick good ,; norpleafe themfelves
In
Gen. 4.^.
Klvg. 18.
2 >3>4 T*
14. to
the end*


ia too free a life of indifferent things,, at the ‘coft of being
fo really prejudicial to the pubiick, as they certainly are
whole ufc of 'allthefe vanities becomes exemplary to others,
and begets an impatiency in their minds, to have the like •
wherefore it is both reafonablc and incumbent on all,to make
only fuch things neccffary, <u tend to life mdgodlinef ; and to
employ their freedom with, moft advantage to their Neigh-
bors: So, that here is a twofold obligation-on them ; the one %
not to be exemplary in the ufe of fuch things, which though
they may ufe them, yet not without giving too much coun-
tenance to the abufc, and cxcefliye vanity of their Neighbors,
The obligation is, That they ought fo fat to condefcend
to fuch Religious People;,who-' are-offended at thefe faftiiogs,
and that kind of convention, as for : ever to rejed: them. Now
thefe,'who (notwicbftanding what I have urg’d) will yet pro-
ceed , what is it, but that they have fo involv’d chemfeives,
and their affedions in them, as that it is not lefs difficult to
reform them, whom all this while we . have .determin’d in the
greateft And : that for all their many Proteftations a»
galnft thdr fondnefs to fuch fopperiesy. they in Hncerhy arc no,
better than People that have IoR the meafure both of common
Prudence and Confcicnce, that neither know what is indiffer-
ent y nor what not ; how far they are to refpedl the good of o-
thers, how far not: and,how ihould they? who do fo little re-
fped their own. For, after a ferious con{ideratio.n,What v#~
nicy, pride, Idlenefs, expence of time, and efates, have been, and
yet arc ? How many Perfons debauch’d from their firft fo-
briety, and Women from their natural fweemefs, and inno-
cent difpolitions, to loofe, aicry, wanton, and many times
more enormous pra&ices ? How many plentiful effaces have
been furpriz’d by numerous debts ; Cbaftity enfnar’d by ac-
curfed lullful Intregues, youthful Health overtaken by the
hafty Ceifure of unnatural dillempers, and their remaining
dayes fpentupoh a Rack of their vices procuring, and fo made
Haves to the fad and unmerciful effe&s of their own inordi-
nate pleafutcs ; in which agony they vow the greateft tempe-
rance, but nofooncr outof it, then in their vice again. That
thefe things are the cafe, and almoff innumerably more, 1 am
I per-
Pfd.i 0.3,4
2 Pet.!*}*
Eph.ft 7,8;
Rom, 1.4* *•
to the end*
Lam. 4.5*,
Pr0v.21.17
Job 21. 13.
14.
Pfa1.37.J0
Ecclef.%.l2.
Ffa1.37.9.'
&J 6. 12,
. Pr0v.2.22,,


perfwaded no ingenious perfon, of my experience, will deny •
how then upon this feilous icflcdlion, any that pretend Ccru
fcicnce, or the lead: fear of God Almighty, can longer con,
dnuc in the Garb, Livery, and Conversation of tfaofe, whofe
whole life tends to little eUe then what I have repeated ♦
much lefs joyn with them in their abominable cxcefs j 1 leave
it to the truly Confcientions, and the jud Principle in them*
felves, to judge* No furely 1 This is not to obey the Voice
of God, who in all Ages did loudly cry to all, Come out:.
from whence ? from the wayes, fa/hions , converge, and ffirit of
Babylon $ who’s that ? the Mother, or that Womb, which hath
been fo fruitful in all thefe vain*, foelijh , wanton, fuperfluous,.
earthly, wicked births \ againd whom the Scriptures denounce
more dreadful Judgments, than any, afaibing all the Int em-
perance of Men and Women to the Cup that fpiiit of wicked-
i nefs hath given them to drink j whofe are the things indifferent ,
if they map be fo : And for witnefs, hear what the Revelations
fay in her defciiption, Mow much fhe hath glorify'd her felf,
and lived deitcioujly, fo much torment and furrow give hen And
the Kings of the Earth who -have lived dtlicioufly with her, jhall
bewail and lament her • And the Merchants of the Earth jhaii
weep over her , for no man buyeth their Merchandise any more:
The Merchandise of Gold, and Silver, and precious Stones, and
of Pearls, and fine Linnen, and Purple, and Silk, > and Sear let
and all manner of Meffe Is of Ivory , and all wanner of Tejfcls of
moji precious Wood ; Clnamon , and Odours, and Oyntments s .
and Frankjneenfe, and Wine, and Oyl, and fine Flour, and Bea(ls ,
and Slaves, and Souls of Men : which though 1 know to have t.
farther bonification then what is littcral, yet there is enough-
to fibevv the Pomp, Plenty, Fulnef, Idlenefi, Eafe, Wanton-
neff JKanity, Lutiy. and Excefl of Her, and all her Favourites ».
But at the terrible day, who will go to her Exchange any
more?- who to her Play’s? who diall TrafTque about her de-
licious Inventions ? Not one • for fhe dial! be judg’d ; no
Flea (hall cxcufc, or refeue her from the wrath of the Judge,,
for flrong is the Lord- who wiU'perform it* If yet thefe rcafon-
able Pica’s will not prevail j though I have fometbing farther
to adjpytift,' however I (lull Caution fuch in the repetition of,
part
jf*r.
M»? 8 ■
U 4?t0*6.:
|F *r» fo. 8.
phap.f
Amos d. 3,4,
$,6,7-
EeV'i%*7%9
in
Vers.13.
Htrf So


part of Babylon s miferable doom s Mind, my friends, more
oemvenly things, ha fen to obey that righteomPrinciple which
would exercife and delight you /«that which u Eternal ; or elfe
with Babylon, the Mother of luft and vanity, the fruits that
your Souls lufi after, fhaU depart from you, and all things which
are dainty and goodly/hall depart from you t &you /hall find them ns
more{Lty your treafures therfore up in Heaven,where nothing
cm break through to harm them, but where Time ftiall flmort-
ly be fwallowed up of incomprehenfible Eternity. And for
your farther perfwafion ( if yet any can remain unfatisfy’d )
I further argue ;
%eaf. ii s
Next, Becaufc the contrary is very much conducing to
good 5 namely, plain and decent Jlppare/, with a meek, fhame-
fac'd and quiet Spirit • and that Cmvsrfation which doth only
txprefi the fame, in all godly honefiy , As the Apodle faith, Let
m corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good to the ufe of edifying, that it may adminijier grace
to the Hearers ; neither file hinefs nor foslijh talking, nor jefling,
hut rather giving of thanks .* for, let no man deceive you with
vain words; becaufe of thefe things comet h the wrath of God upon
the Children of difobedience. Wherefore, if Men and Women
were but thus adorn’d, and did they but once demean them-
felvcs after this truly Chriftian manner, impudence would
foon receive a check, luft, pride, vanity, and wantonnefs, a
rebuke: For, with what countenance could they attempt
fuch univerftl Chiftity, or encounter fuch godly Aufterity?
No, there would fcarcely be left a paffage for vanity and
pride to look out at; all their large windows would be barr’d,
and aimed every cranny dop’d : And however impious any
perfons might be in private, for certain they would find no
Merchants abroad to buy it* no fondlings to-Indulge and em-
brace it, all refped to Perfons for their Apparel , and empty
Titles, would ceafe j which is a notorious evil , and con era-
sy to the very exprefs letter and command of the Scriptures ;
though common Experience tcachcth us what place they have
I z with
Vtrf. *4*
.
34«
Cot. 4.5',^*
1
12*
x Pet.s.i,z
hf‘
# j* 3,4i-J5
tf.
1 Tiw.4. i-
Phil. 3.16}
20.
I Pehz.l2*
Frov^t.Z
to . 3 h
z.-CktoH. !«;
7.
Pr0v.21,2:
nr ”<
fam.2,
f<? jp*


with the generality, to Cap) to Sir, to Woriliip, to Ho*
nour, to Mid a on-, and to Lady,themin almoft all places of the
Land; whereby a great-ft ep might be made towards primi-
tive that plain-heat ted,down-right and barrn-
,;lefs Life might be re ft or cd , of not much careing about what
we pould eat, or fat m\ ( which, however Chrift called
. the practice of them that knew not: God) is the very Spirit of
this Age sender dll its babble about Religion. But wiihd'uch mo*
derate care, as might provide what thould be neceffajyand
convenient for themfelvei and families, be intirely devoted
to the concernments of a CalefHal Kingdom ; And diligently
minding their daily growth and improvement in the 'ißgghteoufnef:
of It las what only makes this life comfon able and.
at their dying moments y can fairly intitle them to that bltjfed Sa~
• lutatlon ofy Well-done my good and faithful enter into the
endlejs Joyes and Sternal heavenly Rewards of your Lord ; who is
JefuSywha.is Cod.qver AllpJeft and renown’d for ever ..
Reaf, ■ *-&*.■
This would be a ready means, and good expedient towards
the enrichment of the land fOl by how much the left there were
of that great Superfluity in alUhefe vanities, by fo much the
moredhould the Commodities of 4 out own,Country be in re-
pute; the great vent of forreign Goods, being that which
indebts, the Land to forreigners; whereas otherwife they
1 would become debtors to us for our Native Manufactures..
■ ■ By, this means, fuch Perfons, who by their Excefs- ,have
/deeplyengag’d their.EftateS) may in rftborr fpace be enabled
£o=clear- them;from, thofe, incumbrances ~* which otherwife
(like Moths}roon.ea£ out very plentiful Re venues-,nor doth it-
le.Cs than greatly advantage Perfons of mean fubftfUncc (e-
-fpecially Servants) to improye : their fmaH docks,,by their di-
ligent attendance on -their bufiaefs \ ; jfad • not.-expending their
dew* earnings } And, harirgot upqn fuperfluom- Apparel ifoo*,
ilfh May--games , Flays?, Daneing-pewes? Tavernr? ■ AlehatifeSy.
and.,the iiksfoßy and intemperance of which this Land is more;
:iofsftcd. 2v sndby which u’s-rendred mote ridiculous than any,?
King--
3°* .
1 Tm.s. 8.
a* Ptft.j.ii'.
Ffal.l6. f.
5»21.
i>rov, 10,4,
I fcclef 10;
/G 57318;■
‘km
rov.20.24,


Kiogdomin-the World 4 .Yea, it. hath- -been.tire-very .Refuge
of altnod ail the cheating Mountebanks* favage Momce-:
dancers, Pick-pocket and prophaoe Playdis ,and Stagers of
Neighbouring Countrys ; to the mine of Religion 5 the-Oiamc.
of Government, and the great idlcnefs, expence, and dc-,
bauchetyof the People ; for which the Spirit of the Lord is;
and ths Judgments of the Almighty areas thedoor s i
and the' Sentence ready to be pronounc’d. Let him that is In-.
juft 3 he injuHjilll r Wherefore it is that We cannot but loudly
call upon the generality of the times, and teftifie- both by our
Life and Doctrine, againd the like vanities and abufes > if
podibly any may be-weaned-from-.theirfolly, and chufe the
good-old-way of Temperance , Wifdom, Cjravity, and Hea-
venly Converjation', the only way to. inherit the bldTings of
Peace and Plenty here, and Eternal Happincfs hereafter-
%*/• *s>-
. taftly, Supposing we Bad none of thefe foregoing and im-
portant Reafons to juftifie our fclvcs, and juftly to reprove
the pra&iceof the Land in thefe particulars ; however, Jet
it be fufficieot for us to fay, That when People have fir (I learned
to fear, and obey their Creator , topay their numerous Debts, to re-
deem their Mortgages , their E-fates of ail Incumbrances ,
to alleviate and abate their opprejf td Tennants j but above all out-
ward when the pale faces are more commljeratedj the
grip’d-bellies reliev'd, and naked- backs cloath’d ; when the fa-
mfh'd Pm 3 the difirejfed Widdow, and helplefsOrphant (God's,
Worky, and your fellow Creatures) are provided for j then I fay,- ,
(if;then) it will be early enough for, you .toplead the Lndiffe-,
rcncy of- your pleafuies: But that the fweat and tedious la- .
hour of rbe Husband-min, be it early or late, cold or-hof,
wet or dry,- fhould be converted into the pletfuse, eafe, and,
pa dims of a Email ‘number of men> that the. Can the Plow,
the Thrajh, fhwAd be in that continual fsverity laid upon nineteen,
partsofthe Land, to feed the inordinatedufit and delicious- appetite s ;
of the twentieth, is fo far from the appointment of the Great
Governor of the World,., and God of -the Spivlti pi all
this
Rev, 22.11,
Prov. 22., 4.
2p. '
Ecclej.il.x,
I-
Job 3 i.id,
Pfal. 10.2.
Pfal. 4. 2.
Pfal+yy. 12,
82.3,4
13.14!
chap. 22,7.
■& 16,22, ■
I fa. 3. 14 14
Ez>e\. 22.28
Mmos 5.1 i j
12,
4,7.8
v/*. 1, id,
17, 18.
Jfr. 7 <?,
12,20
2, Chr. 19.7


ip/i/40.4.
Acts 10.34.
fKgm. 2.11.
Eph.6. o,
W.J.2J.
Jl Pet. 1.17.
Pfd. 41.1.
'Mat. 25.34,
'sS*3 6 -
Rom.if. 16.
Jam, 2,15 V
16.
Pfd. H2,p.
Prov.l 4..21.
Mat, ip.2i*
that to imagine fuch horrible injuliice as the cfFc& of Ms de-
terminations, and not the intemperance of men, wereWrct*
ched and bUfphcmour, As on the other fide, it would be to
defer ye no pity > no help, no relief from God Almighty, to
continue that expence in vanity and pleafure, whilft the other
obje&s great ncccffidcs go unanfwet’d • efpccially,fince God
hath made the Tons of men but fiewtidf to each others
geocy’s tod relief j yet, fo ftrift is it enjoyn’d, that on the
omilfion of tbefe things, we find that dreadful fentcnce part-
ly to be grounded, of Depart from me je cur fed into everlafling
fire>&c. As on the contrary, to vifit the Tick, fee the impri»
foned, relieve the needy, &c. arc fuch excellent properties in
Chiift’s account, that thereupon it is he will pronounce fuch
bleficd, faying, Come ye bleffed of my Father , inherit the King-
dom prepared for ye , tfre. So that the Great are not (with the
Leviathan in the deep) to prey upon the fmall, much lefs to
make a fport of the lives and labours of the Idler ones, to
gratifie their inordinate fenfes'.
- Wherefore this we offer, and addrefr to the ferrous Confi-
deration as well of Magiftmes as others, That if the Money
which is expended in every Parifii (there being near ten thou-
fand in the Land ) in rhofe unoecelfary, vain, nay finful fa-
shions and entcrtaiDments p as , Laces, jewels, Embroydery's,
Ribbands i Prefects, Play's, Treats, Balls, Taverns, unneceft
fa.r f Provlfions and Attendants, of Servants, Morfes , Coaches ,.
■gaudy Furnitures, with much more fruitlcfs and exccfiivc
matters, were coUc&cd into a publick Stock, (which would
indubitably amount to fcveral hundred thoufand pounds a
year ) Ther anight be reparations to the broaken Tennant, Work?
houfes ereßed, where the able might at safe labour procure a plen-
tiful fubfifidnee ; and the unable and aged , wight have fuch an
Annuity as would free the Land from Beggars • the cry of the
Wtddow and her Orphants would ceafe ; and charitable reliefs
might eafly be afforded towards the redemption of poor Slaves, or
the refrejhment of fuck dtfireffed P rot efi ants as labour under the
miferies of Perfection in other Countries. Nay, the €xchequer's
needs, on juft emergency's , might be fapplied : Ad which would be
moft fUajant Sacrifice to the pufi and merciful God, a noble Ex-
ample


ample of Gravity and Temperance to forreign States, and of an un-
ffedkahle benefit to our [elves at home :■ Alas I- Why Chou Id men
seed perfwafions to what their own felicity Co ncceffarily de-
pends upon ? Had thefe Hinofo's of the tinsel a.fence of Hea-
th en-C at o's gtnerofity, they.rather would deny their carnal ap-
petites, than leave fuch noble cntetprifcs unattempted; Bat
that they fhould eat, drinks, play, game, and fpoit away their
health,, efiates, and above all their irrevocable precious time,
which Chou Id be given to the Lord as an needfary Introdu&i-
oa to a vaft Eternity (and then which,.did they but know
no outward foil ace can come in competition) 1 fay, that they
fhould be continually employ’d about thefe things, is to have
the Heathens Memorial, and their Adics judge them, as well
stsChriftian Precepts and Examples to condemn them : And
their final doom will prove the more aftoniflling, in that this
Vanity and Excefs were ided under a dream of being Chri-
ftians ail the while, whiift Chore of Heathens in reality.
That which remains to the accomplißitnenc of this Dif.
courfe, is fomc of thofc very many Teftimonies that might
be brought, for farther Confirmation of what hath hitherto
been faid to thefe particulars*
The Ttfimonies of feveraiCfreat and c Tlom < lPerfonages > both
Heathens and Qhrifitans, agalnß the common Attire *of
the. Age-*,
*• Solon t call’d one of the feven Sages, s noble Philofopfaer
« LaW-giver to the Athenians , being ask’d by Cra/«a,King
«of Lydia, Who was the mo ft happy man in the World I: (ex-
-4 peeing he fhould have faid he-was, becaufc none fofamous-
s for exedfive Riches) Anfwcred, Tellm\ who though a poor
* man, yet anhanefi and good man, and content with what he
«had j; And after having ferved the Commonwealth faithful-
ly, tnd feen his Children and tbek-Chiidrcn virtuouOy e-
Educated,, died in a good old Age.
< This much difpksfed Croe[m } but he diifembkdit. Some
*fewdsycsaffeiv the King being moft, richly eloatbed, and:
‘'BiagnifU*
Exod,7 j '2.*4’ a
. Ifa, 22.133
14.,.
Jer
9-
Amos 7,-3..
J0h.5,6,7i
8,9,10.
Mat
SC E I. 22,
2 Tjw.3.4,
ssv.s. 9 .
Platan
Laerih


€ magnificently Adorned, and featcd in his Throne • demini
4 ded of Solon, If he had ever feen any thing more glorious ? xo
4 whom he anfwered, Cocks, Peacocks, and Pheafants, . who are
*• much more beautiful in their natural drefi, Thefe undervaluing
4 exprefiions of wife Solon i difpleas’d the luxurious wanton
‘ mind of Croefm , upon which they parted ; the one defirous
4 of toyes and vanities, the other an inlhudler and example
4 of true Nobility tod Virtue, which utterly contemn’d the.
4 King’s effeminacy’s; But uotwitbftanding, the Wealth and
4 Plcafure of Crcefm, gave him but little time to chink upon;
* the importance of fuch remarkable faying?, till robb’d of
6 both ; yet at laft he was of another mind : for being taken
4 Prifoner by Cyras, the firft Great Empetour of the Per fan
4 and by his Command, put on a Pile to be-
-4 burnt j after fomc paufe, fighed deeply and ctfd y Solon^
<■ Solon, Solon ; the Emperour hearing, bid the Interpreters
4 ask on whom he cal’d ? On one (faid he) that I wifh,above all
x the Wealth and Pie afar e of the World, might have fpokjtn with
c all Tyrants : Upon which the Emperour being curious to,
4 know further of the buiinefs, he told him of the (crious*
4 grave, religious life and difeoutfes of this Athenian Law-
4giver ; which fo affc<ffed Cyras, that he commanded Crce[m
‘ to be releas’d, and us’d him, the remainder of his life, for
* one of his Privy Council. '
..And as it wasin his time that Tragical Play’s were firft in-
vented,fo was he mod fevere againft them, forefeeing the in-
conveniency’s (hat would attend, finding the People affedfed
with tbit Novelty of-Recreations j It is reported of him,
4 That he went himfelf to the Play, and after it W4s ended,
4 went to Thsjfkthz great Adbr, and ask’d him, If he were
4 not aft am'd to tell fo many Lyes m the face of fo great an Audi-
* tor y * Thejpk ..anfwered (as it is now ufual) There is no harm
to Aft fmh things in j eft : Solon (hiking his Staff
c hard on the ground, reply’d, But in a fhort time , we who ap~
x prove of this kind of je ft, [hall ufe it tn earnefi, in our common
4 affairs and contr aft s. In BnCyhe abfolme ly forbad him to teach or
■ 4 aft Plays,, e one elmng them deceitful and unprofitable, diverting
6 youth and Tradfjmn from more nectffary mi vlnmm employ-
fments* , 4 He
jTerotUt*
Jflahcar e
Plutarch,
Laerh


'Plut.vit.Sol
'Symp* fept-
Sapi. Arift,
■ Ethic. l o,B.'
Demetr*
V haler*'
Stob,Serm*S
fHe affirmed that Family the hefty who got ndt mjuftly, kept
1 not Unfaithfully , {pent not with repentance j and that happinefl
£ conjijis in a vertuom hone ft Life, in being content with a
* competency of outward things, and in uftng them temperately*•-
* And to conclude, he earntftly enjoynd all to fly corporal plea- ■
* fure ; for (ftycsjic) it certainly brings ferrow • but obferve an
f honeft life more ftriUly than an oath, meditate oh feridus things, ■
€ Hippias, a Philofopber; It is recorded of him, That he
‘would have every one provide neccflmcs for himfelf, and 1
6 to have been his own Tradeftmn $ he was fingulat in all
4 fuch Arts and employments, that he made the very Bmkins
* he wore. . •
‘The a feEl of Philofophers in Epypt, that fo ■
‘ difpii’d gaudy Apparel, and the reft of the Worlds intempe- *
‘ ranee, that they went almoft naked, living poorly and with ,
‘ great mcanncfs,by which they Were enabled againft all cold;
‘ and overcome that Luft by innocence, which people that are called
c Chriftians (though covered) are overcome withal,
#* .. ■ ' •
The Bamburacit, were a certain great people that inhabited i.
bout the iivciTygrls obferving the great inftucncc
Gold, Silver, and precious fewels had upon their minds, agreed .
to bury all in the Earth, to prevent the corruption of their man-
ners : they us’d inferior Metals, and liv’d with mean and very
ordinary accommodation; wearing moftly but one very grave
and plain Robe to cover nakednefs. It were well IfChrlftians
would mortifie their infat table appetites after wealth and vanity,
as did thefe Heathens*
Gynacofmi, and Gynaconomi, were two diftlodl numbers of.
Perfons among the Athenians, appointed by the Mt gift rates
to over-look the a&ions of the Inhabitants j the firft was to
fee that they Appareled and behaved themflives gravely • ejpeciaU
ly that Women were behaviour ■ and the ocher .was to
be prerent at their Treats and Feftivals, to fee that there was m
excefl, nor dif orderly carriage; and in Cafe any were found Cri-
K , minalj
Fb,de
Orat*
Pf».7. 2*
Cie, Tufc*
Q*tft* J.
Flint
Vide Smdo


mind, they had full power to punifli them. When, *h/&
when {hall this temperance be feen imongft the called Chii,
ftians of tbe times 1 ■'
£ Camilla? a Noble Rotnane Matron, and Sifter to Sclplo
e was efteem’d the moft famous and honourable Perfonige of
£ her time; not more for the greatncfs of her birth* than her
temperance; And Hiftory particularly mentions
4 this as one great inftance of her virtue, for which (he was fo
£ much admir’d j to wit, That [he never was accuflom'd to wear
£ rich Attire, hut fuch Apparel as was very plain and grave °
c rat her making her Children (whom her -InflratHons and Example
4 had made virtuous ) hergreateft Ornaments. A good pattern
for the wanton Dames of the Age.
The ancient Heathens had gaudy Apparel, change of Fashi-
ons, and curioficy of D/cfs in fuch deteftition, that they
made them a mark of an effeminate mind, and wanton difpo-
fition, and feldom us’d but by Comedians and Curt exams, '
} Gregory (by fome cal’d} the Great, and, efteemed-t Father
of the Church, {peaks thus, 4 There be feme are of opinion.^,
4 that the wearing of piedousSc fumptuous Apparel,is no fin •
4 which if it were no fault, the Divine Word would never have '
■ 4 'fo punctually -exprefi'd mr Hiflerically related? how the Wlch
* man that was tormented In Hell , was cloathed in Purple and
■ £ Silk t whence we may note,that touching the matter or Tub-
-4 j?dt of Attire, humane euriofity availeth highly : The firtt
4 fubftance of our Garments was very mean, to wit, Skins
>£ pith Wo oil j whence it is we read, God made Adam and his
1 Wife , Coats of Skins; that is, of Skins of dead Bcafts:
Afterwards, {to fee the growing pride and vanity of i_Men and
<£ Women) they came to pure Wool!, becaufe lighter; after
4 that to Flax, then to Dung and Ordure of Worms-j-to wit,
<£ Silk ;•* Laffly, to Gold , and Silver , and precious.St ones - which
* e.vcef of Apparel highly dlfpleafethGad f for inftance whereof
('which the very 'pagans tbemfelves obferved ) We reads
k fth*t the very fir ft among the %omans? who.ever wore Pmph?
were
Paler.
{ %Maxim.
fetrm.
Herodot.
Stoh'Serm .
16 1.
f*aert..
20,21,22,
W,27,2g,


«■ were ftrttck with a Thunder-bolt, and fo diedfuddenly for a ter*
i ror toaUfucceedhg times, that none jhould attempt to live proud-
* ly in preclom Attire: this was the fenfc of Gregory 'Hgz.iancen,
that ancient Chriftian Writer, who wore commonly a poor
Coat, like to a Frock ; fo did Juflin Martyr, ferom, Aufiin,
as their beft Robe.' * .
< But above all others, Jerom, a famous man, whom'we
c have had occafion to. mention once before, wrote thus to a
c Noble Virgin, call’d Demctrias ; exhorting her,that(having
< ended her Devotion) (he fiiould take in hand Wool!, and
£ Weaving, after the commendable example of Dorcas ; that
4 by fuch changing and variety of works, the day might feem
4 lefs tedious, and the attempts of Satan Ids grievous; con-
* eluding his Religious Exhortation with this pofitivc fenr
* tence ; (fayeshe) / generally, No Raiment or Habit
« what[oever y fhall feem precious in Chrlfi's fight, but that which
c thou makefi thy felf, either for thy own particular ufe, or ex-
« ample of other Virgins; or to give unto thy Grandmother, or
4 Mother ; No, though otherwife thou dldfl dlflribute thy Goods to
« the poor. Let but this ftridlncfs be obferv’d, and compared
with the Apparel & Gonvcrfation of the Age. For however,
Phavifec-like, they other wife Saint him, pr call him an Holy
Father. Sure if is, they rejeft his counfel.
The great Duke of tJKomerancy, Colleague to the Duke of
Orleance ( Brother to the French King, Lewis the 13th) -in
the War by them agitated againft the Miniftry of Cardinal
%lchileu (then grand Minifter of State) being taken and con-
vi£tcd at Lyons, a little before his beheading, looking upon
himfelf, who was very richly attired ; c Ah (fayes he) this
£ becomes not a Servant of the Crucified Jefus 5 what do I
< with thefe vanities about me ? He was poor , dijflfed , and naked,
< when he went to the Crofs to die for my Jins. And immediately
4 ftript himfelf of all his finery, and put a more grave and
1 modeft garment on him. A ferious reflexion at a time
when he befi knew what was beft.
K z . And
‘ferom*Eplfl\
Int, Oper*
Atts
39-
Rlchilett,


And for the great intemperance of the- Age in %eereatious,aud:
Pled fares ( mofifalfly fo called } hear what more panic#*
larly , hath Heathens and Ghrifiians have left recorded • ai~
phoftgh they were before touch’ll upon ; nor can they well he
feparated from the other: Both being the mofi natural pro*
dufiion of the fame Wmb of Luft, Pride? and Vanity $
unworthy of the Nobility-of rational and immortal Souls,
Chikn? another of the wife men of Greece? left thefc Three
ferious lApothegmeSy or Pathctical Sayings, behind him s
(i) Whofoevtt thou art, learn to know thy [elf> (2) Be not ear~
ntft in thy dtfires after any vifible thing* (3) Miferywill he
the end of medllng with many matters. Intimating, the trouble
that attends much Tnffiquc j and thofe debates sad fuites
that necelfmlyfollow fucha courfe of living,
e Bias tnd Stillpoy two great Philofophers; the firft cftccm-
c ed one of the Seven Wife Men of Greece, and Prince of his
c Citizens • who, when his City was taken, and every one
4 going Bag and Baggage, carried nothing with him ; and Be-
ring ask’d 1 , Why he helped cot to fecure fomething
4 him ? Anfwcred, That h* carried all he had about him.'
i Meaning a good Conference, and a virtuous Mind, which
4 none could rob him of. The latter was of the City Megara,
8 who, when his Country, Wife, and Children, were all de~
4 Itroy’d by hie, being ask’d by Demetrius what lofs- he had
* fuftaioed ? tnfwercd, Nothing: for / only count that to be
which no body, cm takejrom me? which is the peace of a
9 good mind. _
4 Anaxagoras? a Noßk man, but a true Philofopher $ He
4 had a great E(iate,. and large Patrimony, which he furren-
-4 deed to his fu lends; and being reproved for his carelcfl-
,*-oe'Gf; anfwercd> IPs enough for you locate. One asked him,
*-Why he btd-eo more love for his Country ? I have?(fz\d he)
4 point ing his finger towards tbs Heavens.. Whcnhe returned
4 from his. Travels, and law his great PofTeflions, he uttered
c this-
f Ue Calip,
aler.
’/fax,7.2.
iaretJ. 4.
j/otor. r*»f.
far*
ic, Tufc,
tayefi* $*


c jMf. expreflion , Non ego efim falvM, nifilfla periijfent ; If I
« halnot disregarded them, / had perljhed j meaning, That if
he had let his mind gadd after Cuch fading objects .and been
cxetcifed with thofc periling concerns, he had never
known the fwcctnefs of a divine life j but had been igno-
xiQt< of. that*. for which his life was given him; and conTc-
quintly had dy’d as miferablc as the difpifers of a .Heaven-
ly lifej and lovers of this worldsplcafurcs, are wont to do.
Themiflocles, t gttit Athenian General, being.told by Sjma-
ehfts, That he would teach him the Art of Memory j Gravely
tnfwered. He had rather learn, the Art of forgetfulncfs - ad-
din**, He could remember enough, but many- things he could not .
forget, which were neceffary to be forgotten • as the Honours,
Glory’s, Plcafures, and Conquefts he had fpent his dayes in,.
too apt to tranfport to vain glory,
Socrates, themofl. divine and learned Thilofepher of his time y
(and whom ’tis feign’d that Ay olio ( cal’d the Good of Wiu
dom ) gave this Character, That he was the wifeftman on
Earth.) was a man of fevcrc life,, and inftru&ed People gratis,
in juft fgrave, and virtuous manners ; for which, b;ing.envied ;
by 7 the vain Comical wit cf the Age, Ariftopbanes, (as fpoyl-,
iag their Trade o£ Playes ) and cxcrcifing the generality of
the People with more noble and virtuous things,, was repre-
fented in a Play by Arlflophanes, in which he tendred Socrates
fo ridiculous* that tbs Vulgar would rather part with Socra-
tes in earned:, than Socrates in jeft ; ‘ which made way for*
■i their impeaching him as an enemy to their Godds, for
< which they pur him to death. But in a fbort (pace,his Bo
«..j a dg£S,& the whole People fo deeply refented his abfence,
4 tbaAhey flew many of his Accufers • feme bang’d - them*
4 felvcsj none would trade with them,nor anfwer them a que-
-4 (lion. They erc&ed feveral Statues to his praife ; they for-
bad his Name to be mentioned:, that they might forget their
< iojufticc : They..call’d,home hisWnifticd Friends andScaol-
-4 lers : And by the mod wife and learned men of that Age,
Htis obferved, That famous City was pimilhed with |he
4 moft
Piin, i«jB.
Plutarch**
Plat.
Atpolog*
Viog.
Lf/iert,
•Hcivic.
Cic. Tufc*
Quejl.-i*
Xenofh.
Brut,
Cic . Or at.
hiban.AooC,
Varro. H ii.
SchoU Ar.ft .
Eunap,
Calim. Eph
gr.n:i/Ede'S:


4 mo® dreadful' Plague that ever rag’d among® them *
4 and all Greses with it, never profpered in any eonfidciable
c undertaking, but from that time alwayes decay’d.
Among® many of his fober and Heavenly Maxims, ttk-
which he was accuftomed to difeourfe with his
thefe arc fomc 5
4 He taught every where. That an upright mao, and m
£ happy man,* were all one.
4 They that do Gobd, are employ’d ; they that fpend theis?
c time in vain Recreations, are idle,
4 To do'Good, is the be® courfe of - Life ; he only is idle,!
4 who might be better employ’d.
4 A Horfe is not known by his furniture, but qualities •
4 fo Men are to he efeemed for Virtue , not Wealth,
1 Being asked, Who lived without trouble ? He angered,
c Thofe who are confclous to themfelves of no evil thing.
- 4 To one who demanded; What was Nobility ? He m «
4 fwefed, A good temper dnd'dijpojttlon of Soul and Body,
' v They who know whit they ought to do ; and do it aot,atc
6 not wife and temperate; but fools 7 and fupid,
4 To one that complained, he had not been benefited by
c his Travels,;, Not without reafon (fayes Socrates) Thou did/b
4 travel without thy felf: Intimating, be knew not the eternal
‘Mind, or God, to dire& and inform him.
4 Being demanded what Wlfdom was ? faid, Avlnmm
4 compofme of the Soul; And being asked, who were Wife ?
® anfwered, Thofe that Jin not,
* ' * Seeing
riem.
% Alex*
Xen. Mem.
15.jj.720.
|XV», Mem.
7 50.. .
Stuh.Ech.
Ssrm.l . ii. ;
%toh, 218.
x'sKtfh.
lenec* Eplji.
U. 103,
j pok 2S'.


< Seeing a yotmg man Rich, but ignorant of Heavenly
< thing?, and puifuing Earthly pkafuces j Behold ( faycs he)
■C a Gme# Slwe':!>
i Soft wayes of living in pleafure, beget neither good conflP
* tut ton of body} not mind.
€ Fine and rich C loath s 7 are only for Comedians) that would
6 (port the People with only makingthemfehes fools.
€ Being demanded, from what things Men and Women
f ought to. refrain? Ha anfwered, F L 8 A SU R* S.
c Being asked, What Continence and Temperance were ?
e ftid } government of corporal defines, and pi eaf'ires ,3 the wicked
€ live to eat, ,&c. but the good eat to live : temperate'Pcrfons
'* become the tnoft excellent: Eat-that which neither hurts.
6 the body nor mind) and which is eafie to be gotten.
c One faying. It was a great matter to abftain from whir .
■Tone defircs ? But (faycs he) it is better not to defire at aP.
* It Is the property of God to need nothing ; md they that need)
■ € and are contented with leaf) come neerefi God,
c The only and befl way to Worfhip God x is to mind-& obey what* .
Joever he Commands. • )
* That the Souls ofMerr& Women partake of the Divine Na-.
* ture ; that God is jegn of the virtuous mind.; that by waiting up- .
c on hlmphey are united unto him,in an inaccefjiblf place of purity
c stud happmefs ; which (Jod he afferted alwayes to be near him.
Many more are the excellent Sayings of this great manj
who was norlefs famous for his Sayings, than his Examples
■with the greatefl Nations ; yet died he a Sacrifice to the for*
ctifh fury of the vain woild 9
The
St ah. $2,
Xen.msm., l.
c Milan. 9*
37.
St ok 37.
s>o£. 87.
Xen.mtm-ty
4.
xXEhanJPaY
///'(?. 9.
St 6k .57.
Xenoph.
mem. 4.802
Xe n,
Plat. fhad*


The Hiftory of his life reports, That his Father was told,
Lie (hoti id have the'guide of hie Life within him , which fhoald he
more, to him than five hundred Mafisrs; which proved true.
Inftmdting his Scholiers herein. Charging them not to negleft
thefe divine affairs which properly concern man> to mind or enquire
after fuch things at are without in the vifihle world*
He taught the life of outward things only as they-were-nef.
ceffary to Life and Commerce ; forbidding fuperfluities and Cu*
riojicies. He was executed for his Do&rioc after having lived
fevenry years 5 the moft admired, followed, and vifitcd of all
men in his time, by Kings and Commonwealths; and then,
-whom, Antiquity mentions none with more reverence and
honour*
Well were it for poor if her conceited Chriftians
were true Socrates’s ; wbofc divine, fcverc, juft, and fclf-
■denying life, doth not befpeak him more famous, than it will
■Chriftians infamous at the revelation of the righteous judg-
ment where Heathens Virtue (hall aggravate Chriftians In-
temperance ; and their Humility,the others cxccffivc Pride;
and juftly too, fincc a greater than Socrates is come, ( whofc
profefs) but they will riot obey him*
Plato , tha( famous Phllofophet (and Scholtcr to Socrates')
was Co grave, fo heavenly devoted, nay, fo difcrectly Poli-
tick, that in his Commonwealth, he would not fo much as har-
bour Poetical Fancy’s, (much lefs open Stagers) as being too
effeminate, and apt to with-draw the minds of youth from
more noble, more manly, as well as mote heavenly cxer-
cifes.'
L Plato feeing a young man pUy at Dice, Reproved him
* fharfly ; the other anfwered. What, for fo fmali a matter ?
■* Cuftom (faith Plato) is no fmali thing s let idle hours be ffent
c more ufefully.
c Let youth ( faith he ) take delight in good things ; for
1 Pleafures are the halts of evil. Obferve, the momentary fweet~
6 nef of a delicious Ilf is followed with eternal forrow • thefkort
1 pain of the contrary , with eternal pleafures: being command« 4
■ 4 to
Xentmem. I.
p.? 10.
Plato de le—
Plato de rep.
otr,
Paert,
%aert*in viu
'tiftnocras,
■H: ' 1
/Elian*


cto put on a Purple garment by the King of Skilly ; he refu-
< fed, faying, He was a man, and [corn'd fuch effeminacy's,
<■ He addicted himfelf to heavenly Contemplations, and is
c f a id to have liv’d a virtuous but fingle Life ; always* eying
t and obeying the c Mindy which he fometimes cal’d God the
e Father of all things', affirming, Whofo lived, {hould become
4 like him i and fo related, as to be joyn’d with, or to the Di~
f vinity it [elf •
* This fame Plato, upon his dying bed, fent for his Friends
c about him, and told them, the whole World was out of the way,
* in that they underftood nor, nor regarded the Mind ( that is
‘ God ) a {Turing them, thofe men died moft comfortably,
< that liv’d moft conformable to right Rcafon, fought and
4 ador’d the fit ft Caufc, meaning God.
an Athenian Phllofopher, who- had taught in
the ftudy of Eloquence feveral years; -but upon his hearing,
Socrates treat of the ferioufneft of Religion, of the divine Life, e- ,
ternal Rewards, tic, bid all his Schollers to a new Ma-
fler,for he had found one for himfelf • wherefore felling his e-
ftate, he diftributed it to the poor, and betook himfelf wholly
to the confideration of heavenly things, going cheirfully fix
mile* every day, to hear Socrates,
But where are the like Preachers and Converts tmoogft ,
the People called Chtiftians ! Obferve the daily pains of So-
crates • fuvdy he did not ftudy a week, to read a written Sermon ;
we are a fibred of the contrary • for ’twas frequent with him
to Preach to the People at any time of the day, in the vety
ftreets, as occafion ferved. _ Neither was he an Hireling, or
covetous; for he did It gram ■ furely then, he had no fat Be-
nefices, Ty thes, Gleabs, &c. And let the felf-denyal and di-
ligence of Antlfthenes be confidcred ;• of a Philofopher and
Mifter, to become a Schollcr, and that a daily one ; furely it
was then matter of reproach, (as ’dsnow) (hewing both
want of Knowledge, (though call’d a Philofopher ) and his
great defires to obtain it. None of thefe us’d to goto Playes,
Balls, Treats, &c. they found more ferrous employments for
their minds, and were examples of temperance to the world.
L I
Alclnl
Laert, vit*
Socrat,
iAzlian*
Stob*


r
putrt'.
.
.
T will repeat fotne of his grave Sentences, as reported by
Lamm , Bioclef, and others • namely, 4 That ttiofe are only
4 noble, who sre vertuous ; that venue wasfelff-lhfiicienc'ro
4 happinefs * That it confifhth in abhons, not requiring many
4 words, nor much learning, and is fdf-fufficicnt to wifdom . f or
4 that all other things have reference thereunto. That men Thouid
4 not Govern'by-force.; nor by-Laws, unkfs good * but by
4 Juftice. .. , . t
c To a Friend, "complaining he had loft his Notes, Thorn.
< fhmldft have writ them upon thy mind ( faith he ) and not in a
‘■Book. t
■< Thofe-who would never die (faith he-) mu ft live jud/y,
4 and pioufty. ' • : :
c Being asked, what learning was beft >' '-That ( faith he )
4 which mlearnetJj evil. ■
4 To one that prais’d a life full of pleasure's and delicacies .
4 Lst the fans of my Enemies (faith he) hvs delicately • counting
it the greareft ovifery. : I v --
*■ We ought (faith he) to sins, at fuch .pie a fares as follow
4 honeft labour ; and not thole which go before it.
. 4 When at any time he lav?-a Woman richly dref’ef he.
fvyould, in a Way of reproach, hid her Husband bring out his
£ Horfs ml Arras' meaning, If he were prepared to nidi lie
' c the injuries fuch wantoaaefs ufeth tfoproduce, he might: she
4 better allow thofe dangerous freedoms • -Oibermfi'. (kith
c he) he? rich and gaudy Attire*
‘He is (aid Co exchfoi bitterly againft Pleafures; often
4 faying, I bad rather be mad, than addiCted to Pleafart, and
imes tn:dechi>tgand feeding ray Carfafei.
' 4 Thofe (fiyeshej who have ones learned the way? to tem~
c - parance and virtue ; Jet th:m not offer to entangle thmfdvcf
c again with frmtlejs f cries- and vain learnings, non he adiitied K to
€ corporal delicacies which dull the mind, mid will divert and hln-
* def them from, the purfuh of thofe more noble- and heavenly.
4 virtues* '■ ■ ■ ' ’
c Upon the death of his beloved Mafter, Socrates $ he in-
? ftimted a Se<£fc, called C.jnlc\s• out of whom-came mat vaft
‘.Sedof the both which had'thefe common principles*..
4 'Wbicii.
iteh*
8 ‘
■r
#sV,H7,
I Jlog.Lmt.
fgeU.Hb, p.
'■ 5.
am. vit.
femdr*


£ which, they dally with great and unwearied diligence did
4 maintain,-and ioftrudt People in the ’knowledge: of, vi%>.
No mm is- wife, or happy, hm the good and vertmns mm that
mt much learnings mr fludy of many things wm neccffary \ that
a wife man is never drtink. nor mad, that he never finneth. That a
wifi man is void ofpajjion. That he.is fine ere,. religious, grave •
that he only is divine ; that fetch .only are Prlefis and Prophet s j
that they have God. Inthemfehes, and that his Law is imprinted
in theit minds, and the minds of admen, that fuch a one only edn
pray, u meekly temperate, xngemom, noble ; a good Ma-
rate. Father, Son, Mafhr , Servant, and worthy of praife r
On the contrary, that wicked men can be none of thefe that (
the fame belongs to Men and Women. Their diet was fiender yhelr
food only what would fatufle' nature • their coverings exceeding
mean ; their habitations fehtary and homely : They affv-mdthoje
wholly d with fewefl things and were contented). mofi nearly ap 1
preached ..God, who wants nothing. They voluntarily deffiifeiriches,'
glory, and. nobility, as foolijh jhews, ..-and vain fitiionT, ‘thathad no
true and foild wsrtk.dt;happnefs in.them. Theymkder-aHthings to'
be good or evil, and flatly deny d the idle (lories of Fortune and
Chance., .Certainly,, thefe were they, who having no (exter-
nal) Law, became a Law, unto them! elves. I and did not abtife
the knowledge they had -:of the. invifibl.e God burto theit
capacities improved that piety of, lift,-.- and in : ftni6ted men'in
-that righteous, feilous, follid, and heavenly Piinciple 3 which
leads to true and evcrlaftiug happinefs,;:.
c Arlflotle , ScholSer to Plato, and the Oracle of Philofo-.
® phyyo thefe very times, ( though not fo divinely Contem-,
4 :plative as. •hi* Maftgr, neverthdefs ) follows him in this;
£ and looks upon all Inch. Productions, tohe that folly and va-
F mty, which.fhould by good difci plane be exil'd humane focieties.
i Arlflotle feeing a youth finely dreii; faid , Art thou not 4-
e Jhamld, when Nature hath made thee aman y . to malty thy felf a
f -woman ?. . And to another, .gixing on his fine Cloak"; Why
6 dsefl thou boaji ff a Sheeps fleece ? He laid. It wss the duty
c of. a good rntn, to live fo under Law?,-- as he {hould do ll:
£ there were none,. ,
I 2 Clltomachm ,
Laert.
Pljst. ds rep
: Stacks
Stob, r
Cic, de nat,
Deo. lib. 2«
Laß. de ■
Ira. Dei,
cap. io.'
Plut*, PL
Pk.l6:'
Cic. Tufc „
Outfit
Dleg.Laeri
vtt. Mend*
Stab,
St oh. Semi
47-
Srob.ltt,
Ibid. 4d»


Tide (JElian
FtdeJCenoph*
rjr Prob,
1 Clitommhm, and Epamlmniat, two great Captains' and
( Champions at War: The fiitt is reported to have been fo
‘ verychafte, and virtuous in hisdifpofition, That if Be had
c heard any vain or obfeene difeourfe, he prefently was wont
6 to quit the Company and be gone : The later* is defended to
£ have been a man out-gripping any of his time*, in good and
‘ virtuous things; and therefore had in great reverence by the
£ People of thofe times j but above other things, they obfer-
‘ ved, That he would never lye, neither in jeft nor earned,
c though for his own advantage ; fo devoted was he. to a juft
‘andrighteous Convention.
‘ Phocion, a very famous Athenian , honed and poor, yet he
c contemned Riches .* Philip, King of Macedonia , could not cor-
€ rupt him with all his Wealth m , and when fevcral per-
c fwaded him to accept of his offers, or elfe his Children
6 would be in need : He anfwered, If they be like me, that
€ which ferv’d me will ferve them j If knlikf, I will not to
4 marifh their luxury by providing fuperfimies 5 good men will be
€ content with few things ,• and they that would feek, for more, do
c not deferve what they have* How much do thefe wife ex-
prelfions condemn the pride and wamonnefs of this Age ?
Surely ’twere better to be a Phocion in the day of Judgment,
than thoufands that call themfelves by the fpleaded Mime of
Chriftian, who are Arrangers to the Life of if.
4 Mandmim, a gveat and famous Phiiofopherof the Gym-
-5 nofophifies, whom a Alexander, the fiift fjreecian Emperour
s (called the Great) required to come to the Feaß of Jup'u
4 ter’s Son, ( meaning himfclf ) declaring that if he came, he
* fhould be rewarded j if not, he fh-mld be put to death* The Phi-
-4 lofophcr contemned his Mefl’age, as vain- and fordid.. He
4 firft told them, That he denfd him to be Jupiter’s Son, (a
4 mecr fi&ion, ) Next, That as for his gifts, he efteemed them
s nothing worth ; hut. own Country could, furnifh him with ■ necejfa-
‘ jrie'Sj beyond, which he coveted nothing e And laftly, as-for the
* death he tkcata’d., 'Hi Hi not fear it j hut of i-he two, he-
‘ vsijks&
mSmL


e mfhdh rather y In that (raid he) lam fare it is a change to
* a more bleffed and happyflate, How little thefe called Chu-
Brans are true Philofophers, and how much more this Phiio-
fopher was a Chriftian than they ; let the righteous Principle
in every Confidence judge. Is it not then intolerable that
thefe bablcrs of the times fhould be efteem’d for Chriftians,
who arc yet to learn to be good Heathens ? that prate of Grace
and Nature know neither; who faucely will determine
what’s become of Heatbens y and know not where they are
thetnfelves ; nor mind what may become of them ; that can
run readily over a tedious Lift of famous Perfonages; and
cattftmnlate fuch as will not with-them celebrate their memo-
ries with extravagant and fu perditions ptaifes, whilft it’s
laudable to ad the contrary ; and no fo ready away to be-
come vitious., as not to be fo; a ftrange paradox but too true; fo
blind, fo ftupified, fo befotted are ihefoolifh fenfualifts of
the world, under their great pretences to Religion,. Faith,
and Worftiip. Ah I did they know the peace, the joyes, the
unfpeakable raviftimcnt of foul, that infeparably attend the
Innocent, barmlefs, Bill, and retired Life of Jefus: Did they
but weigh within themfdves, the Authors of their vain de-
lights and p-aftimes ; the nature and difpofttion they are fo
grateful to ; the dangerous confequenccs of cxcrdhng the
mind and its affedions below, and arrefting them, from■their
due attendance, and obedience to the moft holy crying Voice
in their Confcienccs ; repent,return, all is vanity and vexation--
cf jflnt. Were but thefe things refleded on, were the in-
ceflsnt woings of Jefus, and his importunate knocks, and in-
treaties at the door, but kindly anfwcrcd, and he admitted to
take up his pofteffion there. And laflly, Were fuch- refoived
to give up to the inftrndions and holy guidance of his eternal
Spirit, in all the humble, heavenly, and righteous Convctfa-
tion it requires, and of which he is become out Captain and
Example.; then, O then, both root and branch of Vanity, the
Nature that invented, and which delights-her felf therein,
with all the folly’s themfdves would be confum’d aad vanifti..
But they, alas ! cheat tbemfelves. by mljemftrtsed Script
and dmh with the mtempe.rU Mcnav of mifapplyU SProm-fl&s-z


My Fiicnds* mind the juft Witnefs & holy Principle in your
felycs, that you may experimentally know more of the divine
Life, in which, and not in a multitude of vain repetition?,
and aiery fancies, true andfoliid felicity eternally conftfts.
4 A fair Macedonian Noble of Blood,
4 (as they term it) but more truly noble of mind, I cannot
4 omit, to mention ; who entertain’d To earndl an affedion
e for Crates, the Cynical Philofophsr t u well for his fevere
« life, is excellent difcoutTe, that by no means could her Re-
-4 lations, nor Suiters, by all their wealth, nobility, 8c beauty,
4 diffwade her from being his companion: Upon which ft range
c refoiution, they all betook themfelvcs to
h-4 Ing him to drew himfelf a true Philofopher, in pcrfwading
4 her to defift ; which he ftrongly endeavoured by many argu-
-4 ments, but not prevailing ; went his way . and brought all
c the little furniture of his houfe and ftiew’d her; This (faith
4 he) is thy Husband, • that, the furniture of thy houfe.: Coupler
c on ity. for thou canfi not be mine, unlefs thou follmtfi the fame
4 unrfe of iife'j (for being rich above 20 tallents,which is mo re
c then yoooo./, he negledted ail to follow a retired ftudious
4 life ) all which had fo contrary an effed, that lire immedi-
ately went to him before them.all, and [aid, I fself mt the
effeminacy '■ 'of this worlds but knowledge and venue >
4 Crates ; and chafe a life of temperance , before a Tife'of deltca-
.< clef* for true fatisfalhon % thou know 1 y?, is in the ?mnd } and
4 that pie afure is only worth feekjng, that laps for ever. Thus WiS
4 it, ihe became the confbnt companion, boih of his love and
c life j hisTrisadiliip, and his virtues •• travelling with him
T from place to and performing the publick Exer-
-4 cifes of Inftrufifion with Crates, wherever they came : She
f was amoft violent enemy to all Impiety bur especially to
8 wanton men and women, snd.thofe whofe garb and conver-
-4 fatiori View’d them devoted- to vain plesfures and paftimes 5
4 'Effeminacy , .rendr moth silky per fans not only m profitably 'but
4 permtious to the whole -world. Which The as well made good
by the example of her exceeding indudfy, temperance, and
feverhy, as tfaofe zm wont to do by their intemperance 2nd
folly j.


folly t fo? ruins of healthy virtue, and lofs of eternal
happinefs, have ever attended, and ever will attend fuch earthly
minds. ' '
■ Thus may the voluptuous Women of ■ the timeSa read their
reproofs in the'character of a brave Heathen and learn,TA#
follid happinefs conflfts in a divine and holy comprfare of mind ; in
a negldh of wealth and greatnefs; and contempt of all corporal
plea fares; as more befitting Beafts than immortal Spirits r And'
which are us’d by none* but fuch as not knowing (he excel-
lency of heavenly things, are both inventing and delighting
like brutes, in that which perifheth j giving the preference to
poor mortality ; and [pending their lives, to gratify the lufls
of a Ih tie dirty jlejh and bloody hat fhall never enter into the King-
dom of Heaven : by which their mmds become dark'ned, and
fo infeohble of more Caeleftiai Glory’s, that they do not only
jrefufe to enquire after them ; but iafamonfly feoff and defpife
whofoever do, as a foolifh, frantick, & meet mad People ;
to that ftrange degree of dsiknefs, and impudence this Age
has got. But if the exceeding temperance, chaftity, virtue,
induttry, and contentednefs of very Heathens, with the plain
and neceffary enjoyments,God has been pleafed to vouchfsfc
the Sons and Daughters of Men, as fufficient to their wants,
that they may be the more at leilure to anfwetf the great-end of
their being born, will not fuflice, but that they will exceed:
the bounds, precepts, sad examples, both of Heathens and
Chriftians , by the invention of vanities, to indulge their bo-
dies j Wrath and inexprcdible anguifb fhall overtake them,,
when they (ball have an Eternity,'to think with gaafhing..
teeth-, on what, to all Eternity, they can never remedy ;
Thefe di final wages are decreed to be their lot,y who fo far affront
God, Heaven, and Eternal felicities, as to negleU their acquain-
tance with them, and daily.increaje in the love and, knowledge of
them, meetly to grattfie the defires of periflnrrg fiefh, and for-the
enjoyment of a few fading toyes. For fuch' to think, that- not-
mthftiocUng their lives of fenfe and pleasure, wherein their,
minds become Haves to their bodies, that they flisli be cvcr-
laftingly happy, is one of the greateft evils they, can com-
mit ; fines ’ds-the gteaceft abufe to the Holy God 3 . that'Mcn-


And Women ftiould believe him an eternal companion for
their carnal and fcnfual minds'; for, a* the tree falls, foit
lyes |as death leaves them, judgment finds them : there’s no re-
pentance in the grave. Therefore you, to whom this comes-,
O retire, with-draw a while; let not the Body fee all,tafte all,
enjoy all ; but let the Soul fee too, tafte, and enjoy that
knowledge and divine food,and thofe heavenly rcfrdhments
proper to that invisible World, of which riie is an Inha-
bitant, and where £he muft abide in an eternal ft ate of peace,
or plagues, when this vifthle one (Bail be diffolved.
Quintillian, had fo ill an opinion of the Stage- flayers? that
beftdcs other enormities, he plainly termed them c Hypocrites^
4 grbfs diflemblcrs, and iyars, from counterfeiting the manner,
c me afore, motion, gefiure, gate, feature, and aßlons of fuch
4 perfons as they teprefent, whole faftrion and humour they
4 coo often infmuatc in beholders, as well-as they retain them
6 themfelves, when they have put on their own deaths again.
How true this guefs was in an Heathen, the impiety's of cal-
led Chriftians, have notorioufiy demohfi rated,
7 ertullian, Chryfofiom, 1 heophylaß , Gregory N"a&. accounted
ancient Fathers; cfpecially Termllian, who,lived about two
hundred years after Chrift; now fourteen hundred and fixty
nine years ftnee : Upon that remarkable paflage, recorded by
Matthew, as the words of Chriß himfelf, namely, But I [ay
mto you, that every idle word that men (hall ffeafi, they {half
glvt account thereof in the day of Judgment : Almofi agree,
Sayes Tertullian, of all vain and foperfiuoas words j more talk
than is neceflary ; Sayes Chryfofiom,Of foch wards m are not
convenient, nor profitable,but move immodefiy. Sayes TheophylaEi,
Of ad Lyes, Callnmny's, all inordinate, and ridiculopu fpeeches.
Sayes Gregory, Such words men jhall account for, which want
that profit , ever redounding from modeß difooterfes, and that are
feldom uttered from any preceding necejfiiy, or caufe \ things frfo
volosti, fables, old-wives- tales. All which fufficicntly repre-
hend the Recreation* of the times, of great folly, vanity*
asdfta* !
Amhrofe^
TertAih. de
Patien*
Chryfojh
Mat <12.36,


another Father*, who Brß was lieutenant of the,
Province and City of MiUan ; and upon his difcreet appear
Eng of the Multitude, fomewhat difordetly upon fomc dif-
ference amongll them, about Electing aßifbop, was by their
unifoim Content'choten hicntelf * Although this Per Con of
til others, might have been thought to plead for the accufto-
med Recreations, cfpcciaUy not havir.g been long a Chritti-
an, (for he was &Catechumnifi, (or one but lately infirußed)
at the time of his being Elected ,* ) yet doth he in Co many
words determin the matter thus ; PI ayes ought not to be known
by Ckrifiims. And,
Augsejline, more famous much for his many Books, and
knowiedg in Church affairs, who'fc fenterices are oracles with <
Come, gives this as his Opinion of Playes, and the like Re- i
creations ; That they were more fernitious mi abominable than
thefe Idol a: rone Sacrifices which were offer d in honour of the
Pagan Godds • Doubtlcfs he thought the one not fooffchEve to
Keafon, and the imprefiions Divinity hath made on every un-
demanding • as the other was very pleafant to the fentes, and
therefore apt to Beal away the mind from better things.';.-for
*twas his maxiuiCj That every thing a man doth , is either a Bin -• ’
drance } or furtherance to good. This would be eßeem’d intol-j
lerablc Do&rine in a Quaker 3 yet will the Quaker rejoycc if
it be eßeem’d and follow’d, as good Dodhinc in Augufiine.
Nay, Polybius , Cicero, Liyim% Tacittes, great Heathen
Writers, afciib’d the flourifbing of the Roman Stare and Em-
pire, to- the Gravity r and Virtue of thofe Ages ; ma-
ny times bitterly envying againft the excefs, and vanity, mt
have here condcmncdf. as that which doth deboyfi civil fo-
ciety’s,. and bring them under fuch effeminate fecuricy, as to
texpofe.them-to the violence -of the firft Pretenders • which
•both . Atfgufilne d -■Laiftytites further attsft.
Machlavel , in his.bifputarions faith, c Thc.fisß promoters
fof Chrifimity y maz to diligent in rooting out-.the vanity**,
M 4 and
Socratdlb .4,
chi 2f,
Augufi, dg
Civit. Dei,
lib,2.chi/.
De 6fv.T>ei
Hb.p , ch, 5*
Mach, difi
lib.^ch^,


e -and fupctfiitlofls of the C smile that they commanded all
4 Poets an dHlfiorlanSy which contained any thing of the Gen.
4 tile .Converfarion ox Woiihip, to be burn’d % But that Spi-
-4 fit’s exdnguifh’d, and thole folly s revived,
e Cardan, more particular relates to us, how
1 a Pope, (another from him afore-mentioned ) did caufc
4 many La tine Authors to be bum’d, becaufe of their vanity
c and iafcivioufnefs ■ as Cad Uanus, Affranituj Jtyvlus, ,Lici~
* nm, ZennlnSy AttiliuSy V'iSlor, Livis Dialogues • nor did
4 PUmusy Martial. , and Terrence (fo much in requeft both in
4 the Schools and Academies of the Land) efcape their honeft
‘ zeal, although the mukitpde of Copies fo far fmftmed
c their good intentions, as they are multiply*d' of late ■ In
4 like manner {fayts'Cardan) did Gregor) Nazdancsn Cupprcls
4 the Greek Authors, Menander } Diphilosj Appollodomssy Phik-
-4 won, A lex it , Sappha, &c «.
f 'etrm Pellomm , tHat great and inquilitive when
he came to Momt Athos % where there live in fevcral Mona-
fteries fix.thouftnd Calderiy or Religious perfons (fo called)
4 Hedid not fo much is find there, (no not in all Greece).
c one man acquainted in the Conveifation of thefe parts , for
* though they 'had fever al Mamrlcript*’ "of. Divinity in ihtii-
* Librsile#, "yet not one Polity Hifloriany ox Philofopher fof
4 the of that Church were fuch enemies thereto, that
4 they Anathematiz’d all fuch. Priefls, and Religious perfons,.
4 as. mould read drtranfcn.be any Books, but what treated of
igion t ' And petiwacied all 'others* thrftdt was not lawful
4 for a Chriftian to Rudy Potfte y chr, though nothing' is more
4 grateful in thofe daye?..
’drian is
tpientd.2...
Bell* oh-
jrr.Ai.c»3 S- •
[bid, .■
Chap.39.
6 o'Hz.ellus, in his Amraadverfions on Mlnmlm Pelux-y faiths
That as the Gentiles did objc&'tb 1 the CBtlftmns,their r-ttfa
c fiiie 9 ill. bred Language? 'and
4 Salutation • calling them %ujiickj-. and Clowns fo did the
c Chrijlians, by way of Irony and Toniewptyititib:t&htn the
* •'& the \mmng>. Tbil :, ht-prdrei%impie;
4 tcfiimo-
AnU
! mad.in Min*
;Fefe j&.&y.


■c teftimomes out of tArnohim, Laßanllus, IjUorus, Vein fat a*
c Theoder'tti and others.
In the ConjHtutiofts of Clement %omavms, (as fuppos’d) it is
injoyn’d, ‘ Abftain from all the Books of the Gentiles • What
« have you to do with ftraage, and unprofitable difcourfes,
c which feduce weak People ?
The Council of Carthage, had an exprefs Canon againft rea-
ding the Heathen Authors, much lefs their fooiifii Cora-
moedies. And,
Gratim alfo hath fuch-Ilke paffages as thefe, *We fee that
c the Prietts of the Lord, negle<sing the Gofpcls, and the
‘ Prophets? read Cotnmocdics, or Play-books, andfing Love-
-6 yerfes, and read Virgil • (a Book now in fo much requeft, as
6 to have been of late tendred into Hngli(li t ) Strange! that
c thefe things fiiould have been fo feverely cenfur’d of old,
‘ and that thofe perfons whofe Names are had in fo much rc-
€ verence, fhould make the like A&ions the conftmdHonsof
G Chrift’s Preo'epts, and the natural confcquences of the Chri-
c Ilian Dodhine; and yet that they fhould be fo far neg~
Mcftcd of this Age? as not to be judged worthy an imita-'
* tion* -
The Waldenfes, fo called from one Peter Waldo, a Citisen .
of Lyons in Prance, in the year iido ; elfewheroicalled AU .
bl^gnfes, -.from the Country AIH ; Lollards in England from ;
one Reynard Lollard, who fometime after. came into thefe j
parts, and Preached boldly agsinft the Idolatry’s, Superftid- ,
ons, and vain Converfation of the Inhabitants of this Ifland,.
They had many other Names, as Armldifts, Efpsrom/ls , Heh-[
rlcisns , Slccars , hfabachmPatarenians, Tur lupins, Lyonifts, ‘
Fraticelll, Huffues, Bohemians , (ftiil the fame ; }'buf finally, j
by the Papifls, damnable Bereticky, though by the Prbt eft ants,
the true Church ofChrift: And to omit many tefiimomes,! .
wili inftance onlyin Bilhop Vjher, who in hisdifcemire : of tbe'j
fucccflio-n of thtLhriftian Church, defends them not only for.
M z the
C on flit
Clem > %o?i
iiLt*eh.6 t
3-
C *V' £ PJ co i
euant*
3* c \
r ff tio ,y e
en
r *
Alh. Capet*
Hifi. deoni
Waldenf "
Flgnta.Hlj:
Blblh.p. rjc
Dubran.hip
ohem.l. 14
Thuan. In]
hifl.fm tem
p. 45 8. ’
MaUParu
hlft.of Eng
An* i174.1l


Bellar.tom.2
u^.ttcap.26.
hiM,
pcehius com.
VC, c„ 28.
Mlp-hoK. 1.6.
IW, Haret*
ls>9* .
tine. Syl.
l lfi.Bohem.
|jhtr de fuc.
ffo/, Chrlfi,
the true Reformers, but makes the fuccdlioa of the Church
to be mainly evinceable from theis Antiquity : I (fiallfor-
bear,all the Circumdances and Principles they held, or in
which he ftrongly defends them againft the' horrid cruelty and
ignorance of the Romanics, particular]y Ralnerius, Ruhis
Capetamis, gre. only what they held concerning our prefent
fubjedl of Apparel and Recreations ; I cannot be fo injurious
to the Truth, their felf-dcnyal, the good of others, at whofe
Reformation I aim, and my own difeourfe, as to omit it • and
therefore I ftia.ll proceed to allcage their Faith and Pri&ice
in thefe matters, however edeem’d but of a trifling impor-
tance by the loofe, wanton, and carnal minded of this gene-
ration, whofe feeling is loft by the enjoyment of their inor-
dinate defires | and that think it-a high Rate of Chriftianity
to be no better than the Beads that perifh ; namely, ia not
being exceffive in Newgate and meer Kennel-enormities, that
thefcfirft Reformers had another fenfe of thefc things, that
they made the- Convention of the Gofpel of a Crucifd
Jefus, to intend,-and require another fort of life than what
is ufual with almoft all thofe who account themfclves Merrs-
bersof Chrift ,• I iliali drew out of their own Do&rincs, 25
found in the mod authcntick Hiftorics.
To be brief, In their Expofition upon the Lord's
that part of it which fpcaks thus. Give us this day our dal If
head • 4 Where next to that fpirirual bread, which they make
£ into be the du;y of all to feek more than life • they come
4 pofitively to deny the praying for more than is requifite fo?
c outward nece Hides, or that its lawfu l ro ufe more ; condemn
4 ring all and excefs out of fcjhion, frlde , or wanton-
c nefs • not only of bread, but all outward things, Which they
judge to be thereby comprehended, afing E&ekiel’s words,
4 That fulnefs of bre.ad, and abundance of Idler.efj, -was the emfe
l of tbe mckednsfs and the abominations 0/ Sodom > for which
4 Cod byfre dtftrofd them off the Earth ; whereupon they con-
-4 elude wit-baa ancient Father.of the Ptimitke Church, after
4 this manner. That cojllj-Apparel, [uperfluity in diet, (asthr.ee
( fifties, when one will feivcj which fat t tn,
‘ thtr
o.
p.
isat./.i.s, 3
37,3 8 -
ioaa ms to
>(ire fan
%hsh ,
■ r emor 9
Kprrel,
vgn* Mm*
i : *7,
bek: 16- 4p
■■gfiar.fsd.


• the body , uotirlfh luxury,weakyn the jfine , mi lead the foul mto
‘ death ; (fay they) jpare diet, labour , fhort fleep, plain and
« wean garments,. help to purs fie thefoul, tame the body, mortifie
6 the lufis.of the fiefh, and comfort the jpirit. So fcvere were
they, that in chat Chapter of the InfiruUi on of their Children,
they would not foffer them to convcrfc with thole of (fringe
placss>or principles, whofc convcrfacion was G arming,
and the like wanton %ecreatims •. but especially concerning
young Women.
c A Man ( fay they ) muff have a great cafe of bis Daugh-
■< ters;■ Haft thou Daughters ? keep them within to wholfome
6 things j fee they wander not ; for Dina, Jacob’s Daughter ,
< woe corrupted by- being [sen of ftrangers: they, affirm no becte-E
‘ to be the general event of fuch convcifation..
To which I (lult add’ their Opinion and Pradice concer-
ning Taverns, publick Houfes for Treats, andPieafurs,
of which'the Land fwarmsin our dayc«. •
* A'Tavern is the fountain of (In', the fchool of the Devil,
€ it works wonders fitting the place : It is the cuftom of God
6 to (hew his power in his Chnrch, and to work Miracles; that
6 is co-fay,, to .give fight to the fpiritually blind,, to make. the.
c fame to leap, the dumb to fing, the deaf to hear: But the
1 Devil doth quite contrary to all thefe in Taverns, and the
c like places of Pleafure ; for when the Drunkard goes to the
i Tavern-, he goes upright; but when he comes forth, he cannot
x go at all ; he has loft hi* fight , fpeech, and hearing too *■ The
‘ Lcdiures that are read in this fchool of the Devil (fay thefe
& poor Waldenfes, and fir ft Reformers) are (gluttony's, Oaths,
4 Perjury's, Lyings, 'Blafphemys , Flattery’s , and divers other
< meks'd yittunfs, and per nit iota efeUs, by which the heart is.
4 withdrawn further and further 4 from God . And as the Es'
*■ cUfiufikm faith. The Taverner jhallnot be freed from fin.
f
?I hid,1.2.C.3.
: ■Lifilli ilgual
naiffon all .
patrons car~
nals deuon \
effieir undus- t
C fc>
Ibld.l t 2<c
, j La Tiwemfi
& mas fans
de phi firs <?|
fontana de
pecca,efthold,
del Didvolaf
■&c.


Bat above other Retreat tons y do bat ferioufty ohferve of what
danger and ill conftqueme theft firft Reformers though
Dancings Mujich and the hkefpafiimes to be t which is
the great eft divert if ement of tkefedayes.
.
h . iZ>c,y*
c Dancing is the Devils ProceiTion, and he that cntreth in-
c to his proceffion, the Devil is the guide* the middle, and
4 the end of the dance ; as many paces as a min maketh in
4 dancing, fo many paces doth he make to go to Hell. A rata
c finneth in dancing divers wayes ; as in his pace, * for all his
4 fleps are numbred ; in bis touch, in his ornaments, in his
c heaiin g> fig hr, fpeeeb, and other vanities. And therefore
c we will prove hr ft by the Scripture, and afterwards by divers
4 other Reafons, how wicked a thing it is to dance. The firft
4 teftimony that we will produce, is that which we read in the
e Gofpcl, where kis faid to pleafe Hired fo well, that it cofb
® John Baptift his life. The fccond is in Exodm y when Mofes
‘coming near to the Congregation, favv the Calf, he cafi the
4 Tables from him y and broke them at the foot of the mountain ,
4 and afterwards it cofi three and twenty thoufand their lives. Be-
‘ fides, the Ornaments which Women wear in their dances,
4 areas Crowns for many vMorfs which the Devil fifth got,a-
-4 gain ft the Children of God. For the Devil hath not only one
4 Sword in the dance,* but as many as there are beautiful and
4 Well adorned Perfons in the dance; for the words of a Womati
e are a glittering [word. And therefore that place is much to
c be feared wherein the Enemy bath fo many fwords y ftnee that
‘one only fword of his may be (juftly) feared. :
- ‘ Again, The Devil in this place fttikes with a ftiarpncd
e fword j for, the Women ( who make it acceptable) come not
4 willingly to the dance , if they he not painted , and adorned ; that
i . which ( painting and ornament) is as a Wheiftone y on which the
f E>evil [harpneth hk [word. 1
f They that deck and adorn their Daughters, are like thofe
Q ''that put dry wood to the fire > to. the end it may burn the better ;
1 far juch Women kindle the fire of Luxury in the hearts of men,
% As Sampfin's foxes .fir’d \bzFhitiftms coraj fo thefe women,
4 thej
La hd es U
■procejfion del
Ltavol &
q \ 'intro, m
la bd } &c.
Si it. Aim.
\fol.
§ 2 >S3A 4-
*'Job 14.1(5'.
l Pfd-$7. 23,
Lrov. 16.9.
.J-cr.1p.23,
\Jktark 6.2
f 4> 2 ? 2(5,
p7,-8»
2,4,


c -tkey have fin In their faces, and in their geftures mi actions,
4 their glances md wanton words, by which they con fume the goods
* of men.
. 4 Again, The Devil in the dance ufeth the ftrongeft Ar*
< mout that he hath ; for his molt powerful arms *r z Women %
* which is nude plain unto us, in that the Devil made choice
< of the Woman to deceive thefirßMan • fo did Balaam,\bn
4 the Children of Ifrael might be rejected (of God. ) By a
4 woman be made Sampfon, David, and Abfolom to fin.
* The Devil tcmptech men by women three manner of
4 wayes ; that is, by the Touch, by the Sye, by the Bare ; by
thefe three means he tempteth fooliili nun to dancings > T by
4 touching their hands, beholding their beamy, hearing their Jongs-
-4 and mufick,-
4 Again, They that dance break that PromiCe and Agrees
4 meri t they have made with God in their God-
-4 fathers promife for them, That they [hall renounce the Devil
6 and all his pomp', for dancing is the pomp of the Devil , and hi
c that lancet h maintaineth his pomp, and fingeth his mafi* For
4 the Woman that fingeth in the dance, is the Priorejs (or
4 chiefpß) of the Devil; and thoje that Anfwer are the Clcrkjy
4 and the Beholders are the Pan [hi oners, and the the
4 Sells, and the fiddlers the Minifiers of the Devil. Far as when.
4 Hoggs arc Bray’d, if the Hog.herd call one,, all affemble
4 themfelves together ; fo' the Devil caafeth one Women to fine
4 in the dance, or to play on fame infirument , and prefently gather
6 ail the dancers together.. ■
4 Again, la t dance, a man,breaks, the Ten Gomtnwde*
4 merns of God : As firft. Thou fhalt have no other (Jodds but
4 me &c. ' for in dancing a man ferves that Perfoo whom be
4 moft defires to ferve, ( after whom goes his heart: ) and
4 therefore Jerom. faith, Every mans Godd is that he ferves and ‘
£ hv.es heft (and that he loves be A, which, his. thoughts wander i
£ andgadd moft after. J -He'fins agaipft the fccond Cbmman*
4 dement, when he makes an Idol of that he
4 third, in that Oaths, [and frivdoufiy ujin-g Cod's Name) are-
-4 frequently amongft: ianetrs-, , , Againil the foiiilb, for that by
c*a>
Jerom m
dcc:im.ope*r


4 dancing, the Sabbath day it prophaned* A gam ft the fifth, for
4 in the dance } Parents are many times dijhonour’dy fince thereby
4 many bargains are made without their cmnfel. Againft the
4 fixtb, A mm kills in danciug, for every one that fits about to
4 pleafe another, he kids the foul as oft as he perfwades unto luff,
4 Agiicift the feventk, For the party that danceth, be it male or
4 female, commit teth adultery with the party they la ft after ; for
4 he that looketh on a Woman to luff after her, hath already com-'
4 mitted Adultery with her in his heart. Againft the eighth'
4 Commandment, A man Jins in dancing, when he with- draweth
4 the heart of another from Cod, Againft the ninth, when in
4 dancing he jpeakj faljly againft the Truth, ( and for feme little
*■ honour , or feerft lafeivims end, deny’s what’s true; or affirms
4 what’s fa/fe.) Againft the tenth, when Women affieft the Or-
-4 naments of others, and Men covet the Wives, Daughters, and
4 Servants of their Neighbours. ( which undeniably attends all
C fuch Playes and Sports.)
€ Again, A man may prove how great an evil dancing is,
4 by the multitude of fins that accompany thofc that, dance ;
4 for they dance without meafure or number: And therefore,
4 faith Augujiine , The miferable Dancer knows not , that as many
6 paces as he makes in dancing , fo many leaps he makes to Hell*
« They fin irr their Ornaments, after a Five-fold manner,
4 Pitft, By being proud • thereof . Secondly, By inflaming the
c hearts of'thoje that behold them. Thirdly, When they make
s thofe a foam’d that have not the like Ornaments , giving them
c occafton to covet the like. Fourthly, By making Women impor-
* tunatefn demanding the like Ornament s'of their Hmbands. And
4 'Fifthly, 'When they cannot obtain them of -th'clr they
i feskjoget them elfevohre by fin. They fin by finging and phy-
-4 ing on Inftruments ; for their fongs bewitch the hearts of thofe
4 that hear them with temporal delight, forgetting God } uttering
4 nothing in their fongs but lyes and vanities and the Very motion
4 of the body which is. mi in dancing, giver tefiimony enough of
. 4 evil. \
4 Thus you fee that dancing is the Devils Procrjfion , and he
6 that enters into a dance, enters into the Devil’s Procejfion. Of
* dancings
jingufa de
'Chit. Del,


‘‘-dancing, the Devil’s the guide, ths Mdle, and the mi ; tad
6 he that entreth a good and a wife man into the dance, (if it
< can be that fuch a one is either good or wife) cometh forth &
‘ corrupt and a wicked man : SARA H t THAT HOLY
* WOMAN WAS NONE OF THESE*: Behold theip*
prehenfions of thofe ancient good old Reformers, touching
thofe things that arc fo much in Pradice and Reputation ia
thefe times thus far verbatim. But I cannot leave off here,
till I have yet added the Condufion of their Chatechifm and
Diredion, with forme paffages out of one of their Pattors
Letters ; fit to theptefentoccsßon.
They-Conclude in this Dlrcdion ; namely, how to rule
their bodies, and live in this World as becomes the Children
of God. * Not to ferve-the mortal defiles of the fUfh. To
6 keep their Membersthat they be not arms of Iniquity, (and'
4 vanity) Tortile their oatward fenfes. To fabjeß the body to thei
4 foul. To mortifie their members. To fly Idleness. To ohferve
c a fobrlety and me afar e in their eating and drinkings in their
c words and cares of this life. To do works of mercy. To live t-
-4 moral (or juft) life by Faith. To fight again/} the defires, To
c mortifie the work* of the fie fa. To give themfdves to the ex*
‘ crcife of Religion. To confer together touching the Will of
4 God. To examine diligently the Conference. To purge and
f amend, and pacific the Spirit*
To which I (hail add eheEpiftle of one of their Paft'ors,
u I Bad recorded among!! other matters relating to thofe
poor a {Bided People.
An Epiflle of Pa far Barthelmcw Tcttion, written to the.
Waldenfiaa Churches of the Valley of Pragda j
thmtr (inflated,
JESUS BE - WITH YOU, '
«r-r*lO all -our faithful and well-beloved Brethren in Chrift
J, Jefus; Health and Salvation be with you iW.Amen*
£ Thefe are to put you ia remembrance, and to admonilli
N ~ 4 you
WdJihM.
ConcLf.i sB*
Bnear en
qml
fldel dsbtan
regir li lor
Corps, Non
fervlr a li
defirier mw*
tal %
Hlfi,Wdd.h
5^
s<s,j7. 5


f you, my Brethren, ( hereby tcqultiog'my felf of that duty
* which I owe unto you all, in the behalf of God, principally
4 couching the care of your Souls Salvation, according to that
4 light of the truth which the moft High God hath beftowed
*onu*) that it would pleafe every one of you, to main*,.
* tain, incrsafe, and murijh to the uttermofl of yoptr power,
4 without diminution, thofe good beginnings and examples which
6 have been left unto mby our fore-fathers, whereof we ars no-
-4 wayes worthy. For ic would little profit us to have been re-
-4 newed by the Fatherly vi [nation, and the light which hath been
* given mof God , if we give our (elves to worldly , carnal con-
r verfat ions, which are diabolical, abandoning the Principle which-
-4 u ffod, and the Salvation of our Souls, for this fhort and tempo-
-4 ral life . For the Lord faith, What'doth it profit a man to gain
1 the whole world , and to lofe his own Soul f For it would be bet-
-1 ter for us never to have known the way of Righteoufnef?,.
fe than having known it, to do the contrary. Let me there-
-4 fore intreat you by the love'of God,, that you decreafe nor, or
4 look back j but rather incicafe the charity , fear, and obtdi-
cence which is due unto God, and to your felves, amongft
4 your felves ■ and ftand faft in all thofe good Principles which
4 you have heard and underfiood of God,-by our means : and
4 that you would remove from amongft you, all vain converfa-
-4 tion and evil fur rmz.es,troubling the peace, the love, the concord,
1 and whatfnever would indi jfofe or deaden your minis to the fsr-
-4 vice of God, your own Salvation, and the adminiflration of the
‘ Truth , if you defire that God fiiould be merciful to you in
1 your goods temporal and fpirituai • for you can do nothing.
4 without him ; and if you defire to be Heirs of his Glory,
, 6 do that which he commandcth ' If you would enter into Life-,
fheepmyCommandements*
< Like wife be careful that there benotnourifhed *moD.«ft-
B you ANY'SPORTS, Gluttony , whoredom.
4 mr any Lewinsfs, or Pdot, nor Queflims,. nor D-eceipts, nor-
-6 Mfury, mr Difcords ; neither fuppon or entertain any Pen*
■■ 4 fons-of a wicked convertstion, -or that give any fcandal oe
®-ill example imong-ft you ; bat let charity and fidelity reign-
f'amoDgft yotipisd ail gpodxsinapk y doing to ©ne -another
c as-.
Vat.19.17.


6 is every one defires fliould be done unto him,j for other-
c wife it is impoffible that any jhonld be faved , or can have the
c grace of God, or good-men m this world, or glory in another. And
'therefore, if you hope and defile to poflefs eternal Life, to
* live in good efteem and credit, and to profper in this world
<in your goods temporal and fpiritual, purge your [elves from
*.a% dlf orderly wayes, to the end that God may be alwayes with
6 you, who foifakc* not thofe that tnift in him. Bat know this.
6 for certain) that God heareth not, nor dwelieth with finners, not
< in the foul that is given unto wickednefs, nor In the man that is
<fubje£tto fin. And therefore let every one cleanfe the wayes
* of his heart, and fly the danger, if he would not perifh shere-
e in. I have no other thing to write as this prefect, but that
c you would put in practice thefe things ; and the God of peace
c be with you all, and go along with m, and be prefent among tu in
c oar fincere, humblt, and fervent prayers, that he will be pkas’d
* to fave all thofe his faithful, that truft in Chrlft Jefus.
c Intlrely yours, ready to do you fervice
e in all things poffible,according unto
‘ the Will of God,
Bartholmew Tertian.
Behold the Life andDotflrine, Inflru&ion and Practice .of
thefe ancient Waldenfes j how haimlefs, how plain, la-
borious, how exceeding Cerious, and heavenly were they in
their Conversions ? Thefe are the Men, Women, and Chil-
dren, who, for above thefe five hundred years, have valiant-
ly maintained acme! War, at the expeace of their mod in.
noccnt blood, againft the unheard of Tyranny’s, and move
than Paganifh inhumanities, of proud, blood-thirfling Popes>
Princes, Cardinals, Lggats, lunch's, Archbljhop, and Bifhcps,.
but above all of the Monklfi hejulfitors ; whole moft barbo-
lousinvented cruelties are the only demonftrations of their,
wit; with whom its held to be a greater: fin to conceal a Here*
than to be perjadd •- to murder an heretical Prince, than u
N a " obey
BernJe Cjlrl
lord.de Marti
bifi.de la Prj
Üb. 10. i
Vsf'm.k or at.
in Waid ß . i
Bez>a Hisf m '
ham. dig,
l r tr et.de nen'
.& falf. Res
JigJ.s.c.iS,
v.Z‘i-9* ■


obey him ; to marry ahwfulWife-, {hanto keep a whore, la
to diffent, though never fo confcientloufiy, than to lye, fieal 9
and commit aU the inormities prohibited both In the fir fh and Jecond
Table: yea, fo dirk* fo blind, fo cruel have moll generations
been, that there could be no fo filly a dotage , r.ofo rldiculom a fu*
perftition, no fo deteftable m idolatry fiut did or might have found,
not only an accsptance, but the favour of being iwpos'd,onmoft:fe*
vere penalties • who having loft tke fenfe of the true God, became
fo darkened onto believe whllfi they were moft z>ealom in fulfilling
the will of Beelzebub,' they were performing the moft acceptable
facrifice to whom the filthieft villain and fwdidft wretch
was more acceptableghan the- moft- patient , fiber r heavenly-mind-
ed man j Nay, let him be never fo virtuous,, to fay that
the flelh, blood, and bones of Jefuf, once nail’d upon the
CrofS) were not in a Wafer, ( held by the nafty fift ofaformca*.
ting fPrieft) my, God not in that Wafer, ( though nibl’d by n
Moufe, or the like vermin, juft before) were caoiighco Rack.*
Hang) or Burn, without any farther Appeal, t>r Examination-
Twss again (i the like Advcrfary’s thefe poorWaldenfes foughr 3 .
by fufferings throughout the Nations, by Prifins-, C onfi.fi
Banifhments , Wandrings from Hill'to Galley, from Den to
being mock 'dyvhipt, rack'd,* hrswn from 'Rocks & Towers,driven
on-tJMountmns, and in* one night-, hundreds perifhfng by exc/Jflvg
Profs-, Snows, and theliky colds \fmot hir'd.in Caves, Starv'd,
Prifind , Pip'd, Mangd, Di[member'd r Rifl'd , Plunder'd,
Strangl'd, Burn d and vrhatfoever could be invented to rtfm
men, women, and children. Thefe you pretend to be you i<
Ancdfeis • from them you fay you have-your. Religion 5 of-
ten are you in building their-praifes by your panigerical
difeourfes j but, Oh 1 look back, 1 befeccb you, how
are you to thefe sfrlidfed Pilgrims ?• what refemblancc isphere
of their life in yours ? Did they purchafe you a Liberty and'
Religion ( can you think ) at the lofs of all that was dear to
them y that yon might pnfi away your dayes and years--in pride, wan*
tonnefis , and vanity ? What proportion bears your excefi with
their temperance f your gandjntfi with their plainmfi* youx'
■luxury, andfiefi-p leafingconverfation, with their fimpllclty and
Ififi-imjdi but,«eyou aot got in to-that Spirit they condemn
■ - fled?/
Sat. Tefi,
s&tr e f>S34*
Vlneaux. -
JHemor.fol.6
\jTift.Wald,
\1*2,C,5.p.20
e Paul. Per.
Mfi.Wald .
48
Waul, Per.
Wifi,Wald.
i. 2. C.4* p •
77,78,79?
|o 3 8i,82.
tyfign* Bib .
%ifi. part. 1.
I l ' ■ ■'' '
* PClneauXi
mem. fat*
b - .
WauP.arus
yf». 1220.
jSgonlus de
fleg. It at,
7,
.Serhay.
hap. 47,
'hafl.p
[dp* 7s.


tied ? mtb thtt carnality & worldly-miadedhefs they reprov’d
in their Perfecuters ? nay, into a ftraih of Perfecution too,
whilß you festn to hide dll under a Reformation. ■ What
have you,befides their good words, that’s like them? And do
you think that words fhall fend off the blows of Eternal ven-
geance ? That a little by-rote babble, (rhough of never fo good
cxpreflionsinthemfelves) {bail ferye youi turn?> No; From
God I tell yon? That whilß yon live in the wantonnefs, pride , and/
luxury the world, pleafimg, and fulfilling the luß of the Eye,
the luß of the Plefh, and the pride of Life , God detefts you all, and-
laughs you and your worjhip to fcorn. Nc’re tell me lam too
nfh, it’s-the Devil that fayes fo he has got two Scriptures
at his fingers end in thefe dayes; on q. That there’s none that
doth good ; to ths cndy.he may perfwade all it’s impoflible to
overcome, which is the rcafon fo many are overcome, aL
though glory is promt fed to none bm conquerers. The
we mu B not judge leß we be judged : but away with the Devil
and his faypocrilie too : I know what I fay, and from whom!
fpeak-; once more I tell you all, That unlefs you forfake your
pride, luxury, avarice, and whole variety of vanities, and mind
the sternal Light in your hearts to obey it. Wrath [hall be your
portion for ever whether you hcaror forbear.. T-ruft not your
Soul'S on mifapply’d Scriptures-; He that is a Child of God map
he holy, for God is holy and none are hts Sons and, Daughters,
hut thsfe who are adopted by the Eternal Spirit, and ledt hereby.
’Twas a holy, humble, divine Life thefe poor fuffering-
Chriftians both projfefs’d and pndUc’d ; refufing to converfe
with any.that liv’d in the fuperfluitics and excefs'of the world;
for which (if you will believe their very Adverfaiies,) they
were perfecuted :, For fayes l ßainerius f They ufe to teach firß
what the Dlfciples of Chriß ought to be y and that none are his
Dlfciples but they that imitate his Life: And that ths Popes,
Cardinals, &£. beeaufe they live.in luxury, pride, avarice,
are not ths Succejfors of Chriß, but themfelves only, in that they
walk-up to his commandments.', thus (layes he) they win upon the
■People ': • But if fo* that none are Chriftians bur thole who imi-
tate Chrift, what will become of thofe who call themfelves
GhriftUnSj), arid jet live at safe inthefiojh } which jhmlifis cruci-
fied l
i J0b. 2.14
1 58 6 3 *7..
The Devil A
Scrlpturiani
1 Pst.t.-l 3i
j ßain. Cap.d
\ftud.permrf\
alios & mac.
] dicendif.tyt
Barron£cc\
, AnnaLToh
i2.an.U?t-
'f.Sjy. _
1 Kmn ■Xiv m
Afetrop. /.&.
feU.iS
Sax.LPc.f


pd ? This was tlie ground of their fufteHag, tad their loud
gyesagalnft the Impieties of the greateli j oot fpanng any
ranks from the Throne to thcDunghil, as knowing their God
was no rejpeffor of Perfons* And now if you wouldfollow them
indeed, if you would be Proteftants in fubftance, if you would
obtain the heavenly Inheritance, if you would be Eternally
bJeffed, be ye p erfwaded to (hake hands with all the pride andpswp
of. this; vain World ; mind the concerns of an cveiiafting reft 5
let the juft and ferious Principle of God be the conftant guide
and companion of your minds j and let your whole hearts be
cxercifed thereby, that you may experiment an inure Refor-
mation and change of Affe&ions: that having the joyes and
glory of another world in your view, you may give your beR
diligence to mike your Calling and Election to the poffeffion
of them, fare and certain 5 left felling that noble Inheritance
for a poor meflof. peri[king pot age , you never enter into his Ex-
ternal Reft. And though this teftimony may feem tedious,
yet could it by no means be omited. - -
But becaufe no Inftance hath been made, to authorize cue
lalh Reafon of converting Tupcffluities into the relief of di-,
ftrefted pe’rfons (although one would think it is id equal, and
fober* that it needs no other Authority than its own, yet) I
Bull produce Two Tcftimonics fo remarkable, that as they
ever were cfteemM truly good, fo cannot be believ’d foby
any, that refufe to do the fame, without believing ihcic con-
demnation,
' ‘ It is reported of Paaiinm, Bifhop of in Italy » That
1 inftcad of converting the Demeans of his Diocsfs to par-
-4 ticukr enrichments, he employ’d it all in the Redemption
4 of poor Slaves tndpiifoncrs 5 believing it unworthy of the
an Faith,- fee God’s Creation labour under the
c want of what he fa ad; to fptre. Ail’agree this was,'well done,
but few agree'to do, the fame,
-But more particularly that Biflaop of Ami da 5
reprefen ted hySocrates in this manner; c When
4 the Romm Soaldlers purpos’d in no wife to left ore again
6 unto
Vic.6.8,9.
Jccltf Bifi *
5* s9l'
.
■
hcrat.fcho*


€ unto the of Per fiat fiich Captives irthey had taken-it the
* winning Az>az,ena, being about fcven thoufand in cumber,.
* (to the great grief of the King of Perfia): and all ready to
‘ ftrrve for food ; Acacias lamented their condition, and cal-
-6 ling his Clergy together, faid thus unto them, Oat God hath*-
< no need of D I S H E S, or of CLIP S, for he neither eateth
4 nor d/lnkethi thefs are not his necejfaries ; wherefore feeing the
4 Church hath many precious JEW ELS, both of GOLD and
<! SILVER, befiowed of the free will and liberality of the Faith-
-4 fid, it is reqmfire that the Captive Souldlers fa uld be therewith
4 redeemed , and delivered oat of prifon and bondage ; and they pe-
-4 rlfhing with Famine*, fhotild therewith be refreshed and relieved
4 After there, and the like Arguments, he prevailed to.have
s them all converted Into Money ; fome fo'r their immediate
4 Refreftiment, fome for their Redemption, and the reft for
4 Coftagt, or provifion to defray rhe charges of their Voyage.
4 Which noble a€t had fuch an univerfal Influence,that it move
4 fam’d the Chriftian Religion amongft the Infidels y than all
4 their Dijputes, or Battels ; infomuch that the King of Perfia,
i and an Pleat hen, faid, The Romans endeavour to win their
® .Adyerfaric* both by Wars and Favours 1 and greatly defired'
4 to behold tbit man, who’s Religion taught fo much Charity
* to Enemies 5, which ’cis reported Theodofimt he Emperour ,
® commanded Acacim to gratifie him in. And if tbe’Apoftic
Patti’s expreffion hath, any force, That he is worfe than an In-
fidel who provides not for his Family ; how greatly doth this
Example aggravate your fhame, that can behold fuch pity,
and companion expres 9 d to nay Enemies , and thole
Infidels too> and be fo negligent of your own Family i ( for
England is no more ) as not only to fee their great nccefiity’a
unanfwer’d ; but that wherewith they ftiould be fadsfied,,,.
converted to gratifie the luß of the Eye T the luß of the Fie fa,
t nd the pride of Life, But however fuch can pleafe thetn~
fdvM in the deceitful daubisgs of their Priefls, and dream
thcmfelvei members’.of Jefus'Cbrift :• • SUcfc itisv thefe things
Were other wife in the beginning ; for all west foid y and pm into
.a common Pur fa to fapplj all Indigemes’] not mattering earth-
ly Inheritance fimha than, they might,- inTomefcsfe,- .be
Cub--
1 Tim.5.8.
ABs 4*32.;


ifubfervient to the great cad for which they were givers]
.namely, the good of the Creadon ; having their minds and
thoughts taken up with better things, andravilh’d with the
-aflurance of a more excellent Life and Inheritance in the
'Heavens, that (hould never pafs away. And for any to flat-
ter themfelves with being Chiiftians, vvhilft exercis’d in the
vanities, recreations, and euftoms of the world, as at this
■very day, is to mock the great ahttfe their immortal
■Souls ,* the Chriftian Life is quite another thing. And led
that any may objcs, Many do great and feemingly good ABi~
-arts, to raife their Repeat ton only and others only decry Pleafare,
.becaufe they have not wherewithal > or kjtowmt how to taks it ?
I (hall prefent fuch with the feveral brief Expreflions of dy-
ing men , and thofc of the greateft Note and Rank ; and
wbofc Experience could not be wanting, to give the ttueft
account how much their Honours, Pleafures, and Recreations
conduc'd' to their fat is fad: ion, upon the extream moments
>of their dying beds? when -Death, and that paffage into vaS
Eternity, look’d them in tbeface.
The ferious Apprehenfions and Exprefftons of feveral aged
. and dying Men of fame and learning*
•i. S olomon,thm whom-noneji*. Laid to have more delighted
himfeif in the enjoyments of this world, hear what he fays,
after all his experience : If aid In my hearty Goto now, I will
.prove thee with mirth ; therefore enjoy pleafure : and behold,this
Afo is vanity* I [aid of Laughter., It is mad , and of Mirth ,
What doth it I I made me great workj, bmlded Houfes, planted
Vineyards, made Gardens and Orchards, planted Trees in them
of all kind of Fruit* I gofme Servants and Maidens, alfo great
Poffeffms ; / gathered me Silver and Gold, and the peculiar
Treafiire of Kings, and Provinces ; alfo Men-fingers, and Wo-
men~fingers,mdthe delights of the fans of men • as tjMufical ht~
firumems, and that of all fortsSo I was great, and increafed
more than all that were before me in Jerufalcm. And whatfoever
mine eyes defind,! kept not from them • I withheld not mine heart
from any joy. Then I looked on all the works which my hands had
wrought^
i,
,758,


wrought, and behold, *ALL WAS FA NIT T AND
VEXATION of SPIRIT, The reafon be gives in the
18th & ipth verfes, is, That the time of enjoying them was
very fhon ; and uncertain he was who fhall be benefitted
thereby when he was gone: Wherefore he concludes all with
ibis, Fear God 3 and keep bis Commandments • for this is the
whole duty of man. FOR CjOD SHALL BRING EVERT
WORK INTO JUDGEMENT, WITH EVERT SE-
CRET THING , WHETHER IT BE gOOD } OR
WHETHER IT BE EVIL .
2. Jgnatim ; who lived within the fit ft hundred years after
Chrift, left this,imongft other things,behind who was
torn in pieces of wild Beafts at Rome, for his true Faith in
Jcfus; There is nothing better than the peace of a good Con-
fcience; Intimating there might be a peace to wicked Con-
ferences, that is paid feeling any thing to be evil, but Aval-
lowed up of the plcafures of the World. And in his Epiftlc
to the Churches at Ephefm Magnejia, Trallis and %om l ?, upon
his faith, Now do I begin to be a TDifciple • I
weigh neither vifble nor invijible things 3 fo that IgainChrip,
3. frdmssh ( called a Father) faith 5 Sucß who make large
CanfeJJions, and fpeak, virtmm words, and yet are not conforms*
hie to them in their life and converfation, are nothing worth «
4. Jaftin (a Ghriftian Philofopher) plainly tells
us, in his relation of his convcrfton to the Chriftian Faith,
That the power of Godlihef in a plain fimple Chr iff had that in-
fluence and operation on his foul, that he could not b%t betake him*
felf to a feriom and flrl£i life and yet before And
this gave him joy at his Martyrdom ; having fpent his dayef
ts a ferrous Teacher, and t good Example. And Eufebim
relates that though he was a follower of Plato’s &odtrinej
yet, when he faw the Chriftians ,piety and courage, he con-
cluded no people fo temperate, lefs voluptuous, and more fet
on divine things 5 whifh firft induced him to bet Chiiftian.
O ChrjfoJim %
Ecclef, I2e
Ignat.Efifh
ad Ephef,
Mag.Trai*
Rom -
EufehJA*;
c. 32.
Eufeb. Be*
clef, Hift,
/.4* £•s»


f, €hryfopom 9 (another Father, fo called) laid, To fan**
Jtct the whole foul and body to the Lord , is the highefl fervice we
can pay mto him, God promifeth mercy to penitent finners , bm
he doth not pramife them they fall have fo much time as to mor-,
row for their repentance .
6. Charles the ph 9 Emperour of Germany, King of Spain,
and Lord of the Nether-lands , After twenty three Pitch’d-
fields, fix Triumphs, four Kingdoms conquer’d, and eight
Principalities added to his Dominions, ( a greater Infiance
than whom can fcsr.cc be given) after all this Pomp, Re-
signed all up to other hands ; betook himfelf to his retire-
ment ; leaving this Teftimony behind concerning the life,
fpenc la the honours and pleafures of the world, and in
that little time of his retreat from them allj- That the pneere
fiady, profeffisn and prathce of the Chrifhan had in it
fuch joys and fvoeetmfi, as. (f Oil RTS were fir angers to,
: 7* Sir Philip Sidney, a peifon whofe parts, courage and
virtue were of fuch reputation, afwel beyond the Seas as here
at home, that had Queen Elizabeth agreed, upon the earndl
follicitation .of the Polandcrs,hc had (’twas faid) been elle&-
l.d King of that vaft Dominion, of more than .2606 .'-%iks in
circumference ? when he lay upon his Death-bed, arid'-jit ft
departing the world, fie bad his friends* behold Miior th&
end of this worlds defires and enjoyments; Rep,ufiner
was fo much purfued by the Great Ones, as poor , abjiB i 'and.
nmvorfhy of' their Immortal fouls • and amongfi: other things'
fits than which (though there have been many
'Newer. Roriancis): there is not one more-model! and in«el
nious' ; yet,as an .effedf of his youthful Melancholy. Amours,
that could be profitable unto none, but rather imprefs the
like fancies- upon and raife thatwhich with all in-
duftry lEouid timely be allay’d and totally extinguiAed its
"them • be eamefily requeued his great friend the Lord
-that it might be caft into the femes, : and never prove fo in-
jurious to -his Memory- (which he defired to have continued
and prefexved on taorefeiioua- fubje&s) nor. thofe who fhonld
fpenci


fpssd their precious time la reading of it, uto be publish-
ed to the world,, (although It is mnfiated into mod ufual lan*
guages: ) Such were the ferious apprehenfions of this dying
man; ami his advice to them he left behind him ; who Cer-
tainly then beft knew the benefit or dif-fervice that would re-
dound from the like convention; neither have I obferved
any Perfon left upon Record, in all our Englijh dories, whom
all Peifons, as well as the Htjlorlam y agreed to merit fo
great an efteem: but more efpedaily for his great Modedy s
Yet after all, vve hear his Recantation of the many unnecef-
fary things? and his Recommendation of but the one thing
Beceflary to his Friends, as what would moft rejoyce at
lad.
8. Secretary H / alfingham i in Elizabeth's time, to-
wards the conclufion of his dayes, in a Letter to his once
fiilow Secretary) then Chancellor of England y called Lord Bur-
iiegh, writes thus, 4 We have lived enough to our Coun-
« trey, our Fortunes, our Sovereign • it is high time we
* begin to live to our felvcs, and to our God. Which
giving occafion for fome Court-bumourift to vidt and divert
him; 4 Ah I faid he, while we laugh, all things are ferious
*round about us; God is ferious when hepreferveth us, and
e hath patience towards us; Chrift is fetious when he dieth
* for us; the Holy Ghod is ferious when he drive th with us •
«the whole Creation is ferious in ferving God and us; they
6 are ferious in Hell and Heaven; and dull a man that hath
* one foot in his grave, jeß and laugh f None can be ferious
too foon, becaufc none can be good too foon ; away then
with all foolilh talking and jeding, and mind more pro*
fitable things.
p. One they call Sir John M.nfon y who had been Privy Coun*
fellot to four Princes, and fpent much time in the prefer*
meats and pleafures of the world ; retired with rbefe regret-
ful Payings; 4 After fo many years experience, Serioufnefs
4 is the greated: wifdom. Temperance the bed Phydck, a good'
I Conference is the bed eftate; and were Ito live again.,-X
O 2. ' c would


*■ would change the COURT far a Cloyfkr, my Privy Cbuo^
< fcllors bufsks, for an Hamits retirement• ■ and the whole
* life I lived in the Palace,. for one-hours enjoyment of‘ God m
*■ the Cbappel. ALL THINGS ELSE FORSAKE ME BE-
-4 S IDES MY GOD,-MY' DUTY, AND MY PRAY-
sTRS f •
xo + One call’d Sir Henry Wotton , thought it to he the srtad.
tefl happinefl in this life, to he at lei fare to he, er to do good- As ia
his Utter end, he was wont to fay, when he relic (Red on
pail times,.(though a man efteem’d fober and learned) HOW
MUCH TIME HAVE I TO REPENT OF, AND
HOW LITTLE TO DO IT IN. !
xi. The Lord Bacon y fometime before his death,confeffed,
1 That to be Religious, was to live ftriftly and feverely ; for if
c, tbe opinion of another World be falfe, yet tbe fweetefl life.
*in this World is Piety, Virtue, and Horsefly • if it be true-,
* there be none fo wretched) and mi for able, as loofe, ssdrmlj and
*prophane Pcrfon®*
3.2 B One 'Dr. 'Donnes and a great Petty talcing his farewel
of his Friends on his dying bed, left this faying behind him,
for■ them to meafure their fancies, and their aßlons by ; / repent of-
Allmy lift) hut that part of it Ifjpent in communion with God y .
and doing g9od o ,
■ 3.3. Silden^.X he greatsfl; ; SchoMer and Antiquary of thefe
Kingdoms j one who had taken a diligent furvey of what
knowledge was coofidcrable amongft the Jews, Heathens, and
thofe call’d Chriflians ] at laft profeffeth this, towards the
end of his daycs 3 That notwithftanding he had been fo labor!--
©us,, gather’d-fo many curiofitics of Learning in Books and
ManufcriptSjComprehcndiflg aimoft all fubjedls in tbe world,
yet could be reft his Soul on none fave the Scriptures 5 and
above all, that paffage lay as mo ft " remarkable upon his Jpirir\
Xitm. 2. Is, x'2j 13 j 14, if. For the grace of God. that hrlngetß
Salvatm, hath appeared t0..a1l men-} teaching m- y that denying.
mood*-


j iffigoiilnefti and worldly luftsj we-jhmld live foberlyf right emfly,
and godly in this prefect world • looking for that blejfed and
glorious Appearing of the great God % & our Saviour fefus Chnßi
who gave hmfelf for m % that he might redeem us from AH tm~
eyuity, and pari fie unto himfelfa peculiar z,ealom of good
works: Thefe things Jpeak,j (tnd:exhort 7 and rebuke with aH
authority,
14. Hugo GrotiuSy than whom, thefe latter Ages think
they have not had a man of more profound Policy and univer-
sal Learning; as well in his Commentaries on the Bible, as
various other Labours ; left this remarkable faying behind
him, which fhould abate the edge of other mens inordinate
delircs- after what they falfely- call Learning j namely, I
WDUII>' GIVE ALL MY: LEARNING. AND HO-
NOUR FOR THE PLAIN INTEGRITY, AND
HARMLESS INNOCENCY OF fB AN VRIC 1C:
who was a Religious poor man, that fpent eight hours of his
time in P'rayer, eight in Labour, and but eight in . Meals,
Sleep, and other ncceffary’s. And to one that admired his
great Indußry, he returned this by my of complaint • Ah I.
J have con fumed my life in lahorioufty doingnothing* And to a
third, that inquired of bis Wifdom and Lcarning,what, courfc;
to take; he folemnly. anfwcred, BE SERIOUS.’ , Such was
the fenfe he had, how much t feriom life out of that vain*
glory of the worlds fruitlefs learning, was of force towards 4
dying houf*\ and anfwering, yea, excelling.all ocher Conß*
derations..
jy. To whom I joyn Salmuftus, that famous ’French Vtatz-
lime Scholler,acd the others Contemporary • who,( after but
many Volumns of Learning,,-. by which he had acquired ,fo
much cftceWi as-fcarccly to be nam’d without .venerable
Titles) confeffed fo far to have miftakgn true Learnmg i and
that in which’ follid happinefs confifts, that he exclaim’d thus
agtinft ■ himfeif> .Oh I / have 108- a world, of. : %-LMBe *
77'MS, that moft precious thing in the world ; whereofy had • I bm,
me year more % it ftmld be In David’s Paul’s E-


Chap, 1 6 t 6 t
.
ftb Strl:! . (laid he to thdfe ibbuthlm )'■ Mtnith?
World lep-i and God more • The fear of the Lord ghat, u Wifdom ,j
and to departfrom evil 9 that u Under (landing*
* " '
1 6, Cardinal x*Maz>arine> the.great Statcfman of his time 8
whole aim was to obtain the Glory and Grcatnefs of the
World; and to which end, all other considerations,he made
fubmit; was of another mind a little before his death ; be-
ing awakened by thelmavt 1 allies of .' Confcknce, which re-
prerented his Souls condition in fo di final a manner, and
caus’d fu'ch aftonifhment of, mind, that with weeping, be cry’d
out, O MY POOR SOUL ! WHAT WILL BECOME
■OF THEE ? WHITHER WILT.THOU GO ? And
fpike one day thus to the Quern-Mother of France ,
TOUR FAVOURS HAVE. UNDONE ME, WERE I
TO LIVE AGAIN, I WOULD BE A CAPUCHIN,
RATHER THAN a COURTIER,
; . 17. ■ And to conclude thefc fciious laftances, I.ftiall make
one more, whichthough in order fiiould have come in before •
yet beeaufe one of the moft importent, and this Nations more
peculiarly fitfor confederation, I Rial I place it here; and
namely, The dying words of MEN.RT) Prince of Wales ,
side ft Son toKing^A M:E S ; of whom others fay many
generous things; Ikar whaf account he gives of himfelf at
iaft. A Perfon, whom he more then ordinarily efteem’d, and
shat had been his companion at Temu, asking him, How be
did ? was anfwered thus, (amongft many other fober expref-
fions) AH TOM! I IN VAIN WISH FOR THAT
TIME I-TOSTiWITH THEE, AND OTHERS, IN
VAIN- RECREATION : So vain was Recreation, and fd
predous was Timeßpin a dying bed. And why wi fil’d he,
■with others, for more time, but that it might be othetwife
employ’d ?■ Thus hath the juft Principle, and holy Spirit of
God, throughout all Generations, convinced men of their
vanity and’folly upon their dying beds, who before were too
much taken up therewith, to mind either a dying bed, or vaft
Eternity; but, when their day a were almoftnumbred,, •when
moi*


mortality haftend on them, when the revelation of the.righ-
teous Judgement was at the door, and that til their worldly
Recreations and Enjoyments mud be parted with, and that
Eye for ever (but, and Fleft turn’d to worms-mett that tool
delight therein 5. then, O then, it was the holy. Witaefs*bad
time to plead with Confcience i then nothing but a holy,
drift, and fevere life was valuable 5 then M the world for a
Unis time, who before had given all their time for a little of a
vain world. But if fo ftorc a reprefencation of the incon-
fiikncy of the vanities of the world with the.Chriftian life,
could make fo deep an impreffion ; Oh 1 to what a noble fu-
ture, and large proportion had they been grown in all Pious
and Heavenly knowledge, and how much greater had theii
Rewards been, if they contentedly hid foregone thofc pc-
afting Entertainments of the World betimes, and given the
cxcrcifc of their minds to the tuition and guidance of that
tmivcrfal Grace and Holy Spirit of God| .which had fo long:
ftined in darknefs, imcotnprchended of: it: and was atddi
but juft perceiv’d to give a fight of what: they hid been:do*
ing all their dayes. Ift all wind upthe whole with this Abort
oefciiption of the Chrif an s within the fhft hundred years
after Chtitt, as what may further juftifie not only my
[ons, .butthe tying Exprspons of thefefievatiißesfoaij
That 'as afeveredife i*the Chri film • life , fd I that il h r ineompd*
f ablyfw eet er than alb the'vain Jhventtms % Fafbions, and P leaf ares-
of the World*
Eph f 4., ISty
Rev. 22. iz a
; 18, The .description was originally c P.hik- rjeft
■:*nd.cited- Ettfebitts Famphifitof. thu.i r ? c 'Tfeat-t®c^e
* Chn&osjrcßounccd 'their fubiianee, •* a«drfeW4*!d:thenii
< fslves from all the cares of this life • 'and- forfaking'tbc:
4 Cities,’ they lived folitarily in Fields and Gardens: r They
their company who followed the Country-life,
«•• (.of ■ cares and buMc ) Mmprofitable.,akdhmtf»l >mt:o tkems
k (as i't--was-iikely■•) tvsha then dived. thus, m the eniitkatysmh
* eormi} i md\ fartientr* ddfirb- '.they 'might, imitate, them *•' whivh
a-isad this frhphcticah and 'heavenly life*- In many places this
iivesh, (for it behoved as well the ■Gmims * slabs
■ F foil. Juihm,
: of the mr~
flip* of
:gypt.Alex*
Eufeb. Pam<
, phil.Eedef*
'capi 7,,


f Barbarians to be partakers of this vabfolu-te goodncfs) But
*in Egypt in every Province they abound, and efpeciaHy a-
-*• bouc %4lfixnndna, From all parts the better fort with-
-4 drew themfelves into the foil and place of thefe Woifhip-
‘ pets, (as they were called) as a moft commodious place, ad-
‘.joyning to the Lake of Mary, in a low Vale, very fit both
4 for its fcqtrity, and the temperance of the Air. They arc
f further, reported to have Meeting-houfes, where the moft
£ part of the day was employed in wonliipping God; that
* they were.great Ailegorizcrs of the Scriptures, making them
c all That the external ftiew of words (or the let-
£ ter) refembleth the of the body ; and the hid-
den fenfe or underflanding of the words, feem in place of
4 the foul • which they contemplate, by their beholding
‘ names, as it were in a Glafs ; (meaning that their Religi-
4on confiftcd not in reading the letter, difputing about it,
4 or accepting things in litceral conftrudlions ; but that they
.‘ placed rheir Religion in the thing declared of, the
IRanceTt felf, 'bringing things nearer to the mind, foul, and
ffpirit, and pi-effing into a more hidden and heavenly
4 fenfe ; making Religion to coniifi In the temperance and
c :fanEiity of the Mini, and not in the formal outfide Worfhip
,fo.mmh-sumaUayesdnvepiitty fitter to pleafe Comedians than
■ChrilUangi Such felf- denying'Gonverfitinns the .pradi.ee
•of thofe times, ■ and onely badge ,of true" Chrifiknity'j but
now the cafe is alter’d ; People wiiibeChrifiians, and have
their worldly-mindednefs too : Bat though God's Kingdom
fafferviolence by fuch 3 fti (h*\\ they never enter; the Life
of'Chiift and bis followers hath in all Ages been another
thing; Andthereis but One Way, One Guide , One Beft } ai
which are purs and holy,
. But if any (notwithftanding our many fober Rcafons and
numerous Teftimonies, from Scriptures, Examples and Ex-
petience s of fpuitnal and religious, worldly and prophane,
living.and:dying.mcn 5 at home -.and of the greateft
note, fame and learning in thewhoie. world ) . fball yet re-
main lovers and imitaters of the folly, and vanity condem-
ned j If the cryc« and groans, andfigh?,and tears, and com-
plaints


plaints and 'mournful willies of fo many reputed Great, nay
fomc Good men j O that I had more time ! O that / might
live a year longer, / would live a feverer life I O that I were a
poor Innocent Jean Llrick ! All is vanity in this world .* Omy
poor foal, whither wilt thou go f O that I had the time, (pent
in vain recreations I A ferions life is above ail, and fuch like -
And can nothing prevail! But if yet they fhall proceed to fol-
ly, remain unfacisfied, and follow the world ; what greater
evidence can they give of their heady refolution to go on itn-
pioufly to defplfe God, to difobey his Precepts, to deny Chrlf},
to fear, not bear his Crofs •to forfake the Examples of his Ser-
vants j to give the lie to the dying fer'ms fapings, and confent of
all Ages ; to harden t hemfelves again/} the cheeks of Conference j
to befool and ffirt away their precions time, and poor immortal
[gals to wo and mlfery ? In (hort, *ds plainly to idi(covet
you neither have Keafon to juftifidyour felves, nor yet e-
nough of Modcfty to bluih at your own folly; but as having
loft the fenfe of one and th’other, go on to eat and drinks and
rife to play ln vain therefore is it for you to pretend to fear
the God of Heaven, whole minds ferve the Godd of the
plcafures of this world: In vain is it to fay you believe in
Ghrift, who receive not his f tij -denying Mejfage : and to no
better purpofe will all you do avail. If be that had loved
God, and his Neighbour , and kept the Commandments from his
path., was excluded from being a I>ifciple, beemfe he fold
not all and followed fefm • with what confidence can you call
your felves Chriftians, who have neither kept the Command-
ments., nor yet forfaken anything to be fo ? And if it was
t birr betwixt him. and the eternal life he fought 5 that not-
withftanding all his other venues* love to money, and his ex-
terna! poflfdfions could not be parted with | whatfhill be
your end, who cannot deny your felves many Icfs things*
but are daily inventing vanities to your fleftily appetites ?
certainly much more impoftiblc is it to forfake the greater ?:
Chrift try-.d his love, in bidding bimforfakj all, beciufebc.
knew (for all his brags) that his mind was rivetted therein y
not that if he had enjoy'd his-poffeftions with Chnftiac in-
differcncy, much of them might not have been continued
? and
Exoi.s2* 6 a
Amos 6. 3^ .
4,y ? 6.
Eph.4. 17,
,
2I J 2.2 ) 23 S .
24. .
2 Tsm, 2.
/WW.xp.l6
20^2Xj22 v>


tnd retain’d ; but what then is their doom, whofc hearts arc
fo fixed in the vanities of the World, that they will rather
make them chriftian than part with them? But fuch aGhri-
ftian this young man might have been, who had more to fay
for himfelf, than the ftri&eft Pharifee living dare pretend
to 5 yet he went away forrowful from Jefm, Should I ask you,
if Nicodemas did well to come by night, and be afhamed of
the Great Meffmh of the Woild, and if he was not ignorant
when Cfa rift fpakc to him of the new Birth f I know you
would anfwer me, Yes, he did very iil i and was very ignorant ;
but ftay a while, the beam is in your own eyes; you are rea-
dy doubtlcfs to condemn him, and the young man, for not do-
ing what you not only refufe to do your [elves, but laugh at others,
for doing. Nay, had fuch pajfages not been writ, and were
it not for the reverence feme pretend for the Scriptures, they
would both be as flupid as 'Hfcodemas in their anfwcrs to fuch
Heavenly matters, and ready to call it Canting in any to [peak,
fo ; as it is frequent for youthen we fpcak t® the fame effedf,
though not the fame words : juft with the Jews • at the time
they called God their Father, they difpifed his Son; and
when hefpake of fublimc and heavenly Myfterics, [ome cry’d,
'He has aSDevit ; others, He is mad • and moji of them, Thefe
are hard fayings, who can bear them f And to you all that fport
your felves after the manners of the World, let me fay, That
you are of thofe who profefi you know God, but in Works deny
him i living in thofe Pleafures, which flay the Juß in your
[elves: for though you talk of believing, it is no more then
taking it for granted, that there is a God, a Chrift, Scrip-
tures, £cc, without farther concerning your felves to prove
the verity thereof to your felves, or others, by a Arid and
holy Convctfation ; which flight way of believing, is butt
light and carclefs way of ridding your felves of farther exa-
mination ; and rather throwing them off with an inconfider-
able granting of them to be fo, than giving your felves the
trouble of making better enquiry ( leaving that to your
Priefts, oft-times more ignorant, and not lefs vain and idle
than your felves) which is fo far from a Gofpel-Faitb, that
the leaft lefpedl youean fliew Cod, Scriptures, &c. and
next
Joh^.l f 2 3
(Titus 1,26,


next to which kind of believing, is nothing under a doubted a
denyal of all. But if you have hitherto laid a fide ail Tem-
perance, Reafon, and Shame, at lead be in treated to re fume
them now in a matter of this importance, and whereon no
lefs concernment rcft?j than your temporal and eternal hap-
pinefs. Oh I retire, obferve the reproofs of Infracti-
on in your own minds ; that which begets melancholy in the middfi
of mirth , which cannot folace it /elf, nor be contented below im-
mortality ; which calls often to an account at nights, mornings,
and at other feafons ; which lets you fee the vanity , the folly, the
end and mifery of the fie things: that is the jufl Principle, andho-
ly Spirit of the Almighty j hear him , obey him, converfe with
them who are led by him and let the glories of another World he
eyed, and the recompence of reward kept in fight:, admit not the
thoughts of former follycs to revive, but be Beady,..and
continually cxercifcd by his (Jrace, to deny all ungodl'mefs and
worldly luffs, and to live foberly, right eon fly, and godly in this pre~
fent world j for this is the true and heavenly nature of Chii-
Bianity ; to he fo awakened and guided by the Spirit and Grace of
Cod , as to leave the fins and vanities of the world, to have the
afftCllons regenerated l, the mind■ reformed , and the whole man fa
bapuzjf.d into purity and faithfulnefs towards God and. tJMCan, at
to aCI with reverence, jufhee, and mercy ; to care for very few
things ; to be content with what you have ; to ufe all as if you .
m’d them not• and to be fo difent angled from the luffs, pleasures,
profits, and honours of the world • as to have the mind rat fed to
things above, the heart and affections fixed there, that in ad things
you may glorife Gael , and be as Lights fet on a Uili, whofie fbin~
ing Examples may be conducing to the happtnefs of others, who be-
holding fuch good works may be converted , and glorifie Gad the -
ld at her of Lights , in which you all would be eternally bleffed,
But if the Impenitence of any is fo great, theirpurfuit of
folly as earned, and notwithftan-ding-what has been thus fen-
on-fly offer’d to reclaim them, they are refolved to. take their
couvfe, and not to be at Icifure for more divine things,. T
have this farther to leave with them, from the Almighry, who
fiift in jo ytv d me this work,, That- trihuUtion r , anguifio-, and
P 2. ,forrow o
Tit-z, ii,
12,1^14.


[arrow, (hall makf their dying beds • indignation and wrath, (hall
wind up their day es and 'vexation of mind and (piritffhalibe
the mlferable fruit sywhich are eternally to be reaped .as the rewards
of all their wretched folly and rebellions , Be not deceivedfSod wifi
not be mocked : It’s fo irreveifibly decreed • whatever is [own
here,(hall be reaped hereafter. And juft is the Almighty, to
make good his determinations upon fuch, who infteid of cm-
: ploying the time given them, to work out their Salvation with
fear and trembling, have fpent it in the pleafures of the
Flefh, which pcrilheth, as if their Heaven were here: nor
can it fectn unreasonable, fince-he hath thus long waited with
remiffion of fin, and eternal Life in his hand, todifttjbutc to
them that repent j that if they will not, to reward fo great
obftinacy, and love of this psrifhing world, with cvexlafting
tribulations, which he will as certainly recompence, as he is
God over all, Holy, and Juft for ever*
But lam otherwife perfwaded of many; yes, lam affured
the everlafting Mercies of God have been fo extended to
many, as this will prove an cffie&ual Call yet further to bring
them out of the wayes and cuftomes of this World that paf-
fech away; and a means for eftablUhing fuch, who hitherto
have been unfaithful to what they have been already con-
vinced of. And you, my Friends, whofe minds have re-
ceived the AL L ARUM, whofe hearts have truly heard the
Voice of one crying in the Wild erne ft, where you have been
ftraying Lord, Repent, repent. To you, in the Name
of this Living dreadful God, I fpeak, I cry, Come away, come
away i Ah I what do you there f Why are you yet behind ? tbaCs
not your Reft ; its pointed with the Sins and Vanities of a perifh-
ing World: Gird up your Loyns ; Eye your Light (One in all)
Chriß Jefus, the fame yefterday, to day, and for ever ; who hath
enlightnedevery one, follow him, he will lead you to the City that*s
defeendedfrom Heaven, to the new Jerufalem, & God the Judge of
all i into which nothing that defiles cm enter, or have admijfion.
Mind not the difficulties of your March ; great and good
things vyere never inteipriz’d and accoraplillisd without diffi-
culty
6.p,
'Gal tS.d. <
7 ’g*
3 2 *
:
Mev.3.20,
S:4 > i| B


culty and haidfHip; which alwayes reader their injoyment
bat the more plcafant and glorious in the end* Let the holy
M s n and Women of old, be your examples; Remember good
old Abraham, the excellency of whole Faith is let out by his
obedience to the Voice of God) in for faking his Fathers hmfe ,
Kindred, Lands, Countrey, and Cuftoms of it j never to return,
rgain . And Mofes, that might in probability have been a
King ; by Faith in God, leaves Spypts glory, and Phar oak’s
favours, and chutes rather to fojourn and pilgrimage with
thedefplfed, affl’ußed, tormented Ifraelitcs in the Wilde rnefs,
than to enjoy the pleafurcs of that great Court for a fcafon •
Chrift’s reproaches greater riches than Eglpts trea-
fares. But above all, how great was the reproach, how ma-
ny the fufferings, what bitter mockings did jefus fuffer at the
bands of his enemies ? yet with what patience, meeknefs,
forgivenefs, and conftancy did he, in all his a&ions, demean
himfclf towards his bloody Perfecutors? Dejpiftng the flume,
induring the Croft, for the joy that was fet before him : And hath
left us'this glorious Example,that we Chould follow his fteps,
which hath in almoli cvciy_ been imitated. The A-
poftles fealed their Teftimonies with their blood, and multi-
tudes,after the examples of their conliancy ; efteeming it the
greateft honour, as it was alwayes attended with the fignaPft
demonftrations of Divine Love. How memorable was that
of Origsn, If my Father were weeping upon his kpees before me,
and my Mother hanging about my neck, behind me-, and ail my
Brethren, Sifters, and Kinsfolks, lamenting on every to retain
me in the life and praßice of the World, I would fling my Mother
to the ground, run over my Father, defpife all my Kindred, and
tread them under my feet, that / might run to Chrift : yet is it
known, how dutiful and tender he was to all. Not much unV.
like to this, was that noble and known-loflance of.latt**',
dayes, in Gale aims Caracciolm, Marqueft of VICO, op-. °f
large Revenues, great Relations, and Reputation the
Worldwho voluntarily abandoned his Friends, and
Countrey ; nay, which was more intollerable lo all
this he did, notwsthflanding the import mU o\ an affe~
Bionate Wife, and manny innocent young Children* thatjeemd to
ami l-,
Gefrii'tjz
2|' } ’2<5 5 27^
Heb.x2.»li i
2. .' ‘ '
i Ptf/.2, ai
22| 2J.


arrefi his leggs, by their tender and pitiful embraces » rcfolutdy
faying with TlLofes, That he would rather fufifer AfiUßions with
the fir ft Reformers, and Protefiants, than enjoy the plenty, favour,
md pleafures that attended hie former life, rvhilß in the Romm:
%& l k ion. Nor is it pollible for any now to quit the World,
and live a ferious godly life, without the like fullering and
pcrfecution.- There are among ns alfo, who have not been'
without the exercife of fuffeiing the difplcafurc of their moft
dear and intimate Relations and Friends j and all thofe trou-
bles, difgraces, & reproaches,which areaccuftomcd to attend
fuch as forgo the honours, pleafures, ambition, and prefer-
ments of the World, and rather c'.ufe to live an humble,
ferious, and-Telf-denying life ; wherefore, my Friends, (ince we-
ar e comp fit d about with fo great a cloud of Witneffes, let's lay a~
fide every weight, and the fins of Fanities that do fo eafily hefet m,
and with a confiant holy patience run oar Race, having our Eyes
fixed upon J-efm the Author and finljher of oar Faith, not minding,
what’s behind; fo (hall vve be delivered from every fnarc , no
finlhail gain us, no frownsTcare us from our felf-dcnying
life ; and honour, glory, immortality, and eternal Life, jhallre *
compeme oar Sufferings i and- the Truth be more abundantly
exalted : For the cry is long fince gone up ; How long! Bow
long / How long I O Lord God, holy and true , will it he,ere thou
wilt come and take,thy great Power, and Raign ? To which, the
snfwcr hath been. Yet a very little while , and he that.[hall come
wilicowe, and will not tarry, to vifin the darkle or ners of the Earth
with his great Salvation, to defiroy the enemies of hu Chofen, and.
make way for the righteous Pfation- • to bind Satan In chains, and
his wandring Spirits iso fetters of Iron that the Pr if oner may
come out of. the the Spirit that’s grieved,rejoyce • that the
Lame may. leapt as an Hart, and the tongue of the Dumb may
that waters may firing in the Wild erne fi, and fireams in the
fPef*-n, and the barren Land become a fiandirg < yWy that
Truth may replenifh the Earth, and Right eonfnefs run down like,
that joy, peace, and ferenity, may cover, the
whale Creation,,:
Which*
I >^.4.1 ? 2j
%eh, 1 2. i.
h.-h
\ A \ ;
1-3; .
kom>iq.
'itv&z*
’ey, 23. 1.
ip..
,>■ 4 2 - 7.


Which, ts it hath been promifed, fo is it on its way to be ,
vvompiifticd I fir the eternal Sabbath is at hand, in which the
■■Ur of his own. works ilnl\ perilli; and that everlaftiog,
T'lbile.c at the door, to which whomfoeyer ftiall come with-
out the %sbe that has been firft wajh’d white in the Blood of the
lamb, and the man? Tribulations ; fid bejafl mt into utter
Mfkmfs, where mH be weeping and gnawing of teeth fir ever. ‘
But as for ‘the Redeemed and San&iliea of 3 who have
o, me i Jgfm in the narrow path of Re feneration, and not loved
'their lives mto the death, their [orrow (had fly away, every tear
(hd. be wiped from their eyes, and fifing (had be heard no more
’iihintheir Borders: But joyes iwpakabk and full of glory :
he their evcilafting Inheritance j fo (liall Divine Ho- '
and Eternal Hallelujah*;be unanimoufly rendered to
lam that fits upoli the Throne, and the Lamb, who is the rnoft
p.gh and Holy One, that Lizes and Reigns, God blefsM and
f * noun’d for ever, t/ime**
ih-vi-
Amos j.
tfai 2.17.:
Mat. 22.i1
12,13314.
Rev*?* 12,
THE END.




