

NO FIXED DUTY.
A PAMPHLET
BY
RICHARD CONGREVE, M.A.
LONDON:
JAMES RIDG WAY, PICCADILLY;
FRANCIS MACPHERSON, HIGH STREET, OXFORD.
1851.




NO FIXED DUTY.
The Case of the Farmer and Labourer stated in a
Letter to Benjamin D'lsraeli, Esq., M.P., pp. 50.
—Riclgway, 1851.
Letters to John Bull, Esq., by Sir E. Bulwer
Lytton. Seventh edition, pp. 104.—Chapman
and Hall, 1851.
Pamphlets such as these are a sufficient apology,
if any be needed, for my writing. For the manner
of my writing, I hold with the authpr of the first
that I am entitled to avail myself of the full privi-
leges of an advocate, who, without being careless
of giving offence to those whose opinions he is most
bound or most desirous to respect, still thinks it his
duty, as well as his right, to state the strongest
truths in the plainest way.
In the following remarks I shall, so far as I limit
myself to criticism, try and meet the positions laid
down in this first pamphlet. It is in this respect
a convenience that the two coincide in the main in
their view of the evil, that they propose the same
a 2


remedy, and substantially on the same grounds.
It is this coincidence of general feeling which gives
them their value. They are from two different
quarters expressions of a feeling entertained by the
landlord class in all its ramifications, that to meet
wdiat is called the present agricultural crisis a
legislative interference of a particular kind is abso-
lutely necessary. As there is this general agree-
ment, I prefer attacking the first for many reasons:
partly because it is anonymous; partly, because its
more close, logical form and statements give it a
great superiority over the more rhetorical writing of
Sir E. Bulwer Lytton : and lastly, if 1 may say
so, with all respect for so high a name in other fields
of literature, it is by far the more candid and
considerate of the two, so much so, that to the more
ultra of his own side of the question, its admissions
and incidental allusions require a very liberal appli-
cation of the context to disarm them of their double-
edged character, to prevent the painful sense creep-
ing over their minds, that their own advocate really
is at one with his opponents on the main prin-
ciples which the question involves. These admis-
sions I shall notice in their order.
There is much which I may pass by with very
slight notice. Ido not wish to entangle myself in
that singularly tedious subject, the question of
Ecclesiastical Titles. Nor again need I say much
on the writer’s compliments to the leaders of his
own party, any more than on his self-complacent


view of its superiority in argument. In presence of
the writings of the last thirty-five years, it is at least
a curious thing to say, that he “ would rather leave
to his opponents the argument of intimidation,
which is indeed their only one, certainly their
strongest one,” —p. 28.
His attacks on the statesmen of opposite views
are in themselves more interesting. That on Sir
Robert Peel, from his point of view, is not one I
need quarrel with—l would rather sympathise
with the graceful tribute that is paid to his influence
and his industry, than dwell on the sneers levelled
at his political blunders, and his inadequate farming
skill ; the last I should conceive to be unjust, the
former rest on better foundation. In much more
questionable taste are the remarks on Sir James
Graham, which with another on the “ Balaks of
Manchester,” are below the general tone of the writ-
ing. The attack on the most eminent of the Free
Trade leaders, the Statesman whose name is empha-
tically the name of the great Corn Law struggle,
may by the pointed vehemence of its language
draw to itself a degree of attention, which its in-
herent want of strength will disappoint. It will
therefore serve but to shew the bitterness of the
feelings entertained against Mr. Cobden, whom his
antagonists would not dislike so much, nor abuse
so heartily, if they felt him to be the sort
of man here described. It is precisely because he
is not vague in judgment, irresolute in purpose, or


extravagant in conjecture, that he is so cordiallv
hated.
The history of Corn Law legislation, so far as it
is merely personal, would be as well buried so fai
as it is a recrimination addressed by one party to
the other on the score of false prophecy, it is un-
profitable, and the more so as neither party is as yet
quite clear what the issue will be. Hitherto both
have failed. On the one side it is certain that the
whole train of evils which was to follow the
repeal of the Corn Laws has not yet done so, oui
supply of gold is yet adequate to our wants,—our
land is yet cultivated as a nation we are yet fairly
prosperous, and foreigners do take our goods of us
in, return for their corn. On the other side prices
have been and are at present lower than the advo-
cates of the Repeal, or most of them, thought. Let
so much be granted —leaving untouched the question
of how long that state will continue. But no one
can say that the argument for Repeal was based on
any calculation of price. Looking merely at the
economical argument, it was demanded in the
interest of the consumer, not of the producer. To
those who so demanded it, it is after all no very
great evil that it has more than answered their ex-
pectations.
The object aimed at by the writer is a just, mode-
rate, and temporary protection. These two last
epithets are evidently worth discussion only in pro-
portion as we grant the first. If we are doomed to


have the yoke of Protection again on our necks,
common sense tells us that we should wish it to
gall us as little and for as short a time as possible.
If, on the one hand, we allow that it is but an act
of simple justice to a wronged and suffering class
that Protection should be restored, its limits both in
amount and duration will be fixed by reference to
the justice of the case. The language used by the
author seems to betray a lurking misgiving on this
point —whether it is just or no ; he seems speaking
more of a necessary evil than a measure in itself
right, a view which other parts of his pamphlet
warrant our taking. If, on the other hand, we object
to Protection in itself, and on principle, if I look on
it, as I do, as an injustice, an act of legalized spolia-
tion, a robbery of me as a consumer in favour of the
landlord class in the case of the Corn Laws ; of the
protected class in the general; I need not feel bound
to spend much time in discussing how far it should
be moderate or temporary.
Let me explain myself more fully. All taxa-
tion ought to be returned to the tax-payer
in the shape of some service done; otherwise it
becomes legalized robbery. It is in this light I
regard Protection. I see no service done to the con-
sumer to balance the service to the producer, which
his payment of the tax represents. Against this,
I believe, two arguments are urged. The one has
been very popular, long established, and wears a
show of reason. It is, that we are unwise nationally,


to suffer ourselves to be dependent on foreign
nations for our supply of food, that in case of war,
or of a general failure in the crops, that supply
might fail us. For the last case, it is clear, that it is
a very extreme one, and that the perfect fieedom of
the trade in corn would be the best guarantee against
any one nation bearing the whole weight of the
suffering. Great as the evil would be, it would
be borne more easily in proportion as it was moie
equally distributed. All that can be said about the
case of a war, is, that whilst it is not an impos-
sibility, it is so very improbable a contingency,
that to live in the constant fear of it, and to waste
our energies yearly to guard against it, is a couise
of policy which reason cannot justify. (See, on both
questions, Mill. Pol. Econ. ii. 486, 487.)
The other argument for Protection is a very odd
one. Yet it is held, and that by those who give
up as untenable or unimportant all economical
arguments in support of their cause. It is so en-
tirely alien to my whole notions on such subjects, that
I may find it hard to state it quite fairly. The point
assumed is, that the social and political welfare of
England rests on the maintenance of her Landed
Interest. It is held unwise to analyze the teim.
Left in this its vagueness, it is more adapted to the
necessity of the argument. This Landed Interest
rests on Protection; for it requires considerable
wealth to enable it to perform its functions as an
element in the social system. Where is it to get


this wealth ? Not from labour clearly. The Aris-
tocracy, for here we are driven perforce to restrict
our large term, must have leisure as well as wealth.
So rent is the proper source of their income, and
“ rents are paid because corn sells high.” To raise
the price of corn is the desideratum therefore ; the
means lie in Protection. The primary assumption
rests on a motley assemblage of statements, over and
over again refuted singly, but thought to gain force
by aggregation. I have not space to point them
out. They range from the necessity of a nation’s
having food up to the dimmer region of national
associations and immemorial services. But grant
the assumption, and then what are the consequences ?
Evidently the economical argument goes to the wall.
The country should be glad—nay, is glad —to sup-
port this interest, so essential to its welfare. It
may cost it much money, but what is money when
all your higher social and moral interests are at
stake? when by some sacrifice of money you can
secure a wholesome leaven of morality, a type
class which all others may emulate. If the nation
is willing to have such a class, it must pay for it. I
put aside for the moment all other answers to this
singular language. I waive all other objections,
strong, numerous, and deep rooted as they are in
my mind. I content myself here with one remark.
Let the nation judge fairly. It is easy for men to
vote themselves a real ornament —an indispensable
blessing—what the French call a “ providential


class. It is easy, when convinced of this, for them
to vote the requisite means to this end, the sub-
sidia for this providential domination. But the
fairer way would be for them to stand aside. 1- hey
are parties in the cause. Let them have delicacy
enough to see this, and when they have, with such
arguments as they can command, stated their case
to the country, let them not hesitate to appeal to
that country to decide the question. To that deci-
sion, even if in their favour, I for one would bow.
Passing from these considerations there is one
point which should be made quite clear at the
outset. Is it Revenue or Protection that is wanted ?
Our author is for Protection apparently, but giving
way to a common practice he dazzles men’s eyes
with a display of the advantage to the revenue.
He aims a blow at those who object to raising a
revenue on the food of the people, but he parries it
himself so immediately that an opponent need only
remember the admission that a tax on the food of
the poor is not a good tax, and a customs duty on
corn cannot be defended oil any other plea but that
of necessity, that “to substitute for the Income
Tax a tax upon bread as a means of raising money
is in appearance at least, to offer a bribe to the rich
at the expense of the poor. ’ bo far good. But
then immediately after comes another statement in
the opposite direction, and we are told of the two
millions which “ we offer on such easy terms, and
which are always kept ready for him in the pockets


of the foreigner.” This is a return to the notions
of revenue, a revenue to be raised on corn at the
dictate of a hard necessity. The economical part
of the argument is hardly worth going over. It
has been gone through so often. * Before we try
this resource it is clear that the necessity must be
shewn, and recent discussion has made it evident
that there are other ways of balancing our national
income and expenditure as yet untried. He offers
two millions. Take him at his word for argument’s
sake, and assume that we want two millions, we
could get them very easily elsewhere. There is
that ineffectual and absurd African squadron offer-
ins' us an economv of a clear million I believe, and
there was but the other day a demonstration of Sir
W. Molesworth that it was possible at once to save
£1,600,000 on the existing misgovernment of our
Colonies. Besides these there remains yet open for
reduction the whole field of our home expenditure,
especially that of the army and navy, lhen grant
that we had exhausted the saving line, there are
many other parts of taxation which will stand revi-
sion, and which will be revised either as a means
of staving off that necessity which the writer really
deprecates, or as a consequence of the awakening
men's attention on this head, the inevitable result of
a revival of the duty on corn. For instance, we might
open the landtax question again. Ihe revenue
* See Mr. Mill’s Political Economy, book v. § 5, or Colonel
Thompson’s Corn Law Catechism, vol. iv. Works.


ground then I consider untenable. Ihe necessity
has not yet been shewn, and until it has, my oppo-
nent and I are agreed as to the principle.
On Protection I have already spoken. There is
yet a third ground, which is not uncommonly
adopted—the combination of Revenue and Protec-
tion. This line of argument is to catch the pro-
ducer on the one hand by higher prices, the con-
sumer on the other, qua tax payer, by lower taxes.
It has its effect on many minds, yet a careful
analysis would shew that this child of two sickly
parents is but a feeble bantling, and has a tendency
to combine the defects of both. It is seldom that
two bad arguments make a good one by composi-
tion. The compound is in this case homogeneous
with its elements, dhe admixtuie is mechanical
not chemical. You lower the aggregate of the
national capital by this duty for Protection, and
you offer the tax payer no great diminution of
his payments; you raise your revenue by say
two millions, but you take it out of him in
the price of corn, and as a fact the moie you
succeed in your Protection theory, the dimmer
becomes your already dim vision of lelief fiom
a duty; your aim is, if it is anything, to make the
corn-growers at home supply in oidinaiy times
the national demand—yet you would keep the
revenue to be derived from a large importation.
Your two objects are ultimately inconsistent. As
your stimulus works, and production at home in-


creases, your 4,000,000 of quarters dwindle down,
and the Revenue with them, and as this process goes
on, it lays bare the fact that the English consumer
pays on all corn grown at home a given sum,
without any corresponding advantage to himself,
and solely for the benefit of one class of producers.
The Revenue half of the argument breaks down,
leaving him with the Protection half to enjoy it as
he best may, and to meditate at his leisure ovei
those easy two millions which were waiting for him
in the pocket of the foreigner, to snatch at which he
consented in his blindness to fleece himself to a
far greater amount.
And now, on what grounds is this Protection
claimed ? I may remark that it is avowedly pio
tection to a class that the writer wishes. This sim-
plifies the matter. The old theory, to which a good
deal of sentiment was so ludicrously appended, of
Protection to Native Industry, is, so far as he is
concerned, abandoned—-not before facts absolutely
demanded it. It is a class suffering from unequal
legislation that we are called on to relieve. “ Ihe
“ case in its general form is this that they are
“ suffering from a change made, without any neces-
“ s ity without fair notice, without due considera-
“ tion —upon grounds of expectation which the
(t event has falsified ; a change which has brought
« U pon them a loss not compensated for by any
“ corresponding benefit to others, &c. &c. p. 4.
Putting aside the questions of its necessity, and


the grounds of expectation, both of which have been
dealt with incidentally, I may ask what the writer
would consider fair notice, due consideration ? Look
at the history of those mad and miserable Corn
Laws—as Mr. Carlyle so justly called them, writing
in 1843. Remember the scenes of their passing,
the violence on the part of the people, the troops
required to protect the Legislature, the voice of
dissent heard even among the Lords. Review since
then the war against them in all their various modi-
fications, whether of 1828 or 1842. Read the Corn
Law Catechism published in 1827, or the lines of
the Corn Law Rhymer, both of which found an
echo through England. Or come nearer, to the
great League struggle, recall to your mind its
humble beginning, the small party that met in
1839, when it seemed as if there was no hope, and
that the stifling grasp of Protection would choke
the life out of England’s commercial enterprise. Re-
member the scenes of 1841 and 42, the half restora-
tion to life of the expiring Whigs, because they at
the last moment held out hopes of a change, the
rising of the Northern districts in 1842 then the
great experiment of the New Tariff, the three years
of excitement and argument, and comparative pros-
perity which changed Sir R. Peel’s mind. Name,
if you can, one writer of eminence on Political Eco-
nomy during those thirty years, who did not con-
demn your laws. Recall to yourselves once more
the thrill that ran through England, Nov. 4,


1845, when the Times announced that the Corn Laws
were doomed-that Sir Robert Peel was prepared
to propose their repeal. Lastly, go over once moie
the final scenes of that struggle, its bitter recrimina-
tions, its vivid excitement,its triumphant issue—and
the people’s welcome of that issue. Do not forget,
that then, as now, you saw the evil of the change,
that you had then a majority on conviction in
both Houses of Parliament, and no want of will
to use that majority. What was it prevented
a Government by Parliamentary majority from
carrying out the will of Parliament? Why, Lords
and Commons alike felt themselves in presence of a
stronger power; they felt that the Minister was
backed by the people of England. They yielded.
You regret that they yielded. You were beaten in
fair fight —but certainly not without fair notice —
not without due consideration. And even in the
hour of your defeat, you were well treated. A
respite was given you, and against the real interests
of the farmers of England, in spite of a plain and
forcible warning, you clung to that period of three
years which was allowed you. With all this I
cannot conceive your now complaining, that there
was not allowed you due consideration. Are thirty
years of argument and seven of agitation not
enough? Then what would be? No period of
consideration, no notice would be enough, if at the
end the abuse was to be swept away. Have those
who profited by a vested wrong, ever thought them


selves treated with due consideration, their pet
nuisance handled with sufficient delicacy ?
The truth is, that what was yielded in 1846 was
yielded reluctantly, and under pressure. The sense
of that pressure has now passed away, and can with
difficulty be recalled. You wish to return on your
steps. You think you might have made a better
bargain then, and that the opportunity then lost
may be recovered. 1 his is rarely the case. You,
of all men, ought best to know this ; for you
may remember that this fixed duty, which you now
clamour for, was offered you in 1841, and was met
on your part by a loud and confident defiance*. In
the cant language of your party at that time, the
war-cry was, No surrender. After all, you may well
be reconciled to your lot. A temperate survey of
the last three years might at least have the effect of
reconciling you. You may remember, however
short your memory, the year 1848 ; how, amidst
the crash of European thrones, England, almost
alone, stood firm. The vessel of the State then met
the tidewave of European democracy, and rode
safely over it: but the crew within held their
breath. It was a moment of anxious suspense as
they watched her meet it.
How anxious, how painful that suspense was,
may be gathered from the boisterous cheer in which
the relief from it found its expression. Possibly the
strain was overrated; but any one who deliberately


reviews that time must feel that it might have been
most dangerous, that there wanted but a cause —a
definite grievance—to have changed the 10th of
April from a day of somewhat unseemly triumph
and Pharisaic self-gratulation to one that should,
like the 24th of February, have inaugurated a re-
volution, and made the pacific settlement of our dif-
ferences impossible.
The remaining parts of the general statement
naturally connect with the greater subsequent de-
tail. Has there been no “ corresponding benefit to
others to compensate for the loss to the suffering
class V’ This is a statement which it would be long
to meet. It is certainly not the language held by
the leaders in Parliament of the writer’s own party,
and stands entirely unsupported by any argument.
The most cursory glance at the Trade Returns for
the last three years contradicts it. It would be a
needless overloading of these pages to give them.
“ They are suffering from a change made, &c.,
and from this they the more confidently ask to be
relieved, that their distress is likely to prove, in its
extent, a national disaster.” Now then for the
modes of relief: Mr. D’lsraeli’s possible substitutes,
other than Protection, are voted useless and im-
practicable ; the sooner we renounce them the
better. The burdens upon ownership to the land-
lord, and all fixed burdens, are put aside. The
repeal of the Malt Tax is declared impossible. The
Poors’ Rate is discussed more fully. The writer
B


does not touch on the change in its incidence, he
does not allow for the fact, that it is not, as it was
once, paid in largest proportion by the land. True
it is paid by real estate in town or country, but the
growth of the towns has relieved those who are pro-
perly called landowners.* Still he has hit a very
difficult point, the Law of Settlement in its opera-
tion on the agricultural labour market, whether it
concerns the employer or employed. r lhat it
operates very prejudicially seems to me clear.
(Mr, Bakers Evidence on Burdens on Land.)
The employer feels it in the alternative he is
driven to of high rates, or unprofitable employment,
unprofitable —not so much as to the quantity ol
labour, but as to the quality. All must be employed
alike, and there is no stimulus to the idle or the
drunken. The employed, if good workmen, feel it
in the restraint on their market, and are, if had,
unconsciously still further lowered by it. Good
legislation here might do much for both parties.
An attempt was made in the administration of
Sir R. Peel; but the outcry was, I believe, too
strong. A change in this respect is also demanded
as a remedy for another evil, the one, I take it,
alluded to by our author (p. 24) where he speaks of
“ those dishonest and oppressive practices by which
many landlords, and amongst them some of the
highest in the land, have been saving their own
* See Lords’ Committee on Burdens on Land ; Mr. IL Ash-
worth’s Evidence ; and page ix of the Report.


pockets at the expense of their neighbours.” The
evil is the clearance of the poor from off the great
estates, and the driving them into the neighbouring
villages —with no good effects either social or moral.
In this matter of the Poor Law, then, I quite agree
that something may be done. It is, however, a
needless embarrassment of the subject to speak as
the author does of relief to come from the State. As
soon as you come to money matters, the State can
give no money to one class but at the expense of
some others. So agriculture cannot be relieved
at the expense of the State, in any strict use of the
expression ; but the State might see that the pay-
ments on account of the Poor Law fell more equally.
I should myself conceive that they fall equally
enough as a matter of payment; but that other
effects of the existing laws are economically and
socially bad.
However, our author takes a different view, and
to meet the burden of the Poor two ways are said
to be open: to reduce labour, to refuse to employ
the supernumeraries; or emigration. The first is
rejected: it is not quite safe. The second is adopted
—a large measure is demanded. Nationally, this
may be desirable ; —economically, it may be de-
sirablesocially, for the labourer’s own sake, it is
desirable. I have often wondered why, under our
existing system, any able-bodied young agricultural
labourers stay in the country. Had they but fail
acquaintance with the facts, I believe they would
b 2


go in large numbers. And I should be glad if they
did.
But as a measure of immediate relief for the
existing distress of tenant farmers —and as such I
understand it to be advocated —it is not one I think
feasible. Let emigration take place to a large
extent, and what are the immediate consequences ?
You would allow that the aged and infirm would
not £0 as a rule. Your indoor relief would not be
materially diminished. The emigration would then
be from the best and most active of your labourers.
If large enough sensibly to affect the numbers, it
would be found that wages must rise, for grumble
as you will at labour, it must be had ;it is the
essential condition of a return —as a great quantity
of labour is of a large return —and your relief to
the labourer becomes a serious additional burthen
to the farmer. Practically, for this reason, you will
find very few farmers anxious to promote emigra-
tion. Their immediate interest, as men hard pressed
by low prices and insufficient capital, is entirely
against it.
One other class of suggestions is noticed and
criticised—the introduction of new crops, and the
removal of all restrictions on their cultivation. Beet-
root, flax, and tobacco, are the three mentioned.
Much good immediately is not expected from them.
Beet root for sugar, and tobacco, are objected to —■
the first as hopeless, the second as fatal to the
revenue, “ which we ought to be equally anxious


about with Protection.” Flax is in the distance a
more hopeful affair. As an advocate of the utmost
possible liberty in such matters, I should be an
enemy to any restrictions on the introduction of new
crops. But on other grounds, as well as those of
our author, I think the question comparatively un-
important.
Exhaustively then, in the view of the writer, we
have arrived at this —it is either Protection or
nothing. Heartily do I agree in what follows. “If
it is to he nothing , the sooner we know it the better
-—the sooner, too, we give up a delusive agitation, of
which the only use has been hitherto in Parliament
to make Government impossible, and out of Parlia-
ment to enable the landlords to take an undue
advantage of the ignorance of their tenants.”
As I hold that nothing can or should be done
directly by Government; and further, that Protec-
tion is wrong in principle, for reasons already given,
there remains but little matter for direct controversy
between me and the writer, except on one point, and
that is, his more detailed statement of the case of
his clients, which suggests several comments.
He takes, not very systematically, the three great
divisions of the agricultural class, and gives his
view of the position of each. No part of his pam-
phlet seems to me so good. Its candour is remark-
able, his statements unexaggerated ; in every part
it is a contrast to ordinary Protectionist language.
Let us see what is the result of his remarks on


I. The Landlords.
11. The Tenant Farmers.
111. The Agricultural Labourer.
The artizan receives rather an odd treatment,
which I will briefly glance at. It would not be
very easy to say what is the result of our author s
remarks on this subject. At the end of his pamphlet
he seems satisfied with his treatment of it (p. 38) ;
and in the course of it he makes this remark
(p. 31): “ Then as to the artizan, and generally
the poorer sort of dwellers in towns, they depend
far less upon bread than the rural population, the
better paid among them having the ability to pur-
chase good meat, and the poorest having facilities
for supplying themselves with refuse, or inferior
provisions, which the dwellers in villages have not.
They are likely to get meat cheaper and receive
some share of the profits of agriculture. A fixed
duty would leave them much as they are, seems to
be the conclusion ; and an acknowledgment, in a
half doubting way, of the simple truth that wages
do not depend on the price of bread. “ Has the
money rate of wages,” he says, “ been lowered , or
kept lower than it would have been by the cheap-
ness of provisions. If not, whatever the cheapness
may have done for the comfort of the artizan, it has
done nothing as yet for our Foreign Trade.” This
is a question I am not concerned with at present.
First, then, for the Landlords. Weigh well the
following statements, and then say whether it is


possible to wish a more candid opponent. Judge,
too, of the community of immediate interest between
landlord and tenant so unblushingly asserted.
“ A tax on bread as a means of raising money is,
in appearance at least, to offer a bribe to the rich
at the expense of the poor.” There is no effort, by
the way, to shew that the reality does not corres-
pond to the appearance.
An increase of income . enabling and disposing
the “ landlord to assist the tenant by a larger out-
lay, in the way of improvement, or to relieve him
by a more liberal reduction of rent. Note that the
landlord’s gain is immediate and certain from Pro-
tection, the tenant’s prospective and very contin-
gent. For compare a subsequent passage, Jhe
landlords are only just beginning to do, ungraciously,
and by compulsion, and insufficiently, what they
ought in common honesty to have done of their own
accord two years ago.”
Again —“ Land, as a permanent property, will
take care of itself; it has a constant tendency to
increase in value, and it has actually gained so
much during the last sixty years, that it can afford
to lose something during the next twenty.
“ It is lucky for the farmer that those who ad-
minister the law deal more kindly with them than
those who make it.’’
«< But if it is meant to shew, that the rent of
land throughout England has not been, or ought
not to be, very greatly reduced in consequence of the


change in the law, it is a proposition which you
must find it very difficult to deal with in Parlia-
mentary language.”
There are other passages bearing on this question
which I have already quoted, and some on the past
and present conduct of the landholders, with respect
to their labouring poor. They are generally more
complimentary for the future and unknown, than
for the past, present, and known facts. See the
pregnant remarks on the subject of enclosures—
allotments, (pp. 24, 25), and the treatment such
questions will meet with from an impoverished
proprietary. And again, I can coincide with the
closing remark: “ Thus it will be in this, as in all
“ other cases, the weakest will go to the wall, and
“ the burden which has been first placed on the
“ shoulders of the highest, will work its way down
“ to the back of the lowest.
The landlord thus will evidently take care of
himself. The other two classes are not so capable
of this. For convenience I will take the labourer
first. Here again the admissions are remarkable,
though more necessary. There is criticism on the
returns of the Poor Law, which the still later ones
just issued nullify—but there is a sufficient acknow-
ledgment for my purpose made, when he says, that
“ employment has been going on, and wages being
“ kept up, the labourer has not only been kept out
“of the workhouse, but has, 1 believe, upon the
“ whole, but not without many exceptions, lived


“ better out of it than he did ten years ago.” “Able-
bodied paupers ” have diminished even in the least
favourable counties, and by the Times , May 23,
1851, since the pamphlet was published, it appears
that the “ prosperity is not wearing itself out.”
The three counties quoted in favour of a contrary
conclusion, Lincoln, Cambridge, and Hereford,
cannot be so quoted any longer. They are now no
longer exceptions to the general decrease. In Lincoln
there is a decrease of 1*8; Cambridge, 3*9; Here-
ford 7*o. The general rate is 8-0 for the whole country.
Monmouth is the only instance of an increase. In
fact the labourer’s gain from Protection is like the
farmer’s, it is contingent, and prospective. And
his loss is measured by the possibility of improve-
ment. It is a very indistinct thing, that said
“ prospective betterment“ those improved dwel-
lings, &c.” which are to be his under a revived
Protection. The question should be first answered
satisfactorily : Why they were not his under the
old system? Whence this new-found care, this
rapid development of a philanthropic interest ?
Time and circumstances considered, it is not abso-
lutely free from suspicion. Our confidence in it
may very well be “ of slow growth.
Lastly, comes the tenant farmer’s case, the real
object of the work. It opens very gloomily indeed,
a black picture of ruin, four millions of corn sup-
plied by the foreigners, at less than 405. per quarter,
whereas five years ago,between 1842-46, the average


price was 50s, and the importation less than 800,000
quarters. Under those genial times, however, “ the
“ farmer was not getting very rich ; he must be
“ getting very poor now.” Such is the state, that
one-third of the tenant farmers are threatened with
removal in favour of men with more capital. At the
outset land-agents wereconfident —farmers were reso-
lute and cheerful—the change is verymarked. They
still cultivate, indeed, partly from justice,partly from
humanitv, partly because they know not what better
to do, and prefer running the chance of something
better turning up, partly that is from despair.
Therefore farms are held on. If thrown up, they are
either relet at a reduced rent, or they are taken at
the same rent, with no very honourable intentions
(fairly or unfairly, says our author). If the land is
well cultivated, still the labourer loses the chance of
improvement in his condition. But this is the best
case. On the poorer lands the evils are greater.
The poor uplands and the wet clays are the real
difficulties in the question. Their condition is such
that no reduction of rent is likely to keep up their
cultivation at the point at which it now is, or to
which it would probably be brought by reasonable
encouragement. As cultivation will not pay, the
occupiers will have to lay down for pasture that
which they have been encouraged by the Legislature
to break up, a process from which the poor will
suffer. Worse still is the case of the cold and wet
clays; drainage is necessary, but drainage is ex


pensive, and prices are not sufficiently remunera-
tive. And so here again cultivation will cease.
Such shortly is the case. What follows? It appears
that useful land, in good condition,, with good
buildings on it, and let on fair terms, will answer to
the farmer. That is allowed. The landlord loses
some of his rent, an evil, but not one to be
remedied by a tax of a halfpenny the quartern loaf
on the bread of the poor. In plain English then,
farming as a commercial speculation, undertaken
with judgment, that is with adequate capital, skill
and forethought to secure good terms, is a business
a man can yet live by with the fair rate of profit.
Thus much seems to follow. But as there is a
large portion of English land which is unfavourably
situated, which either from quality or condition is
unfit to answer the pressure of the times, as capital
is not forthcoming, as every condition of sound
business has been violated, and this in consequence
of a legislation for which the landholders are res-
ponsible, it follows that they are not to suffer in any
way for their greedy imprudence, but that the con-
sumer throughout England should make up to them
their loss. They have speculated—they have failed
in their speculation, and by an act of their own
they would now lay their hands on the money of
others to indemnify them for their failure.
The remedy proposed then, softened as much as
possible, veiled under whatever specious form, is as I
said above, to my mind one not to be tolerated. It is


an injustice, a form of communism which I think
far more odious than any other—other forms at
least have this recommendation that they are the
resource to which the benevolent may be attracted
as a remedy for the social evils that press on the
great suffering masses. This, on the contrary, is to
benefit the rich at the expense of the poor. Was it
not enough, I would ask, that for thirty years the
English nation stood this process ? Is it not enough
that it is content now to cancel that long account,
to bury the past in oblivion and begin afresh ?
Would you again rouse the feelings that existed
prior to “46?” Would you again have poets of
the poor writing songs like these:
“ What is bad government, thou slave
Whom robbers represent ?
What is bad government, thou knave,
Who lov’st bad government ?
It is the deadly will that takes
What labour ought to keep,
It is the deadly Power that makes
Bread dear, and labour cheap.”
For of this you may be certain that your success
in getting a fixed duty would be but the signal for
anew struggle. Never would its opponents rest
till it was abrogated. Let those who advocate it
think over the following passage written against
the old Corn Laws, but applicable to any new ones
that might be passed, “Do you know what ques-
tions, not as to Corn Prices and Sliding Scales


alone, they ar e forcing every reflective Englishman
to ask himself—questions insoluble, or hitherto
unsolved, you are forcing us to think of them, to
begin uttering them.” A fixed duty imposed in
the opening of 1852, in the face of Lord John
Russell’s promised Suffrage Bill, to say nothing of
other events which will easily suggest themselves,
would, I think, not be a wise measure.
Two more remarks I would hazard on this
Pamphlet. The first is, That the author does not
in the least shut his eyes to the general prosperity
of the country, though he is reluctant to attribute
it to free trade. California is brought in as a pos-
sible solution. I believe it is difficult to estimate
aright what the effects of California are on the
markets of the world, and therefore I do not think
we get much by this suggestion. 2ndly, It is ob-
vious throughout from his statements that at bottom
it is a question of rents, so far as immediate relief
is concerned. This conviction wants spreading as
he himself allows.
I have now done with criticism on the Pamphlet.
I hope that the author, if he sees these remarks,
will allow that I have not wilfully misrepresented
him. So little do I feel disposed to do so that I
should be glad to have that advocacy consciously
on the Free Trade side, which he seems to me now
to give unconsciously. I wish that such as he
could be convinced that it is not in Protection that
the remedy lies for the classes whose cause he


espouses, but in very different measures. I wish
they could see that Protection has failed to secure
those classes any real advantage hitherto, that the
present state, painful as I allow it is, is so from a
combination of causes, and from no one singly,
that it is a transition period, that the removal of
all protection is calculated to be the very saving of
English agriculture, a real boon not merely to the
artizan of the town or the agricultural labourer,
but if fairly dealt with to the tenant farmer more
than any other class, and ultimately to the land-
lord in his position of receiver of rent. To stop
this process now going on by a recoil would be,
I cannot but think, the very worst conceivable
policy. My reasons I will explain as briefly as I
can, and though not without reluctance will state
where I conceive the true remedy to lie,—what I
conceive to be the real evils from which the landed
classes are at present suffering.
It cannot be disguised that the change made in
1846 was one whose consequences are anything but
exhausted. It was not merely economical, it was
political and social, and in each of these its three
faces it is highly distasteful, and will be even moie
so for the future to the landed interest of this
country, which has hitherto been its ruling body.
At present it is the economical evil which most
pinches them. It will be soon felt that that is only
the more immediate, that the distant consequences
on their political power and social position will be


still more unpleasant to all who cling not unna-
turally to the old order of things, for by that order
they at any rate held great power and high con-
sideration, the splendid outside of as rotten a state
of society as the world need wish to see.
Previous to this great change, the land was the
basis of political power, it was a property to which
ideas were attached of a different kind from those
attached to any other. There was a certain misty
halo about a landlord’s heart, a convenient mixture
of ideas. He was a combination of semi-feudal
notions, and those of the modern capitalist of
government and dependence, with mere wealth, he
was a capitalist who thought trade discreditable,
but not money when produced by other’s trade; a
grand seigneur with true commercial principles and
instincts. As the grand seigneur and semi-feudal,
traditional governor he claimed votes and game; as
capitalist he wanted a good interest for his outlay,
the highest amount of rent which his land would
yield under a system of simple competition. It
was the very perfection of a social position, and its
combination of incongruous properties was sup-
ported by his hold on the Government. He made
the legislature —it moved obedient to his will, as
far as the course of events rendered that possible.
This state of things received its death-blow by
the Act of 1846. By that Act the food of the
country becomes a simple question of trade. It is
a manufacture as much as anything else. The land


of the country is the instrument for that manufac-
ture. Commercial principles will assert their abso-
lute hold in their own sphere, whether for land or
commerce. The landlords and tenants are joint
producers, joint capitalists, connected by a simple
commercial relation, and the labourer is the great
instrument of production. All influence but that
of personal character —all dependence on the one
side, all claim to it on the other, cease at once in this
new state. Political power goes, and with it goes
game. The simple questions are, how shall we
best work the land, and how shall we arrange our
mutual share of the profits. The answer to these
questions will become very much clearer when no
cloud of other ideas and alien associations interposes
to blind both parties to their strict commercial
interest ; and that strict interest will be found
also to bring the greatest amount of good to the
labourer.
I take it to be an undeniable fact, that a man of
good capital and enterprise, with the simple qualifi-
cation of paying regularly at the appointed time,
is worth in a parish all the charity that ever was
lavished from the best of motives. When the
labourer finds such an employer, then the only other
question that affects him, as a labourer, a receiver
of wages, is one of population. If they are too
thick on the ground, the labour market will be
against him. Throw this open, and educate him to
avail himself of the opportunities then given him,


and I doubt not the present state will cease. On
this, however, more hereafter.
There are two great obstacles in the way of this
result, distinct from each other, and to be treated
on different grounds. We meet them as soon as
we touch on the question of political influence and
the Game Laws. It is difficult to overrate the evil
influence on English agriculture springing from
these two sources. It is in this respect lam mainly
concerned with them. Their moral evils are not so
strictly to my subject—and yet briefly I would
avail myself of the opportunity to stigmatise them.
The day will soon come, I feel assured, when
the baseness involved in forcing a reluctant vote
against a man’s conscience, will be seen in its true
deformity, and it will appear strange that it could
ever have been tolerated. All the sophistry which
now veils it to the eyes even of many thinking and
honest men, will be torn off. I feel even the more
confidence in speaking on this point, as it is an evil
to which all political parties alike are subject. There
are remedies preparing for its cure, which I need
not mention. The day is also fast coming when the
moral sense of England will revolt from the Game
Laws, when that foul fester will be removed from
the body politic. Hares, pheasants and partridges
will become insignificant; the poacher class extinct;
the special justice for that class forgotten; in a more
industrial England, one of fair work and simple
justice, it will not be thought the necessary accom-
c


paniment of a gentleman, the true test of your
holding that position, to be a sportsman—that class
will not require an amusement sanctioned by a
whole series of legislative acts, with a history written
in blood, and the demoralization of the lower orders
of their countrymen —a history of unbroken evil
from that first bad act of Norman oppression, the
enclosure of the New Forest, down to the criminal
register of 1843, when so large a proportion of the
crime of England was attributable directly to those
laws.* That fearful abuse of the rights of property
has yet to be judged and condemned by the voice
of history, as it has been by that of reason. But
this is not my present task. I could not pass them
without a protest against that which is daily making
itself more and more felt—their immorality—they
are the most striking English monument of unjust
legislation.
These two obstacles have worked to one result.
For if over and above your rent, the fair marketable
value of your land, fixed by competition, you
require other advantages of the kind alluded
to, you deter from that competition the more
intelligent and thoughtful capitalist. Such men
are and ought to be fairly qualified to vote. None
more so. But you say, No. You may work my
land, you may pay me rent, both are very valuable
privileges —but game is the landlord s by virtue of
his social position, it is the true gentleman s prero-
gative to take it—and it is hard indeed if my pro-
* 4270 Cases. Report on Game Laws, S, M. Phillips, Esq. Evid,


perty, besides finding me amusement and rent,
should tell against mein the county election. So I
must have your vote. A more debasing system
was never practised, nor owing to circumstances,
one more successful. Is it likely, that with such
clogs, the cultivation will go on as it should?
I have thus far stated the general results of the
change, and attacked the two great obstructions
which interfere with the process of calmly re-
arranging the relations of the landed classes in the
widest sense, on pure economical principles. And
it is only on such that you can act safely, where
you have money transactions. All others are found
in daily experience a failure, the fruitful source of
all kinds of disturbance in the ordinary social life.
Let business be done on simple business principles,
with no false delicacy about money matters. The
time is past when dependence, in the common sense
of the term, will be tolerated : not till the idea of it
is wholly eradicated, does a sounder system find
room to flourish. It is between the free and the
equal that justice in its highest sense, or friendship
in its highest sense can exist; the kindly relations of
life are cramped and stunted by the sense of depen-
dence. It is true, of it, as of exile —sa di sale —it is
bitter to the taste. For dependence in the ordinary
sense is a very different thing from that wholesome
sense of mutual dependence, which our condition
as men involves, or that inter-dependence where
there is no constraint, which is the source of the
c 2


common charities of life. It is in respect to this
question, as to many others in the same sphere
a want of perception of the true and false senses
of the terms, is the basis of numerous social fictions.
From the point of view of the landed gentleman,
nothing is so agreeable as a numerous and subser-
vient tenantry, resting in its turn on a well ordered
body of agricultural poor. The picture is so pleas-
ing, it is thought treason to disturb it, and worse
than treason. All sorts of anathemas are fulminated
against you* But from the opposite side it is a
different picture, its colours less bright its preser-
vation in its present state not nearly so much valued.
An analysis of the rural life of England from below
would give results far from satisfactory.
Such subjects as these my limits force me to
state shortly. I could not leave them untouched
for this simple reason : had I done so I should
at once have been met by the charge that it is a
beggarly system of interest, a £. s. and. affair, which
1 am advocating, that there are higher interests, &c.
&c. I know the kind of language well. I have a
firm belief myself, that if in matters of £. s. and. you
violate the plain rules of the science that treats
of these interesting letters, you infallibly go wrong
in nine cases out of ten; you open the door to in-
justice. The landlords talk of confidence between
landlord and tenant; the language is suspicious on
the part of those who have all the power on their
side, and who support their sense of confidence by


the law of distress, and a system of tenancy at
will. If the weaker have confidence, well and
good ; if the stronger only feel it, it is not so good.
If they do not feel it, but talk of it as an useful
language to prevent their being put on fair terms,
then what shall we say ? It is because of the non-
observance of pure commercial principles, that all
this confusion has arisen. But I feel that there are
other questions at issue, and that whilst on one
side the question is economical and material, it is
not the less true that on the other it is moral.
State the facts as you like, misrepresent if you
like motives or exaggerate statements, or dwell
on some to the exclusion of others, no observer of
that Corn Law struggle and its results, but must
ultimately allow that the change made in 1846,
was not welcome merely economically, but politi-
cally and socially. It was hailed as the right so-
lution of an economical question but it was hailed,
though perhaps by fewer, with a deeper and more
cordial enthusiasm as a victory over monopoly —•
over injustice —as the accession of England to a
great cause, as the death-blow to class legislation,
as the first step involving so many others in the
new era of industrialism.
But I have said enough on this part of the matter.
And now briefly what are the remedies I would
propose, granting that other questions are settled,
and the sole one is left: how, under a system of
fair competition in the market of the world, the


agricultural classes of England are to arrange their
mutual relations, with no fund to draw on if they
fail in their judgment. These are the conditions, i
believe, under which they have now to work.
First for the landlords. In England as in Ire-
land the mere nominal ownership of land must
cease. An encumbered Estates Bill, that quiet yet
sure regenerator of Ireland, is wanted here to set
the land clear for the present. A thorough well
considered system of registration is then wanted,
and such laws as shall prevent land being tied up
in a way which interferes with the best cultivation.
It must be made transferable easily, cheaply, and
in any quantity. Further, if let to tenants it
should be on lease, and that lease of a simple form,
binding the tenant as little as possible. The land-
lord should require proof that his tenant lias
sufficient capital, and both should be protected by
law, the one guaranteed the fair return for his
capital and investments, the other protected from
fraud on the part of his tenant. During the lease
the land should be the absolute property of the
tenant. I would give the landlord the same power
in kind and not one jot more in degree than that
possessed by the owner of a house in a town who
has let it for a lease of years. He does not think
it hard his property should vote against him, and
does not claim the right at any given moment of
entering it, but is guaranteed that right under
certain formalities by express stipulation. It should


be as little a matter of right to enter a tenant’s
farm in the case of the landlord as in that of any
other person. In fairness, of course, as I said
above, adequate means of securing his own interest
roust be guaranteed the landlord. Such, I hope,
may come to be the relations of the two classes of
landed capitalists so far as the landlord is con-
cerned. In the mean time much may be done by
him to alleviate the present difficulty, granting of
course that he is not the merely nominal owner of
his land, so embarrassed that he can discharge
none of the duties of ownership. And all that he
can do should be done, for if not actually in Par-
liament himself he belongs to the class which has
guided the Legislature time out of mind, and the
present distress of the tenant farmer is mainly
owing to bad legislation and to false hopes held
out. He can give liberal terms, he can remove all
impediments in the way of good farming, he can
get access to capital when very often the tenant
cannot, and he can therefore provide buildings and
execute drainage, so that the tenant’s instruments
may be as perfect as possible. Lastly, he mav and
must in fairness re-adjust his rents, especially if
he be a staunch Protectionist, for his theory is that
farmers cannot live at present prices: if so, the
rent is being paid out of the farmer’s capital, at
an actual loss to the farmer, and in conscience a
man who holds this to be a necessary consequence
of Free Trade legislation, can hardly continue to


receive from his tenants unabated that which he
acknowledges they have no fair means oi paying.
This is a simple test of sincerity from which I find
that many of the staunchest Protectionists shrink.
As to the tenant farmer, his case is partly in-
cluded in that of the landlord. He must besides
improve his ideas of commercial requisites. He
must learn that if he has not capital enough for
300 acres he must take 200 or less; he must look
well to the state of the land, the buildings, the
drainage, the complete mastery over it, his complete
independence: all he has to do with his landlord
is to pay his rent. There should be for his own
interest no fear or favour on either side, but simple
commercial justice. Restrictions on his cultiva-
tion, restrictions on his destruction of vermin,
restrictions on his fair rights as a citizen, all should
equally disappear. He must also give up all
claim to reduction on the score of the times, and
accept his condition manfully. If from haste to
get on in life, or other causes, he commits faults
as a man of business, I know no patent by which
he alone can be freed from their consequences. I
know no justification for his grumbling any more
than for any other man. There is a strict logic in
the business of life, and errors in calculation will
sooner or later tell ; they may often be remedied,
but it is but fair that those who commit them should
not be quite on a level with those who do not.
The tenant farmers of England had better at, once


make up their minds that Protection is irrecover-
able in any shape, whether as prohibition, or a slid-
ing scale, or a fixed duty —that prices will probably
rule lower, but at the same time that they will be
more steady, far more within the range of calcula-
tion. The gambling element which the fluctuations
of the thirty years from 1815 to 1845 introduced
may be got rid of with great advantage. Again,
I speak with all deference on the subject, but a
keener eye kept on the state of the markets is, I
believe, most desirable —it would place the farmers
much less at the mercy of others than they are and
have been. Also better accounts might be kept;
this is evident from the difficulty in getting trust-
worthy statements on this head. From the
accounts of farmers’ meetings it would seem also
that many of their own body do not estimate very
high the average of skill, and the constant claim
put in on the ground of recent improvements
seems to shew that there had been some neglect
before. But after all, whatever other causes are
introduced —inadequate skill, deficient capital, too
high rent, —the change of system must I suppose
involve some suffering. But is this a reason for
going back? It could only be so if the previous
state was desirable. Was it so ? I appeal to any
one who has heard the language of the farmer for
some years past whether it was not quite otherwise.
I would appeal to themselves whether it is not true
that ever since the collapse after the war it has


been a chronic state of pressure and discontent,
varied by paroxysms of great suffering. During
the war the landlords and tenants did well. The
first got the lion’s share, but the second made
money. It was an opportunity they never have
had since, as they say, and 1 imagine it was right
well wasted. But let them look back on the period
since the war, with war rents, not reduced because
the Legislature had given them Protection, hut not
with war prices even for corn. Let them think of
1822, 1825, and 1826, 1835, the check of 1839
and the dry summer of 1844, and then say
whether the old system guaranteed them against
anxiety, and distress, and loss, whether any of the
agricultural classes can be said to have profited by
it but the landlords. If this is in any degree true,
let them throw aside any regret for the past, and
for the future trust to themselves only. They have
leant on others and on aid from without too long 1 .
They have been grievously deluded, they should
learn wisdom from their delusion. Quietly they may
abstain from taking any part in keeping up the cant
of Protection. In the present state of dependence
more cannot be required of them, but it can never
be necessary under the most arbitrary landlords to
give active support in countenancing as hollow a
falsehood as was ever palmed upon a nation.
Lastly, for the case of the agricultural labourer.
No class has suffered more, it seems to me, from
the present system, —none has more to gain from the


change which perfect free trade is likely to work.
I have already said that I consider all dependence
must cease between landlord and tenant, I hope to
see the same carried out between the labourer and
his employer. Ido not look with much hope to
any benevolent schemes for making the labourers
comfortable, to cottages built as a favour to them,
or as an ornament to an estate, to allotments or
prizes for great endurance or successful garden
cultivation. Make the of these and ol all
benevolent efforts in the same direction and still
we find that the evil has outstript the good. The
labourers’ condition is not materially better than it
was, the long period of Protection and high rents
never induced the landed interest, landlords or
farmers, to do much for them. The agitation of
the country during the time of the Reform Bill
worked a greater change in their condition by
appealing to the fears of those classes than any
amount of Protection ever did. The evil to which
the agricultural labourer is most exposed is the
hopelessness of his condition. Other men rise,
he never, or so rarely as to make it hardly worth
while to qualify the assertion. A life of unbroken
toil on verv moderate wages at the best, and the
workhouse at the end, such is the short summary
of his state. For him emigration might do much
in the way of immediate rebel—education will do
more, though but slowly. The great remedy lies
in the high cultivation of the land whilst he is a


labourer, and in the measures before mentioned by
which land is to be made divisible and cheaply
transferable. So there might be held out to the
labourer the hope, with industry, of obtaining a
portion himself as proprietor. In this way might be
introduced a very healthy admixture of small pro-
prietors side by side with the great capitalist. For in
the working of the land these are the only two classes
I would wish to see —occupiers of small farms, or
men of small capital, cannot be too soon extinct.
It is only their political subservience and social
dependence, which has made them tolerated so
long. But let the land be thrown open as it were, —
the fair complement of free trade in corn, —and
under the stimulus of low prices, let cultivation
advance, as it naturally will on the better lands,
with it let the demand for labour increase—then, I
firmly believe, that in the country, as in the towns,
you may safely leave the poor to set themselves
right. But one thing is yet in the power of the
upper classes—it is to see that education is furthered
by every means in their power —ungrudgingly
zealously—as men who have no afterthought. So
may the movement, whose sweep is even now greater
than they think, and which is growing daily, be a
healthy and not a sour one, worked out in the
spirit of deliberate and calmly-reasoned progress—
not in that more dangerous one which results from
the sense of rights denied, and of victory gained
over reluctant antagonists.


It will be said that changes such as these, even if
as desirable, as many will think them objection-
able, are at any rate Utopian, or some equivalent
epithet. I believe they were so under the old state ;
that no mending of the faults of the agricultural
system was then possible. But I believe that they
are now no longer so. The fact is, that classes do
not amend themselves readily, they are like corpo-
rations —they are always conducting a moderate and
safe reform, but which no one can trace the fruits
of, till there comes a gentle pressure from without.
Then the fruits become visible, but are not attri-
butable to the pressure —in fact without it they
would have been richer, but they coincide with it.
So under the gentle pressure of lree trade, many
things are becoming possible in the agricultural
world, which were not so before—many improve-
ments are going on, and though they do not attain
that fulness of growth they would have done, had the
spontaneous impulse of their author been trusted,
though in fact the offspring bears signs of a prema-
ture delivery, still they are undeniable improve-
ments, and are accepted by the more practical mind
as such. Barring occasional outbursts of insolent
dictation, such as the late Tamworth manifesto by
Sirß. Peel to his tenants, there is a general sense of
the necessity of some concessions. The rigour of pre-
serving has been relaxed. I could name instances
where it has been given up altogether. Crotchets
about cultivation are not pressed, hedges and timber


are made subservient to the general cultivation,
there is a disposition to meet the tenants on all
points, which they must allow did not exist pre-
viously. It was maturing previously, it has now
come into life.
Here my subject ends. It has extended to
greater length than I had expected, and yet
much remains unsaid. Its entire want of statis-
tical detail is accounted for by my view of
Protection, which renders such detail superfluous
in the argument. Partly for the same reason,
and from complete acquiescence also in the views of
the great masters of economical science, I have not
entered into economical arguments on this ques-
tion. I will only add my conviction, that the
alarm which many feel lest we see Protection in a
modified shape restored, is groundless. Even since
I began this there are significant signs of there
being less danger in that direction than was sup-
posed. The undisguised antipathy of the people to
any reaction is one sign. The desertion of the
party standard, by one of its calmest and most
practical members, is another.* Let us hope that
the leaders of the party will read the times aright,
and interpret them not by the clamours of a few
interested partisans, or an accidental majority in
Parliament, but by the higher principles of interpre-
tation, sanctioned by the statesman before whom
they quailed while they abused him ; sanctioned by
* See Mr. Pusey’s Letters to the Electors of Berkshire.


him, not merely in the hour of that great struggle,
but in the deliberate review which he took of his
conduct in his last session ; sanctioned too by his
ablest surviving colleagues;—that they will inter-
pret them by the interests of the many, not of the
few, as Englishmen, and not as supporters of the
English aristocracy, by the wants of a great country,
not by the necessities of an impoverished proprie-
tary.
Wadham College, Oxford,
„ June 7, 1851.
THE END.
NORMAN AND SKEEN, PRINTERS, MAIDEN IANE, COVENT GARDEN.


