

No Peace
without Victory.
AN APPEAL
TO COMMONSENSE.
BY
GEORGE JEFFREY.
Chairman of the Technical Advisory Board of the
Central Wool Company,
< and
Chairman of the S.A. Slate War Committee.
« " w
Under the auspices of the Directorate of Educational
Propaganda on War and Peace Issues.


|,|| LIBRARY" jjjj


No Peace
without Victory
AN APPEAL
TO COMMONSENSE.
GEORGE JEFFREY,
Chairman of the Technical Advisory Board of the
Central Wool Company,
Chairman of the S.A. State War Committee-
ADELAIDE .
W K, Thomas & Co., Pkihteks Grjsmtei.l St


FOREWORD.
In issuing this neew edition, Mr.
Jeffrey desires to add the painallel
from Plutarch’s "Life of Pyrrhus”
that I read afc the meeting.
An outline of it will b® found at the end.
’the course of a robber war has always
been dotted with such offers of peace,
in which the victims .ar® invited to lock at
the map, and at everything but the crime.
At last, however, the Pjyrrhic victories are
turning to defeat, the nnap is clearing up,
tjie enemy 'wants only feo go home, and he
says he will take the plledge. But K.atzen-
jammer has been moral before, though
never enough to cub off a little finger and
make sure. The world is too old in crimes
of the kind to be cured by a headache.
By victory Mr. Jeffrey im cans only victory
for the cause. It will be no lens a victory
if it is not a military one; but it will be
none .at all if |we rely on the promise of the
future, whether on universal polling (booths
or on a League of Nations, or on any other
instrument. International law will need
more power than ever, and it is not
lawyers nor voices that will restore it. We
are betraying the future if we pardon the
past; the plaintiffs are mot all dead; and it
rests with us 'to prove whether the world
can hold itself better than in the day of
Pyrrhus, when Rome could barely manage
to stop his project of empire, and had to.
count it victory that he should leave Italy,
and take his dreadful elephants home and
out of sight. _
W. MITCHELL.
ryiVTTJTTV


mmmm
NO PEACE WITHOUT
VICTORY.
An Appeal to Commonfcense.
In the presence of a keenly appre-
ciative audience at a special meet-
ing of the Caledonian Society on Thursday Umber -3tn
evening, Mr. George Jeffrey delivered a
forceful and critical address dealing with
the “Peace by Negotiation” proposals, of
which so much has been heard dur-
ing the last few months. The
Chief (Mr. W. J. Hill) occupied
the chair. The lecturer ©aid: —Mar,-hall
Foch, the generalissimo of the allied forces,
has made it an axiom, that the army that
will eventually be victorious must be that
which is made up of men who have the
“will do win.” If that be so, surely the
same idea must apply with even greater
force to the nations behind those men,


whose duty it is to supply all the neces-
sary material to the flighting forces, and
in every way, both matterial and moral, to
support them in their (efforts It is hard
to realize that this ‘Swill to win” is not
so strong and enduring; among some of ns
a« it was four years ajgo, when, from the
highest motives, our nmtion was compelled
to take up arms. Att that time, v*e. in
Australia, enthusiastwcally resolved, at
whatever cost, to see the struggle through
to the end. (Applause.)
—Change of Attitude.
The difiiculty in understanding the
change of attitude is the greater as, during
the course of this cruel war, we have be-
come more and more (Enlightened as to the
deadly menace of German militarism, and
to the very real and grave danger which
threatened the existence of our great de-
mocracy. Mr. Fisher’s “lash man and last
shilling” meant literally that come what
might we, in this fair outpost of Empire
were firmly decided to stand with the
Motherland, and that no sacrifice of blood
and 'treasure would be counted too great
to ensure the safety of future generations.
(Applause.) Yet we find that at a certain
conference held some weeks ago in berth,
a rcfioinfcion in favour- of “Peace by nego-
tiation” was unanimously carried. Since
that time, the subject has been much dis-
ced chicflv by tluose in favour of the


resolution, with the evident desire to
create an atmosphere sympathetic to their
policy. It is, therefore, high time ithat
those who think otherwise should seriously
take the matter up, especially as it is cer-
tain that the great majority of thinking
Australians never could agree to any other
than a peace resulting from a vic-
tory lor the Allies. Unfortunately,
the attitude of those who carried
this dangerous resolution is not confined
to any political party, for it is well known
that the allurement of a negotiated peace
has attractions for some who are not ad-
herents of the section represented at the
Perth conference. Among these are the
pacifists, the greedy but short-sighted in-
dividuals who fear heavier taxation as toe
result of the continuance of the war those
who, from fear of self-interest (not to nse
a stronger term) are averse to fighting
themselves or to allowing their kindred
to take up arms in defence otf liberty; and
most lamentable of all, those who, through
ignorance and prejudice are openly dis-
loyal.
—Selfish People.—
In the time of peace one might have no
serious quarrel with the honest pacifist.
Indeed, it has been said that, broadly
speaking, every man who is not a homi-
cidal maniac is theoretically a pacifist. But,
at present, every serious pacifist must, to
be consistent, be anti-Prussian, Conse-


quently, it is not too muclh to expect that
in the light of the great tragedy of the
last four years, when rnamy preconceived
notions have been proved! fallacious and
old theories found to be 'wrong, the paci-
fist should carefully recoinsider bis former
position, and even if not willing to take up
arms, he should, at any rate, keep silent
and not hinder those who are fighting
and are prepared to die for him and his.
(Hear, hear.) There cam be no possible
sympathy for those selfislh people who put
pocket and personal comfort before na-
tional welfare. But what can be said otf
those who are clearly diisloyal? Surely no
excuse can be made foir this class, who,
while enjoying all the glorious privileges
of living under the British Flag, yet are
enemies within the gates. They must bo
dealt with by public opimlon. Thank God
these types are not in the majority,
otherwise our Empire would indeed be in
deadly peril.
—Germany’s Guilt. —
Before discussing in cHetail what “Peace
by negotiation” means, it will be well to
remember a few facts which unmistakably
place upon Germany thee guilt of commenc-
ing the war. As Viscoumt Grey says:—“lf
we are to approach peace in the proper
way, it can only be dome by recalling and
never forgetting what was the
real cause of the war.”


It is now a matter of history that the
Scrajevo murders were only an excuse to
begin the long-planned war. Austria, at
the instigation of Germany, had demanded
finodu Serbia such unreasonable terms as no
self-respecting nation could be expected to
entertain. Yet Serbia, except on two
points, agreed to Austria’s demands. Mean-
while, the position between Austria and
Russia (the latter had been cham-
pioning Serbia’s cause) became so
acute, that Russia commenced mobi-
lizing on the Austrian border, and
friendly relations between those coun-
tries were broken off. Lord Grey pro-
posed a conference of all the interested
powers to discuss the situation, and all
agreed to attend except Germany, who re-
fused to be represented, ostensibly, on the
ground that the quarrel was between
Russia and Austria alone. But on July
31, 1914, alter Austria bad agreed to re-
sume discussions with Russia—and when
those discussions were actually in progress
—Germany sent an utterly impossible ulti-
matum to Russia, demanding an immediate
demobilization of her forces. This demand
Russia oould not comply with, and Ger-
many at once declared war on Russia and
on France as her ally, and began her wan-
ton and bloody march through Belgium,
whose integrity she, in common with other
powers, had solemnly undertaken to re-
spect and maintain. In defence of these


Treaty Rights for Belgium, Britain, as
one of the signatories, was compelled to
declare war on Germany. Immediately
after hcistiilities had commenced, the Bri-
tish White Book containing all the tele-
grams, messages, and conversations was
published, but the German White Book,
in the attempt to mislead the world, con-
tained only a section of her messages,
and, curiously enough, not one message
that passed between Germany and Austria
was recorded. After the war had been in
progress for a few weeks, and when the
German hopes were highest, Maxmilian
Harden, the leading Socialist editor in Ger-
many tore down the veil of German hy-
pocrisy. In one of his editorials he said —-
“Away with all this snuffling cant that we
did not wish for 'war. We willed it.”
(Hear, hear.)
—What it Would Mean. —
How many have ever tried to realize what
“Peace by negotiation” at the present time
would mean? It is certain that a nego-
tiated peace would play right into the
hands of the enemy. When the German
war lords found that their plan of world
domination had been frustrated by the un-
dying valour of Belgian, French, and Bri-
tish forces in the early days of the war,
it became their unceasing object to obtain
a cessation of hostilities through a nego-
tiated peace, which, if arranged, while not


giving to them all that they hope to win
by the sword, would yet leave them power-
ful and in a position to prepare for an-
other and mightier effort for domination
to be made in a few years. Further,
events have proved that the desire for
world conquest is not confined to the war
lords, but the German people as a whole,
Having accepted the teachings of their
Prussian philosophers and having endorsed
the military plans of their leaders, must
accept their share of the responsibility for
attempting to force their mad designs on
the tranquil and industrious world. It is
now generally known that in all allied
countries peace proposals and peace
rumour? were set in motion, and have been
untiringly carried on by German agents
and by German design. The objects in
view are either to weaken the various na-
tions in their efforts, create a feeling of
war weariness among the neople, or to
engender distrust among the Allies. It
is certain too, that the Germans have
spent millions of money in various conn-
tries in 'this direction, underhand diplo-
macy, briber 1 * and corruption being every-
where in evidence.
■ —Worldwide Evidence. —
As instances of German intrigue which
have been revealed, we remember that
Bernstorff, the late German Ambassador
in the United States, is proved to have


been in close touch with the notorious
8010 Pasha (who was recently executed
for high treason by the French Govern-
ment) in his efforts, by means of immense
sums of German money, to weaken the
will of the French people through a Ger-
man subsidised press in France,
and that Caillaux, a former
Premier of Franco. is shortly
to stand his trial for alleged traitorous
dealings with Germany. The present
French Premier (Clemenceau). although an
old man, is now vigorously carrying out hie
expressed intention of bringing to the bar
of justice, without fear or favour, all those
in high places in France known to have
been secretly negotiating with Germany to
bring about a separate peace between those
two countries, and thus undermine the
foundations of the allied cause. (Ap-
plause.) Again, the unrest in Ireland has
been traced largely to the influence of Ger-
man promises and German cold. The great
betrayal of her Allies by Russia, at its in-
ception, can also be p l aced to the credit of
German intrigue, and the present deplor-
able condition of that country is the direct
result of the “peace by negotiation”
methods practised upon the Russian Bol-
sheviks by the cunning German diplomats.
And, further, the great Italian debacle of
last year, which created a very perilous
position for all the Allies, has been proved
to have been brought about by the peace


talk and peace proposals circulated broad-
cast through a section of the soldiers on
the Italian front. Is this intrigue being
carried on in our midst? I wonder! Is it
reasonable to conclude that Germany has
set her agents to work in this direction in
every other country but ours? You are
men of common sense—what do you think?
There is ample evidence that Germany has
feared what we are now certain (if we fight
on) must be the result of the struggle—vic-
tory to the Allies. Let us remember that
in December, 1916, her first definite peace
suggestions were made. In 1917 reports of
the Reichstag proposals for the conclusion
of the war without annexations and without
indemuites were circulated among the na-
tions. Shortly afterwards followed the
Papal peace proposals, which were made
public. The Central Powers alone replied
in favourable terms to the articles pro-
pounded by the Po|)e.
—Germany's Aims.—
The far-reaching aims of the Germans
have been gradually made plain by writers
and publicists, and of these writers Mac-
fall in his “Germany at Bay” and Chera-
dame (the eminent French essayist and
writer) in many convincing articles, have
plainly shown that on© of the greatest of
these aims was the domination of the
countries (between the North Sea and the
Persian Gulf, This constituted their great
■
-


Mittel-Europa Scheme, and there is no
doubt that Germany would be quite pre-
pared—for a time —to relinquish heir gains
in the west if she were left in a position
to carry out this .great plan. With the
vast strip of territory lying between the
North Sea and the Persian Gulf in her
hands, she would occupy the very heart
of Europe and Western Asia. Having an
outlet at the Persian Gulf she would be in
a position to menace Britain’s hold on In-
dia and Egypt, and eventually to threaten
the safety of Australia and the far east.
The German meaning of “Peace by Nego-
tiation” is illustrated by events which have
already become history. In a conversa-
tion with Bethrnan Hollweg in Berlin in
1916, Mr. Gerard, the then American Am-
bassador asked what was the German idea
of a peace at that time. The German Im-
perial Chancellor replied that regarding
Belgium, the Gormans were willing to
withdraw from that country, but with
guarantees. These were: —1. Germany
must retain the forts of Liege and Namur.
2. She,must hold other fonts and garrisons
in different parts of the country. 3. She
must retain possession of the railroad lines.
4 She must hold the chief ports. 5. Bel-
gium must not maintain an army. 6. Ger-
many must be allowed to keep a large
army in the country. As to France,
“a rectification of the northern frontier”
was demanded, and also “a very substan-


tial rectification” of the eastern frontier.
Bulgaria would be left to deal with Rou-
tnania. A very small Serbia might be al-
lowed, but that would be left for Austria
to determine. This impossible programme
ludicrous in its arrogance, reflects the Ger-
man mind. The Russian negotiated peace
at Brest Litovek gives ample evidence as
to what would follow were Germany to
be allowed to occupy a dominant position
at a Peace Table. (Hear, hear.)
—War Must Go On.—
The present appalling conditions in Russia,
where, apparently, Germany is over-
running and practically governing the great
districts of Lithuania, Poland, and the
Ukraine, would no doubt be repeated in
other places were Germany in a position
to insist, at a conference, upon her as-
serted rights as a result of her successful
campaign up to the present. Her whole
attitude has been, and is, to keep as much
as she can, and to use her conquered terri-
tories as pawns in any negotiations.
But, although peace in the day of our Em-
pire’s unpreparedness would have been the
easier road, yet, notwithstanding the cer-
tainty that the war, if carried through,
must cause many waves of sorrow
and suffering and incalculable loss
of life, and expenditure of money and
material, those in power knew, that t«
ensure the safety of the future, the easy
i
I


'Va.7 must not be taken, and that the war
so long threatened (although absolutely
against the inclination of our rulers and of
of the people) having once begun, must at
all cost be continued until victory shall
have been ultimately obtained. At the'
beginning no one knew the immensity of
the sacrifices in store. But even had it
been foreseen that during four years this
untold loss of life and treasure would con-
tinue in ever-increasing intensity, it is
hardly conceivable that the “will to win”
so righteously proclaimed then, would have
weakened; and as the years have passed
and the deadly menace of German mili-
tarism and German ambition has been un-
folded, the ’thoughtful farseeing members
of every allied country have been more
than ever convinced that in spite of pain,
sorrow, and loss the war must be prose-
cuted, so that future generations may
never again be threatened with such an
awful calamity as that which has over-
taken the world. (Applause.)
—Days of Doubt Behind.—
The days of doubt regarding the ultimate
result of the struggle are happily now be-
hind us; indeed, as Mr. Lloyd George re-
cently stated, nothing but national heart
failure now bars the road to complete vic-
tory. The unbroken strength of our great
navy, and the undaunted spirit of the
splendid veterans on all fronts, added to
the mighty power of America, whose aid in


the war is now being felt with daily in-
creasing force, all make the end certain.
(Hear, hear.) If, during the darkest days
our nation, with bulldog tenacity, was
prepared to take all reverses and hold fast,
it is astounding that now, when the clouds
are clearing, there should be in our midst
any who would think about (much less
advocate) this German-made proposal
of “peace by negotiation.” Still more
surprising is it that those who favour this
dangerous and suicidal doctrine should in-
clude the leaders of the ultra-democrats —
those w-ho, in the event of German victory,
would have so much to lose. Surely they
cannot have seriously considered the ques-
tion with a single regard to the safety of
all that is worth fcspwipf in thiST'llfe! Demo-
cracy has never been so threatened as at
the present, and how. can autocracy, with
its soulless domination, be of service to a
free democracy? Listen to what Samuel
Go infers (President of the American Fede-
ration of Labour) recently said in an ad-
dress to the Trade Union Congress at
Derby, in England. “America’s message
to Great Britain and the Allies is:—‘We
men of the western democracy are coming
five million strong. I have not always
agreed with the policy of British Govern-
ments, especially in regard to the Boer
war, and towards Ireland, but I rejoice
that the old Britain is not the Britain of
to-day. You gave the Boers full self-go-


vernment. Xow they are giving their lives
while fighting for the mother country. I
would not prolong this -war a minute
longer than necessary, hut I am not willing
to shorten it by one hour if that means
that the military machine will remain to
cause further wars.” (Applause.)
—America All In. —
President Wilson trenchantly saj’s;
"This intolerable thing of which the mas-
ters of Germany have shown us the ugly
face —this menace of combined intrigue and
force, which we now see so dearly as the
German power—a thing without conscience
or capacity for covenanted peace—must he
crushed, and if not utterly brought
to an end, must at least he
shut out from the friendly intercourse of
the nations.” Significant words these,
coming from such a man, who has for
years been an advocate of peace and of the
fo r mation of a league of nations to enforce
it. How irresistible must have been his
convictions, when, in spite of his former
predilections, in spite of the Monroe Doc-
trine itself, and in the face of the many
and varied interests that must exist in a
community speaking 50 different languages,
he at last called upon his great nation of
a hundred million souls to join the Allies
in the fight for the freedom and liberty
of the world. And how gloriously they
have responded to his call. (Applause.)


No doubt at present tbe Hohenzollerns
•would readily give pledges to join any
league of nations, but in view of the ex-
perience of this war, what value would be
placed on any treaty to which they might
attach their signatures? For it is cer-
tain we can trust no more German pro-
mises, because the German leaders have
shown themselves on every occasion to be
utterly unscrupulous, perfidious, and
treacherous. They must be made to under-
stand that the day of the mailed fist, of
bullying, and terrorizing lis past. All our ex-
perience shows the utter foolishness of a
negotiated peace. Even with the know-
ledge that to carry on means a continuance
of the sacrifice? and losses, it would be
madness for the Allies to stop now, on the
eve of victory. We know full well that
(cessation -would be only for a brief period,
and that the whole struggle would, recur in
the near future with more deadly com-
pleteness of German preparation than be-
fore. The effect of a premature peace
would not be to reduce armaments, but on
tiie contrary every nation would tben need
to be continually in a state of readiness for
sudden attack, and this would bring with
it all the resultant evil? of militarism
which we are now striving to eliminate.
Better a thousand times to fight until the
German war lords are brought to 'their
knees once and for all, because then a
chastened German democracy may have


won back its soul and be ready and will-
ing to join a league of
nations whose ideals will be
to abolish armaments, and eventually to
aim at ending war on the earth.
—lntolerable Tyranny.—
Lord Robert Cecil, in a statement, re-
cently made, says:—-“The references by Dr.
Solf (German Colonial Minister) to the
carnage, evils, and miseries of the war,
were only too true, but they represent an
entire change of German feeling since last
April, when Hindenburg’s extravagant war
aims were in the ascendant. Dr. Solf claims
to be an upholder of a League of Nations.
I tell him that it will be criminal not to
achieve an international system better than
the present system, but we see no hope
thereof unless the Entente are victorious,
and Germany at last acknowledges that
her whole system is a profound error.”
The German people, who, as far back as
the days of Erasmus, believed themselves
to be chosen of God to regenerate the
world, but who, in later days, sold their
sonic to Prussia, are now determined to
conquer the world by the sword. All their
doctrines are now based on the tihrory that
“might is right,” that smaller and weaker
nations are the natural prey of the
stronger, and that no conquered people
have rights other than those imposed upon
them by their victors. Under Prussian
leadership, how ruthlessly are they endea-


youring to carry their theories into prac-
tice. The free democracies of the world
could not tolerate such tyranny, hence —
your country and my'country, the country
we love because it is our country, the
Britain of many mistakes, but the Britain
which has stood for freedom (not for her-
self only, but for the downtrodden and
weak nations of the earth), the Britain
that has stood for righteousness and for
the Christian faith, was compelled in de-
fence of her safety and liberty, and no less
that of others, to draw the sword, with the
firm resolve that that sword would never
he sheathed until safety and liberty for the
whole world had been secured. And we
knew that only through a conquered Ger-
many can these be attained. (Hear, hear.)
—Peace! After Victory.—
Little reference has been made to Ger-
many’s allies, who are simply tools in the
hands of the master craftsman. They can-
not, however, escape their responsibility on
this account In allowing themselves to be
bound to Germany, they evidently did so
willingly; so that little sympathy will be
meted out to them. It is conceivable,
though, that in the minds of some students
of German history, there may he a lurk-
ing feeling of pity for Germany—a nation
which, less than a century ago, followed
the Christ, among whose last words were
"My peace I give unto you; My peace I
leave with you,” a nation whose lofty


ideals and high intellectual attainments
were envied and admired. Bn I
since the federation of the prin-
cipalities, when they gave theins -Ives
up body and soul to Prussia, they have
forsaken the Nazarene and His teachings,
and now stand as exponents of frightful-
ness and brutality, feared by most nations,
and despised by all. Surely our Empire
and the world have a lesson to learn from
such a downfall, and if this awful war does
nothing more than drive us back to the
faith of our fathers (-which alone can keep
a nation great) then the struggle will not
have been in vain. If what I have said
be true—and it is true —I ask my fellow
Australians; —“Dare we have peace with-
out victory?” I think not, and I am per-
suaded that when the testing time comes—
as come it will —the people of Australia,
with that “will to win” quickened and
fortified, will stand solidly behind our
leadens who, I am confident will refuse, as
the United States President refused, to
discuss “Peace by negotiation,” .because
such a peace would have no lasting effect,
and sooner or later the unrepentant and
arrogant Germans would again rise in
their might, which time would have helped
them to restore. Fellow-Austral ans, I ad-
jure you, in the interests of humanity and
in the interest of posterity yet unborn, to
maintain the only safe attitude —“No
peace without victory.”


Professor Henderson, the Hon. U. J.
Gordon, M.L.C., Mr. A. J. Roberts, and
Mr. James Sadler spoke in favourable
terms of the lecture. A vote of thanks
wag carried on the motion or the Hon. H.
M. Charleston, seconded by Mr. Neill.
The meeting was also addressed by Pro-
fessor Mitchell, Vice-Chancellor of the
‘University of Adelaide, who supported the
lecture by drawing a parallel from
I MAT ARCH'S LIFE OF PYRRHUS.
Halving heavily defeated the consul Lae-
vinus, King Pyrrhus was ajble to lead his
army within thirty-seven miles of Rome.
“But knowing right well that the winning
of the city of Rome ;wae no easy matter to
compass, and also that it would be greatly
to his glory if he could make peace after
this, his valiant victory, be sent Cineas to
Home, who spoke with the chiefest of the
city, and offered presents to them and
their wives, in the behalf of the king, his
maister. Howbeit neither man nor woman
would receive any at his hands. Moreover,
when he' had talked in open audience be-
fore the Senate, of many courteous offers,
and had delivered them profitable capitula-
tions of peace, they accepted none, nor
shewed any affection to give ear unto them
, .Nevertheless, in the end, many
of the senators yielded, and were willing to
make peace, alleging that they had already
lost a great ha Hell, and how they looked


for a greater when, the force of the con-
federate-' should join together with King
Pyrrhus’ power. But Appius Claudius, a
famous man, who .came no more to the
Senate, by reason of Iris age and blindness,
when he heard of the common bruit that
ran through the city, hciw the Senate were
in mini to agree to the capitulations of
peace propounded by Cineas, he could not
abide, hut caused his servants to carry him
in.has chair to the (Senate house
Tiwe he began to apeak in this sort :
‘Hitherunto, with great impatience, up-
lords of Roane, have I borne the Ices of my
sight, hut now I .would I were also as deal-
os I am (bind, that I might not hear the
report of your consultations
You must not flatter yours elves that in
making peace with him, you shall thereby
ho rid of him; but rather shall you draw
others to come and set upon you besides.
For they will utterly despise you when
they shall hear that you have suffered
Pyrrhus to escape your hands, before you
ma.de him feel the jus|t reward of his pre-
sumptuous attempt upon you/ Then every
one, through the whole assembly, desired
rather war than peace. If 'Pyrrhus sought
the Remans’ friendship, he must first de-
part out of Italy, and then send unto .them
to treat of peace; but so long as he re-
mained there with has army, they would
make wars upon him, with all the force
and power they could make, yea, though
he had overthrown .and slain ten thousand


such captains as iLaevinus was.” The war
went on, the Romans losing, though at last
in a battle where the losses were very heavy
on both sides. “It was the force and fury
of the elephants which put them ho rout,
much like the rage of surging waves, or
an earthquake And some say that
it was at that, time Pyrrhus answered one
who rejoiced with him dor the victory he
had won: Tf we win another of the price,’
quo ( th he, “we are utterly undone.’ For
indeed then had he lost the most part of
the army he brought with him out of his
realm, and his confederates began to wax
cold. The Romans, to the contrary, did
easily renew their army with fresh soldiers,
which they caused to come from Rome as
need required, much like un.to a lively
spring, the head whereof they had at home.
And they fainted not at all for any losses
they received, but rather were they so
much the more hotly bent, stoutly deter-
mining to abide out the wan:;, whatever
betide.” So Pyrrhus left Italy with nothing
hut glory, and, on returning, he found the
Remans ready. In a pitched (battle the
reserves “'descended from places of advan-
tage, pierced the elephants with their jave-
lins and forced them to turn their backs;
and the creatures, rushing on their own
battalions, threlw them into the greatest
confusion and disorder. iSo the whole
victory fell to the Romans; and Pyrrhus
fell from his hopes of Italy and Sicily after
he had wasted six years in these expedi-
tions.”


3Sso
vV. K. Thomas & 00., Printers, Adelaide.
