

NO SURRENDER!
The Australian People's Defence
Auxiliary Has Been Formed to:
1. Organise and train the civilian population as auxiliaries to
the defence forces in case of invasion.
2. Stimulate enrolment in the Volunteer Defence Corps,
the National Emergency Services, and all other organisations con-
cerned with the Defence of Australia.
The Australian People's Defence Auxiliary consists of a central
committee and a number of bra*, hes in suburbs, factories, and
country areas engaged in pursuing these objectives .
The Australian People's Defence Auxiliary believes that the
whole population should be mobilised to meet the invasion threat
and trained in methods of co-operating with the Defence Forces.
It believes that all men and women should know how to defend
themselves, how and when to apply the “scorched earth” policy,
and how to continue the fight as guerrillas if the enemy should suc-
ceed in occupying any territory.
Build the V.D.C
The necessary instructions can come only from the local military
commanders of whom the most accessible are usually those of the
local Volunteer Defence Corps.
Therefore, the Australian People’s Defense Auxiliary urges all
civilians who can fight, and want to, to join the Volunteer Defence
Corps.
And where any insuperable barrier of age, sex, or occupation
prevents you from joining the V.D.C., the Australian People’s
Defence Auxiliary invites you to join one of its own branches which
are functioning as adjuncts or auxiliaries to the V.D.C.
There you can receive instruction and training under duly
qualified and! experienced instructors.
The address of the headquarters of your local V.D.C. battalion
should be displayed at your railway station, tram stop, or post office.
If it isn’t, ring V.D.C. Headquarters (BW 4888) and find it
out.
But if for any reason you can’t join the V.D.C., fill in the form
below and we will put you in touch with your local branch of the
People’s Defence Auxiliary.


Help the N.E.S.
The Australian People’s Defence Auxiliary is giving all possible
help to the N.E.S. organisations both in the city and suburbs.
In view of the acute shortage of wardens, more especially in the
City, it earnestly asks all who can do so to volunteer for this essential
task.
More volunteers are also needed for the Red Cross Blood Trans-
fusion service, and other essential war organisations.
Join your local branch of the People’s Defence Auxiliary, which
will help you to find your right place in the war effort.
Officers of the Australian People’s Defence Auxiliary:—
President: Mr. lon Idriess, Australian returned soldier and
author of several famous works.
Vice-President: Mrs. Jessie M. G. Street, President of the
Dnited Associations of Women.
Treasurer: Lieut.-Col. H. G. Yiney, C.M.G., C.8.E., D.S.O.
Chairman: Alderman J. S. Stanton.
Secretary; Mr. W. A. Wood.
Committee: Mr. A. Arthur-Smith, Mr. W. Currey, V.C., M.L.A.,
Mr. H. B. Chandler, Rev. Dr. C. M. Churchward, Mr John Dease
(Commentator, Station 2GB), Mr. J. R. Hughes, Mr. S. H, Jordan
(Commentator, Station 2KY), Mrs. C. Jaques, Mr. Albert Thompson,
Mr. F. Hanly, Mr. J. O’Malley (President Returned Soldiers’ Labor
Club), Mr. J. R. Cranston (Secretary, Illawarra Labor Council), Mr.
Harold Weils (President, Miners’ Federation), Mr. A. Ogston, Mr. J.
F. Leacock.
Offices: 79 Pitt Street, Sydney, Ist Floor.
In pursuit of the Auxiliary’s objectives a Public Congress will be
held in the Assembly Hall, Margaret Street, Sydney, on Saturday,
March 21.
It's Legal!
“If small parties of the enemy are going about threatening per-
sons and property in an area not under enemy control . . . you have
the right of every man and woman to do what you can to protect
yourself and your family.”—Official Invasion Booklet.
Mr. Forde Favours It!
“Mr. Forde (Minister for the Army) stated that he would ask
the Government that people be given the right to organise local units
for training as auxiliaries and reserves of the defence forces.”—
Daily Telegraph, 17/2/42.


-and Dr. Evatt!
. I earnestly ask you to try and devote the enthusiasm and
value of the People’s Army scheme towards the strengthening of the
Volunteer Defence Corps. . . It is in your power to make a great
success of it. Best wishes.”—Telegram from the Attorney-General,
Dr. Evatt, to the Ku-ring-gai V.D.C. Auxiliary.
The Army, Too!
‘ The Army authorities believe that everything should be done
to instruct the civilian population in the best methods it can use to
assist the army.”—Mr. Forde, 3/2/42.
The Lord Mayor:
■‘Every able-bodied man and woman in Australia must be
equipped and trained in the use of weapons of offensive warfare, so
that the people can defend their homes and their country when the
attack comes.”—The Lord Mayor of Sydney, Aid. Crick, 5/3/42.
"Plans Should Be Prepared .
“I have asked that plans should be prepared so that civilians can
be given instruction in how to harass any enemy who attempts to
invade, this country.”—Mr. Forde, 3/2/42.
SO, JOIN TO-DAY!
Fill in this Form
1 o the Hon. Secretary,
Australian People’s Defence Auxiliary,
79 Pitt Street,
Sydney.
Sir.
I desire to become a meniber of the Australian People’s Defence
Auxiliary. Please inform me of the name and address of the nearest
Branch Secretary.
NAME
ADDRESS
