

NOAH'S ARK
VINDICATED AND EXPLAINED.
A RBPLY
|E Colcnso’s difficulties,
TtiE
Rev. jloseph p‘ /VI alley, S'. T -f. |
THOMAS VEROA. CATHOLIC PEINTEK AND STATIONER.
78, RUSSELL STREET.
MDCCCLXXI.




NOAH’S AEK
VINDICATED AND EXPLAINED.
A EBPLY
Co gr. Coleitso's gifftmllies
i "TBeecCOeCOee- » ■■
THE
Joseph p-M ALLEY
Pieltowm:
THOMAS VERGA, CATHOLIC PRINTER AND STATIONER,
78, RUSSELL STREET,
MDCCCLXXI,


H.' A 8 ' :l A 0 r A
, iKiAJiza cm a aaTAoicm
: 1) 'j
: r t»1 YH
!■ (■ ' T. i A :o j| -V f/f
■ / ..
• ' > ;V
■ ' • ■ " ■ ■ : r )I i ’ >M"
, , :• it .
. ' 1 ' ,ir i s [ . ;
. ' yj jM


IMAGINARY PLAN OP THE ARK
Length, 525 feet - -Six lengths of 80 feet - 480; and five passages of 8 feet - 40. Total = 520, which would allow 5 feet for thickness of planking.
Width, 87£ feet, —Six widths of 8 feet - 48; and three passages of 12 feet = 56. Total - 84, leaving 3£ feet for width of planking*
Height, 524 feet.—Three upper stories of 10 feet = 30; lowest = 18. Total = 48, which would leave 4 $ feet lor planking*
A, A. Six blocks of single stalls, ten to the block.
B, B. Six blocks of double stalls—placed back to back, and opening in C, C, C, —twenty to the block.
C, C, C. Three passages, twelve feet wide, running from end to end.
H, D, D, D, D. F ive transverse passages of eight feet.
Sixty stalls in a row; in six rows, 360; in three stories, 1080; in each stall two horses = 2160-




THE DELUGE.
SCEPTICISM.
Weakness of Argument — Flattery—False Principle.
Universal and loud are the lamentations, that all reverence for
belief in the supernatural is fast yielding to the steady advance of
scepticism, and some even consider the day not far distant when
the most sacred dogmas will be rejected with unconcealed contempt.
Having to maintain a bad cause, we cannot expect scepticism
to employ good arguments. Its very best are often a sneer, a note
of exclamation, or an audaoious “Everybody knows.” To compen-
sate for this weakness, it affects an erudition which may awe us,
and a reverence for our attainments which may flatter us into acqui-
escence. It appeals in the most servile manner to our self-esteem,
telling us we are “persons of an inquiring turn of mind”—that “ it is
high time the laity should judge for themselves”—that “they
should follow, not the dictates of others, but the pointings of com-
mon sense,” &c., &c. Whether “ common sense” be so common as
its name would imply, or as it would seem to have been when it got
its name, may be questioned; but whoever is fortunate enough to
be possessed of it, must see the absurdity of inviting people
immersed in the cares of trade, to decide for themselves on such
matters. Yet this is what these foolish men constantly do. Thus,
Dr. Colenso, having first addressed his book “to the clergy and
more highly educated among the laity,” re-published it “ that the
‘ People ’ themselves —that is, all persons of common sense, whether
learned or otherwise —should have the opportunity of seeing with
their own eyes what is the real state of the case ” (Preface to People’s
Edition, p. 6).
The principle he starts with is false, and its application perni-
cious. Common sense will not suffice: science is, even on his own
showing, necessary. How, then, are the “ unlearned to see with
their own eyes the real state of the case ?’* The only way would
be to become learned. Can the “ People ” do so ? Constantly
engaged in a thousand cares, what likelihood is there of success ?
What probability is there that they will even attempt it ? The
majority of mankind must be taught. They cannot decide for
themselves.


Therefore the principle is false.
But it is likewise highly pernicious to degrade these sacred
truths from the supernatural region of faith, to that of mere scientific
speculation, and to tell the multitude that their faith is not to reach
beyond the narrow limits of their understanding.
It is a truth acknowledged by all that nothing is easier than
to move a difficulty, while, as the very name indicates, it is often
extremely difficult to answer it. It is readily understood by the
meanest capacity, while the solution, however complete, is frequently
beyond the grasp of that same capacity. Common sense would
here be certainly valuable. It would whisper, “There is a solution,
though Ido not see it.” Thus people less learned than Dr. Colenso,
in geology, say ; “Our Lord believed in the Deluge; therefore it
must be true, though I cannot explain how.” But the river, flowing,
however gently, wears the stone. Constant repetition gradually
wears away the opposition of faith. False pride frequently takes
the place of humble belief. Men think there is evidence of more
than ordinary acumen in the admission that “there is after all some,
thing in these difficulties ” —though we have seen the meanest capa-
city acknowledges that—and infidelity is the result.
The mass of erudition displayed by the leaders of scepticism, is
frequently calculated to discourage a man of but ordinary acquire-
ments. The very fact of their appearing in print is a sort of guaran-
tee that they do not hazard a singjp doubtful assertion. How readily
we may over-estimate their knowledge if we take them at their
word, we are sometimes astonished to discover, when we compare
the amount of science to which they lay claim, with that to which
they are really entitled.
There is, unfortunately, a still graver charge against these
infidels—their unfairness. They do not examine if a thing be true:
they endeavour to prove it false. Then, if they are answered, they
have a two-fold method of reply. If the answer be a bad one, they
give it every prominence, to have the opportunity of demolishing
it; but if it be a good one, they either ignore it altogether, or advert
to it in such a way as to deprive it of all its force, and at the same
time to enable them to say they have noticed it.
Whoever rescues any truth from perversion renders a service
to society, and deserves its thanks. But he deserves a special meed
who vindicates the Book inspired by Eternal Truth, and consoles
and confirms the timid, by showing them the emptiness of scepticism.
THE GOLDEN RULE.
Of all the wondrous events chronicled in the primeval story of
man, there is but one other—the creation—that stands forth in
such strong light as the tale of the eight just preserved in the ark.
Not the vast power granted to Moses and wielded by him with such ter-


rific effect against the Egyptian king—not the crowning punishment
of Pharao’s crimes, the overwhelming of his host beneath the waves
of the Red Sea—not the miracles wrought in favour of the chosen
people, so lavishly, that in a certain sense they almost ceased to be
miracles —strike us so profoundly as the awful spectacle, presented
in the Deluge, of man’s wickedness and God’s justice.
All flesh, save eight just souls, had corrupted its way on earth,
and all flesh, save these eight just, were overwhelmed in the flood.
Such is the tale we read in an unerring book, and which we
received in our youth with an unreasoning, but not an unreasonable,
faith : unreasoning, because the explanation of the many difficulties
a little examination would discover, is not given, and we did not
ask it; but at the same time not unreasonable, because if it be rea-
sonable to accept so commonly the word of man, who may err,
though we are satisfied he does not, much more reasonable is it to
believe u on God’s unerring word, whatever He has revealed, be it
ever so incomprehensible to us.”
But while God, in His infinite wisdom, so frequently tells us
what is, without explaining how it is, He permits us not only to
examine His works; but, provided we do so in a reverential spirit,
to investigate the mysteries of religion, and even to penetrate, as
far as our limited intelligence will permit, into the Divine nature.
God has written His greatness on the earth and in the sky,
and “ the heavens are telling the glory of God,” that man may
know it, and from these two vast pages the geologist and astrono-
mer read it aloud to mankind. But the letters are not always dis •
tinct, and the readings have been often false. Still, though some
errors will of course be inevitable, those that are more serious may
be avoided by one golden rule—“ Truth cannot be contradictory.”
If we read clearly in the book written at God’s inspiration any fact,
it is impossible we can read the contrary in the pages of nature,
though it may easily happen that we cannot decipher what is writ-
ten there. More frequently, however, having learned from Holy
Scripture what must be the reading, we are enabled to recognise it,
as sometimes happens when a writing is held too far from the eye:
at first we see the letters confusedly; but if some one tell us what
the inscription is, knowing now what the letters must be, we are
enabled to distinguish them.
This golden rule has not been always adhered to. The pages
of zoology and geology, wherein we might expect to find the story
of Noah’s ark written, are blurred and blotted and difficult to reach
The logical conclusion would be that we cannot at present read
them; that we perhaps may never be able to do so, and consequently
that our knowledge is limited; but certainly not that the contrary
is written there. Though one would think this ought to be self-
evident, yet there have been, unfortunately, from the first ages of
Christianity to the present day, men who have read the contrary.


Dr. Colenso tells us that when translating 1 the Bible, a Zulu, of
child-like docility but mature reasoning’ powers, asked him did he
really believe all he was teaching; and he adds very candidly that,
from the knowledge of geology he has acquired, he is certain the
Deluge never could have occurred (p. 8); though he at the same
time acquits Moses of any intentional deception (p. 14, note). He
was merely ignorant (p. 370, No. 1154), Strange spectacle pre-
sented by a Christian bishop! He goes to teach, and he becomes a
pupil. He looks down from the lofty summit of his own acquire-
ments in quiet compassion on the ignorance of the great law-giver,
and he is unable to answer the child-like Zulu !
ORDER OF REPLY.
The order which quite naturally suggests itself is to consider
first the reasons/s;*, and next those against , the deluge.
We shall see—First, that all those mho admit the Holy Bible
to he the Word of God * must admit the Deluge and Ark, though
not a single one of Dr. Colenso’s difficulties could be answered.
Second, that he does not bring a single one which cannot be
explained.
The Deluge naturally presents itself to our consideration in the
first place. The answer to the two following questions—“ What
was God’s object in causing it?” and “What does geology teach
as to the manner in which it 'might have been brought about?”—
will furnish the chief solutions to the difficulties. We shall see
that geology offers a most simple explanation, and that it is in per-
fect harmony with Scripture.
The Ark, being a consequence of the Deluge, is naturally to be
examined in the second place ; and here again a few questions will
furnish the key to all difficulties. “What was God’s object in
ordering the building of the Ark?” “What does common sense
say of its arrangement and capacity?” “ What does Scripture?”
THE DELUGE PROVED.
That the Jews believed in the Deluge just as literally as we do
is evident for three reasons. First, this is the obvious sense of chapters
vi, vii, and viii of Genesis; Second, it is referred to in different
places in the Old Testament, as a well-known fact Third, the
* Unfortunately there are but too many who do not. As the Catholic
Church never exalted the Bible above its true position, so has she never
been wanting in the respect which it deserves; while the Protestant Church,
whose proudest boast has been “ the Bible, the whole Bible, and nothing but
the Bible,” has the mortification of seeing it torn in pieces by her children.
As sincere Protestants are themselves the first to acknowledge and bewail
this fact, they cannot be offended at its being alluded to by one who deplores
it no less sincerely than they, and who takes up arms to defend the Book
so dear to them.
f 1 Paralipomenon, i, 4; Ecclcsiasticus> xliv, 17; Isaias, liv, 9.


The Apostles and our Lord believed in the Deluge. 7
Jewish historian distinctly bears testimony to the belief of his nation,*
and even mentions that the tradition existed.among other nations.
Let us admit for a moment that the Holy Scripture had not
spoken clearly enough on this point, that a different interpretation
was the true one, and that the Jews erred in believing as they did;
the question forces itself on us, “ Were the Apostles and our Lord
aware of the true reading ? Did they know that of the Jews to be
false 1”. They evidently must have known the truth.
What then was their duty towards the Jews —aye, and towards
the Christians too ? At the very least they were obliged not to
confirm by their authority so silly an error. Now hear them speak.
St. Luke enumerates Noah among the ancestors of our Lord.
St. Paul was as firm a believer as any of us, though we may,
without risk of error, suppose he had “ the reasoning powers of
mature age” quite as fully developed as Dr. Colenso’s Zulu.
“By faith, having received an answer concerning those things which as yet
were not seen, moved by fear, framed the Ark, for the saving of his house, by which
he condemned the world.”—Heb. xi,, 7.
St. Peter: —
“ He preached to those spirits that were in prison, which had been some time
incredulous, when they waited for the patience of God in the days of Noe, when the
Ark was a-building, wherein a few, that is eight, souls were saved,” —1 Pet. iii, 19,
20. And God “spared not the original world, but preserved Noe, the eighth
person.”—2 Pet. ii,s.
Finally, our Lord himself (Luke xvii., 26; Mat. xxiv., 37),
appeals to the deluge as a well-known fact in the history of the
world:—
“And, as in the days of Noe, so shall also the coming oi the Son of Man be.
For, as in the days of the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving
in marriage, even tII that day in which Noe entered into the Ark; and they knew
not till the flood came and took them all away.”
The most essential part of the question is disposed of. The
Ark and the deluge ar e facts.
If we can explain them, so much the better; if not, nothing
the worse. The only legitimate conclusion is our ignorance.
DR. COLENSO’S DISHONESTY.
It is inconceivable that Dr. Colenso never came across the
singularly clear passages just cited. Why did he suppress them ?
Because he knew that the fact of 11 our Lord’s having believed in
the Ark ” would have outweighed all his objections ? Thousands
of people read his difficulties without its occurring to them that
they have ever come across such passages; and of course to such
persons this grand argument is lost. But as some will remember
them, he has to shield himself from the charge of unfairness they
might bring against him; and this he effects in the following mail'
ner. He gives two or three citations, implying our Lord’s belief in
Moses, touches in a most transitory manner on the Ark, and at
* Josephus, b, i, ch, 3.


once glides off to something else, almost before one has had time to
perceive that he has touched on it.
“On one point, however, it may be well to make here a few observations-
There may be some who will say that such words as those in John vi, 46, 47. —‘ For
had ye believed Moses, ye woul d have le’ieved Me; for he wrote of Me. But if
you believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?’—or in Luke xx, 37,
* Now, that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at the bush [i.e., in; the
passage about the ‘bush’], when he called the lord, the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’—or in Luke xvi, 29, ‘ They have Moses
and the Prophets, let them hear them’—and verse 31, ‘lf they hear not Moses
and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though oue rose from the dead’—
are at once decisive upon the point of Moses’ authorship of the Pentateuch, since
they imply that our Lord Himself believed in it; and consequently, to assert that
Mo.-es did not write the books would be to contradict the words of Christ Himself,
and to impugn His veracity. To make use of such an argument is indeed to bring
the Sacred Ark itself into the battle-field,” &c,
The word “sacred” might perhaps seem to indicate the “Ark
of the Covenant,” instead of Noah’s Ark; but as he has been speak-
ing of the latter all through, it would be singular to change so
abruptly.
Every one will see how different must be the impression pro-
duced by the vivid testimony of the texts cited in proof of the Deluge,
a nd by the vague recollection, hardly awakened by the word “Ark,”
of having seen or heard “something about the Ark, somewhere” in
the New Testament. Lest, however, even this languid memory
should outweigh all his arguments, he proceeds to show that there
is in reality nothing in it.
“ There is, however, no force in this particular objection, as will appear from
the following considerations.”
Amongst other things, he says:—
“It is not supposed that, in His human nature, our Lord was acquainted,
more than any educated Jew of the age, with the mysteries of all modern sciences”
p. 22).
He relies on the text of St. Luke, about our Lord’s increase in
wisdom, which has so constantly proved a stumbling-block to the
enemies of Christ. Even if the explanation of catholic theologians
were insufficient, the only legitimate conclusion would be that there
are some things which we do not understand.
What are we to think of a man who modestly assures his readers
that our Saviour was possessed ol less knowledge than himself ?
“My own knowledge of some branches of science—of Geology in particular—
had been much increased,.... and I now knew for certain that a Universal
Deluge, such as the Bible manifestly speaks of, could not possibly have taken place
in the way described in the Book of Genesis, not to mention other difficulties which
the story contains.” [p 8]
So that, according to a Christian Bishop, our dear Redeemer
was, in His sacred Humanity—
Interior to Dr. Colenso in learning,
Inferior to the child-like Zulu in reasoning power, and even
Inferior to ordinary men in that most common prudence which
bids them be silent touching matters which they do not understand*


The extraordinary folly and impiety of this doctrine will be all
the more apparent if we reflect that our Saviour, as a child of twelve
years old, filled the grave priests of Jerusalem with wonder at His
wisdom; that He was wont to confound with a word the cunning’
Pharisees, and read the secrets of hearts; that He was able to fore-
tell and describe the destruction of the world. And yet we are to
believe He was ignorant of what a modern geologist knows ! More
—the very lowest teacher, in the very lowest public school, charged
with teaching a no more important matter than the A, B, C, would
not be allowed to do so till it had first been ascertained that he
knew it; yet, according to this modest Christian Bishop, the Teacher
of mankind is sent by God on His sublime mission, unfurnished
with the requisite knowledge, and, presuming to talk of what He
does not understand, He commits blunders of which the better
educated Colenso would be ashamed!
No : He who in all ages “ opened the mouths of the prophets,”
that they might utter words of truth, did not open His own Divine
lips to sanction falsehood.
Strong indeed should be the proofs which could warrant a
man in harboring such extraordinary ideas for a single instant; and
strong Dr. Colenso’s certainly are not. Looked at casually from a
distance, they may have a formidable appearance; but when
examined closely—when stripped to their nakedness and reduced to
their nothingness—they are so slight as to occasion surprise that
he was not ashamed to manifest them to the world.
The first question which naturally presents itself is:— Was the
Deluge partial or universal ?
That it was not universal seems almost certain.
First, such a deluge was not necessary for God’s purpose.
It will be readily admitted that if man had been converted,
God would not have brought on the Deluge. Now, as man’s
destruction was the only end for which God did bring it on, it
seems natural that he should overwhelm the earth only so far as
was necessary for the attainment of that end; and as the earth was
only partially inhabited, a partial deluge was fully adequate to the
purpose.
Second, it would involve countless miracles.
Just to mention one or two —Dr. Colenso (1153,1154, p. 370)
remarks, very truly:—
“Of the innumerable species of known plants, very few could have survived
submersion ior a whole year;.... and supposing that vegetable tissues may have
power to adapt themselves rapidly to such a prodigious increase of pressure, yet what
would be the state of an olive tree, after having been buried for months in water,
some thousands of feet deep, without its natural supplies of light and air?”
And he adds, in a note:—
.... “ even at the level of the snow line of A rarat, the column of water would
be 3,000 feet high, and its pressure 83 tons on every square foot of surface.”


So that that we should require the stupendous miracle of a new
creation of the vegetable kingdom.
In No. 1158, p. 371:
“It is hardly neces>ary to estimate the size of the Ark, sp as to compare it
with that required tor ihe reception of so many thousands of animals .... nor need
we argue as to the way in which, day by day, during this whole year, supplies of
food must have been taken round, morning and evening, by the eight inmates, to
these tens of thousands of living creatures, shut up apparently without light or air,
who [«c] must have needed also to be furnished daily with water and fresh litter,
their cribs being cleansed, and impurities removed; though how and zvhither are
questions equally perplexing.”
Those who defend the Pentateuch, can of course always extricate
themselves, by having- recourse to “miracles;” but, unless we have
direct proof that they were wrought—or can at least show that the
Deluge must have been universal, and thus indirectly prove their
necessity —we are not justified in appealing to them. But though
it is quite right to be cautious about invoking their aid, yet we
should not shudder at the very mention of them. Dr. Colenso’s
horror of them is simply ludicrous. He maintains that the Deluge
must have been universal—the Scripture words cannot mean any-
thing else. But even in the hypothesis that it had been partial, it
would have required so many miracles as to he utterly impos-
sible ! So that he is ready to admit this miraculous punishment
of man, provided only that it can be proved without miracle .
(No. 1188, p. 379). False premises and illegitimate conclusion.
Illegitimate conclusion ; because, if God wills anything absolutely,
He wills all that is necessary for it; and consequently, if miracles
be necessary, He wills and works them, be they many or few.
False premises; because reason, and, as we shall see, Scripture, go
to prove a partial, rather than a universal, Deluge; and because,
when we come to examine how such a partial flood might have
taken place, we shall find but one or two miracles requisite.
If Dr. Colenso had said merely:—“ We should not multiply
miracles unnecessarily” he would have been quite right. This
principle we have closely adhered to. God Himself tells us His
reason for overwhelming the world is the wickedness of man, a
partial flood suffices; and we find nothing in Scripture contrary to
this view, therefore we adopt it.
Third , not only is there nothing in Scripture to warrant us in
affirming a universal deluge, but there is a sufficiently plain indica-
tion that it was partial.
One would expect that, were it merely out of fear of these
terrible miracles, he would gladly have embraced a view which
would have delivered him from at least the most formidable; but,
unfortunately he has undertaken to prove the Bible false; and, with
his usual anxiety, not to explain , but to multiply difficulties, he
insists that it must have been universal.
He proves it by citing various passages like the following :
“ All the high hills that were under the whole heaven were covered ”


(Gen. vii., 19). The obvious sense of these words is undeniably
that which he advocates, but they who believe the Deluge to have
been partial urge many texts of Scripture to show that great latitude
of expression is to be met with in the sacred writings. Thus ‘‘all”
occasionally means “ a great many,” and “ eternal’' “ lasting a long
time.” ,
Hence it is argued that these words do not necessarily prove
the universality of the Flood.
Paradoxical though it may seem, there can be little doubt that
Moses used these words, and his hearers understood them, in their
fullest sense; and that, nevertheless, the waters of the flood did not
flow over the whole earth.
The following consideration will make this clear.
It is evident that if we would not err in interpreting a phrase
of Scripture, we should understand it as it was understood by the
writer. But if the expression has at the present day a totally dif-
ferent signification, it would be absurd to charge the writer with a
meaning which he did not intend to convey.
Now, the words “All the high hills under the whole heaven,”
have actually changed their signification in very recent times, and
how much they may have changed since the time of Moses it is
impossible to say. Geography made a vast stride when the discovery
of America rewarded the indomitable energy of Columbus. The
“ World ” grew nearly as big again ; yet men continued speaking of
the “World,” without reflecting how the meaning of this term had
grown; and, quite unconsciously, and very naturally, when perusing
the account of the Deluge, they interpreted the expression in its new
sense. The “ World ”in all ages signified “ the world as far as it
was known to man.” Before this comparatively recent addition to
its size, people, when speaking of it, neither excluded nor included
America. They merely did not think or know of it. In like man-
ner, Moses, and those for whom he wrote, understood the expression
according to the language of the day, nothing being affirmed or
denied touching that part of the earth which was unknown, and
with which they had no concern. Therefore, even if Moses had
known the Deluge had not swept over the entire globe, he might
still have asserted, with perfect truth, in the ordinary language of
the day, that the Deluge had been universal. He was not obliged
(if, indeed, he knew more) to gratify the curiosity of his fellow-
countrymen, or ours, by entering into particulars. What it interested
them and us to know, is, that all mankind, except eight persons,
had merited and incurred God's wrath. Besides, though it is, of
course, a horrible blasphemy to assert that our Redeemer, in His
human nature, was inferior to any human being in any way; yet
we have no warrant for supposing a mere man to be thoroughly
conversant with everything that comes under the name of science ;
for instance, languages, mathematics, geology, astronomy, &c., as


they are at the present day. Moses has had the advantage of a
first-rate Egyptian education, to develop talents, probably more than
ordinary. God now wishes him to write a book recording certain
events, and, amongst others, the Deluge. The greater part of these
he has learned from his own people, certainly in much greater detail
than he has handed them down, and possibly not unmixed with
error. What is God’s duty to his scribe ? To stand, as it were,
by his side, to allow no falsehood to creep into the inspired writing,
and to impart supernaturally such knowledge as He wishes to con-
veys, and as cannot be acquired by natural means. Moses, then,
writes the sacred record in his own style, giving a bold outline,
rather than minute details, and touching on the event only as far
as it concerns man to know , that is, only as far as it involves the
destruction of the human race.
It is therefore evident that the words of Scripture do not
necessarily imply that the Deluge was universal in the present accep-
tation of the word, because Moses could with perfect truth call
universal, a deluge, which, in the language of the day, was universal.
When geology and the kindred sciences unfolded, at man’s re-
quest, their vast volumes to his view, presumptuous infidelity strove to
read therein a contradiction to God’s written w r ord. But there were
not wanting zealous defenders of the truth, to step boldly forward,
and meet their opponents on scientific ground. They applied
a true principle. “ Truth,” said they, “ cannot be contradictory.”
This is self-evident; but they added what seems to be untrue :—
“ Holy Writ declares the entire world to have been submerged; let
us look in the book of nature for its confirmation.” It often (if not
commonly) happens that where there is a preconceived idea, a faint
appearance becomes a positive proof. The defenders of truth found
in this instance not a mere appearance, but something so very like
reality, that they may well be pardoned if they suffered themselves
to be for a moment deceived. Geology pointed out in every spot on
earth signs that the sea had once rolled there. Even on “ the
highest mountains under the whole heaven ” marine shells were
found. Here appeared to be a proof of a universal deluge, in the
fullest sense of the word; the defenders of the Bible appealed to it
in triumph; and infidelity, baffled for a while, displayed her disloy-
alty by the miserable excuses she put forward. She did not seek
the truth, but she wanted to prove the Bible false , at all cost.
Voltaire—does Dr. Colenso feel at all ashamed of finding himself
in such company—admitted any explanation, provided only the
Deluge should have no hand in placing them there. He pretended
that these shells were those of freshwater lakes and rivers evapo-
rated during dry seasons, or shells of snails prodigiously multiplied
in wet ones, or shells dropped by pilgrims (!) on their way from the
Holy Land (Dr. W. Smith). “ The impious man, when he is come
into the depths of sin, contcmneth.” When Voltaire was not ashamed


to talk such ludicrous nonsense, we may conclude he had come
pretty far. As the shell was the sign of pilgrimage, the pilgrims
used not to throw them away, but kept them most carefully.
But the triumph was of only sufficient duration to allow infi-
delity to show her bad faith. A more diligent investigation showed,
that these shells must have been deposited at different times. In
a word, as time will not allow us to enter more fully into the details,
it cannot at present be shown, from geological research, that there
ever was a universal deluge, although there are abundant traces of
partial floods at different periods, crossing and re-crossing each
other, in every quarter of the globe. This alone would, even in the
hypothesis of a universal Deluge, render it vain to seek any proofs
of it in geology; for, as Sir C. Lyell tells us (Princip. p. 706),
‘‘One flood usually effaces the memorials left by another.” In a
word, geology is silent as to how it has been; though, as we shall
see, it tells us loudly how it may have been.
The partiality of the Deluge seems confirmed by Gen. viii., 1.
“And God remembered Noah, and all the living creatures, and all
the cattle, which were with him in the Ark, and brought a mind
upon the earth t and the maters mere abated Let us conceive for
an instant a universal deluge. The entire earth must have been
one vast sea. Now, when we speak of waters being blown off the
land, we suppose them to be carried into the sea; but if there were
nothing but sea the expression seems incomprehensible. Where
were they blown to ? Empty space ? Or were they piled up in
some particular spot ? And are they there still ? On the contrary,
in the hypothesis of a partial deluge, these words are perfectly intel-
ligible, One or two facts, of many, will suffice to show the trans-
porting power of the wind. In the Caspian sea, it drives the waves
miles over the south-west coast. On one occasion, as we read in
Somerville's Physical Geography, a vessel was stranded 46 miles
inland from the shore (Somerville, p. 300) ; and, speaking of the
Gulf Stream, the author says : —“ Our nautical works tell ns of a
storm that forced this stream back to its source, and piled up the
water in the Gulf to the height of 30 feet. The “ Ledbury Snow ”
attempted to ride it out. When it abated, she found herself high
up on the dry land, and discovered that she had let go her anchor
among the tree tops on Elliot’s Key” (Somerville, p. 327).
Although the flood was brought about by natural means, and
there is no reason to suppose that God’s interference with the laws
of nature went farther than was needful to ensure the effect He
intended, yet such interference was of course miraculous; and this
is the only miracle required to explain that awful event. He gave
them an impulse, necessary and sufficient to cause a deluge, that
would destroy all mankind, and, having done so, left them to take
their course. “ And the whole world shall fight with Him against
the unwise.”—Wisd. v. 21,


If geology does not enable ns to pronounce, with absolute
certainty, what that impulse was, it at least offers an explanation,
so satisfactory, so ‘‘natural,” so conformable to Holy Scripture, that
it is difficult to read it dispassionately without feeling convinced of
its sufficiency.
All physicists are agreed that this globe was once, like the
sun, a blazing mass, in a state of such intense ignition that even
the most solid substances (as the metals) must have been not merely
in a fluid, but gaseous state. After a lapse of ages, stretching, if
we might so say, far back into eternity, the outward stratum, by
constant radiation, cooled so far as to allow a certain number of
these gaseous substances to grow solid and form a thin crust all
round the molten nucleus; but the waters must for a long time
still have remained suspended by the tremendous heat, in the form
of steam. Everything, except eternity, has an end; and even these
vast periods, stretching far beyond man’s imagination, drew to a
close; the steam was condensed, and descended on the surface of the
earth, converting it into one vast sea. Let us now penetrate below
the surface, and behold the mysterious influences at work there.
The entire globe, as A cooled, was contracting; but it was not con-
tracting equally. The particles composing the outer crust, from
the very fact of their having nestled closely together, and grown to
each other, were less in condition to nestle still more closely, than
those of the molten mass inside, which were as yet comparatively
far apart. Hence, as the fiery nucleus continued to contract, after
the formation of the surface, there was a tendency on its part to
detach itself from the surface, and leave a space between. It the
solid crust were everywhere perfectly equal, and of immense strength,
the cooling process might go on indefinitely, and no sign be mani-
fested exteriorly of the mighty changes going on within; but, its
strength being nothing in comparison to its weight, according as
the nucleus contracts —according as it withdraws its support —parts
of the crust will sink down, and afford a bed to the sea, while other
portions will be forced up, and form land and mountains. In fact,
the skin of the earth will shrivel, much as we see the skin of an
apple do when the core dries. Occasionally, the pressure of the
elastic mass beneath is opposed by a resisting weight so slight as to
be enabled to burst through altogether, and afford the grand but
awful spectacle of the volcano. As long as the same cause exists,
we have a right to look for the same effects. As long as the enor-
mously heavy mass of the earth’s crust rests upon the struggling
molten mass below, we may expect the phenomena of subsidence
and upheaval to continue.
This we find amply confirmed by the writings of the most
distinguished geologists. It is the general opinion that ever}'- por-
tion of the earth’s surface has undergone such a change, or even
many such. Take, for instance, a coal-field, and listen to the strange


Slow subsidence and upheaval.—Temple of Serapis . 15
tale the geologist can read for you therein. That black stony sub-
stance we burn, was once growing in a forest; therefore it was once
above ground. Yet it has been found hundreds of feet beneath the
earth; therefore the forest has sunk down, and the sea has in count-
less ages piled all that land over the once verdant trees. But again,
there is dry land there; therefore this spot has been once more
raised.
Omitting many most interesting facts, let us consider merely
the following:—
It is believed that the vast plain of Thibet has been upraised,
and the Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico have subsided, within a
comparatively recent period. Sir C. Lyell concluded, after carefiil
examination, that the Alps have been upheaved by convulsions at
different epochs. Accurate investigation has discovered a most
singular fact in connection with Sweden. The northern coast is
steadily rising; and in some places, the amount is equal to five feet
in a century. The southern coast is, on the contrary, sinking, so
much so that the village of Stassten is actually 380 feet nearer to
the sea than it was a hundred years ago, when Linnseus measured it
(Somerville, p. 185). On the other hand, the city which gave its
name to the Adriatic Sea is now more than eighteen miles from it.
In New Zealand, the town of Westport is going down into the sea
at the present moment. The bodies have had to be disinterred from
the old cemetery and transported to a distance, lest their bones
should be laid bare by the encroaching tide.
But the most interesting fact of all, in connection with gradual
subsidence and emergence, is that which geology reads in the ruined
temple of Serapis. The data are these:—A few pillars stand
upright, and in the upper portion of them are seen, at the height of
twenty-one feet from the ground, holes formed % a little marine
animal that can exist only under water. It is evident that the
temple was built on dry land. It must then have sunk twenty one
feet beneath the sea level, to enable the lithodomus (stone eater) to
perforate the pillars, yet now they tower beyond the reach of their
destroyer. But ’tis only for a time; for, as recent accounts inform
us, a new subsidence has set in, and a portion of the floor has been
again flooded (Lyell, Princip. p. ),
The changes of level hitherto considered have been the slow
work of ages; but they are not unfrequently wrought with fearful
rapidity.
Somerville writes thus of the island of Java :—“ In 1772, the
greater part of one of the largest volcanic mountains was swallowed
up, after a short but severe combustion: a luminous cloud enveloped
the mountain on the llth of August, and, soon after, the huge
mass actually disappeared under the earth, with tremendous noise,
carrying with it about ninety square miles of the surrounding
country , forty villages, and 2,957 of their inhabitants.”


16 Port Royal. — Catch — Gen. vii, 2, favors Subsidence.
Port Royal, a town in Jamaica, in three minutes, sank seven
fathoms under water; and, when the sea is clear and calm, the
submerged buildings can be seen; a fact which brings to our recol-
lection the lines of Moore;—
“ On Lough Neagh’s banks, as the fisherman strays,
When the clear cold eve’s declining.
He sees the round towers of other days,
In the waves beneath him shining.”
Sir C. Lyell, in his “ Principles of Geology,” 1850, p. 422,
gives a most interesting account of the submergence of Cutch, in
British India, in 1819. In a few hours, the sea covered two thou-
sand square miles of land; yet the subsidence took place so gently
that a portion of Fort Sindree remained peering above the water.
At the same time a mound, fifty miles in length, and, in some places,
sixteen miles in breadth, was upheaved, Sir Alex. Burnes had the
curiosity to go in a boat to the only partially submerged fort, and
from thence a singular spectacle met his eye. Where once no
water had been, nothing was visible but water, with the exception
of this mound, upheaved simultaneously with the sinking of the land.
With all these facts before us, do we not feel ourselves inclined
to say:—“What more natural than that God should have caused
the Deluge in this way ?” And observe how this tallies with
Moses’ account of the Deluge. “ The fountains of the great deep
were broken up.” This is the only way in which the words seem
capable of full explanation. It is quite possible there are immense
reservoirs of water in the earth, and it is thus some understand these
words; but the mere opening of these would not suffice to deluge
the dry land. On the contrary, it would be much more likely that
the oceans already existing would flow down into them. But if a
vast tract of land were to subside, people would have no means of
knowing that they were going down, and the waters, rushing in to
seek their level, would actually seem to rise above the land. If
Moses had been as ignorant as the learned Doctor says, he would
have accounted for the Deluge merely by the downpour of rain:
this is especially probable if we reflect that, having been accustomed
to behold the yearly inundations of the? Nile, and being probably
acquainted with their cause, he could judge what a continued fall
of rain is capable of effecting.
Dr, Colenso (p. 8) modestly writes: —
“My own knowledge of some branches of science—of geology, in par-
ticular —bad been much increased,” and (p. 9), “ Nor is anything really
gained by supposing the Deluge to have been partial. For, as waters must
find their own level on the earth’s surface, without a special miracle, of
which the Bible says nothing, a flood which should begin by covering the
top of Ararat (if that were conceivable) or a much lower mountain, must
necessarily become universal, and in due time sweep over the hills of Auvergne.”
Omitting many remarks, which these words suggest, it is suf-
ficient to observe that Dr. Colenso either knows of this way in


which a deluge might have occurred, or he does not. If he does
nor, there is still great room for-increase in his knowledge of Geo-
logy • if he does, and has suppressed it, it is a new token of his
utter want of good faith.
Unfortunately, his want of honesty is but too evident. He
does know of it, and he has just touched on it, in the transitory
way in which he usually deals with inconvenient facts. • After saying
that Moses must have supposed the face of the earth to have been
generally the same before and after the Flood, because he speaks
of the four rivers of Paradise, Ac., he adds (1147, p. 368) :
“ Thus, there is no room for the theory, which some have advanced, of the
land and sea having changed places at the time of the Flood, or the general geo-
graphical disposition of the i arth having been different from what it is now.”
How many of the “ unlearned,” for whom he professes to write,
would suspect, from this brief allusion, that a most satisfactory and
highly probable explanation of a partial deluge, is offered by geo-
logy ? He professes to give them “ the opportunity of seeing with
their own eyes, the real state of the case.” Then why not let them
see both sides of it ? Why give them to understand that if they
embrace the theory of a partial deluge, they must embrace the
absurd idea of a column of water lofty enough to cover Ararat, and
kept in that position, by “ special miracle,” for a whole year (see
p. 16); or the amusing notion of Delitzsch, “that water might
naturally assume a conical form ? (1191, p, 380).
And now, to answer his difficulty.
“ Thus, there is no room for the theory, which some have advanced, of the land
and sea having changed places,” &c.
Why not ? Why might they not have changed again and
again, like the temple of Serapis, and every coal field over the
world 1 There certainly is nothing forced in the supposition that
the same land which suddenly subsided, should slowly re-emerge.
That at least a portion of the land covered by the Flood did re-
emerge, is indubitable. We are told that the waters lifted up the
Ark. It is evident they could not have deposited it on dry land;
therefore, the mountains of Armenia, on which they did deposit it,
must have been covered at the time, and have risen from the flood,
with their burden. Again, the wind blew the waters off the land;
therefore, again, at least some of the submerged world reappeared.
So far, we are not warranted in drawing any conclusion more com-
prehensive than that just laid down —“ that a portion of the land
which, during the Deluge, formed the bottom of that vast sea, was
raised above the Flood;” but, we have no means of knowing whether
it had been previously dry land or not. The mention, however,
which Moses makes of the rivers of Paradise, and of various places
as existing before and after the Flood, shows that these, at least,
were covered and laid bare. As we have already seen, there is no
reason for supposing, that God interfered farther with the laws of
nature than was requisite for His purpose. Having given that one


impulse necessary, He allowed the usual laws of subsidence and
upheaval to act. Is it, then, likely that so vast a tract of earth
should, especially in such brief space, sink and rise with so great
regularity ? Probably the upheaval was attended with convulsive
efforts; and, though some of the submerged portion was the same
before and after, the land and sea may have, in other regions, changed
places.
Another difficulty against a partial deluge suggests itself: —
How is it that the bones of men and animals overwhelmed are not
found in one place, and in great quantities ? In order to be preserved,
they should have been protected from all destructive action. If we
consider, for an instant, all the care with which the Egyptian mum-
mies have been embalmed, and think how little chance a body, not
so protected, would have of escaping- total destruction in between
four and five thousand years, our surprise will cease. We often
see in the fields the bones of large animals—for instance, the ox.
For a few weeks they may preserve a clean appearance; but gradu-
ally the fatty matter disappears, the bone is discolored, its pores
become visible, and it is easy to see, that the sun and rain, acting-
on it alternately, will, before long, disorganise it. Sir C. Lyell
says (Princip. 730) :
“Of the many hundred millions of human beings which perish every century
on land, every vestige is usually destroyed in a few thousand years.”
And, in page 706,
“One flood usually effaces the memorials left by another, and there is rarely a
sufficient depth of untransported matter to preserve the organic remains, for ages,
from destruction.”
If, however, the catastrophe which destroyed life, were of a
nature to protect the body entirely from the action of heat, air, &c.,
it might be preserved indefinitely. All are aware, how perfectly
those hermetically sealed tin boxes answer for keeping meat fresh.
The bodies of animals belonging to species now extinct, have been
found imbedded and preserved in ice; and, even in the common
grave, the action of the air, and of changing temperature, is so far
impeded, tha.t, even after a year or two, bodies have been recognised.
About twelve years ago, one was actually exhumed in England, that
it might be ascertained if the cause of death had been poison ; and
it was, after sixteen months’ interment, in condition to admit of
such an examination.
It might be urged, “ How account for the total disappearance
of men’s works —for instance, their cities ? First, this does not
hold more against a partial, than a universal, deluge. Second, what
proof have we that their cities were like ours ? Third, the ruins
of Port Royal are at present visible, when the sea is smooth;
but will they be so four or five thousand years hence ? Sir C.
Lyell says (p. 739) that buildings might be preserved, if covered
with deposit, or even if beyond the action of the waves. But, if
the animals were destroyed, because they had served man, it may be


admitted, at least as a not improbable conjecture, that God wished
to purge the land from everything that man had used and abased.
“And the Ark rested, in the seventh month, the seven and twent'eth day of
the month, upon the mountains of Armenia. And the wa'ers poinir and
decreasing until the tenth month; for in the tenth month, th‘> first day of the
month, the tops of the mountains appeared.”—Gen. viii, 4, 5
Dr. Colenso, as usual, mailing difficulties, will have it, that the
Ark must have rested on Mount Ararat, though in the Bible there
is no warrant for it. It might be urged, in favor of this view, that
if the Ark rested on any lower mountain, Ararat would have been
visible, whereas the tops of the mountains are said not to have
been visible for three months later.
The peak of Teneriffe rises nearly twelve thousand feet from
the sea. In extraordinarily favourable circumstances, it can be seen
at the distance of one hundred miles. Now, though Ararat is con-
siderably higher, it certainly did not rise to its full height above the
flood, and, at the distance of a few hundred miles, would be wholly
invisible. Besides, it may have been then, for the first time, upheaved,
as Dr. Colenso himself admits.
The difficulty about the destruction of vegetation comes to
nothing in the hypothesis of a partial deluge. That about the cones
of Auvergne,* may be troublesome to those who adopt the ludicrous
views given on page IT ; but it does not even exist for those who
adopt the theory that the waters flowed down upon the sunken land.
* “ I refer especially to the circumstance, well known to geologists
that volcanic hills, of immense extent, exist in Auvergne and Languedoc,
which must have been formed ages before the Noacbian Deluge, and which
are covered with light and loose substances—pumice-stone, &c.—that must
have been swept away by a flood, but do not exhibit the slightest sign of
having ever been so disturbed.”—Pref. to People’s edit., p, 9.
And he cites, in proof of this, the testimony of several distinguished
geologists. Sir C. Lyell’s reason’s for believing some of the cones of Etna
to have lain, undisturbed, for at least 12,000 years, will be found, Princip.
Geol., p. 420.


THE ARK.
i3|g^
GOD’S OBJECT.
Lot's Warning. — “ Noah, the preacher of justice ”
The order hitherto followed, has been not to propose the objec-
tions first, and then answer them, but to consider each point, as it
is narrated in Scripture, and examine it, by the light thrown on it
by reason or science. In this way, the difficulties have disappeared,
step by step, without even requiring a direct reply. In pursuance
of this plan, let us consider what was God’s object, in commanding
the Ark to be built.
If ever God manifested His will, that the sinner should not die,
but rather be converted and live, it unquestionably was when He
commanded the building of the Ark. Had He desired simply to
overwhelm tlie world, He would have warned the eiglit just, to fly
to a place of safety, as He warned Lot, when about to rain down
fire on Sodom and Gomorrah, Hut nothing was farther from His
wishes than man’s destruction. As He ordered His prophet Jona
to threaten the Ninevites with His wrath, He likewise ordered
Noah* to menace “ all flesh that had corrupted its way on earth
and as He pardoned the great city on its doing penance, so would
He have pardoned “ all flesh,” had it abandoned its “ corrupt way.”
How calculated such a preacher must have been to sway his
hearers! The venerable patriarch must have been known to all
mankind. IM any of them had known him for hundreds of years.
* “Noe, the eighth person, the preacher of justice.”—2 Peter, ii., 5.


They had known his progenitors, Mathusalem and Lamech, the
latter of whom, had lived with Adam, for fifty six years, and the
former, for two centuries and half. Both lived almost till the
Deluge. In fact, Mathusalem appears to have died, at most, but a
few months before it began. Certainly nothing, but the most har-
dened impiety, could have slighted the testimony of those, who had
known the first man, who had witnessed the* close of his long career
of penance, who had gathered from his own lips the precious, but
sad, story of his disobedience and punishment; yet, though con-
firmed by such authority, the awful denunciations of Noah fall
unheeded on the ears of guilty men !
Almighty God, finding His threats unavailing, ordered His
servant to set about one of the most surprising undertakings on
record—the building, on the dry land, far from any ocean, of a
vessel so vast as to be capable of sheltering seven pairs of every
species of clean animal, and two of every species that was unclean,
in order to save them from the waters, which, the holy old man fore-
tells, are one day to convert the dry land into sea, and cover “ all
the high hills under the whole heaven.”
The forests resound the live-long day, with the crash of falling
timber, multitudes are engaged in the gigantic construction, and it
is speedily noised abroad that this man, so eminent for sanctity, so
conspicuous for wisdom, is actually bent on executing a work which
almost seems to savour of insanity. Crowds doubtless flock from
all parts, to see. The Voltaires and Colensoes of the period go also,
to deride his folly, or pity his infatuation. They can understand
the Ark and Deluge, just as little as those of our day, and, like those
of our day, contribute, by their unbelief and cynicism, to hinder
others from hearkening to the voice of truth. Though, in the
beginning, many, probably, are terrified, yet the novelty of the Ark
gradually wears off, and is speedily pushed out of their thoughts, by
the pursuit of interest or pleasure.
What was God’s object in commanding that the Ark should
be built, and the animals received into it? Could he not have
warned off Noah, like Lot, and might not the same instinct which
impelled tfiem to seek safety in the Ark, have led them to regions
beyond the reach of danger ?* Doubtless, God might have saved
this just family, and the brute creation, by other means, but their
salvation was not the only object He had in view. He wished to
make a powerful appeal to men's senses. f
It is self-evident that this object would be fully attained bv
the reception of the nobler animals, but that the admission of many
* One of the Doctor’s difficulties against a partial deluge is, “ that there was
no need to crowd the Ark with birds, since they might have easily escape'!.” Cer-
tainly, they might, if God had not willed their presence, for the same reason He
willed that of the other animals.
t St. J. Chrys., In genes, homil., xxiv., tome iv.j p. 210.


Vermin excluded—Natural Means—-Noah as an Architect.
of the smaller ones, to say nothing of gnats and every conceivable
species of disgusting vermin, would have been useless to this end.—
In fact, their presence or absence would have been unnoticed.—They
were therefore committed to all the risks of the Deluge; and, though
many species probably survived in spawn or eggs, it is highly prob-
able that some perished.
Against this view may be urged the strong expressions of the
sacred writer—“ every creeping thing ” —everything wherein is
the breath of life,” &c.
If Moses had had the good fortune of reading Dr, Colenso on
the Pentateuch, he would, doubtless, have expressed himself more
carefully; but, not having had that advantage, and trusting to the
good faith and good sense of his readers, he does not convey himself,
as we shall see more fully later on, in terms rigorously precise.
The Doctor wants to know, how could snails get across rivers
and seas on their way to the Ark. The most obvious answer is, that
they didn’t get across, and didn’t try. We have just seen, that
God’s object, in guiding the creatures to the Ark, was to make an
appeal to the senses. The myriads of animals thronging from every
direction across the plains, and the enormous flights of birds dark-
ening the air, afforded a grand and awful spectacle, well calculated
to impress, even the most reckless, with terror, but the picture of a
couple of miserable snails, toiling painfully along, or stretching their
horns disconsolately towards the Ark, from the wrong side of a
brooklet, that barred their progress, is ludicrous and insignificant.
COMMON SENSE.
Dr. Colenso tells us to appeal to our “common sense.” By
all means, let us do so. It is true that it, alone, will not suffice;
but it will unquestionably aid us in forming a correct judgment.
What, then, does common sense teach us touching the Ark ?
God, all through this wondrous event, works His will by
natural means, as far as they are sufficient for the great end He has
in view, interfering with the laws He has Himself laid down, for
merely one brief instant, to bring on the catastrophe. He “ opens
the fountains of the great deep,” and rains down water from heaven,
and He dries the land with a wind. He could have preserved Noah
and the animals, by ordering or inspiring flight, but He prefers
saving them by natural means. He tells His servant to build this
enormous ship, furnishes him with such knowledge as is necessary,
—for instance, its measurements —and then leaves him to carry out
the plan, just like any other architect, according to the dictates of
common sense.* As God knew, exactly, how large it required to be,
it follows that the animals must have had abundant room; and
when we consider the extent of the Deluge, and God’s object in
* Compare what has been said (p. 12) about inspiration of Scripture.


preserving 1 them in this manner, we readily understand that no
miracle was necessary. Numerous as they must have been, their
number fell far short of that which zoology counts at the present
day.
What does common sense tell us touching such questions as
the lighting 1 and cleansing of the Ark? That Noah, who had so
many yearst to think over his task, provided for matters of so much
moment, at least as well as an ordinary ship-builder would, is self-
evident. Supposing the lowest calculation, sixty years, to be cor-
rect, it must, some time or other, during that long period, have
occurred to him, —just as well as to Dr. Colenso, —that the animals
would need light and air; and he must have either made sufficient
provision for their requirements, or had an assurance, from God, of
miraculous assistance. Whichever way we take it, there is no diffi-
culty ; but, as we are not warranted in invoking the aid of miracles,
without need, we must conclude that there were as ample means
prepared for the lighting, ventilating, and cleansing of this enormous
vessel, as the best naval architect of the present day could devise.
As might be expected, he makes great capital out of the filth
that must have accumulated during the long captivity of so many
animals; yet the explanation is just as easy as of all the foregoing
difficulties.
Though not mentioned in Scripture, it is evident that the ani-
mals had to be not only fed but watered. We may imagine a series
of water tanks, along the roof. These must have been well filled,
during the forty days and forty nights of rain, the supply was main-
tained by that which fell from time to time, and tubes conveyed it
to the troughs according to need. The decks were probably slightly
elevated in the centre, and there were at the sides scupper holes.
Water, descending from a height of even ten feet, would move with
great force; and any one who has seen the waters of the Yan Yean
distributed over the streets of Melbourne, will readily understand
what an easy matter it would be, with pipe and hose, to scour the
decks, at least once a day.
The difficulty of feeding the animals is no greater. We must
remember that Noah had on board such useful beasts as the horse,
the ass, the ox, <kc., and we may be sure he did not allow these
gentlemen to eat the bread of idleness: he made them work their
passage. There were doubtless numerous windlasses, and other
contrivances, for raising the food of the graminivorous kinds, and
distributing it in some wholesale manner. The prey of the carni-
vorous species was probably driven into the part set aside for them,
and they instantly became their own butchers and cooks, an instinct
implanted by God, preventing them from turning their rage against
each other. What they dined on—whether they regaled themselves
t The sacred record does not fix the time. Its building is supposed by
some to have lasted 120 years, iby others 60.


on pork, or feasted luxuriously on mutton we have no means of
knowing 1 , nor does it import much, so long as they got plenty.
SCRIPTURE.
Of course, the difficulty of there being apparently but one
window, according to Scripture, does not escape Dr. Colenso ; and,
as usual, he seems anxious to maintain it, rather than fairly examine
it. He just touches on the solution, but does explain it so clearly,
that “the People themselves” may see, at a glance, “the real state
of the case.”
After citing from Dr, Smith’s Dictionary, and damaging as
much as possible the hypothesis Mr. Perowne embraces of a slit
running the whole length of the roof, and covered by some transpa-
rent, or at least translucent substance, to permit the light to enter
and exclude the rain, he continues :
1146, p. 367. “ Delitzsih also notes, p. 250: —‘According to Baumgarten’s
idea this opening, a cubit wide, was carried a’ong the whole upper length of the Ark
... .was it also carried along both sides of the ship ? ’ [ But as there was three sto-
ries, even thus a great number of the creatures would have ha I no light or air, —not
to lay stress on the fact that in viii. 6, IS oah is spoken of as ‘opening the window lie
had made,’ which seems plainly to imply that this window was small enough to be so
opened, and was specially intended for the use of Noah himself and his family.] ‘On
the other hand, most commentators understand a window a cubit each way
for giving light to Noah’s chamber, while the animals had to be in darkness... .This
explanation is so far modified by the Syriac, that the Hob. word for window, tsohar,
is taken collectively,’ [= a row of windows]; ‘ but this is not probable, not so much
because in viii, 6 mention is made of only one window, Khallon, as because then the
number of windows would have been given.’ [Still the difficulty of having light and
air in the different stories remains.] ”
It should be noted that the writers whom he cites, adressed
themselves to men of education, for whom a brief description, or
even a mere hint would suffice. But it is, to say the least neither
considerate nor fair of Dr. Colenso to drag his “unlearned” readers
through such passages, at such a rate, and further bewilder them by
his own observations.
His unwillingness to be convinced is evidenced by the persis-
tence with which he fights for every point, yielding his ground only
by inches, and with the worst grace imaginable. Unfortunately we
find here the same dishonest suppression, which we have already
noticed, of what tells against him.
“ ... .not to lay stress, etc.”
Yet he not only does lay stress on it, but he carefully omits Mr
Perowne’s remark ;
“The chaTjLon (the window which Noah opened), might very well he a
single compartment of the larger window (running the whole length of the Ark],
which might be opened at will.”
And when he admits that the word tsohar is taken collectively,
he endeavours to diminish as much as possible the value of such an
admission, by asserting that it means “ a row of windows,” so that
he may keep at least two of the storeys in darkness. Why a row ?
Here is the solution of this difficulty.


In the Latin Vulgate, and in the English versions, we read
(Gen. vi, 16), “ Thou shalt make a window in the Ark, and in a
cubit thou shalt finish the top of'it ” The Heb. word, tsohar ,
which is here translated 1 window,’ occurs nowhere else ;* but the
word tsaharim , which is another form of it, is found in five or six
other places, and always means “noon.” All the lexicographers
agree, that there is no warrant for making tsohar mean a “single
window;” and, as we have no warrant for supposing God to have
multiplied miracles, to keep the human beings and living creatures
in the Ark, alive for twelve months, without light or air, when it
was such a simple thing to light and ventilate each storey, it stands
to reason, that the word tsohar implies, that there were abundance
of windows, wherever they were needed. The learned Gesenius
translates the passage thus : —“‘Thou shalt make light for the Ark,’
i.e., windowsand he understands the expression, “in a cubit thou
shalt finish the top of it,” to mean, “of a cubit long thou shalt
make them.” Very probably, they were a cubit, that is, twenty-
one or twenty-two inches, square—about the ordinary size of a
ship’s cabin window.
Here is a most simple and satisfactory explanation; yet, know-
ing that to suppose there was but one miserable little window, is to
render necessary a prodigious number of miracles, knowing that
nothing, but an express declaration of Holy Writ, could warrant
us in imputing to Noah a conduct so much at variance with that of
every architect, and knowing that the words of Scripture, so far
from indicating anything of the sort, imply precisely the reverse—
just as clearly as the English expression, “ a house is well lighted,”
means, that it is well furnished with windows—he writes (p. 367): —
“ If there was only one window, and that, apparently, only a cubit—twenty-
two inches—high. ”
A fact on which, as we have seen, he does not fail to “ lay
stress.”
Although he bestows on his unsuspicious readers the flatter-
ing title of “ thoughtful persons,” (p, 379) he knows well that these
“ thoughtful persons,” having very little time, or opportunity, to
“think” over the matter at all, and having nothing but their
English Bible to fall back on, if they do “ think ” of it, have very
little chance of perceiving, from the studied obscurity with which
he puts it, that, whereas in English the same word is used when
God tells Noah to make “ a window,” and Noah is said to open
“ the window ” —in Hebrew, in the first instance, the word tsohar
is employed, and means, as we have said, “ light,” while, in the
second case is used a totally different word, hhallon, which signifies
a single window.
To conclude, from Noah’s opening “ the window,” that there
* Except as a proper name— e.y., Gen. xlri., 10 :—“ The sons of Simeon:
.Tamuel, and Jamin, and Ahod, and Jachin, and Sohar ”


was only one, is as absurd as it would be to conclude, from our
opening t( the window/’ or u the door,” that there is, in our house,
only one window or one door.
When we are informed, by Holy Writ, that Almighty God,
Himself, gave the dimensions of the Ark, we have a most satisfac-
tory proof of their sufficiency, for the accommodation of the vast
crowd of living- creatures, destined to he stowed in the huge ship.
The partiality of the Deluge once established, we feel that, as not
all the animals of the earth, but those only belonging to the region
submerged, were to be there represented, the number of species
received on board may have been not very considerable. Dr.
Colenso says: —
1149, p. 368. “ Every great continent has at this time its own peculiar set
of beasts and birds; and thesf are known to have occupied the circlts around these
centres, in ages long before that ascribed to the Deluge.”
His reasoning, that the animals could not have crossed oceans,
deserts, frozen seas, on their way from these centres to a common
point, and then returned , seems unanswerable, without recourse to
miracle, in the hypothesis of a universal deluge; but, in that of a
partial one, it is merely a little additional light, thrown on the diffi-
culty. The “ peculiar set of beasts and birds,” belonging to that
part of the world, may have been, for aught we know, far from
numerous.
Let us now take the measurements of the Ark, as given in
Holy Scripture, and calculate its enormous capacity.
It was three hundred cubits long, fifty broad, and thirty high.
Various values are assigned to the cubit. Dr. Colenso estimates it
at twenty-two inches. Taking it at one inch less, the length of the
Ark was 525 feet, its breadth and its height Allowing,
for planking, 5 feet in the length, 4 in the height, and 3 in the
width, the clear space, each way, would be 620 feet, 84|,
Dividing, now, the height into four storeys, and allowing 10 feet to
each of the upper three, there will remain a vast chamber, feet
high, running from end to end, and affording ample room for ballast,
and stowage of provisions.
As we do not know what animals were to be received, we can-
not calculate on the number which would find room; but let us
suppose none to have been smaller than a horse, and estimate how
many could be stabled in the three upper chambers. If each stall
were eight feet square, there would be room for sixty-five stalls in
a row; and, if we were to imagine but six such rows, we should
have three passages of twelve feet, going the whole length of the
vessel. It would, of course, be exceedingly inconvenient to have
no cross ways; but, by taking from each row five stalls, this inconve-
nience would be obviated, and we should have five transverse passages,
of eight feet in width. Admitting, therefore, six rows, of sixty to
the row, there would be, in each storey, 60 x 6 = 360, and, in the
three storeys, 360 x 3 = 1080 stalls, which would hold 2160 horses.


Every couple did not require a little compartment to itself;
and it stands to reason, that, by placing- various animals in common,
a good deal of room would be economised. If it be further con-
sidered that we have allowed a pair of sparrows as much room as
SiUcit/U mat wc nave auuwcu a pair ui
a pair of horses, it will be evident, that the number of animals the
Ark was actually capable of receiving, must have been prodigious.
In fact, we shall find no less true than humorous, the idea of Father
Kircher, who, after having lodged all the animals, found still unoc-
cupied a large space, in which he proposed to put all those who do
not believe in Noah’s Ark,
CONCLUSION.
All the difficulties have vanished before exceedingly simple
and obvious explanations. It would be just as reasonable to doubt
of the “Great Eastern,” as of Noah’s Ark. Let us conclude by a
few conjectures as to the assembling of the animals, and the com
mencement of the Deluge.
God, having in view, as we have seen, the impression so
strange a spectacle was calculated to produce on wicked men, gave,
probably, not to a pair of each species, but to all the animals, on
that portion of the earth, about to be submerged, an irresistible
impulse towards the Ark. Far as the eye can reach, countless
myriads of living things stream over the plains, or sail through the
air, darkening the sun by their multitudes. Conceive the terror of
all beholders, on witnessing this unexpected fulfilment of the aged
patriarch’s words. No doubt men hurry to the spot where the huge
vessel lies, and Noah makes a last appeal to their hard hearts.
That they can resist, appears incredible, till we reflect on the obdu-
racy of the Egyptian king, which caused the ten plagues of Egypt,
the impiety of the Jews, who saw in Christ’s miracles nothing but
the violation of the Sabbath, or the evil operation of Beelzebub,
and, without going so far back, the cool effrontery of a Christian
bishop, who will not believe what our Redeemer believed, and who
excuses himself from so doing, by alleging his own superior know-
ledge.
The embarkation seems to have lasted about a week. On the
seventh day, Noah went into the Ark, and “ the Lord shut him in
on the outside.” The last moment of mercy, in this life, had passed
away, the fate of the wicked world was irrevocably fixed
’ And then a profound silence fell upon the hearts of all. Men
looked mutely at each other, as if to enquire what would next hap-
pen. The supernatural impulse, which had hitherto swayed the
animals, having accomplished its end, was withdrawn, and they
were once more permitted to their natural instincts. Forewarned
by these, they, probably, exhibited by their movements, and
expressed by their cries, that distress they so usually display, pre-
vious to earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Dark clouds roll over


the horizon, a confused hoarse cry goes up from all creatures, rum-
bling, subterranean noises, and tremblings of the earth, announce
that “ all the fountains of the great deep are about to be broken
up,” and “ the whole world is about to fight with Him against the
unwise.” Many, stricken with fear, fly to the Ark, and wildly
clamor to Noah for mercy; but he is unable to help them, save
with his advice, and with his prayers. He points out to them, the
opportunity they have, of atoning for their incredulity, by humble
submission to God’s chastising hand; and the same waters, that
close over the death-shriek of many a hardened and blaspheming
sinner, blot out the offences of many a poor penitent soul.


APPENDIX.
Latitude of Expression in the Bible.
When Dr. Colenso—in order to prove that vermin of all sorts,
no matter how insignificant and disgusting, should, according to
Holy Scripture, have been received into the Ark—urges such s Jong
expressions as the following: —“ all fesh wherein is the btea iof
life” “everything that is in the earth,” “of every living thing of
dll fesh,” &c., it'seems, for an instant, that he must be right; but
when we consider what these expressions, if taken according to e
letter, and not according to the spirit, would imply, we see at once
that he must be mistaken. It is so all through: the first appearance
is always in his favor; but if we penetrate behind it, we find no
reality to sustain it. The inutility of such creatures, for Goa s pur-
pose, is, for every unprejudiced reader, a sufficient proof t at a
limited order is conveyed in unlimited terms. That the bacre
Writer sometimes permits Himself such latitude as amounts to posi-
tive contradiction, if we attend to the mere words, and overlook ic
evident meaning, we shall see from the following passages. c
select them, because they afford us an opportunity of not merely
proving our position, but also of refuting the very first difficulty in
the Doctor’s book, and thus farther evincing its vanity.
“And he (Jacob) came into Egypt with all his seed. Gen. xlvi., 6.
“ And Her and Onan died in the land of Chanaan. Gen. xlvi., 12.
Therefore all his seed did not come. Besides, it is (as Dr.
Colenso very clearly shows), all but certain that Hesron and Hamul
were born in Egypt , so that they did not come either.
And sons mere horn to Joseph in the land of Egypt. . .Manasses and
Ephraim.”—Gen. xlvi., 20.
“ All the souls that went with Jacob into Egypt besides his sons»
wives, sixty-six.”—Gen. xlvi., 26.
“And the sons of Joseph, that mere born to him in the land of -Egypt
two souls. All the souls of the house of Jacob that entered into Egypt
were seventy.”Gcu. xlvi., 27.


In order to make up the number sixty-six, who went in Egypt,
we have to count Hesron and Hamul, of whose birth in that land
there is hardly any doubt; and, in order to make up the seventy of
the house of Jacob, who “ entered into Egypt,” we must count,
besides Jacob and Joseph, the two sons of tbe latter, of whose birth
there, there is no doubt whatever. Nothing can be clearer than
that there are several verbal contradictions ; nothing can be more
manifest than that the meaning is perfectly consistent and intelli-
gible ; and nothing can be more surprising than that anyone should
find a difficulty. But one who is on the look-out for difficulties,
has, naturally, sharper eyes than ordinary readers: he will detect
all that do exist, —and some that do not. The meaning of the pas-
sages cited is, first, that all the seed of Jacob, at that time living,
in the land of Chanaan, went into Egypt; second, that in EgTPt)
the entire family, up to the period of Jacob’s death,* amounted to
seventy persons.
16, p. 29. “I shall first show that the books of the Pentateuch
contain such remarkable (!) contradictions, and involve such plain impossi-
bilities, that they cannot be regarded as true narratives of actual, historical,
matters of fact.”
17. u lt appears certain that the writer means to say that Hesron
and Hamul were born in the land, of Canaan."
And he goes on to prove it by the iterated expressions came
into Egypt, &c. If Hesron and Hamul were born in Egypt (as is
most probable) Moses certainly never “meant” to say that they
were born anywhere else, any more than he “ meant ” to say that
the two sons of Joseph were born in Chanaan, when, after declaring
most expressly that they were born in Daunt, he said they went
with Jacob thither.
Surely Dr. Colenso must be anxious to make out, and, what is
worse, to make difficulties, when, not content with those which
undeniably exist, he seizes on such trifles.
Probably, at this distance of time, it would be impossible to
answer everything he says in his work; but some things would
admit of as easy a solution as the “ remarkable contradictions,” just
explained, and others could be unravelled by patience and research.
Any one who imagines, while reading the Doctor’s book, that
he “ sees what is the real state of the case ” —that is, that he sees
both sides of it —is grievously mistaken; and any one who, because
he does not see the solution, concludes that there is none, is rash
indeed. The worst that infidelity can do is to show that there are
* Besides Hesron, Hamul, and the two sons of Joseph, it is very probable tha
several others of those who are said to have gone into Egypt, were, in reality, born
there, during Hie seventeen years that preceded Jacob’s death (Gen. xlvi., 28). Is
it likely that, during so long a period, none of his sons should have had children?
Benjamin, who was only about twenty or twenty-two at the time of his departure
from Chanaan, is said to have had ten. When and where were they born?


in Scripture t( certain things hard to be understood, which the
unlearned and unstable wrest....to their own destruction;* but
they can never prove false the Word of Truth.
* 2 Pet. iii., 16,
& #
<#•
Thomas Verga, Printer, Melbourne.


E E R A T A.
Page 21, line 12, —For “ordered,” read “orders,”
„ 22, „ 14, —After “later on,” supply u See Appendix.”
~ 23, Note: —Continue after “by others GO. ‘For which of
“ ‘ you having a mind to build a tower doth not
“‘first sit down and reckon the charges.’ (Luke
“xiv. 28.) We may rest assured that Noah
“ ‘ reckoned * everything before felling a single
“ tree.”
Page 24, line G, —For “does explain,” read “ does not explain.”




