



w '/jZydney Gazette






NON-BRITISHERS IN AUSTRALIA


University of Melbourne
Publications No. 10.


Non-Britishers in Australia
INFLUENCE ON
POPULATION AND PROGRESS
By
J. LYNG, F.R.G.S
Harbison-Higinbotham Scholar of the University of Melbourne, 1927
Author of “Our New Possession/' “Island Films/' etc.
Foreword by Ernest Scott
MELBOURNE:
MACMILLAN & CO. LTD.
in association with
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY PRESS


PRICE:
SEVEN SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE.
Registered at the G.P.0., Melbourne, for transmission
by post as a book
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
BROWN, PRIOR & CO. Pty. Ltd.
Printcraft House, 430 Little Bourke Street
Melbourne , 1927


FOREWORD.
The purpose of Mr. Lyng’s book is practical rather
than theoretical. He wishes to analyse and indicate
those elements in the racial mixture of Australia which
are likely to conduce most effectually to the successful
development of the country. The nature of his enquiry
has caused him to devote chief attention to the foreign—
that is, the non-British —features of the blend. The
mass of biographical and historical information which
he has accumulated, together with his ingenious graphs,
make his book an original and extremely interesting
contribution towards the understanding of the Aus-
tralian people.
But, though concentration upon one aspect of the
question is justifiable—and, indeed, was necessary—in
such an enquiry, the discerning reader must apply a
corrective to the facts here presented. Otherwise the
impression will be acquired that the distinctively Eng-
lish, Scottish and Irish strains in the Australian amal-
gam have been less important than has, in fact, been
the case. For example, while the importance of foreign
enterprise in the establishment of the wine trade is
quite properly stressed in these pages, the reader will
observe that there is no allusion to the foundation of
the greatest industry Australia possesses, the production
of fine wool. The Scotsman John Macarthur, son of a
Highland rebel who had fought for the Stuarts in the
? 45 made the merino sheep the Atlas which for three
quarters of a century carried this country on its back.
As a colonial pioneer the Scotsman can challenge com-
parison with any. The volume of Letters from Vic-
torian Pioneers, published by the trustees of the Vic-


torian Public Library in 1898, ought to have been bound
in a tartan. Scottish names are all over it —Grahams,
Macgregors, Mackays, Mackenzies, McKillops, Mac-
kinnons, Mackintoshes, McLachlans, McLeods,
McMillans, McNeils, McPhersons, Macredies, Macalis-
ters, Macarthurs, McCallums, McCraes, Macdonalds,
McFarlanes, McGills, Jamiesons, Hamiltons, Camerons,
Campbells, Kerrs, Langs, Malcolms.
The importance of race in the composition of a nation
has been sometimes over-stressed, sometimes under-
rated. As Mr. Lyng observes in this book, the modern
emphasis on race is due largely to the writings of the
French Count Gobineau. That philosopher contended
that: ‘ ‘ The history of mankind proves that the des-
tinies of people are governed by a racial law. Neither
irreligion, nor immorality, nor luxurious living, nor
weakness of a government causes the decadence of civili-
sations. If a nation goes down, the reason is that its
blood, the race itself, is deteriorating. ” Disraeli echoed
Gobineau in the statement that “All is race, there is
no other truth.’ ’ On the other hand, Herr Albert
Wirth (Basse und Volk, Halle, 1914), argues that there
is no such thing as a pure race; that “races” are mere
postulates; that other elements, such as climate,
economic conditions, culture, political circumstances, are
far more important. Mr. H. G. Wells (A Modern
Utopia, p. 316) thinks that “no generalisations about
race are too extravagant for the inflamed credulity of
the present time,” and that “save for a few isolated
pools of savage humanity, there is probably no pure
race in the whole world. ’ ’ Dean Inge avers that ‘ ‘ race ’ ’
is a mere catchword.
But it is quite certain that different peoples in dif-
ferent parts of the earth do possess different physical,


moral and temperamental characteristics. The ambition
to excel, the energy and courage which conquer diffi-
culties and endure hardships and privations, the
capacity to solve problems, the love of order and respect
for law, the qualities of industry, initiative, and tenacity
—these are possessed in greater measure by certain
peoples than by others. Are they possessed more
largely by those who are called Nordics than by such as
are labelled Latins and Celts? The student of the his-
tory of nations, comparing them for a long span of
centuries, is inclined to be shy of generalisations. The
causes of the rise and decline of nations are exceedingly
complex. No simple formula will fit any instance. No
kind of formula will fit all the instances.
Mr. Lyng’s study brings out many fresh facts, some
of which are startling. They prove that the Australian
population is not, essentially, quite so purely British
as the statistician’s crude 98 per cent, proportion had
led us to suppose. They throw valuable light on the
kind of people who are most inclined to settle and re-
main upon the land, and upon those who are not. As
a piece of Australian sociological literature it fills a
place which no previous work has occupied. “A
Society,” Herbert Spencer taught us, “is but a collec-
tive name for a number of individuals. ” Quite so; and
a rock is simply a collective name for a number of
granules. But there are various sorts of rocks, ac-
cording to the nature of the granules of which they are
composed, and there are various kinds of societies, some
of which have been, and are, admirable, whilst others
are not. This book helps us to understand the com-
position of Australian society, and it is valuable for
that reason.
ERNEST SCOTT.




CONTENTS
Page
Introduction 1
Racial Composition of the Australian People 7
The Germans 25
The Scandinavians 67
The Italians ............. 93
Other Europeans:
The Dutch 109
„ French 114
„ Swiss 122
„ Belgians .. .. . 126
„ Austrians 129
„ 'Spanish 132
„ Portuguese 135
„ Russians . 136
„ Poles 137
„ Finns . 139
„ Greeks .. 141
„ Jugo-Slavs, Maltese, and Albanians 143
„ Baltics .. .. 145
The Jews 147
The Yellow Race:
The Chinese .. .. 157
„ Japanese ~. 171
The Brown Race:
The Indians 182
„ Syrians 185
„ Afghans 187
„ Malays .. 188
The Black Race:
The South Sea Islanders 189
„ Australian Aboriginals 196
Conclusion .. . * .. 209
Appendix ~ 229




GRAPHS
Page
Round Skull and Long Skull 10
Viking Settlement in Great Britain and Ireland .... 18
Indication of Distribution of Races in Europe 21
Proportion of Nordics, Mediterraneans, and Alpines
in Australia 23
Italian Settlement in Queensland 106
Number of Chinese in Australia .. 164
Proportion of Australia held by Whites and Blacks in
1830, 1850, 1870, and 1925 200
Proportion of People living in Rural Districts and
Towns I. and II 214
Proportion of Primary Producers and other Bread-
winners 218




NON-BRITISHERS IN AUSTRALIA.
INTRODUCTION.
In view of the fact that the British discovered that
part of Australia which possesses the greatest economic
value—that they were the first to settle there —made
English the language of Australia, and English culture
the foundation of a distinct Australian culture in the
making, and, last but not least, that about 88 per cent,
of the people are of British stock, it may be said that
to all intents and purposes the history of the British
in this country is the history of Australia. There are,
however, others who have contributed, modest though
in most cases these contributions have been.
The position can be compared with that of a river,
started by a small spring in the mountains, winding its
way through unknown country, gaining in volume and
importance as it flows along, till, at the end of its
course, it has become a mighty stream with incalculable
potentialities. Here and there the river is made slightly
bigger by tributaries. The principal object of this book
is to explore these tributaries. The main stream has
been investigated by many able men and is familiar
to everybody; but the tributaries, carrying but little
water, have been ignored. Yet, just as a few bacilli
may transform the content of a large vessel, so it is
possible that some of the attributes of the tributaries
in the course of time may profoundly influence the big
river of which they become part. Failing this, it is
at least of interest from the point of view of general


knowledge to know something about them —the Ger-
mans, the Scandinavians, the Italians, and so forth, who
in the course of time have settled in Australia, are the
tributaries.
In dealing with the influence of various people on
the population and development of Australia, I have,
as far as my knowledge on a much debated question
permits, done so with race as background. While
nationality, founded as it is on political boundaries,
is ever changing, racial characteristics are passed on
from generation to generation, and are at best subject
only to modification by environment during a long
period of time.
In Australia four out of the five main groups into
which mankind often is divided are represented—the
black race from whom the country was taken by the
white race —the yellow race who arrived later and
threatened to submerge the white race —and finally the
brown race whose representatives scour the hinterland
as pedlars and camel-drivers. Compared with the whites
the coloured members of the homo sapiens family are
but few in this country, constituting less than 2 per
cent, of the total population; yet, they number some
110,000 souls.
Regarding the white race which, as pointed out above,
is all predominant in Australia, archeologists, philolo-
gists, anthropologists, historians, and so forth have all
tried to solve the mystery of its origin, movements,
and present composition without arriving at definite
conclusions. Approaching the subject from different
angles, and often obsessed with bias and preconceived
notions, the aggregate result up to the present has been
confusing.


The part played by prejudice is especially shown in
the controversy which has lately taken place about the
Nordic race. The ball was set rolling by a French
historical writer, Gobineau, in the middle of last cen-
tury. Gobineau maintained that the Roman Empire
had at no time been rejuvenated by Christianity, but
by successive invasions of Nordics, in his opinion, a
superior race. His views gained but few adherents in
France, where the Nordic element is not particularly
strong. In Germany, however, whence most of the
barbaric invaders had come, it stirred people’s imagi-
nation, and closing their eyes to the fact that there
also the Nordics had largely been supplanted by people
of Slav origin, the Nordic cult took root. Pan-German-
ism was the outcome, and the idea that the Germanic
race true blue Nordics”—was destined to regenerate
an aged and decadent world, grew into something akin
to a religious belief. After the Great War, race-
worship ceased in Germany, only to revive in the United
States. It is but natural that this unscientific extoll-
ing of the virtues of one particular race, at the expense
of all others, should cause a reaction which, as often-
times happens, went to the opposite extreme. A result
of the dispute has been that ethnologists have parted
company, the old school still maintaining that variation
in skull-shape, and other racial peculiarities are of
primary importance, and the new school denying it.
When the pendulum has come to rest between the two
extremes, there can be little doubt that the three groups.
Nordics, Alpines, and Mediterraneans, will be allowed
to stand as racial realities.
While the physical and temperamental differences be-
tween Nordics and Mediterraneans at a glance strike


even the casual observer, the divergencies between the
Nordics and the Alpines are less pronounced, probably
because they enjoy similar climatic conditions, and the
crossing of these two sub-races has been much more
extensive than any which has taken place with the
Mediterraneans. Still, even if shape of skull and colour
of hair and eyes are disregarded as conclusive proofs,
there are yet psychological nuances between nations,
where the one or the other sub-race predominates, which
can only be accounted for by the aid of diverging racial
characteristics.
It would be most interesting if we could draw the
veil aside from the remote past and follow the varying
fortunes of the different branches of the human family;
but for the purpose of solving problems confronting
us to-day, or which must find their solution in a not
distant future, it would be of comparatively little value.
For the ultimate aim of creating a healthy and happy
mankind, a scientific analysis of the present human
material and its divergent potentialities appears to be
the most urgent need.
If we make a survey of Europe, extending back in
time to when the great maritime discoveries, the in-
vention of steam-driven machinery, and the spread of
education enabled mediaeval Europe to emerge from
conditions which, from the point of view of economics,
practically had remained unchanged for ages, we find
(1) that some countries moved forward with rapid
stride, while others stood still or were dragged along,
almost against their own wish and will, by more enter-
prising neighbours, and (2) that it was western, north-
ern, and in a less degree central Europe that led, and
eastern and southern Europe which stood still. Amongst


the causes to which this undeniable fact must be
ascribed, racial composition cannot be omitted.
In western and northern Europe the Nordics predomi-
nate with an admixture, at some places, of Alpines and
at others of Mediterraneans. In eastern and south-
eastern Europe the Alpines form the overwhelming
part of the population, while bordering on the Medi-
terranean we have the dark white strain of the Cau-
casian race, at places intermixed with elements of Nordic
and Alpine blood.
Though no particular race can claim to be the sole
possessor of this or that mental attribute, these attributes
are distributed amongst them in a varying degree. The
artistic pinnacle to which Italy attained at the Renais-
sance was undoubtedly due to the love of beauty and
colour so strongly developed in the Mediterranean race,
just as the economic revival witnessed in Italy to-day
must in the main be credited to the freeing of pent up
forces of an economic trend imbedded in the Nordics
and Alpines inhabiting northern Italy.
Nowhere racial purity exists, but the intermixture
varies greatly. Each of the three strains has something
to give, different from that of the others. The best
result, therefore, is not obtained by racial purity, but
by a judicious blending of the three, in the proportion
most conducive to human progress.
J. LYNG.




RACIAL COMPOSITION OF THE AUSTRALIAN
PEOPLE.
We are told by the Commonwealth Statistician that
exclusive of Australian aboriginals 98 per cent, of
Australia’s population are British subjects by birth.
This plain statistical fact is by many taken to mean
that 98 per cent, are of British stock. There are even
instances of publicists having interpreted the inform-
ation given us by the Statistician as indicating that 98
per cent, of the Australians are Nordics.
If we divide the Australian people according to
colour, and examine the census results of 1921, we
find that about 98 per cent, were white, 1.3 black, .45
yellow, and .25 brown. This would appear to indicate
that from the colour point of view the Australians are
fast becoming a homogeneous people. The reasons for
this are the decline of the aboriginals, the fact that
the numerous Chinese who came here between 1854 and
1891 did not bring their womenfolk with them, and the
White Australia policy.
In allocating the white population between the three
branches of the white race—the Nordic, the Alpine, and
the Mediterranean—we are confronted with considerable
difficulties, and only a rough estimate can be arrived
at. The difficulty commences with the “British.” These
hail from England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland,
whence they have migrated to many lands and multi-
plied. It is easy enough to calculate, according to
birthplace, the percentage of English blood, of Scotch
blood, and so forth, flowing in the veins of the com-
posite Australian body; but owing to insufficient data


States.
English.
Scotch.
Irish,
Welsh.
Germ.
Scan.
Other
Europ.
Total.
N.S.W.
52.2
13.0
26.3
1.8
3.3
1.6
1.8
o/
/o
100
Viet.
49.1
15.7
26.5
1.5
3.3
1.5
2.4
100
Q’land
45.5
13.5
26.1
1.3
9.1
3.1
1.4
100
S. Aus.
58.2
11.0
18.5
1.8
9.0
1.2
1.3
100
W.A. (1901)
54.0
11.3
21.0
1.7
3.2
3.1
5.7
100
Tag.
60.0
13.5
20.0
1.2
3.3
1.2
.8
100
Average..
53.0
13.0
23.0
1.5
5.2
1.9
2.4
100
we can scarcely make more than an intelligent gness
when it comes to determine how much of the English
or Scotch blood is Nordic, and how much something
else.
Looking at the figures relating to place of birth, at
the census of 1891, and counting the heads of those
born in the various mother countries, and then dis-
tributing amongst them, pro rata, those born in Aus-
tralia, New Zealand, and other British dominions, we
find that of the white population the English repre-
sented 53 per cent., the Scotch 13 per cent., the Irish
23 per cent., the Welsh 1.5 per cent., and other Euro-
peans 9.5 per cent. —of the latter the Germans accounted
for about 5 per cent., and the Scandinavians for close
on 2 per cent. 1
The figures from 1921 show a considerable falling off
in migration from Ireland to Australia, and an increase
from England; but the number of immigrants is now
too small compared with the number of native born
persons to greatly modify the proportional figures of
thirty to forty years ago. At best they can only indi-
cate the trend of racial movement.
Taking the results from 1891 as the most reliable
guide, it is interesting to study the figures for the differ-
ent States:—
i. Owing to the large number of German females and their expectionally
high fecundity, the percentage of non-British Europeans may be nearer 10
per cent, than 9.5. (See Appendix.)


Owing to the heavy migration to thinly populated
Western Australia in the nineties, which tended to
largely influence the racial make up of the population
there, the figures from 1901 are applied to that State.
It is interesting to notice that the English element
is particularly strong in Tasmania and South Australia,
the Scotch in Victoria, and the Irish in Victoria, New
South Wales and Queensland. The German element is
strongest in Queensland and South Australia, and the
Scandinavian in Queensland and Western Australia.
Having determined as near as possible how much of
the blood flowing in the veins of the Australian nation
is English, Scotch, Irish and so forth, the next step is
to analyze the blood of each of these groups.
The white race, while representing ever so many
nationalities, only embraces the three sub-races —the
Nordic or Aryan race; the Alpine (mainly Slavs); and
the Mediterranean—which is often wrongly called the
Latin race. The three different sub-races have been
aptly described thus:—
Physically the true Nordic is tall and blonde, with
a long head, blue or gray eyes, and fair skin. The pure-
blooded Alpine is dark complexioned, with a round
skull, of medium height and heavy stocky build. The
true Mediterranean is short-statured, slenderly built,
long-headed like the Nordic, but with black hair and
eyes, and a skin inclined to be more or less swarthy.
To visualize these race types, call to mind a typical
Scandinavian for the Nordic, a peasant of Central or
Eastern Europe for the Alpine, and a Southern Italian
or Spaniard for the Mediterranean.
The outstanding mental characteristic of the Nordics
is their restless, creative energy. In this peculiar quality


they surpass not only the other European stocks, but
also all other branches of mankind. For thousands of
years they have poured forth from their northland
homes around the Baltic, in conquering waves over
Europe and many parts of Asia. Always the Nordics
have been a race of warriors, sailors, pioneers, and ex-
plorers. Extremely race-conscious and politically
efficient, they settled down as a ruling aristocracy in
many lands. Gradually they have been out-bred, and
only where they have thoroughly occupied a country,
expelling or overwhelming the previous inhabitants,
as was the case in England and Scotland, has the racial
conquest been permanent.
Round Skull. Long Skull
The Alpines are emphatically a continental stock,
taking naturally to highlands and to inland plains,
and showing little liking for the sea. They are a sturdy,
tenacious race, very stable but apt to be stolid and un-
imaginative. They have a strong sense of group soli-
darity, and they cling to the land wherever they settle.
The Alpines are not individually so warlike as the
Mediterraneans, and far less than the Nordics. Usually
their advances are slow and unspectacular, but per-
sistent. It is a kind of peaceful penetration, and regions


in Central France and Northern Italy once populated
by Mediterraneans are to-day occupied by Alpines.
The Mediterranean temperament is emotional. Medi-
terraneans are passionate and excitable; loving and
hating intensely. They are inclined to lack stability
and tenacity, and neither in politics nor in war do they
possess a high sense of discipline. For this reason they
have difficulty in holding their own, both against Nor-
dics and Alpines. Strong magnetic leaders can do great
things with them, but the personal element is necessary.
They have a keen sense of beauty, form, colour, and the
joy of life, and particularly in the past have produced
many remarkably clever men. They are quick-witted,
but prone to be superficial. 2
Having briefly outlined the characteristics of the
three branches constituting the white race, it is desir-
able to examine in detail the racial composition of the
English, the Scotch, the Irish, and the AYelsh, who
together form about 90 per cent, of the white popu-
lation of this country, and about 88 per cent, of the
total population.
We are in this respect not concerned with the people
who lived in the British isles many thousands of years
ago, and who have become known as the Piltdown people
from a fossilized skull and some bones found at Pilt-
down, Sussex, some years back. They were entirely
different from any human beings living to-day and
became totally extinct. We commence with a Medi-
terranean people akin to the Iberians of Gaul and Spain,
who occupied the British Isles probably more than
5000 years ago. Their relics have been found over the
whole extent of Great Britain and adjacent islands.
2. Racial Realities of Europe, Lothrop Stoddard, pp. 11-18.


These Mediterraneans, probably intermixed with a small
strain of Alpines who had arrived before the end of
the neolithic age—were in possession when under dif-
ferent names Goidels, Britons, Belgoe the Celts
crossed over from the continent and made themselves
masters. The time for this event is uncertain, but has
been provisionally fixed at about 400 years B.C. By
some scholars the pre-Celtic inhabitants of Britain are
believed to have formed the sub-stratum and larger
portion of the population, when, roughly at the time
of Christ, the Romans poured into the country. It is
generally agreed that their descendants are still with
us. It was probably due to a preponderance of Medi-
terranean blood that for long the Celts were classified
as Mediterraneans. They were undoubtedly Nordics,
though it is possible their racial purity had suffered
through intermixture with Alpines and even Mediter-
raneans before the invasion of Great Britain. 3
The Romans, who remained in Great Britain some
400 years, are not believed racially to have influenced
the British population to any noticeable degree. The
legionaries were largely recruited from Nordic bar-
barians and were eventually withdrawn, or the legions
faded away through lack of reinforcement. During
Roman occupation, Nordics from the continent com-
menced to visit Britain as traders, and to form trading
settlements. Later on they came in greater number and
took possession of the land, absorbing the native popu-
lation, exterminating them, or forcing them westwards.
The earliest of these invaders are known in English his-
tory as Saxons, and until recently were believed to have
3- For further information read Ancient Britain, by T. Rice Holmes,
PP* 375-458*


come from Germany at the request of the Britons to
help them against the Piets and Scots. Evidences are,
however, accumulating to prove that they were not
Germans. They may have been Frisians; but in all
probability they were Scandinavians. According to
John Dawson in his valuable book, “England and the
Nordic Race, ” they came from Viken in Norway. He
suggests that they got the name Saxons from a particu-
lar kind of sword used by them, called a ‘ ‘ sax. ’ ’
According to the same authority the Angles, who arrived
slightly later, were originally Scandinavian fishermen,
from Norway and Denmark, who sold much of the fish
they caught in the North Sea to the Roman garrisons
in Britain, eventually invading the country after the
departure or decline of the Roman soldiery. Anglers
is the old Scandinavian name for fishermen. The Jutes
are reasonably supposed to have come from Jutland.
From the racial point of view it is of little importance
whether the Saxons, the Angles, and the Jutes came from
Germany or Scandinavia, as in both cases they would
be Nordics. But in regard to general history and cul-
tural development it makes a difference in so far as
the Germans at that time were still barbarians, and the
Scandinavians had attained to a high degree of culture.
The Roman historian Tacitus, who visited Germany in
the latter part of the first century, wrote about the
people there that they were steeped in utter barbarism,
were wretchedly poor, lived in hovels shared with their
cattle, and that they were completely ignorant of
writing. On the other hand, he had heard that there
existed, a long way to the north, a people who knew
how to write in Greek characters and were expert sailors.


We know from runic inscriptions that the Scandi-
navians at that early age possessed a written alphabet.
The Scandinavians are believed to have originally
lived to the north of the Black Sea and the sea of
Azoff. They embodied traders, seafarers, and agri-
culturists, and had attained a civilization beyond their
contemporaries. As in similar instances in history, their
prosperity brought down upon them savage hordes from
Asia, and being unable to beat the invaders back, those
who could embarked on their ships and sailed away
through the Bosphorus and became the very celebrated
ancient Greeks. Others, who were unable to find ship-
room, trekked with their cattle and agricultural imple-
ments towards the Baltic, the bulk of them not stopping
until, after touching the island of Gothland, they settled
in Sweden. From there they gradually spread to Nor-
way and Denmark, and later, as has been pointed out,
to England.
In the interval between the invasion by the Anglo-
Saxons and the Vikings—more than three centuries—
there is a blank in English history; but it is almost
certain that trade-relations existed between the Nordics
on the two shores of the North Sea. Divergencies in
language and customs would naturally develop, and in
one respect particularly did the cleavage become abso-
lute and far reaching in its consequences—the Nordics
in England embraced Christianity, while those in
Scandinavia still believed in Odin and Thor, and in
Valhalla for the brave who fell in battle.
The invasion of England by the Vikings, which
lasted from the middle of the Bth century till the first
half of the 11th, falls in three distinct periods—of
plunder, settlement, and political conquests. Of the


three phases we are concerned here only with that of
settlement.
Considering the Scandinavian people all belong to
the same stock, it does not signify much which parts
of the British Isles were settled by Danes and which
by Norwegians, and it will suffice briefly to mention
that the Danes mainly kept to England, and the Nor-
wegians to Scotland and adjacent islands, and that in
conjunction they harassed Ireland. The Swedes, by the
way, played their greatest role in Russia, where they
founded dynasties and laid the foundation of the
Russian Empire. Their descendants in a large measure
constituted the Russian aristocracy, right down to the
revolution in 1917.
Apart from historical records the chief sources throw-
ing light on Scandinavian settlement in England are
place-names and personal names. Any village or town
whose name ends in by, dale, thorpe, wall, ford, gard ,
holm, and so forth, was originally a Scandinavian settle-
ment; and such suffixes in personal names, and
also that of son, point to Viking descent. By
these means it has been ascertained that the Scan-
dinavians settled permanently in large numbers in
the part of England, which, in the ninth century,
was ceded to the Danish chieftains, Guthrun and
Alfdene. The territory has become known as Dane-
lagh, or Danelaw, through Danish law having been
introduced there. The boundary of Danelagh was the
Thames estuary to the mouth of the Lea (a few miles
east of London), then up the Lea to near its source,
then due north to Bedford, then north-westerly along
Wattling Street. Thus Danelagh embraced the North-
ern Mercia, East Anglia, the greater part of Essex and
Northumbria.


The Encyclopedia Britannica tells us that some of the
land-divisions still in use in England, such as Riding,
are of Scandinavian origin, and further on it says: “The
highly developed Scandinavian legal system has left
abundant traces in this district. We may mention
specially the institution of 'lawmen/ whom we find
as a judicial body in several of the towns in or near
Danelagh. There can be no doubt that these 'law-
men/ who can be shown to form a close parallel to,
and indeed the ultimate source of our jury, were of
Scandinavian origin. Many other legal terms can be
definitely traced to Scandinavian sources, and they are
first found in use in the district of the Danelagh. . . .
The whole of the place nomenclature of Yorkshire, Lin-
colnshire, Nottinghamshire, and Northern Northampton-
shire is Scandinavian rather than native English, and in
the remaining districts of the Danelagh a goodly propor-
tion of Danish place-names may be found. Their influ-
ence is also evident in the dialects spoken in these
districts to the present day. It is probable that until the
end of the 10th century Scandinavian dialects were
almost the sole language spoken in the district of Dane-
lagh, and when English triumphed, after an intermediate
bilingual state, a large number of words were adopted
from the earlier Scandinavian speech.”
The Scots at the time of Roman invasion were akin
to the Britons, though the Iberian, or pre-Celtic strain
probably was much stronger in Scotland than in Eng-
land, particularly in the north and west. Tacitus ’
description of the Caledonian tribes makes them Nordics.
Comparisons of skulls and other physical features
undertaken between Highland students and Norwegian
recruits drawn from the Trondhjem district show great


similarity; but the darker pigmentation of hair, eyes,
and skin of the former points to an intermixture of
Mediterranean blood. We may, therefore, assume that
in Scotland—as undoubtedly also was the case in Ire-
land and the western portion of England, particularly
Wales and Cornwall—lived a mixed population of Nor-
dics and Mediterraneans when the Vikings appeared.
The Vikings settled permanently in the Orkney
Islands and the Shetland Islands earlier than in any
other part of the British Isles, these islands forming
part of Norway till 1469. In that year the daughter
of the then King of Denmark and Norway, Christian
1., was married to King James 111. of Scotland. King
Christian being unable to pay the dowry agreed to,
handed the Orkney Islands and Shetland Islands over
to King James as security, and the dowry never being
paid, the Scots kept the islands.
The old Norse speech was still spoken there by a
few people until the end of the 18th century. Place-
nomenclature is almost entirely Norse, and the modern
dialects are full of Norse words. Prom the Shetlands
and Orkneys the Norsemen crossed to the Scottish main-
land. Sutherland, Caithness, Ross, and Cromarty are
full of Norse place-names, and Norse influence may be
traced even further south.
The Hebrides were also largely influenced by the
Norsemen. Together with the Isle of Man they formed
a Norse kingdom down to the middle of the 13th cen-
tury. Many of the islands themselves and their chief
physical features bear Norse names; many personal
names are of Norse origin, and there are many Norse
words in the Gaelic both of the islands and the main-
land. In the Isle of Man, too, much bears testimony to


iHi \, . P
Q Don ejayh J *> K V
ey /•*
Norse settlement, including a number of runic inscrip
tions and the Manx legal system.
In Ireland the Scandinavian influence was concen-
trated in the great coast towns —Dublin, Wexford,
Waterford, Cork, and Limerick—and the districts im-
mediately around them. Irish place-nomenclature bears


very definite witness to this fact. There was free
inter-marriage between the Scandinavians and the Irish,
but the strength of the clan-system kept the races
distinct and there was no such infiltration of the whole
population as for instance took place in the English
Danelagh. This system prevented settlement upon their
own farms as took place in England, and the invaders
lived almost entirely in the coast towns and the districts
in their immediate neighbourhood, busying themselves
with trade and shipping, and giving the impetus there
as elsewhere to town life. Mr. Allan Mawer, in his
excellent little book “The Vikings,” from which much
of the information contained in the above is taken, tells
that Scandinavian influence, as a political force, de-
clined after 1014. In that year at Clontarf the Scandi-
navians and the Irish engaged in the greatest battle
ever fought on Irish soil, to decide who were to be
masters in Ireland. The Scandinavians were beaten;
but nevertheless they remained a strong element in
the towns, right down to the English invasion in the
12th century, and in the case of Dublin there can be
no doubt that it was the Scandinavians who made it
the capital city of Ireland. Later the Nordic element
in Ireland was strengthened by a large number of Scot-
tish families settling in Ulster, and by a number of
English settling in other parts of Ireland, and to-day
a distinction is made between Celtic Irish, 4 Ulstermen,
and Anglo-Irish.
On the other hand a large number of Celtic Irish,
since the advent of modern industrialism in England,
have settled in English manufacturing centres and now
constitute a considerable part of the population there.
4. “Pre-Anglo-Saxon” would be a better term than “Celtic.”


There is still to be mentioned the strengthening of
the Nordic strain in the British Isles by the Norman
invasion in 1066. Norman is a softening of the word
Northman, and the Normans were descendants of Scan-
dinavians who had conquered and settled in Normandy
in 911. During the century and a half which passed
until the conquest of England took place, the Normans
were adopting the French language and culture, but
their racial strain and characteristics were unimpaired.
After the Conquest, Normans were scattered through-
out England, and were even settled, though in smaller
numbers, in Scotland, Ireland, and Wales.
From the foregoing condensed outline of the racial
origin of the British people it would follow that the
English and the greater part of the Scotch are pre-
dominantly Nordics, and that the Celtic Irish, the
Welsh, and, to some extent, the Highland Scotch —all
largely hailing from the pre-Anglo-Saxon inhabitants
—contain an unmistakable element of Mediterranean
blood.
Perhaps we are not far wrong in assuming that the
number of Anglo-Saxons in Ireland equalises the num-
ber of pre-Anglo-Saxons in England and Scotland, that
50 per cent, of the latter are Nordics and 50 per cent.
Mediterraneans, and that the Alpine element is so small
that it may be ignored.
Returning to the racial make up of the Australians,
which is the main object of this chapter, there still
remains to clear the ground regarding the race of the
white element of non-British descent in this country.
Based on such data as are available, and not forgetting
that no absolutely pure race exists anywhere in Europe,
it may be roughly assumed that the Scandinavians and


Dutch are 80 per cent. Nordics and 20 per cent. Alpines;
the Germans, Austrians, Swiss, and Belgians 30 per
cent. Nordics and 70 per cent. Alpines; the Italians
and Greeks 50 per cent. Alpines and 50 per cent.
Mediterraneans; the French 25 per cent. Nordics, 50
per cent. Alpines, and 25 per cent. Mediterraneans; the
Spanish, Portuguese, Maltese, and Jews 100 per cent.
Mediterraneans, and the remainder Alpines.


Assuming the above proportions to be approximately
correct, and applying them to the census figures for
1891, we find that about 82 per cent, of the white popu-
lation in Australia is Nordic, 13 per cent. Mediterran-
ean, 5 and 5 per cent. Alpine.
Apart from place of birth, religion affords a crude
racial guide. Generally speaking the Nordics are Pro-
testants, and the Mediterraneans and Alpines Roman or
Greek Catholics. At the Census of 1921 the Protestants
numbered about 78.5 per cent, of the white population
and the Catholics 21.5 per cent.
As suggested in a previous table the racial compo-
sition varies in the different States. Thus in Queens-
land the Nordic element falls nearly 4 per cent, below
the average for Australia, while the Mediterranean is
2 per cent, above, and the Alpine 2 per cent, above.
In Tasmania it is just the opposite, the Nordic element
being about 3.5 per cent, above the average, the Medi-
terranean 1.5 per cent, below, and the Alpine 2 per
cent, below.
The higher percentage of Mediterraneans in Queens-
land and the correspondingly lower percentage of Nor-
dics may explain the fact that politically Queensland for
long has been the most turbulent and unstable State in
Australia, 6 while in South Australia and Tasmania,
wdiere the racial composition is the opposite, political
disturbances of a serious nature have practically been
unknown. It may make us wise with regard to some
places being backward in economic progress and others
5. It is possible that the percentage of Mediterraneans is rated too high
and that of the Nordics too low; but as a tentative solutiorv of a difficult
problem the figures may be allowed to stand.
6. J. Mackenzie Robertson, in his book, The Saxons and the Celts, makes
out a strong case to prove that the tendency of the Irish to be excitable
is due to their history, and has little to do with racial characteristics.


100%
fl/flf/A
' ; ’ ' ...
HI
• •.
■—i
w/M
\
■y.
Alpine
-
m
m
w
»
HI
w////
W/m
Mediterranean
///////.
m
W/
■
Bl
-
f////A
-
50%-
-
Nordic
0%
N.S.W
Via
9
S.A.
1A.
Tas.
Aust.
being more advanced. And it may also in some measure
explain why the Australians, taken as a whole, are an
intensely sports-loving 1 people, somewhat deficient in
discipline, and overfond of gambling.
The Nordic race, which is so strongly represented in
the Australian people, have always been fond of sport
and enthusiastic admirers of athletic prowess. Accord-
ing to an Icelandic saga the youthful king of Norway,


Olaf Trygvason, was the foremost in sport of his day.
The Norse mythology pictures the heavenly abode as a
place of endless sport.
In the Nordics, too, the gambling instinct is con-
spicuous. Tacitus, after having related about their
sports, tells of the old Germans, who were true Nordics:
“Strangely enough they make games of hazard a
serious occupation even when sober, and so venturesome
are they about gaining or losing that, when every other
resource has failed, on the last and final throw they
/ 4/
stake the freedom of their own person.”
To the Mediterraneans —who include the Jews —
gambling is less a game of chance and more one of
business. The Nordics supply the “punters” and the
Mediterraneans the “bookies.” Between them they
keep the wheel of fortune in rapid, perpetual motion.
Finally the general deficiency in discipline may per-
haps, to some extent, be traced to the influence of the
13 per cent. Mediterraneans, who, as already stated,
are less amenable to discipline than are the Nordics
and the Alpines.


THE GERMANS.
Racial Composition.
We owe our first knowledge of the Germans to
Tacitus and other Roman writers who lived some two
thousand years ago. The Germans of that early period
formed numerous tribes, and they all belonged to the
tall, blonde, Nordic race. Being warlike and valiant
they repeatedly defeated the Roman legions sent to
subdue them. Later on they entered the Roman armies
in large numbers. In the declining days of Rome her
bravest soldiers and best generals were Germans.
Finally waves of Germanic Nordics invaded Italy and
put an end to the tottering Empire. This exodus south
left extensive parts of Germany thinly populated and
gave the Alpines an opportunity to push further west-
ward in their slow but irresistible movement towards
the Atlantic Ocean.
The Alpine race originated in Asia, and at the time
of the Roman collapse occupied Russia and the major
part of the Balkan peninsula, sending a wedge across
Europe into the heart of France. They now penetrated
into Germany and, adopting the German speech, in time
submerged what was left of the Nordics in her eastern
provinces. The next great opportunity was afforded the
Alpines by the Thirty Years' War, during which the
Nordic race carried on the greatest fratricidal slaughter
known in history. When the war came to an end, in
1648, the German population had been reduced to one-
third of what it had been at its beginning. The losses


were gradually made good from the vast reservoir of
Alpines in eastern and south-eastern Europe. This
Alpinisation of Germany has probably gone on un-
noticed ever since, and it is estimated by some (with
what degree of accuracy it is difficult to say) that of
her seventy million inhabitants in 1914, only nine
million were true Nordics. Others estimate the Nordics
at fifteen to twenty millions. A large section of the
present-day Germans are probably a cross between the
two strains, and the remainder are true Alpines.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Founding of South Australia and Arrival of the First
Germans.
Owing to the unemployment caused in England by
the introduction of steam and the consequent misery
amongst the working classes, plans to relieve the situ-
ation by founding overseas colonies were readily listened
to by philanthropists and others having the welfare of
the British people at heart. When, therefore, Edward
Gibbon Wakefield promulgated a scheme to make colo-
nisation successful and avoid the errors and pitfalls
which had characterised the colonisation of New South
Wales and Western Australia, he had no difficulty in
forming an association to give practical effect to his
ideas. Simultaneously news arrived in England of
Sturt’s journey down the Murray, and his discovery of
fertile land in the basin of that river, and the British
Government was urged to establish a new colony there,
on the lines suggested by Wakefield. There was some
hesitation on the part of the Government to incur new
responsibilities in the remote island continent, and not


until 1834 was the colony of South Australia established
by Act of Parliament. A Governor and a Board of
Commissioners were provided for, the latter being made
responsible for the colony’s finances. The necessary capi-
tal to float the colony, £200,000, was raised by a private
company, of which one of the movement’s greatest
enthusiasts, George Fife Angas, became chairman.
The first two shiploads of colonists left England in
1836, and in the same year a settlement was founded
where Adelaide is now situated. 1
While England was troubled with unemployment,
Prussia was stirred by religious strife. Owing to lack
of clearness in the teachings of Luther, serious con-
troversies arose shortly after his death. The divided
state of German Protestantism, resulting from theologi-
cal differences, contributed in no small degree to the
disasters in the Thirty Years’ War. Various attempts
to unite the warring factions were made from time to
time, but failed. At length a union was effected by
the forces of the civil authorities, the aim being, without
interfering with any particular dogma, to bring all
the confessions or congregations under one government
and discipline. In Prussia the enforced union was
effected in 1817, and it was combined with the publi-
cation of a new liturgy intended for common use. This
led to a secession from the State Church. The seceders
were eventually tolerated, and finally, in 1845, recog-
nised, and now form the Free Churches of Germany,
but for many years they were very harshly treated by
the Government.
Amongst those who had been persecuted for refusing
to use the prescribed new form of worship was a Pastor
i. Krnest Scott’s Short History of Australia, Chapter XIII.


Kavel, of Klemzig, a little village a hundred miles
to the east of Berlin. Having heard of the proposed
settlement in South Australia, he proceeded to England
to learn more about it. In Mr. Angas he found a
sympathising friend and a staunch believer in freedom
of conscience and worship. Kavel remained in London
over two years and married an English lady. Having re-
ceived a loan of £4OOO from Angas to finance an emigra-
tion scheme, a vessel was sent to Germany by the South
Australian Company to take on board the oppressed
Lutherans. The German Government at first objected
to them leaving and put all sorts of obstacles in their
way; but eventually they were allowed to depart, and
after an exciting journey down the Oder they reached
Hamburg, where they boarded the company’s vessel, the
“ Prince George. ” Having called at Plymouth, they
proceeded to South Australia, arriving safely in Ade-
laide in November, 1838. Another detachment arrived
a month later in the “Zebra,” a Danish vessel com-
manded by Captain Hahn, and a third on board the
“ Catharina, ’ 7 at the latter end of January, 1839. This
brought the German immigrants up to about 500, a
tenth of the entire population. Others soon followed,
and the German element in South Australia grew
steadily in ascendancy.
Those who arrived in the “Prince George” were
settled on land belonging to Angas on the banks of the
Torrens River, two miles north of Adelaide. The
settlement was named Klemzig, after their native village
in Prussia. Those who arrived a little later were less
fortunate. The Germans had no money, and, according
to the laws of South Australia, Crown land could not
be sold on credit; consequently they had to buy from


private speculators, paying at Hahndorf, the second
settlement, £7 an acre plus interest.
About the early days of the German colonists in
South Australia Mr. J. W. Bull writes in his book,
“Early Experiences in South Australia,’ * published in
1884;
Through their pastor, the Rev. Ravel, they ob-
tained provisions on credit until their own crops were
realised on. Their seed wheat cost them £1 a bushel
and working cattle £4O a pair. Up to the time of the
arrival of the Germans, the inhabitants of Adelaide
had been insufficiently supplied with vegetables and
dairy produce, which consequently had to be paid
for at exorbitant prices. This want was relieved by
the German settlers, who soon began to carry into
the city their commodities, generally on the backs of
the women, and in the same manner bringing from
the town their purchases there. In those days a string
of matrons and girls could be seen wending their way
to the capital in their German costumes. Their pro-
duce fetched a good price, and they soon paid off
all their debts and bought more land, this time from
the Government at £1 an acre. They made their own
implements, such as had been used in their homeland
for hundreds of years. For some time after their
arrival we would see funny rigs attached to one of
their small ploughs or wooden harrows—say, a
woman with a strap over her shoulder with a rope
to a swingletree, a necessary advantage being given
to her in length, and at the other shorter end a small
bullock, cow, or pony, the husband or father steering
the plough. It was, however, not long before we saw
them in better circumstances, with their pairs of fine


and fat horses, kept and treated in a manner which
set an example to the settlers amongst whom they
had come. ”
At another place in his book Mr. Bull, in referring to
Angas and the German immigrants, writes: —
“I may remark, without fear of contradiction, that
this wealthy and beneficent gentleman never made a
better use of his money than by affording this body
of Lutherans the means to migrate to this colony. ”
Also George Sutherland, in a book published in 1898,
The South Australian Company, gives unstinted
praise to the German colonists. About the women he
writes: —
“They were expert shearers from their native land.
In South Australia they proved to be almost, if not
absolutely, the sole persons who could be relied upon
to perform the shearing and make up the merino wool
in proper style for the market. ”
Subsequent Arrivals .
While human kindness had inspired Angas to help
the first shiploads of Germans to South Australia, the
economic needs of the young colony led to more of
their kind being encouraged to come, their passage
money being advanced by interested parties, and by two
wealthy Germans, the one living in Hamburg, and the
other in Bremen.
Owing to a widespread human desire to get rich
quick, with as little exertion as possible, Wakefield’s
colonisation scheme did not work according to expec-
tation. His ideas were that land, instead of being given
away or sold for next to nothing, as had been done in
New South Wales and Western Australia, should be


sold at a good price, and the money paid for it utilised
exclusively to bring out immigrants. But land being
dear, the immigrants would have to work and save for
several years before they were able to purchase land
themselves; thereby those who had invested capital in
land would be assured a regular and reliable labour
supply. In other words, land would continually be
bought for hard cash, more emigrants would be brought
out to assist working it, and so matters would move as
regularly as clockwork, till all the arable land in South
Australia had been brought under culture.
Unfortunately, many of the new arrivals, mostly
Nordics, possessed neither the thrift nor the patience
required to advance by inches, and soon drifted back
to Adelaide, the result being a rapidly growing body
of unemployed. To relieve the distress amongst these
discontented and disappointed people, the Governor
started extensive public works, for which he paid with
treasury bills. The financial depression was followed
by a time of prosperity and a boom in fixed property.
After a while people no longer bought land to cultivate
it, but to hold it purely for speculative purposes. Out
of 299,000 acres sold by 1841, only 2500 acres were
under cultivation. The boom came to an end when the
bills, issued by the Governor on his own responsibility,
had to be met. The Commissioners could not honour
them, and the British Government, having undertaken
no financial responsibility in regard to the new colony,
refused to do so. This caused a sudden collapse of
credit, and the ruination of thousands of people who
had considered themselves wealthy.
It was but natural that in England South Australia
came to be looked upon as a place from which it was


best to keep away, the consequence being that suitable
British emigrants, who were to be given preference,
ceased to offer themselves; nor could people, who were
able to pay their own fare and establish themselves
after arrival, be induced to proceed to the new colony.
Under the circumstances the directors of the South
Australian Co., to insure progress, had to take immi-
grants of good character and healthy constitution from
any place in which they could be found.
The land boom, with its collapse and consequent
misery, had passed over the heads of the German colo-
nists. They had patiently cleared their land, tilled it,
and brought their produce to Adelaide. With the rigid
economy with which they were brought up and which
is natural to the Alpine race, they were able not merely
to earn a living but to improve their financial position
from year to year. In letters to their kinsmen in Silesia
and Brandenburg, South Australia was described as a
land of freedom and plenty, where the horrors of war
were unknown and everybody could worship God
according to his conscience. These letters produced a
good effect, considerable numbers of Silesians and others
prepared to migrate to South Australia, and shipload
after shipload departed for Adelaide.
In 1849 the directors were able to announce that up-
wards of 1500 Germans had gone to the colony.
Prior to this South Australia had recovered from her
economic depression—partly through the British Gov-
ernment having put her finances on a sound footing,
and partly as the result of the appointment of an
exceptionally able man, George Grey, as Governor.
Shortly afterwards came the great mineral discoveries


in New South Wales and Victoria. Many of the gold-
diggers, who went there from South Australia, were
fortunate, and on their return invested their money in
land, which led to a great development in the agri-
cultural industry. A period of great prosperity fol-
lowed, which proved an effective means to attract new
settlers from overseas.
By 1861 the population of South Australia had in-
creased to 126,800 persons, of whom about 50,000 were
born in the colony. Of the 76,800 immigrants, the
Germans accounted for 8863, or approximately 11.5 per
cent. From 1881 onwards deaths and departures have
exceeded arrivals, so that at the end of 1925 there
were probably less than 3000 xmrsons in South Australia
born in Germany.
Contribution to Economic Development .
It w r ill be seen from the foregoing how in the early
years Adelaide, in a large measure, depended on the
German colonists for farm and garden produce, and
that the German women largely helped the wool in-
dustry when in its infancy. Throughout the whole
career of South Australia the German element has
played an important part in the development of rural
pursuits, and when South Australia became the first
grain exporting colony and, in certain directions, led
Australia in regard to agriculture, much of the credit
is due to the Germans. Also the fact that South Aus-
tralia is well advanced in fruit growing and has de-
veloped a wine industry well to the fore in Australia,
would have been unattainable without the German colo-
nists, although others than Germans deserve to be men-
tioned in this connection. The author of The South


Australian Company speaks with a great deal of truth
when he says:—
“It is interesting to note how, just as the perse-
cution of the Huguenots in France had the effect of
assisting to spread throughout some portions of the
British dominions a knowledge of certain arts until
then but little practised by the Anglo-Saxon race, so
the trouble of the Silesian Lutherans became the
means of for the first time introducing into Australia
a knowledge of the methods of growing and tending
the economic plants of Middle and Southern Europe. ’ 7
Of viticulture, it is wrong to assume that the Silesians
possessed any knowledge; but the Germans hailing from
the Rhine provinces did, and when in the forties vine
growing was introduced into the colony, mainly by
British initiative, the Germans soon became its main-
stay. Roughly speaking, it can be said that the British
organised and financed the wine industry in South
Australia, and the Germans supplied the knowledge, the
skilled workers and small growers. Amongst the great
pioneering names is only one of German origin, that
of Seppelt, while of British there are half a dozen
or more, of which those of John Reynell, Dr. Penfold,
and Sir Samuel Davenport are the best known.
Of the many excellent wine-making establishments,
that of “Sep pelt field” stands first. It was founded
by a German couple, J. E. Seppelt, who in 1851 planted
a vineyard at the foot of the Barossa Ranges. Under-
neath the building erected by the Seppelts, a small cellar
was excavated. The old building has long ago given
place to the palatial cellars which to-day contain more
than a million gallons of wine. While J. E. Seppelt
was the founder, it was his son, Benno Seppelt, who


made it the most magnificent establishment of its kind
in Australia. About “Seppeltfield” the Government
Viticulturist of South Australia, Professor Perkins, in
a pamphlet, “The South Australian Vintage in 1903,
published by the Agricultural Department, is quoted
to have said: “I know of no cellars, either here or in
Europe, so perfectly conceived from the general plan
down to the minutest detail.’ ’
The vineyard was then 150 acres; the bulk of the
grapes were purchased from smaller growers, mostly
Germans or of German descent, within a radius of 16
miles from the estate. There were 165 of these growers,
each employing on. an average ten pickers. The num-
ber of hands “Seppeltfield” provided work for during
the vintage time numbered quite 1700. About Benno
Seppelt, the author of the above pamphlet wrote: “It
would be hard indeed to mention another man in South
Australia who has been a greater benefactor to his
country. ’ 7
The writer ends a three-page description of “Seppelt-
field” with the following picturesque description of the
district and its people:—
“In the afternoon we drove through undulating
country, with vineyards on every side, to the quaint,
clean and inviting Tanunda. In most of the vine-
yards they were picking the grapes. Pretty, fresh-
looking girls were the principal workers. When their
vessels were filled with fruit they carried them off
to the German wagon and emptied their contents
therein. I saw 20 or 30 of such wagons ready to be
sent to the vinery, and there was not a poor-looking
horse in one of the teams. The explanation is that
the owners regard their horses as members of their


family, and treat them as kindly as they would their
wives and children. As we passed by the fresh-
complexioned girls, nearly all dressed in blue print
dresses, they got up from under the fruitful vines,
and, seizing their huge sunbonnets by the long strings,
waved them round their heads, smiled to us and
showed their even rows of white, pearly teeth. They
were soon hard at work again, cutting the big bunches
of juicy red grapes. ”
In many places the German immigrants in South
Australia settled in fairly compact colonies, while in
other places they were intermixed with the British
population, the most friendly feeling everywhere pre-
vailing between the two races. In over seventy places
they lived in sufficiently large numbers to establish
their own Lutheran churches, and in the majority of
cases to conduct their own German schools. The
weighty contribution of the Germans to the opening
up of South Australia and to bringing it under culture
was indicated by the many German place-names which
were entered on the map of that State. It is to be
regretted, if on no other ground, for historical reasons,
that during the Great War German names to the num-
ber of seventy were substituted by British, by names
taken from the war, or by aboriginal names. Klemzig
became Gaza, Hahndorf-Ambleside, Grunthal-Yerdun,
Krichauff-Beatty, Siegersdorf-Bultawilta, and so forth. 2
Though a greater proportion of the Germans than
of any other nationality went on the land, many settled
in Adelaide, Mount Gambler, Port Pirie, and other
South Australian towns, where they generally made
good and enjoyed the esteem of their fellow citizens.
2. See Commonwealth Year Book, No. ig, p. 50.


Some of them took an active part in the promotion of
trade, particularly with Germany, and in establishing
such secondary activities as are indispensable to the
agricultural industry.
THE LUTHERAN CHURCH IN SOUTH
AUSTRALIA,
As in Europe and America, so in Australia, and more
particularly in South Australia, the Lutheran Church
is divided against itself. The differences are not merely
concerned with form of worship, but also with the in-
terpretation of certain dogmas such as Chiliasm; the
plenary inspiration of the Scripture; election (in its
theological sense), and so forth. One faction leans to-
wards the views expounded by Calvin, and, indeed, by
Melanchthon, the staunch friend of Luther and the
author of the Augsburg Confession. Owing to debate-
able dogmas being left open questions, this faction
may, for want of a better term, be called 44 moderate’ 7
Lutherans. The other faction applies a more literal
interpretation, which allows of no approach to the
Reformed Church; its members are designated 44 strict’ ’
or 4 4 old ” Lutherans. Both views are represented by
the followers of Luther in this country, and, together
with other differences, have caused distinctive and
mutually antagonistic church organisations to grow up.
The Germans whom Pastor Kavel, like a modern Moses,
led into the strange land of South Australia, were 44 01 d”
Lutherans, and the congregations formed by them be-
came the nucleus of a small church organisation. A
more powerful church body, also of 44 01 d” Lutherans,
was founded slightly later by a Pastor Fritsche, and


was named “The Evangelic Lutheran Synod of Aus-
tralia/’ the ramifications of which gradually extended
into other parts of the continent where Germans lived
in any number. At the head of it was a prefect or
president, assisted by a vice-president, and by district
presidents in South Australia, Victoria, New South
Wales, Queensland and New Zealand respectively. Most
of its ministers and teachers were obtained from Ger-
many, though some were trained in South Australia at
colleges which,' in succession, existed in Lobethal, Hahn-
dorf, and Murtoa, the latter in Victoria. In 1905 this
college was moved to Adelaide. In the year when the
Great War broke out, the organisation employed 28
ministers in South Australia, 14 in Victoria, 4 in New
South Wales, 9 in Queensland, 2 in Western Australia,
and 4 in New Zealand.
Another church organisation arose in South Australia
as a branch of the Lutheran Synod in Ohio, U.S.A. It
was named the “Synod of Australia,” and it employed
in 1914 five ministers.
A more formidable rival to the organisation formed
by the “old” Lutherans became the one founded at an
early date by the moderate Lutherans. It was named
the “ Evangelic-Lutheran Immanuel Synod in Aus-
tralia.” After a while this organisation split into two
mutually antagonistic factions. The one coalesced with
the “United German-Scandinavian Lutheran Synod in
Queensland, ’ ’ adopting the common name of the ‘ 6 Evan-
gelic-Lutheran Church-bund.” The other joined the
Synod of Victoria under the common designation, “The
General Synod of Australia.” Confining ourselves to
South Australian organisations, the sundered Immanuel
Synod in 1914 employed 23 ministers in South Australia,


2in Victoria, 2 in Western Australia, and 1 in Tas-
mania.
During the war and post-war period, evil days fell
upon the Germans in Australia, and the soundness of
their various organisations was put to a severe test.
Their social organisations, manifested in clubs and
societies in the various population centres, received a
crushing set-back. As for the German language, which
already before the war had experienced difficulties in
holding its ground, it was crippled almost beyond repair.
Prom the religious point of view, however, what at first
seemed a great calamity proved a blessing in disguise,
in so far as it widened the scope for the propagation of
the Lutheran faith.
For many years after the founding of South Australia
the Government did not concern itself with educational
matters beyond subsidising private schools. These were
primarily established by various church denominations.
Like the other religious bodies, the Lutheran organisa-
tions opened schools wherever the number of German
children warranted it, and as the daily language in the
homes was German, and very few of the parents were
proficient in English, it was but natural that Germans
were engaged as teachers, and that the schools were
conducted in the German language. In 1875 the first
Education Act was passed; but beyond making primary
education compulsory and providing for the establish-
ment of schools where none such were found, and the
training and classification of teachers, the existing order
was not disturbed. In time a Director of Education
was appointed, who decided the course of instruction
subject to the approval of the Minister charged with
education. The German schools were allowed to carry


on as heretofore. During the war an outcry was made
by the press and the public to have the German schools
closed, some of which at that time had existed over
70 years. This, in 1915, resulted in a new Education
Act being passed, whereby it was ordered that English
should be made the medium of instruction for at least
four hours a day. 3 As this compromise did not satisfy
the public demand, an amendment was made. This
came into force on Ist July, 1917, and by it all Lutheran
schools were taken over by the Government, and it was
provided that nothing but English was to be spoken
in school hours. Out of 52 German schools existing at
the above date, 49 were closed; of these, 25 were absorbed
by neighbouring English schools, and 20 carried on in
their own buildings with English teachers. With the
exception of the Concordia and the Immanuel secondary
schools in Adelaide, and two seminaries for the training
of ministers and missionaries, no Lutheran schools
remained in South Australia. 4
Previously to the closing of the Lutheran schools the
German language had received another staggering blow
through the War Precautions Act prohibiting the pub-
lication in German of anything whatsoever. In the case
of religious papers, the English language, where not
already used, was substituted, which enabled them, with
some interruption and inconvenience, to carry on. The
locally printed German newspapers were placed in a
more difficult position and had no other choice than to
close their doors. In the case of the Sud-Australische
Zeitung, which was founded in 1850, and had appeared
3. Already before the war, in many of the German schools, English had
been introduced voluntary as the medium of instruction.
4. An amendment in 1925 to the Education Act has made it possible
for thq Lutheran primary schools to re-open. A few have already done
so.


regularly ever since, the enforced suspension proved
fatal. The only German newspaper now published in
Australia is the Queenslander Herald, in Brisbane. 5
To understand how the closing of the German schools
helped the Lutheran Church out of a position which
steadily sapped its life-blood, it must be borne in mind
that from the outset it was based on the preservation of
the German language. It never had any intention of
making proselytes amongst the British. Towards each
other the different factions were at times aggressive
enough, and founded rivalling congregations wherever a
foothold could be gained; but towards the British world
their attitude was one of defence. Now for a more
or less scattered German population, with nine to one
against them, the ninety per cent, being mentally as
well equipped as themselves, to preserve their mother
tongue indefinitely would have been contrary to all
human experience. To begin with, it would have re-
quired the survival of a very strong German spirit;
but how could such a spirit endure generation after
generation, with a fast diminishing number of persons
born in Germany and an ever-increasing number born
in Australia —all of them daily associating and inter-
marrying with the British ? As Germans they belonged
to a small minority—as Australians they were part of a
powerful majority, deriving all the advantages com-
manded by majorities under a democratic system of
government. After all, Australia was their native land,
and King George their Sovereign. All that many knew
of Germany was that she had not treated their ancestors
5. The oldest German newspaper in Queensland, Die Nord-Australische
Zeitung, was founded in 1876. It was in time amalgamated with the
Queenslander Herald, founded in 1895.
Since this book went to press Die Snd-Australische Zeitung has sent out
two numbers from Tanunda. It would thus seem that it may revive.


too well. Consequently, there was a growing disinclina-
tion amongst the children to learn German and to
consider themselves anything else than Australians.
When the war broke out, their young men enlisted in
large numbers with the Australian Imperial Forces.
Already, long before the war, there was probably not
a single German settlement in Australia where a bilin-
gual state had not arisen, if, indeed, English had not
become the daily speech. Many of the ministers had
been compelled by dire necessity to compromise, and
were rendering the church services alternately in English
and German. The church leaders still clung to their
German schools —maybe out of reverence to the long
departed, staunch pioneers who had founded them —
maybe as a matter of national sentiment —but most
likely through fear of the Lutheran creed as a spiritual
force not being able to survive in Australia if separated
from the German language. The Government prevented
a lingering death to the German schools by closing them
through Acts of Parliament.
Realising the hopelessness of preserving the German
language, the various Lutheran ministers are fast
dropping it, and unless a halt is given to this movement
by a fresh inflow of German immigrants, it is bound
to disappear entirely within another generation. Being
gradually freed from the strait-jacket of language and
nationalism, a hitherto undreamt of scope for activity
opens itself to the Lutheran Church in Australia, which,
if a union could be effected between the ‘ ‘ old ’ 9 Lutherans
and the “moderate’ 9 Lutherans, could not but make
itself felt. This is, perhaps, unthinkable, but even dis-
united the Lutherans are gaining in strength, and since


the war congregations have been founded at places where
there were none before. 6
The position of the Lutheran Church in Australia, in
1925, was, briefly, the following:—
The ‘ ‘ Evangelic-Lutheran Synod 5 * or “ old ’ * Lutheran
organisation had remained unchanged. It still had its
stronghold in South Australia, with ramifications in
the other States. It employed 64 ministers as com-
pared with 57 in 1914.
All the different shades of the moderate Lutherans
in Australia had consolidated under the name of the
i ‘United Evangelic-Lutheran Church in Australia,”
with headquarters in South Australia. It employed 65
ministers. Negotiations were in progress with the Aus-
tralian branch of the Synod in Ohio, which since have
led to its absorption by the bigger church body.
THE GERMANS IN VICTORIA.
Already in the forties, barely ten years after the
foundation of Melbourne, Germans arrived in numbers
in the Port Phillip District. Some were business-men
and artisans and remained in the city, others were agri-
culturists and settled on the land near by. In 1849
some Germans arrived in Geelong, and shortly after
eight families settled four miles from that town at a
place which became knowm as Germantown, but is now
called Grovedale, where in time arose a strong German
settlement. In 1850 a number of Germans from Meck-
lenburg, Saxony, and Silesia settled in and around
Thomastown, ten miles north of Melbourne. In 1853
a large number of German families, mostly Silesians,
6. Last year a movement was started to bring the two factions of the
Lutheran Church in Australia together in one church union.


bought 20 to 30 acre blocks at Doncaster, ten miles
east of Melbourne, and settled there, while others
pushed twenty miles further east and founded a settle-
ment at Berwick. In the same year a number of Ger-
man families came from South Australia and took up
land in the Wimmera District, to be followed later by
a great many more.
The number of non-Britishers in Victoria in 1851,
before the discovery of gold, is given as 1494, of whom
it may be assumed the greater part were Germans. The
influx of immigrants, resulting from the news of rich
gold discoveries reaching Europe and America, greatly
augmented their number, and three years later there
were close on 4000 Germans in Victoria. They kept
on increasing till 1861, when they numbered well over
10,000. During the next twenty years they declined by
about 2000, owing, in the main, to many Germans from
South Australia returning to their homes after the
decline of alluvial gold-digging, and to others proceed-
ing to the gold-rushes in Queensland and New Zealand.
The prosperous years in the eighties attracted many
immigrants from overseas, amongst whom were a couple
of thousand Germans. The latter reached their highest
level in 1891, with upwards of 11,000; the economic
depression in the nineties, however, caused many again
to depart; at the end of 1925 there were probably not
more than 3000 in Victoria.
Contribution to Economic Development .
From the economic point of view the Germans in
Victoria may roughly be divided into three groups,
viz.; (1) those who from the outset settled on the land
and took up rural pursuits; (2) those who followed up
goldmining; and (3) those who settled in the cities.


The early Germans, who settled around Melbourne
and Geelong, naturally concentrated on supplying the
needs of the capital. In the case of Doncaster the
settlers in the beginning eked out a living by cutting
and carting firewood to the metropolis. Having cleared
their holdings, they commenced farming and vegetable
gardening, gradually switching over to fruit-growing,
for which the district in time became widely known.
The inhabitants of Germantown were largely engaged
in the carrying trade, taking produce from the West-
ern District to Melbourne. By the construction of rail-
way lines the place suffered severely, and 26 families
left to select land elsewhere. It is, however, as pioneers
in the Wimmera District and, to a lesser, yet noticeable
degree, in the Mallee that the Germans have played
their most important role. The Wimmera was largely
settled by Germans coming from South Australia and
by former German gold-diggers, and such well-known
agricultural centres as Horsham, Murtoa, Dimboola,
Green Lake, and many others, in the main owe their
origin to the Germans. When the production of a wheat-
grain, yielding a crop with an annual rainfall of but
15 inches or less, made it profitable to open up the
Mallee country, many Germans and their descendants
from the Wimmera and South Australia went there.
Everywhere the German farmers have done well and,
particularly as wheat-growers, rank high.
Scattered in the various fruit-growing districts the
Germans, too, have been successful, while in regard
to vine-growing and the creation of a wine-industry
second only to that of South Australia, a great share
of the credit is due to them. In Victoria and Its
Metropolis , published in 1888, it is said: —


“Vinegrowing was first introduced to Victoria by
a few Swiss settlers, near Geelong; but no extensive
efforts were made till 1847, when some German
farmers among the Barrabool Hills endeavoured to
make their homes resemble the vine-clad slopes of the
Rhine. And yet the want of experience to tell which
particular species of grape suited best for this or
that soil, in this or that district of Victoria, at first
marred all their efforts, and though some wine was
produced it was, as a rule, a poor, inferior beverage.
By the middle of the seventies it had, however, be-
come an assured resource of Victoria. 7 ’
It should be mentioned that to this happy result the
British, the Swiss, the French, and the Italians con-
tributed, the British here, as in South Australia, mainly
finding the capital and organising the industry. The
Germans, however, rendered exceedingly valuable ser-
vice, and the once extensive vineyards around Bendigo
are stated to have been mainly their work. In con-
nection with one of Victoria’s greatest wine-producing
centres, that of Rutherglen, the following extract from
John Bull’s Vineyard , by Hubert de Castella, reads
like a fairy-tale:—
“ Grapes had been planted at Rutherglen as a
speculation, mostly by English, Scotch, and Irish
farmers ignorant of the manufacture of wine. The
wine produced by them was found too strong for
daily consumption in that warm region, and as there
was no outside market, the railway line having not
yet been constructed, a reaction took place.
“At the same time close to the township of Ruther-
glen a middle-aged German bachelor, half a man of
letters, and a thorough man of vines, cultivated a


vineyard of six acres. He was a kind of recluse,
worked alone his ground, and accumulated his crops.
His casks were his friends, and only now and then,
if pressed by his modest wants, he parted with any.
“When the demand of Australian wine revived in
Melbourne, an innkeeper, his neighbour, took samples
from him to a city merchant. Struck by the quality,
and being told that to obtain these wines he had to
find the master in a selling mood, the merchant
arrived with a round sum to tempt him into a con-
tract.
“Our vine-grower’s cellar was a most primitive
one, a wooden structure covered with bark, stocked
only with French hogsheads—one hundred and twenty
of them, containing about 7000 gallons of wine, the
produce of six acres during three years. Truly
valuable casks they were, for which the owner was
paid £I6BO.
“The news of that sale spread like wild-fire in the
district. The path to future progress had been shown.
The 7000 gallons were resold in Melbourne at auction
for double the money the merchant had paid. This
caused other merchants to appear in the Eutherglen
district in search of similar wine, the outcome being
that trenching and planting was again commenced
in real earnest.”
As on the goldfields of Victoria, no distinction was
made except as between “Europeans” and “Chinese,”
the quota contributed to the busy army of fortune
seekers by this or that nation is unrecorded. Making
deductions from the census figures of 1861 and 1871,
and applying the law of proportion, the German gold-
diggers for a long period would number about 5000,


and at any given time constitute approximately 5 per
cent, of the total number of Europeans engaged in the
industry. On the principal goldfields, Ballarat, Bendi-
go, and Castlemaine, they were in sufficient numbers to
establish strong clubs, installed in their own buildings, 7
and to found Evangelical-Lutheran congregations,
ministered to by clergymen of their own nationality,
and worshipping God in churches erected by themselves.
In the unsuccessful stand of 1854 taken by the gold-
diggers against the despotic measures adopted against
them by the Government, known in Australian history
as “The Eureka Stockade,” the Germans took a note-
worthy part. One of the chief instigators of the rising
was a Hanoverian, Frederick Wern, for whose appre-
hension the Government afterwards offered a reward of
£SOO. In the hour of danger, Wern fell lamentably
short, imitating the famous Falstaff by saving his skin,
leaving it to others to do the fighting. The honour of
Germany was, however, vindicated by two compatriots,
who both gave their lives for the cause of liberty. The
one, a blacksmith, is mentioned in Our Own Little
Rebellion (H. G. Turner) for exemplary bravery. The
other, a Prussian by the name of Thonen, was one of
the two lieutenants constituting Peter Lalor’s staff.
Together with his colleague, a Canadian by birth,
Thonen died at his post.
After the excitement of the early gold-rushes, a con-
siderable number of Germans settled on the land, gene-
rally showing a preference for the western provinces
of the colony.
In the cities, though numerous, the Germans usually
disappeared amongst the overwhelming number of
7. These clubs have now ceased to exist.


Britishers, and only their clubs and congregations stood
out as easily detectable landmarks. Prior to the war
there were three German clubs in Melbourne —the ‘ 1 Ger-
man Club,” the “Turn Verein,” and the “Tivoli,” of
which the Turn Verein dated back to the gold-digging
days. They all possessed their own premises. During
the Great War their activity was suspended, the Turn
Yerein and the German Club eventually succumbing to
the adversities of the time. The buildings of these two
clubs were disposed of, in the case of the latter to the
Naval and Military Club of Victoria. Tivoli, however,
survived, and is now the social and national centre of
the Germans in Melbourne. Of contributions made by
the Germans to secondary industries should be men-
tioned the founding of Wertheim’s piano factory, the
second of its kind in Australia, and the assistance
rendered by imported Germans to establish the making
of briquettes at Yallourn, on lines long in vogue in
the brown-coal districts of Germany.
The German Lutheran Church in Victoria .
Differences in worship and dogmas—already referred
to in connection with the Lutheran Church in South
Australia —also led to the Lutherans in Victoria sepa*
rating into two distinct, and for many years mutually
antagonistic, bodies —the old or strict Lutherans, and
the moderate Lutherans.
In the case of the former, the congregations estab-
lished in Victoria were organised from South Australia.
They constitute the “Eastern District” of the “Evan-
gelic-Luheran Synod of Australia.” The first congre-
gation was formed in Hochkirch in 1852. As time went
on more congregations arose, particularly in the Wim-
mera, which soon became the stronghold of Lutheranism


in Victoria. At the outbreak of the Great War, the
old Lutherans had some twenty congregations in this
State.
The church organisation established in Victoria by
the moderate Lutherans also dates back to the middle
of last century, and its beginning must be associated
with the name of a certain Mathias Goethe. This gentle-
man was born near Coblenz in 1827, and was originally
trained for the Catholic priesthood, but afterwards
joined the Protestant Church. He went to England,
where he entered into matrimony with a British lady.
While staying in England he accepted an offer to pro-
ceed to Sydney and join the teaching staff of a college
there. In 1852 he visited Victoria, and during this visit
founded a German Lutheran congregation in Melbourne,
himself accepting the position as its minister. Bene-
fiting by the free Crown grants of land and money given
to churches in those days, the foundation stone of a
German church was laid at Eastern Hill in 1853, at
the site of the present fine granite structure which
dates from 1874, when the old church was pulled down
and a new one erected.
Besides attending to his parishioners in Melbourne,
Goethe regularly visited the German settlements in its
neighbourhood. Before long congregations were
founded and Lutheran churches erected in Thomastown,
Doncaster, and Berwick. Goethe also went to Bendigo
and Ballarat to minister to the spiritual needs of his
countrymen on the goldfields, and it was undoubtedly
due to his influence that strong congregations arose at
these places. By the middle of the fifties the moderate
Lutherans had also founded a congregation in Hamilton,


while several others were soon to follow in the Wim-
mera and at other places, such as Castlemaine.
In 1856 a conference of ministers was held at German-
town, and as a result the scattered congregations of
moderate Lutherans were welded into a synod. In
1925 the moderate Lutherans had 20 congregations in
Victoria, most of them in the Wimmera District. They
were served by nine ministers.
German Schools in Victoria.
It may be said that up to 1872, if the German settlers
in Victoria desired their children to be educated they
had, to a large extent, to see to it themselves. Conse-
quently, wherever a Lutheran congregation arose, a
Lutheran school was established. Occasionally the
church was used for school purposes, and the clergyman,
to reduce expenses or to augment his income, acted as
teacher; but generally schools were built separately, and
often suitable persons were specially engaged as school-
masters. Education was conducted in the German
language, and religious instruction formed an important
part of the curriculum. At places where strict and
moderate Lutherans had founded rival congregations
there would also be rival schools. The withdrawal in
1872 of Government grants to denominational schools,
and the divided state of Lutheranism in Australia made
it difficult for the German schools to carry on. Follow-
ing the trend of the time, many of the children were
sent to the non-sectarian State schools, and Sunday
schools were established for the purpose of implanting
in the young ones the religious belief of their parents.
In the Lutheran Sunday schools instruction was natu-
rally given in the German language in order to preserve
as far as possible the mother tongue.


When, during the war, the Government looked into
the activity of the German schools, it was found that
only ten had survived, with 355 pupils all told. They
were allowed to carry on, subject to the following con-
ditions : —The German language was not to be employed
in teaching, and books and charts, etc., in German were
prohibited. Religious instruction in German was not
permitted, and the syllabus generally had to be on lines
prescribed by the Education Department and be such
as would promote citizenship and loyalty to the British
Empire. 8
THE GERMANS IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
Though numerically the German element is stronger
in New South Wales than in any other State, except
Queensland, in proportion to the British population it
is comparatively small. The main reason for this is
that New South Wales had been an out-and-out British
community more than sixty years before foreigners of
any kind commenced to arrive in numbers. Leaving
out the Chinese, the foreigners in 1861 only constituted
1.8 per cent, of the total population. In regard to
Germans, not till 1866 were those living in Sydney
numerous enough to form a Lutheran congregation, and
even then it succumbed after two years. It was revived
in 1873, but was too weak in number and spirit to build
a church and parsonage till 1883 and 1888. Nor did
the German Club impress by strength and national
8. Now that the intense nationalism of the war and post-war period
gradually, though slowly, is being tempered with a spirit of tolerance, and
in view of the obvious advantage to Australia of a few of her citizens
possessing a thorough knowledge of foreign languages, there may be reason
to think that the obstacles placed in the way of learning more than a
smattering of German will be removed. Those who are acquainted with
foreign languages know that to be proficient in any one of them it i«
necessary to in part be brought up in it.


importance. As for the Germans settled on the land,
they mostly came either from Queensland or South
Australia. The greater number of those who came
direct settled in the county of Durham, north-west of
Newcastle. Those who came from Queensland mostly
kept to the north-eastern districts, particularly to the
Rous and Clarence counties, while the German migrants
from South Australia settled in the counties of Hume
and Goulburn.
The German settlements founded in the north-eastern
corner of New South Wales were mostly small and far
apart. About the Germans in and around Grafton it
is known that they founded a Lutheran congregation
and called a pastor in the latter end of the sixties or
the beginning of the seventies, but they were too poor
to adequately support him, for which reason he had
to leave. The position was refilled in 1877 by a certain
Pastor Hampe, but he, too, after a while, was forced
to seek a living elsewhere. A striking illustration of
the conditions of German settlements in the north of
New South Wales sixty years ago is contained in a
report submitted to the Lutheran Synod of Victoria,
which Hampe afterwards joined. He writes: —
“As the Lutheran congregation in Grafton was
small, and the teaching of the German language to
the children had been neglected, it was necessary to
extend my activity to Tenterfield, where I founded
a congregation of ten families. From there I went
to Tandy, where five German families lived. From
Tandy I travelled forty miles further north, where I
founded a congregation of nine families. Then to
Armadale, where a small congregation also had been
formed, and from there back to Grafton. The journey


of 360 miles took a month, it was undertaken four
times a year, and was made on horseback. ”
The German settlements in the vicinity of the Murray
River were the result of a well-regulated trek, similar
to the treks of the Dutch in South Africa. Groups of
families formed caravans and wdth all their goods and
chattels left South Australia, traversed Victoria and
entered New South Wales, where they had been told
that good land was obtainable on easy terms. This trek
took place in the latter end of the sixties, and the first
batch settled in Jindera, 11 miles north of Albury. A
second detachment, arriving some months later, founded
two settlements near by, naming them Bethel and
Eben-Ezer. More of their countrymen soon followed,
and additional German settlements arose at Gerogery
and Burrumbuttock. Owing to a steady flow of new-
comers and to the fecundity of the Germans, the settle-
ments gradually outgrew their bounds and some twelve
years later an exodus further north took place, new
settlements being founded at Wallendool, Doodle Cooma,
and Munyabla. Other German settlements arose from
time to time, for instance at Moornartha, Pleasant Hills,
Milbrulong, Rock, Uranquinty, and, on the Victorian
side, seven miles south of Wodonga. Some of these
settlements are now known by other names, Eben-Ezer
has become Walla Walla; Doodle Cooma, Edgehill;
Wallendool, Alma Park; Moornartha, Brocklesby; and
so forth.
Up till 1891 the Germans in New South Wales steadily
increased; but since then they have declined, and prob-
ably now only number about 4000.
The Germans, who went on the land in New South
Wales, proved as diligent tillers of the soil as their


compatriots elsewhere in Australia. Naturally they
succeeded and became prosperous. Besides agriculture
many went in for vine-growing. Only where the Ger-
mans settled in numbers has New South Wales produced
a wine industry. In the promotion of the beer-brewing
industry the Germans in Sydney, as in other parts of
Australia, have played a conspicuous part, and the
Germans deserve much of the credit for the introduc-
tion into Australia of a light beer, more suitable to
the climate than the heavy English ale and stout. In
this connection the name of Resch is entitled to special
mention.
Lutheran Churches and Schools .
In religious matters in New South Wales there has
been the usual rivalry between the strict Lutherans and
the moderate Lutherans, and in the principal German
settlements two churches have been built where one
would have sufficed. The strict Lutheran congregations
constitute the North-Eastern District of the “Evange-
lical-Lutheran Synod of Australia/’ with headquarters
in Adelaide. The moderate Lutherans at an early date
joined the Victorian Synod. Since 1920 they form part
of the “United Evangelical-Lutheran Church in Aus-
tralia. ’ ’
Regarding German schools, such arose in New South
Wales, under similar conditions to those in Victoria, in
all the principal German settlements. Gradually they
succumbed to the competition of the State Schools.
There are at present only two German schools in New
South Wales, the one at Jindera, and the other at
Trungley Hall, near Temora. The use of German as
the school language is not permitted.


THE GERMANS IN QUEENSLAND.
The first white settlers in Queensland were a number
of German missionaries who, between 1838 and 1844,
were sent out from Germany by a certain Herr Gossner,
to preach the gospel amongst the aboriginals in the
locality of Moreton Bay. They settled on the Brisbane
River at a place afterwards called German Station.
The necessary financial support to carry on their re-
ligious work failing, five of the missionaries applied
themselves to farming and thus became the first agri-
culturists in Queensland.
Owing to the arrival of the Germans in Queensland
being less spectacular than their coming to South Aus-
tralia, not so much is known about it. Yet, not only
did they come to Queensland at an early date, but they
came in large numbers and have played an important
part in the economic development of that State. While
Queensland was still the Moreton Bay District of New
South Wales the Germans formed a not inconsiderable
part of its small population. At the census of 1861
they numbered 2124 persons, of whom 1049 lived in
the towns and 513 in the country. During the next
decennium they rapidly increased.
To get more people one of the expedients adopted by
the first Government of the new-born colony was to send
a German merchant of Brisbane, Herr Heussler, to
Germany as immigration agent. Heussler’s mission was
eminently successful, and, encouraged by free passages,
shipload after shipload of sturdy Germans went from
Hamburg to the distant land with the golden oppor-
tunities. The ships carrying them belonged to Godefroy
and Son, the same firm which afterwards played so pro-
minent a part in connection with Germany's colonial


expansion in the Pacific. In 1864 the Germans in
Queensland had doubled, and as the assisted immigra-
tion lasted for about twenty years, they kept arriving,
till in 1881 they numbered upwards of 12,000. Most
of them hailed from Prussia, Pomerania, Silesia, and
Wurtemberg.
Some thirty families who arrived in 1864, after a
short stay at the Immigrant Depot in Brisbane, were
settled by the Government on the Logan River at a
place called New Germany. Their number was soon
strengthened and the German colonists gradually spread
further up the Logan River, founding settlements at
Beenleigh, Eagleby, and Alberton. Another large num-
ber of the early Germans went to Toowoomba, where
they obtained employment in railway construction.
Gradually they settled in the fertile Rosewood District,
at that time covered with impenetrable forest which,
being unsuitable for grazing, was considered almost
valueless. In 1877 the Passifern District was thrown
open for selection. Many Germans went there, including
a large number from the Rosewood and Logan River
Districts, and the Germans in and around Passifern
steadily increased, till in time they numbered between
4000 and 5000 families. 9 Also the Lockyer District,
stretching from Rosewood to the foot of the mountain
range near Toowoomba was largely occupied by Ger-
mans. The same was the case with the Darling Downs,
the number of German families who settled on that
fertile highland plateau being estimated at upwards
of 1600. All the districts mentioned in time became the
backbone of the dairying, wheat-growing, and general
agriculture pursuits of Queensland.
9. The figure, which is taken from a German record, must have included
many families of second generation.


On the coastal plains the Germans also settled in
large numbers, particularly around Bundaberg, Mary-
borough, and Mackay, where they mainly engaged in
cane-growing. Of the about 100,000 acres under sugar
cane in 1910, approximately 11 per cent, were held
and worked by German colonists.
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, for many years Premier of
Queensland, in a speech in the Legislative Assembly,
paid the German colonists the following fine tribute: —
“Having disembarked from the ships and spent
one or two days in the Immigrant Depot the German
immigrants disappear. One hears or sees nothing of
them for 18 months or a couple of years, when some
fine day they return from the bush in their own
attractive turn out, wife and children seated high,
and all well dressed and happy looking.”
The Germans in Queensland also made a notable con-
tribution to the progress of the cities, where many
settled as business people, artisans and general labourers,
while together with the Scandinavians, they supplied
the bush-towns with the indispensable blacksmith,
wheelwright, and saddler. Several became manufac-
turers and employers of labour on a large scale, cover-
ing the field from boot manufacturers to beer-brewers.
Others became prominent in the mining industry and
in the professional world, while a few filled trusted
positions in the Public Service.
Lutheran Churches and Schools.
Regarding the religious life of the Germans in Queens-
land its intensity manifested itself from the beginning.
Lutheran congregations were already founded in Bris-
bane and Toowoomba in the latter end of the fifties,


while at several other places the congregations date back
to the sixties. By 1891, when the Germans in Queens-
land numbered close on 15,000 persons, and the Scan-
dinavians about half that number, the Lutheran con-
gregations, worshipping in their own churches, could
be counted by the scores. In Queensland, as in other
parts of Australia, the strife between the different
shades of Lutheranism has been prolonged and bitter.
The fact of the matter is that the Germans, who pro-
duced a Martin Luther and a Philip Melanchthon, until
within comparatively recent times —when Nietzsche and
his school of philosophy greatly influenced the German
mind—were a deeply religious people. In matters per-
taining to the salvation of their souls they have always
found it difficult to compromise. To this should be
added the fact that the bulk of the early German
colonists in Australia sprang from the peasant class in
Germany, who fifty years ago were poorly educated,
and naturally prone to be narrow in their outlook.
The old or strict Lutherans and the moderate Lutherans
were as little able to march together in Queensland as
they were in South Australia, Victoria, and New South
Wales.
Some of the congregations founded by the old
Lutherans became the Queensland District of “The
Evangelical Synod in Australia, ” taking their orders
from Adelaide, while others, who received support from
the Lutherans of Scandinavian birth, formed an inde-
pendent organisation, naming it “The German and
Scandinavian Synod of Queensland. ’ ’ From the con-
gregations founded by the moderate Lutherans arose
“The Lutheran Synod of Queensland, ’’ which eventu-
ally affiliated with the Victorian Synod, and in 1920


merged in the “United Evangelical-Lutheran Church
in Australia."
Regarding German denominational schools, at one
time numerous in Queensland, they have shared the fate
of the German schools in other parts of Australia and
have now practically ceased to exist, the children of
German descent attending the State schools.
THE GERMANS IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA AND
TASMANIA.
Up to the time of discoveries of gold in the nineties,
Western Australia's small population was mainly made
up of English and Irish, the former being two to one.
The Scotch accounted for but 6 per cent., and all
others, exclusive of aboriginals, for about 2 per cent.
Western Australia had practically stood still ever since
the founding on the Swan River in 1829 of the first
white settlement. The finding of rich goldfields, how-
ever, brought about a great change. In the course of
ten years the colony’s population rose from about 50,000
to upwards of 200,000, and simultaneously its racial
composition was considerably modified. The proportion
of English sank 6 per cent., and that of Irish 9 per
cent. The proportion of Scotch rose 5 per cent, and
that of non-Britishers 10 per cent. In the case of
the Germans they went up from 290 in 1891 to 1522
in 1901, most of whom had probably come from South
Australia and the Eastern States.
In Perth and various other places the Germans in
Western Australia settled in sufficient numbers to form
Lutheran congregations.
In Tasmania the non-British element has always been
and still is conspicuously weak. Thus in 1870, more


than three scores of years after the foundation of the
colony, it only numbered 932 souls all told, or less than
1 per cent, of the total population. In 1881 it had
risen to about 2 per cent., but has since decreased.
While odd Germans are found all over Tasmania, they
are most numerous in Hobart and in the districts of
Fingal, Glenorchy, New Norfolk, Selby, and King-
borough. Not far distant from Hobart some German
families, with a small addition of Danes, founded in
the eighties a settlement which was named Bismarck.
It became a prosperous fruit-growing district and was
able, to maintain a Lutheran pastor. During the war
the name Bismarck was altered to Collins Vale.
Mission Work of the Lutheran Church.
From the beginning of mission work amongst the
aboriginals the Lutheran Church has taken a prominent
part. In South Australia Lutheran missionaries were
the pioneers. At the instigation of Angas, two German
missionaries, Schuermann and Teichelmann, were sent
to Adelaide by a Lutheran mission society in Dresden.
They left London in 1838, travelling in the same ship
as Governor Gawler, and they were followed, a couple
of years later, by two others, Meyer and Klose.
Schuermann, who was appointed by the Government to
be Protector of the Aboriginals, commenced work in
the Port Lincoln district; Meyer established a mission
station at Encounter Bay, and Klose one in the vicinity
of Adelaide, where many native children attended his
school. After a few years the mission work lapsed
through lack of support. 10
10. Schuermann wrote an interesting work about the now extinct Port
Lincoln tribe. Various other Lutheran missionaries have rendered con-
tributions to our knowledge of the aboriginals. The Scripture has been
translated by them into the native language spoken around Hermansburg,
and pubbshed by the British Bible Society.


In 1867 the Lutheran synods in South Australia com-
menced mission work at Killalpaninna, on Cooper’s
Creek. After a while the activity had to be temporarily
suspended, owing to a severe drought. It was, however,
resumed and carried on until difficulties arising from
the Great War necessitated its abandonment.
A little later a mission station was established on the
Finke River, Northern Territory, called Hermansburg,
owing to the first missionaries having been sent out
from Hermansburg in Germany. Later this station was
taken over by the Lutheran Immanuel Synod in South
Australia and is now carried on by the “ United
Evangelic-Lutheran Church in Australia.”
In 1897 an aboriginal station was established by the
“old” Lutherans at Koonibba on Denial Bay, for which
an area of 12,000 acres was secured from the South
Australian Government. This land has been cleared
and brought under cultivation, and the mission work
has been attended with great success.
In regard to Queensland, reference has already been
made to the fact of Lutheran missionaries having been
first in the field. In 1886 the German mission society
Dettelsau opened a mission station at Hope Valley, near
Cooktown, which it carried on till 1914, when it was
taken over by the Lutherans in Australia.
These various efforts at christianizing, civilizing and
educating the aboriginals compare favourably with the
work of a like character undertaken by other church
denominations, and reflect great credit on the Lutheran
church organisations. Though often torn by internal
strife and in many cases hard put to it to keep the
wolf away from their own doors, they have always found
time and money for the uplifting of primitive people—


both in Australia and in New Guinea. In the latter
place the mission work from its inception has been
liberally supported by the Lutherans in this country,
and it is worth noting that the first missionary in the
former German portion of New Guinea, the Rev. J.
Flierl, went there from Australia in 1886. This ex-
tensive work of love has had two important results to
the Lutherans themselves —it has emphasized the spirit
of Christianity as opposed to the dead letter of debatable
dogmas, and thereby paved the way to a more friendly
feeling amongst the various divisions which, despite
misunderstandings in the past, may eventually lead to
unification, and it ripened the Lutherans in Australia
for the great task set them when, after the Great War,
they were called upon to shoulder the burden and re-
sponsibility of taking over and carrying on the Lutheran
mission work in New Guinea, inaugurated by societies
in the Fatherland, and which had attained to consider-
able dimensions. There were two such organisations,
the Dettelsau (operating from the British border to
Madang), and the Rheinische mission (operating from
Madang to Alexis Haven), together employing some
fifty white missionaries, teachers, and nurses. These
organisations and the financial responsibility connected
with them were not only taken over by the 4 ‘ United
Evangelic Lutheran Church in Australia/ * in con-
junction with a Lutheran synod in lowa, U.S.A., but
they have been carried on since with an enthusiasm
and vigour which augurs well for the future.
(Re Lutheran congregations founded in Australia, see Appendix.)
Prominent Germans .
Of Germans who became prominent through render-
ing outstanding services to the State in which they


settled or to Australia as a whole, several are entitled
to special mention.
The first on record is the astronomer, Carl Ludvig
Rumker, a native of Mecklenburg, who had served in
the British navy and afterwards became superintendent
of the nautical school at Hamburg. In 1821 he was
brought to Australia by Sir Thomas Brisbane as his
private astronomer and placed in charge of the ob-
servatory at Parramatta. In 1828 he was appointed
Government Astronomer, a position he afterwards re-
linquished to take charge of the Hamburg Observatory.
While in Australia he discovered a new comet in the
constellation' of Orion, re-discovered Encke’s comet, and
measured an arc of the meridian. Still better known
than Rumker was the dauntless explorer, Dr. Leich-
hardt, who in 1844 successfully led an expedition from
Sydney through Queensland to Port Essington, in the
Northern Territory, but in 1848 perished in an attempt
to cross the continent from the Darling Downs to Perth.
Next in fame stands Baron Ferdinand von Mueller, 11
whose name is also closely associated with the explora-
tion of Australia, and whose numerous on the
flora of this country are of fundamental importance
for all time. The name of Dr. Hubbe is less known
than it deserves to be, in so far as Hubbe was the real
author of the famous Torrens Act. He served under
Colonel Torrens, and framed the Act on the practice
in vogue in the Freeport of Hamburg in connection
with the transfer of ships from one owner to another.
ii. It is perhaps doubtful if Mueller should be called a German or a
Scandinavian. His parents were Danes, who had settled in Rostock,
where his father had a position in the Customs Department. Both died
early, and Mueller was brought up in his mother’s home in Denmark. In
the Australian press he is in the earlier part of his career generally re-
ferred to as a native of Denmark, and in the latter part as a native of
Germany.


Menge became known as a distinguished geologist.
Wittburg and Muller were prominent educationalists
in South Australia. Many Germans entered politics
and made names for themselves as legislators and ad-
ministrators. Of these the names of Krichauf, Basse-
dow, and Homburg are still revered in South Australia.
Bassedow was for a period Minister for Education.
In Victoria the same position was at one time ably filled
by another German, Herr Saxe. In Queensland Consul
J. C. Heussler entered the Legislative Council, and was
sent by the Government to Germany as a Trade Com-
missioner. Theodor Unmack entered the Legislative
Assembly in 1893 and became Postmaster-General. In
the last Griffith Cabinet he was Minister for Railways.
Another, J. Lissner, represented Cairns in the Lower
House and became Minister of Mines. Sellheim was
an outstanding Public Officer, whose services as a pro-
moter of the mining industry are still gratefully re-
membered in Queensland. Of the many Germans who
have held office as Mayors and Shire Presidents may
be mentioned Tidemann, Mayor of Adelaide from about
1865 to 1868.
By including Germans of less renown, who neverthe-
less in various walks of life have attained prominence,
the list would be quite formidable, and, by extending
it to the second and third generations, it would take
in such household names in the pictorial art as Heysen,
Gruner, and Hilder, and in literature and journalism
the late Mr. Schuler, editor of the Age from 1900 to
1926, and who as such played a big part in Australia’s
public life.
While the Germans in the cities have taken an active
part in politics and the promotion of science, art, sec-
ondary industries, and commerce, it is as pioneers on


the land and tillers of the soil they figure most promi-
nently. They are painstaking agriculturists, and—
owing to the predominant Alpine strain in their racial
make up—are home-loving and remain on the land, as
is strongly borne out by statistical evidence. It is prob-
able that James Bonwick was mainly thinking of the man
on the land, when he wrote in his History of Australia:
“The progress of Australia is in no small degree
due to Germans and Scandinavians, who make ad-
mirable colonists. ”


THE SCANDINAVIANS.
Race and History.
The racial origin of the Scandinavians is veiled in
mist, as is the case with every other political or lin-
guistic group of people in Europe. Anthropoligical in-
vestigations have disclosed the fact that in all three
countries long-heads are intermixed with round-heads,
the latter typical of the Alpine race. Long-heads pre-
dominate, but round-heads form a not inconsiderable
part of the population in Denmark, the western districts
of Norway, and the southern part of Sweden. The
round-heads are less common in central Sweden, the
eastern districts of Norway, and around Trondhjem.
To explain the intermixture of two apparently distinct
races, it has been suggested that the Scandinavian coun-
tries were inhabited by a round-headed people prior
to the arrival of the Nordics. What strikes one, how-
ever, is that in Scandinavia the Alpines are mainly
found in the parts which, owing to their geographical
position, would be most severely drained of people
through the exodus during the Viking period. It there-
fore seems possible that Alpines were brought in by
the big land-owners of the post-Viking age to cultivate
the soil, as is actually being done in Denmark to-day,
with seasonal labourers from Poland. Being extended
over a long period, and separated from the glamour of
war, such a migration in small parties would pass
unnoticed and be unrecorded. However that may be,
the present-day Scandinavians are not pure, or almost
pure Nordics, as assumed by some American writers.


Originally Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes —the latter
at one time extending along the eastern shores of the
Baltic, as far as Poland, and still constituting 10 per
cent, of the population of Finland —all spoke the same
language; the old Norse mythology was their common
inheritance; they embraced Christianity almost simul-
taneously ; and they repudiated their allegiance to the
Holy See and became Lutherans by concerted action.
A political union under one sovereign was brought
about in 1397, but except between Denmark and Nor-
way it lasted less than a hundred years. In 1814, when
after the downfall of Napoleon the map of Europe was
re-made, the great Powers caused Norway to transfer
her allegiance from the King of Denmark to the King
of Sweden, while finally, in 1905, the union between
Sweden and Norway was dissolved. Disunion and
internecine wars, lasting several hundred years, pre>
vented the Scandinavians from remaining a strong sea-
power effectively equipped for the acquisition of oversea
territories, when the race for such commenced.
Having failed to secure colonies of their own, the Scan-
dinavian surplus population has mainly settled in
Anglo-Saxon countries, although during the last two
score of years several thousands have gone to Argentine.
Including the second generation, the Scandinavians in
the United States exceed six millions. In Canada they
constitute an ever-increasing proportion of the popu-
lation. In Australia their number is much smaller, and
the Scandinavian element —including their descendants
of Australian birth —accounts for barely 2 per cent,
of the total population.
The Danes, the Norwegians, and the Swedes, from
every point of view except the political, being so closely


related as to almost forming a unity, are in the follow-
ing remarks treated under the common designation
‘ ‘ Scandinavians. ’ ’
Scandinavians Coming to Australia.
The Scandinavians being a seafaring people it is but
natural that the first of their kind to visit Australia
and settle there were sailors. From Scandinavian
names occurring on the roll of Abel Tasman’s crew
when that enterprising navigator embarked on his ex-
pedition in 1642, it is quite safe to conclude that in
former days a sprinkling of Scandinavian sailors were
employed in the Dutch mercantile marine. As the
Dutch vessels trading with the East Indies passed close
to Australia, it is probable that more than 300 years
ago many a Norse sailor drew comparison between the
headlands of New Holland and those of his native
shores. Also in the British ships, arriving later, were
Scandinavians, as is borne out by the fact that Jorgen
Jorgenson, afterwards known in the history of Australia
as the ex-King of Iceland, arrived in the “Lady Nel-
son * ’ in 1802, and remained in Australian waters seve-
ral years, rising to the rank of chief officer, and to
the position of captain on a whaling vessel.
Already in the first half of the last century Scandi-
navian vessels visited Australia. The second contingent
of German immigrants, arriving in Adelaide in 1838,
were carried in a Danish vessel, and it is known that
in Adelaide, in the forties, a large number of the men
employed on the wharves were run-away Scandinavian
seamen. The same may have been the case in Sydney.
When gold was discovered in 1851, sailors formed a
considerable portion of the Scandinavian fortune-seekers


at the mines, though many other Danes, Norwegians,
and Swedes were gradually attracted by the chance of
“ getting rich quick/ ’
Scandinavians were found on every known goldfield
in Australasia and probably totalled about two thou-
sand. In Ballarat they were sufficiently numerous in
1857 to form a Scandinavian club, to erect their own
club-building, and even to inaugurate a Scandinavian
newspaper. In Campbell’s Creek, near Castlemaine, the
gold-diggers consisted largely, if not entirely, of Scan-
dinavians, and throughout Victoria reefs which bore
Scandinavian names testified to their presence.
The next impetus to Scandinavian migration to Aus-
tralia was given by the Queensland Government from
about 1870 to 1880. During that period Queensland
was extensively advertised in the Scandinavian coun-
tries, and a free passage offered to suitable immigrants.
Between three thousand and four thousand men and
women accepted the offer, and, embarking at Hamburg,
proceeded to sunny Queensland, settling primarily on
the coastal plains around Mackay, Maryborough, Bun-
daberg, and Brisbane, and on the Darling Downs. A
smaller number went to such gold-mining centres as
Charters Towers, Mt. Morgan, and Gympie, while those
who had been trained in some craft or other settled in
the rapidly growfing cities. Of these early immigrants
the Danes accounted for about 70 per cent. Probably
the number of Scandinavians going to Queensland would
have been much larger had not New Zealand during
the seventies also made a bid to obtain them. The
inducements given by New Zealand were similar to
those offered by Queensland, and about 5000 Scandi-
navians went there.


Paying their own fares, over six thousand Scandi-
navians migrated to Queensland, New South Wales, and
Victoria during the eighties. The Danes, Norwegians,
and Swedes in Australia reached their highest total
in 1891, with 16,548 persons. During the next decade
they increased in Western Australia from 245 to 1494,
but taking Australia as a whole, they barely held their
own. In 1899 Queensland commenced paying part of
the passage money for suitable Scandinavian immi-
grants, but only a few hundred had arrived, nearly all
Danes, when a severe drought set in and caused assisted
immigration to be discontinued. Since 1901 the number
of Scandinavians in Australia has gone slowly back,
and at the census in 1921 there were but little over
14,000 left. Ordinary immigrants from the Scandi-
navian countries have practically ceased coming, as far
as the Commonwealth is concerned, and those who
arrived forty to fifty years ago are fast passing away.
Except for the many Scandinavian sailors leaving their
ships when in Australian ports, the decline would have
been much more pronounced.
Shortly before the Great War, when Victoria launched
her extensive irrigation schemes, the director of the
Irrigation Board, Elwood Mead, a Yankee who had
seen the achievements of Scandinavian settlers in the
United States, strongly advocated the encouragement
of migration of Scandinavian farmers to Victoria. Per-
suading the Government, immigration agents were sent
to Denmark and Sweden. Simultaneously a School
Paper, descriptive of Victoria and its resources, was
prepared by the Education Department, in the Danish
and Swedish languages, it being part of the plan to
send copies of this school paper to all the country schools


in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden. Meanwhile war
broke out, and the school paper never got beyond being
set in type. The agent who had gone to Sweden re-
turned to Australia, after having received a somewhat
hostile reception by the Swedish press, which was
opposed to migration. The one who went to Denmark
remained there, eventually severing his connection with
the Victorian Government. The total result of the
shipwrecked immigration scheme was two or three score
of young Danish farmers. These went to different
parts of the State, some of them settling in the Maffra
District, where they took a prominent part in the revival
of the beet-sugar industry, with which they were familiar
in their home land.
Contribution to Economic Development .
The Scandinavian gold-diggers who, after some years
of excitement at the mines and a varying measure of
success, eventually settled on the land, appear to have
favoured Gippsland, though small clusters settled in
the Goulburn Valley, and isolated pioneers were en-
countered at many other places. In the Korumburra
district between thirty and forty Scandinavians selected
land. At East Poowong fourteen families formed a
compact settlement which for upwards of forty years
was known and spoken of as “The Danish Settlement. ’ ?
Though somewhat hilly, and densely wooded, the soil
at Poowong is of good quality, and the settlers, having
passed through the struggles and hardships usually
accompanying the pioneering stage, embarked on dairy-
farming with great success. Most of them prospered
and reared large families.


In Queensland, too, the Scandinavians who arrived
in the seventies and turned to farming had to clear
and sweeten the land before it became productive. A
considerable amount of experimenting, to introduce
Danish agricultural methods, prolonged their struggle.
However, gradually adapting their methods to the natu-
ral conditions of Queensland most of them were
rewarded with success. W. H. Traill, in his book, A
Queenly Colony, wrote about them: —
“From the Scandinavian nations some contingents
have been introduced, and although their transference
from cold countries to ones of semi-tropical tempera-
ture involves an entire readjustment of all their ideas
so far as agriculture is concerned, they have proved
excellent colonists, have adapted themselves with
singular aptitude to their novel surroundings, and
number strongly among the prosperous settlers in
country localities. ’ ’
Also a large number of the Scandinavians who arrived
during the eighties and later must have settled on the
land, because at the census in 1921 well over forty per
cent, of the Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes in Aus-
tralia were recorded as living in rural districts, which
is considerably above the average for the total popu-
lation.
While mostly engaged in dairying and mixed farming,
or occasionally in wheat-growing and fruit-culture, in
Queensland a considerable number of Scandinavians
took up cane growing. In regard to the promotion of
the sugar industry, through the enterprise and life-long
devotion of one single Dane, the late Sir Edward Knox,
the Scandinavians contributed more than their share
towards making it a national asset of the utmost im-
portance.


Edward Knox, on his father’s side, was descended
from a Scotch family which, during the troubled days
of the Stuarts, migrated to Denmark. He w T as born
in Elsinore in 1819, and educated in one of the best
known Danish colleges, the Soro Academy. Having
left school he received a business training in Denmark,
Germany, and England. He w y as thus well equipped
to fight his way in the world, when in the forties he
migrated to New South Wales. A few years later he
was at the head of the Commercial Banking Company,
and in 1855 was instrumental in founding the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company, himself assuming the position
of managing director.
Experiments with growing sugar cane in Queensland
were undertaken long before Knox came on the scene,
but beyond establishing the fact that cane would grow
there, practically nothing had been achieved. The
Colonial Sugar Refining Company having been founded
with a capital of £150,000, cane growing was embarked
upon in a rational spirit; crushing mills were erected
at suitable places, tram lines constructed, refineries
built, and so forth. The growth of the company during
the course of years falls outside this narrative, and it
suffices to state that Knox was its managing director for
the long period of 46 years, that its activity was gradu-
ally extended to New South Wales, New Zealand, and
Fiji, while refineries were erected in most of the capitals
of Australia; and, last but not least, that the “C.S.R.”
has been one of the greatest factors in developing our
sugar industry, the economic limits of which have not
yet been reached.
Sir Edward being a Dane, it was but natural that a
large number of Danes should be attached to the com-
pany. Many of these attained to responsible positions


as managers of refineries and crushing mills, as analysts,
and so forth. One young Dane, Y. H. Rothe, a nephew
of Knox, who arrived in Sydney in 1871, became sub-
manager and afterwards general manager for the whole
of the huge undertaking, a position he held until 1924,
when he retired on account of old age.
In connection with the fruit-growing industry the
Scandinavians have also played an honourable though
perhaps, comparatively speaking, small part. Chaffey
Brothers, when leaving California to found Mildura and
Renmark, brought with them as their right-hand man,
a Norwegian by the name of Johnson or Johansen.
Besides him, several of the early pioneers in the now
famous fruit-growing centre of Mildura were Scandina-
vians. Odd ones were also found amongst the early
apple-growers of Tasmania, and orchardists of Scan-
dinavian extraction may still be found here and there.
Nevertheless, the share of the Scandinavians in promot-
ing fruit-growing in Australia would scarcely have
merited mention were it not for the labour and ingenuity
of one single person, the late C. A. Nobelius.
Born in Sweden, Nobelius arrived in Victoria in
1872. In 1884 he founded at Emerald a nursery, which
gradually grew to be the largest fruit-tree concern
under the Southern Cross. He also imported many new
varieties from other countries. His goods were sent to
every part of Australia, and also found ready sale in
New Zealand, and even in India, South Africa, and
America. Besides his nursery, easily the biggest in the
Southern Hemisphere, Nobelius in 1908 bought 600
acres on the Tamar River in Tasmania, where he planted
40,000 fruit trees, thereby creating the largest one-block.


privately-owned orchard in the world. His fruit pack-
ing shed was capable of handling 250,000 cases of fruit
annually. Later on he commenced flax growing, and
before his death, in 1921, he had produced 100 tons of
the valuable Phormium Tenax, the first of its kind
produced in Australia.
In the mining industry the Scandinavians in Australia
do not figure prominently; yet in proportion to their
number they supplied an appreciable quota to the host
of prospectors and miners, who in the past so materially
contributed to the economic development of this country.
Reference has already been made to their presence at
the early diggings in Victoria and New South Wales.
In the scattered diggings of Gippsland no names became
better known than those of the three Jorgensen brothers,
Niels, Hans, and Louis, the discoverers of the Haunted
Stream gold-field, which caused a rush, and of numer-
ous other gold bearing reefs and alluvial deposits. In
the history of gold-mining in the Northern Territory,
no name looms bigger than that of Jensen, a native of
Denmark. In Queensland such well-known reefs as the
“Alliance,” the “Comet,” the “Louisa No. 1,” and
others were discovered by Scandinavians. In Tas-
manian mining records, few names shine brighter than
that of Peter Balstrup, also a native of Denmark. On
the occasion of his death in Launceston, in 1905, one of
the leading papers wrote: —
“Balstrup arrived in Tasmania in 1881 and,
together with W. S. Monk (also a Scandina-
vian), went prospecting, discovering the * Ar-
gus ’ tin mine, on the Wyniford River. In
1885 Balstrup was connected with the first
exploring party that discovered the Zeehan field. In


the following year he was connected with the floating
of the Crown Lyell, Prince Lyell, South Tharsis, and
the Central Mount Lyell companies. Prior to his
death he was largely interested in the North-Eastern
tin mines. He was a director of several companies,
and a large shareholder in the Tasmanian and Mount
Bischoff mines. Balstrup died in consequence of a
cold contracted while prospecting on the west coast
for new mineral fields. The news of his death was
received with profound regret, as perhaps no one had
done more than he to foster Tasmania's mining in-
dustry. His name on the directorate of companies
gave investors a feeling of confidence. The Launces-
ton Stock Exchange was closed for an afternoon out
of respect to the memory of the deceased."
Since the beginning of white settlement, Scandinavian
seamen in considerable numbers have been employed in
the coastal waters of Australia, occupying all grades,
from the swarthy, perspiring stoker in the smelly stoke-
hold, to the dignified master mariner on the bridge. In
addition they are met with in all the avenues branching
off from shipping—toiling on the wharves as lumpers
and stevedores; putting off in their pilot boats in all
kinds of weather; attending to the lighthouses, warning
and guiding the navigators out on the deep. They
include such extraordinary characters as Jorgen Jorgen-
sen, whose remarkable career is described at length in
the Australian Encyclopaedia, and J. S. Christensen,
popularly known as ‘ 1 German Harry, ? ’ who, from Cook-
town, established the first passenger service between
Australia and the Western Pacific, and wdiose daring
deeds as a pearler, labour-recruiter, and smuggler gained
for him the unbounded admiration of the once lawless


North. One of their number, Engelhardt Jorgensen,
for many years a popular captain in the Australian
coastal service, in 1890, with a compatriot, performed
the extraordinary feat of travelling from London to
Adelaide in a life-boat, the Storm King, designed by
himself. Anything ranging under the now fast dis-
appearing sailing craft was largely manned by Scandina-
vians. Along the little dock in Melbourne, where Tas-
manian timber schooners once were plentiful, the Scan-
dinavian lingo was almost the daily speech. Others took
to fishing, with which particularly the Norwegian saiior
is familiar from his childhood. The Australian fisher
population has in no small measure been recruited from
Scandinavian sailors who have deserted from their ships.
The fishermen at Port Welshpool, Victoria's principal
fishing port, are all Scandinavians or of Scandinavian
descent, and the same applies to several other fishing
settlements along the coast. Incidentally, many have
settled on the land or in the cities and have been
eminently successful. One, a former ship’s cook, L. Han-
sen, has for years been a leading builder and contractor
in Melbourne.
From amongst their weather-beaten ranks rises nobly
the figure of Mr. Dannevig, who, together with many
more of the old Norse stock from the opposite shores
of the North Sea, gave their lives in an endeavour to
create an Australian fishing industry.
H. C. Dannevig, a native of Norway, after having in
his native land and in Scotland gained experience in fish
culture and deep-sea investigations, in 1902 received an
appointment as fishery expert to New South Wales. In
1908 he was appointed Commonwealth Director of
Fisheries, his work being to examine and report on the


fish in Australian waters from every angle bearing on
their economic utility and value, and also to undertake
hydrographic survey work, etc., to ascertain the nature
of the sea-floor, depth of water, currents, and sea-
temperatures. Under Dannevig’s guidance a special
ship, the Endeavour, was built for the work. Up to
November, 1914, 98 cruises were undertaken in the
eastern and southern waters. On the 99th cruise the
Endeavour failed to return to port. All that is known
regarding the catastrophe is that Dannevig and all hands
on the ill-fated vessel met their doom in Bass Strait.
Perhaps in no other field of economic activity have
the Scandinavians who made Australia their second home
rendered greater services than in the development of the
dairying industry. Years after the Danes and Swedes
had produced the separator and had commenced trans-
ferring the making of butter and cheese from the farms
to well-equipped factories, dairying in Australia was
still pursued as an ill-organised, wasteful, and unhygienic
home-industry. It is true that a Laval separator was
brought to Victoria from Sweden in 1884, probably at
the instigation of some unknown Scandinavian immi-
grant, but the new idea did not take on till 1888, when,
at the Centennial International Exhibition in Melbourne,
a number of Laval’s separators were exhibited and a
model dairy, on Scandinavian lines, set at work. It
happened that a couple of years previously a Danish
dairy expert, Emil Hansen, had arrived. Being un-
successful as a dairy-produce merchant in Melbourne,
Hansen went on a lecturing tour in the principal dairy-
ing districts of Victoria, explaining to the farmers the
methods introduced in Denmark, strongly urging them
to co-operate for the purpose of industrialising butter


and cheese-making. Owing to failing health, Hansen
returned to his native land in 1894, but had the satis-
faction before he left of seeing the first butter factories
established in Victoria, and of managing in turn fac-
tories in Rochester and Kyneton. A namesake of
Hansen, born in Victoria of Danish parents, but educated
and trained in Denmark as a dairy expert, returned to
Melbourne in 1890 and successively was in charge of
butter factories in Thoona, Melbourne, and Euroa.
Other Scandinavian dairy experts soon arrived, as they
have arrived in small numbers ever since, bringing with
them knowledge from their homeland of the latest
improvements in dairying. Some of these attained to
positions as factory managers and dairy inspectors in
different parts of Australia and in New Zealand, and
one, Petersen, was appointed Assistant Dairy Expert
by the Government of New South Wales. His services
were afterwards secured in turn by New Zealand and
the Government of Argentine. Perhaps the best known
Danish dairy experts who came to Australia are Bendix
Hansen and Svend Hartman, both of whom have
rendered the Australian dairy industry inestimable ser-
vice.
Hansen arrived in 1892 and was put in charge, first
of the Victoria Creamery, and afterwards of the Shep-
parton Butter Factory. In 1901 he entered into
partnership with Mr. Farrall and started the York
Butter Factory in Melbourne, which is still in existence,
and at present is the centre of a butter and cheese
manufacturing organisation extending to various parts
of the State. Besides having acquired and re-modelled
several old factories, Hansen & Farrall have established


butter factories in Bendigo, Violet Town, and Leitch-
ville. Mr. Hansen is a member of the State Dairy Board,
the Cream Graders and Testers’ Examination Board,
and the Dairy Industry’s Wages Board, and is the
Proprietary Cheese and Butter Manufacturers’ repre-
sentative in the Melbourne Chamber of Commerce.
Hartman arrived from Denmark in 1896, and he
had gained experience as manager of different butter
factories in Victoria, when in the opening years of the
new century, his services were secured by P. W. Heyman,
a leading exporter of dairy produce in Denmark. Being
of the opinion that it would be more profitable to supply
his customers in the Far East and Dutch Indies with
butter tinned in Australia than to send it from the
distant Denmark, Heyman sent out a tinning plant
and established a branch business in Melbourne. To
bring the Australian product up to Danish standard
he had built at Boolarra a butter factory, designed bv
%/ 7 O c/
Hartman, on the most up-to-date Danish lines, and
equipped with the latest machinery produced in Den-
mark, and of this establishment Hartman took charge.
On Hartman’s advice Heyman later on established a
Kassein factory at Gamperdown, sending out a Danish
expert in that particular industry. Heyman eventually
disposed of his factories, to which had been added
butter factories in Alberton and Numurkah. The
Kassein factory passed over to James Bell, and after-
wards to a share-company of farmers, James Bell, into
whose service Hartman had entered, remaining their
selling agent. At that time all the dairying machinery
used in Australia was obtained either from Scandinavia
or from the United States, which latter country had
copied the Scandinavian machinery and in some respects


improved on it. Advised by Hartman and taking him
into his firm as a partner in, and manager of, a machinery
branch, James Bell financed a struggling engineering
firm in Melbourne for the purpose of manufacturing
dairy machinery. So successful has this venture been
that nearly all the intricate dairy machinery, except
separators, used in Australia to-day is made in Mel-
bourne. In addition to managing the extensive business,
which now has depots in the principal State capitals,
Hartman is an observant student of all the occurrences
in connection w T ith dairying in Europe and America, and
under his editorship, James Bell’s Machinery Pty. Ltd.
publishes periodically a pamphlet, Gems from Dairy
Journals, which is of no small value to the dairy
industry of Australia.
Of Scandinavian immigrants who, though not trained
in their homeland as dairy-experts, have played an
important role in the advancement of Australia’s dairy
industry, may be mentioned Jorgen Pedersen, Poul
Holdenson, and E. H. Fromen.
Pedersen spent some of his earliest years in Victoria
on the gold-fields at Bendigo. He afterwards selected
land near Elmore, where a small Danish settlement
of eight families arose. Selling out in 1890, he became
a large shareholder in the “Chilled Butter Factory” in
Melbourne, but after a while went into the butter busi-
ness on his own account, and established a butter factory
at Youanmite. Securing the service of a Danish dairy
expert, he later on established the “Goulburn Valley
Butter Factory,” and subsequently the “Rosenborg
Butter Factory,” and a factory at Welshpool. He also
became agent for a Danish firm of dairy implement
makers, and in this capacity was instrumental in intro-
ducing pasteurisers into Australia.


Holdenson arrived in Melbourne from Denmark at
the latter end of 1879, a country lad eighteen years old.
Having gained colonial experience in different parts of
Australia he went into the dairy produce business, a
little later taking in with him as partner another young
Dane, Andreas Nielsen. In 1888 the firm Holdenson
and Nielson started one of the first butter factories in
Melbourne, obtaining the cream from skimming stations
inaugurated in different parts of the country. When
the home or farm separators came into general use the
factories were beset with the great difficulty of accurately
estimating the butter contents of the cream as a basis
of payment to the farmers. Holdenson & Nielson
engaged Emil Hansen to work out a method which would
solve the problem. The system evolved by Hansen
proved fairly reliable and gradually came into general
use in Australia, until a more efficient method was
introduced much later from Denmark. Nielsen died in
1904, and Holdenson carried on single-handed till, in
1908, the “Fresh Food and Ice Coy. Ltd.’ 7 was taken
over and the firm registered as Holdenson & Nielson
Fresh Food Pty. Ltd. During the last twenty years, on
account of the increased rates of rail-freight on cream,
the tendency has been to establish butter factories in
the country, and the above firm to-day has factories in
the following country centres: —Wodonga, Wangaratta,
Bendigo, Numurkah, Moyhu, Warragul, Hamilton, Coro-
rooke, Bena, Birregurra, and Ballarat, besides the cen-
tral factory in Melbourne. In addition to the local and
interstate trade, when opportunity offers a large export
trade of butter —tinned, print, and in bulk —is done with
South Africa, Great Britain, the Continent of Europe,
Egypt, Java, China, Japan and America. The firm of


Holdenson & Nielson is the largest exporter of tinned
butter in Australia.
During the Great War Holdenson was appointed a
member of the Australian Produce Pool Committee,
which body controlled the export of all butter and
cheese during that period. He has also been a member
of the Australian Dairy Produce Control Board, the
Australian Produce Stabilisation Committee, and of the
various Victorian State bodies incorporated therewith.
Holdenson is easily the most outstanding figure in the
butter industry of Australia.
Fromen, a native of Sweden, established a large pro-
duce and butter manufacturing business in Adelaide.
This he eventually sold to the South Australian Farmers ’
Co-operative Union, and he assumed the position of
general manager for the said Union's produce depart-
ment. Under Fromen ? s able leadership the department
has greatly expanded and now includes ten butter and
cheese factories in different parts of South Australia;
huge cool-stores, egg-stores, an egg-pulping plant, a
bacon-curing establishment, etc. A Danish dairy
expert, M. Petersen, in addition to having managed the
Adelaide factory for several years, fills the position of
factory inspector to the Farmers' Co-operative Union.
It is in Victoria, however, the mother State of modern
dairying in Australia, that the Scandinavians have made
their influence most directly felt. The industry was
transplanted thence direct from Denmark, and Scandi-
navian immigrants have played a conspicuous part in
making the process of transplantation rapid and success-
ful. To this may be added that the Scandinavian
countries for long supplied the machinery required, and


even to-day upwards of ninety per cent, of the separa-
tors used in Australia are of Swedish make.
In the furtherance of secondary industries, the
Scandinavians in Australia have played a much smaller,
yet not altogether contemptible, part. A sprinkling of
Scandinavian artisans have been absorbed by the manu-
facturing industries. Of these, several attained indepen-
dence and in time became employers of labour. In a
few cases Scandinavians were amongst the pioneers of
new industries. Their share in connection with dairy
machinery has been described. One of the earliest
local manufacturers of implements and machinery for
tropical agriculture was a Dane, N. P. Willmann, in
Mackay. He can boast of several inventions made by
himself, and in his present factory in Brisbane a large
staff is employed. The first motor-driven crosscut saw
seen in Australia was invented by a Danish lad in
Victoria, Axel Holmberg, who, together w T ith his father
and several brothers, were confronted with the problem
of clearing their land in the Western District in the
quickest and cheapest way. The saw has since been
imitated both in Australia and in America, and there
are now several varieties on the market, but the one
invented and afterwards improved upon by Holmberg
more than holds its own, and w T ith other tree-clearing
implements is turned out in large numbers by the Holm-
berg brothers. Amongst the pioneers of a porcelain
industry in Australia, C. F. Mauritzen, a native of
Copenhagen, ranks as the foremost. Having in Western
Australia discovered suitable clay for the manufacture
of porcelain, he founded in Perth, in 1921, the Calyx
Porcelain Coy. Ltd., himself assuming the position of
managing director. The art of making milk powder


was introduced by a Swede, a brother of the inventor,
Dr. Eckenberg. A Swedish chemist, Mr. Nycander,
pioneered the manufacture of compressed yeast, and
Swedish brains are closely associated with the founding
both of the Australian match industry and of paper-
making. The list could be augmented considerably, but
the cases mentioned may be sufficient for the purpose in
view.
Science, Art , Literature, and Sport .
In connection with science, the first to be mentioned
is the Swede, Dr. Solander, the scientific member of
Captain Cook’s expedition which in 1770 discovered the
east coast of Australia. Though employed by Great
Britain, indirectly he served Australia. His memory is
kept green by a cape in New South Wales and an
island off the coast of New Zealand bearing his name.
Reference has already been made to the Scandinavian
claim to a share in the w T orld famous botanist, Baron
Sir Ferdinand von Mueller. In the case of the gifted
geologist, 11. I. Jensen, only the raw material can be
said to be Danish, as he arrived in Queensland when
a child. Having gained a State Scholarship he gradu-
ated at the Sydney University in 1903 as B.Sc. He
was subsequently Demonstrator of Geology and Chemis-
try at the Sydney University, and from 1904 to 1907
held the Linnean Macleay Fellowship. In 1908 Jensen
won the Syme Research Prize of the Melbourne Uni-
versity, and in the same year he completed his D.Sc.
Degree, winning the Sydney University Science Medal.
He was attached to the N.S.W. Agricultural Depart-
ment as Soil Analyst and Surveyor from 1908 to 1912,
and from the latter date until 1916 he was Chief Geolo-
gist and Director of Mines of the Northern Territory.


In 1917 he joined the Geological Department of Queens-
land, and during the following year completed a scien-
tific work on the Geology of that State. He is a leading
oil-expert and a voluminous writer on scientific and
general subjects. Carl Lumholz, a Norwegian scientist,
spent four years in the eighties of last century amongst
the aboriginals in Queensland. His work, Amongst
Cannibals , is a valuable contribution to the study of
the Australian pre-European population. Of other
Scandinavian scientists in Australia may be mentioned
P. Fraenkel, professor in electrical science at the Perth
University, and G. Gundersen, demonstrator in mathe-
matics at the Melbourne University. If civil engineering
be included amongst sciences, the late Mr. Rahbek, a
Danish civil engineer, cannot be omitted. He was for
many years attached to Queensland’s Water Supply
Department and in 1900 was borrowed by the Tasmanian
Government to investigate and report upon the hy-
draulic power resources of that State. Another, Colonel
V. Larsen, was for over forty years chief draughtsman
and assistant engineer to the Railway Department of
Queensland.
The contribution by Scandinavian immigrants
towards art in Australia is but small, though in Queens-
land a Swede, Oscar Fristrom, became known as a
painter. In the musical world may be mentioned
Madame Steinhauer, who, however, left Australia shortly
after having married the English composer, Albert
Mallinson, and Madame Agnes Janson. The latter was
a Swedish opera star who in 1900 came to Australia
as the prima donna in a grand opera company, and
in 1906 received an appointment as chief instructor in
singing at the Melbourne University Conservatorium, a


position which she occupied with distinction for 21 years.
Mr. Kohlenberg, an exceptionally gifted artist, who
recently has been attached to the Sydney University
Conservatorium as teacher in pianoforte music, and
M. Lagerlof, organist at the Swedish-Lutheran Church,
Melbourne, a spontaneous composer and an untiring
worker in introducing Scandinavian music to Australian
music lovers.
Of writers there are perhaps more than could be
expected, in view of the fact that a foreign language
had to be acquired to a considerable degree of perfec-
tion. In the eighties an unknown Dane produced a
very readable book, descriptive of pioneer life in
Queensland, entitled Missing Friends . In the nineties
the late Yaldemar Bannow compiled a comprehensive
work, Victoria Socially and Materially . Miss Marie
Bjelke-Petersen has made a name for herself as a fiction
writer. Her novels, The Captive Singer, Dusk, The Im-
mortal Flame, and Jewelled Nights have appeared in
several editions, and have been translated into other
languages. Jewelled Nights has been successfully
screened. The nature of this essay also compels me
to mention my own contributions. Having produced a
couple of books in the Danish language, I made my
debut in English with an historical record of the Scan-
dinavians in Australasia. My next work was a novel,
Teddy Wilkins’ Trials, depicting the struggles of the
pioneers in the Australian bush. My books, Our New
Possession and Island Films, are the only ones hitherto
produced on former German New Guinea. The present
work, Non-Britishers in Australia, was considered worthy
of the Harbison-Higinbotham Scholarship by the Mel-
bourne University. Several Scandinavians have been


prolific newspaper writers. A Dane, Lundager, at one
time editor and proprietor of the Mount Morgan
Argus, wrote over 200 articles on miners’ phthisis,
for a variety of Queensland papers, and was the chief
cause of legislation being introduced in that State to
relieve the suffering from this dreadful disease.
The origin of things is quickly forgotten, even if at
one time many knew how they began. Thus it is
doubtful if any but a few specialists now know that
the system of physical training practised in our schools
and forming part of our military training system, was
evolved in Sweden by a certain Professor Ling, and,
slightly modified to suit the Australian climate, was
brought to this country by two Danish immigrants, the
Bjelke-Petersen brothers. The elder of the two was
appointed by the Defence Department as Chief Instruc-
tor in Physical Culture, and in this capacity he trained
a large number of teachers, who gradually brought the
system into every training camp and every public
school throughout Australia. Also the introduction to
Australia of the invigorating winter-sport, ski-ing, was
due to Scandinavians. Skis were first used some thirty
years ago by Scandinavian miners in Kiandra, New
South Wales. In the winter there the ski is now used
in the ordinary course of the day’s work or recre-
ation. Some years ago, when in charge of the Buffalo
Chalet, Miss Samsing, a Norwegian lady, who had
served as nurse in the A.1.F., imported skis from Nor-
way, and thus the sport began in Victoria.
Scandinavians in Public Life.
Owing to racial kindredship no foreigners assimilate
so rapidly with the British as the Scandinavians. They


learn the English language quicker and to greater per-
fection than all others, which may explain their readi-
ness to drop their mother tongue. In Australia it is
quite an exceptional occurrence for the Scandinavian
language to be passed on to the second generation, even
where both parents are Scandinavians. For this reason
Lutheran congregations based on the Scandinavian
language did not endure. Of about a dozen such,
founded in Queensland during the seventies and eighties,
only one had survived at the end of the century.
The Nor den, the only Scandinavian journal published
in Australia, is largely printed in English. The journal
recently offered a prize for the best original story
written by a Scandinavian in their own or in the English
language. Out of 18 stories submitted, 2 were written
in Danish, 2 in Swedish, and 14 in English. It will
be seen that language is no hindrance to the Scandi-
navians entering public life in their adopted country,
and since the public institutions in their homeland and
in Australia only differ' in detail, they do so to no small
extent. A list of those who have been municipal coun-
cillors would be a long one. Scandinavians have occu-
pied the mayoral chair in Fitzroy, Sandringham, Ben-
digo, Sebastopol, Sale, Hobart, Bankstown, Townsville,
Mt. Morgan, Gladstone, and so forth, and they have
occasionally been members of State Parliaments. On
two occasions Scandinavians were selected as candidates
for the Senate. J. H. Lundager, a founder of the
Queensland Labour Party, was one of Labour’s chosen
candidates for that State at the Federal election in
1907. Dr. Harald Jensen enjoyed a similar honour in
1925. Owing, however, to a setback of the Labour Party
at these two elections, neither was successful. One


Scandinavian, N. Nielsen, was for a period Minister of
the Crown in New South Wales. A Swedish lady, Hilma
Molyneux Parkes, was one of the foremost champions
in Australia for the emancipation of her sex. She was
vice-president of “The Women’s Suffrage League” in
New South Wales, and the first president of “The
Women’s Liberal League,” an institution which she was
instrumental in creating.
Scandinavians in the A.I.F.
Owing to no statistics being available regarding place
of birth of the soldiers who served in the A.I.F. during
the Great War, the number from any particular part
of the world can only be estimated. The Scandinavian
contribution may have been approximately a thousand,
about 6 per cent, of the total number of Danes, Nor-
wegians. and Swedes in Australia. They enlisted freely;
no less than 52 members of the Danish Club in Mel-
bourne joined the A.1.F., of whom 37 were natives of
Denmark. The same willingness to risk their lives,
for what they believed to be a good cause, was shown
by sons of Scandinavians. One old Dane in Melbourne,
Hans Hansen, had 5 sons and a grandson serving in
Gallipoli and France, three of whom fell; and cases of
Scandinavians with 3 sons in the war were quite com-
mon. Several Scandinavians obtained commissions,
though none are known to have risen to a higher
rank than that of captain. The interpreter in German
attached to Admiral Patey’s staff, when German New
Guinea was captured, was a Scandinavian, and so was
the pilot taking the troopship to Rabaul. Two Danes,
who went to Europe with the A.1.F., were awarded the
V.C. One, Corporal J. Jensen, for bravery in France;


the other, Oluf Andersen, who after the armistice en-
listed with the British force sent to Archangel, won
his Y.C. fighting against the Bolsheviks.
The Second Generation.
According to the census of 1921, in the case of 4424
native born Australians both parents were Scandi-
navians; 32,057 had a Scandinavian father, and 5273 a
Scandinavian mother, the other parent, with few excep-
tions, being British.
Of Australians who on the father’s side are of Scan-
dinavian descent, several have attained prominence.
They include such well known names as Henry Law-
son, the poet; Oscar Asche, the talented actor; Sir
Adrian Knox, Chief Justice of Australia; Sir Charles
Rosenthal, who ended third in command of the Aus-
tralian Imperial Force; F. Hagelthorn, who was Minister
for Agriculture in the Watt-Peacock Ministry, Vic-
toria, and ever since has been a driving force in the
promotion of agriculture; Edward Sorensen, the well-
known writer, and others.


THE ITALIANS.
Racial Composition.
Racially, the Italians fall in two main groups, viz.,
the Mediterraneans in Southern Italy and Sicily, and
the Alpines in Northern Italy.
It is more than probable that the founders of Rome
were Nordics, and it is possible that the highly civilized
Etruscans w T ere a branch of the Nordic stock. At the
breaking up of the Roman Empire the Nordic con-
querors of Italy, the Vandals, and the Ostrogoths, either
left again or were more or less exterminated. The
Longobards, another Nordic tribe who, a little later,
invaded Northern Italy and settled in Lombardy have,
however, left traces of their presence on the Italian
population; but they have been gradually almost sub-
merged by a slow invasion of Alpines, probably ex-
tending over several hundred years. 1
In Southern Italy and Sicily the small strain of
Nordic blood infused by the Normans in the 11th cen-
tury has been out-bred, and in its place the once pure
Mediterranean blood has been impoverished by an in-
fusion of inferior African and Asiatic blood.
The result of the different racial strains in Italy has
been that the northern districts are well cultivated and
that generally economic progress in Northern Italy
compares favourably with the most advanced countries,
whereas the southern districts are backward and the
living standard of the people low.
i. One school of thought inclines to the belief that in the main the
Northern Italians are of Nordic descent. The prevailing round skull-
shape and dark pigmentation of hair and skin are advanced as proofs of a
gradual modification of type.


Immigration authorities in the two Americas, as well
as in Australia, have gradually learnt to differentiate
between Northern Italians and Southern Italians, and
while the latter are not always popular, the former are
viewed much more favourably by those responsible for
the economic progress of their country. The general
public in Australia is less cognisant of the difference.
To them an Italian is an Italian —difficult to absorb,
and more likely than not to lower the social standard.
Number and Achievements of the Italians in Australia.
It is known that as early as the fifties there was a
quota of Italians on the Victorian goldfields, one of
whom, an ex-school teacher named Carboni Eafaells,
played a prominent part in working up the spirit of
rebellion which led to the Eureka Stockade. Their
growth for a long time was slow, and at the census of
1881 they numbered less than 2000 in the whole of
Australia. In 1891 they had increased to 3890, in 1901
to 5660, 2 and in 1911 to 6719, thus showing an average
annual growth of about 150 during the period under
review. During the Great War a large number of
Italians were drafted back to Italy by the Italian con-
sular service, to enter the army; but after the war the
Italians again commenced to increase, and in 1921 they
totalled 8135. Since then a considerable influx has
taken place, and there are now well over 25,000 Italians
in this country, wdiile for various reasons further rapid
increases may be expected.
Leaving out Queensland, which will be dealt with
separately, most of the early Italians probably hailed
from the city population of Italy, and may be assumed
2. The gold-discoveries in Western Australia attracted a considerable
number of Italians.


to have been largely of the Mediterranean stock. They
principally established themselves as shopkeepers,
barrow-men, and waiters, choosing fruit, fish, and wine
as their speciality. Several of the Italian gold-diggers
settled on the land, showing a preference for viticul-
ture, their contribution to the wine industry being
at a later date, emphasized by the Government of Vic-
toria in 1888 appointing one of their number, Signor
Bragato, its first viticultural expert.
Amongst the Italians at a period which rapidly is
becoming old history appears to have been an element
of highly cultured men. Of these Pietro Baracchi
ranks foremost. On the occasion of his death, in July
1926, the following necrology appeared in the Herald:
“The passing of Pietro Baracchi, formerly Govern-
ment Astronomer of Victoria, removes a pleasant and
picturesque figure from our midst. He was one of an
interesting group of Italians, mostly from Tuscany,
who played their part in the building up of our
State. Like many of his countrymen, particularly
those hailing from Florence and the North, he con-
tributed to the growth of science and the love of
beauty. Baracchi did much fine work in connection
with the Observatory, and in collaboration with the
veteran Mr. Ellery, whom he succeeded; and his
work in observing and classifying the stars in the
Southern Hemisphere formed part of perhaps one of
the earliest instances of international co-operation
for scientific purposes in which Australia has taken
part. The group of these able and cultured Italians
included Signor Cecchi, the first teacher of Melba, the
late Signor Catani, who helped so greatly in fostering
love of beauty, and to whom we owe what is best


in the Alexandra Avenue and the St. Kilda foreshore,
his brother the veteran painter, Catani, who has now
given up Art for Diplomacy, and occupies a post in
the Italian Embassy in London, and others whose
names escapes me at the moment. ”
In regard to music, the contribution rendered by the
Italians is an exceedingly large one, and it may be
said with a considerable measure of truth that the
Italians brought music to Australia. We only need to
refer to the scores of Italian street orchestras which,
up to the outbreak of the war, in conjunction with
German brass bands, filled the streets with music, and
in a pleasant manner relieved the prose of city-life.
The Italian street-bands of from two to three string-
inStruments, always including the picturesque harp and
occasionally supplemented by a flute, generally took
up their positions in front of hotels, where, for the
modest sums collected from floating audiences, they
rendered —often in the most exquisite manner —gems
from operas, and ballads by the world’s greatest com-
posers.
Apart from the humble street musicians, there arrived
many Italian artists of note. One of the earliest was
Count Carandini, a political refugee, who came to Tas-
mania in the forties and established himself as a dancing
master. For the sake of his wife’s training as a singer
he later moved to Sydney. Marie Carandini afterwards
became prominent in the musical world. Pardoned in
1870 Carandini returned to Italy, but left behind his
daughter, Mrs. Palmer, who became a popular concert
and oratorio singer. From about 1860 to 1880 Italian
opera flourished in Australia. A few old music lovers
in Sydney may still remember the magnificent musical


festival in 1870 at the University where appeared Lncia
Barrati, Neri, Contini, and Lucy Chambers —the latter
an Australian contralto from the lyric stage of Italy.
In 1871 two opera favourites arrived, Signor and Sig-
nora Coy, who lived in Melbourne for many years.
Almost simultaneously Maestro Zelman arrived—father
of the late conductor of the Philharmonic Society in
Melbourne, the highly gifted Alberto Zelman. In the
eighties Roberto Hazon came to Sydney with an Italian
opera company and for nearly twenty years exercised
a profound influence on musical life in Australia.
Since the war the Italians have played a smaller part
in the realm of music than formerly; yet the country
has recently been visited by an Italian opera company
(including Toti dal Monte), the famous Sistine Choir,
and the celebrated Galli-Curci. What they have done
in the past towards promoting the soul-inspiring art of
music will, however, be fruitful for ever.
The Italians who have arrived in the southern States
during latter years have largely come from the rural
districts of northern Italy and been sons of hard toil.
They embrace, besides agriculturists, a percentage of
fishermen and of artisans, the latter including the
makers of Terrazzo floors, an art evolved in Italy, which
has largely superseded Mosaic paving. Most of them,
however, are hewers of wood and drawers of water;
scores of Italian gangs are engaged on the roads, while
practically all the navvying in connection with the Rubi-
con hydraulic work is being carried out by them. In
the season they now engage extensively in maize-pick-
ing, potato-digging, etc. A few have settled on the
land; in the hill-country of Victoria, holdings which
have been deserted by their original occupants are


occasionally taken up by small syndicates of these
people, two or three working the holding while others
take employment in the district and provide funds.
New Italy.
In April 1881 about 200 way-worn foreign immi-
grants, of whom a considerable number were Italians,
arrived in Sydney. They were the survivors from Mar-
quis de Ray s ill-fated attempt at founding a colony,
“Nouvelle France/ 7 in New Ireland, which later became
part of Germany’s New Guinea Protectorate. The immi-
grants were practically destitute and unable to speak
English. In the following year one of them, an Italian
named Rocco Comminitti, took up a conditional pur-
chase farm of 40 acres near Woodburn in the Northern
Rivers District at what was subsequently known as
“New Italy.” He was joined by other members of
the expedition as quickly as they could save the neces-
sary money to get there. At the end of 1888 a total
of 46 holdings of an aggregate area of 3030 acres was
under occupation, and the population had increased to
250. The land was very poor and heavily timbered
and had been passed over by local settlers. However,
the Italians set to work and by great industry and thrift
succeeded in clearing some of the land and making it
productive. In the early stages good returns were
obtained by cutting sleepers and supplying timber for
various purposes. Within three years their houses had
been built and a school erected, and by the end of seven
years the holdings had all been securely fenced, and
small areas been put under grapes and other fruits,
as well as vegetables. As time rolled on, barren forest
gave way to a comfortable looking settlement with clean


and tidy dwellings, good and substantial fences and
out-buildings, while splendidly tilled and well-cared
for gardens, orchards, and vineyards met the eye on
every side. Besides working on their own properties
the settlers were engaged in the sugar industry, in
timber squaring, grass seed gathering, and other mis-
cellaneous work. The settlement has gradually lost
its Italian features. As opportunity offered, many of
the settlers and their descendants moved to more
favoured localities, and they are now scattered through-
out the North Coast district. Most of them have done
well, and many to-day are comfortably off and able to
retire.
The Italians in Queensland,
While the census of 1921 shows that in the southern
States far the greater proportion of the Italians lived
in the towns, in Queensland 85 per cent, lived on the
land. These have shown a preference for the northern
districts, and have entered whole-heartedly into the
sugar industry.
Italians were for long slow in migrating to Queens-
land. In the year when the Moreton Bay District was
elevated into a colony (1859), Italians were practically
an unknown quantity north of the 29th degree of
southern latitude. At the census of 1871 there were
only 88 Italians in Queensland, and in 1881 only 250.
These had trickled north from the southern States and
were mostly town dwellers. In 1890 a number of Italian
families of the peasant class came from Piedmont and
Lombardy to Queensland, and were settled in the Wide
Bay district, on the Herbert River. An Italian business
man in Townsville, Signor Fraire, was instrumental in
furthering this direct migration from his homeland,


which must be connected with the desire at that time
entertained by the Queensland Government of abolish-
ing Kanaka labour, and replacing the big sugar plan-
tations by small growers. In pursuance of this policy
another shipload of Italian agricultural labourers was
brought out in 1891; they numbered 335, and amongst
them were 26 married couples and some single women.
At first the majority took work as cane-cutters, but
subsequently acquired land of their own.
The Government’s plan with small holders miscarried,
and it was decided to continue with Kanaka labour;
consequently no further encouragement to Italian immi-
gration was given. Meanwhile it had led to an element
of thrifty and able Italians engaging in Queensland’s
sugar industry, and in the course of time they became
prosperous farmers.
These Italian cane-growers facilitated arrangements
for relatives and friends in Italy going to Queensland.
Their number steadily grew. As these new arrivals
generally were life-long cultivators of the soil, and
knew exactly where to go and what to do, they were
absorbed by the social and economic life of the country
without friction ensuing. The steady growth of the
Italian colony was accelerated when in 1906 the Kanakas
were returned to their island homes. It was, however,
checked by the Great War; but was revived after peace
had been declared and the armies in Europe were dis-
banded.
It is probable that the restriction placed on immigra-
tion by the United States had much to do with a human
stream of Southern Europeans commencing to pour
into Australia from about 1921. It comprised Italians,
Greeks, Jugo-Slavs, Albanians, and Maltese. The


Italians, who accounted for the greatest number, totalled
over 20,000 between Ist April, 1921, and 31st December,
1926. A large proportion went to Queensland, either
direct, or overland from the southern States, and as
the Italians were already firmly established in the sugar
industry, the new arrivals invaded the sugar districts
in great numbers.
A contributor to the now defunct Melbourne Punchy
who visited the sugar centres at the latter end of 1925,
drew the following interesting picture of an episode
which probably is of frequent occurrence: —
“In front of the little station on the outskirts of
the town stretches an array of cars and buggies,
vehicles of all kinds, their wheels and hoods stained
faintly with the rich, red mud of the surrounding
country. From the crowd on the platform comes a
babble of vivacious talk that contrasts vividly with
the afternoon somnolence of the town behind, where
a creaking tram-engine is drawing trucks of cane
through the street so slowly that the wandering horses
can pull off stalks as it passes.
“ ‘More rain coming,’ says a porter, standing at
the entrance of the platform and looking cheerfully
at the hills.
“ ‘Yes, and more blanky Italians,’ growls a carter,
staring, a little resentful, at the expectant crowd.
‘ ‘ There is a whistle, and the Townsville train
crawls in, panting through the green luxuriant
gardens. The train is crowded; every window holds
a head. As it pulls up a perfect salvo of welcome
sounds out from the waiting crowd on the platform.
Guiseppe catches sight of the wife he has not seen
for five years; Antonio grasps his young brother and


kisses him on both cheeks. There is a babel of noises,
laughter, tooting of motor-horns, and for a while the
platform has the aspect of a French quay. Then
gradually the excitement subsides, and the new
arrivals are bundled with their belongings into the
waiting cars and buggies, to be driven out over the
muddy roads to half a hundred different cane-farms.”
Alarmed by the large number of Italians and other
southern Europeans pouring into the sugar districts,
creating unemployment, cutting wages, and forcing
British workers out of the industry, the Queensland
Government in 1924 appointed a commissioner, T. A.
Ferry, to investigate and report on the problem of alien
settlement in North Queensland, and its bearing on
social and industrial conditions.
Mr. Ferry’s report bears witness to the growing
influence of the Italians. He mentions as evidence that
in the Mossman area for many years there were not
more than five or six Italian farms, and the cutters
w y ere mostly British. In 1924, however, they had in-
creased to fourteen and, as the farms carry shares in
the mill, he expressed the opinion that in time the
Italians would have complete control of the mill and
would also control the employment of the cutters re-
quired. In the Herbert River district the Italian cane-
growers showed a steady increase and numbered 179,
compared with 192 British and 20 of other nationalities.
In the Innisfail district there were 362 British cane-
growers and 254 of other nationalities (chiefly Italians).
In the Cairns district, 69 of the sugar farms were owned
by Italians. In the three last mentioned districts,
during the previous five years, 130 farms, improved
and unimproved, had changed hands from British to
alien occupiers, mainly Italians.


Mr. Ferry gives as one of the reasons for the rapid
progress of the Italians their capacity for team-work.
Several of them will pool their savings and buy a farm,
which then is worked on a co-operation basis.
Regarding cane-cutters, in the 1925 season, in the
Herbert River district 13 were British, 575 Italians,
and 16 other nationalities; in the Cairns district 301
were British, and 395 aliens (chiefly Italians). On
the other hand the employees in the mills were still
principally British. That Italians first got a footing
as cane-cutters British workers had themselves to blame
for. To increase their day’s earning some of these
commenced “firing” the cane-fields; thereby the cutting
and stripping were rendered easier, but it necessitated
the quick treatment of the raw material lest the sap
commenced fermenting. As long as only an occasional
cane-field was “fired,” the mills were able to cope with
the situation, but when it developed into a common
practice they became choked, the result being that cane
growers suffered severe losses. They then began to
employ Italians.
Of the North Italians Mr. Ferry speaks highly. “It
is,” he says, “the general opinion that these people
are thrifty and industrious, law-abiding and honest in
their business transactions.” He quotes evidence given
by several experienced members of the Australian
Workers’ Union who all bear testimony to their being
good and loyal unionists, who do not cut wages, and
whose standard of living is equal to that of the British.
He is less favourably impressed with the southern
Italians, who constitute a majority of the new arrivals
during latter years. By the way of comparison he
refers to the results of the illiteracy tests of immigrants


taken in the United States over a number of years as
regards the two different groups. The South Italians
are more inclined to form knots and less likely to be
assimilated! He mentions as proof the many exclusive
camps and clubs formed by Italians, though he admits
that the unfriendly feeling often shown towards them
by Britishers may help to force them together.
That a strained feeling exists between British and
Italian workers in Queensland is, of course, well known.
It came to a climax when in 1926 members of the
“Australian Workers’ Union” refused to handle Italian
grown sugar. The Consul-General for Italy proceeded
to Brisbane, and an interview with the Labour Premier
of Queensland led to an understanding which, at least
temporarily, overcame the difficulty. As this book goes
to press (July, 1927) there is again serious trouble in
the sugar district, partly economic and partly racial
issues being intertwined.
Some observers put much of the blame on the British
seasonal workers in North Queensland, who are pictured
as a conglomeration of adventurous spirits from all parts
of Australia, often spending their money unwisely,
evincing lack of self-discipline, and making unreasonable
demands.
The position is described thus by the Far Eastern
Review for February, 1925 :
“The problem is not easily solved. The dismissal
of the Italians cannot be considered owing to the
danger of international complications, as well as in
the very pronounced fact, that the continuance of
the Queensland sugar industry in a great measure
relies upon the efforts of the Italians. Forming great


companies or communities they have come to be pos-
sessed of large areas of the richest sugar lands, and
Italian labour is popular with Australian growers.
It is not given to strikes, nor to unreasonable demands
for wages above award rates or to superior living
conditions, demands which, on the part of Australian
labour, incessant and irritating, have no finality and
have endangered the prosperity of the sugar indus-
try.’ ’
Perhaps the root of the trouble has been that nearly
all the Italians crowded into the sugar districts. Fortu-
nately some have of late commenced to devote them-
selves to peanut growing. If the cotton culture can be
made a payable proposition there can be little doubt
that they will enter that industry as well. The Italians,
while perhaps not men of the sturdy fibre which charac-
terised the British, German and Scandinavian pioneers
half a century ago, are nevertheless hard-working, and
their aim is to make money. Moreover, the heat in the
tropical north suits them far better than it does the
Nordics, who quickly lose vitality in warm climates.
Assimilation of the Italians.
The question of ‘ ‘ assimilation ’ ’ has of late been raised
in Australia more frequently in connection with Italian
immigrants than with any other foreign nationals. The
reason is obvious —the Italians are the only non-
Britishers who are arriving, and are likely to keep on
arriving in large numbers.
According to accounts from the United States, the
Italians there more than other Europeans live in com-
pact communities and stubbornly resist being Ameri-
canized. In France, too, it has caused some appre-
hension that the upwards of a million Italians, who have


r „ „ !■
j \ Sugar Belt ] Where Jhliaaf
| QUEENSLAND
MWJOUm WALES


migrated there since the Great War, have brought with
them their own priests, school-teachers, and newspapers.
There can be little doubt that the Italians are an
intensely patriotic people, for which their emotional
temperament and Italy’s glorious past may account.
Where, however, the Italians are interspersed with the
British, the weight of their surroundings soon tells,
and particularly is this the case with those hailing from
northern Italy. The second generation of the sturdy
pioneers from Peidmont and Lombardy, who settled
in Queensland thirty-five years ago, are as true Aus-
tralians in language and sentiment as anyone can wish,
and the children of the latest migrants from southern
Europe promise to become the same. In his report to
the Government of Queensland, Mr. Perry writes: —
• “The number of children of Italian origin in all
the State schools in the district of Ingham is about
190. As the majority of Italian families live on their
farms their children would attend the schools away
from the main centres of population. On the average
about 85 per cent, of the Italian children in our
State schools are Australian born, and there is every
reason to believe that they will make good Australian
citizens.
“The other foreign nationalities attending the
schools are Greeks, Spaniards, Maltese, Jugo-Slavs,
Poles, Russains, Syrians, Chinese, Malays, Japanese,
and Cingalese. I am advised that on the whole the
alien school children are intelligent, regular in attend-
ance, and anxious to learn. They are clean and well
dressed, and mingle amicably with the Australian
children. ’ ’


The secret of successful assimilation, from the social
point of view, lies in education and the free mingling
with British children in and outside of school, of chil-
dren of foreign extraction. Leading Roman Catholic
Church dignitaries are reputed to have said: “Give us
the children during school age, and they will remain
good Catholics for the remainder of their lives.” In
the United States the value of education was for long
under-rated, and the imagined pride in “American
citizenship ’ ’ over-rated.
Regarding intermarriage, which is another great fac-
tor in the process of assimilation, unions between
British and Italians are not uncommon. Out of 1989
married Italians, who in 1921 were enumerated together
with their wives, 880 had British wives 3 and 1034 Italian.
In the case of the Italian females the difference was
more conspicuous, those with British husbands number-
ing only 88. On the same date 5861 persons in Aus-
tralia had Italian fathers and British mothers, and 467
Italian mothers and British fathers.
Italian immigrants may not always become enthusi-
astic Australians, but neither do many of the English;
they may form clubs wherever they live in sufficient
numbers to do so, and they may support their Italian
newspaper, Italo Australia, published weekly in Sydney;
yet, it is apparent from the foregoing that their assimi-
lation up till now has progressed, at quite a satisfactory
rate.
3. Some of these would be Italians of the second generation.


OTHER EUROPEANS.
General Remarks .
While there are representatives in Australia from
every country in Europe they are in most cases so few
in number, and with the exception of an occasional out-
standing personality, have made themselves so little felt
save in connection with early maritime exploration, the
creation of the wine industry, and the growth of com-
merce, that they are apt to be overlooked as factors in
the progress of development. This applies to the
French, the Swiss, the Dutch, the Belgians, the Austro-
Hungarians, the Spaniards, the Portuguese, the Rus-
sians, and the Poles, all of whom belong to what may
be termed the “old” immigration, dating back in most
cases to the discovery of gold; and the Jugo-Slavs, the
Albanians, and the Maltese who, together with many
Italians and Greeks, have arrived comparatively recently
and may aptly be called the “new” Southern Euro-
pean immigration.
THE DUTCH.
Owing to the small number of Dutch in Australia,
they have contributed much less to the population and
development of this country than they did to its dis-
covery.
The discovery of the “Fifth Continent” has been
exhaustively dealt with by such painstaking and able
historians as Rusden, Ernest Scott, Arthur Jose, and
others, and ought to be familiar to every Australian;
still, for the sake of completeness a brief summary


must be given here of what non-Britishers did in the
matter of maritime exploration.
The first map published in which Australia is indi-
cated was produced in Paris in 1542. The land is called
4 ‘Java la Grande,” and the French cartographer is
assumed to have obtained the knowledge of its existence
from some unknown Portuguese navigator. There is
other evidence pointing to the Portuguese having been
in Australian waters earlier than any other nation,
while in the case of Spanish maritime explorers it is
known for certain that Australia was sighted by Torres
in 1606.
The first Dutch ship known to have visited Australia
was the exploration vessel Duyfken, which in 1605 was
sent out from Bantam, Java, to explore the islands of
New Guinea, and came to Australia, striking land a
little to the south-west of Cape York. In 1623 two
Dutch ships, the Per a and the Arnhem, sailed out from
Amboina and explored the Gulf of Carpentaria, giving
to its westward peninsula the name of Arnhem Land.
The name of Carpentaria was bestowed on the vast
gulf in compliment to Peter Carpenter, then Governor
of the Dutch East India Company.
The Dutch gradually gained a knowledge of the west
coast and part of the south coast, through a series of
accidents. On his way to the East Indies on board the
Eendragt, Dirck Hartogs in 1616 sailed out of the
beaten track and came to Sharks Bay, where he landed
on the island bearing his name; the mainland he named
after his vessel “The Land of the Eendragt,” and it
soon became a landmark on the trade route between
Holland and Java. Both going to and coming from
the East Indies ships would discover and chart fresh


sections of coast line; thus in 1623 Leeuwin’s Land was
discovered and named; in 1627 another Dutch vessel,
the Guide Zeepart, carrying on board a Dutch official,
Peter Nuyts, was driven out of her course and dis-
covered a portion of the southern coast, as far as the
head of the Great Australian Bight; in 1628 De Witt’s
Land was discovered under similar circumstances; in
1629 the Batavia, commanded by Francis Pelsart, was
wrecked on the reef known as Houtman’s Abrolhos.
The captain, with a few of his crew, explored the coast
of the mainland for some days, and eventually succeeded
in reaching Java.
In the history of Australian discovery the name of
the Dutch navigator, Abel Tasman, stands out particu-
larly luminous. After ten years’ service in the East
he was in 1642 commissioned by the Governor-General
of the Dutch Indies, Anthony van Diemen, to under-
take a voyage of exploration. Two ships, the Heems-
kerk and the Zeehaen, were placed under his command.
Having made a wide circuit of the Indian Ocean, Tas-
man struck a southerly and easterly direction and
eventually discovered Tasmania, naming it Van Die-
men’s Land. His landfall is believed to have been near
the entrance to Macquarie Harbour, within sight of
the two mountains which Flinders in 1798 named after
Tasman’s vessels, Mounts Heemskerk and Zeehaen.
Coasting round the south ofl the island, Tasman effected
a landing and caused the Dutch flag to be hoisted as
a symbol of taking possession. Proceeding east he
discovered New Zealand, calling it “Staaten Land.”
The stretch of water traversed, he called “Tasman’s
Passage,” believing it to be a comparatively narrow
strait. The name has since been altered to “Tasman’s


Sea. ” On a second voyage, undertaken in 1644, Tasman
cruised along the north coast of Australia, from De
Witt’s Land almost to Cape York.
The last Dutch expedition recorded was sent out from
Batavia in 1705, under command of Martin Van Delft.
It explored and named the north-west coast of Australia.
Thus by accident and planned investigation the
Dutch gained knowledge of and mapped the coastline
of Australia from the Gulf of Carpentaria to the Bight,
and added Tasmania and New Zealand to the map of
the world. Besides the geographical names already
mentioned many others remind us of the presence of
the Dutch in Australian waters, for instance, Groate
Eylandt, Wessel Island, Vlaming Head, Nuyt’s Archi-
pelago, and several others.
Though the Dutch called the continent New Holland,
they did not make any attempt at colonising, probably
because the parts they had visited looked barren and
desolate compared with the fertile East Indies, and the
inhabitants appeared to be cruel savages totally useless
as wealth-producers. Nor have the Dutch at any time
since taken kindly to Australia; their own colonies
have offered so wide a field for adventure and enter-
prise that not even the rich gold discoveries in Australia
tempted them. In Victoria they rarely numbered more
than from 200 to a little over 300; nor did the gold-
fields in Western Australia impress the Dutch, their
number in that State only rising from 19 in 1891 to
41 in 1901. A notable increase occurred in New South
Wales and Queensland between 1911 and 1921, probably
owing to the proximity of these States to the Dutch
Indies and the rapidly extending trade intercourse
between Java and Australia. To promote this, the


Royal Packet Navigation Company (Dutch) in 1908
opened a regular monthly steamship service between
the East Indies and Australia, calling at Brisbane,
Sydney and Melbourne.
Of Dutch in Australia whose names have become out-
standing should be mentioned Delprat and Scheltema.
Guillaume Daniel Delprat was born in Delft, Holland,
1856, and he served his apprenticeship as constructional
engineer in Scotland. He studied chemistry and
physics at St. Andrew's University and later at the
Amsterdam University. Afterwards he was engaged on
the construction of the Tay Bridge, ending up as chief
constructor. From Scotland Delprat went to Spain as
chief metallurgist for the Thasis Sulphate of Copper
Company, after four years obtaining full control of
the mines and w r orks. In 1885 he joined the Bede Metal
and Chemical Company as manager of several mines in
Spain, and in 1888 the control of the whole business was
placed in his hands. In 1898 he accepted an appoint-
ment as general manager of the Broken Hill Proprietary
Company, a position he ably filled for more than twenty
years. It was on his advice that the company risked
about £4,000,000 on establishing its steel works at New-
castle. This huge undertaking arose under Delprat's
guidance and supervision, and its rapid progress was
in no small degree due to his untiring energy. Prior
to the establishment of the steel works, Delprat had
earned distinction by discovering a process of flotation
for treating zinc concentrates, by the use of sulphuric
acid. This process is now almost universally adopted.
Delprat, who is a strong believer in applying science
to industry, was one of the original members of the
executive committee of the Federal Institute of Science


and Industry. For his manifold services to the Empire
he has been created a C.B.E. 1
Jan Hendrik Scheltema was born in Hague, 1861,
and already in his native town commenced to devote
himself to fine art. Afterwards he went to Belgium,
where he studied for three years at the Royal Academy.
He was well on the way to make a name for himself as
a portrait painter when the publicity given to the Cen-
tennial Exhibition in Melbourne, in 1888, caused Aus-
tralia to be much spoken of in Belgium as a land of
plenty and with a marvellous future. So Scheltema went
to Melbourne to pursue his art there, devoting himself to
landscape and figure painting. He gradually developed
a style of his own which enables one at a glance to
pick out his works in any collection of pictures. They
are pleasing, fresh and finished to a degree. As a
painter of the bovine species and of farmyard scenery
he ranges amongst the foremost in Australia.
THE FRENCH.
Exploration .
Although the maritime discoveries in Australia made
by the French were of secondary importance to those
of the Dutch and the British, they were by no means
negligible. In fact, the voyages undertaken by the
French occupy a considerable portion of the story of
Australian discovery.
The first French expedition was undertaken in 1771
by Nicholas Marion-Dufresne. He visited southern
Tasmania and New Zealand, where he met his death at
i. Science and Industry, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 60-61.


the hands of the Maories in 1772. In the same year a
French captain, de St. Alouarn, is supposed to have
reached the coast of Western Australia where an island
has been named after him. In 1788 Laperouse put in
at Botany Bay, only a week after the arrival of Captain
Phillip and the first fleet. As Laperouse and the two
ships at his command were subsequently lost, probably
in the New Hebrides, it is not known if the ill-fated
explorer visited other parts of Australia. 2
The mystery surrounding the fate of Laperouse led
to the despatch in 1791 of a search expedition under
Bruni Dentrecasteaux, who in the Recherche and the
Esperance visited Tasmania in April, 1792. Later
Dentrecasteaux visited Western Australia, a little south
of Leeuwin, and coasted it closely, charting it as he went.
In Tasmanian waters, too, the work of Dentrecasteaux
was fruitful. The many French geographical names
in that island and in Western Australia keep alive the
memory of this expedition. Dentrecasteaux found no
trace of Laperouse, and both he and his chief officer
died in distressing circumstances before the voyage was
over.
The most important of the French expeditions to Aus-
tralia was one commanded by Nicholas Baudin, 1800
to 1804. The whole coast of Australia from Port Jack-
son —south-about as far as the Gulf of Carpentaria—
was examined by Baudin. The w T ork of his carto-
graphers was not uniformly accurate and was greatly
excelled by that of Flinders; the Tasmanian part of the
work, however, is of exceptional merit. The expedition,
2. A site for a monument ta the memory of Faperouse was set aside
at Botany Bay by Governor Brisbane, and this, by the New South Wales
Government, was given on the 14th July, 19 17, to the French nation in
perpetuity.


which Baudin did not live to take back to France, was
purely scientific; but a fear that the French intended
colonization led to the British occupation in 1803-4
of Port Phillip and Tasmania.
Of other French expeditions visiting this country
should be mentioned one in 1817 under Louis Freycinet,
one in 1822 under Duperry, and one in 1824 under
Baron de Bougainville. The last expedition sent out
from France was in 1826 under Dumont d’Urville.
Though there is nothing to prove that the French on
this more than on previous expeditions were bent on
annexation, its presence caused the British Government
to found a settlement in Westernport in 1826, and one
in Albany in 1829. 3
The French and Their Doings in Australia.
During the next generation little was heard of the
French in this country. The belief gradually gained
ground that they were bad colonizers, and to this day
it has become a saying that ‘‘ France has plenty of
colonies but no colonists.” This is not to imply that
France never has had any surplus population, which
we know is the case to-day, but that owing to certain
peculiarities of the French people they are loth to leave
their native land, and that when they do so, they always
yearn to go back to La belle France and gay Paris.
Though the French are immensely devoted to their
country, the above assertion is not correct. Those who
settled in Canada made admirable colonists, and the
comparatively few who came to Australia mostly settled
there for good. Nor could such peculiarities be ex-
plained by racial characteristics, in so far as all three
3. See Australian Encyclopaedia, pp. 417, 418.


branches of the white race are represented in the French
nation.
Geographically France is composed roughly of three
belts, viz., a northern, consisting of lowland plains; a
central, made up of mountains and highland plateaux;
and a southern which again is level country. It is
believed that when Julius Caesar came to Gaul, the
northern plains were inhabited by Nordics, the highland
plateaux by Alpines, and the southern plains by Medi-
terraneans, and that despite the troubled history of
France with its succession of invasions and conquests
by fresh Nordic tribes, and here and there unavoidable
intermixture of different strains, the racial distribution
has remained comparatively unchanged till this day,
albeit the Alpines have slowly gained ground at the
expense of the Nordics and Mediterraneans alike.
Kegarding French settlers in Australia, we hear little
of them before the discovery of gold and the planting
of vineyards. Some gold-diggers of French nationality
afterwards settled on the land and commenced to grow
vines, and it was due to the initiative and thrift of these
Gallics that, for instance, the now famous Great Western
vineyards came into being. 4
Hugo de Castella, in describing this magnificent enter-
prise, commences with a farm-house in Lorraine, in the
fifties of last century. The farmer’s daughter and five
years younger son had been fired by the tales of gold
in Australia. Leaving their home and their slumbering
parents one dark night, and on their way to the coast
calling on an uncle who helped them, they eventually
came to Melbourne in a British ship. They betook
4- In an account of Ararat, in the Victorian Historical Magazine, Vol.
VIII., it says:—“ Messrs. Truette and Blompied were the fathers of the
viticultural industry. They planted the first vines at St. Peters in 1863.’'


themselves to the mines at Beechworth, where they met
a number of their countrymen. The girl married one
of these, Monsieur Truette. Being familiar with vine
growing, Truette and one or two compatriots selected
land at St. Peters, the present Great Western, and com-
menced to plant vines. They found a ready market for
their grapes, their fruit and their wine amongst the
miners of Stawell. This enabled them to extend their
activity, and by 1886 they had 2000 acres under culture.
In that year de Castella visited the Great Western
district. He arrived on the 24th May, Queen. Victoria's
birthday, and he was directed to some French vignerons,
where he was told people from the neighbourhood
usually gathered on that day. He found amongst the
guests several leading men from Stawell, including the
Shire President, a Swiss by birth. The hostess was the
peasant girl from Lorraine, now a dignified middle-aged
woman, wearing the picturesque national dress of her
homeland. Mr. Castella was greatly impressed by their
vineyard and by the 25,000 gallons of fine wine maturing
in their cellars.
At Rutherglen a Frenchman, Monsieur Gassier,
founded one of the first distilleries in Victoria, the plant
for which he imported from Bordeaux. The Chateau
Thabilk vineyards were for many years under French
management, and so, in all probability, many others in
various parts of Australia have been.
In the case of South Australia the name of Monsieur
Mazure stands out prominently. In 1903 Mr. Whiting-
ton, on behalf of The Register, a leading Adelaide daily,
visited the principal wfine centres of South Australia.
Regarding Mazure he wrote;—


“It always seems fit and proper to make a first call
at Auldana vineyards where Mazure presides. South
Australian wine has improved out of all knowledge
since Mr. Mazure first landed on these shores. Wine-
makers are born and not made. When Edmond
Mazure first arrived from France he was associated
with Sir Samuel Davenport. In 1887 he was classi-
fying wines at the Exhibition, and shortly after went
to Auldana, of which he became managing partner.
It is now a model winery in every respect; the in-
ventive genius of Mazure being in evidence every-
where. Mazure was one of the first to introduce
levures into the making of wine in South Australia.
He applies the French germ when he wants to produce
a wine of a French character, and the Spanish levures
for sherry making. So far he is the only one who
has made a wine that in any way approaches the
Spanish sherry. Mr. Mazure is also the only one to
date who has had anything like success in the manu-
facture of the champagne type of wine. Recently
the Messageries Maritimes invited the wine producing
States of Australia to send samples of their wines to
Marseilles. The Auldana wine was chosen for the
company’s ships, which indeed was a feather in the
cap of the popular little Frenchman.”
In addition to such Frenchmen as figure prominently
and whose intimate touch with developments in France
to a large extent explains why Australian wines are
considered amongst the best produced anywhere, should
be mentioned the many hundreds French of the rank
and file who have laboured and who still labour in our
vineyards.


Of less importance, yet worthy of being recorded, is
the share of the French in producing the fine asparagus
we enjoy to-day. It was a French horticulturist settling
in Geelong in the latter part of last century who first
embarked on asparagus culture in a rational manner
and raised it to its present high level. The plants he
brought out from France, and he was financed by the
French bank in Melbourne. Good asparagus are now
produced at other places, but Geelong has ever since
been the recognised centre for the raising of that vege-
table.
In former days there was a considerable number of
French tutors and governesses in this country, but at
present French chefs and haidressers outnumber the
professional class, showing, perhaps, that also in Aus-
tralia the material gradually is taking precedence over
the intellectual. Probably the greatest section of the
French to-day is engaged in business, and as Sydney
leads in commerce and is the natural business centre
for the southern Pacific, including the French colonies,
New Caledonia and Tahiti, and also the New Hebrides,
the weight of the French in Australia has shifted from
the one time cosmopolitan Victoria to New South Wales.
In Sydney they now number approximately one thou-
sand. There the French Consulate General is situ-
ated, the French Chamber of Commerce, the chief
branch of the Comptoir National D’Escompte de Paris,
the head office of the Messageries Maritime, which has
established a fortnightly steamship service between Syd-
ney and Neumea, and there, too, the only French news-
paper in Australia, Le Courier Australia, is published.
A branch of the national organisation, ‘ ‘ Alliance


Francaise, with its central office in Paris and rami-
fications throughout the world, was established in Mel-
bourne earlier than in Sydney, but the latter is now far
the most important.
Besides those permanently residing here, visiting re-
presentatives of La grande notion have conferred bene-
fits on Australia. The first professional concert in the
Port Phillip District was given by Monsieur and Madame
Gautrot, who went from Sydney to the newly-founded
Melbourne. In 1859 another French musician, M.
La\ enu, conducted a choir of 250 voices at the opening
of the hall of the Sydney University, on which occasion
the Messiah was rendered. In 1888 two French scien-
tists, Dr. Loir and Dr. Germont, arrived in Sydney with
some germs produced by the uncle of Dr. Loir, the
famous Pasteur, which they claimed would put an end
to the rabbit pest. Tests undertaken with great pre-
caution proved the deadly effect of the germ, but fearing
these would not confine their activity to rabbits, none of
the Australian Governments adopted the remedy. The
two scientists then went to Queensland, where they
successfully introduced a vaccine against Peric Pneu-
monia, a disease which had commenced to play havoc
amongst cattle. In 1911 Monsieur Cuignet arrived with
the first aeroplane seen in Australia, and gave our
people the first object lesson in flying. It should, per-
haps, also be mentioned that amongst the many foreign
wool buyers annually coming to our shores, the French
predominate.
One of the best known French names in Australia is
that of Dr. Crivelli. In 1887 Crivelli joined another
French medical practitioner, Dr. Duret, who had settled
in Melbourne in 1870. Both attained to leading positions


in their profession. Crivelli, who has been made a
corresponding member of the French Academy of Medi-
cal Science and a Knight of the Legion of Honour, had
three sons serving in the French artillery during the
Great War, and one in the medical corps. All distin-
guished themselves; the third eldest, a Master of Elec-
trical Science at the Melbourne University, received the
Cross of the Legion of Honour. The second, who held
a degree in agricultural science, died in 1923 from the
effects of a war wound, three weeks after having pub-
lished in Paris a valuable book, L’Australia et Le
Pacifique, in which Australia and the Pacific Islands
are interestingly described.
Dr. Crivelli has been specially mentioned because ho
is a typical example of the French in Australia. Simul-
taneously with successfully endeavouring to be good
colonists and faithful servants of their adopted country,
they retain an almost pathetic affection for their native
land. It is a striking fact that although French migra-
tion to Australia is of no recent date, at the census of
1921 65 per cent, had remained subjects of France. The
corresponding figures for the Swiss were 35, for the
Scandinavians 21, and for the Germans 18. 5
Perhaps, in addition to refinement of manners, the
French teach us a lesson in love of country which should
be taken to heart.
THE SWISS.
Intercourse between Australia and Switzerland was
established at a very early date. It commenced with
the celebrated John Macarthur, captain in the New
5. See Appendix.


South Wales Corps, while exiled in Europe, visiting
Switzerland for the purpose of having his younger son,
William, educated there. William, who had been born
in Parramatta, in 1800, was placed in school at Vevey.
The sojourn of that young Australian amidst the vine-
clad slopes of Lake Geneva left an indelible impression
on his mind, and in time led to the planting of a vine-
yard at Camden, Macarthur’s estate in New South
Wales. From Camden vine-cuttings were later distri-
buted to other parts of Australia, and as skilled viticul-
turists from Switzerland and other vine-growing coun-
tries in Europe commenced to arrive as early as in the
thirties, the progress of the wine industry in Australia
was assured.
A halo of romance surrounds the coming of the first
settlers from Switzerland.
William Macarthur’s best friend at Yevey was the
young Count Louis de Pourtalis, of Neuchatel. It so
happened that Charles Latrobe, a British gentleman of
French descent, during a visit to Switzerland, met and
fell in love with a charming Swiss lady, Mile, de Mont-
mollin, a relative of Count Pourtalis. The wedding was
celebrated in 1835, and, partly owing to William’s glow-
ing description of his native land, the young wife gladly
proceeded to the distant and little known Australia. In
1839 Latrobe received an appointment as superintendent
of the Port Phillip District, afterwards to become the
first Governor of Victoria.
In a small community such as Neuchatel was in the
thirties of last century, the departure for the Antipodes
of a lady belonging to one of the oldest and richest
families of the town naturally created a sensation, and
it is reasonable to assume that this had something to


do with the departure of eleven young Swiss from the
Canton of Neuchatel for Australia not very long after
Latrobe had taken up his position in Melbourne. They
settled near each other in the Geelong district, where
they planted the first vineyards in Victoria. In 1848
a nephew of Mrs. Latrobe and another young Swiss,
De Castella, arrived in Melbourne, and a little later
were joined by Hubert Castella and De Peru. The
latter, w r ho also was related to the Governor’s wife, later
became the first consul for Switzerland in Victoria. The
two brothers Castella and De Peru bought a station at
Yering, about 30 miles from Melbourne, where they
planted large vineyards. “St. Hubert Vineyard” par-
ticularly became widely known, while Hubert Castella
himself developed into one of the most outstanding
pioneers of Australia’s wine industry. His enthusiasm
was inherited by his son, who for years has occupied the
position of Government Viticultural Expert of Victoria.
The fact that “the first lady of the land” was of
Swiss birth naturally drew the attention of many more
adventurous persons in Switzerland to Victoria, and as
the vineyards planted by their compatriots offered
remunerative employment, Swiss immigrants soon com-
menced to arrive in considerable number. The gold
discoveries attracted others, and it is stated that at one
time there were upwards of 2000 Swiss in Victoria.
They were found in greatest numbers in and around
Geelong and in other wine producing centres, wdiile
Swiss gold-diggers in years long gone by were particu-
larly numerous in and around Daylesford. There were
comparatively few Swiss in the other colonies.
The Swiss are probably the most broad-minded people
in the world. The fact of their national existence being


guaranteed by the big Powers, in conjunction with the
protection afforded their country by its rugged moun-
tains, has made them open and unsuspicious. The
numerous tourists from all parts of the world bringing
wealth to the- nation have tended to make them cosmo-
politan in their outlook. For these reasons, though some
are Protestants and others Roman Catholics, and the
people is divided into three language groups, through-
out Switzerland a mutually sympathetic feeling prevails.
This spirit of tolerance the Swiss take -with them when
migrating to foreign lands; in Australia the Swiss have
set an example in broad-mindedness which can only
operate for the general good. Socially the German-
speaking Swiss have generally joined German Clubs, the
French-speaking Swiss French Clubs, and the Italian-
speaking Swiss Italian Clubs. In matters of religion the
Protestant Swiss have split up between the different
Protestant denominations, a preponderance having
joined German Lutheran churches, where such exist.
Yet they have their Swiss organisations, subsidised by
the home government, to which all contribute, for the
relief of distress amongst persons of Swiss birth. And
as many as can, come together on the Ist August in each
year to celebrate in a fitting manner the Constitution
Day of their native land.
The principal contribution by the Swiss towards the
economic development of Australia is in connection with
the wine-industry. Many are still engaged in it, and in
1921 no less than 45 per cent, of the Swiss residing in
the Commonwealth were settled in rural districts. Apart
from the wine industry, very few Swiss have been out-
standing. It is worthy of mention, however, that the
modern art of landscape painting was introduced to


this country by a Swiss, M. Buvelot. Regarding this,
J. S. Macdonald wrote in the Melbourne Herald for the
4th September, 1926 :
“The impetus given to landscape painting in Aus-
tralia came from the period immediately pre-dating
the Barbizon one, a correct and in many ways charm-
ing kind of painting, sentimental and possessing little
atmosphere. It stood or fell by certain current canons
of taste, and in Europe was about to fall by them
when Australia adopted them.
“The bearer of the torch to Australia was a Swiss
named Buvelot. To-day we can see his personal in-
fluence here, and on the whole it was a good one, for
it aimed, in the face of the tradition he grew up in,
at fidelity to Nature.”
Another Swiss, Mr. Lavater, was much in the limelight
in 1888. Lavater, who was an accountant in the Rail-
way Department of Victoria for many years, enjoyed the
distinction of being appointed Secretary to the Centen-
nial Exhibition in Melbourne, a position which he filled
with great credit to himself and to the land of his birth.
Lately the Swiss have made a noteworthy contribution
to the development of secondary industries in Australia,
through the Swiss firm, Handschin & Ronus, having
established in Bendigo a branch of their large knitting
factories in Switzerland.
THE BELGIANS.
Though Belgians in Australia may be traced back
to the middle of last century, when a Belgian merchant,
Jules Renard, established himself in business in Mel-
bourne, they have never been very numerous. Not till


1881 do we have any reliable figures of their number;
there were in that year 382 Belgians in this country.
They slowly increased during the eighties, numbering
518 in 1891, but after that they declined, and in 1911
there were only 339. In the early post-war period
several Belgians arrived in Australia, amongst whom
were a considerable number of war brides. Of the 605
Belgians enumerated in 1921, 329 were females, repre-
senting 54 per cent, of their total number, as compared
with 29 per cent, in 1911.
The Belgian merchant class has always been well repre-
sented, and such names as Dewez, Rompaey, and Yander-
kelen have become widely known. Dewez arrived in
1875, and Rompaey five years later. They joined forces,
establishing themselves as wool brokers. Later on they
joined Ostermeyer and became agents for the Nord
Deutsche Lloyd. F. Yanderkelen arrived in 1880 as
secretary of the Belgian section of the international
exhibition in Melbourne. He afterwards joined Dewez
and Rompaey, but later conducted an import and export
business of his own. He was followed by a nephew,
Rene Yanderkelen, who established himself as a merchant
in precious stones, and has succeeded his uncle as Consul
for Belgium.
In the manufacturing industry the name of Charles
Doutreband, in New South Wales, should be mentioned.
He was an outstanding pioneer and was a foundation
member of the Chamber of Manufactures in Sydney.
In the realm of learning, Belgium has for some years
been worthily represented by Dr. Lodewyckx, Doctor of
Philology and Assistant Professor in Germanic Lan-
guages at the Melbourne University.


In musical circles the name of the celebrated violinist,
Verbrugghen, still shines prominently. In 1916 the New
South Wales State Conservatorium was opened by him
as principal. During his six years’ stay in Australia
he proved himself a brilliant conductor, and the State-
aided Verbrugghen orchestra has as yet been unequalled
in the Southern Hemisphere.
Probably the best known Belgian name in Australia
is that of the distinguished bacteriologist, Auguste de
Bavay. Born near Brussels in 1856, of an old, illustrious
family, De Bavay arrived in Melbourne in 1884, and
shortly afterwards became head brewer of the Victoria
Brewery. While there he did a considerable amount
of scientific work in connection with the purification of
Melbourne’s water supply, and he was largely respon-
sible for the removal of some thousands of fire plugs
from the street channels to safer places. These fire
plugs admitted sewerage into the water mains, when-
ever the water pressure was turned off. During the same
period De Bavay’s services as a bacteriologist were also
rendered, free of charge, to Melbourne’s hospitals and
to the Melbourne University, there being no depart-
ment of bacteriology in those days. A visit to Europe
brought him into personal contact with Pasteur, from
whom he received, and was afterwards able to present
to the Melbourne Hospital, a bottle of the first anti-
toxin against diphtheria produced by the famous
French savant.
After several years’ service as head brewer at the
Victoria Brewery, he accepted a similar position at
Foster’s Brewery, and it was while there that he made
the discovery of a process for the separation of the zinc
blende from the then worthless residues of the Broken


Hill mines. This process has added millions to the wealth
of Australia, and has been responsible for establishing
the zinc industry in this country.
During the Great War there was a shortage of acetone
for the manufacture of cordite. The then Minister of
Defence sent for De Bavay to inquire if it could be
manufactured in Australia. Two weeks later De Bavay
brought a bulk sample of the desired substance, and he
was requested to design, erect, and start the Common-
wealth Acetate of Lime Factory on the Brisbane River.
Simultaneously with this, his two sons were at the front,
the younger, Captain De Bavay, being decorated for
valour. His wife and daughters also were enthusiastic
war workers, for which they received recognition from
the Queen of Belgium.
Of other services rendered Australia by the indefatig-
able De Bavay, his work in establishing the paper in-
dustry should be mentioned, and also the fact that
some thirty years ago he produced the first paper pulp
from Australian wood. In the brewing industry, with
which he is still closely associated, he has introduced
several improvements, including pure cultivation and
filtration.
De Bavay is an Officer of the British Empire, Cheva-
lier of the Leopold Order, and Officer of La Couronne
of Belgium. He has also received the Papal decoration,
Pro Ecclesia et Pontifici.
THE AUSTRIANS.
Up to the last census the Austrians and the Hungari-
ans in Australia were grouped together. In 1911 they
reached their highest number with 2774, of whom 2397


were males and 377 females. The disproportion of the
sexes is striking. The world war caused a great reduc-
tion in the number of Austrians and Hungarians, and
in 1921 there only remained in Australia 834 Austrians
and 147 Hungarians.
Though at one time upwards of three thousand of
their kind resided in Australia, little has been heard of
them. As a contributing cause to this may be mentioned
the fact that the Austrians —who always were much more
numerous than the Hungarians—are Roman Catholics
and speak German. In religious matters they melted
away in the great Catholic Church, and in racial matters
in the German clubs. Nevertheless, they have contri-
buted a certain number of bricks to the edifice we call
Australia, of which probably the most notable are those
furnished by Mr. and Mrs. Carl Pinschof. The latter,
better known as Madame Wiederman, was a popular
concert singer, and for years was chief instructor in
singing at the Melbourne University Conservatorium.
Carl Pinschof, Consul-General for Austria, was a great
patron of art in its different manifestations, and an
acknowledged authority on the principles of high
finance. It was he who, in Australia, pioneered the
credit foncier system and the various State forms of
assistance to country land-owners. Owing to the war,
his fortunes suffered eclipse, and he was forced to leave
Australia. On the occasion of his death, in May, 1926,
the Herald contained the following obituary:—
“The memory of the late Carl L. Pinschof will be
cherished by painters, sculptors, musicians and all
people interested in art and letters throughout Aus-
tralia. He was, in his flourishing days, the foremost
and most generous supporter of music in Melbourne.


Largely owing to his influence it is that the Melbourne
Conservatorium, now known as the Melba Conserva-
torium, which has trained so many singers and musi-
cians, attained its position.
“Ably assisted by his talented wife and daughters,
he was the centre of the circle that brought Marshall
Hall to Australia and encouraged him in every pos-
sible way. He entertained artists and people of letters
and distinction in a princely way, and Studley Hall,
with its noble apartments furnished with works of
art, was the meeting ground of folk of thought and
culture.
“With a small group of three or four, his support
made the success of great artists like Arthur Streeton
and others, on their return to Australia, and his
patronage and influence made their exhibitions and
repeated visits worth while. He was one of a little
group that realised the fine work of our sculptors
and painters from the beginning, and whose example
encouraged artists, enabled them to get more than
the scanty livelihood that formerly attended their
work, and prepared the way for the present wide
appreciation of the Australian school of painters.
The same with sculptors; he bought MackennaPs
Circe , but surrendered it to the National Gallery in
the public interest.
“When one contrasts the large number of eager
buyers of fine works and masterpieces to-day with
the scanty few of the past, and remembers the great
missionary work and example of the group of which
the late C. L. Pinschof was the foremost and most
generous, one will see how much Australian art, as
well as music, owes to his kindly aid. It was support


and friendship without patronage, but based upon
understanding and real judgment. ’ ’
Of other notable Austrians may be mentioned Bau-
hinia and AYeindorfer, both botanists. The former is
remembered by a genus of the family Leguminosas being
called after him—they are trees or wnody climbers,
chiefly tropical. The latter supplied an article on the
flora of Auctoria to the Victorian Year Book, 1904.
THE SPANISH.
In view of the close relationship between Spain and
the South and Central American States, both in regard
to blood and language, it is but natural that not many
Spaniards found their way to distant and little known
Australia. It is indeed cause for surprise that in 1921
the Spanish element in this country numbered upwards
of one thousand persons.
The arrival of the first Spaniards in Australia of
which we have any record would appear to be associated
with the upheaval in Spain in 1835, whereby the monas-
teries in that country were closed. Two of the persecuted
monks, Dom Serra and Dom Salvado, of the Benedictine
Order, found refuge in the monastery of La Cava, Italy.
Both developed a desire to go out as missionaries, and
as Dr. Brady, in 1845, arrived in Rome and was conse-
crated as the first Bishop of Perth, they were introduced
to him, with the result that he brought them back wdth
him to Australia. Their desire was to take up missionary
work amongst the aboriginals in Western Australia, but
as Dr. Brady had little faith in any real good being
done amongst the savage inhabitants of the bush, he
kept the monks in Perth, and it was not till the following


year that they were allowed to carry out their desire.
Accompanied by Dom Tootell, a French brother, and an
Irish catechist, they left Perth, travelled north, and
eventually fell in with the aboriginals. They lived
amongst and shared the life of these primitive people
for three months, when they had been so much reduced
by privation that it was deemed imperative to send the
strongest of them, Dom Salvado, to Perth for relief.
Being a virtuoso on the violin, Salvado organised a
concert in aid of the mission work, and heartily sup-
ported by Catholics, Protestants and Jews alike, the
result was highly satisfactory. Before, however, he
could return to his colleagues, the catechist had suc-
cumbed.
In 1847 the two Spanish monks laid the foundation
stone of a monastery and mission station on the Moore
River, naming it New Norcia, after the birth-place of
St. Benedict. It was situated some eighty miles N.N.E.
of Perth, and Irish and French immigrants came from
that city to give a hand in erecting it. In 1848 they
bought 2560 acres from the Government. Dr. Brady
stood good for the purchase money, but as the diocese
was poor, he advised Dom Serra to proceed to Europe
to raise funds. While in Rome, Serra was consecrated
Bishop of Port Essington, where a British colony had
been founded in 1838, and Dr. Brady, fearing that the
money collected for the mission work would be diverted
to Port Essington, sent Dom Salvado after him. Salvado
was accompanied by two young aboriginals, who were
introduced to the Pope and to the King of Naples, the
former with his own hand clothing them in the habit of
the Order of St. Benedict, and the latter paying for
their training as mission workers.


Before the two Spanish monks could return to Aus-
tralia, Dom Serra was made coadjutor to Dr. Brady,
whose health commenced to fail, and Dom Salvado was
made Bishop of Port Essington; but in the same year
the settlement was abandoned. From Italy, Serra and
Salvado went to Spain, where they obtained a large
number of assistants for the mission work in Western
Australia, all wearing the Benedictine habit.
Dom Serra became Dr. Brady's successor as Bishop of
Perth, but withdrew to Spain in 1859, where he died in
1886. For nearly fifty years Salvado devoted himself
to mission work as head of the New Norcia Monastery.
He retired in 1899, and died in Rome the following
year. His successor, Fulgentius Torres, who arranged
the affiliation of the abbey to the Spanish Benedictine
province, died in 1914. The present abbot is Dom
Catalan. The mission now has 25,000 acres, 6000 being
under cultivation. As early as 1867 New Norcia was
elevated into an abbey. Originally it had within its
spiritual jurisdiction 16 square miles of territory, but
this has been increased, and in 1926 the abbot controlled
10 churches, 19 religious and 2 secular priests, 50 monks,
20 monastic students, and 23 nuns. The Marist Brothers
and Sisters of St. Joseph have teaching institutions
within its territory. 6 During the whole of its existence
the mission station has been conducted by Spanish
ecclesiastics, and it has done excellent work amongst the
aboriginals.
In Victoria, odd Spaniards can be traced back to the
early gold discoveries. In 1856, one Stephan Parer
arrived and commenced selling saveloys and hot potatoes
6. Birt’s Benedictine Pioneers in Australia (London, 1911). Australian
Catholic Directory, 19 27, p. 161.


to 44 late birds” in the streets of Melbourne. He was
followed by two or three brothers, and together they
took over the Duke’s Hotel, Bourke Street, where they
established an up-to-date restaurant, which is still in
existence, though now located in the next-door building,
Stephan is looked upon as father of the Spanish colony
in Victoria, which, by 1871, had attained to 136 souls.
In the middle of the eighties the then Mayor of Bendigo,
desirous of promoting tomato culture, introduced a
number of Spanish families, settling them at a place
named White Hill. Other Spanish tomato growers have
since settled near Echuca.
In 1881 there were, in the whole of Australia, only a
little over 400 Spaniards. During the next forty years
the annual increase averaged but a dozen. The
44 Southern European” immigration of recent years has
increased their number by a few hundred, who have
mostly gone to the cane-fields in Queensland.
In 1920 a descendant of one of the early Parers,
Lieutenant Raymond Parer, greatly distinguished him-
self by flying, in company with a dauntless Scotchman,
Lieutenant Macintosh, from London to Australia, arriv-
ing only a few weeks later than the Ross brothers.
THE PORTUGUESE.
The same reasons for the Spaniards not having
migrated to Australia in appreciable number apply
equally to the Portuguese. They, too, have naturally
preferred South America, particularly Brazil, where the
language is Portuguese. In 1891 there were only 428
of their kind in Australia, and that small number had
declined to 119 in 1921.


The best known Portuguese name is perhaps that of
Arthur Loureiro, an artist of considerable ability, who
lived in Melbourne for many years. One or two of his
pictures are preserved in the Art Gallery of that city.
The name of another Portuguese, De Fretas, is
associated with the so-called “eight o’clock rush.” De
Fretas, during the latter part of last century, was
licensee of the Mechanics’ Hotel, in Melbourne, and,
in addition, he conducted a restaurant. Every evening
at eight o’clock he fed free of charge scores of destitute
people with what was left over from the day, no one —
whatever their number —leaving his restaurant hungry.
Another fine example of true philanthropy was shown
a few years back, when a Portuguese wharf-labourer
in Melbourne, known amongst his comrades as Spanish
Jack, a middle-aged bachelor, took all his savings, some
£2OOO, and presented them to the Children’s Hospital.
THE RUSSIANS.
According to the last census before the breaking up
of the Russian Empire, that of 1911, there were 4456
Russians in Australia. How many came from particular
parts of the Czar's mighty realm was not ascertained.
At the taking of the census in 1921, the boundaries
between some of the new States had not been finally
determined, just as the vision of such brand-new political
entities as Estonia, Latvia, Azerbaijan, etc., was as yet
somewhat hazy in people’s minds. Differentiation was,
consequently, limited to Russians, Poles, and Finns.
The Russians in that year were given as 4138, dis-
tributed as follows:—New South Wales, 1444; Victoria,


943; Queensland, 1139; South Australia, 170; Western
Australia, 412; Tasmania, 21; Northern Territory, 9.
There were, in Queensland, a comparatively recent
element of true Russians, who, in the main, are an
agricultural people, whereas the Russians in the other
States were mostly of the Jewish race, living in towns.
This is borne out by the fact that in Queensland 44 per
cent, of the Russians lived in rural districts, compared
with 14 per cent, in the other States.
Apart from visiting artists, more especially famous
dancers, the Russians have been little heard of in Aus-
tralia. During latter years a small number of Russian
communists are alleged to have come to the Common-
wealth for the express purpose of propagating the doc-
trines of Bolshevism. The extreme political views held
by some trade unionists and an occasional parliamen-
tarian are ascribed to their influence. The accusation
that several labour leaders are taking their orders from
Moscow is probably exaggerated, even if it be admitted
that the Communist Party adheres to the Third Inter-
national, and in all likelihood is in close touch with the
world centre of this movement, and also with the Soviet
department, whose function it is to spread the com-
munistic creed. According to a list issued by the
Soviet Government two or three years ago, of adherents
to Bolshevism in the various countries, the number in
Australia was quite negligible.
THE POLES.
The number of Poles recorded in 1921 was 1780, of
whom 1206 were males and 574 females. About 80 per
cent, lived in towns and only 20 per cent, in rural


districts, which suggests that also far the greater
number of Poles are Hebrews. They were distributed
in the several States thus: —New South Wales, 717;
Victoria, 480; Queensland, 319; South Australia, 123;
Western Australia, 125; Tasmania, 12; Northern Terri-
tory, 4.
The fact of the highest peak in Australia and a moun-
tain range in Victoria bearing Polish names would point
to the Poles having played an important part in the
exploration of this country. This they have in the
person of Count Strzelecki.
Strzelecki was born in Polish Prussia in 1796. He was
educated in Heidelberg and Edinburgh, and was a much
travelled man when, in 1838, he arrived in Sydney. He
devoted himself to an exhaustive study of the Dividing
Range and its foothills. During his excursions he dis-
covered gold at two places, but at the request of Gover-
nor Gipps it was kept secret, the Governor fearing the
possible consequences were it made known to the
45,000 convicts under his care. Strzelecki scrupulously
omitted mentioning it in his work, Physical Description
of New South Wales and Tasmania (London, 1845).
In 1839 he discovered the Muniong Range and named
the highest peak Mount Kosciusko, after the Polish
patriot. Continuing, he traversed Gippsland, which he
so named after the Governor. Afterwards he spent two
years in exploration work in Tasmania, and returned to
England in 1843. His name is associated with a range
discovered by him near Westernport; an island in
Bass Strait, and a creek in South Australia.


Up to the census of 1921 Australian statisticians
treated the Finns as Russians. For this reason no
figures are available regarding their number till com-
paratively recently. In 1921 they totalled 1358, dis-
tributed amongst the various States as follows: —New
South Wales, 550; Victoria, 242; Queensland, 254;
South Australia, 161; Western Australia, 128; Tas-
mania, 23.
Very little is known about the sons and daughters
from “The Land of the Thousand Lakes” till about the
year 1900, when a few hundred Finnish communists
arrived. Their extreme political views had brought
down upon them the displeasure of the Russian authori-
ties, and to escape being persecuted they migrated to
Queensland, where they took up land at a place called
Bli Bli, near Nambour, about three hours' train journey
north of Brisbane. Gradually their communistic ardour
diminished, and their leader, Mr. Kurikka, was expelled
from the settlement. He returned to Finland, where he
founded a short-lived communistic paper, the first of its
kind there. The initial difficulties having been over-
come and cane-growing established, the settlement at
Bli Bli prospered, and it has during latter years
attracted a considerable number of lately-arrived com-
patriots. In Nambour a Finnish society has been
founded and a hall erected, where, on suitable occasions,
the Finns foregather.
The desire on the part of Finland to advertise her
newly-gained independence and to take her place
amongst other free nations, coupled with trade-ambition,
caused her shortly after the Peace Treaty of Versailles


to send out ambassadors and consular agents to different
parts of the world. One of the latter, Harald Tanner,
took up his headquarters in Sydney. Mr. Tanner was
greatly impressed with the opportunities Australia
offered for immigrants of the right type. He reported
to his Government in Helsingfors accordingly, and some
of these reports went into the Finnish press, with the
result that many farmers disposed of their properties
and departed for the “Paradise of the Sons of Toil” in
the far distant south. In the period 1922-1925 upwards
of one thousand arrived in Australia. In addition, a
large number of sailors deserted from Finnish ships in
Australian ports, and the captains of such vessels often
experienced great difficulties in manning them again.
To the Finnish Consul-General, himself a new-chum,
all these new arrivals constituted a serious problem, and
caused him to recommend to his Government that a
Finnish clergyman be sent out, and simultaneously he
issued warning against thoughtless migration. The
clergyman, on arrival, made Sydney his headquarters,
but afterwards moved to Melbourne, where he has since
remained, occasionally visiting Finnish centres in New
South Wales and Queensland.
The year 1926 has disclosed a considerable falling off
in Finnish migration to Australia; only about 125
arrived and 40 departed. Those who came in preceding
years have been absorbed, and very little is heard of
them. A considerable number found temporary employ-
ment in connection with the electric works at Yallourn,
Victoria, but have since scattered over the whole State.
Many went to the sugar fields in Queensland, and, in
addition to Bli Bli, they are now comparatively numer-
ous around Cairns and Innisfail. According to the


accounts received from the northern State, the Finns
have made a good impression, and their prospects are
stated to be good. In odd cases they have become
owners of their own sugar farms. The Royal Commis-
sion appointed in 1925 by the Queensland Government
wrote about the Finns: —
“ Among the Northern Europeans a number of
Finns have recently arrived in the Cairns district. A
few of these are farmers; others are field workers,
carpenters, and mechanics. Generally they are a
well educated, clean-living and industrious people. ”
THE GREEKS.
The Greeks, like other Southern Europeans, were slow
in discovering the attractions of Australia. In most of
the States they w r ere for a long time too few to be
specially recorded, and not till the census of 1891 do
we have comprehensive information regarding their
number and distribution. There were in that year 482
Greeks in this country. From then on they about
doubled every ten years, till 1921, when they totalled
3654. Between April, 1921, and December, 1926, the
arrivals were 4424. Making allowance for deaths and
departures, the Greek population in Australia on Ist
January, 1927, may be estimated at 7000. Most of the
Greeks who have arrived during later years have had
their passage paid by friends in Australia, who, in addi-
tion, have taken charge of them on arrival. They have,
therefore, been absorbed without any unpleasant inci-
dents. In the principal Greek centres, clubs have been
formed, and there are Greek Orthodox churches in


Sydney and Melbourne. In Sydney—the most cosmo-
politan of the State capitals—the Greeks are particu-
larly numerous, and two newspapers, the National Tri-
bune and the Hellenic Herald, are published there in
the Greek language.
The Greeks are, perhaps, the least popular foreigners
in Australia, for which three reasons have been sug-
gested— (1) the somewhat inglorious history of Greece
since its liberation from Turkish rule, (2) the many
low-class lodging houses, boarding houses, and occa-
sionally restaurants, conducted by Greeks, and (3) the
fact that with few exceptions the Greeks remain in the
cities, and when they have become well-to-do generally
return to Greece.
Those Australians who have had little contact with
the Greeks naturally judge them by what they read
about their country. The happenings in Greece during
the last fifty years have not been such as would arouse
enthusiasm. The first king was expelled, the second
assassinated, the third and fourth expelled; twice the
Greeks provoked war with and invaded Turkey, and on
both occasions they were sent in headlong flight back
over their own borders; Greek statesmen rise and fall
with the rapidity of meteors, and Greek governments are
about as stable as spinning tops. Unfortunately for the
Greeks in Australia, much less has been heard of the
truly marvellous work performed by their nation in
settling the one and a half million refugees from Asia
Minor, who crowded into Macedonia and old Greece
before and after the agreement at Lausanne.
The Greek lodging and boarding houses have
gained a bad reputation for over-crowding and lack
of cleanliness, though the Greeks are not the only


sinners in this respect. Mr. Ferry, after his previously
referred to investigation of conditions in the sugar
districts, made some very scathing remarks about Greek
lodging houses and cafes in the north; he also stated
that the Greeks do not engage in agriculture. In de-
fence of his countrymen, the Consul-General for Greece
furnished an article to the Daily Standard for 29th
June, 1925, based on information received from the
Hellenic Society of North Queensland. In it he stated
that out of 250 Greeks in the Innisfail district, 17 were
owners of cane farms, and 180 were employed in farm-
ing. Attention should also be drawn to the fact that
a Greek started the salt-industry in Darwin, and that
as fishermen in various parts of Australia a number
of Greeks have entered the ranks of primary producers.
Nevertheless it cannot be denied that the large ma-
jority of the Greeks remain in the cities, where they
have got a much firmer grip on the fish trade and the
retail fruit trade than the Italians ever had. Most of
the fish-and-chip shops and the oyster saloons are in
their hands. The best of these, surrounded by a distinct
Mediterranean atmosphere, form an interesting and not
unpleasant patch in Australian city life. We would
miss the Greeks, if they left us; yet, it is not city dwellers
Australia is in need of.
JUGO-SLAYS, MALTESE, AND ALBANIANS.
It is, as previously suggested, probably due to the
restriction introduced by the United States on immi-
gration during latter years that the attention of south-
ern Europeans has been directed to Australia. In any
case immigrants from places heretofore hardly heard of,


such as Jugo-Slavia and Albania, commenced to arrive.
Many of the southern Europeans, being destitute and
without work to go to, became a burden on the public
purse. It was feared that those already in the country
were the vanguard of a large influx of immigrants who,
rightly or wrongly, were considered difficult to assimi-
late, and were more likely than not to lower the stan-
dard of living. Various regulations were therefore
introduced in order to check their flow. 7
In 1921 there were only 829 Jugo-Slavs in Australia,
of whom 524 had settled in the western State. Since
then their number has increased by a little over 3000.
Small groups of Maltese had entered the Common-
wealth before the war without administrative inter-
ference, but in 1916 rumours were circulated in Aus-
tralia that an effort would be made by interested parties
to introduce “cheap labour' ’ to take the place of the
men withdrawn from the industry for active service
abroad. Soon after the rumours became current, a
French mail-steamer was reported off Fremantle with
about 200 Maltese immigrants aboard. W. M. Hughes,
then Prime Minister, being anxious not to prejudice
the conscription issue then before the people, informed
the captain of the vessel that the immigrants would not
be allowed to land; and so for almost six months the
unfortunate Maltese, taken first to New Caledonia by
arrangement with the French Government, and later
brought to Sydney and detained on a hulk in the
harbour (no transport being available to return them
to their country of origin), suffered much distress until
they were finally admitted under certain guarantees
of employment. No more Maltese were admitted during
o
7- See Appendix.


the war; but as already stated, arrangement has since
been made for restricted immigration of these people.
In 1921 they numbered 1325, of whom 623 were in
New South Wales. During the last four years 1318
new arrivals have been recorded.
The Albanians, though occasionally referred to in the
press, are very few. The greatest number who landed
in any one year was in 1924, when 176 arrived. The
total number recorded for the three years ended De-
cember 1926 w T as 235.
Too little time has lapsed for much to be said about
the Jugo-Slavs, the Maltese, and the Albanians, but
particularly the Jugo-Slavs and the Albanians, being in
the main Alpines, should prove a valuable addition to
Australia’s rural population.
VANGUARD OF BALTIC IMMIGRATION.
While a sprinkling of immigrants from Czecho-
slovakia have been recorded since the middle of 1924,
the first Esthonians heard of officially in Australia
arrived in the French mail steamer, Yille de Strasbourg ,
as recently as April, 1927. Another contingent arrived
some weeks later in the Cephee, also French, bringing
their number up to 350 during the first six months of
the present year; of these newcomers, 255 were males
and 95 females. Simultaneous with the Esthonians, 14
Letts and 8 Lithuanians arrived. Now that they have
made a start, more of their kind may be expected to
find their way to Australia, yet it is hardly likely a
Baltic migration will assume alarming proportions. To-
gether, Esthonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, though cover-
ing an area nearly as big as Italy, number only about
eight million people, mostly of the Alpine strain.


It appears that the sudden influx of Esthonians is
due to glowing accounts spread by one of their country-
men, who made his living in Australia for many years
as a surveyor. Recently he returned to his homeland
and has since lectured on the vast possibilities of Aus-
tralia and the chances of gaining wealth there.


THE JEWS.
The Jews range in a category apart from that of
nationality. Those who settled in Australia came from
many different parts of the globe. Some claimed British
nationality, others German, Polish, Russian and so forth.
The bond of common creed quickly merged them into
a composite body, and the Jews early founded communi-
ties which, though not unassailable, have proved much
stronger than those based on nationality. Racially the
Jews are classed amongst the Southern Caucasians, a
term identical with that of the Mediterranean sub-
division of the white race.
Brief Historical Sketch .
While every Bible student is familiar with the early
history of the Jewish race, beyond the facts that after
the conquest of Palestine by the Romans the Jews were
dispersed and became outcasts in many lands, few are
acquainted with what really took place. Yet, it is that
part of their history which has mainly made the Jews
what they are to-day, just as it is ignorance of it that
causes the race to be so little understood.
The opening pages of this second chapter of their
history was not at all unfavourable to the Jews. They
remained within the Roman Empire, and attained citi-
zenship with right to peaceful pursuance of whatever


vocation they chose, and of worshipping their God in
their own fashion. Nor did their position greatly alter
during the reign of the early Christian Emperors,
whose subjects were still largely pagans. So soon, how-
ever, as the Church obtained temporal sway, religious
intolerance commenced to manifest itself. The Jews
showing unwillingness in mass to embrace the Christian
religion, the Church Council became embittered and
opposed peaceful intercourse with them. Marriages
between Jews and Christians were interdicted, a Chris-
tian was not allowed to eat with a Jew nor to be in
his employ. Under such influence the Emperors issued
successive decrees depriving the Jew r s of municipal
rights, expelling them from the army, excluding them
from public service and so forth, till under the Emperors
Honorius and Arcadius in the year 430 they were
divested of all civil rights.
During the last stages of the break up of the Roman
Empire the Jews enjoyed a period of respite, and under
Charlemagne they regained some of their lost rights,
including that of owning land; but with the rise of
feudalism and the growing power of the Church their
lot became harder and more humiliating than ever.
Feudalism split up the aggregate society into many
separate bodies and assigned to each a particular
position and constitution with specific rights and privi-
leges. Only for the Jews no provision was made.
Neither amongst the nobles, nor in the guilds of the
towns, nor under the serfdom of the peasant did the
system concede a place to the Hebrew. He was a des-
pised alien, and only by the grace of the Sovereign was
he permitted to wander, footsore and weary from place
to place, as hawker, pedlar, and money lender.


The religious fervour which from the latter end of the
11th century swept over Huropo and resulted in the
Crusades, first turned, against the Jews. It was remem-
bered with uncanny vividness that their forefathers
had caused the Saviour lo be crucified. Those who could
not lice from the tempest to Moravia, Poland, and the
eastern shores of the Baltic as yet more or less heathen
countries were massacred in great numbers. After the
Crusades the belief gained ground that the Hebrews
used the blood of Christian children in connection with
their religions riles, and (his was a new cause for mob
violence. After tin* Reformation, when Catholics and
Protestants were engrossed in destroying each other, the
animosity against the Jews abated; yet, it was not till
after the French Revolution that ordinary rights as
human beings were accorded them.
In Mohammedan countries more tolerance was shown
towards the Jewish race. There they practised their
religion unmolested and were even admitted to such
public positions as were associated with finance. For
this reason many Jews settled in Spain after the con-
quest of that country by the Moors, and while in
Christian lands they were kept poor and ignorant, and
were converted into knaves by highly placed spend-
thrifts and unscrupulous lax gatherers, in Spain they
prospered and attained a high literary, social, and scien-
tific position. After the subjugation and expulsion of
the Moors, the Jews to the number of 300,000 were
driven out of the country. Some went to Turkey and
others to the Netherlands, at which latter place, owing
to a mutual hatred of the Spaniards, they were tolerated.
Three times they were driven from France and recalled.


From England they were expelled in 1290. They were
re-admitted under Cromwell with the result that many
from the Netherlands crossed the Channel, their num-
ber afterwards being augmented from Moravia, Poland,
and the Baltic provinces.
Such in brief is the history of the Jews since their
dispersion. Their one great offence was that they clung
to the religion of their fathers. Whether it be due to
exceptional fidelity in the Jewish character, or to the
obstinacy against coercion inherent in human nature,
for that offence they suffered persecution during fifteen
centuries.
We now understand why the Jews do not settle on
the land. Originally they were a pastoral people. After
their return from Egypt they developed agriculture,
though being Mediterraneans they probably did not
become very proficient farmers. However that may be,
for some fifty generations subsequent to misfortune
falling upon them they were cut off from the land and,
naturally, such inclination and ability for rural pursuits
as they once may have possessed were eliminated. Simul-
taneously the conditions under which they lived de-
veloped their gift for commerce and finance in a high
degree. To survive, the Jews had to use their wit. The
dull and sluggish amongst them perished. The conse-
quence of this continual weeding out of the unfit and
the less fit has been an exceptionally vigorous, alert,
and gifted race. Their ambition to distinguish them-
selves may be ascribed to racial pride, a natural sequence
of antecedent humiliation of a high-spirited people. The
desire to render service—a notable trait in many of
their race—is perhaps due to a conscious or sub-conscious


sense of gratitude for the elimination of distinction be-
tween Jew and Gentile, even if it be admitted that this
is only belated justice. Being unsuited for rural pur-
suits, it is no loss to a country that they do not settle
on the land, whereas the benefits bestowed by their
genius in other directions on many a nation of which
they became part are real and lasting.
The Jews in Australia.
The first reference to a Jewish element in Australia
was in 1817, when 20 Jews in New South Wales formed
themselves into a society for the interment of their dead.
Their number and resources gradually increased, and
in 1830 the first congregation was formed, representing
a Jewish population of approximately 300 souls. Two
years later the first synagogue was erected in Sydney,
and simultaneously a grant of land was obtained for
a burial place. A Hebrew philanthropic society was
founded in 1833, while in 1843 a ladies 7 maternity
society was organized. This is claimed to be the oldest
women's organization in Australia. Several other
philanthropic institutions have since been added, and in
1842 the first Jewish newspaper, The Voice of Jacob,
appeared.
In the other colonies also the Jews arrived at an
early date. In Melbourne the first Jewish divine service
was held four years after Batman pitched his tent on
the banks of the River Yarra. In 1846 they numbered
117, but not till 1853 were they sufficiently numerous
to lay the foundation stone of a synagogue. By 1856
they had increased to about 1500, and in that year the
first Jewish philanthropic society was founded. In
South Australia, though Jews are known to have arrived


in Adelaide two years after its foundation and to have
met for divine worship, not till 1848 were they in
sufficient number to form a permanent congregation.
Two years later the first synagogue was consecrated. In
1852 a philanthropic society was formed and a grant
of land obtained for a burial place. In Queensland
there were Jews before its separation from New South
Wales, but their number was very small, and not till
1867 was a cottage in Brisbane fitted up as a synagogue.
In 1886 the present synagogue in Margaret Street was
consecrated. Though also in Western Australia odd
Jews settled at an early date, a Jewish congregation
was not founded in Perth till 1892. The gold discoveries
in the nineties brought many Jews to the western State,
and even at remote Coolgardie a Jewish congregation
was founded. The passing of the climax of AVestern
Australia’s prosperity caused the inflow of Hebrews to
cease. In Tasmania there was a considerable number
of Jews in the middle of last century, and the congre-
gation in Hobart was at one time only considered second
to that in Sydney. A benevolent institution in Hobart
was founded in 1847. The Jews in Tasmania declined
during the next thirty years, and at the census of 1891
only 84 were recorded.
Prom what has been said above it will be seen that
the Jews, who in the beginning mainly came from
England, were amongst the earliest colonists in Aus-
tralia. The gold discoveries in the fifties rapidly in-
creased their numbers in Victoria and New South Wales,
and in these two States Judaism has mainly centred
since. Sydney especially promises to be for the Jews
in Australia what New York is for the Jews in the
United States. Not only do 40 per cent, of the twenty
odd thousand Jews in this country live in Sydney, but


Judaism is particularly virile there. Two Hebrew
papers are published in Sydney, the Hebrew Standard
and the Australian Jewish Chronicle, and there are
eight Jewish charitable organizations and a Board of
Jewish Education. In 1923, on Armistice Day, the
Maccabean Hall was opened at Darlinghurst, as a New
South Wales Jewish war memorial, affording a home
for the numerous Jewish clubs and young people’s
movements.
Compared with the 40 per cent, of the Australian
Jews in Sydney, there are only about 32 per cent, in
Melbourne, and whereas during the period 1911 to 1921
they increased in Sydney by 33 per cent., they only
increased in Melbourne by 22 per cent.; nor does Juda-
ism show quite the same intensity in Victoria’s metropo-
lis. There are the usual Jewish charitable organiza-
tions, a Hebrew newspaper, and three or four
synagogues. The strongest congregation is found in St.
Kilda, which suburb is particularly favoured by the
Jews. It has become a popular saying that the English
have their St. George, the Scotch their St. Andrew,
the Irish their St. Patrick, and the Jews their St.
Kilda.
It is interesting to notice how the Jews gradually
congregate in the big cities, probably because their com-
mercial talents find greater scope there. According
to the census of 1921 upwards of 87 per cent, lived
in the capital cities, distributed as follows:
Sydney 40 per cent.
Melbourne 32
Perth 7.4 „ ”
Brisbane 3.5 ~
Adelaide 3.3 „ „
Hobart 5 „ „
Of the remaining 13.5 per cent., 7.5 per cent, lived
in provincial towns, and 5 per cent, in rural districts.


The balance of .5 per cent, were travelling in boats and
trains on the night the census was taken.
On the outskirt of Judaism, both from the geographi-
cal point of view and the spiritual, the Jews are con-
tinually merging with other races and creeds. Towns
like Rockhampton, Toowoomba, Maitland, Launceston
and others had once Jewish congregations, but have none
to-day. Either the Jews have left these places for the
bigger cities or, through intermarriage with Christians,
have lost their Hebrew identity.
The same tendency to intermarry with the people
amongst whom they live as is shown by the Jews in all
countries where unjust laws do not throw them back
on themselves, is in a marked degree noticeable in
Australia. In 1921 30 per cent, of the married Jewish
men had taken Christian wives. The Jewish ladies ex-
hibited greater conservatism, yet 17 per cent, had
Christian husbands. Marriages between Jews and Ro-
man Catholics are less common than between Jews and
Protestants, the proportion being 17 to 83. The Hebrew
language is only used in connection with religious ser-
vice, in the same way as Latin is used in Catholic
churches, and only for the purpose of worship is it
taught to the rising generations. Though Judaism in
Australia hitherto has held its ground—owing, probably,
to the steady infusion of fresh blood from overseas
countries —the possibility of eventually being absorbed
is by no means an imaginary one.
The Jews are sometimes blamed for being a race of
middlemen, just as “Jew” and “Usurer” have become
synonymous terms. As stated before, it is true that
in Australia as elsewhere, one rarely meets a Jew tilling
the soil or engaged in any other primary industry. It
is also true that money-lending is largely monopolized


by them, and that many smart under their exactions.
The expeiience of pitiful persecution the race has passed
through has hardened many of the Jews. Yet, while
to a Jew Business is Business’ ’ the often passionate
desire for making big profit is not necessarily tanta-
mount to a desire for hoarding gold. None look after
their poor as the Jews do, in which respect they out-
rival both Freemason and Catholic organizations. Yet,
besides looking after their own they give generously
to charities of a general character. It is stated, prob-
ably with a great deal of truth, that many of Britain’s
chai itable institutions could not be kept going were it
not for the liberal support of wealthy Jews. Their
friendly care for one another, at least in Australia,
explains why one rarely sees a Jew “down and out.”
Y hile many of the immigrant Jews who, in days
gone by, settled in this country, were none too enlight-
ened, and while their existence in their stuffy little
second-hand clothing booths were sordid enough, they
entertained a commendable desire to give their chil-
dien a better chance in life than they themselves had
expei ienced. Often with considerable self-sacrifice they
procured for them the best education obtainable. Hence
in regard to culture the native born Jews—in 1921
numbering about 13,000 —hold their own with anybody.
As, in addition, they are public-spirited to a degree,
a list of those who have become prominent or rendered
outstanding service to the community would be a lengthy
one. The list would include artists, scientists, soldiers,
men of commerce, and of the learned professions, and
men of politics.
In music Dr. Isaac Nathan deserves special mention.
He was born in England and became a personal friend
of Lord Byron. It was probably at his request that


Byron wrote the text of Hebrew Melodies, which he
himself afterwards, set to music. He arrived in Sydney
in 1841 and inaugurated oratorio in Australia at St.
Mary’s Cathedral. For 23 years he exercised a refining
influence on musical art, and he has rightly been called
the father of music in Australia. Alberto Zelman, re-
ferred to under the Italians, was of Jewish extraction.
In law the names of Justice Isaacs, Justice H, E.
Cohen, and Judge Cohen are familiar.
In finance none ranks higher than George Judah
Cohen, chairman of the Commercial Banking
New South Wales.
In business none are better known than Sidney Myer,
the founder of Myer’s Emporium. Interested in learn-
ing as well as in business Myer recently bestowed a
gift valued at nearly £50,000 on the Melbourne Uni-
versity.
In politics the Jews have always evinced conspicuous
interest, and names such as Sir Saul Samuel, Sir Julian
Salomons, V., L. Salomon, N. Levi, J. Sternberg, Daniel
Levy, and many others, will long be remembered.
Among soldiers the name of Sir John Monash will
live for ever. The General in question is an engineer
by profession and he proved one of the “finds” of
the Great War. Sir John is now head of the Electricity
Commission of the State of Victoria, a huge under-
taking having for its object the supply of electricity
throughout the whole State.
During the war the Jews in Australia gave a particu-
larly fine account of themselves, both in regard to the
number enlisted, and to the part played at the different
battle fronts. In all ranks they served with distinction,
and they point with justifiable pride to the fact that
a Jew led the Australian army to victory as Generalis-
simo.


THE YELLOW RACE.
THE CHINESE.
The Coming of the Chinese—Racial Conflict,
Just as in the early period of American history the
United States, through shortsightedness, sowed the seed
of the colour problem which in time has grown to such
formidable dimensions that no solution seems possible,
so in a large measure Australia had herself to blame
for what, during more than forty years, was known
as the Chinese problem.
Here, as in America, it started owing to a shortage
of labour. The last convicts came to New South Wales
in 1840, and the supply of cheap labour from that
source gradually dried up. Between 1837 and 1839
some of the pastoralists had already obtained coolies
from India, but as objection was raised by the authori-
ties to the importation of Indians this practice was
discontinued. Towards the end of the forties employers
began to introduce labourers from China. This con-
tinued to 1852 or 1853 and only ceased because it
became unprofitable. The lure of the goldfields proved
irresistible to the Chinese, and they deserted from their
employers as fast as they could be brought from over-
seas. As no complete records were kept of the Chinese
imported, their number is not known, but it must have
been fairly large, because the Consul in Amoy wrote
in 1852 that 2666 had been taken thence to Australia,
of whom 1438 left in 1851.


The same expedient of importing Chinese coolies to
help develop the country was adopted by the Govern-
ment of Western Australia in 1878 when, as a first
instalment, fifty were indentured. Four years earlier
the South Australian Government had imported 200
Chinese to assist in promoting tropical agriculture in
the Northern Territory.
Up to the time of the discovery of gold the number
of Chinese who came to Australia on their own account
was quite negligible; thus between 1846 and 1849 only
28 arrived in New South Wales. The vellow tide set
«/
in in the fifties. For that also the white race had
themselves to blame, by reason of the opportunities for
getting rich quick on the Australian goldfields were
advertised in Chinese seaport towns by Australian
shipping companies trading between China and Aus-
tralia, who greatly profited by carrying immigrants.
As the richest mines were found in Victoria it is but
natural that the yellow wave struck that colony with
particular force. The number of 2341 Chinese in 1854
had increased to 25,424 in 1857, and it is stated that
by 1859 there were 42,000 on the goldfields of Victoria.
It is doubtful if their number ever exceeded 35,000,
still, it was large enough to call forth emphatic protests
from European miners, and to make alarmists loudly
proclaim that Australia was fast becoming a yellow
man’s land. Under the circumstances violent clashes
between the two races were unavoidable.
The first serious trouble arose on the Bendigo gold-
field, in 1854. At a public meeting held there in the
month of June it was moved that “a general and unani-
mous rising should take place in the various gullies of
Bendigo on 4th July next (the anniversary of the


American day of liberation), for the purpose of driving
the Chinese population off the Bendigo goldfields.” The
disturbance was prevented by the prompt action of the
authorities and a tactful handling of the whole delicate
situation; but it had become evident to the Government
that a policy of drift would lead to disaster. So a Royal
Commission was appointed to look into the matter and
make recommendations in order to avoid unpleasant
complications in the future. The result was the passing
of an Act, in 1855, to restrict Chinese immigration.
By this the number of Chinese who could be brought
in any vessel was limited to one for every ten tons
of registered tonnage, and a capitation fee of £lO was
imposed, for the payment of which the captain was
made responsible.
Unfortunately the Victorian Restriction Act did not
result in a decline in the number of arrivals, since the
masters of the vessels timely unloaded their cargoes
of yellow humanity in the adjoining colonies, whence
they rapidly found their way into Victoria, incidentally
escaping paying the entrance fee. Thus in the first six
months of 1857 no fewer than 14,486 were landed in
Guichen Bay, South Australia, in due course to shout
their Mokkahaia on the Victorian goldfields. The Gov-
ernment’s incompetence to deal with what from the
point of view of the European miners was becoming a
serious menace, caused the agitation against the Chinese
to be revived, till at last the smouldering fire broke out
in open flame. This occurred on the Buckland River
goldfield in 1857. An indignation meeting was held,
the American Day of Deliverance being again chosen
as the most suitable for hoisting the flag of revolt.
Action followed upon fiery words, and the white miners


ill a body attacked the Chinese mining camps, burnt
their tents and threw what they contained in the way
of bedding and luggage into the river. The panic-
stricken Celestials, after some rough handling, were
chased into the bush across the river, where some of
them succumbed from the exposure to the cold weather.
The police intervened and restored order, and the ring-
leaders of the riot were arrested; but so strong was the
feeling against the Chinese that the Crown failed to
procure a conviction, the jury finding the defendants
“not guilty.” A reaction set in in favour of the un-
fortunate Chinese miners, however, who soon were back
on the fields, for the time being protected by public
opinion.
The rioters achieved one of their objects, namely, that
of arousing the Government to the necessity of taking
more drastic measures to stem Chinese immigration.
As this, however, was well nigh impossible as long as
the neighbouring colonies kept backdoors open through
which the undesired newcomers could enter Victoria
with impunity, New South Wales and South Australia
were asked to restrict Chinese immigration on similar
lines to those adopted by Victoria in 1855. South Aus-
tralia as a good neighbour at once complied with the
request. Fewer Chinese passed through New South
Wales, and for other reasons the Government of the
mother colony hesitated to act, till their own house
caught fire.
This it did in 1861. With the discovery of rich gold
at Lambing Flat a great number of miners, white and
yellow alike, left Victoria and trekked to New South
Wales. The usual clash between the two races occurred.
The European miners petitioned the Government to


restrict Chinese immigration and, as nothing was done,
they took matters into their own hands. A meeting
was held at which the question was put: “Is this to be
a European Digging or a Mongol Territory V 9 From
the meeting the most turbulent of the miners marched
to the Chinese camp with banners flying and bands
playing. The terrified Chinese fled before the attackers.
There was the same pillage, and burning, and ill-usage
as on the Buckland River several years before, and
order was not finally restored till soldiers had been
dispatched to the scene of disorder. As, however, the
number of Chinese miners kept on increasing, and the
Government chose the role of silent onlookers, a fresh
riot broke out a few months later. The police vainly
endeavoured to quell the disturbance. One European
miner was shot dead and several on both sides were
wounded. Also on this occasion a military force had
to intervene. The unfortunate Chinese took refuge
where they could. One New South Wales squatter sup-
plied over 1200 destitute Chinese with the necessaries
of life for several weeks. To avoid further trouble
the Government at last passed a Chinese Immigration
Restriction Act, whereby New South Wales was brought
into line with Victoria and South Australia.
These Acts soon proved effective; the Chinese popu-
lation declined to such an extent that eventually re-
strictive measures were considered unnecessary. No
alarm was felt again till the middle of the seventies —
this time in Queensland.
The discovery of gold in that colony and particularly
of the rich alluvial deposits at Palmers was the signal
for a big influx of Chinese. During the last nine months
of 1875 no less than 7000 mining licences were issued


to these people on the Palmer goldfield. By 1877 they
had increased to 17,000 and, the European miners only
numbering about 1400, it looked as if the yellow race
was taking possession of the field. Further, scared by
the fatal results in America of the Chinese migration to
California, the Queensland Government in 1876 passed
an Act whereby the licence fee for Chinese was raised
very considerably, it being hoped thereby to discourage
more of their kind from seeking their fortune in
Queensland.
The above Act, by the way, was unexpectedly reserved
by the Governor. In his opinion it was at variance
with Britain’s treaty obligation to China and offensive
to a friendly Power. The Governor referred the matter
to the Colonial Office, which upheld his action. This
attitude of the British Government was greatly resented,
not merely in Queensland but in other colonies as an
interference in a purely Australian affair, and after
much turmoil, augmented by a seaman’s strike in 1878
against employing Chinese crews in Australian vessels,
and by a sudden fear of a mass influx of Chinese in
consequence of the Pacific coast of America having been
closed to them, it led to concerted action. An inter-
colonial conference was held in Melbourne in 1880 to
discuss the whole problem of Chinese immigration to
Australia. The conference terminated in Sydney in
1881, and resulted in fairly uniform restrictive legis-
lation being enacted in all the colonies exposed to the
yellow peril. Tasmania stood out until, in 1885, gold and
tin were discovered there, and an influx of Chinese was
anticipated. The then Crown Colony of Western Aus-
tralia likewise kept aloof until, in 1886, gold was found
in Kimberley, and simultaneously it seemed as if the


pearling industry at Shark's Bay was passing into
Chinese hands.
Space in a single chapter does not permit of full de-
tails being given regarding the happenings during the
next ten years. Various factors contributed to the desire
gaining strength of entirely closing Australia to
Chinese immigration, the result being that at a second
intercolonial conference, held in 1891, the passenger
limitation was raised to one passenger to every 500 tons
ship's burden. By a gradual evolution of the White
Australia idea, the Immigration Act passed by the Fede-
ral Parliament in 1901 practically excluded all Asiatics
from entering the Commonwealth. 1
Their Doings and Decline.
As will be seen from the accompanying graph the
Chinese population in this country is rapidly declining.
At the census of 1921 only a little over 17,000 full-
blood persons were recorded. Of these about 2000 were
born in Australia. Though from time to time it is
discovered that a few Chinese are still trickling into
this country, on forged naturalization papers and by
other illegal means, the number of such is probably so
small that, providing no unforeseen external event com-
pletely changes Australia’s future, the day when only
locally born Chinese and half-castes are left is not far
distant. Considering the fact that at a time when the
European population in Australia numbered little more
than a million, there were upwards of 40,000 Chinese,
it seems at first incredible that instead of gradually
disappearing they should not long ago have been so
strongly intrenched that the White Australia policy
i. History of White Australia Policy, Myra Willard.


1856 1861 1871 1881 1891 1901 1911
4Q.nnnn I I I I I I ITT I I I I I IT | I I I I [ I 1 M I l-l-l |-j | H l l 4a9W
35.000 zzz~^zzz^s,~zzzzzzzzz~?zzzzzzzzzzzzzt'iz~zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz 25,000
3aooo — 30,000
25.000 -- “iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii_-s“iiiiiiiiiii 25 ’ 000
i: ii —i
i;tiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiii=iiiiiiii=iiiiii=============^^===--
200*30- -N~iill‘liiiliiiliiii— iiiiiiii—II~III'IIIIII _ I"-IIII 20000
15.000 J II — II V IIII— IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII 15,000
10,000 1 iiii^ iiii~ iiii^ muiiii^iiiiiiiii mu mu 10000
5000 Northern Territory “ 5000
I_. y 1 — P' — — J— — — |— 1-|— [—1~~ ~T~ — = = — — “
1854 1861 1871 1881 1891 1901 1911 1921
CHINESE IN AUSTRALIA


would have been impossible. The explanation is that
they came here to make money and not to settle. One
of the objections taken to them during early digging
days in Victoria was that they “sent their gold to
China, thereby showing they took no interest in develop-
ing the country/’ Always having it in their mind
sooner or later to return to their beloved native land,
and there at the end of their earthly career to be laid
to rest alongside their ancestors in the sacred soil of
China, they did not bring their womenfolk with them.
At the census in 1861 there were 24,724 Chinese males
in Victoria and only 8 females. The same disproportion
between the sexes existed in all the other States. Nor
has it materially altered since. Thus in 1921 the immi-
grant Chinese males numbered 14,820 and the females
only 237.
But fortune did not smile upon all the Chinese who
proceeded to Australia, while there may have been other
reasons for some hot returning to China. These re-
mained, and as alluvial gold mining gradually petered
out, those who directly or indirectly had lived by it
began to launch out in other directions. They soon
entered all different walks of life. Often they became
a thorn in the flesh of the European workers who, with
their higher standard of living, could not compete
against them. Various vocations, such as market gar-
dening and cabinet making, were in a large measure
monopolized by them.
The following extract from the census report of 1911
shows how the Chinese are mainly employed 2 : —
2. At the census taken in Australia during last century little attention
was paid to the subject of “race.” Even in The Census and Statistics Act
of 1905 it is not mentioned as one of the items of inquiry. Owing, how-
ever, to a growing interest in the persons of non-European race, it was at
the census of 19n made one of the “prescribed matters.”


Of the total of 21,856 Chinese males in that year,
21,140, or nearly 97 per cent, were breadwinners, of
whom more than half were employed as primary pro-
ducers. Agricultural pursuits accounted for 9125, of
whom 7315 were market gardeners. The number em-
ployed in industrial pursuits was 2709, of whom no
fewer than 1926 were engaged in the manufacture of
furniture. Merchants, storekeepers, and dealers un-
defined accounted for 1717, while dealers in food, drinks,
narcotics, and stimulants totalled 1597. Included in
this latter were 1220 greengrocers and fruiterers, and
217 grocers. The total employed in mining was 1598,
of whom by far the greater number were engaged
in gold and tin mining. The total engaged in
domestic service and attendance was 1312, of whom 622
were laundrymen, and 590 were house servants. In
pastoral pursuits 939 were employed, of whom 856 were
station hands. Traffics on seas and rivers accounted for
917, mainly employed as seamen, stokers, stewards, and
ships’ servants. The only other large group was that
of 655 engaged in supplying board and lodging. These
consisted mainly of cooks and other servants employed
in hotels, coffee palaces, restaurants, boarding houses,
etc.
The half-castes were employed much the same as the
full-bloods, but the proportion of dependents was con-
siderably larger.
At the taking of the census of 1921, 1116 Chinese were
employers of labour; 5123 worked on their own account,
and 7543 were wage earners.
Since 1911 the vocational proportions of the Chinese
have altered in one or two respects. This is particularly
noticeable in the furniture trade. Long hours and


small wages at first enabled the Chinese furniture
makers to force the Europeans out of the trade. When,
to protect European employers, wages regulations were
made applicable to the Chinese, such regulations were
counteracted by the introduction of a system of piece-
work, whereby production was intensified. During latter
years, however, most of the big furniture warehouses
have established their own up-to-date factories, pro-
vided with the best time-saving machinery. Against
these tne small Chinese craftsman is unable to compete.
It is now the turn of the Chinese to be squeezed out,
and many are seeking new avenues of making a liveli-
hood, or are returning to China.
Something similar has happened to the Chinese mar-
ket gardeners. Once they produced most of the vege-
tables consumed in the cities and townships of Australia,
but in spite of their marvellous thrift they are unable
to hold their own with Europeans, who possess bigger
areas and employ up-to-date implements. So the Chinese,
by nature small holders and utterly conservative
in their methods, give up gardening and switch over to
business, for which their natural politeness and integrity
make them eminently suited. Most of the vegetables
now sold by the Chinese in the markets or hawked
round in the streets are grown by Europeans. With
vegetables they often combine the vending of fruit; the
most energetic of them become wholesale dealers, and
this, in conjunction with the fact that until barred by
the Queensland Government shortly after the war, the
Chinese were Australia’s principal banana growers, has
resulted in the wholesale fruit trade now mainly being
conducted by the Chinese. Apart from the wholesale
fruit vending, much, if not most, of Australia’s import


and export trade with China has always been in the
hands of local Chinese firms.
In regard to the social position of the Chinese the
change which has taken place in the portion of Australia
situated, roughly, south of the Capricorn is still more
striking. While in the beginning the objection to the
influx of Chinese was of an ecomonic nature and, in
the spirit of self-preservation, raised with greatest force
by the labouring class, it was soon reinforced by social
considerations. Racial contrasts and all which such
contrasts stand for in the way of thinking and mode of
living, intensified by linguistic difficulties, was an ob-
stacle to the free and easy mingling of the two races.
The Chinese formed communities within the community,
living in isolated camps or secluded parts of the cities,
much after the style cherished in their homeland for
thousands of years. Each little Chinatown had its
opium dens and gambling dens and all the other para-
phernalia of the East. White women, whose self-respect
had been weakened through hectic living or the de-
grading influence of slum existence, were irresistibly
drawn towards the Chinese quarters, where their march
towards self-destruction was accelerated, or they blos-
somed out as the legally wedded spouses of Chinese
husbands. Also whites of the male sex, who socially
and morally were on the down grade, often found a
harbour amongst the Chinese, and, as in addition their
quarters decennium after decennium remained squalid,
insanitary, and mystifying, these came to be looked
upon as social plague spots, where all that shunned the
light of day was perpetrated. In the north, conditions
have not altered much since the Chinese first got a
footing, and there they are still a handicap to social
progress, but in the south matters are entirely different.


The ban in 1906 put on the importation of opium into
Australia —following on a deputation by the Chinese
themselves to the then Prime Minister, Alfred Deakin
—together with the difficulty of evading the law in the
great centres of population, has practically put an end
to opium smoking. Also the gambling dens have been
suppressed; and simultaneously sanitary innovations
and health measures introduced by the various muni-
cipal bodies have caused other objectionable features
of the Chinese quarters to disappear.
Less noticeable to the casual observer is the change
wrought in the human material. The immigrant Chinese
are dying out, or, when able to do so, returning to
China with their hard earned cash, often to join wives,
who, with the fidelity characteristic of the Chinese
women, have waited patiently for them thirty years
and more. Their places are to a limited extent taken
by the Australian-born Chinaman, and by those of
mixed offspring—numbering upwards of 4000—who,
owing to their mothers having been ostracised by their
own race, are thrown back on the Chinese community.
This younger generation is gradually becoming west-
ernized. The Chinese children frequent the State
schools, where no difference is made between them and
European children. The full-blood may in their homes
learn to speak Chinese, but only odd ones, sent to
China to finish their education, learn to read and write
it. In the case of the hybrids they seldom know any
other language than English. It is an interesting fact
that in Melbourne the only school for teaching the
Chinese language is conducted by the Presbyterian
Church, with a European as teacher. Having finished
in the State schools, a number of Chinese children are


sent to higher schools, particularly to those imparting
technical knowledge, and a few eventually enter the
universities. There are now Chinese in all the higher
professions, and though their number is small, it is not
out of proportion to the number of Chinese residents.
As with their language so wdth their religious creeds;
Taoism, Confucianism, and Buddhism are gradually
being replaced by the various forms of the Christian
faith. Thus in Melbourne the Chinese have an Angli-
can church, a Presbyterian church, a Methodist church,
and a Church of Christ, where services are rendered
alternately in their own language and in English. As
against these there is only one non-Christian place of
worship.
Other evidence of the westernizing influences are the
Chinese branches of the Freemasonry order, of which
there is now one in every State capital in Australia,
and the progress associations founded for the purpose
of introducing European forms of recreation.
Though the younger generation is becoming western-
ized, owing to the mark of inferiority forced upon their
race by our legislators, even the local born Chinese,
including those who are fifty per cent. British, evince
no pride in their Australian citizenship. On the con-
trary, they have largely remained Chinese in senti-
ment, as is borne out by the strong “National Party”
organisations which have arisen. The Act of 1903,
precluding more Chinese from becoming naturalized,
rankles in their mind, and the feeling of injustice is
intensified by the fact that no immigrant Chinese, though
he may be naturalized and have been a tax-payer for
forty years, is eligible for the old age pension.


Though this piece of admittedly unjust legislation
would point to the contrary, there need be no hesitation
in stating that the old-time animosity towards “John
Chinaman” has disappeared. It is now willingly con-
ceded that, though in the past he has been alternately
a source of anxiety and annoyance and often been wished
“to Hongkong,” he has in no small measure contributed
to the economic development of this country and given
Australia a valuable lesson in intense culture. More
than that, the uneasiness caused by the Chinese inrush,
drew the colonies closer together and made people
visualize Australia as a whole. The intercolonial con-
ferences held to put a brake on the immigration of the
yellow race were the first experience in intercolonial
co-operation, without which Federation might not later
have been accomplished. If, in addition to these bene-
fits, the readiness to sacrifice themselves for their off-
spring, the peaceful industry, integrity, and masterly
self-control typical of the Chinese have influenced the
Australian mind, be it ever so little, then their coming
to the shores of Australia has been a gain, the import-
ance of which is not easily over-estimated.
THE JAPANESE.
The first Japanese mentioned in connection with the
development of this continent was in 1876, when the
Government of South Australia approved of a scheme
for bringing Japanese farmers to the Northern Terri-
tory and sent an agent to Tokio to negotiate with the
Japanese Government. It led to nothing, but later, with
the approval of the Government of Queensland, large


numbers of Japanese were brought to the pearl fisheries
in Torres Strait. The good fortune of some Japanese
divers, who drew Carbine in Tattersall’s Sweep on the
Melbourne Cup in 1889, and received a prize of £22,000,
attracted much attention in Japan to Australia. At
the census of 1891, 420 Japanese were recorded as
living in this country, but during the nineties they
came in increasing numbers, principally to northern
Queensland and Western Australia.
Inspired by a desire to preserve Australia for the
white race, a conference of Australian Premiers, held
in Sydney in 1896, decided to introduce legislation in
their respective colonies in order to extend to all
Asiatics the restrictions of admittance already placed on
Chinese. Queensland, however, stood out and made
arrangements with Japan whereby the Government of
that country undertook to only issue passports to the
class of Japanese emigrants desired by Queensland.
But at this time the whole question of coloured immi-
gration to Australia was being hotly discussed all over
the colonies, and the Queensland Government had no
mind to involve itself in turmoil over action that all
the non-ministerial parties in the colony strongly op-
posed ; it was therefore decided to refuse all applications
for the time being. This decision called forth an im-
mediate protest from the Japanese Consul at Townsville,
who insisted that his Government had agreed to the
regulation, not the prohibition, of immigration into
Queensland. Resident Japanese merchants, he said,
were suffering from the Government’s decision, as well
as the planters. In November, 1899, he suggested
that the number of Japanese labourers in Queensland
should be limited to the number resident in that year


{i.e.y four to five thousand) ; as contracts were completed
the vacancies could be filled up by further importations
to the limit agreed upon. He urged the Government
to make a decision as soon as possible, not only because
the matter affected the amour propre of Japan, but also
in the interests of the immigration companies whose
sole business was to supply Japanese labourers to em-
ployers in this country. In the following year the pro-
posal was accepted in principle; the limit was fixed at
3247 (the official figure for resident Japanese labourers
in 1898), and it was agreed that not more than 25
should be imported at any one time—a restriction later
modified to allow shipments of 50. Importation on
these terms, however, came to an end as soon as the
Commonwealth Immigration Restriction Act of 1901
came into force. 3
In 1905 the Commonwealth Government entered into
a kind of “gentlemen’s agreement” with Japan similar
to the one which had been made between Queensland
and Japan in the nineties. Under this arrangement
Japan issues passports for Australia only to merchants,
students, and tourists, or to Japanese of other occupa-
tions, such as those employed in pearling, who have
obtained prior permission from the Australian Govern-
ment, and Australia admits Japanese holding passports
without the dictation test.
As a result of the White Australia Policy and the
above special agreement with Japan, the number of
Japanese in this country has gradually declined. At
the census in 1911, 3474 were recorded, and in 1921
2761. Of their total number, 1219 resided in Western
Australia, 1079 in Queensland, 342 in New South Wales,
3. Australian Encyclopaedia, Vol. 1., p. 649.


72 in Victoria, 34 in the Northern Territory, 10 in
South Australia and 5 in Tasmania. Regarding sex,
2565 were males and 196 females. In addition to the
2761 persons born in Japan, there were 74 full-blood
Japanese born in Australia, and 175 half-castes. In
northern Queensland there are several hundred farmers
and land workers, who are permanent residents. Scat-
tered through the towns of Queensland, New South
Wales, and Western Australia are a large number of
laundrymen, and in the principal cities there are a
few score merchants. More than fifty per cent, of the
Japanese in Australia are engaged in pearl-shelling,
and some in boat-building, having been admitted tem-
porarily by permission of the Commonwealth Govern-
ment.
The history of the Japanese in Australia —as also of
the Malays and kindred people—is in no small degree
the history of the pearling industry.
The first pearl shell raised seems to have been obtained
from the Warrior Reef, in Torres Strait, about the
year 1868. Soon shell was found at other places in the
northern waters, and so plentiful was it that ship-
owners in Sydney equipped vessels and embarked upon
what, to this country, was an entirely new industry.
In the early days the pearl-shell was found in shallow
waters close to the shore, and was either picked up
on the reefs or raised by swimming-divers. The diving
was generally done by coloured men—principally
natives of the islands in Torres Strait or Pacific
Islanders who worked from small boats under the direc-
tion of white men.
As the shallow waters commenced to be worked out,
it became necessary to explore the deeper waters, and


as swimming-diving cannot be successfully prosecuted
at a greater depth than 7 to 8 fathoms, improved
methods had to be adopted and bigger craft equipped.
At this stage the white diver and the diving outfit were
introduced. The success attending the new departure
was marked, and as the number of white divers avail-
able was comparatively limited, coloured men were in-
duced to don the dress. Most of these were Pacific
Islanders, Maoris, and Norfolk Islanders. The majority
of the white divers had previously led a seafaring life,
and true to the habits of their class most of them spent
freely, when in port, the big money they earned, thereby
undermining their health and rendering themselves unfit
to pursue the strenuous work for any length of time.
The more prudent, on the other hand, soon amassed a
competence and retired to more congenial climes. In
a few cases divers purchased vessels and became em-
ployers in the industry themselves.
All these things brought about a shortage in the
supply of divers. The boat-owners were compelled to
look elsewhere for labour, and this they found in the
Philippine Islands and the Malay Peninsula. The
Philipinos and Malays were willing to work for lower
wages than were paid to white men, and gradually most
of the remaining white divers dropped out.
In 1885 and 1886 several pearl-shellers, influenced
by the gradual diminution in their catch in Torres
Strait and by the discovery of rich beds on the coast
of Western Australia, left for the latter State with a
large number of vessels. Many of the vessels, however,
returned in 1889 and 1890, their return being partly
due to the terrible havoc wrought by a cyclone on the
Western fishing-grounds, which caused a heavy loss of


life and the destruction of numerous boats, and partly
to the recovery of the beds in Torres Strait.
When the fleet returned from Western Australia, the
supply of divers, tenders, and seamen was insufficient.
To remedy the deficiency, men had to be sought for
in other quarters, and recourse was had to the fishing
population of Japan. These men were accustomed to
a seafaring life and inured to its hardships, while they
were prepared to work for a comparatively low wage.
Although unused to dress diVing, they proved apt
learners, and in a short time became expert and fearless
divers. Year after year increasing numbers of Japanese
were introduced, until practically all the divers in
Torres Strait were Japanese. Out of 165 divers licensed
in 1908, 164 were Japanese and one a Malay. A large
proportion of the tenders and of the crews were also
natives of Japan, and it could truly be said that, so
far as wage-earners were concerned, pearl-shelling in
Torres Strait had very largely become a Japanese in-
dustry.
Something similar happened in Western Australia.
The owners of the pearling boats were, and still are,
Europeans, though some dummying is said to take place.
However, the position of an important industry being
dependent on an alien people, caused the Queensland
Government in 1908 to appoint a Royal Commission
to ascertain if it could not be worked by whites. Several
recommendations were made by the Commissioners to
bring the desired change about, but as the experiment
would be costly and not assured of success, they were
not acted upon, the problem being left to the Common-
wealth Government to solve.


In accordance with the White Australia policy it
was originally determined that the employment of
Asiatic labour in the pearl-shelling industry should be
restricted, and ultimately cease, and it was proposed
that after 31st December, 1913, permits to bring in
Asiatics for the pearling fleet should no longer be issued.
So a Royal Commission was appointed in 1912, by the
Commonwealth Government, to see how coloured labour
could be substituted by white.
From a preliminary report submitted in 1913 by the
Commission, dealing with conditions in Torres Strait,
it is learned that the divers in almost all cases were
Japanese, and the crews a mixture of Japanese, Malays,
and Papuans. The reason advanced by many witnesses
for employing Japanese divers was that white divers
would not undertake the risks involved in securing shell
in the deeper waters, whilst the Japanese, besides show-
ing a remarkable aptitude for the work, were absolutely
fearless of consequences in seeking for shell at great
depths. This rendered their service of inestimable value
to the owners of the boats.
The war and the consequent disorganisation of the
pearl-shelling industry interrupted the work of the
Commission, and the introduction of Asiatic labour was
made permissible up to 30th June, 1918. In 1916
the investigations were resumed, this time in Western
Australia, the Commission sitting in Broome.
The evidence given there by the boat-owners was very
similar in character, and they were unanimous in stating
that, whilst European divers were equally as good as
men of any other race, so far as the actual diving was
concerned, they w T ere not possessed of some special
faculty which enabled the Asiatic diver to discover shell


on the ocean bottom. This faculty, or sense, it was
remarked, was similar to that possessed by the aborigi-
nal, whose keenness of sight, and remarkable powers of
observation, enabled him to track man or beast over
country where a European would fail to note a trace.
Briefly the conclusions arrived at by the Commission
were: —
(1) That the industry could not survive if wages
acceptable to white men were paid. Australian
shell had to compete in the world’s market with
shell from the Philippines, the Dutch Indies
and other places where cheap labour abounded,
and, besides, both shell and pearls being in the
nature of luxuries, they were not bought regard-
less of cost.
(2) That the vocation was strenuous and perilous,
involving discomfort, much suffering from
"divers’ paralysis,” and heavy mortality.
(3) That the "White Australia” policy would neither
be weakened nor imperilled by allowing the in-
dustry to be continued as hitherto conducted.
As a result of the Commission’s finding, no subsequent
Act of Parliament has altered existing conditions. Steps
have, however, been taken to eliminate, as far as possible,
the scourge of "divers’ paralysis,” and in various other
ways to protect those employed in this unenviable in-
dustry which, though not of supreme importance, assists
in exploiting Australia’s natural resources. It may in
this connection be mentioned that the value of the pearl-
shell obtained during the five years 1919-23 amounted
to £1,506,368, and that of pearls to £277,865.
The official report, in 1916, presented to the Governor-
General, contained the following pleasing testimonial


to the good conduct of the Japanese and others engaged
in the pearling industry:—
“The population of Broome is approximately 2700,
of whom the European population at present number
500. The Asiatics (2200) comprise various nationali-
ties, principally Japanese and Malays. The whole
population of Broome is entirely dependent on the
pearl-shelling industry. Were this industry to col-
lapse, owing to any cause, it is unquestionable that
Broome would inevitably become depopulated. It was
learned that, notwithstanding the preponderance of
Asiatic races, the population is singularly law-abiding.
Quarrels occasionally arise between the Asiatics, but
the European population is not interfered with.
Houses are left uncared for, and with doors and win-
dows unfastened, yet robberies and petty thieving
are almost unknown. A police force of five men is
found ample to control Broome and the surrounding
district. ? ’




THE BROWN RACE.
General Remarks.
The term “brown race” is a somewhat loose one.
Geographically, the brown man’s land includes that part
of the Pacific Islands inhabited by Polynesians, Micro-
nesians, and the various kinds of Malays. On the main-
land of Asia it includes the Malay Peninsula, India,
Afghanistan, Persia, Arabia and parts of Asia Minor.
This geographical diversity, says Lothrop Stoddard
in his work on the colour problem, is reflected both in
the history and the character of the inhabitants. Unlike
the secluded yellow world, the brown world is nearly
everywhere exposed to foreign influences, and has under-
gone an infinite series of evolutionary modifications.
Racially it has been a vast melting-pot, or series of
melting-pots, whereinto conquest and migration have
continually poured new and heterogeneous elements,
producing the most racially diverse amalgamations. In
fact, there is to-day no generalized brown type-norm,
but rather a series of types clearly distinguished from
one another. Some of these types, like the Persians and
Ottoman Turks, are largely white; others, like the
southern Indians and Yemenite Arabs, are largely black;
while still others, like the Himalayan and Central Asian
peoples, have much yellow blood. Again, there is no
generalized brown-race culture like those possessed by
yellows and whites.


The great spiritual bond is Islamism, yet in India,
the chief seat of the brown population, Islam is professed
by only one-fifth of the inhabitants, while in Asia Minor
the Armenians and many of the Syrians are not included.
The principal bond between them is a feeling of being
“Asiatics,” and that, as such, they have a common
grievance against domination by Europeans.
In Australia, the brown race, including half-castes, 1
number about ten thousand. They are represented
mainly by Indians, Afghans, Syrians, and Malays—the
latter including Philipinos, Javanese, and Timorese. 2
THE INDIANS.
After a great deal of discussion for and against bring-
ing in coolies from India, the opposed parties being the
Government on the one side and the squatters of New
South Wales on the other, an experiment was made dur-
ing the thirties of last century by private individuals
at their own expense. One prominent merchant and
squatter, giving evidence before an Immigration Com-
mittee, sitting in 1838, said that many settlers were
obliged to send to India for coolies, though opposed in
principle to this course; he knew that 1203 such
labourers had been actually sent for by 111 settlers.
Some of the landowners employed as many as 40 Indians.
They proved fairly satisfactory workmen; indeed,
several employers thought they made better shepherds
than Europeans.
1. Only half-castes with one parent a European are specially enumerated
by the Commonwealth Census Bureau. Half-castes between coloured
people are included in the father’s race.
2. There is a big element of Papuans and a smaller one of Polynesians
in the population of Timor. For brevity’s sake they are here all classed
as Malayans.


In 1839 the Colonial Office caused general prohibition
against coolie emigration from India to be enacted.
After that year only a few were brought, under pretence
of domestic work. 3
The number of Indians who went to Australia on
their own account was for long so small that, compared
with the invasion from China, it gave no cause for
alarm. The first voice raised against Indians appears
to have been in New South Wales, where, in the eighties,
objection was taken to the growing number of Indian
and Syrian hawkers! To check “the evil,” magistrates
commenced to refuse to issue licences to them, thereby
driving them into other colonies where the law was not
so strictly administered. At the census of 1891, 1981
persons in New South Wales were recorded as having
been born in India and Ceylon, but these would include
a number of whites.
Owing to lack of uniformity of the censuses taken in
the different colonies, and to “race” being more or less
ignored, except in the case of Chinese and aboriginals,
it is now not possible to follow the growth of Indians
and other coloured people in Australia during last cen-
tury. In 1901 there were 4383 Hindus and other races
of British India in the Commonwealth. The restriction
placed on Asiatic immigration caused their number to
decline, and in 1911 they only totalled 3653 —3523 being
males and 130 females. The census of 1921 showed a
further decrease in full-blood Indians. The marked
disproportion between the sexes continued to prevail,
the former numbering 2974 and the latter 176.
The Indians were then distributed between the dif-
ferent States as follows:
3. History of White Australia Policy, p. 7.


Males.
Females.
Total.
New South Wales ..
.. .. 1127
99
1226
Victoria
.... 450
17
467
Queensland
.... 536
44
580
South Australia .. . .
.... 649
6
655
Western Australia ..
.... 187
5
192
Tasmania
.. .. 11
0
11
Northern Territory ..
.... 14
5
19
Total .. .. . .
.. .. 2974
176
3150
Owing to the disproportion of males to females, the
nnmber of persons of mixed Indian and European off-
spring is comparatively large. In 1911 they totalled
458, and in 1921, 806.
Regarding occupation, no less than 98 per cent, of the
full-blooded Hindus enumerated in 1911 were bread-
winners. The occupations most largely represented were
those connected with shipping, the number so employed
being 1296, consisting mainly of seamen, stokers, stew-
ards, and ships’ servants. 4 The group of merchants and
dealers undefined comprised 714, of whom 554 were
hawkers. There were 366 engaged in agricultural pur-
suits, mainly as farmers and sugar planters’ hands, and
201 in pastoral pursuits. The only other group of any
size was that of 111 teamsters, more than half of whom
were in Western Australia.
The Indian hawker is still a feature in Australia, add-
ing colour to the landscapes “at the back of the be-
yond.” Though opinions may differ regarding the
necessity for the Indian hawker, those who, like the
writer, have had experience in the back-blocks, will give
them their blessing. While the white business man, with
his often magnificent travelling store, seldom moves far
from the beaten tracks, the Indian hawker, with his
4. These would almost exclusively be serving in British ships, which
happened to be in Australian ports at the taking of the census.


heavily-laden pack-horse, will penetrate to the most
remote places and there serve the lonely settler, whom
he supplies with clothing and the few luxuries enjoyed
by these people, at a reasonable price, giving credit when
desired.
Most of the Indians are Mahomedans, whose spiritual
needs are ministered to by some local member of their
community. Only in Adelaide do they possess a small,
permanent temple for worship.
Being born British subjects, the Indians enjoy certain
advantages not possessed by other Asiatics. These are
the rights to bring their wives and children, to old age
pension, and to Parliamentary vote. The latter right
was withheld from them till, after a visit of the Indian
statesman, Dr. Sastri, in 1925, some Indians in Mel-
bourne tested the matter in court and gained the verdict.
THE SYRIANS.
The almost complete absence in old census reports of
any information about Syrians in Australia points to
their former insignificance, both in regard to number
and importance. Prior to the 1901 census they were
mostly entered under “Other's,” or at best, under the
heading, “Born in Turkey.” In 1901 they numbered
1498 persons. At the first census taken by the Com-
monwealth, that of 1911, more attention was paid to non-
European races than had been done before. It was on
that occasion ascertained that there were 2339 Syrians
in Australia —1297 males and 1042 females. In the
census of 1921, 2892 were recorded, distributed amongst
the different States as follows:—-


Males.
Females.
Total.
New South Wales ..
.... 862
743
1605
Victoria
.... 292
240
532
Queensland
.... 199
177
376
South Australia .. ..
.... 162
98
260
Western Australia ..
.... 36
30
66
Tasmania
.... 33
20
53
Total
.. .. 1584
1308
2892
Out of the total number of 2892, no less than 1549,
or more than half, were born in Australia.
A special feature of the Syrians is the exceptionally
large proportion of females. In this respect they are
the antithesis of the Chinese, and, indeed, stand out from
all the immigrant races in Australia, white and coloured
alike.
The majority of Syrians belong to the Semitic family;
but there is a large element of pure whites in Syria of
the Mediterranean strain. Owing to this fact, the
Syrians are not treated by the Australian immigration
authorities as pure Asiatics. They may, by application,
obtain permission to enter and settle in Australia.
Cases of Syrians becoming naturalized are not uncom-
mon.
It is, perhaps, due to the Syrians not being a very
homogenous people that they keep less together than
probably any other race or nationality. Syrian societies
never existed, and only when in sufficient number to do
so do those belonging to the orthodox faith congregate
for the purpose of worship. In Sydney, where upwards
of six hundred are domiciled, there are two Syrian
congregations, a Greek Orthodox and a Maronite. Nor
is any great effort made to preserve their language,
Arabic. It is lost with the second generation.
Owing to the large proportion of women, the number
of children is large. This explains how, in 1911, the
percentage of bread-winners amongst the male popula-
tion was only 69, as compared with 98 and 97 in the


case of Indians and Chinese respectively. The occupa-
tion most largely represented was that of merchant and
dealer, undefined, representing a total of 455, and con-
sisting mainly of general store-keepers and hawkers.
The sale and manufacture of textile fabrics and dress
accounted for 189, mainly drapers and tailors, while
agricultural pursuits were represented by 47, and the
sale of food and drink by 45, mainly greengrocers,
fruiterers and grocers.
THE AFGHANS.
The coming to Australia of the Afghans is associated
with the introduction of camels. The first camels suc-
cessfully landed in this country, numbering 24, were
brought, in 1860, for the Burke and Wills’ expedition.
Six years later Sir Thomas Elder imported 100 camels
into South Australia and commenced camel-breeding on
his station, Belt ana. They were first extensively em-
ployed in carrying supplies along the overland telegraph
line during its construction in 1871-73. Afterwards
they became regularly employed for exploration and
transport work generally in the arid hinterland, and
they are now in general use in the interior of Western
and South Australia, New South Wales, and Queensland.
The latest returns (1924-25) give 11,853 as the number
of camels in Australia.
It was to tend, drive, and undertake the breeding of
these animals that Afghans were introduced. They
never exceeded a few hundred and, like the Chinese,
they left their women-folk in their homeland. In 1901,
393 Afghans were recorded in Australia. Since
then they have steadily decreased. In 1911,
295 were recorded, 6 being females, and in
1921, 147, including 3 females. Only 10 were recorded
as having been born in Australia. In addition to the


full-blood Afghans, there were 50 of mixed European
and Afghan offspring born in this country. Of the full-
blood Afghans, 7\ were stated to be employers of labour,
73 working on their own account, and 28 wage-earners.
Many of the owners and breeders of camels are still
Afghans, but since the war the industry has begun to
pass into the hands of Australians who handled camels
in Egypt and Palestine.
THE MALAYS.
The story of the Malays in Australia has been told
under “The Japanese.” They were mainly brought
here in connection with the pearl-shelling industry—
some from the Malay Peninsula, others from the Philip-
pines, and others again from Java and Timor. In 1901
they numbered 1647. Ten years later they had increased
to 2191, of whom 99 were females. At the census of
1921 they had decreased to 1860 —1632 males and 228
females. In the case of Timorese there were only 29
left. Of the total given, 366, or about 20 per cent., were
born in Australia. It is interesting to notice that of
those born in Australia 209 were females and only 137
males. Those of mixed European and Malay offspring
totalled 344, of whom a little less than half were born
in Australia.
According to the census report of 1911, the bread-
winners in that year accounted for 96 per cent, of the
total population of full-blood Malays. Besides those
engaged in pearl-shelling, the only other occupations
largely represented were agricultural pursuits (238)
and shipping (311).
Not many of the Malays in Australia attain to econo-
mic independence. Thus in 1921 only 14 were entered
as employers of labour, 131 worked on their own account,
and 1207 were wage-earners.


THE BLACK RACE.
THE SOUTH SEA ISLANDERS.
General Remarks.
In Australia the black race, in addition to the
aboriginals, is represented by about five thousand South
Sea Islanders, of whom some are Papuans and others
Melanesians.
Briefly, the inhabitants of the Pacific consist of
Malays, Polynesians, Micronesians, Papuans, Melanesi-
ans, and Negritos. To these have been added in com-
paratively recent times an ever-growing number of the
yellow race and a small element of whites. The three
first mentioned groups are generally classed with the
brown race, and the three next with the black. The
Papuans and the Melanesians, with whom alone we
are concerned in this chapter, belong to the negro
variety of the human species. The former stand slightly
closer to the African negro than the latter, in whose
veins it is believed runs a small strain of Polynesian
blood. The Papuans are almost exclusively confined to
New Guinea and the adjacent islands in Torres Strait.
The Melanesians inhabit the following island groups:
Admiralty, New Britain, D'Entrecasteaux, Lousiade,
Solomon, Santa Crux, Banks, New Hebrides, New Cale-
donia, Loyalty, and Fiji.
Melanesians Coming to Australia.
The difficulty of obtaining workmen after transpor-
tation to New South Wales ceased not only caused the


first Chinese to be brought to Australia, but also the
first Pacific Islanders. An enterprising New South
Wales business man and squatter, Benjamin Boyd, in
1842 introduced some natives from the New Hebrides
to Boyd Town, near Table Bay. Encouraged by Boyd
other pastoralists, especially of the Eiverina, also tried
the experiment with this unencumbered Melanesian
labour, Boyd fitting out vessels to supply the demand.
The number of Islanders brought to New South Wales
is not on record, but it was sufficiently large for the
experiment to be watched with interest, and in some
quarters with misgiving. In 1847 complaints came from
the British Consul in Fiji of violence committed by the
crews of two of Boyd’s vessels while endeavouring to
obtain native labour, and steps were taken by the
authorities to protect the Islanders. But perhaps the
greatest protection was afforded them by the experiment
with black labour proving a failure. Many of the
Islanders died, some because the climate was so much
cooler than that to which they had been accustomed,
and others through homesickness and loneliness. Most
of the survivors deserted and, as they could not legally
be brought back, importation gradually came to an end.
But while island labour failed in New South Wales
in the forties, it proved a success in Queensland in
the sixties.
The first Kanakas —by which name the Islanders
brought to Australia have become known—arrived in
1863, when a wealthy Sydney merchant and shipowner,
Captain Towns, introduced 67 natives to engage in
cotton growing. His business had caused him at various
times to make visits to the Islands, and some of the
Islanders were employed on his vessels. Captain Towns


was anxious to try cotton growing on a fairly large
scale in Queensland, and to demonstrate that cotton —
for the production of which the colony offered a bonus
—could be profitably grown. He obtained a tract of
land not far from Brisbane for an experimental cotton
plantation. Though for various reasons the cotton in-
dustry made little progress, the Islanders proved well
suited for the work.
In 1864 the Hon. Louis J. Hope obtained 54 Islanders
for sugar growing. His success with sugar encouraged
others to undertake the same work, and soon enterpris-
ing pioneers commenced pushing northward. Accord-
ingly Kanakas, who in the beginning had been brought
only to Moreton Bay, were landed in Bowen and other
ports convenient to the settlers, while agents made it
their special business to procure them.
In the above manner the sugar industry, which since
has become so important to Australia, was firmly estab-
lished, and, aided by ever increasing numbers of cheap
and efficient labourers brought to Queensland from the
South Sea Islands, it greatly expanded as years went
by. In the beginning the Islanders were obtained from
the New Hebrides, but as this group could not continue
to supply the growing demand for black labour, the
recruiting agents extended their activity to the Solomon
Islands and afterwards to the New Britain Archipelago.
New Guinea was the last place to be exploited, and
comparatively few natives came from there.
The story of how the Islanders were obtained and
of the futile efforts of the authorities to humanise labour-
recruiting is a long and sad one. The backwardness
of the inhabitants of the Western Pacific made it well-
nigh impossible to establish co-operation between them


and the sugar growers of Queensland without entailing
much suffering. While it is to be regretted that this
should have been so, some consolation is afforded by a
great industry having been created, beneficial to man-
kind as a whole and to Australia in particular. It is
also well to remember that these primitive savages
inflicted untold suffering upon themselves before ever
they had seen a white man, and that the experience
gained on the sugar fields of Queensland resulted in some
good to their race. It is true that none brought wealth
back with them to their islands, the reward for three
years ’ service being, besides their keep, only £lB, mostly
paid in trade goods, but they brought iron implements
and the knowledge of using them. It is equally true
that probably about ten per cent, of the Kanakas never
returned to their beloved islands, but were laid to rest
in Australian soil; but then in their own home their life
was, and at many places still is, a short and perilous
one. In any case we are not concerned here with the
above aspects of the Islanders coming to Queensland,
but with their influence on the population and develop-
ment of Australia.
Owing to the low standard of civilization of these
people, none were so equipped mentally as to become
outstanding. The highest any of them ever reached in
the social scale was probably to the position of “boss-
boy, ’ ’ and occasionally to lay preacher when on Sundays
the dusky sons and daughters of the Western Pacific
gathered under some shady tree to listen to the gospel.
A narrative of the Kanakes, therefore, is in the main
bare statements of numbers and of such Acts passed
by various parliaments as affected their destiny.


Males.
Females.
Total.
1868
1,536
7
1,543
1871
2,255
81
2,336
1881
6,000
396
6,396
1886
9,116
921
10,037
1891
8,498
745
9,243
1901
8,380
380
8,760
It is estimated that, up to the end of 1890, between
46,000 and 47,000 of their kind were brought to Aus-
tralia. Of these a few went to the sugar fields on
the north coast of New South Wales. In Queensland at
the various censuses taken since 1868 up to the termina-
tion of the system their numbers are given as follows: —
Owing to the discredit brought upon Queensland by
the indenture of Kanaka labour, the Government de-
cided to terminate it in 1890, but as the plan miscarried
of replacing the big plantations by small holdings,
worked by the small holders themselves, the importation
of Kanakas was continued.
On the formation of the Commonwealth in 1901, how-
ever, steps were taken to put an end to it, the Common-
wealth being determined on the White Australia policy.
So an Act was passed whereby no Islanders were allowed
to be introduced after 1904, and the Federal authorities
were given power to deport any Kanaka found in Aus-
tralia after 1906. To prevent hardships being inflicted
in specific cases, the Pacific Island Labourers Act,
1901, was amended in 1906 so as to allow the following
South Sea Islanders permanently to settle in Australia:
(a) All who were in Queensland before October, 1879;
(b) those who had lived there continuously for 20 years;
(c) those whose return because of their marriage con-
trary to tribal customs involved risk either to themselves
or their families; (d) the very old and infirm; and
(e) the owners of freehold land.


There were, at the end of 1906, roughly 5000 Kanakas
in Australia, and of these 3642 were repatriated. Some
of those exempted from repatriation were settled on
the little island Moa, in Torres Strait.
According to the census of 1921 there were in that
year 1869 Melanesians in Queensland (1351 males, 518
females), and 228 in New South Wales, while odd ones
had drifted to some of the other States. Approximately
50 per cent, were born in Australia. Half-castes with
one of the parents a European numbered about 300. 1
The contribution of the Kanakas to the economic
development of this country is quite an appreciable one.
They were a valuable asset to many of the early pas-
toralists in Queensland. Of 2017 Kanakas brought to
the colony by the beginning of 1868, 697 were employed
by pastoralists. Out of 600, who arrived during the
* last nine months of the following year, 450 were for
pastoralists and 71 for employers in towns. Their
greatest service, however, was in connection with the
development of tropical agriculture. In the case of
the sugar industry it can safely be said that it could
not have been established without cheap labour. In all
the sugar producing countries with which Queensland
had to compete, cheap labour abounded as it has done
to this very day, and the home market afforded inade-
quate scope for a great industry.
Though popular with the sugar growers and with
those responsible for the economic development of the
colony, the European workers in Queensland were averse
to the Kanakas, seeing in them a danger to the white
i. Owing to some writers applying the term Polynesia to all the Pacific
Islands east of the Philippine Islands, New Guinea and Australia, it has
become the rule in Australian census reports to enter the Kanakas under
the heading “Polynesians.”


man’s standard of living. In spite, however, of pro-
tests from trades unions and from the rising Labour
Party, the importance to Queensland of the sugar in-
dustry was so great that the indenture of Kanakas was
continued.
The position was entirely changed when the federa-
tion of the various Australian colonies took place. In
a day the home market expanded eight times. The
Commonwealth desired a White Australia and was able
and willing to pay for it. The sugar growers were
protected partly by the imposition of a heavy import
duty on foreign sugar and partly by the payment of a
bounty for sugar grown in Australia by white labour.
Highly protected, the sugar industry has greatly
progressed ever since. But what Australia could do,
when united, was beyond the strength of a single thinly
populated colony. There is also a difference between
pioneering a new industry, and carrying it on under
modified conditions when once established.
Perhaps the services rendered Australia by the humble
South Sea Islanders is best realised when we hear that
between 1902 and 1910 more than £2,778,000 were paid
in bounties for white grown sugar, and that in various
ways the industry has been heavily subsidized ever since.
Regarding the place the Melanesians to-day occupy in
Australia’s economic system, the census report of 1911
gives the following indication:—Out of 1704 males,
1468, or 86 per cent, were breadwinners. The occupa-
tions most largely represented were those connected with
agricultural pursuits, no fewer than 837, or 57 per
cent, of the breadwinners being so engaged. Of these
410 were employed as farmers and farm hands, and
244 in sugar planting, 117 were returned as labourers


undefined, while fisheries accounted for 117, pastoral
pursuits for 113, and domestic occupations for 90.
In 1921, 26 were employers of labour; 275 worked
on own account, and 822 were wage earners.
Next in importance to the part played by the South
Sea Islanders in developing tropical agriculture ranks
the fact of a small Melanesian strain having permanently
entered into the population of Australia. As a large
percentage of those left behind in 1906 were females,
the condition for natural growth was existent. This,
in conjunction with the great fecundity of the South
Sea Islanders, explains the increase of about 500 in
fifteen years, corresponding to 2.1 per cent, per annum,
which is more than the natural increase of the white
race.
Papuans.
Besides the Melanesians it should be mentioned that,
as a result of Queensland annexing the islands in Torres
Strait in 1878, some 2300 Papuans became included in
Australia’s population. These have, in the course of
time, been civilized and educated up to European
standard, and, together with a limited number of natives
indentured from Papua, greatly assist in manning the
pearling fieet centred on Thursday Island.
THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINALS. 2
Racial Conflicts.
It seems probable that, in the late Pliocene or early
Pleistocene age, a negro race came to an unpopulated
Australia over a land bridge which then connected
2. Though the aboriginals, like the Indians, are Britishers by birth,
being of non-British race, it seems proper to include them in this book.


Asia and Australia and of which the Malay Archipelago
and New Guinea formed part—that they spread over
the whole continent—then including Tasmania—and for
long ages were in undisputed possession; and that
later on the country was invaded by a new race —by
some scientists called dark-skinned Caucasians—who
were kindred to the Dravidians of India and the
Veddahs of Ceylon. Between these two people arose
the first racial conflict in this country, with the result
that the negroes were wiped out. Only in Tasmania,
which by then had been separated from the mainland
by the Bass Strait, did the negroes survive.
Believing that fundamentally human desires and
mental characteristics have not changed since man first
entered on the world’s stage—and knowing that in
those remote ages they were all nomadic hunters —as,
indeed, the Australian aboriginals remained ever after
—the exact lines on which the conflict was waged can
be fairly correctly surmised. It may be assumed that
the dark-skinned Caucasians (if such they be) were
mentally better endowed than the negroes and were
better equipped for killing. Organized war—which is
supposed to have been one of the outcomes of the intro-
duction of agriculture—did not take place. The two
races mingled haphazardly, the males occasionally
duelling for the possession of the most attractive females,
with the result that the negro was slain—or they fought
in small mobs for the possession of localities rich in
game, the negroes again coming out second best. The
vanquished were not enslaved—to nomadic hunters
slaves are an encumbrance—they were killed, and any-
thing they owned worth having (including young
females) became the spoils of the victors. This explains


that, while the negro race disappeared, certain negro
features are recognisable in the present day aboriginals,
who are lineal descendants of the second host of
invaders.
How many thousand years have elapsed since the
above racial conflict 'took place is difficult to even
conjecture. Not so very long ago a fossilized skull was
found on the banks of a little stream, the Talgai, in
Queensland. The Talgai skull is of a lad about 14
years of age. It had been crushed by the weight of
deposits, which lay on it as it became fossilized; but
in spite of its crushed state, it is easy to recognize in
it all the essential characteristics of the Australian abo-
riginal to-day. The skull was in the same strata of
fossilization as the remains of extinct kinds of pouched
mammals, which occur abundantly in a stratum in the
neighbourhood of Talgai. The struggle between the
two races, therefore, must have taken place when these
marsupials were still alive, or even before they had
made their appearance. Scientists assign to the Talgai
man the same antiquity as to the Neanderthal man in
Europe. How long the Neanderthal man enjoyed the
undisputed possession of Europe no one knows, but
he is supposed to have been extinct some 20,000 years
ago. 8
Struggle Between the Blacks and the Whites .
Time rolled on. In other parts of the world man
progressed and passed through different stages of civi-
lization. Empires rose and fell; but in Australia the
dark-hued hybridized Caucasian, accompanied by his
3. In 1925 a fossilized skull was unearthed near Cohuna, Victoria, which
it is claimed antedates all known human remains, including the Rhodesian,
Piltdown, and Talgai skulls.


dog—and in Tasmania the negro—still roamed the
forests and wooded plains in search of food, constructing
their primitive shelters wherever they happened to be.
The land bridge over which their ancestors had
wandered had broken down and, protected by a vast
expanse of water, they remained undisputed lords of
the land.
But a time came when water no longer afforded pro-
tection, and one day—quite recently it seems—the fore-
runners of a white invasion pitched their tents on the
shores of what has become known as Port Jackson.
Others followed—white settlements arose at different
places along the coast, and from these strongholds the
racial struggle for the possession of the land was
repeated.
The instruction the invaders had received from their
Sovereign beyond the seas was singularly humane and
involved equal rights for whites and blacks. 44 You are,”
it said, “to conciliate their affections and live in amity
and kindness with them.” Simultaneously, however,
by a stroke of the pen the aboriginals were deprived
of ownership in the land which had been theirs from
time immemorial, all land being declared the property
of the Crown, and this became the deciding factor in
the first phase of the struggle ensuing.
The native population in Australia at the time is
estimated to have been about 150,000, or one to every
twenty square miles of country, and that of Tasmania
to approximately 2000, or one to every thirteen square
miles of country. Sparse, however, as the population
was, every nook and corner of habitable country was
required for their sustenance, owing to their manner
of eking out a living. This being so, only if the


/830
/870 /
aboriginals could have changed their mode of living,
and become a pastoral or agricultural people, could
the race have persisted. Such a transformation under
prevailing circumstances would, however, have been
nothing short of a miracle and, naturally, it did not
happen.
Bi Held by Aboriginals, CD Held by Whites
Y///A Uninhabited
Owing to the incoherence of the aboriginals, their
deficiency in racial pride, and their extreme primitive-
ness generally, conquest by the white race became easy.
As shown on the sketch maps, by 1850—while many of
those who had seen Captain Phillip land were still alive
—the dark race had already lost to the white the most


valuable part of the temperate zone. Thirty years later
the best of the tropical land had also been lost, while
at the present—excluding the deserts of the interior,
which are coveted by nobody—the dark race only holds,
undisputed and more or less undisturbed, the Musgrave
Ranges and adjoining hills in South Australia, Western
Australia, and the Northern Territory; stretches of
land in the Kimberleys, Western Australia; Arnhem-
Land, and a piece of country between Daly and Vic-
toria Rivers, Northern Territory; and some of the islands
in the Arafura Sea, the Gulf of Carpentaria, and the
Torres Strait.
By about 1838 the numbers of blacks and whites in
Australia were probably about equal, with a little over
100,000 for each race. In 1925 the full-blood aboriginals
were estimated to number a little over 60,000, thus con-
stituting only one per cent, of the total population.
Nature of Struggle,
The erstwhile friendly relation between the whites
and the blacks came to an end when the former com-
menced to penetrate into the interior and take possession
of the land for their flocks of sheep and herds of cattle.
Particularly bitter did the struggle become in Tasmania
where, on account of the smallness of the island, the
contesting races were brought much closer together than
on the mainland. The blacks were continually irritated
by the steady inroad on the territory upon which they
were allowed to hunt, and by the interference with their
womenfolk. The white settlers were equally annoyed
at the blacks helping themselves to their sheep and
cattle. As long as both parties could eke out a living,
and the competition for the native females had not yet


become acute, the position was bearable; but the
sustained advance inland of wifeless pastoralists and
their attendant convict servants, matters grew from bad
to worse, and from about 1819 the state of affairs
approached one of guerilla warfare, with merciless
slaughter on both sides. In the Oatland district alone
twenty-one inquests were held on murdered settlers in
less than three years, while in regard to the blacks
only 200 were left when, in 1834, they agreed to have
all their needs provided for by the Government, and to
live in peace. Though in the eleventh hour an honest
effort was made to save the race from extinction, their
number steadily dwindled, and in 1876 the last one in
Tasmania, a woman, succumbed.
On the mainland the feud between the white and
the dark race was less fierce and more protracted. Still,
clashes, accompanied by bloodshed, were of frequent
occurrence. In 1797 a stand-up fight actually occurred
between the soldiery and a strong party of natives, five
of the latter being killed. In 1802 the aboriginals
at one place plundered many of the settlers and
murdered four women. A Public Order of 1803 urged
men to be well armed when travelling in the bush.
Another official notice, dated 20th July, 1805, says:—
“From the necessity of coercive measures being taken,
six of the natives, and those of the most guilty, were
shot in pursuit by the settlers.” These are but a few
instances out of a good many on record. Occasionally
the Government sided with the pioneers, but generally
it was left to the settlers and the aboriginals to fight
matters out between themselves, the result being that
the ranks of the latter were persistently thinned out.
The lamentable fate of the Tasmanian blacks, however,


stirred the conscience of those in responsible positions,
and from abont 1835 and onwards steps were taken
to protect the lives of the natives. But while these
armed conflicts came to an end, the struggle for
“to be or not to be,” continued.
As previously indicated, the pastoral industry is the
pioneer industry in Australia, after which, in former
days, came gold mining. It was consequently with
these industries, and the men engaged in them, that
the aboriginals mainly came in contact, and it is in
the outer fringe of the pastoral area that the vitality
of the aboriginals is most severely tested to-day.
The pastoral industry, as it advances, absorbs a cer-
tain number of able-bodied natives; the tribes situated
near new cattle or sheep-stations thereby gradually
become reduced and disorganized, and gravitate towards
the homestead of the Europeans, where they form camps
and become hangers on. The squatters, no doubt, often
have a feeling that, although they have bought or leased
from the Crown the land they occupy, it rightly belongs
to the aboriginals. Besides, if they do not feed these
people they are likely to make inroads on the stock
and give trouble. So, whether inspired by human kind-
ness, a feeling of justice, or as a matter of expediency,
the aboriginals in the camps are generally provided
for. Little by little these lose their energy, virility, and
whatever racial pride they once possessed; they become
indolent and apathetic towards life, and guard with
less jealousy than formerly their womenfolk from asso-
ciating with the whites. Half-caste children from the
stations at intervals drift to the camps, grow up and
replace the full-blood individuals, till, in the course
of time, there are few aboriginals beyond the half-castes
left in the district.


Western Australia
23,000
Northern Territory
Queensland
South Australia
2,500
New South Wales
1,000
Victoria
Even more disastrous to aboriginal tribes has been
their contact with European and Chinese miners. The
natives have not to any great extent been engaged
in the mining industry itself, but by congregating
around mining camps, the road for the introduction of
malignant diseases amongst them was opened, and
simultaneously a craving for alcohol and opium created.
Stringent laws have been enacted to prevent the abo-
riginals being served with alcohol or, in former days,
with opium, but the difficulty of enforcing such laws
at out of the way mining camps is manifest to anyone
acquainted with the back-country of Australia.
Owing to the slow advance of the white man in the
north there are still, as previously stated, some 60,000
full-blood aboriginals left in Australia, distributed
approximately as follows:
Whether the combined efforts of State and Church to
save the race in Western Australia, the Northern Terri-
tory and Queensland will stem the decline for a while,
has to be seen. The good results obtained at odd places
are not general, and the outlook for the blacks as a
race is anything but bright. 4 But while the full-blooded
aboriginals are declining, the numbers of half-castes,
quadroons, and octoroons are increasing. The former
rose from 11,500 in 1921 to 15,000 in 1926. Their
4- > Baldwyn Spencer, the greatest living authority on the Australian
aboriginals, after in 1926 having travelled amongst some of the inland
tribes, said:—“lt is inevitable that the full-blooded aboriginal must dis-
appear. The difference between the white race and the black one is so
great that it cannot be bridged. All that can be done is to treat those
who remain as generously as possible.”


growth is accelerated by breeding amongst themselves
and, though on the fringe of this black body, a move-
ment from darker to lighter colours points to racial
absorption, the idea of the White Australia ideal even-
tually being shattered from within cannot be dismissed
as altogether absurd.
Contribution to Development .
In this connection it should be mentioned that it is
quite wrong to assume that the Australian aboriginals
have nothing to give to the wdiite race. Those who
are most intimately acquainted with them are unanimous
in declaring that they are an exceptionally healthy
and physically fit race. When Captain Phillip went
from Botany Bay to examine Port Jackson, he met a
number of natives on the beach, and he and his officers
were so struck by the manly appearance of these
people that he named the place Manly Cove. Dr.
Charles Pickering, after studying the aboriginals on
the spot some fifty years ago, gave it as his deliberate
opinion that “the Australian native is the finest model
of human proportions I have ever seen.” And Herbert
Pitt writes: “Physically the aboriginals are, in their
wild state, a splendid people; tall in the North, in the
South of medium height, their proportions are almost
perfect. ’ 7
The resourcefulness of the aboriginal in procuring
food and water and in finding his way in unknown
country is unique, and there can be little doubt that
the well known resourcefulness and sense of location
of the present day way-backs of Australia, the marvel-
lous feats performed by stockmen and drovers in
waterless country, and the gradual conquest of Aus-
tralia’s inhospitable interior, in a large measure are


due to lessons taught the pioneers by the natives or in
many cases to a black strain in their blood.
As against the heavy expenditure, amounting to about
£150,000 annually, to succour, instruct, and preserve
the aboriginals, and the vast stretches of land
set aside for their exclusive use, should be put their
contribution towards the economic development of
Australia. It is doubtful if in the north the pastoral
industry could be carried on without them, no other
labour being available. They have been taught to shear,
pick up, roll, yard, cook, drive the bullock teams to
the nearest port, and in some cases to class wool. In
cattle country every station has its quota of aboriginal
stockmen, and they prove trustworthy and most efficient
in a land without fences, where stations are anything
up to 10,000 square miles. The Chief Protector for
Aboriginals in Western Australia, in one of his recent
official reports, wrote: —
“Few people realise how much the aboriginals have
done in the development of the North generally. It is,
therefore, sound policy, also for economic reasons, to
preserve the race as far as possible, in order that it
may continue to assist in developing the Territory/ ’
But also in other States they have beneficially in-
fluenced economic development, as is borne out by
the New South Wales Census report of 1891. In that
year in the mother colony 442 full-blooded males and
301 half-caste males were employed in primary pro-
duction, of which the pastoral industry accounted for
more than half; 127 full-blooded and 150 half-castes
were engaged in connection with secondary industries,
and in addition a considerable number were employed
as domestic servants and police-trackers.


In 1911 the manner in which the aboriginal half-castes
had entered into Australia’s economic system was subject
to investigation. It was found that out of a total of
5283 enumerated males, 3081, or 58 per cent., were
breadwinners. Of these, 1392 were employed in pastoral
pursuits, mainly as station hands, and 523 in agricul-
tural pursuits, mainly as farm hands, while 385 were
classed as industrial workers imperfectly defined, and
consisted mainly of general labourers. The other occu-
pations, which were at all extensively represented, were
the capture of wild animals and produce 149, fisheries
106, and forestry 105. The half-caste females totalled
4830, of whom 933, or about 19 per cent., were bread-
winners. The greatest number, 749, consisted of house
servants, which shows that, at out-of-the-way places,
the aboriginal half-caste females greatly assist in solving
the servant girl problem.
In 1926, in Queensland, 2715 full-blood aboriginals
and 1129 half-castes were in regular employment. In
Western Australia the number exceeded 5000. Detailed
information from the other States is not available; but
it may reasonably be assumed that, including half-castes,
the number of aboriginals in European employ in the
whole of Australia now exceeds 10,000.




CONCLUSION.
Influence of Non-Britishers on Trade and Commerce .
To avoid tedious repetition very little has been said
about the part played by enterprising persons from
any particular foreign country in the promotion of trade
between Australia and the outside world.
Very few countries have ever been self-sustained
economic units or attained greatness without external
trade. The growth of new T countries would be im-
possible without it. This is so obvious that it scarcely
needs elucidation. Under normal conditions, new-born
members of the family of nations must pass along the
same road of economic development as mankind as a
whole travelled—pastoral, agricultural, manufacturing,
only skipping the earliest phase of economic evolution,
that of hunting. The innumerable things required in
the way of tools, machinery, and other necessaries must
be obtained from outside and paid for in raw material.
In modern times a new factor has been added, making
trade and commerce indispensable to progress and well
being—that of specialization. Human requirements are
becoming so manifold that the ingenuity of almost
every nation and the resources of every part of the
world are needed to gratify them. One nation has
specialized in this direction and another in that, accord-
ing to natural conditions, inborn genius, or occasionally
as a result of mere accident. Owing to extensive pro-
duction of coal-tar Germany became the world's manu-
facturer of dyes; and as lime and chalk are the only


minerals in Denmark the Danes specialized in cement-
making and, as a corollary, in cement-making machinery.
England’s vast deposits of iron and coal made her the
world’s workshop for a multitude of types of heavy
machinery. The technical qualities of the Swedish mind
made the Swedes leaders in the manufacturing of tele-
phones, separators, lighthouse outfits, intricate electrical
appliances, and so forth. It is true that one country
learns from another, yet their products rarely become
quite the same—in some cases the distinguishing feature
is durability, in others attractiveness, and again in
others it is cheapness. All this is, of course, common-
place, and is only mentioned to emphasize the import-
ance to Australia of the non-British-born business man.
He knows the requirements of his adopted country, and
he knows which of such requirements can be supplied
by his native land and vice-versa. Having a firm grip
on at least two languages—English and his mother
tongue—he almost automatically becomes the medium
for opening up new trade.
Amongst the nationals described under different
headings in the foregoing chapters are a sprinkling of
importers and exporters and business people of various
kinds, some in a big way, others perhaps occupying
but a single room containing, besides the writing desk,
exhibits or catalogues of the particular lines they are
representing. In occasional instances, they have formed
Chambers of Commerce such as the French Chamber
of Commerce, the Italian Chamber of Commerce, and
the Swedish Chamber of Commerce. Of all it can be
said that they are live wires in the complicated process
of Australia’s development.


Commercial Value of Non-Britishers .
A matter to be elucidated is what may be termed the
crude commercial value of foreign-born immigrants as
something apart from special services rendered. Opinions
as to what constitutes national wealth differ; it is,
however, beyond dispute that wuthout a community of
people the term is a misnomer, and it may, therefore,
be laid down as an axiom that the human material
forms the basis of national wealth. Accepting this
view as a universal truth, it becomes important to
examine the human material.
Roughly it consists of adults and children. If we
ignore the fact that not all adults are an asset to the
community, the bringing up of the children is certainly
a liability. Assuming that in Australia it costs approxi-
mately £5O a year to rear and train a child from birth
till, at the age of fifteen, he or she joins the ranks
of breadwinners, the cost to the community to produce
a worker is £750. 1 If that sum be multiplied by the
number of foreign immigrants—generally the healthiest,
most undaunted and energetic of their race —who have
settled in this country since the arrival of the first
Germans in South Australia in 1838, till the last con-
tingent of Italians, in 1927, it will represent a very
large capital indeed. And this vast amount, probably
exceeding £150,000,000, is neither liable to redemption,
nor is interest chargeable upon it. In the case of
oversea countries gaining through trade intercourse
with Australia, it can be said that indirectly they
receive interest on their outlay. This has undoubtedly
been the position with Great Britain and some foreign
countries, notably the United States, which is receiving
i. A moderate allowance is made for the toil of mother*.


handsome rewards for the quite negligible share she
has rendered towards the population and development
of this country.
The above figures represent the bare cost of making
whimpering babes into well equipped men and women
without even taking into account the unavoidable per-
centage of unfit raw material and failures generally.
The potential value is, of course, higher, particularly in
the case of such persons as possess virtue, skill, and
knowledge needed in the new country, and therefore
are likely to become fruitful. We have seen that this
was the case on a large scale in connection with Aus-
tralia's wine industry and the development of dairying.
The assertion made in the introduction to this book
that the best result is not attained by racial purity but
through a mingling of different human strains, is borne
out by the astounding development of the United States.
In science and art America is undoubtedly destined to
become as outstanding as she is to-day in industry. 2
The marvellous progress made by Great Britain during
parts of the 19th century points in the same direction,
and it is at least arguable that a contributing cause
to the gradual decline of her agriculture is a deficiency
in Alpine blood.
Future Bole of Non-Britishers in Australia.
Before turning our eyes on Australia's agriculture,
so largely benefited by foreign-born settlers, the future
of which has become an enigma requiring the best
brains in the land to solve, it is well to deliberate on
the ideal at which to aim.
2. It should be noted that for reasons apart from racial composition
America s agricultural population is on the verge of bankruptcy.


Starting out from the premises (1) that education
alone can save mankind from self-destruction, and (2)
that the rural class is the most difficult for education
to reach, a small group of intellectuals, with H. G.
Wells as chief, advocate the abolition of the proverbial
rustic, by making him a “towney.” The tillers of the
soil, instead of being strewn broadcast throughout the
countryside, are to live in towns whence they are to
sally forth in the spring to plough and sow, and in
the autumn to reap. The introduction of high class
machinery, soon to be driven by electricity, will, they
maintain, make this transformation possible. Inciden-
tally, it would tend to reconcile the clashing interest
and consequent animosity between town and country. 3
The other school of thought is of older date —that
not only because the rural class produces the first essen-
tial of life, food —but by virtue of a simpler existence
close to nature, it has become the backbone of a nation.
There are sociologists who boldly assert that except for
the steady flow of fresh uncontaminated blood from
country to town, the latter would cease to exist in three
generations. From the physical point of view this
would not hold good in the case of Australia’s open
healthy cities, whereas mental and moral decay would
probably much reduce their usefulness.
In the absence of statistical data, the following hypo-
thesis may be hazarded: —
Speaking in a general sense, thus making allowance
for numerous exceptions, there are in our cities two
strains of blood —the old of city origin, dating back
more than three generations, and the new of more or
3. The experiment was actually tried in America some twenty odd
years ago with the so-called Bananza Farms. As nothing has beenf heard
of them since, the experiment may be assumed to have failed.


100%-T 1 nri 1 1 1 ,
g tj <3 ** ,
r>j \3 N !n
g-S In S S
S N § 5 .*Q O <u
0) J3 <o c
<3, h ■% <o
less fresh country origin. From the former spring all
that is artificial, corrupt, base, mentally impoverished,
and bent on committing race suicide —from the latter
our leaders in thought, education, art, and industry.
SHHy Hi Rural DJslte I \Jn Towns
(Those living in rural districts include the trades people and others
settled around country railway stations and in country townships, of which
there is one or more in every local government area throughout Australia.)


Even if this hypothesis only approaches the truth,
in view of the fact that the new blood in time gets old,
we may well ask what would happen to the human race,
if all and sundry—including the section exacting toll
from the soil —were made city dwellers. Education
would be of no avail if in the end the human mind
became unresponsive to it.
The two opposing views having been briefly outlined,
space may be given to Australian agriculture in the
past and the present, and the part non-British stock is
likely to play in the future.
Though agriculture existed at an early date, and in
South Australia had made good progress, it did not
assume national importance till, in the seventies, alluvial
gold-digging had petered out and many gold-diggers
settled on the land. In Queensland the number of
these was augmented through assisted immigration from
Great Britain, Germany, and the Scandinavian coun-
tries ; while some of the other colonies gained by people
coming at their own expense. These, then, were the
pioneers of Australia’s agriculture, consisting in order
of number of English, Irish, Scots, Germans, Scandi-
navians, other non-British Europeans.
Expecting to be substantially rewarded for their
efforts, the pioneers threw themselves wholeheartedly
into the work of clearing the forest, breaking up the
ground, erecting fences, sinking wells, and building
homes. Aided by growing families many succeeded, but
at a cost in toil and self-denial which made the second
generation wonder if the game was worth the candle.
So they commenced to drift to the cities, entering the
railway service, the police force, the tramway service,
and any other service not requiring special skill. Those


who remained on the land naturally had easier days
than their parents had ever known, but they, too, had
much to contend against. The introduction of freezing
chambers on sea and shore had certainly caused their
meat and butter to realize prices abroad which seemed
prodigious, compared with the pittances the flooded
local market had offered their fathers. Yet they did
not prosper—it was the merchants in the cities who
grew opulent. In Denmark, where through co-operation
the farmers have dispensed with the middleman, their
overhead expenses are about 28 per cent., in the United
States they are about 62. No statistics are available
to throw light on this subject in Australia, but it is
doubtful if the Australian farmers are better off than
their American colleagues. To this disability must be
added the heavy burden placed on primary pursuits
in order to create and maintain secondary industries.
The farmers who, at the beginning of extensive wheat
growing, bought their land cheaply, and who later on
benefited by the high prices on foodstuff during and
after the war, prospered, but the plight of all others
is as acute to-day as ever it has been. Only last year
it was revealed that, while the milk vendors in Mel-
bourne grow opulent, dairy-farming in Victoria can
only be carried on at a profit by the aid of child-labour.
The farmer cannot pay wages comparable with the wages
paid in the cities, so what labour he does get, if he
gets any at all, is generally of an inferior quality.
Seeing little hope of betterment, and desiring to make
the life of their children more carefree than their own
has been, they sell out whenever an opportunity offers,
and move to the cities. Capital is thus continually with-
drawn from the rural industry, those coming in having


less than those going out, and in most cases less experi-
ence. If they cannot sell, they may embark on a
system of share-farming. In either case their service
is lost to the land. Those who take over the farms
with scanty means and strike an initial unfavourable
season, go to the wall. As for the small holders, they
have little chance from the outset and, when beaten,
sell out to more successful neighbours; or they simply
quit, seeking employment in town, while rabbits and
weeds triumphantly take possession of their former
homes.
The necessity for increasing Australia’s population
to enable her —should need arise—to defend herself
against external foes is often voiced by public men and
the press. Mention is hardly ever made of defending
herself against internal foes; yet, these are real, and
they are amongst us to-day—floods and fires, the devas-
tation of which could be minimised by engineering
works and extensive fire breaks; diseases and pests, the
fight against which only adequately equipped and
devoted scientists can successfully direct; weeds and
rabbits laughing Parliamentary Acts and Government
Inspectors to scorn, well knowing that only a virile
and numerically strong body of cultivators can arrest
their progress.
While in the cities there is no end of strikes for
higher pay and shorter hours, or for principles of
little importance to anybody, each increase in salary,
without a corresponding increase in efficiency, being a
new nail in the coffin of the most vulnerable rural
pursuits, the fair land of Australia is being laid waste
by noxious weeds. This scourge, represented by prickly
pears, St. John’s wort, Stinkwort, blackberries,


loo Percentageo/ Breadwinners in Australia
AJJ O/h ers
50-
0 1871 1921 1985
thistles, bracken ferns, capeweed, sweet briars, and
so forth, spread over ever increasing areas, some of
them creeping into the very gates of the capital
cities. 4
Making allowance for the impetus given to wheat-
growing on large holdings, on the open plains wherever
improved machinery can be given free play, and to
fruit-growing in circumscribed irrigated areas, it does
not augur well for the future that, in many districts,
of which the best watered in Victoria, Gippsland, may
be mentioned as an instance, the sparse population is
becoming sparser from year to year. No less gloomy
is the outlook for the secondary industries, so important
to Australia's development. For reasons well known
4. In Victoria 66 different plants and shrubs have been proclaimed
noxious weeds by The Noxious Weeds Act.


to every student of world economics, these can only
reckon on the home market for expansion, and this
market, in no small degree, is dependent on a large
rural population with great purchasing powers.
The lesson conveyed by the graph is, that if the
percentage of primary producers continued to decline
at the same average rate as between 1871 and 1921,
there would be none left by 1985. This is, of course,
unthinkable,* but in view of the slowness with which
economic re-adjustments take place, the downward trend
may continue for some considerable time yet.
It should be mentioned that a decrease in the per-
centage of food-producers is quite natural and a world-
wide phenomenon. Indeed, it may be a sign of progress,
as is pointed out in a carefully considered treatise,
Drift of Population to the Cities, submitted by E. T.
McPhee, of the Commonwealth Bureau of Census and
Statistics, to the Science Congress in Adelaide in 1924.
He rightly says that there is a fixed limit to food
consumption per unit of population, and as agricultural
machinery and methods improve, a decline in the per-
centage of food-producers is inevitable; whereas to a
world advancing in civilization there is no limit to
other requirements—luxuries of to-day becoming neces-
saries to-morrow. McPhee’s arguments, however, are
only applicable to a self-sustained economic unit and
do not deal with Australia's specific problems.
Nor is much comfort to be derived from an article
on Australia’s Commerce and Production in Australia
To-day, 1925, from the pen of Professor Copland, Dean
of the Faculty of Commerce, University of Melbourne.
The Professor bases his optimistic views regarding Aus-
tralia’s future on the facts (1) that our wealth per


Mining.
Pastoral.
Agriculture.
1911 ..
109,748
157,967
295,710
1921 ..
66,882
142,349
338,088
head of population is very high; (2) that our natural
resources are great; and (3) that there is a growing
demand for our products. He has little difficulty in
proving that our secondary industries are making
satisfactory progress; but beyond rejoicing at the de-
velopment of tropical agriculture in northern Queens-
land, particularly cotton, which is predicted to become
one of our staple products, little is said about our rural
industries. It is not my intention to join issue with
Dr. Copland, and all I desire to say is that a careful
study of his exceedingly able article conveys the im-
pression that Australia’s development is lopsided, which
indeed it is.
The primary industries are:—Agriculture, pastoral
pursuits, hunting and trapping, fisheries, forestry, water
conservation and supply, mining and quarrying. Those
engaged in agriculture, pastoral pursuits, and mining
constitute the overwhelming majority, and need only
be considered here.
Comparing the actual figures for 1911 and 1921, we
get the following table: —
In the period under review the mining industry, apart
from coal mining, practically collapsed. The reason is
well known —prices of metals did not keep pace with
the cost of machinery and stores, and the rise in wages,
and most of the mines were closed down. Quite recently
the value of tin has much improved, and a revival of
tin mining may be expected.


The pastoral industry embraces sheep and cattle rais-
ing, dairying, and pig and poultry farming. Cattle
i aising suffered, and still suffers severely, through com-
petition with Argentine and Uruguay. Owing to the
shorter distance to the meat market of Europe, South
America saves in freight and can supply meat in a
chilled condition, whereas Australia must freeze hers,
which makes it less attractive to buyers; but more
especially did the pastoral industry suffer through
dairy farming being unprofitable.
The increase in agriculture—which is considerably
less than in many secondary industries—was mainly
due to the expansion of fruit growing in irrigated areas,
to the placing of returned soldiers on the land, and to
the opening up of new areas for wheat growing. If,
however, we include the six years which have elapsed
since the last census, we find that a decline has also
commenced in regard to agriculture. (See Appendix.)
What is happening in Australia to-day is that the
farmers are meeting existing disabilities by aiming at
mass production, and by substituting machinery for
human labour. In old, and even in comparatively
recently established crop raising districts, the size of
the farms is increasing in inverse ratio to their number.
It is interesting to note that in Europe the movement
is just the opposite. There the holdings are getting
smaller from year to year and the tendency is in the
direction of substituting garden tools for machinery. 6
Leaving out the question of how the change, one
way or other, may affect a nation’s human material, it
5- lu Australia, except Queensland, from which State no figures are
available, the average size of the holdings rose from 553 acres in ion
to 666 acres in 1924. *


can be argued that it matters little whether 50 per cent,
of those directly or indirectly existing on a country’s
agricultural production live on the land and 50 per
cent, in town, or 10 per cent, on the land and 90 per
cent, in town. The same number of homes are sus-
tained, and life becomes more pleasant to the greater
number of people enabled to live in the cities. But
what about the greater part of Gippsland and similar
hill country in other parts of Australia, which does not
lend itself to mass production?
If such districts had been left alone from the outset,
their timber resources would have represented a national
asset, the value of which would have increased with the
population. But unfortunately they were thrown open
for selection, and at most places where grass could be
grown for cattle and a family eke out a living, the
forest was cut down. And now the families, one after
another, discover they can no longer exist on their
circumscribed plots, and they sell out or leave them.
Weeds, of which several species such as blackberries,
sweet briars, and St. John’s wort, either accidentally
or thoughtlessly have been introduced to Australia by
Europeans, prevent the forest from reconquering its
lost domains. Nor is afforestation on the gigantic scale
required within the range of possibility.
Unless the heavy load placed on farming be relieved
in some way or other there would seem to be only the
choice between letting such districts go back to wilder-
ness in its most useless and distressing form, or en-
couraging a type of settler to occupy them, to whom
toil is a pleasure and who, if need be, is content with


a lower standard of living than that to which the Nordics
of to-day readily submit. 6
Such is the present position of Australia’s agricul-
ture. 7 For various reasons, of which only one need be
mentioned here, all efforts at organizing the rural
class for economic self-protection have utterly failed.
The difficulty alluded to is that of Protestants and
Roman Catholics being unable to march together. In
most country districts, religious intolerance is an ob-
stacle to the rallying of forces for common ends, greater
than that arising from different nationality. The so-
called co-operative companies, of which there are several,
are in reality ordinary share companies with limited
liabilities, in which, it is true, a greater or smaller
number of farmers may be shareholders. Owing to both
the political power and the money power being centered
in the highly organized cities, the disunited, and at many
places impoverished, country population is at their
mercy.
Assisted British Immigrants.
It is not likely that the cities will yield any of the
powers and economic advantages until every other
avenue for preserving the rural industry has been ex-
plored; nor is it an easy matter to radically interfere
with the course of a nation’s economic life once it is
adopted. So recourse is being had to obtaining labour
from Great Britain to work on Australian farms for a
wage the industry can pay, such labourers simul-
6. These settlers may come from various parts of Continental Europe.
The most suitable of those who, during latter years, have evinced an in-
clination to migrate to Australia, are North Italians, Jugo-Slavs, and
Albanians, all of whom, as stated before, are overwhelmingly of the
Alpine race.
7. It may be mentioned here, that in the United States, to help the rural
population, a farm loan system, by which farmers can obtain cheap credit,
has been agreed to, and the Government will help by studying schemes for
co-operative marketing. In Australia the most notable steps to date is
the Patterson Stabilisation Scheme, and the efforts of the Queensland
Government to promote co-operation between producers and consumers.


taneously helping to increase Australia’s small popula-
tion. The hope is entertained that a large percentage
of these new-comers will permanently settle on the land
and make efficient farmers, thereby reviving the stagnat-
ing rural population.
Though the British immigrants already have brought
some relief and may continue to do so, the result is
bound to be disappointing in the end. There is amongst
them a large sprinkling of the Mediterranean strain,
who never took kindly to the land, and therefore rarely
made efficient farmers. Nearly all the immigrants hail
from the city population of the Mother Country, and
they include a fair number of artisans. On arrival at
an Australian port they are sent up-country, generally
starting their new career at a pound a week and their
keep. Lured by the high wages in the cities, the artisans
naturally return to town when the year has elapsed for
which they pledged themselves to remain on the land;
others, coming from decent homes in England, get dis-
heartened by the shocking living quarters many Aus-
tralian farmers offer their labourers; others, again, be-
come dubious as to their prospects or are overpowered
by the solitude of the lonely farms, so they trickle to
town whenever opportunity offers. In this case also no
statistics are available, but it would not be surprising
to find that less than 25 per cent, remain permanently
on the land. Some of these replace native-born farmers
and farm-hands, who then gravitate to the cities. And
so it goes on—from Great Britain to Australia’s rural
districts, and from there to the already over-crowded
cities, where the intensified competition for jobs causes
constant irritation. It is to be hoped that the assist-
ance planned to root them more firmly to the soil will
bear fruit; but in view of the experience gained by


settling returned soldiers on the land, it would seem
unwise to be over-sanguine as to the final result. 8 If it
failsy the question will be: What next. Will it go as in
the United States, where the ownership of the land is
gradually passing into the hands of city capitalists and
money corporations of various kinds, it being worked
by share-farmers, tenants, and married couples, in an
ever-increasing degree composed of Italians, central
Europeans, and other suitable Continentals from the
Old World? Or, as an alternative, will the Alpines
eventually become the owners of the land and work it
indirectly for the benefit of the Nordics—or, preferably,
for the common good? No one can tell.
Mixed Nordic and Alpine Rural Population Desirable.
Even the last mentioned solution would be unsatisfac-
tory. The withdrawal of the Nordics from the rural
population would be something in the nature of a
national calamity. The spring which feeds the cities
with fresh, invigorating blood would cease to flow, and
the rural stock itself would be impoverished. The
Nordics possess virtues supplementing those of the
Alpines. Both are equally needed on the land, perhaps
in the proportion to that existing in Denmark. The
Nordics are dynamic pioneers, innovators of new ideas
and methods, good organisers and progressive farmers.
The Alpines are frugal, patient, hard-working plodders,
who possess that intense love of the land which makes
them cling to it in rain and sunshine, generation after
generation, without which the growth of rural tradition
is difficult and a staple rural population an impossibility.
8. Mr. Allan, ex-Premier of Victoria, himself a practical farmer, address-
ing a delegation of soldier-settlers seeking relief, said: “To make a living
on the land at present is not easy” (The Herald, 1/2/1927).


m h m 1 (
S *9
HH In Rural Tislk l I In To wns
(See Footnote, page 214).


It is stated that over four thousand farmers in South
Australia sold out and moved to Adelaide after the pros-
perous war years and early post-war years, and that
the sellers were mostly of British stock and the buyers
of German. It would be of more than passing interest
to know to what extent this statement is true. That
the Germans and their descendants cling to the land
with more tenacity than the British was disclosed at
the last census, when 83 per cent, of the Lutherans in
Australia (German and Scandinavian stock) lived in
rural districts, as against 48 per cent, of Presbyterians
(Scotch), 37 per cent, of Anglicans and Methodists
(mainly English), and 36.5 per cent, of Roman Catho-
lics (mainly Irish). One cannot help visualising what
stagnant Tasmania would have been to-day had the
thousands of Germans who went to South Australia
settled in the Island State; or what Queensland, despite
all its natural resources, would become, if the non-
British people and their descendants, largely of the
Alpine strain, were withdrawn.
Final Remarks .
So much for the material advantage of a mixed racial
population, and now as to the need of it for the mind.
Nothing is so soul-destroying as uniformity. Occa-
sionally in mediaeval Europe it was used to torture sus-
pected criminals and heretics by placing them under a
cistern of water, releasing one drop at a time with
slow, regular intervals —drop after drop, drop after
drop, till the monotony of it resulted in insanity. And
is not a bag-pipe, with its one octave and monotonous
drone, a torture to listen to for others than sentimental
Scotchmen. It is the blending of a multitude of colours


into a harmonic whole which makes a picture delightful.
Only the blending of individuals —Mediterraneans, Al-
pines, Nordics, and even coloured peoples, if possible of
assimilation into the composite body—possessing dif-
ferent gifts, ideas, traditions, outlook on life, charac-
teristics, physical features, and so forth, all working for
the common good, makes life rich and full and worth
while living.


APPENDIX.




EXTRACTS FROM AUSTRALIAN CENSUS REPORTS.
GERMANS.
1851.
1854.
1857.
1861.
1871.
1881.
1891.
1901.
1911.
1921.
New South Wales
—
—
—
5,467
6,623
7,490
9,565
8,716
7,241
4,569
Victoria
abt. 1,000
3,955
7,834
10,418
9,264
8,894
10,772
7,608
6,142
3,693
Queensland
—
—
—
2,124
8,317
11,638
14,910
13,163
11,979
9,527
South Australia
—-
," —
—
8,863
8,309
8,801
8,553
6,664
4,977
3,193
West Australia
—
—
—
43*
71
290
1,522
2,036
1,005
Tasmania
—
—
—
—
782
918
670
590
887
Northern Territory ..
—
—
•—
3
9
25
22
Total
—
—
26,872
32,556
37,676
45,011
38,352
32,990
22,396
* 1870.


At the Census of 1921, in the case of 36,564 native-born Australians,
both parents were bom in Germany; 45,582 persons had a German
father, and 15,645 a German mother, the other parent in the large
majority of cases being British. How many Australians can count
Germans amongst their grandparents and great-grandparents is not
on record.
LUTHERAN CONGREGATIONS IN 1927.
“The Evangelical Lutheran Synod in Australia”
South Australia.
Adelaide; Alawoona; Allen’s Creek; Ambleside; Appila;
Auburn; Australia Plains; Bakara; Balaklava; Birdwood;
Black Hill; Blyth; Booborowie; Bower; Brinkworth; Caloote;
Cambrai; Canowie Belt; Catt; Ceduna; Cobdogla; Crystal
Brook; Denial Bay; Dutton; Edillilie; Emu Downs; Eudunda;
Freeling; Fullerville; Galga; Gawler; Goode; Hectorville;
Jabuk; Kapunda; Karoonda; Kimbda; Koonibba; Kunden;
Lameroo; Lock; Loxton; Lower Bright; Lyndoch; Malpas;
Mannum; Merghiny; Meribah; Millendilla; Monarto; Moo-
rook; Morgan; Mt. Torrens; Murbko; Murray Bridge; Myrla;
Naidia; Nangari; Neale’s Flat; Nildottie; New Residence;
Paisley; Palmer; Pekina; Perponda; Peter’s Hill; Pinnaroo;
Pompoota; Port Adelaide; Port Lincoln; Port Pirie; Punthari;
Quorn; Renmark; Rosedale (Rosenthal); Rowland Flat;
Rudall; Saddleworth; Sandalwood; Sandleton; South Kil-
keran; St. Kitts; Springton; Strathalbyn; Summerfield; Swan
Reach; Tanunda; Tarnma; Tailem Bend; Tweedvale; Upper
Bright; Veitch; Waikerie; Wilmington; Wudinna; Yaninee;
Yorktown.
Victoria.
Arkona; Bangerang; Clarkefield; Dimboola; Freshwater
Creek; Galaquil; Geelong; Green Lake; Grovedale; Gym-
bowan; Hamilton; Hopetoun; Horsham; Jeparit; Katyil; Ken-
mare; Keweil; Kiata; Melbourne; Mildura; Minyip; Murray -
ville; Murtoa; Natimuk; Netherby; Neukirch; Nhill; Ni Ni
Well; Parwan; Pella; Rainbow; Roseberry; Sea Lake; Ser-
vicetown; Tabor; Tarrington; Vectis; Walpeup; Warrackna-
beal; Warrayure; Willaura; Winiam; Wodonga; Woomelang;
Yanac.
New South Wales.
Albury; Alectown; Bidden; Burrumbuttock; Coolamon;
Culcairn; Forbes; Gidginbung; Gilgandra; Henty; Jindera;
Leeton; Lockhardt; Munyabla; Nelungaloo; Rose Bay
Heights; Sydney; Trungley Hall; Ungarie; Walleroobie;
Weethalla; Wyalong.
Queensland.
Aubigny; Barney View; Binjour Plateau; Blenheim; Bli
Bli; Bracalba; Brigalow; Brisbane; Clarendon; Delaney’s


Creek; Dun-das; Edenvale; Esk; Evergreen; Fairney View;
Forest Hill; Gatton; Greenwood; Harlin; Hazeldean; Head-
ington Hill; Helidon; Ingoldsby; Ipswich; Maclagan; Mar-
burg; Minden; Mondue; Mt. Kent; Mt. Sylvia; Mt. White-
stone; Nanango; Nutgrove; Rapeley; Stanthorpe; Taabinga;
Teviotville; Toowoomba; Wararba; Yamison.
The “United Lutheran Church” in Australia.
1. In South Australia.
Adelaide; Ambleside (Hahndorf); Angaston; Angas Val-
ley; Appila; Bethany (Bethanien); Bethel; Black Hill; Blyth;
Bower; Bow Hill; Caliington; Cambrai (Rhine Villa);
Daveyston; Ebenezer; Eden Valley; Edithburg; Eudunda;
Freeling; Geranium Plain; Punthari (Hildesheim); Hoyleton;
Gawler; Greenock; Kapunda; Lameroo; Laura; Light’s Pass;
Loxton; Lyndoch; Mannum; Millicent; Morgan; Mount Gam-
bier; Murray Bridge; Nain; Neales; North Rhine; Nuriootpa;
Palmer; Paringa; Parrakie; Peep Hill; Pinnaroo; Penrice;
Peterborough (Petersburg); Point Pass; Ramco; Quorn;
Robertstown; Salem; Sedan; Renmark; Sandleton; South Kil-
kerran; St. Kitts; Stoneheld (Steinfeld); Sutherlands;
Tanunda; Taplan; Tailem Bend; Towitta; Tweedvale
(Lobethal); Wasleys; Winkie; Willowie; Wirrabara; Yorke-
town.
2. In Victoria.
Arkona; Bendigo; Castlemaine; Dimboola; Doncaster;
Green Lake; Grovedale (Germantown); Horsham; Jeparit;
Katyil; Lochiel; Melbourne; Murtoa; Natimuk; Ni Ni; Rain-
bow; Hamilton (Hochkirch); Thomastown; Murrayville.
3. In New South Wales.
Alma Park; Baradnoodah; Beckom; Bethel; Boganvilla;
Brocklesby; Edge Hill; Jindera; Mangoplah; Mittagong;
Pleasant Hills; Temora; Ungarie; Wagga Wagga: Walla
Walla; Uranquinty.
4. In Queensland.
Alberton; Ambrose; Aratula; Beenleigh; Bethania; Ber-
gen; Bidwell; Bildoa; Boah Peak; Bundaberg; Brisbane;
Currajong; Diddillibah; Doctor’s Creek; Douglas; Dugandan;
Eagleby; Edenvale; Kulpi; Lockrose; Logan Reserve; Mac-
kay; Maclagan; Maryborough; Milbong; Meringandan;
Mondure; Mount Alford; Mount Beppo; Mount Cotton; Mount
Mort; Murgon; Nambour; North Arm; Norwell; Nudgee Road;
Nundah; Engelsburg; Gin Gin; Glencoe; Glenray; Goom-
bungee; Guluguba; Hatton Vale; Highfields; Hillside; Home


SCANDINAVIANS.
1871.
1881.
1891.
1901.
1911.
1921.
New South Wales..
—
2,637
4,885
4,558
4,126
4,257
Victoria
2,254
2,414
4,613
3,229
2,938
2,876
Queensland
925
3,245
5,026
5,300
4,380
4,044
South Australia ..
—
1,029
1,433
1,193
1,379
1,206
West Australia
—
29
245
1,494
1,582
1,363
Tasmania . .
—
225
331
360
283
265
Northern Territory
—
—
15
10
12
30
Total
3,179
9,579
16,548
16,144
14,700
14,041
Of the 14 v 011 Scandinavians in 1921, the Danes numbered 6,002,
the Swedes 5,025, and the Norwegians 3,014.
ITALIANS.
1871.
1881.
1891.
1901.
1911.
1921.
New South Wales ..
.
521
1,477
1,577
1,723
2,080
Victoria
772
947
1,717
1,526
1,499
1,850
Queensland ..
88
250
438
845
929
1,838
South Australia
—
141
186
327
184
344
West Australia
—
10
36
1,354
2,361
1,975
Tasmania
—
11
36
49
21
37
Northern Territory
—
—
—
—
2
11
Total
860
1,880
3,890
6,678
6,719
8,135
Creek; Hoya; Ipswich; Kirchheim; Pimpama Island; Plain-
land; Steglitz; Stone Quarry; Taabinga; Toowoomba; Wiloon-
ton; Witta; Yarwun; Yengarie; Zillmere.
The names in brackets indicate the original name of the
respective places, changed during the war.
As regards the nationality of the pastors of the above
two Lutheran Synods, it is interesting to note that approxi-
mately 80 of them (60 per cent.) are Australian born, 35 per
cent, are born in Germany, and 5 per cent, hail from America.
But as both Synods now have their own training colleges in
Australia, there is no need for the Lutheran Church to call
any more pastors from abroad.
Lutheran congregations were founded by the Scandinavians
in Brisbane, Bundaberg, Maryborough, Tiaro, Pialba, Mackay
and Edenvale —all in Queensland. Besides these there were
at one time Scandinavian congregations in Sydney, Mel-
bourne, East Poowong, and Adelaide. Only the congregations
in Brisbane and Melbourne have survived; they are both
combined with seaman’s mission, and receive monetary sup-
port from Denmark and Sweden respectively.


APPENDIX 235
FRENCH.
1854.
1861.
1871.
1881.
1891.
1901.
1911.
1921.
N.S.W.
Viet.
Q’land
S. Aus.
W. Aus.
Tas.
Nth. Terr. ..
Fed.Cap.Ter.
909
690
1,250
56
891
1,170
188
162
33*
1,369
1,334
340
293
30
59
2,270t
1,307
400
400
72
77
2,129f
955
364
225
254
57
1,347
734
333
166
254
38
4
1,519
746
349
324
271
43
1
2
Total
909
1,996
2,444
3,425
4,526
3,984
2,876
3,255
* 1870.
t Persons born in French Possessions included.
SWISS.
1871.
1881.
1891.
1901.
1911.
1921.
New South Wales ..
Victoria
Queensland
South Australia
West Australia
Tasmania
1,240
169
482
1,314
407
194
11
594
1,317
142
15
18
454
903
441
103
118
19
442
632
376
110
154
21
534
439
372
116
176
23
Total
1,409
2,408
2,086
2,038
1,735
1,659
JEWS.
1861.
1871.
1881.
1891.
1901.
1911.
1921.
N.S.W.
• •
1,759
2,395
3,266
5,458
6,447
7,660
10,150
Viet.
2,903
3,571
4,330
6,459
5,907
6,270
7,677
Qld. .,
49
291
457
809
733
672
1,003
Sth. Aus.
—
435
762
840
786
765
743
West Aus.
—
—
—
129
1,259
1,790
1,919
Tas.
—
200
—
84
107
130
121
Total
• •
4,711
6,892
8,815
13,779
15,239
17,287
21,613
In Western Australia, 1881, and in Queensland, 1891, Swiss were
included in “ Other Europeans.”
The figures for the Jews are obtained from records dealing with
religion. Such Jews as have embraced Christianity or have designated
themselves “ Agnostics,” “ Atheists,” “ Refuse to state,” &c., are,
therefore, not included.


As an indication of the proportion of males and females for
the non-British nationals in Australia, the figures for 1921
are adopted. This is the case in all the following tables:—
Males. Females.
Germans 63 .. 37
Scandinavians 82.8 .. 17.2
Italians 77.5 .. 22.5
French 57.4 .. 42.6
Swiss 71.6 .. 28.4
Dutch 76 .. 24
Belgians 46 .. 54
Greeks 86 .. 14
INTERMARRIAGE.
The husbands are non-British, the wives British, own
nationality, and others.
74.5 per cent, of French males had British wives
18.5 ~ ~ ~ ~ „ ~ French ~
fr ft yy yy yy yy Other „
66.2 per cent, of German males had British wives
81.3 „ ~ ,j yy yy yy German ff
2.5 ~ ~ yy yy yy yy Other ~
38 per cent, of Greek males had British wives
43.8 ~ ~ ~ yy yy yy GrCCk yy
18.2 „ „ yy yy yy yy OttlCr yy
44.2 per cent, of Italian males had British wives
52 „ yy yy yy yy yy Italian ~
3.8 ~ yy yy yy yy yy OttlCr yy
81.3 per cent, of Scandin. males had British wives
14.5 yy yy yy yy yy yy SCUndin, „
4.2 ~ yy yy yy yy yy OttlCr ~
75.6 per cent, of Swiss males had British wives
13.3 „ „ „ „ „ „ Swiss „
11.1 yy yy yy yy yy yy OttlCr yy
Only the husbands and wives who were together at the
night of the census (3rd to 4th April) are included.


German-born Wives
5.81
Children
Danish-born Wives
4.94
Norwegian-born Wives
4.63
99
99
Swedish-born Wives
3.99
»»
Italian-born Wives
3.91
a
Swiss-born Wives . .
a
Dutch-born Wives
3.49
it
British Isles-born Wives . . . .
3.46
it
Australian-born Wives
3.30
it
New Zealand-born Wives .. ..
2.97
it
Greek-born Wives
2.83
French-born Wives
1.86
it
THE AVERAGE ISSUE OF WIVES IN AUSTRALIA
ACCORDING TO PLACE OF BIRTH.
As will be seen, the fecundity of the principal European
nationals settled in this country varies greatly. The number
of children averages from slightly less than 2 children for
each French-born mother to slightly less than 6 for each
German.
NATURALIZATION.
In their general application, the words “alien” and
“foreign” are synonymous terms. Applied to human beings
in connection with place of birth or race, daily use has, how-
ever, created a distinction in so far as “alien” is further
removed from the root idea than “foreign.” Thus in Aus-
tralia, by “aliens” are generally understood persons substan-
tially different in race and culture from the British, and by
“foreigners” those who differ only in regard to nationality.
Scandinavians, Germans, French, etc., are “foreigners,”
whereas Indians, Chinese, and other coloured people are
“aliens.” Southern Europeans, though members of the
family of white people, are sometimes designated “aliens.”
The same inconsistency exists in the relationship of
“foreigner” and “Britisher.” Legally, a foreigner becomes
a Britisher through the act of naturalization; yet, having
been born a non-Britisher, in the consciousness of the general
public he remains a foreigner. In this book only place of
birth has been considered.
According to the following list, the Germans in Australia
seek naturalization in greater proportion than any other


nationals. The German figures would, however, have been
influenced by the conditions of war; thus in 1921 there were
practically no “migratory” Germans in Australia or late
arrivals of any kind.
Of the total number of Germans 82 per cent, were naturalized
~ ~ „ „ ~ Scandin. 72 „ „ » »
71 77 17 17 11 Swiss 65 ~ ~ „ ~
71 77 17 i 7 ii Italians 37 „ ~ „ »
ii ii i 7 17 17 French 35 „ ~ >» »
„ „ ~ » i 7 Greeks 23 „ ~ » »
The conditions for becoming naturalized are that the ap-
plicant has resided in Australia the last twelve months
preceding his application, and in a British country not less
than five years out of the last eight. In addition he must
have a satisfactory knowledge of the English language.
IMMIGRATION REGULATIONS FOR NON-BRITISHERS.
The admittance into Australia is regulated by the “Immi-
gration Act 1901-25” and by Regulations issued thereunder.
Regarding non-Britishers, the following regulations are at
present in force:—
Quota Restrictions on Jugo-Slavs , Greeks and Albanians. —
In view of the arrival of large numbers of these nationals
during the latter part of 1924, many of whom became
stranded, the British authorities were requested to arrange
that the number of visas granted to such persons should be
limited, as far as practicable, to within 100 a month for
each class.
Italians do not require to obtain British visas for Australia,
and no quota restriction has been placed upon them, but the
Italian Government, which has a highly organized Emigration
Department, has arranged that such migrants shall not be
permitted to come to Australia in greater numbers than can
readily be absorbed, and care is also taken to see that they
are distributed fairly evenly over the various States.
Ex-Enemy Subjects. —The special restriction against the
entry of former enemy subjects was removed by proclamation
(except in the case of Turks of Ottoman race) as from the


2nd December, 1925, and such nationals may now enter Aus-
tralia subject to the conditions applicable to non-British
Europeans generally, regarding health, character, passports,
and landing money—£4o.
Russians require special permission before they can enter
Australia.
Maltese . —A similar arrangement to that made with Italy
has been made with the Government of Malta, with the
additional provision that no more than 20 immigrants from
Malta are permitted to land from the same vessel during
the same month at any one port. Illiterate Maltese are ad-
mitted only by special permit on the application of friends
in Australia.
Palestinians , Armenians , and Syrians also require special
permission to enter Australia, and it is usual to consider
application by them or on their behalf only in cases where
they have relatives or friends of good character and standing
resident in Australia, who are prepared to vouch for them
and to guarantee their maintenance, if necessary.
COLOURED IMMIGRATION.— In pursuance of the
‘‘White Australia” policy, Asiatic or other coloured immi-
grants are, with very few exceptions, not permitted to enter
Australia for the purpose of settling here permanently.
Exclusion is effected by the application of the dictation test
prescribed in Section 3, paragraph (a), of the Act, which
may be imposed in any European language at the discretion
of the Officer who applies it. In other words, the test, when
applied, is used as an absolute bar to admission; but, as a
matter of fact, occasion does not arise for the test to be
applied to any great extent, as shipping companies refrain
from bringing coloured passengers to Australia unless they
have authority to land, either on the ground of former
domicile or temporarily for business purposes, etc.
There are special arrangements with India, Japan and
China, whereunder facilities are given for subjects of those
countries who are bona fide merchants, students and tourists
to enter Australia and to remain here whilst they retain their
status as merchants, etc.


Indians domiciled in Australia are permitted, as a special
privilege, in view of a Reciprocity resolution passed at the
Imperial Conference of 1918, and subsequently agreed to by
the Commonwealth Government, to introduce their respective
wives and minor children, subject to the production of Certifi-
cates of Relationship issued by the Authorities in India, and
provided also there is evidence that the wives and children
will be provided with a decent home in Australia and properly
maintained.


MOVEMENT OF RURAL WORKERS, 1921-1922 to
1924-25.
1921-1922.
1924-1925.
Increase or Decrease.
State.
Males.
Females.
Persons.
Males.
Females.
Persons.
Males.
Females.
Persons.
New Sth. Wales
120,905
16,842
137,747
123,225
16,255
139,480
2,320
—587
1,733
Victoria
106,369
53,059
159,428
103,013
33,954
136,967
—3,356
—19,105
—22,461
Queensland
55,395
16,235
71,630
61,661
15,863
77,524
6,266
—372
5,894
Sth. Australia
39,138
14,502
53,640
37,893
3,508
41,401
—1,245
—10,994
—12,239
West Australia
25,648
8,952
34,600
30,427
5,804
36,231
4,779
—3,148
1,631
Tasmania
18,693
2,908
21,601
17,086
3,124
20,210
—1,607
216
—1,391
Australia ..
366,148
112,498
478,646
373,305
78,508
451,813
7,157
—33,990
—26,833
Note ; (—) indicates decrease.


The above table shows that the womenfolk are gradually ceasing
to take an active part in rural work. This may or may not be a
healthy sign, but in either case close on 34,000 pairs of hands were
withdrawn from the industry in four years. The male workers slightly
increased, but even this small gain becomes depressing when seen in
connection with the immigration figures. New arrivals between 1921
and 1924 numbered 120,897 Britishers (75,531 males, 45,366 females)
and 21,159 other Europeans, mostly from Southern Europe (16,465
males and 4,694 females). Assuming one-third of the immigrants
went into the country, it is evident that either they did not remain
there long or they displaced Australia’s old experienced rural stock
at a rate not hitherto dreamt of. In reality, as previously pointed
out, the two movements have proceeded in double-harness. It would
seem that the lately-appointed Development Commission is up
against an extremely difficult proposition.
Brown, Prior & Co. Pty. Ltd., 430 Little Bourke St., Melbourne.






3 1508 00074291 1




TjfcH ~jr 1^^——-
i 3150802323^51^
NATIONAL
LIBRARY
Date Due OF Australia
- cJrt-g txc. < • Q
—
—


