

Normal




Normal
Souvenir of
the Quarantine Camp,
Jubilee Oval,
Adelaide,
Feb. ZGth-riar. sth, 1919.




NORMAL
Souvenir of the Quarantine Camp, Jubilee Oval,
Adelaide,
February 26th —March 5th, 1919.
FOREWORD.
The preparation of this little souvenir has
been no easy task, for even labours of love
may be full of difficulties. Our first word to
you, therefore, is one of apology. In the
first place there are doubtless many things
omitted which should be recorded in order
to make the booklet complete. This is in-
evitable, for your editors were not appointed
until nearly the end of the cam]), and hence
had not kept a record of events. Further,
it was impossible (fortunately) for us to
know all that was going on in camp ; we did
not hear of all the funny incidents; we did
not keep a spy at the doctor’s elbow to re-
cord all his remarks when the thermometer
refused to work; we could not be investigat-
ing the reason for the silence in the Dopeski
Mansions and at the same be hunting out
the reason for the lack of silence in the
“South Australian Hotel;” we could not
possibly make a tour of the mounds after
dusk; we could not go hunting for a column
of copy about high living in the Garden of
Eden when we had not received an invita-
tion to the supper party there. No! Two
of us are clergymen, and the other is a father
of a family. AA 7 e can only write of what we
know and saw. If aught is missed out which
should be in, on your head be the blame
for not sending us some “copy.”
Our Name.
For long we hesitated before christening
this, our only child. Of suggested titles for
the souvenir, there w r ere many. Some pro-
posed “The Detenue,” “The Detonator,” etc.
But ■we think that all will approve our
choice. If there is one word which will live
in our memories when much else is forgot-
ten, except in these pages, it will be the
monotonous verdict of our common friend,
the doctor. If there is one salutation with
which we shall in years to come greet those
who were with us during that week, it will
he “Normal.” Already it has been raised
to the dignity of a password. \Vc do not
know' what mystic word reveals to one Free-
mason the presence of a fellow-Craftsman,
hut we believe that if any one of us stood
up in a South Australian crowd—religious,
political, or sporting —and cried out the title
of this booklet, he would at once receive a
hearty response from some part of the mul-
titude, and an invitation to comanav a cup
of tea. Try it, just for an experiment.
Rut, to be serious for a moment, “Nor-
mal” expresses what was, and perhaps
makes us think of, wdiat might have been.
Just consider the situation. We came here
from all parts of an infected State; there
was no really rigorous inspection of us be-
fore we left, no sucking of glass tubes or
counting of pulse beats. We might have
brought with us millions of germs, which in
the comparatively crowded life of the camp
would have played havoc with us. Or we
might have developed other diseases than
flu. On the second day someone in camp
was spreading a rumour that many cases of
dysentery had broken out as a result of
drinking unfiltered and unboiled water.
When we heard that rumour from what
seemed a very reliable source, we felt as if
some machinery inside had stopped work-
ing. That the rumour was false we now
know ; but up to the very moment we left
camp something serious might have hap-
pened. AVe were near a precipice; but we


never got right to the edge, or rolled over.
We remained “normal,” in temperature,
temperament, humour, good-fellowship, and
desire to render such service as we were
capable of to our neighbours. If there was
one infectious thing in the camp it was
the doctor’s smile. Panic and confidence
have the same spreading qualities as bush
fires; one or the other may go through a
community with lightning rapidity, and it
was the doctor’s work and spirit which
made it impossible for panic to even get a
start. His triumph, and that of Mr. Anstey
and the Board of Health in seeing that all
our wants were supplied, made it possible
for life to jog normally along, made it
possible for our memory of that week to
be a happy one, made it possible for the
contents of the following pages to be bright
instead of gray or black. In fact, the only
abnormal thing in the whole adventure was
the fact that we got something from the
State without having to pay for it.
No one ever reads editorials, so we will
now remove our collective personality out
of the way, and make room for better things.
But we trust that this little effort will help
to keep green the memory of a great time
that was. As the years slip away, and the
hair which grew so long in camp gets scanty
and grey, perhaps you may sometimes
glance over these pages and let your
thoughts slide back to the days of the great
epidemic. And when your little grandson
comes up to your chair and says, “Grandad,
what did you do in the Great Picnic?” you
will hand him this little souvenir and say, “1
had a glorious holiday, mv boy!”
OUR QUARANTINE HOME IN SOUTH AUS.
(Tune: “Little Grey Home in the West.”)
When the locked-up train leaves for the west
And the dull stay in Melbourne is o’er,
Though the night may be long,
And the gargle stuff strong.
I’ll forget that the train trip’s a bore.
Far away where the stud sheep should roam.
And the harvesters sleep when they’re home.
We shall sink down to rest,
Thanks to this Spanish pest,
In our quarantine home in South Aus.
There are soft drinks at fourpence a time,
But we can’t get a'lager or wine.
We must not touch the fence,
Or send kisses out thence,
And this concert must shut up at nine.
Dr. Smith says we don’t play the game.
Our opinion of him js the same,
But our pulses are right.
We’re merry to-night,
In our quarantine home in South Aus.
There are strange sights that come to our eyes.
Dirty jobs done by wealthy and wise,
Fiddlers wash up the pots,
Parsons gaily draw lots
To see who shall empty the bins.
We all do thermom. drill each day.
But have not yet received any pay.
Still if Peake foots the bill
We shan’t mind not being ill
In our quarantine home in South Aus.
H. Heaton.
MIWBEE OUR "TIPPERARY”
It’s a Ion? way to come from Melbourne,
It’s a long way to go,
It’s a Iona: way around the Oval,
’Tis the sweetest place I know.
Some h'ke the Treasury Gardens,
Some like Leicester Souare,
But give us good old South Australia,
My heart’s right there.
Mrs. A. Williams.
ETERNITY—OR WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN.
(Tune: “Till the Sands of the Desert Grow
Cold.”)
Till the drinks in the canteen grow cold,
And tbe babies in camp are all old,
Right here we must stay
If the Board has its way,
And the days into years have rolled.
Till our houses and homes are all sold.
And our gardens have turned into mould.
We’re here till we die,
And escape to the sky
If you dare go catching a cold.
E. Woodley.


OUR PILGRIMS’ PROGRESS.
Had John Bunyan been still alive, this
story of our pilgrimage would have passed
into the pages of immortal literature. But
Bunyan died nearly 300 years ago, and had
he been alive in 1919 his delicate constitu-
tion would doubtless have succumbed to
the inroads of the flu germ. A less skilful
pen must therefore take up the tale, and the
story will be a brief, unassuming account of
how the precious cargo of souls found its
way from the Dirty City of the South to the
Queen City. If there are any serious omis-
sions from my tale, please be tolerant, for I
am not all-seeing or all-knowing, and were
this story to attempt to be comprehensive,
then this magazine would reach the dimen-
sions of a family Bible.
The Exodus.
I wonder how many glorious plans were
wrecked this summer? Now that peace had
come, most of us could with lighter hearts,
and possibly heavier purses, had looked for-
ward to a holiday freed from anxiety and the
dread of terrible cablegrams. Some of us
had set our eyes on Tasmania, some on New
Zealand, and all of us had worked out to the
very day the length of our sojourn across
the border, and the date of our return. So
off we had gone, leaving less fortunate
friends to revel in the prospect of a few
days at 110 degrees in the shade. Some of
us struck trouble very soon, for the Loon-
gana would not run, and we could not get
to Tasmania on schedule time. Still, St.
Kilda had its compensations, and some of
us had even got as far as Manly. Our
money went, but we cared nothing for that,
tor should not we be back in King William
Street just about the time we broke into
out last ten shilling note?
Then came the crash! For days some of
us heard rumours about people being taken
to hospital and their friends not being al-
lowed to see them. We heard of sudden
deaths and hurried funerals. We heard of
Mr. Holman sneaking away by special
train from the Premiers’ Conference. But
the Melbourne medical authorities still
smiled serenely, and assured us that there
was no need for alarm, since they were sure
that the germ was not Spanish. But whe-
ther Spanish or Portuguese, the thing was
spreading, and New South Wales took the
first step by admitting herself infected.
That was about the 18th of January. Mel-
bourne soon followed suit, and at last we
really faced the situation with our eyes
open. Of course, there would be no diffi-
culty in our getting away, for had not the
Federal and State Governments come to an
arrangement last November by which inter-
state traffic betwen infected States would
be possible? So all we need do was sit
back and wait, either till Melbourne became
clean or South Australia was declared in-
fected. Then the agreement would automa-
tically come into operation.
Stranded!
But alack for this delightful arrangement!
New South Wales had something to say on
the matter, and because of her anger at
Melbourne’s delay in declaring itself in-
fected, took up an attitude which resulted
in the complete stoppage of Melbourne-
Sydney traffic, and a complete breakdown of
the November agreement. Ah, well! this
w r as just part of the eternal Sydney versus
Melbourne squabble, and our own State
would honour its word. But Adelaide de-
cided differently. Melbourne had been cri-
minally negligent in delaying the admission
of her infection; the disease had got a firm
grip, and the number of cases was growing
rapidly. In sheer self-preservation of South
Australia, the Adelaide Central Board of
Health declared that it had decided to stop
all traffic into the State, whether by sea or
by land, until such time as arrangements
could be made to enforce a rigid quarantine.
That settled us; for the first time we rea-
lized that the straight line on the map sepa-
rating South Australia and Victoria was a
real thing. It was not so much a straight
line as a wall stretching from the ground
almost up to Heaven, and there were no
gateways through it. We could not do any-
thing but wait, and so began that series of
meetings in the Treasury Gardens every
afternoon at 2.30. Here some of the pilgrims
met. and Mr. Anstey, who fortunately for
us, was one of the stranded, reported regu-
larly the result of his negotiations with his
Government. For a long time there was
little to report, and some of us, I must con-
fess, felt that the Federal and State Govern-
ments were doing their utmost to disagree
with each other instead of finding some way
out. The whole question seemed to turn


Where he said he wasn't.
Waiting for a Home,
The Publishing Committee.
The Scavengers.
Small Fry.


upon the finding of a suitable place in which
to isolate us. Serviceton was out of the
question for a big crowd. Torrens Island
might be wanted for returning soldiers,
and none of us liked the idea of being put
down there. Somebody said Kangaroo Is-
land. “Not bad!” thought we, but the inha-
bitants of that place differed. “What about
Granite Island?” suggested someone, but
the lovers and boarding house keepers of
Victor Harbour promptly threatened to re-
sist our advent with pitchforks and sand-
bags. There seemed to be no place where
we could rest our many heads in our own
State, and some of the newspapers openly
hinted that since we had run away for a
holiday in that Victorian cesspool of disease
we should be left there to stew in our own
juice till the epidemic was over. So the
weeks dragged on, dull, drab, dreary, with
no theatres, picture shows, or libraries open,
with the disease claiming its hundreds of
cases daily, and with our money dwindling
rapidly. Had it not been for the cheering
effects of meeting fellow-townsmen in the
Treasury Gardens, our spirits might have
sunk very low. Some of us made a dash for
Serviceton, and put in quarantine there,
hoping sooner or later to get past the police
at the barrier. Of their troubles I cannot
write, since that is another story. But we
know that their lot was far from happy, and
that many of them deeply regretted having
left Melbourne.
Salvation.
At last, when hope deferred had almost
turned into hope stone dead, the unexpected
happened. The newspapers announced that
we were going by special train, and were
to serve our week’s isolation in the Exhibi-
tion buildings. The “Age” printed the
word “buildings” with a capital “B,” and
so we had visions of all sleeping in the huge
main hall, with the women in one annexe,
the men in another, the children on the plat-
form, and the Central hall as a dining-
room, etc. That was splendid. Possibly
we might be allowed to stand on the front
steps and watch the cars go down North
Terrace. Possibly even, the Wondergraph
people might pull down the top part of their
North Terrace fence and let us watch Mary
Pickford and Billie Burke for nothing. At
any rate w r e were going to get home, and
that was the most important matter.
Getting Passed.
The first process was medical examina-
tion, and our newspapers instructed us to
turn up at the Inspection Buildings in Ex-
hibition Street on Saturday, February 22,
at any time between 9.30 and 5. When we
arrived there, the first thing which struck
us was the fact that all Adelaide, or at any
rate all Adelaide that counted, or rather
everybody in Adelaide that we knew, seem-
ed to be in Melbourne, and we had not been
aware of the fact. The second thing which
struck us was that we were going to be
knocking about that building for the great-
er part of the day. Only very slowly were
people admitted; there must be quite 100
people in front of us, and we began to wish
that we had brought camp stools and a sup-
ply of provisions. Somehow it seemed im-
possible to get folks to line up into a queue;
we just formed a big blob of humanity,
standing round the door, up the steps, and
into the passage. If this record is to be
nearly complete I cannot omit one incident
which still remains vivid in the minds of a
number of people. I was there very early
on Saturday morning, and found about 30
folks in front of me. Gradually those ahead
disappeared into the Hall, and the number
behind grew to 20, to 50, to 100. At last I
was up against the entrance door, and was
sure to be one of the next six to be admitted.
Then the door partly opened and a frag-
ment of a head became visible. A voice
spoke; “No more people will be admitted
by this door. You must go round to the
other one.” For a minute most of us saw
red. Was this a sample of what we were
to expect all through the progress? We
protested that we had waited hours, and that
if the other door was to be used, the first
would become last, and the last first. But
supplications and even tears were unavail-
ing. We clung to our position for a while
in the hope that somebody inside might
change his mind once more. But No! and
we sorrowfully concluded that we had better
trek for door No. 2, and recommence our
long wait for our turn. Hence some folks
were as near inspection at midday as they
were at 9 a.m. The explanation lies, not
in a piece of official freakishness, but in the
fact that the crowd was preventing access to
the rooms over the examination hall, and


so, on the complaint of the proprietor, we
had to seek other means of entrance.
One pilgrim, after waiting there till near-
ly noon, went away. He had a wife and
two children to bring for inspection that
afternoon, and when the whole family ar-
rived later they were faced with the pros-
pect of a long wait. After about twenty
minutes on the pavement, during which the
baby’s weight had grown from 20 lbs. to
20 stones, someone casually remarked that
there was a side entrance by which people
with children could get immediate admis-
sion.
No one has forwarded to the Editor his
impressions of that Examination Hall, so
perhaps some impressions of the above-
mentioned pilgrim may be inserted here.
Forms, tables, papers of all colours, clerks,
khaki uniforms, and a sort of staid bustle.
The people sitting on the benches awaiting
their turn had on their faces the scared
look which one associates with a dentist’s
ante-room. Someone said “Sit down,” and
I sat down, gave my name and address, and
was quite ready with a statement as to my
moral character and financial position when
the official suggested that I should annex
myself at the tail-end of a string of waiting
people. At the end of that wait, a man
wrote something on a piece of yellow paper,
and invited me to give him a specimen of
my handwriting. I wrote my name in that
florid style usually associated with endors-
ing my salary cheques. I was then told to
proceed to the dais, where, enthroned be-
hind a table, sat a ruddy-countenanced gen-
tleman surrounded by papers, who eloquent-
ly wielded a rubber stamp. He borrowed
the piece of paper containing my signature,
embroidered it with the rubber stamp, and
I passed on. By this time my heart was get-
ting flurried, and the stones were turning
into hundredweights, so I stopped for a
breathing space to read the paper in my
hand. I discovered that it was a certificate
to the effect that I had been medically ex-
amined. The name at the bottom was Henry
Howard. But whatever had the said Henry
done to his flowing beard? Someone ex-
plained that there might be two Henry
Howards in the world, and I ceased to won-
der. I was then called to table No. 1, where
a foolscap sheet of grey paper was handed
to me. I read the first few words: “Know
all men by these presents that I (then a lot
of blank space) am bound to His Majesty
King George the V, by the Grace of God,
etc.” A line or two further down I saw
something about £IOO to be paid to His
said Majesty, something about “my heirs,
executors, and administrators,” “sealed with
my seal.” I read no further, for I realized
that I had become an important person.
Whether this paper was my will or a deed
of insolvency I did not know; certainly I
had no idea that George the V. was
aware of my existence; it seemed curious
that he should want me to pay him £IOO,
and equally curious that I should have
heirs, executors, administrators, or a seal.
At any rate George the V. would have
to dun me with all the bailiffs in the Empire
before he got £IOO out of me, or even a
hundred halfpennies. So without reading
any further I signed my name at the bottom,
and a man in khaki put a little red patch,
such as ladies put on their cheeks in fancy
dress carnivals, alongside my name. “That’s
all,” said the man in khaki. My wife had
been dutifully following in my footsteps all
through this grave process, and as I got to
the door she remarked querulously, “Now
where do we have to go to see the doctor?”
“That’s the doctor,” I replied, “that fellow
on the platform with the rubber stamp; he
has medically examined you, and he gets
5/ or £5 (I don’t know which) for every
one of us.” And so home to tea and rest.
After that excitement we all developed what
we thought was a temperature, and medic-
ally examined ourselves per clinical ther-
mometer, to our profound reassurance. My
Monday morning’s paper informed me that
the paper which I had signed committed me
to pay £IOO if I broke quarantine. I was
already so well broke that I had no desire
to break quarantine or anything else. That
afternoon we went for a second inspection,
and after a certain ritual had been gone
through, received another piece of paper,
this time grey, permitting us “to leave the
quarantine area of Melbourne by sea,” and
containing the rubber signature of the
above-named Howard, Henry. We also re-
ceived some tickets which were to admit us
to the railway platform and the train.


Homeward Bound.
All being now clear, 670 people made their
wav, preceded by their luggage, to the sta-
tion on Tuesday afternoon, February 25. I
suppose our faces showed the same happy
smile as must have been on the counten-
ances of the West Indian negroes, who in
1833 were told that they were to be liber-
ated at the end of five years. Our liberation
was coming within sight, and once we were
inside the station barrier, the germs of free-
dom became very active in our blood cor-
puscles. The first train was well filled and
off by 3,30, and the rest of us left an hour
later. Of course many of us would have
liked sleeping cars to be provided, but, ow-
ing to the number of travellers, that was
impossible. Still, arrangements were made
by which people with children could have
some spare room so as to allow the kiddies
to sleep. The rest of us were quite recon-
ciled to a sitting-up sleep, or if necessary a
standing-up sleep, so long as we got back
to Adelaide. As the keys were turned in
the doors, and the train slowly steamed out
of the station, every passenger sent up a
sigh of thankfulness and relief. We were
thankful to all who had helped to get us
away : to Mr. Anstey, to the railway officials,
to the quarantine folks, and to the hard-
worked, but patient officers of the Victorian
Tourist Bureau. If this account should
come before the eyes of any of our Vic-
torian friends we hope they will accept our
thanks, which are none the less sincere be-
cause expressed through the medium of
print.
Of that railway journey little need be
said. The trains kept up a good steady pace,
and fell little behind schedule time. We all
had good substantial meals, we all bore
patiently with the spraying of our compart-
ments, and I think we all dutifully attempted
to gargle. Those in charge of the trains
(Matron Nicholls, Staff-Sergeants Couch
and W. S. Evans, and Messrs. L. K. Ward,
H. C. Woods, and W. E. Flint in the first
train ; and Sister O. Garrood, Sergt.-Major
J. W. Westley, Messrs. E. A. Anstey and A.
McTnnes in the second section) handled us
tactfully but effectively, and cards, books,
meals, and attempted slumber made the
time pass quickly till morning arrived. I
suppose we all felt a thrill of joy when we
saw the river flowing under Murray Bridge ;
Mount Barker, Aldgate, Mount Lofty, those
dear familiar places, passed quickly by, and
the inhabitants of the houses near the line
stared eagerly at us in the hope of seeing
some of us attempt to forfeit our iIOO. Then
came the first glimpse of the Gulf, and we
were at Relair. Here we picked up our
traps and bundled hurriedly into the smaller
South Australian carriages. It was good to
feel South Australia underneath our feet
once more, and as we passed down through
the suburbs, past the railway station, under
the North Adelaide road, and behind the
North Terrace buildings, we realized at last
that we were nearly at our journey’s end.
We were hungry, tired, and dusty; there
was still a spell of mystery-bound isolation
before us; but what did that matter? We
were here, and there was the Exhibition
Building, and there the Conservatorium, and
there the familiar police uniforms, and
there the clang of a tram-car bell.
Landed!
As soon as we were out of the train we
realized where and how we were to be
housed for the next few days. On the Oval
100 tents had been erected; piles of iron
beds and bedding could be seen, so evidently
we were not to sleep on the ground with the
sky as our only covering. At once Mr. An-
stey called us together in front of one of the
grandstands, and informed us of the arrange-
ments which had been made by the Board
of Public Health. A letter from Dr. Ramsay
Smith had been handed to him at Service-
town. A copy of that letter is before me,
and shows the thoroughness with which
provision for our accommodation had been
thought out. For instance the letter de-
clares “The railway authorities have made
all arrangements, of which the Press have
got some particulars, but these arrange-
ments will be changed at the last moment
for more convenience and safety.” As for
the tents on the lawn, Dr. Smith writes: “I
would suggest no more than two persons
in each, unless they be children. The large
Machinery Hall will accommodate easily
any up to 572 people. Bedsteads, stretchers,
mattresses, sheets, blankets, pillows, pillow
slips, towels, soap, are all provided for each
passenger. Lighting, water supply, shower
baths, and to some extent plunge baths are
all available.” Dr, Smith then went on to


explain the procedure for the receipt of par-
cels, the arrangement of a post office, the use
of the telephone, the catering and canteen
arrangements, and the general control of the
camp by Judge Buchanan and Mr. Anstey,
One further sentence is worthy of quota-
tion: “My idea that you should manage all
the affairs is self-governing, each one mak-
ing his own arrangements or having some-
one to make them for hiin, as in private life,
and that you should refer for executive au-
thority when necessary to the cam]) medical
authority or to me direct.”
Making Our Nests.
From this letter it was evident that ample
raw material had been provided. The next
task was therefore to manufacture that
material into a big home, and after making
a hurried meal we all set to work with zest
to secure at least our share of the equip-
ment provided. Gentle brain workers could
be seen carrying wire mattresses and bed-
ding ; very respectable elderly ladies scram-
bled without any regard of dignity for pil-
low-slips, sheets, and towels. Staid old gen-
tlemen, who probably always slept with the
windows shut, eagerly began to make up
beds in the grandstand. The Machinery
Hall, alias the South Australian Hotel, be-
came the chief dormitory for unattached
men, the live-stock show hall being set
apart for unattached women. One little
dilemma cropped up, and is best recorded
in the words of the dilemmist, a married
lady, whose husband was on the wrong side
of the gate. “When I got here,” said she,
“I found tents for families, elderly ladies,
and people with children; the machinery
shed for the men, the fowl barn for the
girls. But no place had been provided for
grass widows; so I camouflaged myself as a
pullet, and flew to the fowl barn.”
Within a couple of hours there was not
an unappropriated piece of furniture or linen
in the camp, and since many had innocentlv
taken more than their share, others still re-
mained unsupplied. But the telephone was
soon at work, and within 24 hours of our
detraining alongside the stud sheep shed
everybody was well supplied with all the
essentials of camp life. The luggage had
turned up, the post office was open, and the
stream of parcels was flowing into the camp
with all the force of the Murray in flood.
When darkness fell that first evening we
were a terribly tired band, ready for a good
feed, a wash (we were too weary to take
our turn in the bath queue), and bed. I
suppose we all went to bed earlier that night
that we had done since the days of child-
hood. And how we slept! A battalion of
snorers or a company of burglars would
have equally failed to awake us. Hence
when morning came we all felt refreshed,
and the beginnings of the Oval smile began
to show themselves on the faces of the six
o’clock bathers.
The Dawn of Civilization.
A Greek philosopher once said that the
business of the State was to guarantee not
merely life but also the good life. On the
first day w r e had laid down the foundations
of life; on the second day we set to work to
develop a good life ; and by tea-time we had
a complete set of committees at work look-
ing after our bodily and mental well-being.
We all made our second appearance before
the Doctor, and though one or two were
placed aside on the detention stool, it soon
became evident that the health of the camp
was surprisingly good. Day after day we
paraded, the women in the morning, the men
in the afternoon, and few of us will forget
the feeling of confidence with which we
emerged from the Doctor’s tent. I suppose
the joy of being told daily that we were nor-
mal was so great that many of us have
already invested in a clinical thermometer,
and will suck that bit of glass one minute
daily for the rest of our lives.
On Being Slandered.
During that day we also began to realize
what people outside were thinking about
us. Apparently from press comments, offi-
cial whirlwinds, private letters or telephone
messages, and the hampers of eatables sent
us, Adelaide was thinking that we were a
terrible plague spot, the abode of a sort of
human swine-fever. It seemed to visualize
germs marching in millions over our bodies,
and believed that we were like lepers doom-
ed to eternal uncleanliness. How other-
wise could the inhabitants of a city board-
ing-house write , objecting to the return to
their midst of two of our fellow campers?
To the outside world we were famishing,
and devoid of the most primitive neces-
saries of life, How else explain the fact


that kind-hearted friends were sending
beds, stretchers, tables, tinned fruit, tinned
soup, and grapes by the hundredweight?
Finally we must be all panic-stricken,
crouching in our tents or occasionally
driven by fear to an attack on the guards
and the iron fence. We must be a crowd of
“toughs,” breaking our bonds, chafing in
duress vile, and only held back from an
onslaught on the city by the harsh threats
of an omnipotent Board of Health. How
otherwise explain a certain statement made
by an eminent personage on Thursday
about some of us being blind to our legal,
moral, and other obligations; how other-
wise explain the later statement that all
was “quiet” on the Oval? the implication
naturally being that formerly we had been
rowdy, destructive, angry, and insubordin-
ate
This fantastic picture made some of us
angry, but finally we all regarded it as a
great joke. We suspected that if the truth
were known, the attack on the gates would
come from the outside, as thousands of citi-
zens endeavoured to get in to share our
good fortune. We were far too happy and
comfortable to want to get out; I doubt if
anybody in camp had the least desire or
intention to break his bond, and few of us
had time or inclination to realize that we
were as completely penned in as some of
our less fortunate citizens residing at the
Stockade or Parkside. As for food, our
chief problem was to get through one parcel
before another came along. Grapes were
at a discount, and few of us will have the
pluck to look a bunch of grapes in the face
for many a long day.
The Daily Round.
Of subsequent events, there is little need
to write here; they form the subject of the
remaining part of this booklet. The daily
routine was soon well established —bath,
breakfast, thermometer drill for women,
committee meetings for the few, spraying
of tents and removal of dust-bins, dinner
at 12.30 or 1.30, cricket, thermometer drill
for men, afternoon tea-parties, tea at 6 or 7,
and the concert, or less public entertain-
ment, in the evening. On Sunday the reli-
gious requirements of the camp were well
provided for. The Christian Brothers con-
verted the Garden of Eden into a little
church for Roman Catholics; the Rev. R. P.
A. Hewgill arranged a morning celebra-
tion of Holy Communion in one of the
grandstands, and in the evening a united
service was held, led by seven clergymen of
different denominations, in the big
stand, I do not think any of us will ever
forget the singing at that service. Led by
a little orchestra consisting of Miss Stevens
(violin), Miss Oldham (piano), and Mr.
Dean (cornet), and assisted by a hurriedly
arranged choir, the congregation threw it-
self into the well-known tunes with a fer-
vour such as is seldom heard in any place
of worship. The parts blended beautifully,
and a volume of sound which came out on
to the Oval made one realize that one of
the most neglected joys of life is community
singing.
Tempus Fugit.
And so the days passed. Our health re-
mained good, except in the case of a few
children, whose food was either too plenti-
ful or unsuitable. But the Doctor, assisted
by Matron Nicholls, Sister Garrood, and the
Army nurses, was always ready to hand,
and gave unceasing and kindly attention to
the little ones. On Monday evening the
Broken Hill contingent, numbering 27 in
all, left us. Had they gone on Thursday
we should all have lined up and cried, “You
lucky beggars.” By Monday we had no
such comment to make. Rather did the
above exclamation come from the lips of
the Hill-ites, many of whom were very sorry
that their stay was being cut short. Our
own holiday then rushed on all to rapidly
to its close. On Tuesday we featured for
the cinematographer, and then at a mass
meeting voiced hearty votes of thanks to
all who had helped to make our trip so
pleasant and our sojourn so comfortable.
Some of us who hold the strings of the
money-bags had experienced occasional
qualms as to the size of the payment we
should be expected to make for our board
and lodgings. Mr. Anstey’s announcement
at the meeting that possibly we might have
to pay nothing, was therefore received with
cheers which came not merely from the
bottom of our hearts but from the bottom of
our empty pockets. At the evening con-
cert we took the opportunity of expressing
our thanks to Mr. Anstey for all his work
and patience by presenting him with a suit
case.


Melbourne !!!
Daily Duties —“Normal."
Arrival
Our
The D


Instructions.
Dish Washers.


Farewells.
Then came all-round good-byes, and next
morning cabs, motors, and carters were
swarming into the ground from 6 o’clock
onwards. I turn to my copy of the real
“Pilgrim's Progress," and discover that when
Christian reached the gate of the Celestial
City he found written over it these words in
letters of gold: “Blessed are they that do
his commandments, that they may have
right to the tree of life, and may enter in
through the gates into the City.” The
quotation fits our case fairly well, and so I
draw this narrative to a close. There is
much more which might have been said. I
have, for instance, omitted to give an ac-
count of the romance of the ladies’ shower
baths; I can do little more than express the
thanks of the whole camp to those women
who sprang to the assistance of the over-
worked waitresses, and helped so materially
in juggling with our wants for soup and
custard. I can only voice our equal grati-
tude to the men at the gate who saw that
our parcels reached their proper owners, and
to the voluntary postal officers who dealt in
everything from telephone messages to lug-
gage labels. To the Doctor’s clerk, Judge
Buchanan, for making us so nervous that we
forgot our baptismal names, to Mr. Tolley
for providing us all with a photograph of the
camp, to the newsboys for awakening us
at 6 a.m. with their false cries, and to a
score of others I pass on the heartfelt thanks
of the Six Hundred.
My story is ended. In the words of Bun-
yan : “Should it be my lot to go that way
again, I may give those that desire it an
account of what I here am silent about;
meantime I bid mv reader adieu.”
John Bunion.
IDEAL ISOLATION.
(Tune: Chorus of "If you were the only Girl in
the World.”)
If the “flu” were the only germ in the world.
And Ramsay the only boy,
Nothing else would matter if he had his way,
Wc could go on living here from day to day.
This Garden of Eden was just made for us,
With nothing to mar our joy.
He would say such horrible things to us,
We should be such beautiful things to cuss.
If the “flu” were the only germ in the world,
And Ramsay the only boy.
E. A. Williams.
CONTRITION
(or "The Girl who was afraid of the Lootenant.”)
A NOCTURNE.
Scene: A tent not U)0 miles from freedom.
Time: Midnight. The evening after Lieutenant
F g's address on Sanitation.
Silence, save for snores from Machinery Hail.
Then the air is pierced with a scream of mingled
anguish and dismay.
Araminta: Whatever is the matter, Arabella?
Arabella: Oh. Oh I I’ve just remembered 1
dropped a pin on the floor of the tent, and you
know he said we mustn’t throw rubbish about.
Araminta: Well, I’m sure we’ve done our best.
This tent has been swept, disinfected, and gargled,
and every blade of grass has been wiped with a
pillow-case. The temperature of all the mos-
quitoes has been carefully taken: all but one are
normal, and he has been dispatched kindly but
firmly. We have unpacked the whole of our lug-
gage, and 2648 articles have been out in the sun
for two hours. The flies and beetles of our tent
have been rolled up, and holes cut all over the
roof of the tent to let in plenty of air: I’m sure,
Arabella, when we explain with full details about
the pin, you’ll be forgiven, so go to sleep now,
and don’t worry any more.
First Irate Voice (from next tent) : “For good-
ness sake, stop that talking over there.”
Second Irate Voice (in distance): “Hey 1
F g! Give up throwing grape stones about!”
(Loud peals of joyous laughter from whole
camp. Then silence. Slow curtain, as germs die
for lack of food.)
Miss A. B. Whitham.
INQUISITION.
Where did you come from people dear?
Out of Victoria into here.
What did you bring as you came through?
Everything else except the “flu”.
Who was it hustled and got you the train?
Our E. A. Anstey; he’d do it again.
Where did you get that grin so glad?
It’s the same as our portly sar-major had.
Where did he learn to smil e I wonder?
Out midst the roar of battle thunder.
What do you do with your time all day?
We work and we wash and we eat and we play.
Do you find it easy to get a shower?
We stand in Iin e for many an hour.
And do you keep your tent quite clean?
Yes, never a grape skin is to be seen.
How do you like it camping out?
It’s the best thing on earth without a doubt.
We’re clean and we’re happy, well fed and
content,
It's the jolliest picnic we ever have spent.
Fouriel.
PERPLEXITY.
(Tune: “K-Katy.”)
B-b-b-beautiiul Adelaide, beautiful Adelaide.
Proving that we’ve got no “flu” to you, are wc.
Till the clock strikes nine on Wednesday,
We’ll be wondering why they called it Jubilee.
G. Cashmore.


THOUGHTS OF EXILE.
“Earth hath not anything to show more
fair” than the sight of their own home town
to weary travellers, whose weeks of holiday
are past, and who return eager for the well-
loved work and familiar faces that await
them. What sad plight is ours, then, to
whom but a passing glimpse of our city was
given, ere we were spirited out of sight and
locked away in an isolation that seems the
further from home in that it is so near. It
is so much more difficult to believe that
Adelaide lies just beyond that boundary
fence than it was to believe it smiling on
the other side of the long distances between
Melbourne and Mount Lofty. We are here
in a world of our own, strangers in a well-
known land, and setting up our household
gods in unfamiliar places. In our little
town of canvas tents and vast unhomelike
buildings we feel as curiously removed from
home as if upon some special planet made
for us alone.
Is it really true that over there lies North
Terrace, with its row of sedate buildings, its
doctors’ plates, its ribbon of green and blos-
soming beauty, and its open-air picture-
show? Do picture shows still show pic-
tures? And what is Mary Pickford’s latest?
And' do people still imbibe soft drinks there
under the seat? And is King William
out of the bottle neck, and put the empties
Street still there? King William Street with
its Beehive Corner, its fruit stalls, and its
button sellers? Do they still have button
days, and is Sammy Limn still alive? And
is Rundle Street still there? Dear old
Rundle Street, with all its bustle, its Kin-
derrnann coffee cake, and Birks’ soda foun-
tain ! And I suppose all the sales are over
by now: I did want a new blouse and hat.
Araminta sat on my hat last night whilst
hunting for the candle, and I can’t face
civilization in a top-dressing with a bat-
tered crown. And over the trees there,
can that be North Adelaide? Dear old
.North Adelaide with its mansions on the
front streets, and its squalid hovels in the
back lanes! Is the river there, and the
bridge, and the hill ?
At night when we lie under canvas roof,
and see through the open flaps of the tent
the strange horizon and the untroubled
stars, it’s very hard to realize that home is
so near, and that all the familiar life of
which we were once a part is beating out
there beyond the policemen and the iron
fence. Surely it is all a thousand years,
a million miles away, that home and that
life. Surely some great catastrophe has
taken place, engulfing all that dear old
civilization, and we alone are left, a hand-
ful of souls saved from the ruins of a
world. Heavens! how did it .
Hello! What’s that? The clang of a tram
car bell and the squeak of the wheels as it
turns out of Pulteney Street into North
Terrace. After all the world is still there,
and that is the last car, empty of passen-
gers. with sleepy-eyed driver and conduc-
tor, going home to bed in the barn.
And if the trams are there, North Ter-
race must be there, and the Hospital,
and the River; and the ice cream and the
chocolate shops. Thank God !
How many hours is it now to next Wed-
nesday? To-day is Thursday. It is half
past 11 : 81 hours a day, Friday, Saturday,
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday—that is five
whole days. Five twenty-fours are 180;
half an hour to-day still to go, that is 180 L;
and I’ll be out by six on Wednesday morn-
ing. so that’s 126 L Not so long after all.
Glory! But what if somebody should get
the “flu” between now and then! I say, I
am feeling rather feverish; surely I can’t
be . Araminta ! Wake up ! Get
the clinical thermometer out. I am feeling
hot. Have you got it ? Give it to me!
Just a minute! . . . Hallelujah! It
says “Normal.”
CLEAN FOLK AT HOME.
(Tune: “The Old Folks at Home.”)
Way down upon de Juh’lee Obal,
Camping am we.
All jes’ along oh Mr. Anstey,
He am de bes’ chap dere are.
Ole Doctur Ramsay Smith not want us,
Tole us stay away.
Don’ come back to Souf Australia
Not for many a day.
Chorus:
All de folks am gay and cheery,
Hark to dere refrain,
Such a jolly good time we’re habing,
We’ll want to come back again.
We tink our tents am clean an’ tidy,
Till de Nuss come by;
She an’ Sar-Maje shake dere heads togebber,
Den we all want to cry.
Folks holler at us cross de fences,
Mus’n do dat.
If dey wait until anoder few days,
Den we can all hab a chat. Chorus.
Miss A. R. Good.


A SMALL BOY'S ESSAY ON
INFLUENZA.
Influenza is a decease what you catch in
Sydney and Melbourne, it’s a germ that
moves on four legs, and keeps us away from
school, my mother says she wishes it would
last for ever as we don’t have things to do.
and only have one bath a day
The Doctor sends us funny little packets
of lovely scented soap. It’s Red. Our din-
ner is served up punctual and we have
tickets like father gets at the races, firsts
and second. We is all in the first and has
a shed of our own. In the mornings we
gets up early, 'cos there is so much to sec,
after we’ve had our grape nuts mother takes
us to a tent where the ladies with red capes
put things in our mouths, which is ’orriblc,
wonct mine fell out and rolled under the
table, where a nice kind old man with a book
sits—gosh I was scared : but the lady gave
me another. There is another man what
looks at the glass (he wears a white suit)
and says ’orrible—l think he’s tasted them
too. There is a little fire brigade what goes
round every morning with an ’ose, in case
we catches alight. Some men whats never
worked before goes round with a cart to
big tins and takes away green bottles like
father’s, the rest they leaves —the bottle-oh
always buys fathers.
There is a Mr. Smith, what people calls
Ramsay —I think they loves him, ’cos they
makes up songs about him, we wishes he
could find one of them things what he’s
looking for, ’cos then we’d have another
week.
After dinner a nice man tells us fairy
tales about the people what lives in Ade-
laide. his name is Asquith, he works on the
land.
We has concerts and movies at night —
our mothers and fathers comes to the con-
certs —others goes for walks. Once I found
a soldier’s cap but left it there ’cos I thought
he might have only one. We has lots of
fruit but to-day I had none ’cos mother put
a feeder on me what said “Please Don’t
Feed Me.”
We has fatty Arbuckle and a friend what’s
dressed up in soldier’s clothes, they sells
napers to the tents and sheds where ladies
is. To-morrow, we goes home, that’s all.
Beryl Alford and A. Davies.
THE GLORY OF THE OVAL.
(After Kipling's “Glory of the Garden.”)
Our Oval is a garden, that is full of stately views,
Of tents and sheds and galleries, and lawns and
avenues:
W ith soldiers on the terraces, and policemen
strutting by.
Hut the glory of the Oval lies in more than meets
the eye.
For where the old thick plane trees grow, along
the thin grey wall,
You’ll find the police, and caterer’s carts, which
are the pride of all.
The dust bins and the carters, the spraying
pumps and tanks,
The disinfectants, drain pipes, the barrows and
the planks.
And there you’ll see the soldiers, the men, and
'prentice boys,
Told off to do as they are bid, and do it with some
noise,
For except where ’phones are planted, and we
shout to scare our friends,
The glory of the Oval, it goeth ’-ithout end.
And some can mend the children's frocks, and
some can write some prose,
And some are hardly fit to trust with anybody’s
clothes,
But they can wash and dry the plates, and serve
the food alone,
For the glory of the Oval glorifieth everyone.
Our Ova! is a garden, and such gardens are not
made
By singing, “Oh, how beautiful,” and sitting in
the shade.
While better men than we go out, and spend their
working lives
At digging in the trenches, and longing for their
wives.
There’s not a pair of legs so thin, there’s not a
head so thick,
There’s not a hand so weak and white, nor yet
a heart so sick,
But it can find some needful job that’s calling to
b e done,
For the glory of the Oval occupieth all who come.
Then seek yonr iob with thankfulness, and work
within your borders,
If it’s only picking up the scraps, or carrying out
your orders.
And when your back stops aching, and your
hands begin to harden,
You’ll find yourself a partner in this little bit of
garden.
Oh, Anstey was the organizer, and Peake, who
loves him. sees
That half a proper member’s work is done upon
his knees.
So when hip work is finished we can wash ou"
hands and pray
That the memory of the Oval may not pass awv.
And the glory of the Oval, it shall never p-ss
away.
Miss B. Alford.


MUSICAL AND DRAMATIC NOTES.
(By Scene-Shifter).
“Whatever did you do with yourselves?
How ever did you put in your time?” are
two of the questions put to most of us by
all our friends since we got out. “Whatever
shall we do with ourselves?” is a question
we asked ourselves before we landed in
Ramsayville. It was answered for us by
many people —by the doctor with his daily
drill, by the friends outside who kept us
hard at work dissecting grapes, by the
sports committee, by the footballers who
made us walk in constant fear for our lives,
and last but not least, by the entertainments
committee. People like to spend their even-
ings in many different ways. Some like to
go to bed after tea; others prefer to talk
philosophy; some are of a scholarly dis-
position and find great profit in studying
botany and astronomy at one and the same
time. But experience shows that the big
bulk of us prefer to gather together and
make merry, and the entertainments com-
mittee provided amply for our merriment.
Formed on the second day in camp, the
committee soon got to work, and filled up
every evening with something which made
it worth while climbing up to the central
grandstand. Thanks to the loan of a piano
by Allans, and the presence of every kind
of talent, it was possible to arrange con-
certs which in variety and quality leave the
shows at Austral Gardens miles in the rear.
On the Thursday evening we had an im-
promptu sing-song, which revealed the fact
that we had in our midst good, singers
players, and—Archie. On Friday we were
given a properly arranged programme. On
Saturday came the poetry and parody com-
petition, when all the wit and poetic genius
of the camp came to light. Rumour has it
that many of the world’s great poets turned
over in their graves that night, and a num-
ber of ballad writers are meditating institu-
ting libel actions. On Sunday the united
evening service was followed by a short
sacred concert, in which Chopin, Greig, and
some of their fellows were allowed to
emerge. On Monday we had a few songs,
after which Mr. Heaton turned from con-
cert managing to his own job, and gave us
a lecture on that much misunderstood topic
“Bolshevism.” I think we all benefitted
immensely from the lecture; at any rate we
understood the meaning of the word as no
amount of cables from Europe had enabled
us to understand it. Then came the great
discovery! Archie had a rival! Mr.
Robert Pain emerged from his underworld
of drains and soldering-irons, and gave us
a startlingly realistic representation of the
love affairs of a Cockney costermonger. It
was a work of art, it was the real thing. No
less real was the accompaniment, supplied
on the spot by Mr. Heaton, who literally
took the whole keyboard as his province,
and skilfully wove Schumann’s “Merry Pea-
sant,” Elgar’s “Salut d’Amour,” Rachman-
inoff’s “Prelude,” and Anon’s “Nightingale
in the Spout” into a canvas on which the
singer painted the simple tale of requited
love. The tempest of applause which
greeted the end of the song showed the
vast audience’s appreciation, and it is to be
regretted that Mr. Pain’s encore broke
down because of the crass inability of the
accompanist to enter into the spirit and
rhythm of the song.
Tuesday was wind-up night, and all the
old favourites, along with some new ones,
made their positively last appearances.
There were speeches to Mr. Anstey, cheers
for the doctor, prizes for the poets, and
votes of thanks to Miss Cook, Miss Oldham,
Mr. Griffith, and Mr. Heaton. Two things
of that evening will long live in our mem-
ories : one was Archie’s get-up as the school-
boy who won a ha’penny for an essay on
influenza (published elsewhere, and copy-
right in the United States of America) : the
other was the perfectly sweet way in which
the doctor distributed the prizes. The
grace, the charm, the almost ab-normal
eloquence and stately grandeur with which
he bestowed the rare and priceless gifts on
their well-deserving recipients were only
equalled by the looks of amazed, dazzled
pleasure on the faces of the patients as the
doctor gave them their medicine. Then
Auld Lang Syne, the National Anthem, and
down to bed. But not to sleep. The ruf-
fians in the Machinery Hall saw to that.
But as to that pyjama parade, its frenzied
choralist, its invasion of the Garden of Eden
and other sacred places, and its damage to
the property of the Board of Health, —that
is another story, about which it is not safe
for me to say I know anything. I have no
desire to be called upon to supply new lids
for forty rubbish bins.


THE HUNGRY SIX HUNDRED.
O’er the grass, through the stiles,
Round the back, onward.
Straight for the dining rooms
Rushed the six hundred.
Forward the heavy weights,
Pell mell the “firsts” and “lates,”
Rattle the knives and plates
Hungry six hundred!
On come the short and tall;
Will there be room for all?
Not though the caterer knew,
Ample’s provided.
Quickly the chairs are filled,
Soon noisy tongues are stilled,
How well the whole are drilled,
Hungry six hundred!
Waitress to right of them,
Waitress to left of them,
Waitress in front of them,
Shouted and thundered.
Bang go the chops and steaks,
Disappear fruit and cakes.
No wonder the caterer quakes,
Appetites splendid!
Then with a smile serene,
Back o’er the Oval green.
Slowly strolled back again,
Happy six hundred!
When shall their memory fade?
Oh, the self-control displayed!
All the State wondered.
Honour the price they paid,
Honour the sacrifice made,
Noble six hundred!
E. A. Anstey.
AN OVAL ALPHABET.
A. stands for Anstey deserving all praise,
B. is Buchanan who’s doing seven days.
C. Cook and Wallis who cater for all.
D. is our Doctor who “normal” does call.
K. the Excitement on reaching the ground.
E. is the Flirting that's seen on the mound.
G. is the Girls in the cat and dog shed.
H. is for Hubbies outside nearly dead.
I. is the Inspection that's held every day.
,T. is the Joke of our seven days’ stay.
K. is Krakowsky in suit all of white.
L. is where we are each day and each night.
M. is the Matron who cares for us all,
X. are the Nurses at her beck and call.
O. is the Oval where we have to stay.
P. Priests and Parsons who for us do pray.
Q. Quarantine which w e all undergo,
R )
g'| Ramsay Smith, the boss of the show,
T. is Thermometer that in each mouth goes,
U. is the Usual “normal” it shows.
V. are the venturesome caught at the gate,
W. the Warning by officials irate,
X. the Exquisite tents of a few,
Y. is the Youngsters who sound like a
Z 00.
ON FEELING "MORE-ISH.”
(Air: “Another little drink wouldn’t do us any
harm”.)
There was a little germ—Flumonia his name;
He lived in Victoria, from whence we all came,
Though a stranger to us and a baseless alarm,
Still a little quarantine hasn’t done us any harm.
Though our Canteen is dry and the weather is hot,
Considerate friends have remembered our lot.
Johnny- Walker and West-End have come as a
balm,
But a case or two more wouldn’t do us any harm.
Though some are deprived of their sweethearts
and wives,
They can go back to them [or the rest of their
lives,
Compensations are here—not wanting in charm,
And a little more of that wouldn’t do us any harm.
There are lots of brave soldiers and heaps of nice
girls,
(Please allow me to pause for my brain fairly
whirls).
They all arc agreed, as they walk arm-in-arm,
That a month’s quarantine wouldn't do them any
harm.
And the nurses so trim in their caps, capes, and
bands,
Are embarrassed with offers of hearts and of
hands,
When yon get out of here back to villa or farm,
1 f you take one along it will do you no harm.
In Machinery Castle they won’t go to bed,
They chat and play cards and swap “night-caps”
instead,
When the light has to go, each raises an arm,
“A few minutes more wouldn’t do us any harm!”
But when darkness descends and slumber would
creep,
With a friendly mosquito to sing us to sleep,
Then the Snore King tunes up and we wish with
each breath,
That he’d sleep with the flu germ, and snore it to
death!
A.M., The genie of the electric light.
MY HOSIERY.
(Tune: "The Rosary.”)
The hours I spent in quarantine
Are more than all the girls to me.
I count the price for which Thou must have
bought
My Hosiery, My Hosiery.
Each pair a tear, each tear a darn,
To fill the gap and link the yarn.
I try in vain to cover up the holes
In all the soles, eternal holes.
And now that 1 have known this pain,
Before the flu breaks out again,
One lesson I will surely learn—To mend
these socks
Sweetheart—l’ll learn to darn.
E. R. Chambers.


The Medical Staff
The Housing Committee
The Heads
The Stranded Six Hundred.
The “Cash Getters."


SPORTING NOTES.
CRICKET.
(By our Sporting and Dramatic Corre-
spondent).
The first match of the season was played
between two teams of ladies led by Miss G.
Good and Miss Marks. The players showed
great enthusiasm and the spectators were
very free with their applause and advice.
Miss Williams played very careful and cor-
rect cricket in compiling 32, and for Miss
Mark’s XI, or rather XII, the top score
was mad.e by Miss F. Good whose style was
reminiscent of Jack Lyons in his palmy
days. Mr. A. H. Young’s umpiring left
much to be desired, and he would have done
better to have kept his eye on the ball
rather than on the players. The scores were
as follows: —
Miss G. Good’s Team. Total .. 66
Miss Marks’ Team. Total .. 58
The next match aroused intense enthu-
siasm throughout Ramsayville. An enor-
mous crowd assembled and the betting was
heavy. Huge sums are believed to have
changed hands. Two-up schools, crown and
anchor, and other national games were
much in evidence. The barracking was
continuous and impartial except on the
part of a party from the Dopeski Mansions
who, in vulgar parlance, were decidedly
“one eyed.” The Army Sisters had chal-
lenged the rest of the town. The “Red
Capes” batted first, but immediately the
first casualty occurred and “stretcher-
bearers” was called. After a short interval
the match was resumed. Sisters Ringwood
and Jackson hit out vigourously and their
running between the wickets showed excel-
lent judgment. (They were both run out*)
The Ladies’ Team (“No reflection on you,
Sisters”) showed good form and won by
2 wickets. Miss Chapman smote the leather
to the tune of 55 and Miss G. Good com-
piled a useful 29. Youngie umpired rather
better on this occasion though some of his
decisions were appalling. The scores were:
Army Sisters. Total .. 118
Combined Ladies’ Team. Total ..136
(For 9 wickets).
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENCE
AND CONTRIBUTORS.
To several contributors. —Some of the
less subtle references to autocracy and
autocrats we have been compelled to omit.
Our purses will not bear the inroads of the
Libel Act.
Constant Reader states that on visiting
the headquarters of the Housing and Bil-
leting Committee he noticed four cases of
Walkerville and one case of ginger beer.
He asks for an explanation of the presence
of the ginger beer. We have made careful
investigation of this apparently inexplicable
phenomenon, and can assert officially that
the ginger beer got there by mistake.
Pro Bono Publico asks for the private
camp address of Staff - Sergeant - Major
Evans and Mr. Llew Holmes. The answer
is C/o. Mr. Tolley’s Ice Chest.
Carbolic Soap. —We understand that the
mendacious cries of the camp newsboys
which so frequently inveigled you into buy-
ing three papers daily were based on cables
from Amsterdam.
Dress Circle. —Your information is inac-
curate. The plumber was not Albert Chev-
alier travelling incognito, and Mr. A. Davies
is not even related to Barry Lupino.
Indignant. —We certainly agree, in view
of the establishment of a night club in the
“Garden of Eden,” that the name of that
retreat should be changed.
Mother of Six. —Any football or cricket
ball found in your tent can certainly be
claimed by you as your own private pro-
perty.
Shampoo. —Mr. Heaton has promised to
have his hair cut immediately on liberation,
so your professional grievance will speedily
be remedied.
B. Flat. —The cradle song performed by
the Pyjama Tin Band on the last night in
camp was composed by Signor Pain (F. Roy
Plumb. Soc.) and is to be performed by Mr.
Brewster Jones’ orchestra shortly.
A revue entitled “Wash me up!” is being
rapidly prepared and will be staged in Ade-
laide. The book is by Mr. C. Ohlmeyer, the
music by Mr. G. Walenn. Amongst the
many catchy numbers we recommend you
to try the following over on your piano:
“Five little washers-up are we,” “Grease,
Grease, Eternal Grease,” “Our Charming
Chef,” “Dirty Dishcloths” (two-step), and
“Paper Plates? Certainly Not!”


THE SEVEN ANGELS.
Angel No. 1.
I am angel Number One,
In our camp I cause some fun
Making signboards very neat,
Captain of “Angels Retreat”.
Angel No. 2.
I am angel Number Two,
My Job’s to keep away the flu,
To-morrow I’ll be on the spray
Round your tents the livelong day.
Angel No. 3.
I am angel Number Three,
Sent down to the Jubilee.
Why am I in quarantine?
Near the flu I’ve never been.
Angel No. 4.
I am angel Number Four,
I’ve not got the flu, I’m sure.
You can judge me by my looks,
Why am I here with the crooks?
Angel No, 5.
I am angel Number Five,
Keeping all you folks alive,
This quarantine’s the King of jokes
Played on us tarts and blokes.
Angel No. 6.
1 am angel Number Six,
Never stoop to dirty tricks,
My object was to fly the fence,
Only for the darned expense
Angel No. 7.
I am angel Number Seven,
Sent to guide you all to Heaven,
The fittest place for you I ween
When released from quarantine.
Epilogue.
All the angels send their love,
Hope to nrnet you up above,
As for X.Y.S—Ah! well!
He’ll meet his cobbers down in ——
H. Slade.
QUARANTINE.
(Tune, “Tennessee.”)
Right down in quarantine,
That’s where we all have been.
I’ll tell you what it means,
And all the things I’ve seen.
If your temperature is high,
Isolation you must try,
Coughing or sneezing,
Chest found a-wheezing,
Are all good reasons why
Doctors and nurses do
Their very best for you,
So you won’t catch the flu,
And will not have to do
Any longer than one week,
For I know that you’ll all seek
To get out of. to get out of,
To get out of quarantine.
H. Slade.
AS THE POETS SEE US.
85/2/19. 3.0 p.m.—4.30 p.m.
“What means this anxious hurrying throng?”
Disinfectant Spray.
“A scent by any other name would smell as
sweet.”
The Hungry Ones, to the Dining Cars:
“Leave us not, leave us not,
Say not adieu.”
At the Border—Serviceton.
“We don’t want to leave you,
But we think we ought to go.”
Murray Bridge (first train).
“Where did you get that hat?”
Belair.
“The people on the top
Stood up beside the cop,
While the people down below
Changed the trains.”
Talking through the Fence.
“Archibald! Certainly not!”
Chorus heard the First N : ght.
“Wav down in quarantine,
Without a bed.”
Sanitation Instruction.
“Where the grape skins all have rested.
Germs are left upon the grass.”
The Day We Go.
“Half a mi!e, half a mile.
Half a mile onward.
Into clean Adelaide.
Charge the six hundred!”
On the Delay in Getting Out this
Souvenir.
“Who steals my purse steals trash,”
but the Publishing Committee seem
to have stolen all our bobs.
SOME QUARANTINE LIMERICKS.
Of a snorer’s great prowess I sing,
He makes our big roof fairly ring.
Bass treble soprano,
He snores out —■ piano
And sometimes tries “God Save the King.”
—A.M.
There once was a Doctor Krakowsky,
Who know all the why and the how-sky,
At thermometer drill
Said be “Please keep still
Or I’ll kick up a deuce of a row-sky.”
There once was a lecturer, Heaton,
Who addressed a b : g Quarantine meetin’.
Some one asked “Will you play
Just a tooral-i-lay,
For my song.” And he tried, but was beaten.
The D'octor won’t fit in a rhyme,
Let’s hope for another next time
Whose name will be Jones,
(Though at handling bones
Our Doctor is simply sublime).
Jacko.


FOREIGN CORRESPONDENCE.
(Foreign Office Press Bureau).
I.
TO THE RETURNED SOUTH
AUSTRALIANS,
QUARANTINE CAMP,
JUBILEE OVAL ADELAIDE.
From The Matron and Staff
of The Exhibition Isolation Hospital,
. (Sometimes known as “The Better ’Ole”)
Greeting: —And an assurance that to all
travellers who seek kind attention and all
the comforts of home we can provide
superior Accommodation!
Palatial Building, of historic tradition and
stored with finest art treasures.
View (unequalled) over the City, River
and Carden Suburbs.
Close proximity to (But no connection
with) Picture Shows, School of Mines and
Conservatorium of Music.
Pxcellent Cuisine by unexcelled Chef!
All Comforts —Clean Single Beds, Baths,
'Telephone (by proxy), etc.
Free Medical Advice by expert Practi-
tioner.
(every attention by trained (Resident)
Nursing Staff.
Congenial Companionship!
Complete Privacy! !
A Home from Home! ! !
EVERYBODY WELCOME! ! !
11. THE REPLY.
HOTEL JUBILEE.
'Telephone CENTRAL 781 (six lines)
Cable Address: “NOGERM,'” Adelaide.
To the Matron and Staff of
“THE BETTER ’OLE” (sic).
Your kind greeting of the 26th ult. to
hand. Whilst thanking you sincerely for
the palatial accommodation that you are
prepared to place at our disposal, we feel
that we cannot leave our present “Hotel
de Luxe.”
We occupy a home that is as pleasant as
it is germfree: and we trust that you will
keep a close watch on your own pampered
germs to prevent them from climbing the
thin grey line that alone separates us from
infection with, we know not what.
Further may we ask, that you so attire
your insiduous germs (we suggest in red
flannelette) that thcv may he mure readily
recognized, should they escape in our
direction.
We take strong exception to the designa-
tion of your infected quarters as “The Bet-
ter ’Ole." We submit that “Better ’Oles”
are temptations only when they offer dis-
tinct advantages, and when other 'Oles are
not all that may be desired.
From your epistle it may be gathered that
we are not receiving that kindness, courtesy
and attention which is ours by reason of the
mere fact that we are the guests of His
Most Gracious Majesty George V., D.G.,
Britt. Omn. Rex F.D., Ind. Imp. (no
option). As a matter of plain fact our ’Ole
is bottomless in its fund of wisdom, health,
wit and good humour, not to speak of the
more material and mercenary advantages
which we enjoy.
Furthermore we would have you know
that there is no better ’Ole than ours.
AVe trust sincerely that the grief and pain
that you must surely suffer at having vour
domicile relegated to the category of the
nameless will not be inconsolable. As a
consolation it would be a matter of great
pleasure to us all to invite you here, were
it not for the fact that man may propose
but R S must dispose (it is his nature).
It is the earnest desire of all who reside
within the iron bounds of this Garden of
Eden that you will so order your lives and
surroundings that you may be fit and proper
persons to associate with clean society (our-
selves) after the hour of High Twelve on
March the 5th.
AA r e remain,
Yours in happiness and health.
For and on behalf of the “Clean” Six
Hundred.
THE GENERAL COMMITTEE.
To the Clean Six Hundred. Jubilee Oval.
From the Staff of the Exhibition Hospital. 5/3/19.
(Permit and Gate Pass:—“For C.B.H. Nurse
with controlled Germs.” R.S.)
The "Clean Six Hundred”, glad and free
Thankfully leave the Jubilee.
Farewell, farewell, “Six Hundred” blind,
Though cold to us, you may be kind.
Our thoughts will often stray to vou
While we stay on to mind th e ’Flu,
And so we send you through the fence,
A germ or two of Common Sense.
This fact our sojourn here discloses,
Germs may propose—R.S. disposes.
By plagues and pests you’ll ne’er be floored
If you’ll obey the Central Board.


LISTEN TO MY TALE OF WOE.
Seven long days in quarantine.
Listen to m3' tale of woe.
Six hundred all declared “unclean.”
Listen to my tale of woe.
We dodged the “Flu” in Melbourne town,
We left the place with scarce a “brown,”
They sealed us up in a special train,
With sprays and gargles they gave us pain.
Listen to my tale of woe.
They fixed us up on the oval green.
Listen to my tale of woe.
And each his area must keep clean.
Listen to my tale of woe.
The sisters place in ,our mouths a tube,
Not quite as nice as a sweet jujube.
The medico’s smile, or the medico’s frown,
Makes us quite glad or “turns us down.”
Listen to mv tale of woe.
When Wednesday comes we'll say good-bye
Listen to my tale of woe.
With quivering lip and tear-dimmed eye.
Listen to my tale of woe.
We will wish each other a safe return
To long lost friends, and kin who mourn.
And we’ll never forget what “might have been,”
And our seven days stay in quarantine.
Listen to my tale of woe.
In days to come when the story’s told.
Listen to my tale of woe.
When the young have grown, and the rest are
old.
Listen to my tale of woe.
By the fireside hearth when the nights are long
We’ll tell the story, and sing the song,
How fair South Aus. was kept quite “clean,”
By' the six hundred held in quarantine.
No longer a tale of woe
E. A. Anstey.
QUARANTINE LIMERICKS.
There were caterers Wallis and Cook,
Who despised Mrs. Beeton’s old book.
Did someone complain,
They replied with disdain,
“Them banquets is fit for a dook.”
There was a postmaster named Ward,
Who said with the best of accord,
“No letters for you,
Try stamps, labels, or glue,
That’s the best we can really afford,”
A chef who can boil, roast, or bake
Has a gift which his fortune should make
For fine sleight-of-hand,
As you’d well understand,
If you saw him perform with a steak.
We’d a match on the oval to-day.
And we watched all the damsels at play,
One captain called Love,
Simply looked like a dove,
In her neat little costume of grey.
A. M.
Jacko.
A FRAGMENT.
Forward the mixed brigade!
Oh, what a charge they made
Marooned Six Hundred.
Flu-germs to right of them
Flu-germs to left of them
Volleyed and thundered,
To quarantine camp
On Jubilee Oval
Came the Six Hundred.
All the time,
On the way.
Squirted and gargled.
Their’s not to reason why.
They' are exposed to die.
Theirs only to defy
Chefs, cook and wallis.
Their’s to live not to die
On Quarantine Oval.
To show themselves really,
Though someone had blundered.
Quite an unusualb-
Healthy Six Hundred.
SCIENTIFIC NOTES.
A New Discovery. By Sir Loliver Odge.
The medicos, scientists, and mathema-
ticians of the Quarantine camp have been
most busy during their enforced stay at
Jubilee Oval in dissecting and analysing the
influenza germ. As a result of their inves-
tigations it has been proved that if iron*
(well magnetised) be taken by the affected
person in sufficient quantities (these all ma-
thematically determined hv the aid of the
calculus) and a magnet inserted in each
nostril, after a certain period of time, the
germs will easily be drawn from the body.
Once extracted from the living organism
they die. The simplicity of this remedy has
astonished many professors who have spent
years in trying to catch the germ.
*The iron should he taken in liquid form.
Attempts to swallow tin-tacks or sheets of
galvanized iron from the Frome Road fence
proved fatal.
HOME, SWEET HOME.
Mid tents and ropes and dust-bins
Through which we roam,
Our thoughts are sad at leaving
These lowly canvas homes.
The football flying skyward,
The sunny afternoons,
The concerts in the evening,
Have made this camp a home.
(Chorus: As in original song).


STRAY THOUGHTS ON GETTING OUT.
I wonder what was the first big impres-
sion made on each of us when at last we
got out. To me it was an unpleasant one.
-For a week I had been widening the range
of my friends and acquaintances, and every
person I met in those last few days greeted
me with a smile and a cheery word* We
had become in very fact a real family, all
;n the same boat, all making the best of a
good time, and all feeling satisfied' with our
little world and its inhabitants. There
were smiles everywhere: you didn’t know a
person’s name, but he was one of Jlhe 600,
and that was enough. No need for intro-
ductions. You grinned, and he (or she)
grinned in reply.
•Then out we went, and on every hand
folks waved us a cheery good-bye and cried
Good Luck! And so out of the gate we
‘passed into a new hard world of unknowns.
The bobby at the gate sat sternly on his
horse, his face as of granite. As we reached
the top oiHfrome Road we met .three men.
Instinctively, under the force of a week’s
growing habit, we turned towards them
and sent out a beam. In return we got a
stony stare. They didn’t know us! We
were strangers. A minute later we passed
a dear old lady, of the kind for whom seven
days before one put up tents and stole
other people’s buckets. But this one never
noticed'us’! We didn’t exist for her! And
so on, through a land of people blind as
bats. The Maid and Magpie looked famil-
iarly at us, but not so the squash-quaffing
carters at its door. And inside the house
the dust, the moths and silver fish greeted
us with insolent eyes, eyes which seemed
to snarl out “Who are you?” Later in the
day as I passed down Rundle Street I saw
people —hundreds of them; but they didn’t
see me. Alas! thought I, this is a nasty
lonely world. I sighed for the comradeship
of the Oval, for its familiar tents and fam-
iliar faces. Eagerly I walked to the nearest
teleplfDipe bojq to ask Dr. Smith to let us
all go back to our happy smiling world.
My hand was on the knob of the box-door
when a cheery voice out “Hello!
Normal!” I swung round and there was
one of us. I don’t know his name, but the
smile was of the true Oval brand, and
gripped hands in approved movie fashion.
I left the telephone alone, and saved my
twopence. The world became bright again.
For now I know that here in this 440,000
people there may be 339,400 strangers. But
at least wherever I go I shall always be sure
that by chance I may hear the grand old
word ring out. Life becomes an adventure,
a great quest for any one of the other 599
smilers. *
CAMP DIRECTORY.
The editors cannot vouch for the com-
pleteness of this list, and apologize to any
persons whose names are inadvertently
omitted. _
Gei?tMlW?U»mittee:
Messrs. A. Ferguson, B.Sc. (chairman),
J. H. Hobbs, A. Day, J. Barrett, Addison
Miller, Mesdames Martin and Wittber, and
Miss L. Fowler.
Housing and Billetting Committee:
Mr. Llew. Holmes (chairman), Staff-
Sergeant-Major Evans, Messrs. Priestley,
Roy Steele, J. Steele, WilleH, Netter, and
the tent erectors, i.e., the Diggers.
Sanitation Squad:
In charge of Lieut. H. H. Bieske.
Health Committee:
Mr. Justice Buchanan, Dr. Krakowsky,
Matron Nicholls, Staff-S.-M. Evans, Mr.
Llew. Holmes, and Staff-Sergt. J. R.
Couche.
'Entertainments Committee:
Misses M. Hubbe, E. L. Killicoat, D. C.
Oldham, G. L. Thomas, Revs. R. P. A.
Hewgill, and A. Depledge Sykes, Messrs. G.
Griffith, A. Day, and H. Heaton (hon. sec.)
Ladies’ Committee:
Mesdames J. Smith, Stapleton, Heaton,
Job, Misses Fiveash, Fowler, G. Good, F.
Good, K. Birks, Mellor, and A. B. Whitham
(hon. sec.)
Presentation Committee:
Mrs. Smith, Misses Fowler and Whitham,
Revs. Purton and Daly, Messrs. Ferguson,
Good, Hobbs, Day, Addison Miller.
Publication Committee:
Mr. Heaton, Bro. Purton and' Dr. Bur-
gess, editorial committee; Messrs. Good,
McC.am.ish, and Llew. Holmes, business
committee.
Post Office Officers:
Messrs. Scott, Abbott, Woods, Flint,
Bonnar, Moody, and Ward.
Additional copies of “Normal” can be had
on application to Secretary Quarantine Jour-
nal, Box No. 6, G.P.0., Adelaide. Price, post
paid, 1/6 each.
