

f IDMbo.
LAVARS & SHARP,UTH BROAD ST. BRISTOL.




NORTH AUSTRALIA:
SOME OF ITS RESOURCES AND
HOW TO DEVELOP THEM.
BRISTOL:
Lavars and Sharp, Printers, Broad Street






I AVARS a .5 HARR 9 ROAD 5~ BRISTOL.


IS- 5
NORTH AUSTRALIA.
Introductory. —ln response to the applications of numerous
friends who are anxious to acquire some information in regard to the
northern and least known portion of the Australasian colonies, I have
ventured to sketch in brief outline some of the more salient features of
the country, variously known as Port Darwin, Alexandra Land, and
North Australia. For this purpose I have collated a few figures from
official and semi-official sources, and narrated a few facts which came
under my own observation during a recent visit to this very interesting
and remarkable country.
Geographical Position and Area.— The area of the Northern
Territory is about 530,000 square miles, or about 2\ times the size of
France, and between four and five times the size of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland. It extends from latitude 12° 28' S. to
2G° S. Port Darwin, the principal harbour for shipping, is situated on
latitude 12° 28' and longitude 130° 52' E.
Government. —The government is carried on by a Resident
Magistrate, with the title of “ Government Resident,” and acting under
the orders of the South Australian Government in Adelaide.
Climate and Population. —The climate within 200 miles of the
coast is in some respects very similar to that of the Mauritius, and is
semi-tropical in character. The population is at present very small,
being estimated at 500 or GOO Europeans and 2000 Chinese. The
rainfall averages from seventy to eighty inches per annum. The wet
season lasts from October to April, and the dry from May to September.
Mr. Little, the senior officer of the Telegraph Department, says, “There
is an almost entire absence of those enervating influences which prostrate
h iiSS/floXSf


the European laborer in other tropical countries, such as India, Java,
Singapore, or Africa. Workmen carry out their various avocations
throughout the day without taking any precaution to ward off the rays
of the sun—the eight hours system being usually adopted, as in other
parts of Australia. The climate, in fact, may be said to be more of that
type which is generally known as Australian, rather than tropical ; and
the same remark will—with very few exceptions—also apply to the flora,
fauna, and perspective of the country. It is free from cholera and other
scourges of hot countries, and on the whole may be considered healthy.
Intermittent fever, commonly known as fever and ague, is prevalent at
times, especially in low-lying localities, or immediately after the wet
season ; but this complaint is not dangerous in itself, and can often be
prevented by a moderate and judicious use of medicine and a small
amount of bodily exercise.”
Resoueces.— The metalliferous portions of the country abound in
gold, tin, and copper, whilst a great deal of land along the magnificent
rivers which water the territory, such as the Roper, Daly, Alligator,
Victoria, &c., is well adapted for the cultivation of sugar, coffee, and
indigo. Within ten miles of the port a larger quantity of land is now
being cultivated for sugar, and some Ceylon planters are engaged, about
30 miles up country, in establishing coffee plantations.
Gold.— Mr. Knight, J.P., Warden of the Territory, and author of
a very valuable but rather scarce pamphlet on the country, says: —“The
goldfields of the Northern Territory are now ascertained to be very
extensive. At present gold is known to exist over a block of country
containing about 1,700 square miles, which has been indifferently
prospected, and as country of a similar character extends for a much
greater distance, it is more than probable that when it has been carefully
examined the area already known will be but a small portion of the
whole auriferous country. Many valuable gold-bearing quartz reefs
have been discovered and worked; but the larger portion are at present
lying idle, owing to the want of capital to develop them. Rich deposits
of alluvial gold have also been found ; but it is at present believed that
the main lead or deposit has not yet been struck.”


That a very large quantity of gold is raised, is shown by the
general prosperity of the diggers. And this prosperity exists in the face
of the great cost of most of the necessaries of life caused by the
difficulties of transport and the scattered character of the population.
The “alluvial” fields are for the most part worked by Chinese, and the
quartz reefs by Europeans, in some cases with, but mostly without, the
aid of celestial labor.
It must always be borne in mind that in North Australia the
existence of gold in paying quantities is not. as in India, a matter open
to doubt, but is an established fact. Writing within the last few weeks,
the editor of the Northern Territory Times says : —“ Our position on
the Ist of January. 1882, is very reassuring. If the imposition of the
gold duty has done nothing else, it has shown us that with a handful of
people we are raising gold. One hundred and fifteen thousand pounds’
worth of gold shipped in 1881 shows us we can raise our Ebenezer, and
say that gold is with us ; and we can go further, and truly assert we
have the next best thing, in large quantities, and that is tin. Tin
quoted at £llO per ton means £75 for a two-horse drayload—and not
overloaded at that —so you country teamsters and packers take heart
and rouse yourselves.”
Again, writing on the 21st January, he says:—“ During the past
three weeks four Chinese working Griffith’s claim on tribute obtained
four hundred and thirty ounces of gold.’’ Of course, such finds as the
last mentioned are exceptional, but taking into account the sparse
character of the population and the immense extent of gold-bearing
country remaining practically untested, no doubt can exist in the mind
of any practical man who has visited North Australia that, before very
long, it will become the El Dorado of Australia.
The actual workings which I saw were for the most part on patchy
little “leaders’’—very rich, no doubt, but not true or permanent reefs.
The latter require capital for their proper working and development,
and as a matter of fact the mines have never been worlced with capital
at alt. On surface indications appearing these have been followed up by
small parties backed perhaps with a week or two’s credit for
provisions at the nearest store. From personal observation I can testify


that the stuff raised is frequently pounded laboriously by hand in a
mortar with a “ jumper,” and then panned off, If £G per week per man
cannot be knocked out in this way, the claim is generally abandoned
and the miners seek “ fresh fields and pastures new.”
This brings me to the real weakness of the present system. It is
the want of sufficient battery 'power. I have seen many places where a
big battery surrounded by necessary appliances, boring apparatus for
testing ground, and dam for storing water, would soon become the
nucleus of a thriving township, rivalling if not surpassing the great
mining centres of Victoria. In Victoria the charge for crushing is ss. a
ton. In the Northern Territory it varies from £1 as the minimum to
£2 as the maximum. When we find that even then the returns are
very remunerative to the diggers after allowing for heavy cartage on
stores, &c., and 2s. 6d. an ounce export duty on gold, there can be no
doubt that the Northern Territory, when properly worked, will turn out
to contain some of the richest—if not the richest—goldfields in the
world.
At present we find this curious state of things. It does not pay
to crush for a low figure, because the batteries are not kept constantly
supplied with stone. This reacts on the digger, who will not continue
raising stone because he has no guarantee that the battery will continue
to crush. Both parties are hampered by want of capital preventing the
establishment of works of a permanent character—dams, proper
appliances for saving the tailings, itc., &c. Wages are inflated,
because uncertain. Land carriage and cost of stores rise from same
cause. Nothing can remedy this but the investment of capital on a
large and liberal scale. Nothing short of negligence and mismanage-
ment of the grossest kind could prevent such investment from yielding
a rich return.
The Britannia Reef, which is the property of a company recently
formed in Adelaide, is a good case in point. It is one of the richest
claims in the country, and has always yielded very rich stone. Before
it passed into the hands of the present occupiers, who hold it under a


lease from the crown, it had to be reluctantly abandoned by its former
possessors because they had not the capital to erect proper plant of their
own, but were compelled to cart three miles to a battery, which was
not ready to crush for them.
To be thoroughly successful a company should be formed on a
large scale, with a considerable capital.
Such a company might with advantage erect powerful batteries in
the chief mining centres, and crush stone for all comers at a uniform
rate. It should also purchase one or two well-tested mining claims, erect
stores and depots at the outposts and mining centres, and supply the
mining population with the necessaries of life at a reasonable price. For
the latter purpose it would be necessary that the company should have
the means of cartage and conveyance within its own control. Teams of
horses with wagons, &c., as now used should be purchased, and a steam
launch suitable for goods, traffic, and, if necessary, for lighterage, should
be run by the company from Palmerston to Southport, which would be
the immediate base of supplies for the diggings.
The certainty of steady employment would attract a very desirable
class of practical men from Queensland, Victoria, and the other colonies,
whilst proper medical attendance and comforts, now entirely wanting,
would effect an immense economy in human life and labor.
At Southport it would probably be necessary to put up plant
suitable for effecting such minor repairs to machinery as might be
necessary.
Cattle. —Cattle and horses thrive well in the greater part of the
Northern Territory. In December last (1881) I saw about 250 head of
cattle in splendid condition near Yam Creek. These had been brought
overland from Brisbane. About 110 miles south of Palmerston there
were 600 head of mixed cattle, and 1800 at Elsey Creek, 300 miles from
the coast. On the Delamere Downs there were about 1 GOO head of mixed
cattle and 6000 sheep. The sheep breed fairly, but the increase is said
to be much smaller and lighter than the southern sheep. Before very
long the export of horses to India and of frozen meat to Europe must
become a very important business in North Australia,


Railway and other Communication. —At present Port Darwin
is in communication with the Australian, Chinese, and Dutch Settlements’
Ports, by means of regular mail and trading steamers of several lines
which call there at frequent intervals. It is described by Capt. De
Harte, R.N., a gentleman of large experience in Netherlands, India,
and Australian commerce, as being “ certainly, after Sydney, the finest
harbor of Australia, having good room for an immense number of
vessels, wdth a safe entrance and good anchorage. There can be no doubt,”
he says, “that after a few years Port Darwin must be the depot of
eastern commerce for Australia.” The South Australian Government has
already constructed some hundreds of miles of railway, forming the first
section of a trans-continental line which will ultimately bring Port
Darwin in the north and Adelaide in the south into direct connection by
railway.
Labour. —Within the last two or three months Major Fergusson
has, on behalf of the South Australian Government, successfully concluded
arrangements with the Government of Bombay for the introduction of
coolie labor into the Northern Territory.
Thomas Harry.
58, Studley Road, Clapham, S.W.
6(6U0
Lavars & Sharp, Printers, Broad Street, Bristol.




