

NORTH MELBOURNE
fittrarg anb gtbating Association
The objects of the North Melbourne Literary and Debating
Association are the intellectual improvement of its Members by Essays,
Discussions, and Headings'.
The interchange of ideas and opinions which must necessarily
take place during discussions, have a tendency to excite a thirst for
knowledge'and a desire for useful information. As all Essays must
be composed by Members of the Association, and submitted to the
open criticisms of the meeting before which they are delivered, Essayists
are thereby induced to make themselves well acquainted with their
subjects, to be careful in their composition, and original in their style.
As Members who undertake to open debates will naturally prepare
for that duty by collecting information on and studying their subjects,
they have thus a strong motive for the acquisition of knowledge on
questions of their own selection. Members who are present during a
debate will be called upon to take part in it, but may decline doing so
if they think proper.
The Meetings of the Association are held in the Town Hall, Hotham,
every Friday evening, at half-past seven o’clock.
The Committee of Management earnestly request the co-operation
of those who appreciate the advantage of mental culture, and would
gladly receive any such as members.
£ •


RULES & BYE-LAWS
OF THE
NORTH MELBOURNE
%%itrdv® a info Ibfoatiw#
& *
PRESIDENT ! W. AITKEN, ESQ., J.P.
ilules.
1. That the name of the Association be the “North Melbourne
Literary and Debating Association.”
2. That the objects of the Association be the mutual improvement of
its members in the study of Literature, Science, History, and Christian
Knowledge.
3. That Candidates for Membership be proposed at one meeting, and
balloted for at the next, and elected by a majority of the Members
present.
4. That the Office-Bearers of the Association be a President, two Vice-
Presidents, a Treasurer, and Secretary; these, along with five members,
shall form the Committee of Management. The same to be elected half-
yearly ; five to form a quorum.
5. That the Ordinary Meetings of the Association be held every Friday,
at 7.30 p.m. All meetings to be opened and closed with prayer.
6. That the Order of Proceeding at ordinary meetings be—minutes of
previous meeting read and confirmed, nomination and election of can-
didates for membership, notices of motion (all notices to be given in
writing), essay read, discussion opened, or readings given, remarks by
members.
7. That each member subscribe two shillings and sixpence per quarter
(in advance) to the funds of the Association. Any member falling into
arrears for one half-year’s subscription will be liable to have his name
struck off the roll of membership.
8. That any member appointed to take part in the proceedings, finding
himself unable to attend, shall provide a substitute, or give one week’s
notice in writing to the Secretary.


9. That all essays, subjects for discussion, or readings, be approved of
by the Association at least two weeks prior to their being brought
forward.
10. That the essayist, opener of a discussion, or reader, be allowed
half-an-hour ; the respondent in a discussion fifteen minutes ; other
members ten minutes each.
11. That any member may introduce his friends at any of the ordinary
meetings, and that non-members shall not he allowed to speak without
permission from the Chairman.
12. That the Half-Yearly Meeting for the election of office-bearers
and transaction of business, be held on the first Friday in February, and
the first Friday in August.
13. That a General Meeting shall be empowered to make any altera-
tion in existing Rules, subject to three months’ notice.
I’njc-Sutos.
1. That the President shall take the chair at all business and extra-
ordinary meetings of the Association ; or in his absence, one of the Vice-
Presidents ; and that at the ordinary meetings the member who last
delivered an essay shall take the chair.
2. Five members shall constitute a quorum.
3. Should a quorum not be present by eight o’clock, the Chairman will
have the power to declare the meeting adjourned till the ensuing
Friday.
4. When any question of order arises during a debate, the Chairman s
ruling in the matter shall be final.
5. At the conclusion of a debate, the Chairman shall state the question
to the meeting, and take the vote upon the same.
6. No member shall be allowed to speak twice upon the same question,
except in explanation or to a point of order, or the mover of a resolution
in reply.
7. No member shall be allowed to speak to a question after a vote has
been taken upon it.
8. In the case of an equality of votes, the Chairman shall have the
casting vote.
r/3^7


/FI 3447
i, a.
