

"North of the Jardine"
A look at the five communities
of the N.P.A.
Produced by students of Bamaga State High School






CONTENTS
Maps (I)
Contents (II)
Foreword 1
Introduction 2
Bamaga State High School 3
Torres Strait College 5
History Of Bamaga 7
Muttee Head 13
Services In Bamaga * 16
The Seisia Village 18
New Mapoon 20
Umagico 22
Cowal Creek 24
Somerset 26
Jackey Jackey Airstrip 30
DC3 Wreck 31
Festivals 32
Dancing And Singing 33
Stories 35
Crayfishing 36
Recipes 37
Key to Map of Bamaga 41


Foreword
THIS book has been produced by the Year 9 Study of Society students of Bamaga State High School
during Semester Two, 1987. Students who assisted in the production of the book are:
Geraldine Charlie
Belinda Dean
Jillian Gebadi
Druscilla Gebadi
Mabelene Gebadi
Melanie Talty
Michelle Wasiu
Jillian. Melanie. Mabelene. Druscilla. Geraldine. Belinda and Michelle
Year 9 S.O.S. Class - 1987
Many people have helped us gather information and put the book together. We wish to thank;
Fr Gebadi (Bamaga - July 1)
Mr Mugai Elu (Seisia)
Mr Stephen Mark (New Mapoon)
Mr and Mrs Peter (Umagico)
Miss Jenny Whitehouse (Art Work)
Mrs Carleen Tilbury (Typing)
Mr Jackson Sailor (Ranger)
Mrs Josephine Lifu (New Mapoon)
Mrs Jenny Adermann (Art Work)
Sepi Woosup (Cowal Creek)
and many other people for their advice and assistance given to us.
Mrs Ruth Robinson
(Year 9 S.O.S. Teacher - 1987)


Introduction
THERE are five communities in the Northern Peninsula Area. These are Seisia, New Mapoon, Cowal
Creek, Umagico and Bamaga.
The Jackey Jackey airstrip is approximately 11 kilometres out of Bamaga. The wharf is located at
Seisia, and this is where we get a lot of our goods delivered by barge.
Each of the communities has its own council and chairman. In 1987 these chairmen were: Cowal Creek
- Mr Dan Ropeyarn; New Mapoon - Mr Charlie Lifu; Bamaga - Mr Waiaka Jawai; Umagico - Miss
Abigail Wilson and Seisia - Mr Joseph Elu.
A sign constructed in 1987 by Year 10 Manual Arts students


Bamaga State High School
BAMAGA State High School is Australia’s northernmost mainland high school. It is 32 kilometres south
of the extreme tip of Cape York Peninsula and a few kilometres from the gulf coast. The school serves
communities on the Peninsula and the Torres Strait Islands.
Education in Bamaga was controlled by the Department of Aboriginal and Island Affairs (now the
Department of Community Services) until the Bamaga Primary School opened in 1969, when the
Education Department took responsibility for education in the community. The Bamaga High School was
opened in 1973, with students in Years 8, 9 and 10. The first students to complete Year 12 did so in 1976.
Next to the school there is the Torres Strait Residential College. It was also opened in 1973. Students
from the distant Aboriginal and Islander communities come and stay here and attend the High School.
Approximately 200 students of Aboriginal and/or Islander heritage attend the school. There are about
20 teachers, including the Principal, Senior Mistress and Curriculum Subject Master. A new library was
built in 1986. A tuckshop and covered area was also completed in 1986 and a manual arts machine shop
was built in 1987.


The school has a traditional artifacts collection which is housed in the library. The collection includes
such things as Bu (shell trumpets), Deri (head dress), kulap shakers, turtle shell work, head and arm
bands, hair combs, Zari (grass skirt), weres (fish scoops), carved dugong, Piwul (broom), bailer shell, fans
and a drum. The school also owns some artifacts from other communities. From Mornington Island, we
have obtained shields and didgeridoos; from Duaun Island, some spears, mats and grass skirts; and from
Aurukun, some baskets, shells, jewellery and a didgeridoo.
Some artifacts in our collection
SPORTS: We have inter-house sports competitions between the two houses of ‘Gelairf and ‘Bowie'
throughout the year, when we compete in a wide range of sports. Inter-school sports competitions include
Junior and Senior Sports Exchanges with T.I.S.H.S. In these exchanges we compete in basketball,
volleyball, football and soccer competitions. We also have a Three-Way Meet between Weipa, T.I. and
Bamaga where for three days, we compete in many sports, and track and field events. The venue for the
competition is rotated around the participating teams each year.
TRIPS: Every year, some students go out on excursions. Year 8 students usually go to Cairns, with
other year levels going to other places, such as the Atherton Tablelands. In 1987, students from Year 9-11
went to a Careers Market on T.I.
Druscilla Gebadi


Torres Strait Residential College
OUR daily routine at the College goes something like this;
MORNING
6.00 wake up
7.00 get dressed
7.30 dormitory duties are to be done
7.45 breakfast
SCHOOL
AFTERNOON
3.00 school finishes - get fruit
3.00- free time .
4.00- homework session
5.00- get ready for dinner, kitchen duty is to be done
5.45 dinner
6.00- make sandwiches, kitchen duty is to be done
7.00- tutorials
8.00- video or basketball
10.00 lights out
Kitchen - Dining Hall - Torres Strait Residential College - Bamaga
Staff at the College
WE have a manager, two recreation officers, three cooks, two cleaning ladies, one laundry lady, one
groundsman, two male dormitory masters and two female dormitory mistresses.


Girls dormitory - Torres Strait Residential College - Bamaga
Facilities
AT the College, we have a girls’ dormitory, a boys’ dormitory, an extra dormitory for visitors, a dining
hall, a recreation hall, a laundry room and a toolshed for the groundsman. In the dormitories there are 10
rooms on each side and one big common (TV) room. The recreation hall has an office for the manager, a
video room, a television room, a video games room, a kiosk and a dart and billiards room. In the grounds,
we have a basketball court, a new cricket pitch, an oval, a trampoline, a swimming pool and some bicycles.
At the College . . .
THE students who stay at the College come from many distant communities, such as Torres Strait
Islands, like Saibai, Badu, Darnley and Murray; and communities of the Peninsula like Lockhart River,
Bloomfield, and Edward River. The College has its own student council, which helps the staff at the
College to organise things.
On the weekends, the students are allowed to go out and stay with friends or relations. The College
students go for day trips, have barbecues, discos etc. on the weekends as well. Sometimes the College has
a concert at the end of term.
Belinda Dean


History of
DURING World War 2, several people from Saibai Island, who were in the army service, decided to
change their old life and lead a new life somewhere else. These people were Jerry Wasiu, Nadi Anu,
Jimmy Koraba, Maki Assi, Ali Mudu, Sigai Aki, Yusia Ginau, Mugai Elu and Tumena Sagaukaz. When
these people went home on leave in 1943, they discussed this matter with Bamaga Ginau, their chief.
There were two main reasons why they wanted to leave Saibai Island. Firstly, it was too small to provide
homes for their children and grandchildren, and secondly, there was not enough water on the island.
Maleria and diahorrea were also a problem. After having discussed this with Chief Bamaga, he agreed
with them and told them that their children’s future must come first.
Remains of old wharf at Muttee Head
In 1946, the Department of Native Af-
fairs (D.N.A.) bought four luggers from
Port Moresby and sold them to the is-
lands. Bamaga’s people bought one lugger
which was named “ Millard ” and it cost
$2,400. The skipper of this boat was Mr
Nadi Anu. They also bought another boat
from Daru Island, which was worth
$2,600. The skipper for this boat, the
“Macoy," was Jerry Wasiu.
Although Bamaga's people bought
these boats to move the families to Cape
York, they needed more money. To earn
this extra money, they had to work at
Saibai for another year on trochus and
pearl diving. While diving for pearl shells,
they didn’t use any diving gear, and the
luggers had no engines at all, they only
had sails.


The bay at Muttee Head
On the 4th June, 1947, the families left Saibai on the two luggers. They spent two weeks at Thursday
Island making arrangements with the D.N.A. to build a store, Medical Aid Post (M.A.P.) and school. The
people also asked the Lord Bishop of the time to build a temporary church where they intended to stay,
while awaiting for the new settlement to be built. The Lord Bishop appointed Father Bowie, who lived at
Cowal Creek, to be their visiting priest.
Their first 1.1.8 manager was Mr Paul Wasiu and the first M.A.P. nurses were Miss Aima Paii and
Nabu Soki and the appointed school teacher was Miss Mary Betty Townsend.
In June 1947, the islanders continued their journey to the mainland.
The people planned to settle temporarily at Muttee Head, which is some 48 kilometres from Cape York,
before deciding where to build their new settlement. Charlie Wasiu was responsible for the running of the
boats from Saibai Island to the mainland. Philip Wasiu was responsible for the organisation of the
clearing of the area at Muttee Head before the people started to move from Thursday Island to Muttee
Head.
For the rest of 1947, the two luggers continued to bring the rest of the families of the Bamaga people.
During the journeys, they had some difficulty travelling in some very bad weather.


The boat “Millard" lost its mast in a cyclone and drifted to Mt Adolphus. It was very dangerous at that
time to travel on luggers, since the boats had no engines. The islanders continued to travel to their new
home.
At the beginning of their stay at Muttee Head, the islanders lived in old army huts left over from the
war. Some people built their own houses out of left-over building materials. When the people had settled
at Muttee Head, they built a school, a store, a M.A.P. and a temporary church. When the school building
was finished, the children started going to school. The cargo for their store was delivered every month
from the Island Industries Board (I.l.B.) at Thursday Island by the MV Rcphie . which is now the MV
Gelam. Father Bowie visited Muttee Head once a month by dinghy, foot, and/or horseback. The people
elected Mr N. Anu to be chairman and Mr Jerry Wasiu as deputy chairman. Mr Sigai Aki was sent by
Lord Bishop John Hudson to look after the church at Muttee Head under the supervision of Father F.
Bowie.
Pylons at Muttee Head, with the remains of wharf in the background
The Minister for Lands visited the people some months later to help them find a more suitable place for
their settlement. The old Chief Bamaga, the Minister for Lands and some of the islanders travelled by
truck some miles up Cape York to search for a suitable location. Having inspected the land, the Minister
suggested that the suitable land for the settlement would be some miles inland from Red Island Point. Old
chief Bamaga told the Minister that he wanted the settlement built between the two creeks in the area to
provide plenty of water for his people.


In February, 1949, the chairman and deputy chairman attended a conference at Badu Island at which
they elected island representatives. Chief Bamaga was in T.I. hospital. Mr Anu and Mr Wasiu visited the
chief and he told them he may not live long and they were to look after his people. A few days later, on
the sth March 1949, Mr Killoran, the deputy director of the D.N.A. arrived at Muttee Head and told the
people that Bamaga had died and advised Mr Anu and Mr Wasiu to look after the islanders. The next day
they moved old chief Bamaga’s body over to Muttee Head for the funeral. Old chief Bamaga was buried
at Cowal Creek.
Bamaga Monument in the main street
In May 1949, the people came from Mutee
Head to where old chief Bamaga wanted the
settlement to be made. Mr Killoran and the three
Torres Strait Island Group's representatives were
there to have the land staked out. After the land
was marked, there was a celebration at Cowal
Creek. The next day, all the people went back to
Mutee Head.
During August, all the people from Muttee
Head came over and stayed at Cowal Creek, while
waiting for the date given for the consecration of
the land that had been staked out. They made
preparations for the feast to celebrate the day.
During that time, three of the Bamaga people
died and were buried at Cowal Creek.
The D.N.A. invited all Torres Strait Islanders
to attend the consecration of the land at Cape
York and the naming of it. Many people came
from all the islands, including the three Islander
Group’s representatives. The land was then conse-
crated on 9th September, 1949. The consecration
was conducted by Father Bowie. During the ser-
vice he was assisted by Father Fischer, Father
Poey Passi and Father Kabay Pilot. The consecra-
tion took place where the Bamaga Monument is
at present. The land was named after the old chief
Bamaga. After the presentation, the Group repre-
sentatives had little creeks named after them
Mosby, Nona and Marau. Nona Creek is 5.2
kilometres from Red Island Point, Mosby Creek is
near the centre of town and the Marau Creek is
4.8 kilometres from Mosby Creek. The road from
Red Island Point to Mosby Creek was named
Koraba Road and from Mosby Creek to Jackey
Jackey airport (past the High School) was named
Sagaukaz Street. After the ceremony, there was a
big feast at Cowal Creek.


The dancing went on till daybreak. The next day, all the people started to return to Muttee Head. In
1950, the men from Muttee Head came in to start clearing the land. The D.N.A. sent some men up from
Woorabinda to help with this. They did not have any bulldozers to clear the land, they had to root the
trees out. The work was very hard and tiring. They cleared the administration area first, before the village
area. They worked for two years to build six houses in the administration area and 15 houses in the village
area. Mr Jerry Wasiu was the leading hand in carpentry work from 1950 to 1953. While clearing the land,
Bamaga’s people sold the “Macoy” and the “Millard” crashed near the reef.
On the 9th November, 1950, the islanders from Muttee Head began to move over to their new and
promised land - Bamaga - to settle down. Mr George Thomas, the new superintendent, moved the people
to Bamaga by truck. The truck used for the move was owned by the Baira family of Cowal Creek.
During those two years at Muttee Head the Gebadi family moved to Cowal Creek, because Miss
Tebeku Gebadi (now Mrs T. Ger) was appointed by the D.N.A. as assistant teacher to work under Jomen
Tamwoy at the Cowal Creek School. The D.N.A. appointed Mr Gebadi Sidsulai as a caretaker of the
Government property at Red Island Point. He attended to the boats that came and went, and reported all
movements to Mr George Thomas. Some of the coconuts that were planted near the wharf at this time are
still there today.
Bamaga Showgrounds


The last people to leave Multee Head were the 1.1.8. Branch Store manager, Mr Jir Wapau, the Church
warden, Mr Sigai Aki and a police sergeant, Mr Yusia Ginau. They left Muttee Head by boat. In 1952,
Mr Jerry Wasiu was the chairman of Bamaga and Mr Giuberi Assi was the deputy chairman. On the 2nd
February, 1953 Mr Adidi was appointed chairman.
Every year on the 9th September, the anniversary of the Land Consecration, the annual Bamaga Show
is held. The Show is held over two days - Friday and Saturday.
Melanie Tally
Mr Charlie Wasiu, Fr Ephraim Gebadi, Mr Philip Wasiu who helped us with this article


Muttee
While the families from Saibai were living at Muttee Head, the settlement was divided into four
‘camps.’ These were Jungle, Radar Hill, Surum and Dry Damper. The people also had a school, store,
church, hospital and cemetery. The Jungle camp had approximately 10 to 12 houses. Radar Hill was so
called, because there was a radar left on the hill after the area was evacuated when the war was over.
Trenches used during the war are still present on the hill. There were few houses in the Radar Hill camp.
Below Radar Hill, about 20 metres above sea level, there is a rock that was used as an observation post for
spotting turtles during the mating season.
Map of the Muttee Head are showing the four camps
The people obtained their water supply from an army reservoir. Evidence of this reservoir is still present
today. Army huts were used as houses, with some families building their own houses from materials
available at the site. Because the families knew that the site was only a temporary home, they did not
clear a lot of land. A vegetable garden below Radar Hill was made.
Dry Damper had about three to four houses, and this was where the Jacob and Jawai families lived. The
wharf extended from Dry Damper. This wharf was built during World War 2 by the Americans, and was
burnt down after the Saibai people moved into Bamaga.


There are four graves in the cemetery. One grave, that of Jimmy Koraba, has a headstone on it. The
other three graves are unmarked. One is the grave of Leah Mau (maiden name) and one other is of a baby
child of Edith Graya Sagaukaz.
View of Radar Hill across from Dry Damper


A gun enplacement on Radar Hill
An old winch used for getting boats up the beach . at Surum


Services in Bamaga
HERE in Bamaga we have an Administration area. It is made up of the Bank, Liasion Office, Air
Queensland Office, Ranger’s Office and a switchboard. We also have Council Chambers, canteen,
supermarket, post office and clothes shop.
CLUBS: Two Rugby League clubs, Girl Guides, Scouts, Brownies.
THINGS TO DO: Camping and fishing are most popular. Scuba diving and snorkelling
when conditions are not rough, collecting orchids, bird watching and
visiting islands.
COMMUNITY EVENTS: Annual Show, church fetes, tombstone unveilings, barge arrivals, Anzac
Day celebrations, Easter celebrations, Christmas and New Year cele-
brations and Coming of the Light - “July Ist” celebrations.
CHURCHES: Anglican: Bamaga, Cowal Creek, Umagico and Seisia - services weekly.
Roman Catholic: Bamaga - fortnightly (priest comes over from T. 1.).
Assembly of God: Bamaga - twice weekly.
St. George Church of England
MOTEL: Small 6x2 person rooms approximately. $32 night full board.
MECHANICAL SERVICES: A new Service Station built in 1986 run by I.I.B.; Mechanic available at
times.
CANTEENS: The communities of Umagico, Cowal Creek, New Mapoon and Bamaga
have their own canteens. They are open from 10am until 10pm. (Beer
licence only at this stage).
TELEVISION: ABC - good reception.
MAIL: Airmail four times per week. Surface mail comes in every week on the
barge.


RADIO: ABC with special local program - 3.15pm-5.00pm, conducted by Torres
Strait Island Media Association.
TELEPHONE: We have STD and ISD telephones. Some Goldphones were installed in
Bamaga at the hospital, airport and college. A microwave link was
established in 1987.
BANKING: There is a Commonwealth Bank Agency in the Administration offices.
Bank cheques up to $5OO can be drawn on Savings Bank passbooks.
Department of Community Services offices
HEALTH: Good hospitals, with doctors staying for varying lengths of time. Emer-
gency cases are evacuated by helicopter to Thursday Island.
DENTAL: Dentist available sometimes, but none currently available at Bamaga.
There is a full-time dentist on T.I.
CHEMIST: No chemist. A few lines are available at the supermarket.
AMBULANCE One vehicle in the community.
BARGES: Come in every week. Supplies for the community e.g. building/mechani-
ca! materials, store and canteen supplies etc. and supplies for individuals,
e g. food are brought up on these.
Druscilla Gebadi


The Seisia Village
IN 1948, Mr Mugai Elu and his family moved to the mainland from Saibai Island. Accompanying him
was Mr Tumena Sagaukaz and his family. They moved to Red Island Point where Stan Holland gave
them huts, that were left by the army, to live in. Mr Tumena Sagaukaz and his family then moved from
Red Island Point to Muttee Head where the rest of the people who moved from Saibai were settled. In
1950, Danalgub Isua and Wilma Sagaukaz moved from Saibai to Red Island Point. They lived in the huts
that were left by Mr Tumena Sagaukaz.
In 1951, some more families started to move to Red Island Point. In 1955, the Department was
approached for some building materials to build houses for all the people that were coming to live at Red
Island Point. People worked on a village contract and when the houses were finished, the people moved in.
The church at Seisia, St. Francis Of Assisi
As they started to settle down properly, Canon Bowie from Cowal Creek and Mr Mugai Elu asked
Bishop Hawkie to put up a new church, as they only had a temporary one. A week later, the building
materials for the new church were sent over from Thursday Island. Mr Gabri Asse and a couple of men
then started to build the church. Later, when the walls were already up, the diocese sent a carpenter, Mr
John Kaines, to finish the church. The roof was then put up and the church was finished in 1971. On 14th
October, 1972, the church, St Francis of Assisi, was dedicated.


The people of Red Island Point wished to change the name of the village. When they first asked if they
could change the name, Mr Killoran said to wait five years. That time has passed and the area is now
known as Seisia. Seisia js a name formed by taking the first letter of the names of Mr Elu's father and his
father's brothers. The names are Sagaukaz, Elu, Isua, Sunai, Ibuai and Aken.
Mabdcne Gebadi
Wharf at Red Island Point - now known as Seisia


New Mapoon
NEW Mapoon is a community which is approximatley 1 kilometre north of Bamaga, along the road to
Sesia. New Mapoon was formed when the people from Old Mapoon, near Weipa, were relocated in 1964
by the Department of Native affairs (D.N.A.).
In November 1963, the Government boat “Ge/am” arrived at Old Mapoon with Mr Turner (D.N.A.
Officer from Thursday Island) and some police, to move some families north to their new home. Some
families that moved to New Mapoon on this boat were Robert and Susie Reid, Andrew and Alison Archie.
Frank and Maggie Don, Dick and Victoria Luff, Gilbert and Jean Jimmy, William and Constance
Cooktown, Henry and Louisa Kennedy, Matthew and Elsie Cooktown and Hardie and Felecia Fletcher.
After the departure of “Ge/am” from Old Mapoon, many of the homes of these people were burnt
down. The church, school, cookhouse, workshop, butcher shop and store were pulled down.
Uniting Church at New Mapoon
Upon their arrival at “Hidden Valley” (now New Mapoon) the group lived in rented houses at ‘Sweet
Corner’ near the Showgrounds in Bamaga. They eventually moved to the present site. The late Horace
Bond, chairman of the Mapoon Council, had come to Bamaga in 1959-60 to help the D.N.A. choose a site
for the people and to obtain houses for them to live in. With Horace Bond came his wife and family,
Jubilee Wooble, Milton Brown and Dick Luff. A monument was erected in the park at New Mapoon in
memory of Horace Bond.
At Old Mapoon, the final group of about 50 people stayed for months. They eventually left early in
1964, as food and medical supplies were running very short. Not all of the people from Old Mapoon
moved up to Hidden Valley as some moved to other towns such as Normanton, Cairns and Weipa.


Mr Stephen Mark, his wife, six children and one grand-daughter along with his brother-in-law, Jimmy
Bond and his family, were some of the last people to leave Old Mapoon. Mr Mark was the ordained elder
who preached to the people after the missonary had left the community.
New Mapoon has its own chairman and council which runs the community. There is a Uniting Church
which has a visiting priest come over from Thursday Island once a fortnight. As at 1987. the elders ot the
church are Stephen Mark, his wife Katie Mark. Ellen Daniel and Roy Fletcher. There is also a store a
new canteen and a M.A.P.
Michelle Wasiu
Mr Stephen Mark (New Mapoon) who
helped us with this article.


Umagico
UMAGICO is a small Aboriginal/Islander community 4 kilometres south-west of Bamaga. The language
name for Umagico is “Alau.”
Umagico was formed in 1963 when the people of Lockhart River Mission were encouraged by
Government officials to move to a place just outside Bamaga. A public meeting was held at Lockhart
where Government officials and a bishop spoke to the people about the move. The main reason for the
move was to improve health standards. The move to Bamaga meant improved housing and being closer to
health services on Thursday Island.
Johnny Butcher was the first chairman at Umagico. He came up with a group of workers to build eight
houses. These were the homes for the families that were to move from Lockhart. Most of the people were
reluctant to leave their homeland.
St James Church of England - Umagico
Francis Bowie, the priest from Cowal creek, was the first to visit and work with the people of Umagico.
The first M.A.P. nurse was Nancy Fowler. Cowal Creek people used to have large vegetable gardens at
Umagico before the Lockhart people came. Some continued working the gardens after Umagico was
formed, but these gardens no longer exist.


After about eight years, a man called William Namuk visited Umagico. At a public meeting held in the
community, he urged people to move back to New Lockhart (now known as Iron Range).
Many families did move back to their homeland. Some people and their families that moved from
Umagico were Jamie Nightland. Isaac and Phylis Hobson. Billy and Maudie Brown. Jimmy Hobson and
his wife (went to Weipa), Mr and Mrs Ominyo. Simon and Ivy Ropeyarn, Mr and Mrs Fowler. Mr and
Mrs Butcher. Roy Sandy, Jimmy and Georgina Johnson, Hazel and Pedro Pascoe and Daniel and Celia
Accoom.
I.LB. Branch Store - Umagico
The only people who first came from Lockhart to Umgagico, and are still there are Kelly Pascoe, Mrs
Abigail Wilson (chairman of Umagico) and Ellen Peters (deputy chairman of Umagico). Walter Claudie
has since died.
When the Lockhart people moved from Umagico, many Islander families moved into the vacant houses.
The community now has people of both Aboriginal and/or Islander heritage living there. The community
used to have a “Feeding House' 1 (for young people and the elderly), jail and a picture centre - but these
are no longer operating.
Facilities at Umagico include the M.A.P., store, canteen and St James Church of England. In the
canteen building, there is the council office, kitchen and garage.


Cowal Creek
YEARS ago, Injinoo (now Cowal Creek), was just a hunting ground for the people of Cape york
Peninsula. There were the Pooloognu (Somerset), Itoonti (Red Island), Inbean (Seven River) and
Atambya (McDonnell). These tribes all spoke different languages and lived by hunting. They would make
camp wherever food was available.
In 1864, Frank Jardine arrived at Somerset to build a new settlement. He had some natives work in his
plantations. The settlement was eventually moved to Thursday Island, as the anchorage in the harbour of
Somerset was too small and not safe.
In 1911, a planter named Jack McLaren leased a block of land near Pattersons Creek called Utingu
(means ‘big trees’). He planted coconuts with the help of the aborigines. He taught them how to plant
their own vegetable gardens and they taught him how to hunt and fish. He lived there for eight years and
eventually wrote a book “My Crowded Solitude.” The older people of Cowal Creek can remember Frank
Jardine and Jack McLaren.
An Aboriginal chief from Shellbourne Bay named Alec Whitesand, travelled from his homeland to
Somerset and Red Island Point and down to Seven River and McDonnell to gather people and bring them
to live aj Cowal Creek, which was then known as Small River. The people live in the bush in huts. When
all the people were gathered there, he then spoke to the Bishop about the Anglican Church forming a
mission there.
In 1915 Cowal Creek was established. It was administered by the Anglican Church Mission. The people
then gathered at Cowal Creek, as it was a centre for all areas. In 1936, the Department of Native Affairs
took over, and sent Mr Jomen Tamwoy over from Badu Island to be the Head Teacher of the school. A
priest, the late Canon Bowie, was also sent in the early 1930’5. He lived at Cowal Creek for many years
until he died. He is buried inside St Michael’s Church at Cowal Creek, which was built in 1978, Mr
Tamwoy is buried in the park in the village, at the request of the people.
St Michael's and AH Angels Church - Cowal Creek


These two islander families lived with the Aboriginal people through their hardships. Now Cowal Creek
has a mixed population through inter-marriages between the Aboriginal and Islander people. The
population of the community is about 300.
Cowal Creek Pre-School
The people don't speak their own language - they use Creole. The community has its own chairman and
four councillors. There is a welfare canteen which sells beer only, a kindergarten, an 1.1.8. branch
store and a medical aid post (M.A.P.). There is also a camping ground with a barbecue and toilets for the
tourists to use. In 1987, the building of a sporting complex was begun with the help of “Operation
Raleigh" personnel. Cowal Creek is 10 kilometres south-west of Bamaga.
Jillian Gebadi
Cowal Creek Canteen


Somerset
QUEENSLAND separated from New South Wales in 1859. a few years later, a settlement was
established at Cape York, 2400 kilometres north of Brisbane. The colony’s main purpose was commercial-
ly based. It was to be a port between Australia and Indonesia. Somerset was established on the eastern
side of Cape York, looking over the Albany Passage to Albany Island.
Map showing location of Somerset
Sir George Ferguson Bowen, the first Governor of Queensland, promoted the idea of the settlement anc
saw it as another Singapore. The town of Somerset was founded in 1863, from this idea of Bowen’s.
HMS Salamander arrived at the site chosen for Somerset in 1864. The party that was sent to establish
the town arrived on two separate ships, including the Salamander. This group included a naval surgeon,
some Royal Marines (a sergeant and a group of privates), Captain John Jardine (former Police Magistrate
at Rockhampton), and his son Johnny, Clerk of Petty Sessions/Customs Officer/District Registrar and
Postmaster (one person). A town planner was sent to lay out the town. If fully developed, it would have
been a large town with many streets and blocks of land.
Site of the Somerset Homestead


After the town had been planned, there were land sales where over 100 allotments of land at Somerset
were sold. The people who bought this land did not build on it, only Government buildings were ever built.
Captain John Jardine’s house, the first house to be built, was located on the top of the cliff overlooking
the harbour. Near this building was the beginning of the town - marine barracks, hospital, quarters for the
sergeant and surgeon, cottages, guard room and cells, boat house, court and customs houses. The remains
of the wharf can still be seen at low tide in the mudflats. In the tropical climate and without constant
maintenance, the buildings deteriorated quickly.
Bathtub and winch at the homestead site
A few years after their arrival, the marines were replaced by the police. John Jardine left Somerset after
a couple of years to return south. After him, seven men were in charge of the settlement at different times.
His son, Frank, was in charge during three separate periods. In 1877, Frank Jardine ventured into the
pearling industry in Torres Strait. The settlement on Thursday Island was formed in that year as a base
for the pearling fleets. The Government Station was transferred from Somerset to Thursday Island in
1877 for reasons such as the harbour being too small and the tidal mudflats making it difficult to moor
boats.
Low tide at Somerset Bay - showing the mudflats and remains of old wharf (in background)


Somerset was the home of Frank Jardine, Sana Solia (his wife, a Solomon Prince’s niece) and their
family for many years - except for a few years spent pearling. Frank Jardine died in 1919 and his wife
died in the 1920'5..
Somerset Cemetery
Some of the S.O.S. group with the Ranger (Mr J. Sailor) at the caves at Somerset


A plaque on a monument in front of the Somerset Homestead site reads:
(IN MEMORY OF)
Major Herbert Somerset “Boy” Vidgen born Somerset 21
August 1901, died Brisbane 16 August 1973.
Eldest son of Captain Herbert Grahame Vidgen and Alice
Lascelles Jardine. Grandson of Frank Lascelles Jardine origi-
nal explorer, pioneer and Government Resident at Somerset.
Married sister Werna Reid, Matron of Thursday Island
Hospital, 14 March 1936.
“Boy” Vidgen purchased Somerset from his Uncles Chum
and Booties Jardine in 1925. Residing there until called for
duty in World War 11. Somerset was run as a grazing and
copra plantation in association with pearling and other com-
mercial interests on Thursday Island, until sold to the Gov-
ernment in 1948.
Erected by his loving wife Werna and sons Grahame, John
and Bruce Vidgen.
Druscilla Gebndi
The authors copying down the above information from the plaque


Jackey Jackey Airstrip
The plaque on a monument at the Airport
THE following inscription is in the air terminal building.
Jackey Jackey Airfield, later named Higginsfield was
originally constructed by the United States Army
Corps, but they abandoned it on 26/12/42 before it was
completed. The airstrip was then 10,000 feet by 300
feet. The Royal Australian Air Force developed the
airstrip as a heavy bomber field and the first bomber
flights were made on 25/12/43. The R.A.A.F. were to
remain until 17/12/47. The airfield was the first in the
Torres Straits to be used for bomber raids in Papua
New Guinea and Southern Dutch New Guinea. The
airfield was named in honour of F/OBH Higgins who
was awarded the DFC for bombing Japanese installa-
tions of Rabaul and Gasmata. He was killed on
24/5/43.
Higginsfield was the base for No. 23 and No. 7 Squad-
rons. Bush Pilots began regular flights to Bamaga from
1971 when the strip again became into regular use and
was repaired.
Mian Gebadi


DCS Wreck Site
THE following is on the plaque at the DCS site.
A DC3 aircraft VH-CXD departed Archerfield Bris-
bane at 2039 hours on 4/5/45 en route to New Guinea.
The aircraft crashed at this site at 0518 hours on
5/5/45. This memorial was erected in memory of all
those on board who died in the crash.
Captain: William Ernest Clarke, an A.N.A. civilian
pilot, aged 42.
2nd Captain: W/O J. H. Hornbrook, R.A.A.F. Official
No. 432183.
Under Instructor: F/Sgt. N. P. Browne R.A.A.F. Offi-
cial No. 43652.
Radio Operator: W/O A.A. Gidley R.A.A.F. Official
No. 215975.
Passenger: Cp. Rudolph H. Kozen. Official No.
16022995 U.S.A. and a second passenger believed to be
S/Sgt. Dougherty. Official No. 32337697 U.S.A.
JHlian Gebadi


Festivals
HERE at Bamaga, we have many festivals. Three of these festivals are The First Shave, The Tombstone
Opening and The Coming of the Light.
• First Shave: When a boy turns 16, he has his first facial shave. His godparents shave him for this
important occasion. Many relatives and friends come to the house where he is going to be shaved, to join
in the festivities.
After the boy has been shaved, we have a feast and some dancing. There is always a lot of island food at
the feast, such as damper, boiled or fried rice, fish, coconut dishes like sop sop and bicie damper, namus,
chicken and turtle dishes, curries and so on. While we are having our feast, our relatives and friends may
do some dancing. Our celebrations may start in the afternoon and go on till night time.
After the boy has been shaved, he is treated more like a man, and can go hunting for turtle and dugong
with his uncles or father.
• Tombstone Opening: After a funeral, a roof is built over the grave of the person who has died. Many
years later, or as long as it has taken the family to save the necessary money for the headstone, we have a
big feast (surrom yelgan).
When the family first buys the headstone, the roof is taken from over the grave and the ground is
flattened. Once the tombstone is in place, it is covered until the Tombstone Opening ceremeny. We build a
cement base over the grave to which we attach some tiles. Once the grave is finished, we give an open
invitation to all of our relatives and friends. Before the ceremony, we decorate the grave and the fence
around it.
We have a service and sing some hymns beside the grave. When this is over, someone cuts the ribbon
and then the relatives and family go inside the fence. Two or three people unveil the headstone and
someone reads the inscription. When this over, everybody goes home or to the church, for a feast and some
dancing.
• Coming of the Light - July 1: Before the missionaries of the
London Missionary Society came to the Torrres Strait Is-
lands, some people had already had a little contact with
Europeans and South Sea people of the pearl shell and
beche-de-mer industries. This does not mean the people were
westernised.
The missionaries which arrived at Darnley Island on June
30, 1871 were Dr Samuel McFarlane (European) and these
South Sea Islanders and their wives: Tepeso, Elia, Mataika,
Gucheng, Keri Sidui, Waunded, Sivene and Josaia. They did
not land on the island, but had evensong on the boat. It was
late in the evening of the following day when they finally
landed on the island and conducted the first English service
there and sung the hymn “Jesus Shall Reign Where’er the
Sun.”
The group put up buildings on Darnley to leave some of
missionaries and their wives and children there, to put into
practice their plans to convert the people to Christianity.
“Coming of the Light ” Cross at Somerset


Under the leadership of Fr McFarlane, the missionaries landed on various islands of the Torres Strait
and each time they left someone there to get on with the work of converting the people. Although they
landed on the islands on different dates and months, they first landed on the soil of the Torres Strait
Islands on July 1, 1871. That is why the celebration always takes place on that date every year in this
diocese and wherever Torres Strait Islanders are living - inside or outside Australia.
Druscilla Gebadi
Dancing and Singing
BEFORE we can do our dances we have to make our own costumes. Each team chooses a colour and then
buys some material for the costumes. As well as making the dresses for the girls and the lava lavas for the
men, we also make kulap shakers, murups (bamboo), drums (warup), paddle and a sardine scoop. Scarves,
headbands, armbands, head-dresses and skirts (made out of raffia, grass or coconut leaves) are also made
by the dance team members. There is a lot of preparation for the dances, especially when we have to
practice the dance steps as well.
Here are some of the parts of our dance costumes that we wear. If you look at the drawings on the
opposite page, you will be able to see what some parts looks like.
Marka Marks: These are small bands worn around the ankles. They can be made out of white
material, woven raffia or grass.
Kulap Shakers: These are the shakers that the dancers hold in their hands. They are made by
splitting kulap shells in half and then joining them together with string, so that they
rattle.
Muraps: This is a piece of bamboo that the dancer holds. It has been hollowed out and had a
split put half way up the side. When the dancer shakes it it makes a clapping sound.
Drums: These are about a metre long and shaped so that they are wider at each end than
they are in the middle. Designs are often painted on the drum. Snake or goanna
skin is stretched over one end of the drum, for people to play the instrument.
Paddle: Made out of cotton tree, these are used by the girls. They are pieces of wood carved
into a paddle shape and decorated.
Head-dresses: As seen in the drawing, these are decorations worn on the head. Pieces of vine,
feathers or cardboard cut into shapes are attached to a head band.
Headbands: A strip of cardboard is cut and then stapled at the ends to form a circle. Strips of
coloured raffia, woven into patterns, are then used to decorate the headband.
Armbands: These are worn around the arm and can be made out of coconut leaves woven into
patterns (coloured raffia can also be used).
Songs are sung in different languages. People from different islands have different kinds of movements
and songs. There are three dance teams in Bamaga and they are Umagico, Bamagau Kain Kasil and the
Bamaga Primary School dance team. Some of the songs of the Bamagau Kain Kasil dance team are about
the crocodile clan. The dance that the boys perform are generally more energetic and involve more
movements than the girls’ dances.
Jillian Gebadi


Murap
Drum
Kulap Shakers


STORIES
-/How The Kookaburra Got His Laugh
&J // Once upon a time, Kookaburra didn’t make any sound at all. One day he went out looking
W [/ for his food. He flew way up in the sky. He saw a big brown snake. The snake had a lot of
t baby ones inside.
The Kookaburra got her by the head and flew away. He killed the mother snake and swallowed it.
SB The baby ones came out of the mother and tickled the Kooraburra. The Kookaburra started to laugh
f and he couldn’t stop laughing. That is how he got his, laugh.
hy John Zaro
! “The Little Boy”
I A long time ago in the dreamtime there was a boy called Turkey. He went with his little puppy
1 for a swim. His little puppy watched how he swam. The little boy had a spear and he speared a lot of
fish.
He came out of the water and they went through the bush to collect some wood. He lit a fire and
he cooked fish for him to eat. After he finished eating he went to sleep. He didn't go back to his
mother and father. The boy grew bigger and taller - he was a man. A few weeks later he found that
his little puppy was killed by a snake, so he found a way to go back !o his family and friends.
by Geraldine Charlie
The Tree Snake
A long time ago there was a tree snake in the desert. It was hot and dry and he was very thirsty. His
scales began to fall off.
Suddenly he found a tree with a lake around it. The snake went and got a drink, and he saw a fish
swimming around. He tried to catch it, but he couldn’t. He went up the tree to wait for the fish to
come up and swim near the top of the water.
The snake's body was fat because he had no scales. The snake came down very slowly and watched
the fish. The fish came closer but did not see the snake. Then the snake jumped out and grabbed
him, then he ate the fish up, and started to grow scales again.
by Ron Wailu
How The Goanna Got His Legs
Once upon a time, the Goanna was a snake. One day the snake went down to the mangroves to have
a swim. A crocodile chased him but he went too fast through the roots. Some of the roots got stuck
in his side.
He tried to get the roots out of his body, but he couldn’t. Since that time, some snakes have legs
and are called Goannas.
by Malcolm Poi Poi


Crayfishing
After the wet season until November is the best season to catch crayfish. Low
“ tide when the water is clear and not too deep is the best time to go crayfishing.
1? — = ~
When we go crayfishing, we use a spear gun, hand spear or we can pick crayfish up
with our hands. We search for crayfish amongst the coral reef - but especially
around the “bommies.” »”
„ AV W
It we catch many crayfish, we can sell it to the canteen or to tourists. Some people
sell them to people on Thursday Island to make money. Otherwise, we keep them
* for our family and friends to have
'X. f ■ MM «|
Michelle Wasiu
Recipes
GREEN BANANA IN COCONUT MILK
INGREDIENTS: 6 huge casava (scraped)
2 cups sugar
12 scraped coconuts
1 dozen bananas
METHOD
1. Peel the bananas.
2. Wash in salt water.
3. Grate the bananas.
4. Mix with coconut milk.
5. Make little envelopes from the banana leaves.
6. Steam for 30 mins, then it’s ready to be served.


SOP SOP
INGREDIENTS: Yam
Sweet potatoes
Coconut milk
1 teaspoon salt
Banana leaf
Chicken
Fish or pumpkin
1. Scrape coconuts on a scraper or blend the coconut pieces on a blender.
2. Peel yam and sweet potatoes.
3. Chop them up finely into a dish.
4. Hold a banana leaf over a fire until soft and browned. Cut the strip from
the back of the banana leaf, place in saucepan.
5. Place the finely chopped yam and potatoes (and pumpkin if you wish to
add some) into a saucepan and place the chicken meat or fish, as well.
Put in layers.
6. Put the scraped coconuts into a dish, add enough water to make thick
milk. Squeeze the milk into a jug or a large container and add salt.
7. Place a large strainer on the saucepan and pour the coconut milk into it.
NOTE: MEASURE THE MILK BY FILLING THE SAUCEPAN UP AND
IT 2cm BELOW THE SURFACE OF THE SOP SOP.
lA BONDED COCONUTS CAN BE STRAINED AND POURED INTO THE
CONTAINER AND ADD SALT.
I i 'm.
B.—Cook the Sop Sop on a medium heat.
“"Sop Sop is cooked when the vegetables are soft.
BAMAGA FRUIT SALAD
INGREDIENTS: Cashew Fruit Bananas
Wongai Pawpaw
l Soursop Lime juice
’l. Peel and dice all fruits and mix them together.
,2. Squeeze lime juice all over the top.


BICIE - DAMPER
INGREDIENTS: 6 huge casavas (scraped)
2 cups sugar
12 scraped coconuts
METHOD
1. Squeeze the scraped casava into a baking dish, sprinkle with sugar and
pour in two cups of coconut milk.
2. Bake it in a moderate oven for 20-40 minutes.
3. When brown use a knife to cut into blocks and sprinkle over the top.
4. Pour the other cup of coconut milk on the top of the damper.
NAMUS
INGREDIENTS: Vinegar
White fish - mackeral
Onions
Chilli
Lemons
METHOD
1. Slice the white fish, onions, chilli and lemons
2. Put the vinegar in the bowl and put the fish in.
3. Add the other ingredients into a bowl.
4. Put a lid on the bowl and put it in the fridge.
5. Wait for half an hour, then serve.


STEAMED TURTLE
INGREDIENTS: Turtle meat
Soy Sauce
Salt
Teagrass
METHOD
1. Cut turtle meat, put into saucepan
2. Add a little amount of soy sauce.
3. Then add the salt and teagrass.
4. Steam until meat is soft.
5. Serve it with rice.
STINGRAY MABUS
INGREDIENTS: 1 file stringray with raw fat
2 onions
10 chillies
METHOD
1. Slice and boil the stingray until tender.
2. Remove from saucepan when cooked, cool off.
3. Take the meat and squeeze into saucepan.
4. Slice fat; put it into a saucepan.
5. Slice 2 large onions and 10 chillies and fry.
6. Add the squeezed meat into saucepan with the fat.
7. Steam the meat and fat for 10-20 minutes.
8. Serve with chillies and onions.
PURE COCONUT MILK
1. Remove husk from coconut with a pick. V
2. Cut in half with a knife. v
3. Scrape coconut into a basin.
4. Put the scraped coconuts in netted material, wash first then
squeeze hard until the milk comes out.
Belinda Dean and Maybelene Gebadi




Notes:


Key for Town Plan of Bamaga
1. Showgrounds
2. A.O.G. Church
3. Girl Guides and Scouts Hut
4. St George Church of England Church
5. Primary School
6. Anzac Park
7. Pre-School
8. Shopping Centre and Parking Area
9. * Council Chambers
10. Canteen
11. Reuben’s Store
12. Bakery
13. St Stephen’s Roman Catholic Church
14. Administration Office
15. Liaison Office & Air Queensland Office
16. Park
17. Park
18. Motel
19. Torres Strait Residential College
20. High School
21. Hospital
22. Nurses’ Quarters
23. Aboriginal Health Team & Children’s Clinic
24. Police Station
25. Jail
26. Football and Soccer Ovals
27. Basketball and Tennis Courts
28. State Works Shed
29. Garage
30. Heavy Machinery Shed
31. Joinery
32. Petrol Station
33. Telecom
34. Power House
35. Brick Works
36. Sawmill




Printed by The Cairns Post
