

NORTH - WEST
BASE
(UNITED STATES COMMUNICATIONS STATION)
Extracts from
House of Representatives Hansards
(P
rz
d-
-5-
&
m
J
z


(continued from page 18...) (Mr. Menzies 1 reply)
The United States will be granted the necessary tenure.
Sovereignty will, of course, remain with Australia.
December 6th, 1962 Question Hansard - page 3035
UNITED STATES NAVAL COMMUNICATIONS STATION
Mr. UREN;- I address my question to the Prime Minister. On 29th
November, in reply to a question by my leader in regard to the
proposed United States naval communications station at North-west
Cape in Western Australia, the right honorable gentleman said
Whether or not legislation will be required to implement it
will be known when its terms are settled, but if the Parlia-
ment desires to debate the matter when it is worked out, the
Government will make every effort to provide an opportunity
to do so.
As it is proposed that the Parliament go into recess until late
March or early April, will the Prime Minister assure the House that
no treaty will be signed before that time, and that no tenders will
be called and no work commenced on the site until the House has
debated the proposed base ?
Mr. MENZIES.- The negotiations an this matter, although proceed-
ing, are farefrom reaching conclusion. I do not expect that we
will have arrived at a state of finality before the House resumes.
If that prospect arises, I will certainly be prepared to consider
the suggestion that has been made.


March 16th, 1961
Question
Hansard
page 285
ATOMIC ENERGY.
MR. DREW, - I direct a question to the Minister for Defence, Is
it a fact that Australian defence experts have suggested to an
American technical mission that an atomic reactor be used to provide
power for a radio station in northern Australia ? Is it a fact that
such a station would not need as much power as would be generated by
an atomic reactor? If such a reactor were built, would it not be
economic only if its power could be used for other purposes,, such as
to supply nuclear power for Polaris missile-carrying submarines ?
MR. TOWNLEY.- There has been no request from the United States
Government to this Government for any station of any sort in the
north of Australia.
August 15th, 1961
Question
Hansard
page 8
ATOMIC ENERGY
MR. UREN.- I direct my question to the Minister for Defence, I
remind him that, on 16th March of this year, I asked whether it was a
fact that the United States Government was being granted permission to
build a nuclear-powered radio station in northern Australia. In reply,
the Minister said -
There has been no request from the United States Government
to this Government for any station of any sort in the north
of Australia.
I now asks Is it a fact that negotiations over a proposed site for
the building of a nuclear-powered radio station have been held between
the governments of Western Australia, the Commonwealth and the
United States of America? Is it a fact, also, that United States
Government survey teams have carried out work on the proposed site ?
If so, will the Minister make a statement without delay, or does he
propose to ignore the Parliament and thw people as he has done up to
date ?
MR. TOWNLEY.- I refer the honorable member to the statement that I
made in the Parliament in September of last year.
September 6th, 19&1 Question Hansard - page 936
ATOMIC ENERGY
MR. UREN.-asked the Minister for Defence upon notice
1. Will he supply me with a precise reference to the statement


relating to a nuclear-powered radio station in northern Australia
which he stated, in reply to a question without notice on the 15th
August, he had made in Parliament in September of last year?
2. If this statement does not fully answer my question without
notice, will he now supply me with a written answer ?
MR. TOWNLEY.- The answer to the honorable member's question is as
follows ;-
1. On Bth September, i 960, I announced in Parliament that the
Governments of the United States of America and Australia had held
informal discussions concerning the establishment of a Naval Radio
Communications Station in Australia.
2. Two technical survey teams from the United States have
visited Australia to study the feasibility of establishing a Nsml
Radio Communications Station in the north-west of Western Australia
No proposal to establish such a radio station has been received
from the United States Government, but if firm proposals are put
forward when the United States studies have been completed these
will be fully considered at the time by the Australian Government.
3, There is no intention of using anything but a conventional
power source for such a station.
March 2?th, 1962 Question Hansard - page 943
RADIO STATION ON NORTH-WEST COAST OP WESTERN AUSTRALIA
MR. CHANEY.- Can the Minister for Defence say what stage has been
reached in negotiations between the Government of the United States of
America and the Australian Government on the establishment of a radio
station on the north-west coast of Western Australia?
MR. TOWNLEY.- As I have told the House on two or three occasions,
the United States Government approached us and asked whether it would
be permitted to investigate prospective sites in the north-west of
Western Australia to determine whether it would be possible or tech-
nically desirable to establish a radio station in that area. The
United States technicians have examined several possible sites. At
the present time, representatives of the United States Government and
officials of the Department of Defence and of the Department of Exter-
nal Affairs are discussing the question, to decide how far the Aust-
ralian Government can go to meet the wishes of the United States Gov-
ernment., Ido not expect these discussions to be concluded in the
next few days. I should like to say, however, that lam grateful to
the Government and the Premier of Western Australia for the c-operat-
ion they have afforded us and the United States technicians. If this
major work is undertaken in Western Australia it will be largely due
to their efforts.


May I?th, 1962
Mr. Menzies* Statement
Hansard - page 2449
UNITED STATES NAVAL COMMUNICATIONS STATION IN AUSTRALIA.
MR. MENZIE3 (Kooyong - Prime Minister).-by leave-As honorable members
are aware, the United States naval authorities have for some time been
investigating possible sites and studying the feasibility of establish-
ing a naval communications station in Western Australia. Following
these investigations the United States Government has formally requested
permission to establish and operate such a station at North West Cape.
The Commonwealth Government has approved the request. The Western
Australian Government, which has been kept informed, has already ren-
dered considerable assistance in the initial survey activities. It has
expressed its desire to co-operate in the project to the fullest pos-
possible extent-an offer which is greatly appreciated by the Common-
wealth Government.
The purpose of the station, which will include a complex antenna
system, high-powered transmitting and receiving equipment, and adminis-
trative and supporting facilities, is to provide radio communications
for United States and allied ships over a wide area of the Indian Ocean
and the western Pacific. The power supply required for the station
will be provided by conventional-type diesel motors. The total area of
land affected by the px-oject will be about 28 square miles. Of this
area, all except about 4 square miles will continue to be available for
activities such as grazing, subject for technical reasons to restrictions
on certain types of construction or installations.
The estimated capital cost of the station itself will be of the
order of £A.33,000,000. Substantial additional funds - probably as
much again -will be required for things such as housing and family
amenities. The United States Government will meet in full the expend-
iture required for both the construction and operation of the station,
which will be without cost to the Australian Government. Construction
is planned to commence as soon as possible and will be at its peak from
early 1963 to late 1965* During this period employment on the project
is expected to be between 800 and 1,000 people. In the construction
of the station, the maximum practicable use will be made of Australian
contractors, labour and materials. Detailed liaison will be estab-
lished between the United States authorities and appropriate Australian
departments and authorities to achieve this.
Present plans provide for an eventual population in the area, to
operate and maintain the station, of approximately 450, including both
United States and Australian personnel and their dependants. Married
quarters and essential community facilities will be provided for the'se
people. A detailed agreement is being worked out with the United
States Government to cover the status of American personnel who will be


in Australia in connexion with the station. In addition to normal
inter-service, technical and administrative liaison between the
United States authorities responsible for the station and co-oper-
ating Australian departments and services, arrangements will be made
for consultation between the two governments on matters relating to
the station and its use. The facilities of the station will be
available to the Australian forces.
The matters to which I have referred will be embodied in a
formal agreement between the two governments which is now being
prepared. The terms of this agreement will be announced in due
course. The establishment of this station in Australia will mark
an important step in the steadily increasing defence co-operation
between the two countries. It will make a highly significant con-
tribution to general allied military capability in this area. It
is within the spirit of co-operation envisaged under the Anztis
Treaty, under which the parties agreed to co-ordinate their efforts
for collective defence for the preservation of peace and security.
MR. UREN.- A very important decision that has been made by the
Government has shocked me. The Prime Minister has announced that
there will be a United States Navy communications station estab-
lished at North-West Cape in Western Australia. This Prime Minister
has decided that the Government will allow a foreign military base
to be established in Australia.
MR. BURY,- It is to be a communications unit, not a base.
MR. UREN.- I want to remind the smug Minister at the table, who
has interjected, that on 16th March, 1961, I asked the Minister for
Defence (Mr. Townley) whether there had been negotiations between the
United States of America and Australia regarding the use of an atomic
reactor to provide power for a radio station in Northern Australia.
The Minister replied as followss-
There has been no request from the United States Government
to this Government for any station of any sort in the north
of Australia.
That answer was given only fifteen months ago, and now the Prime
Minister has announced a decision to allow a foreign military base to
be established in Australia. The statement made by the Prime Minister
commits the Government to that. .For the first time in
history, we are allowing 28 square miles of our sovereign country to
be handed over to a foreign power for military purposes. 1 repeat,
it is a part of sovereign Australia that is being given away to a
Handard - p. 2463
Speech
May I?th, 1962


foreign military power.
The radio station to be established will be
for war purposes and not for the purposes of peace.
condemn this
action of the Government. I believe that we should not make our soil
available to any foreign power whatsoever.
I should like to know why there is a need for thi
be established in Australia. What are we preparing against ? Whom are
Australians defending themselves against ? I should like members of
the Government to answer those questions. I think that we should all
condemn this action of the Government.
(Debate interrupted under Standing Order No, 291)
jflay 17th, 1962 Mr. WARD'S Speech Hansard - page 2516
Let me turn now to another decision that has been announced by the
Government. For some time past, questions have been asked in this
Parliament and elsewhere about a suggestion that the establishment of
foreign bases on Australian territory was being considered. Ido not
propose to canvass the merits of the question. X merely say that any
agreement with a foreign power for the establishment by that power of a
base on Australian soil should be debated and considered in this Parl-
iament. The terms of such an agreement should be known. But that is
not done. The Government, first of all, committed the country and the
Parliament, and the Parliament has to tag along and be told at some
convenient time in the future what the terms of the agreement are.
These are very serious matters that ought to be receiving the attention
of this Parliament,
UNITED STATES NAVAL COMMUNICATIONS STATION
MR. UREN. - On 17th May the Prime Minister made a statement regarding
a United States communications station at North West Cape, in Western
Australia. In his statement he said
A detailed agreement is being worked out with the United States
Government to cover the status of American personnel who will
be in Australia in connexion with the station.
He went on to say
. . . formal agreement between the two governments which is
now being prepared. The terms of this agreement will be
announced in due course.
I ask the Prime Minister whether any steps have been taken in the
preparation of this agreement. Will he inform the House of the
present position, and give full details of the agreement as soon as
possible in a manner which will permit this House to debate the agree-
ment before it is ratified ?
Question
LUgust 28th, 1962
Hansard - page 754


Mr. MENZIES.- This is not a matter which I am handling, myself.
Therefore, I shall have to find out the present state of negotiat-
ions. But certainly, if and when the final agreement is worked
out, were it desired to dehate the matter in this House, I should
think that a very useful thing to do.
.November 13th, 19&? Question
Hansard - page 2310
FOREIGN MILITARY EASES IN AUSTRALIA.
Mr. UREN.- I direct a question to the Prime Minister. Is the
right honorable gentleman aware that Government supporters have
asked questions in this House concerning the foreign military bases,
being located in Indonesia ? Has his Government discussed with
Indonesia, or any other nation in the near north, the proposed
foreign base at North-West Cape in Western Australia? If so, what
was their reaction to the establishment of this base ?
Mr, MENZIES.- The honorable member asks about a foreign base ?
Does he mean some military base ?
Mr. UREN.- I refer to a statement made by you on 17 th May of
this year.
Mr. MENZIES.- Well, any statement I made on 17th May this year
was dead right.
UNITED STATES NAVAL COMMUNICATIONS STATION
Mr. CALWELL.- On 17th May the Prime Minister, by leave, made a
statement to this House in which he said that the United States
Government had formally requested permission to establish and operate
a naval communications station in Western Australia covering an area
of 28 square miles, and that the Commonwealth Government had approved
the request. I ask the right honorable gentleman whether it is
necessary for this Parliament to pass legislation to ratify any agree-
ment that the Government has made or is likely to make in connexion
with this project. If so, when is the legislation likely to be intro-
duced ? Finally, is it proposed that the United States shall have a
lease of the area from either the Commonwealth Government or the
Government of Western Australia and, if so, for how long ?
Mr. MENZIES.- I am not able to answer these questions, off-hand.
If I may treat them as being on the notice-paper, I shall have an
answer prepared and forward it to the honorable member.
Hansard - page 2451
Question
November 15th, 19&2


November 15th, 1962
Mr. Cairns * Speech
Hansard - page 2535
Two questions, I think,are of importance, and they must be asked
and answered as soon as possible in this House. The first is: Should
nuclear weapons be brought to Australia? The second iss How should
the decision be made ? Let us take the second question first. I sub-
mit that it has become the practice of the Prime Minister, perhaps of
his own volition or perhaps after discussion with some of his colleagues
in Cabinet, to make irrevocable decisions on international affairs and
to notify the House afterwards, sometimes through the press. I think
this was-done in the case of the Suez affair. It was certainly done a
couple of weeks ago in the case of the crisis over Cuba. It has been
done in relation to several agreements entered into with the United
States of America, and I believe it is now being done in relation to the
use of North-West Cape as a base for a radio station. I understand
that work has already commenced there, although this House has not
received any notice whatsoever of the agreement on which this project
is based. I ask the Prime Minister and the Government to inform the
House thoroughly.of any proposal to bring nuclear weapons into this
country before - and long before - they are brought here. I ask them to
allow the House to make the decision that has to be made one way or the
other. There is no great urgency about this matter. There is plenty
of time for discussion and for a decision.
The second question, which I mentioned as the first of the two,
wass Should these nuclear weapons be brought to Australia or not ?
This is a vital and significant matter, and there should be no politics
and no misrepresentation for political purposes involved in it. The
Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Calwell) has dealt with the matter in one
way. He challenged the Prime Minister to name the American official
who made certain statements to him. Nearly 48 hours later that
challenge is unanswered. If the Prime Minister has anything to back
up the statement he made recently about what authorities in the United
States of America had said to him, let him answer without any further
delay the challenge of the Leader of the Opposition.
UNITED STATES NAVAL COMMUNICATIONS STATION
Mr. UREM.- I direct m j question to the Prime Minister. On 17th May
he said that the United States was to build a radio station in Western
Australia. On 28th August, in reply to a question I asked, he said
that he would give the House full details, as soon as possible, in a
manner that would permit debate. Is the Prime Minister aware that
there are numerous reports, from people who have actually been on the
Hansard - page 2556
November 27th, 1962
Question


spot, that work has already started ? In view of these circumstances
can he say why he was not i& a position to supply the House with any
information on 15th November when he replied to a question without
notice asked by the Leader of the Opposition ? Is it true
Mr. SPEAKER.- OrderJ The honorable member is now making his
question too long.
Mr. UREN.- I now asks Can the Prime Minister now say whether the
construction of this radio station has been commenced ? When will
he be able to inform the House of any details ? Will the House be
given an opportunity to debate this matter? If so, when?
Mr. MMZIES. - As the honorable member knows, I do not administer
the department that is concerned in this matter. But I will find
out what the present position is and if there is an opportunity for
exposing the subject to dabate, I will be delighted to do so.
November 27th, 1962 Question
Hansard - page 2558
UNITED STATES COMMUNICATIONS STATION IN AUSTRALIA.
Mr. CHANEY.- My question is addressed to the Minister for Defence
and is supplementary to that asked by the honorable member for Reid.
Is the Minister aware that the overwhelming majority of people in
Western Australia strongly favour the establishment by the United
States of a communications station in Western Australia ? Does he
realize that the people of Western Australia would appreciate every
effort that the Government could make to hasten the establishment of
such a station?
Mr, TOWNLEY.- I agree with the honorable member that a substantial
majority of people in Western Australia are fully cognisant of the
importance of this United States signal station. They are whole-
heartedly behind the Government in encouraging the Americans to
build it.
November 28th, 1962
Mr. HAYLEN 1 s Speech Hansard - page 2682
Mr. HAYLEN (Parkes).- I want to refer for a few moments to the
actions of the Prime Minister (Mr. Menzies) in relation to the base
at Exmouth Gulf. Before I make any general reference to this sub-
ject, I think I must say that the House deserves better treatment
than it has received from the Prime Minister. He has observed an
unusual silence on this matter. There was an old Australian play,
written many years ago, called "The Silence of Dean Maitland". I
think a man by the name of Holt - Bland Holt -at one stage performed


meritoriously in this famous Australian classic. But I would say that
the silence of Dean Maitland has nothing on the silence of Boh Menzies
in relation to one of the greatest issues we have faced in this country.
J. refer to the question of bases of all kinds. A silence enshrouds
what is happening in the north-west of Western Australia.
So that there will be no doubt about the attitude of the Austral-
ian Labour Party on this matter, let me read a decision of the federal
executive, made at a meeting in October, 1962. It is in these terms —
The Australian Labour Party is opposed to any base being built
in Australia that could be used for the manufacture, firing or
control of any nuclear missiles or vehicles capable of carrying
nuclear missiles.
Our script is entirely clear. There is no division in the Labour
Party on this matter and there never has been any suggestion of division
Mr. Harold HOLTs When was this resolution carried ?
Mr. HAYLEN. -In October, 1962. lam sure you must have it.
We believe that the nation, as well as the Parliament, has been
treated very cavalierly by the Prime Minister. Let us reconstruct what
has happened. First, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Qa.iyon) J aaM
a most moderate question. I was in his office when we phrased this
request in the form of a question. He asked whether the Prime Minister
would give us some information about what was happening in Western Aus-
tralia and whether there would be any motion or debate by the Parliament
on this matter. He also asked whether the Parliament and the people
would have an opportunity to decide this most vital question, whatever
type of base it may be - a radio base, a tracing station and so on.
But this matter is veiled in darkness and all the Government's intent-
ions are completely unclear. The Prime Minister's reply was a windy
piece of repartee in which he gave no definite answer. He said, from
memory, that this was not strictly within his department. He was not
then Acting Minister for External Affairs, as he is on occasions, and
he begged off the question.
Earlier in this year -in March, I think - the honorable member for
Reid (Mr. Uren) asked a series of probing questions on this subject and
he continues to seek, when opportunity permits at question time or
during an adjournment debate, to ascertain what is happening. He has
not asked for any declaration of policy; he has asked only for some
information on this matter. He wants to know what really is happening,
People outside the House are also anxious to know what is happening.
It is the Prime Minister's own fault if many rumours have spread about
this subject. Some of these rumours are strange, some grotesque and
some seem to have a basis of truth.
The honorable member for Yarra (Mr* Cairns) also addressed


himself to this question in the House recently. He said that
the Prime Minister was in the process of making great decisions of
international importance in the dark. The Prime Minister, prob-
ably infected with the test virus, has batted all the answers down
the pitch. He has refused to give concrete, deliberate and con-
sidered answers to what we believe are most important questions.
He has refused to answer any questions. In reply to a question
asked by the honorable member for Reid on 17th March, he said, "If
I said it then, it must have been dead right". Whilst he may
think he is dead right, many people think he is dead wrong. This
is a serious matter and there is now a belief
Mr. Harold Holt.- You said March, did you not? The statement
was made in May.
Mr. HAYLEN.- The statement of the Prime Minister was made on
17th May, and subsequently the honorable member for Reid asked
probing questions.
Mr. Harold Holt.- Yes. You said March.
Mr. HAYLEN.- lam sorry, I meant 17th May. Ever since then the
evasion has continued and the conviction is growing in the Labour
Party, and certainly outside, that something will happen after the
House adjourns next week. One of the allegations made in a Mel-
bourne newsletter is that a contract is to be signed, tenders are
to be called and there will be co-operation between the Americans,
who will ultimately build the base, and the Commonwealth Government.
The allegation is that everything will be signed, sealed and
delivered before Parliament resumes for the next session. The
view of the correspondent of this newsletter is that something is
being done in the dark without any approach being made to the
Parliament.
We on this side of the House want to know why there is need
for this dark secrecy. This is a most important matter. We have
a solid party declaration on it and we want to know what is now
intended. There have been stories about what is happening at
Exmouth Gulf and there are rumours about a further station at Albany
and about something else happening at Pearce. Questions asked in
the Senate are treated with the same lack of respect that is shown
to questions asked in the House of Representatives. These questions
are not answered} but this is too big a subject to be batted down
the pitch by the Prime Minister or by any one else in authority
when replying to questions.
We have a legitimate grievance. The Leader of the Opposition
has been refused a considered answer. Questions asked by honorable


members have not been answered. In view of the Prime Minister's
evasiveness, is it any wonder that all sorts of dark hints are being
made ? The curious point is that some unofficial mouthpiece of the
Government occasionally makes statements, also in the dark, which later
prove to be right. Recently, a correspondent of the Melbourne "Herald"
made an open prophecy that everything was settled, that there would be a
nuclear base at Exmouth Gulf and that everything was cut and dried.
The inference to be drawn was that the base would be built without any
reference to Parliament and without any debate.
I ask the Treasurer (Mr, Harold Holt) to give us some information
on this subject. I make the point that there has been too much silence
and too much evasion. There has not been any sincerity on this great
political issue.
Matters of great importance are being clouded in the Parliament.
The debate on Cuba in this House to-day was a disgrace. In this great
issue, the world was brought to the edge of nuclear war, but only two
honorable members were allowed to speak on it. Most of the time the
Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Whitlam) was speaking, the Treasurer
was interjecting. Did he have something on his mind? Did he have
something to hide ? What was he concerned with ?
Then we have the spectacle of the Senate, a chamber of review,
debating at the same time as this House the question of Cuba. The
Senate, under the leadership of Senator Spooner, has become a laughing
stock in this country, because Senator Spooner is pushing the Senate
ahead of this House. He created one of the most amusing situations in
the history of constitutional government by discussing the Budget before
we had discussed it here. We had the picture of a chamber of review
reviewing something that we had not voted upon. Now a debate is going
on in the Senate at this moment on Cuba, when a similar debate was
gagged in this House earlier in the day.
There are two very serious aspects of foreign affairs involved
here about which we want some answers. The first one concerns the
mystery that shrouds the establishment of a base in Western Australia.
What is the Government afraid of ? Is it trying to pull a fast one?
Does it know what our great allies are doing? Is it lurking in
stubborn, dogged silence until the matter is resolved outside the Par-
liament so that when we come back here we will be faced with a fait
accompli, and the people of Australia will find that they have another
set-up ? We warn the Government that such tactics will not go uncon-
tested, and that if they are adopted there will be serious trouble.
Before this House adjourns we should be given a full statement on what
is being done, and why. Nothing else will satisfy the Australian
people or the members of the Opposition.


The other matter that needs attention is the necessity for a
full-dress dehate on Cuba. I have heard people saying that the
Cuban situation is finished. Certainly one situation has passed,
but all the things that remain in relation to Cuba and the storm in
the Caribbean are by no means finished. There is a whole new
situation there and its implications to be discussed. I ask the
Leader of the House (Mr. Harold Holt), who is now at the table, to
give some attention to this matter. Returning to my first question,
I point out that the Leader of the Opposition and half a dozen
honorable members as well as I, have asked questions about this
base from time to time, but we have been given no satisfaction.
We are not asking these questions simply to kill time. I am not
speaking about this matter, after a tiring day, simply for the pur-
pose of wasting the time of the House. We want some answers.
Mr. SPEAKER (Hon. Sir John McLeay).- Order ' The honorable
member's time has expired.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT (Higging - Treasurer).- We have just listened to
an extraordinary statement by the honorable member for Parkes (Mr.
Haylen). He claims to be speaking on behalf of the Opposition,
but I am quite certain he has not consultedthe Deputy Leader of the
Opposition (Mr. Whitlam), judging by what we have heard from him
to-night.
First, let me put the facts before the House. The honorable
member says that the Government has been silent on this matter of
the establishment by representatives of the United States of America
of a base on the north-west coast of Western Australia. I remind
him-and, indeed, he made a reference to the fact himself - that a
statement was made by the Prime Minister (Mr. Menzies) on 17th May.
On that date the right honorable gentleman made a formal statement
telling the House what was intended. He referred to the fact that
the United States naval authorities had been investigating possible
sites and studying the feasibility of establishing a naval communi-
cations establishment in Western Australia. He said that the
United States Government has formally requested permission to
establish and operate such a station at North-West Cape, and that
the Commonwealth Government had granted that request.
He went on to give details of the purpose of the station. He
gave some technical description of what would be constructed there -
a complex antenna system, with high-powered transmitting and receiv-
ing equipment and administrative and supporting facilities to pro-
vide radio communications for United States and allied ships over a
wide area of the Indian Ocean and the western Pacific. I shall not
go into the details of his statement. Any honorable member who


wishes to do so can read it.
Mr. HAYLEN.- That was made in May. This is December.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.- The honorable member says that the statement was
made in May. It was a clear and precise statement. The honorable
member talked about the silence of Dean Maitland. The silence of
Arthur Calwell is the more remarkable aspect of this matter, because at
no time since the Prime Minister delivered his statement has the Oppos-
ition stated, through either its leader or its deputy leader, just where
it stands in regard to this matter. The honorable member for Parkes
says that a long time has elapsed. He has told us about the policy of
the Labour Party, which he read to us. I regret - that I was unable to
comprehend all the details of his statement, but I shall study it very
carefully in "Hansard". He said that this policy was decided, and
that he was in the office of the Leader of the Opposition when it was
being drafted, ip October of this year. Between May and October the
Labour Party was evidently trying to decide its policy in relation to
this matter and the Leader of the Labour Party has not yet told this
Parliament what the party's policy is.
Mr. HAYLEN.- You are wrong as to the sequence.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.- The honorable member says I am wrong as to the
sequence. I have been waiting rather impatiently to learn just where
the Labour Party stands on this matter, because, knowing the very deep
divisions that exist on the Opposition side in respect of matters of
foreign policy that come before us, I was intrigued to know how the
Leader of the Opposition and his deputy would line up their views with
those of the honorable member for Parkes, the honorable member for
Yarra (Mr. Cairns), the honorable member for Reid (Mr, Uren), and
perhaps other honorable members.
Mr. HAYLEN.- The federal executive of the party has its view.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.- The honorable member says that the federal exec-
utive has a view on this matter. I repeat that it would be intriguing
to ascertain just how they all come together, with the highest common
denominator of agreement, on this matte.; which is of vital importance.
It is most necessary that the people of Australia should be told where
the Labour Party stands.
The Prime Minister has already spoken in veiy critical terms of
the Labour Party's attitude in respect of one aspect of defence, and we,
and, I am sure, the Australian people, are eager to know where the
Labour Party stands on another matter of defence. Here we have a pro-
posal for a great naval communications station, capable of servicing


the needs of the one power that can give us effective protection
in this part of the world. It is a station that the United States
has said will he available for our own use and for the use of other
allied powers in this area. We find this matter of major policy
brought forward at this time, without any prior notification given
to us so that the appropriate Minister, or the Prime Minister, could
have been here to deal with it. The matter is brought forward not
by the official spokesman of the Opposition in the person of the
Deputy Leader of the Opposition, but by the honorable member for
Parkes, who is, admittedly, a senior member of the Labour Party.
Mr. HAYLEN.- I was within my rights in raising it.
Mr. HAROLD HOLT.- He was within his rights, of course, but does he
speak for the Opposition as a whole ? Does he speak for the Labour
Party on this matter ? I think we are entitled to know these things
and goes on to say
I do not need to take up any more of the time of the House.
We would welcome a full-dress statement from the Opposition, prefer-
ably from the Leader or Deputy Leader of the Opposition, setting out
just where the Labour Party stands on this matter. I am quite sure
the United States of America would be interested to know what the
alternative government of this country thinks about its proposal.
When we have received such an official statement from the Opposition
the appropriate Minister will deal with it in the detail that its
importance demands.
November 28th, 1962 Mr. Whitlam's Speech Hansard - page 2687.
Mr. Harold Holt.- What about North-west Cape ?
Mr. WHITLAM.- The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Calwell), whose
name the right honorable gentleman took in this matter, asked a
question on this subject on 15th November, and the Prime Minister
replied
I am not able to answer these questions, offhand. If I may
treat them as being on the notice-paper I shall have an
answer prepared and forward it to the honorable member.
The Prime Minister has not yet prepared this answer, although he has
had six months’ notice. People want to know what are the facts and
what are the administrative or legislative steps that have to be
taken. If there are misapprehensions about North-west Cape, and I
believe there are some misapprehensions, it is due to the secrecy and,
maybe, the deception of the Government. If the Government were open,


frank and prompt in this matter, there would he no misconception and
everybody would be able to say where he stood.
Mr. URM.- I rise to-night to support the honorable member for
Parkes (Mr. Haylen). I did not hear all of his speech, but I heard the
latter part and I heard the criticism levelled by the Treasurer (Mr.
Harold Holt). I want to quote from "Hansard" a question asked by the
Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Calwell) on 15th November, It reads a,s
follows s-
On I?th May the Prime Minister, by leave, made a statement to this
House in which he said that the United States Government had
formally requested permission to establish and operate a naval
communications station in Western Australia covering an area of
28 square miles, and that the Commonwealth Government had approved
the request. I ask the right honorable gentleman whether it is
necessary for this Parliament to pass legislation to ratify any
agreement that the Government has made or is likely to make in
connexion with this project. If so, when is the legislation
likely to be introduced ? Finally, is it proposed that the
United States shall have a lease of the area from either the
Commonwealth Government or the Government of Western Australia
and, if so. for how long?
The Prime Minister (Mr, Menzies) replied
lam not able to answer these questions, offhand. If I may
treat them as being on the notice-paper I shall have an answer
prepared and forward it to the honorable member.
Up to the present date, no answer has been forwarded. All that the
honorable member for Parkes asked wass "Why the secrecy ? Why do you
not bring the matter out in the open ? What is happening at North West
Cape ? What are you guilty of ? What are you frightened to tell the
Australian people ?
Yesterday morning, I asked the Prime Minister this question
I direct my question to the Prime Minister. On 17th May, he
said that the United States was to build a radio station in
Western. Australia. On 28th August, in reply to a question I
asked, he said that he would give the House full details, as
soon as possible, in a manner that would permit debate. Is the
Prime Minister aware that there are numerous reports, from people
who have actually been on the spot, that work has already
started? In view of these circumstances, can he say why he
was not in a position to supply the House with any information
on 15ih November when he replied to q eustion without notice
Mr. UREN's Speech
Hansard - page 2690
November 28th, 1962


asked by the Leader of the Opposition?
I now asks Can the Prime Minister now say whether the con-
struction of this radio station has been commenced ? When will
he be able to inform the House of any details ? Will the House
be given an opportunity to debate this matter ? If so, when?
The Prime Minister replied
As the honorable member khows, I do not administer the department
that is concerned in this matter. But I will find out what the
present position is and if there is an opportunity for exposing
the subject to debate, I will be delighted to do so.
That is a further evasive answer. If one goes back through the re-
cords, one will find that we have continually been given evasive
answers. An evasive answer was given to the question that I asked on
28th August. The whole time, we have been subjected to evasion. The
truth is that the Government is trying to hide something from the Aust-
ralian people. There have been numerous newspaper reports of the work
that has been undertaken. On 18th November, 1962, the Sydney "Sun-
Herald" published an article written by a Mr. Gavin Handley, who went
to North West Cape and inspected the installations there. This news-
paper article is even accompanied by a photograph of a mess and kitchen
hut used by the men stationed at the site.
Why cannot the Government be frank about the matter ? Why can-
not it come out in the open and say honestly what is happening ? On
17th May last, the Prime Minister declared that the Government had al-
ready agreed to make available to the United States of America 28 squai
miles of our sovereign soil for a communications station. Newspaper
articles state that this radio station will be in direct communication
with submarines carrying Polaris missiles. If this is a fact, the
policy of the Australian Labour Party will be infringed. That policy
is designed to ensure a southern hemisphere free of nuclear weapons,;
The Australian Labour Party, I may say, has made a decision in accord-
ance with this policy. The federal executive of the Australian Laboui
PArty, at a recent meeting, stated where Labour stands on this issue
and laid down the Labour Party’s policy in these words
The Federal Executive resolved unanimously that it would oppose
the building of bases in Australia which could be used for the
manufacture, firing or control of any nuclear missile or vehicle
capable of carrying a nuclear war-head.
The Federal Executive also resolved that Australia should not
cede its sovereignty to any foreign power of any part of its
territory.
I say quite frankly that the Government is trying to be evasive on
this issue. The Leader of the Opposition has asked questions about
it and many questions have been asked by me and by other honorable
members on this side of the House. But, always, we are given evasive


answers. The honorable member for Parkes tried to draw out something
this evening, but still the Treasurer was evasive. We in the Australian
Labour Party have seen over the last few years the making of many treatie.
between Australia and the United States. These have been for peaceful
purposes, and we on this side of the House applaud and support any treaty
that may be entered into with the United States or any other country as
long as that treaty is designed for peaceful purposes. But we on this
side of the chamber say that we will not cede Australian territory to
any power for the purposes of war.
Mr. HOWSON.- Do you all say that ?
Mr. UREW.- Let the honorable member be frank on this issue and let .him
put pressure on the Government that he supports. What has the Government
to hide in this matter?
I remind the House, Mr. Speaker, that I first asked a question
about this subject on 16th March, 1961. As reported at page 285 of "Han-
sard" of that date, I asked the Minister for Defence (Mr. Townsley)
whether a radio station was to be established in northern Australia by
the United States of America. The Minister replied—
There has been no request from the United States Government to
this Government for any station of any sort in the north of
Australia.
I remind the House that I asked that question fourteen months before the
Prime Minister announced that territory was to be ceded to the United
States for the establishment of the radio station, and that I was told
then that the Government knew nothing about a proposal to establish such
a radio station. Under questioning, eventually, the Government stated
that negotiations were going on. Then, on 17th May of this year, the
Prime Minister made his statement announcing that the radio communicat-
ions station would be built in Western Australia. If it is to be used
for peaceful purposes, we of the Australian Labour Party will support the
Government’s action. But, if the radio station is to be used for the
purposes of war, we of the Labour Party are opposed to its establishment.
We say that we should not give away Australian sovereign soil for such
purposes.
(Mr. Wentworth and Mr. Killen also spoke, November
28th, - no need to record their remarks.)
29th November, 1962 Mr. ERWIN's SSSS&IL Hansard - page 2820
Mr« ERWIN 1 I ask why certain members of the staff of the Russian Em-
bassy, particularly one Mr. Ivan Sfcripov, a first secretary of the Em-
bassy of the Union of Soviety Socialist Republics, has been a regular
visitor to this House and has been cultivating the friendship of certain


l 8« KAIIONAL LIBRARY OY AYYTR ’AAA
members of the Australian Labour Party, in particular the honorable
member for Reid (Mr. Uren), the Honorable member for Parkes (Mr.
Haylen), and the honorable member for Hunter (Mr. James). Have these
members been inspired by this Soviet diplomat to ask question on a
number for sensitive foreign policy issues, and have they been briefed
for foreign policy debates ?
( and goes on to say...)
also the visit to this House yesterday by Mr. Skripov, who called for
the honorable member for Parkes, and having in mind also the sinister
remarks in the debate last night, on the motion for the adjournment
of the House, by the honorable members for Paikes and Reid concerning
the proposed American base on the north-west coast of Australia, I
suggest that we again have evidence that these honorable members are
being directly inspired by Soviet Embassy officials. I believe that
the people of Australia should be made aware of the fact that members
of the Australian Labour Party, which would constitute the alternative
government in this country, have been associating with representatives
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for motives which must be
highly suspect, and which would not be conducive to peace and freedom
throughout the world.
November 29 ♦ 1962 Mr. MENZIES 1 s reply Hansard - page 2831
UNITED STATES NAVAL COMMUNICATIONS STATION
Mr. MENZIES.- On 15th November the Leader of the Opposition (Mr.
Cal well,) asked a question without notice about the United States Naval
Communications Station in the following terms:-
Whether it is necessary for this Parliament to pass legislation
to ratify any agreement that the Government has made or is likely
to make in connexion with this project. If so, when is the legis-
lation likely to be introduced? Finally, is it proposed that the
United States shall have a lease of the area from either the
Commonwealth Government or the Government of Western Australia,
and, if so, for how long?
The honorable member for Reid (Mr. Uren) also asked a question on this
matter on 27th November.
The answer to the honorable members’ questions is as followss-
An agreement with the United States covering the establishment
and operation of the communications station is still being negot-
iated, Whether or riotlegislation will be required to implement
it will be known when its terms are settled, but if the Parliament
desires to debate the matter when it is worked out, the Government
will make every effort to provide an opportunity to do so. Fol-
lowing consultation with the Western Australian Government the land
for the project will be acquired by the Commonwealth Government.
(continued on inside front sheet
