

NORTHUMBERLAND ASSIZES, 1788.
A Calendar of the Prifoners in the Gaol for the faid County.
DAVIDSON RICHARD GREIVE, Efquire, SHERIFF.
1ft Auguft, 1787.
27th Oct. 1787.
11
17th Nov. 1787.
17th Nov. 1787.
24th Dec. 1787.
27th Jan. 1788.
12 true Bill
7th Jan. 1788.
6th Feb. 1788.
2 2 d March, 1 788 >
13th May, 1788.
13th May, 1788
13th May, 1788.
29th May, 1788.
29th May, 1788.
31ft May, 1788.
4th June, 1788
14th June, 1788.
18th June, 1788.
30th June, 1788.
30th June, 1788.
FORGE BROWN, charged before me on oath with the felonioudy dealing, taking, and carrying away, from and out of the
JT barn, belonging to Martin Graydon, at High Moor, in the faid county, on the 4th of May lad, at night, or early in the
morning following, a large quantity of oats and chaff, the property of him the faid Martin Graydon, of the value of ten drillings ;
committed by Walter Trevelyan, Efq;—Aflizes 1787,1 guilty burglary; judgment refpited until the next Affizes.
One who calls himfelf JAMES ROBINSON, brought before me this prefent day, and charged on a fufpicion of felony, that is to
fay, of picking the pocket of Edward Moor, of Ovington, in the /aid county, Labourer, of a purfe, containing two guineas.
Committed by WILLIAM BAINBRIDGE, Efq.
JOSEPH POLWARTH, and JANE POLWARTH, his Wife, charged before me on a fufpicion of having felonioudy flolen, or
having in their poffelfion, as receiving a parcel of wogJ*in fleeces, taken, and carried away from an out-houfe belonging to Prideaux
Walkie, ot Doddington, in the faid county, on the night between the oth and 7th day of November indant.
Committed by the Rev. GEORGE MARSH, Clerk.
JOHN STEWART, charged before me with a fufpicion of being aiding and afllding in felonioudy dealing and carrying away
a parcel of wool in fleeces, from an out-houfe belonging to Prideaux Wilkie, of Doddington, in the faid county, on the night be-
tween the 6th and 7th day of November instant. Committed by the Rev. GEO. MARSH, Clerk.
ELEANOR SCOTT, charged before me with fufpicion of felony in dealing a piece of printed cotton, about twenty yards long
the property of John Forder, of Alnwick, in the faid county, Woollen t and Linen-draper; and alfo with fufpicion of felony ir
dealing about twenty-flx yards of light blue calimancj), and about twelve yards of linen cloth, the property of Robert Pattifon, o)
Alnwick aforefaid, Linen-draper.—And alfo ELIZABETH THOMPSON, wife of William Thompfon, of Colddream, in Nortf
Britain*, charged before me with fufpicion of felony in dealing one piece of printed cotton, about if yard long, the property 01
the faid John Forder; and alfo half a dozen of blvA lint, the property of William Lindfay, of Alnwick aforefaid, Grocer and
Flaxdrefler. Committed by EDWARD GALLON, Efq.
WILLIAM ARNOTT, charged before us with fufpicion of felony in receiving the carcafes of two wedder fheep, the property
of Ann Tomlin, of Guyfon, in the faid county, widow, he the faid William Arnott knowing the lame to have been felonioufly
ftolen by one Robert Winter and __ _ Drummond. Committed by WM CHARLETON and EDWARD GALLON, Efqrs.
JOHN SMITHWHITE, charged before us with fufpicion of felony in receiving a part of two carcafes of two wedder fheep,
the property of Ann Tomlin, of Guyfon, in the faid county, widow, he the faid John Smith white knowing the fame to have been
felonioufly ftolen by one Robert Winter and ___ _ Drummond. Committed by WM CHARLETON and EDWARD GALLON, Efqrs.
Whereas WILLIAM BROWN, late of Haydon-Bridge, in the faid county, Labourer, hath been arrefted by the Conftable, of
Hexham, in the faid county, for fufpicion of a felony by him as it is faid committed, in dealing, taking, and carrying away, three
wedder fheep, the property of Nicholas Leadbitter, of Warden, in the faid county, Gentleman, of the value of 40s. from off his
eflate and grounds at Pais, in the parifli of Hexham, in the faid county, between Sunday the 27th day of January, and the 30th
day of the fame month. Committed by JOHN TWEDDELL, Efq.
WALTER CLARK, charged before me on fufpicion of felonioudy ftealing, and carrying away from an out-houfe or granary, at
Doddington, in the faid county, belonging to Prideaux Wilkie, Gentleman, a quantity of wool in fleeces, and a parcel of cheefes
on the night between the 6th and 7th days of November lad, the property of the faid Prideaux Wilkie.
Committed by the Rev. GEORGE MARSH, Clerk.
MARGARET THOMPSON, wife of Matthew Thompfon, of Kelfo, in North Britain, Shoemaker, upon oath before
me, by Richard Fenwick, of Ulgham Grange, in the faid county. Yeoman, with fufpicion of felony, in receiving a pocket book, the
property of him the faid Richard Fenwick, knowing the fame to have been felonioudy flolen by a woman whofe name is unknown.
Committed by EDWARD GALLON, Efq;
MARY DAVISON, late of Kircaldie, in N t orth Britain, fingle woman, charged upon oath, before me, with fufpicion of felony,
in ftealing ten muflin handkerchiefs, and fixteen yards of taffety filk, the property of Alice Readhead, of Alnwick, in the faid
county, Milliner. Committed by EDWARD GALLON, Efq.
JOHN DAVISON, late of Mansfield, in Nottinghamfhire, Labourer, charged upon oath, before me, by Robert Ogle, of
Swarland Ead Houfe, in the faid county, Farmer, with fufpicion of felony, in privily, and without his knowledge, dealing out of
his right hand coat pocket, a pocket book, the property of him the faid Robert Ogle, which contained fix Newcadle five pound
notes, and fome other papers. ♦ Committed by EDWARD GALLON, Efq.
JOHN WINTER, charged before me, upon the oath of John Dixon, of Heflyfide, in the faid county, on fufpicion of
burglarioudy breaking and entering into the Dwelling Houfe of William Charleton, Efq; of Heflyfide aforefaid, in the county
aforefaid, and from thence felonioudy dealing and carrying away one diver plated tankard, the property of him the faid
William Charleton. Committed by WALTER TREVELYAN , Efq.
ROBERT WINTER, charged before me upon the oath of John Dixon, of Heflyfide, in the faid county, on fufpicion of
burglarioudy breaking and entering into the Dwelling Houfe of William Charleton, of Heflyfide aforefaid, in the county aforefaid,
and from thence felonioudy dealing and carrying away one filver plated tankard, the property of him the faid William Charlton. *
Committed by WALTER TREVELYAN, Efq.
JOSEPH WILLSON, late of Sheepwafh, in the county of Northumberland, charged before us, on fufpicion, upon the oath of
the'Rev. Jofeph Cook, of Sheepwafh, in the parifh of Bothal, in the faid county, of felonioudy dealing, taking, and carrying away,
out of a locked drawer, in the dwelling houfe of the faid Jofeph Cook, two Newcaftle bank notes, five pounds each and one
guinea, the property of the faid Jofeph Cook. Committed by W. TREVELYAN and W. ORDE, Efqrs.
MARGARET WINTER, charged upon oath of James Purvis, of Hallydone, m the laid county, Viaualler, on the fifth day of
February lad pad, with fufpicion of felony, in dealing, taking, and carrying away one plated filvcr tankard, the property of William
Charleton, of Heflyfide, in the faid county, Efq; of the value of two drillings. Committed by W. TREVELYAN, Efq.
JOHN BROWN, late of North Shields, in the faid county, Labourer, charged with fecreting and embezzling a letter, delivered to
him to put into the pod office, at North Shields, in the faid county, which letter contained four notes, for the payment of five pounds
each, of fome of the banks of Newcaftle upon Tyne; and a promiffory note of the value of forty two pounds, nineteen drillings, and
one penny, halfpenny, being the property of Jafper Browell, of Newfham, in the faid county, gentleman.
Committed by THO. FENWICK, Efq.
JOHN CLARK, charged before me with fufpicion upon oath of John Dixon, of Heflyfide, in the faid county, of breaking open
and entering into, in the night time of the 3d of February lad pad, the houfe of William Charleton, of Heflyfide, in the county
aforefaid, and from thence felonioudy dealing, taking and carrying away divers goods, particularly one tankard, plated with diver,
value 10s. 6d. the property of him the faid William Charleton. Committed by W. TREVELYAN. Efq.
GEORGE EMMERY, late of Ratcheugh, in the faid county, Labourer, charged upon oath before us, by Edward Porter, of
Difhley, in the parifh of Thorpe, in Leicefterfhire, with fufpicion of felony, in dealing a double yellow canvas purfe, containing
ten pounds and upwards, the property of Robert Bakewell, of Difhley aforefaid. Farmer.
Committed by WILLIAM CHARLSTON, and EDWARD GALLON, Efqrs.
ARCHIBALD PATTERSON, late of Edinburgh, Barber, charged before us, upon oath, with affaulting and dangeroufly wound-
ing Robert Stoddart, late of Newcaftle upon Tyne, Labourer, infomuch that he is in danger of his life.
Committed by WM CHARLSTON and EDWARD GALLON, Efqrs.


