

PIONEER PAPER.
NORTHERN
QUEENSLAND
AUGUSTUS G. PERCEVAL.
Author of “Common-sense of Colonization
PRICE ONE PENNY.
LONDON;
“LABOUR NEWS” PUBLISHING OFFICE,
15, Russell Street, Covent Garden, W.C.
1881.


annals on the
Various Fields of Emigration
THE FIRST SERIES,
FORMING
No. 1 Shilling Packet,
CONTAINS :
“ British Columbia.” By J. S. Knevett.
“ California.” By Alexander Macdonald.
“Diamond Fields of South Africa.” By J. W.
Winter.
“Kansas.” By Alexander Macdonald.
“ Manitoba.” By W. G. Finney.
“Natal.” By W. Y. Day kin.
“ New South Wales.” By F. B. Treatt.
“South Australia.” By Lorimer E. Harcus
“ Texas.” By an Old Traveller.
“Virginia.” By J. Stanley James.
“ New Zealand.” By A. R. Carrington
“ Northern Queensland.” By Augustus G. Perceval
Single Numbers, Id.; Post Free , IJr/.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
Invaluable Papers.” Weekly Budget.
“Written by men who know what they are writing about,
Reynolds s Newspaper.
“LABOUR NEWS” PUBLISHING OFFICES,
16 BUSSELL ST.. GOVENT GARDEN, LONDON, WO,


A Seri
“ Britis
“ Califo
“ Diam(
“ Kansi
“ Manil
“ Natal
“ New ijVM-U-H *-»jr * ■ ‘‘UWV..
“ South Australia.” By Lorimer E. Harcus.
“ Texas.” By an Old Traveller.
“ Virginia.” By J. Stanley James.
“ New Zealand.” By A. R. Carrington. 5
“ Northern Queensland.” By Augustus G. Perceval
Singh Numbers, Id.; Post Free , 1 \d.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS,
“ Invaluable Papers.” Weekly . Budget.
;l “Written by men who know what they are writing about.”—
] Reynolds's"Newspaper.
Reynoldsa Newspaper.
“LABOUR NEWS” PUBLISHING OFFICES,
15, RUSSELL ST.. COVBNT GARDEN, LONDON, W.C.


PIONEER PAPER.
NORTHERN
QUEENSLAND
AUGUSTUS G. PERCEVAL.
Author of “Common-sense of Colonization
PRICE ONE PENNY.
LONDON:
“LABOUR NEWS” PUBLISHING OFFICE,,
15, Russell Street, Covent Garden, W.C.
1881.


LONDON:
PRINTED AT THE INDUSTRIAL PRESS WORKS.
59, GREEK STREET, SOHO, W.


NORTHERN QUEENSLAND,
AUGUSTUS GEORGE PERCEVAL.
A not unnatural, but nevertheless mistaken, impression exist*
that the low latitude of North Queensland implies a hot and
unhealthy climate unsuitable for the residence of emigrants
from the Temperate zones. In fact it is frequently stated by
writers and speakers, not well informed on the subject, that
such is the case, and the mistake is rather fostered than
otherwise by the Colonists of the more southern parts of
Australia, to whom this unjust handicapping of their Northern
neighbour is in some sense not without its advantages. It i»
necessary to remove this prejudice as a first step towards
placing Northern Queensland as a field for Colonisation fairly
before our countrymen and towards showing them what a
magnificent appanage they have in this little-known portion
of the empire. The vital statistics published from time to
time by the Queensland Government are sufficient to prove
to those who will take the trouble to analyse them that Nor-
thern Queensland notwithstanding its low latitude is excep-
tionally healthy. The experience of those who have had the
good fortune to live in that beautiful climate will confirm it.
Meteorological statistics will also show that the extremes of
temperature are closer together, and consequently the climate
more equable there than in the southern parts of Australia,
The thermometer never rises so high nor falls so low as it does
on the southern coasts of the continent. Furthermore the un-
deniable fact that the most laborious of known occupations
are constantly carried on in all parts of the territory by white
men under most unfavourable sanitary conditions, and yet


with a low death rate, should convince the most incredulous.
The fact is that—as is well known to meteorologists—the
isothermal lines by no means run parallel with the equator,
or with each other, for that there are many other climatic condi-
tions that modify the effect that comparative nearness to, or
remoteness from that line has in producing a healthy 01
unhealthy climate in any given locality. Having stated what is
necessary and should I, think, he sufficient to remove this pre-
judice, I will proceed to give a description of the country of
which I speak under the name of Northern Queensland. It
is the north-eastern corner of Australia, and may be found
delineated in any moderately good map of Australia or better
still of Queensland and comprises the provinces of Burke,
Cook, Mitchell, and Kennedy. These provinces contain
7,500 ; 25,500 ; 30,000; and 10,200 square miles respectively,
making a total of 73,200 square miles, or nearly 17,000,000
acres with a coast line of over 1,600 miles, nearly 1,000
miles of which are so protected by the Great Barrier
Beef as almost to deserve the name of one continuous
harbour, and although the navigation is difficult for sailing
vessels of large size yet for steamers this track forms perhaps-
the most magnificent maritime highway in the world.
The province of Cook is identical with the great promontory
of Cape York, which has a base of five degrees of longitude
in latitude 18°S,and terminates in a point in latitude 10°30 S.
The province of Kennedy extends along the N.E. coast of
Australia from the southern boundary of Cook in latitude
Xgo as aforesaid to Cape Palmerston in latitude 21>’30 S. r
and is bounded on the south by provinces of Southern
Queensland, on the west by the provinces of Burke and
Mitchell, and on the north by Cook. The province of
Burke is bounded on the north by the shore of the Gulf of
Carpentaria, from the S.W. corner of Cook to the boundary of
the Northern Territory of South Australia in longitude 138° E.,
and is divided from the province of Mitchell on the south by
the line extending from about, latitude 21°30 S., on the W. to
about 22 Q S. on the East. The Mitchell, which, with the three
provinces already described, completes the territory of Northern
Queensland, is an inland province bounded by Burke on the
north, by provinces of Southern Queensland on the W.and S.,
and by Kennedy on the E.
The provinces of Burke and Mitchell are at present, 1881,
entirely under pastoral occupation, hut a new and excellent
harbour—Port Parker—has lately been discovered in Burke,


on the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria. This is to he the
terminus of the trans-continental railway, which will pass
through these two provinces, and, no doubt, rapidly promote
the agricultural settlement of them. At present there is not
much to say about them, except that they are known to
contain a deal of good land and probably contain much
more that is not known. Cook, which by the way, includes,
as do the other two maritime provinces, the adjacent islands,
has on Thursday Island, off the extreme N. point of Cape
York, a station maintained partly by the Queensland and
partly by the Imperial Government for the relief of mariners
wrecked in Torres Straits or the adjacent seas. This is known
as the Cape York Station and formerly had its quarters on
the mainland opposite Albany Island, but in 1875 was moved
to its present location. Some seven or eight years ago
•auriferous country was discovered on the Palmer River, which
speedily attracted a large population both of white men and
Chinese. The port to these diggings is Cooktown, so named
after the great navigator, Captain Cook, as being situated at the
mouth of the Endeavour River, wherein 1770 he careened his
good ship the “Endeavour.” Since then from time to time
other gold diggings have been discovered in this province and
other ports, but f ooktown maintains its supremacy as a com-
mercial port. The Customs receipts at Cooktown for the year
1879 amounted to £29,673. In 1878 the imports amounted
to £228,196, and the exports to £456,965. Besides its mineral
wealth Cook has a large area of most magnificent agricultural
land on the coast to the southward of the Endeavour river,
with some line rivers and good cedar and other timber on
their banks. Our knowledge of Cook is as yet very imperfect,
.and I have little further to say about it except that its very
great extent of sea coast and the wonderful wealth of the
adjacent seas indicate unsurpassable opportunities for people
of maritime habits. This field for enterprise may be said to
be at present almost untouched. There remains the province
of Kennedy, which is the only part of Northern Queensland
which can be called settled, and to it most of my future
remarks will apply. I have already given the boundaries
of this province. Before discoursing about the Kennedy, we
will sum up what I have already said about Northern
Queensland. The territory is very large and has an al-
most unparalleled extent of sea-coast line in proportion
to that area. As to the climate, —although the country is
well within the tropics it must be remembered in the first


place that lines of equal temperature, whether of extremes*
or means, do not by any means run even with either the
parallels of latitude or with each other ; and in the second, —
that, owing probably to the greater extent of ocean in the
Southern as compared with the Northern hemisphere ; the
intertropical regions of the former enjoy a far more temper-
ate climate than those of the latter. Again, if we compare
Northern with Southern Queensland it will be found that, owing
probably to the influence of the trade winds —the climate of
the coast districts is actually cooler in the former than in the
latter. Further inland where the effects of this sea breeze
though not entirely absent are less perceptible the altitude
of the table-land lowers the temperature, especially at night,,
so that one can throughout the year be glad of a warm blan-
ket. In the winter, frosts are of frequent occurence and
natural ice is occasionally seen. The hottest parts of the
country are at the foot of the coast range in valleys sheltered
from the sea breeze. On the whole the climate will compare
favourably with that of any part of Australia—and therefore
of the world. As in all countries the rich alluvial lands —
especially if, as is usually the case, they are imperfectly drained
—will, when first they are stirred, produce fever and ague.
Men pursuing the occupation of mining or other occu-
pations that require an equal amount of exposure and
fatigue are liable to intermittent fever and oilier diseases
arising from exposure and neglect and above all from intem-
perance. But these are causes of disease all the world over,
in some parts of the district, notably Bowen and its neighbour-
hood I may give the climate a yet better name. There fever
and ague are unknown except in cases of patients who have
acquired the disorder in other places, and come to Bowen to
get rid of it. Other illnesses are mostly caused by the
imprudence of the sufferers.
The principal towns in Northern Queensland are the fol-
lowing:—Beginning from the south-eastern corner and fol-
lowing up the coast, the first that Ave come to is Mad ay r
situated in latitude 21.30 S„ on the banks of the Pioneer
River, and the port of an extensive sugar growing district..
The population of Mackay in 1876 was 729. In lat. 20 S. is-
Bowen, situated on the shore of an excellent harbour, Port
Denison, probably the best on the North Queensland coast.
Although settled sooner than any other town in this part of
the country it has not advanced so fast as its excellent natural
advantages rvould lead one to expect, and has been out-


stripped by most of its younger rivals, but there can be little
doubt that eventually it must enjoy a very considerable
amount of prosperity. In 1876 the population was 946.
Here is the seat of the Northern branch of the Supreme
court of Queensland. In lat. 19° 18 S. is Townsville,
the port of the wealthy gold fields of Charters-Towers,
Millchester, &c. Townsville is younger than Bowen, which
it has far out-stripped in wealth and population,
though in place of a harbour it has only an open roadstead
and a small creek (Boss Creek) that affords shelter to boats
and small coasting craft. A railway has been commenced
from this port to Charters-Towers, that is to say, westward
and is intended to be eventually a branch of the Trans-
continental line, that is now in contemplation and the con-
struction of which is merely a matter of time.
Proceeding along the coast northwards, we come first to
the mouth of the River Herbert, up which are growing com-
munities of sugar-planters,of whom as well as of the district in
which they are settled, I shall speak presently. A port of
entry has been proclaimed at the mouth of the Herbert, iat.
18°27 S. We next come to the very excellent harbour of
Port Hinchinbrook on the shore of which is situate the
settlement of Cardwell. This harbour is strictly speaking
a Sound, its shelter to seaward being the mountanous
Hinchinbrook Island. The entrance to the Sound from
the southward is narrow and not much used except by
small coasting craft, though occasionally a captain of one of
the A.S.N. Co’s or other large coasting steamers will venture to
save time by going through it. But a very intimate acquain-
tance with the locality is necessary to justify the venture..
Inland the coast range—here called Sea View Range—sends
its almost perpendicular spurs to within a few yards of
the water’s edge, leaving but a narrow strip of land at
their feet. This range is at present practically impassable
except for pack animals. Several attempts have been made
to engineer a good road through or over this impediment. No
doubt these attempts will before long be successful and open up
large tracts of good land.
There are some gold fields in the interior, served partly
from Cardwell and partly from Cooktown, of which I shall
speak presently. There is also a considerable extent of
grazing country of good character, and from the geological
description of the district there can be no doubt that there
is great mineral wealth awaiting discovery.


Port Hinchinbrook is the northermost port of the Province
of Kenned^ 7 , the boundary of which cuts the coast line, as
we have said above, in latitude 18°- S. Immediately to the
north of Cardwell falls into the sea a small river called the
Mackay—not to be confounded with Port Mackay on the
Pioneer river above mentioned —where there is land suitable
for sugar growing.
The inland towns in the Kennedy are Charters-lowers,
Milchester, Ravenswood, and some others of smaller popula-
tion. These are all gold-fields townships.
Northern Queensland has industries of all kinds for the
employment of the energies of men of all classes. The
principal are agricultural, pastoral pursuits, mining, and
maritime industries, such as fishing, beche-de-mer, peai 1-shell
gathering, corailing, tortoise-shelling, &c. Commerce and
manufactures, the hand maidens of these are as yet in their
infancy, and must necessarily depend for progress upon their
development.
In the few remarks I propose to make upon these different
matters I will begin with agriculture as the most important
of them, the rest in a manner depending on it.
We wdl begin then with Mackay which may be said to occupy
the southern°part of the coast district of the Kennedy, from
the southern boundary of the province to about half away
between Mackay and Bowen. Here agriculture may be said
to be in a high state of development, wonderfully so con-
sidering that the Pioneer River upon the banks of which the
town is situated, and which is the nucleus of the district, was
not known to exist until 1863 when it and the O’Connell, a
river not far from it, were discovered by the late Mr. G. E.
Dairympie in H.M.S. Pioneer, a survey vessel then employed
on the coast, which vessel gave its name to the first men-
tioned river. The principal crop is sugar-cane, which is ex-
tensively and on many of the plantations scientifically
grown. The manufacture of sugar and rum employs many
crushing mills and some few distilleries. Up to a very recent
date I believe that all, both of the mills and of the dis-
tilleries, belonged to the owners of the plantations. A very
amount of capital has been invested in the machinery
and other requirements of sugar growing. Within the last
year or two, however, a new system has sprung up, which
will materially alter the circumstances of this industry, and
render it possible to embark in it with a more moderate
amount of capital than was formerly necessary. This is the


Yictor Crushing Mill. Until this invention was perfected it
was always considered necessary to bring the cane to the
crushing power, and as the weight of the megass or worth-
less part of the sugar cane —that is of the fibre, &c., after the
juice has been squeezed out of it —is very large in propor-
tion to that of the sugar itself, it will be easily seen that it
was necessary that the sugar cane should be grown within
a short distance of the mill; and again, as the mill and its
appliances are very costly, a very heavy capital was indispen-
sable for starting a sugar plantation. The Yictor reverses all
this by bringing the mill —crushing powers, boilers, and all—
to the cane, and thereby throws open the avenue to this im-
portant industry to many to whom it was aforetime closed.
Besides sugar, other crops are grown to a certain extent
such as maize, cocoa-nut palms, bananas, coffee, pine-apples,
,&c., but sugar is here the main crop. The crop of 1880 pro-
duced 7,000 tons. On the whole the farming district of
avhich Mackay is the port, is in a most flourishing condition,
employing a great deal of labour and altogether far more
settled and home-like than many places of much greater age.
The town has its town council, hospital, library, and museum,
and other kindred institutions, and its racecourse, on which
it is enabled to secure very good sport by the offer of liberal
prizes.
I must not omit to mention that South Sea Islanders
are employed to a certain extent on the sugar plantations and
other farms for heavy work, such as “ trashing ” (stripping
the underleaves and sheaths off) the sugar cane stalks, in
which operation tbe labourer working between the tall rows
of cane gets the full heat of the sun without the benefit of
the breeze. European labourers have awakened to the truth,
that so far from these coloured labourers reducing the white
man’s wages they enable work to be done which finds em-
ployment for the white man, but could not be done at all, so
as to pay, without the coloured man’s labour.
The road from Mackay to Bowen, of course, is along the
coast, and besides connecting the two towns, much to their
mutual advantage, affords access from Mackay and Bowen,
respectively, to the very valuable strip of agricultural land
lying between the coast-range and the coast. The portion of
this district extending from Mackay to about the river
O’Connell is tributary to the port of Mackay. Crossing that
river vre come into the Bowen territory. The country from
the O’Connell to Cape Conway is intersected by numerous


creeks and rivers with high and steep banks necessitating
heavy cuttings and thereby making the formation of the
road expensive, so that it was not made so soon as might
have been expected, and consequently upon that, cultivation
is not so far advanced as it otherwise would have been.
Three, at least, of these water-courses are navigable to
within a short distance of the road, viz,, the St. Helen’s, the
O’Connell, and the Proserpine.
Along the whole of this strip of country, from Mackay to
Cape Conway, there is arable land of first class quality. Very
little progress has yet been made in agriculture in this direc-
tion, but the pioneers have been pushing out from Bovvcu on
the one side and Mackay on the other, and we may expect in
a few years to see great results from their energy and enter-
prise. There will be scope for much labour on this tract of
country, and when it shall be reclaimed from the wilderness,,
there will not be a pleasanter place of residence to be found
on the face of the earth than this. To the north of Cape
Conway, between it and Gloucester Island, which forms one
of the headlands of Edgcumbe Bay, of which Port Denison
is an inlet, is a peninsula. There is a mountain of consi-
derable altitude on it, which has been named Mt. Dryander,
and the peninsula named after it the Dryander district. This
district contains a considerable tract of valuable land, and a
remarkably humid climate, rain falling on an average at
least two days a week throughout the year, and yet it is
quite healthy. Settlement is making considerable progress
here. This peninsula is bounded on one side by the waters of
Port Denison, the harbour, aforementioned, of Bowen, and
on the other by the South Pacific Ocean. The country in the
immediate neighbourhood of Bowen is dryer and therefore not
so fertile as that on the coast, but, perhaps from the absence of
some of the conditions of fertility, of surpassing healthiness.
When the richer lands shall have been drained and cultivated,
they will no doubt be as healthy as Bowen, which with the tract
of country, of which I am now speaking, certainly bears the palm
at present, not only over the adjacent coast countries, but over
most places in Australia or the world. The “ fever and ague,”'
and “ low fever,” of the rich alluvial lands are not of a malignant
type and can be avoided by simple precautions; but in Bowen,
these precautions are not necessary. However, the result is
that agriculture at Bowen, has made but little progress as
compared with the country around Mackay. There is some
very first class land on the Don river (whence Bowen gets its


water supply) and on Euri Creek, which streams fall into
the sea in Edgcumbe and Abbott Bays respectively, and some
few patches in the immediate neighbourhood of the town,
hut their extent is limited, and on the whole there is at
present very little to be said about agriculture in Bowen.
However there has recently been established a pastoral and
agricultural society —or rather one that has been lying
dormant for some time, has awakened from its slumbers and
seems to be working well and energetically, holding perio-
dical exhibitions, Atc., and there is a Botanical Reserve,
not over liberally endowed by the Government, in which
much active and intelligent interest is taken by some of the
energetic Bowenites, and which it may be hoped will do
much to promote agriculture and horticulture. Though the
land in the neighbourhood of Bowen cannot from an agri-
cultural point of view, be ranked with that near the coast
and elsewhere, yet there is much that would pay for cultiva-
tion as homesteads under the very liberal provisions of the
Queensland Land Associations’ Acts. A man with such a
selection (the particulars of which may be learnt at the Agent
General’s Office, 1, Westminster-chambers) keepingafew goats,
pigs, and cows, and growing patches of such things as sweet
potatoes, bananas, maize, pumpkins, &c., would keep himself
and family, without occasion to buy anything but clothing ;
tea and sugar he could grow for himself, though no doubt he
would find it cheaper to buy the latter. If such a man were
willing to go to work for hire for two or three days a week,
or perhaps the whole week at first, he would soon be able
to please himself whether to go out to work or to devote his
energies to the cultivation of his homestead or to anything
else that would pay him as well or better.
Proceeding northwards from Bowen (Port Denison) to
Townsville (Cleveland Bay) we come to the Burdekin River,
which may be considered as the boundary between the
districts more particulary dependent on those two places
respectively.
The Burdekin is a river that drains a basin of very large
extent, comprising, in fact, the whole of the province of
Kennedy with the exception of the short course rivers that
drain the seaward slopes of the coast range. It is conse-
quently liable to heavy and lasting Hoods, whi ch at present render
the exceedingly fertile lands on the delta of the river practical ly
useless, and will continue to do so till the river is tamed and
has a bridle put upon him, which work will demand resource*


greater than are likely to be available for it for many a long
year to come, though no doubt it will eventually be done, and
when done will add greatly to the value of the national es-
tate. Since writing the above I have learnt that the machinery
and other appliances for a very large sugar plantation are
being erected and supplied for an estate on the Burdekin.
From the Burdekin to the Herbert River, lat. 18 Q 3O S.
nothing has been attempted in the way of agriculture, princi-
pally, I believe, because the people of Townsville, to which
this district naturally belongs, have devoted themselves,
entirely to commercial pursuits, of which more will be said
in its proper place.
On the Herbert River is a considerable quantity of arable
land fully equal, I believe, to that at Mackay, but settlement
is not so far advanced as it is there. There are, however, at
work, and doing well, several sugar plantations with the
necessary machinery for manufacturing the crop. No doubt
there will be a steady and increasing demand for agricultural
labour in this quarter. As I have before said, Cardwell, which
is the next place to which we come on our journey north-
wards, is too much pinched between the mountains (Sea
View Range) and the sea to allow much scope for agriculture;
hut what soil there is, is rich and horticulture flourishes.
Between Cardwell and the north boundary of the Kennedy is
the river Mackay of which I have already spoken.
Crossing the boundary into Cook we come to a tract of
very exceptionally rich agricultural land, explored about 1873,
by the late Mr. G. E. Dalrymple and Mr. Walter Hill, the able
director of the Botanical Gardens at Brisbane. These gentle-
men, both competent judges, and acting in a qvasi official
capacity, speak in the most enthusiastic terms as to the richness
of the soil in this locality as far surpassing anything as yet dis-
covered in Australia. This district extends from Mourlyan
Harbour (discoverd by Captain Moresby of H.M.S. Basilisk),
in about 17° 50 S., to Weary Bay, in about 15° 50 S.,
and is watered by several fine rivers, the Moresby, Johnson,
Daintree, Russell, and some others. Much cedar grows about
here. Of the agricultural capabilities of the rest of the
eastern shore of Cook but little is yet known, and still less
of the west coast of it, and the same may be said of the
northern coast of Burke. The formation of the trans-con-
tinental railway may be expected to accelerate considerably
the colonisation of the coast of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
All the agricultural land in the Kennedy of which we have


spoken is comprised in a narrow strip of some 40 miles wide
along the coast. Nor is there much elsewhere to equal this
in richness, except along the margins of the rivers and creeks
and in fertile valleys among the mountains. With these
exceptions the Kennedy reminds one of an old comparison of
the county of Surrey to a cloth of frieze with a golden border
—the golden border in that case meaning the banks of
the Thames, and in this the sea coast. That, how-
ever, the land in the interior, though far less fertile
than that on the coast, will produce good crops is proved
by the fact that no goldfields’ township has yet been
known where those indefatigable gardeners, the Chinese, have
failed to furnish the diggers with abundant supplies of all
sorts of culinary vegetables of excellent quality. I have
little more to say as to agricultural matters, but that atten-
tion is being drawn to Liberian coffee, rice, fibre-producing
plants, and other staples of export, for the growth of which
the country is well adapted, and which will give employment
abundant and remunerative to a very large number of colo-
nists. My readers will, doubtless, be glad to hear that the
other industries of Northern Queensland will take much less
space to describe. Of the Pastoral industry it is only neces-
sary to say that for some considerable distance from the coast
the pasture is, with the exception of some few favoured spots,
totally unfitted for Merino sheep. It is, however, as is also
the climate, excellent for cattle and horses, and there is very
little doubt that breeds of sheep are to be had or formed that
will thrive well here. Merinos have been tried and failed.
Further inland, however, on the northern borders of the Ken-
nedy and on the Mitchell the case is different. There there is
land for merinos, as well as for cattle and horses, not to be sur-
passed in Australia. Here also is agricultural land of fii’st
class quality and in unlimited quantities, that is at present
useless for want of access to market, but which will doubtless
be rapidly colonised when that defect is remedied, as it is
intended to be, by the construction of the Trans-continental
railway, which will thus be made a paying concern to its
constructors, and a great boon to the colony and colonists.
Many runs were taken up some years ago on the Gulf of
Carpentaria and the rivers flowing into it, but owing to the
hard times of 1866-70 were abandoned, and the stock was
withdrawn. But they have mostly been again occupied, and if
the frozen meat trade acquires the proportions it is expected to
attain, large quantities of cattle will be raised here for export.


Cashmere and Angora goats should do well here, nor does
there seem to be any reason why ostrich farms should not
pay in some parts of the country as well as they do in South
Africa. So much for the pastoral interest. As to mining,
there is hardly a known metal that has not been found in
Northern Queensland—not all of them, hitherto, in “ payable ”
quantities, but enough to indicate that the mineral wealth of
this highly endowed country is great beyond calculation, and
only requires skill and patience, labour, capital, and energy,
for its development. Topaz has been found in large quanti-
ties and of good quality; diamonds and other gems are known
to exist, but have not as yet been sought to any great extent.
It may be observed en passant that the goldfields are a great
blessing to men of the labouring class. If employment is
from any cause scarce, there are always the “diggings” to
fall back upon, where men can at all events, either as wages
men, or, as the saying goes, “ each on his own hook,” always
“ make tucker,” that is to say, earn their food, and most times
something—sometimes a great deal more, The diggings, in
some respects, supply the place of trades unions, in safe-
guarding the employed against tyranny on the part of em-
ployers.
The next industry to which I propose drawing attention is
the maritime, which has been less developed than any of
the others. The sea along the whole of the many miles of
coast, teems with wealth to be had for the picking up and
yet wnth the exception of a few vessels, mostly hailing from
Sydney, collecting : —some hecTie-de-mer , some pearls and pearl
shells, and others to a much smaller extent, tortoise shell,
nothing has been done with it. Along the whole coast,
especially the N.E. coast from Cape Palmerston to Cape
York are innumerable sites for villages where the hardy
fishing population of the coasts of England, Ireland, and
Scotland, might find congenial employment, and turn to the
very best advantage their hereditary and acquired skill in
matters maritime. The sea swarms with fish of innumer-
able varieties, many of which are practically unknown ; the
dugong (a species of seal) abounds; heche-de-mer, pearl
oysters and other shells yielding valuable mother of pearl,
•ponges, coral, turtle, tortoise-shell-bearing and others, are
plentiful; edible oysters abundant and there many and great
facilities for their artificial production ; salt is to be made.
In fact it is impossible for me to enumerate all, or nearly all,
the untouched sources of wealth, waiting for some one, or more,


to come and gather it, and not in a terrible climate like that
of most of the English fisheries, but beneath a genial sky,
and in sheltered waters that yet yield, or rather may he made
to yield, a far greater return than is to he won with privation,
suffering, and danger on the tempestuous seas of the mother
country.
There remains for notice the commercial interest. This is
•as yet in its infancy, hut should receive a great impetus from
the formation of the Trans-continental railway. I think the
following extracts from Pugh’s Almanac (the Queensland
Whittaker) of 1880, of the returns from the different ports
will he nearly sufficient for my present purpose.
Customs Revenue. — Mackay, £3,694; Bowen, £1,742;
Townsville, £26,676 ; Sweer’s Island (Gulf of Carpentaria),
£3,237 ; Port Douglas, £5,514; Port Hinchinbrook, £l2l ;
'Cooktown, £29,673 ; Cairns, £667 ; Thursday Island, £1,412 ;
Total £72,936. These are the returns for 1877. I have not
access to export or import returns since the year 1878.
The following are the import figures for the year Mackay
£35,861; Bowen, £22,652 ; Townsville, £187,578 ; Cardwell,
£2,877; Trinity Bay, £3,399 ; Port Douglas, £19,586 ; Cook-
town, £132,915 ; Thursday Island, £22,078 ; Sweer’s Island,
£11,785 : Total £438,731. The exports are as follows Mac-
kay £48,684 ; Bowen, £12,788; Townsville, £292,230 ; Trinity
Bay, £131,660 ; Port Douglas, £46,741 ; Cooktown, £456,965 ;
Thursday Island, £60,918; Sweer’s Island, £2,285; Total,
£1,052,373. It is to be noted, in order to understand these
statistics, that Mackay is the principal sugar-growing district;
Townsville, Trinity Bay, Port Douglas and Cooktown are
goldfield ports ; and that Thursday Island is exceptional and
principally exports maritime produce, and imports pro-
visions, etc., for the maritime producers. A new port has
quite recently been discovered, Port Parker in the Gulf of
Carpentaria, admirably adapted for the terminus of the
Trans-continental railway, and a point d' appui for the com-
merce that may be expected to develop itself between the
coast of Australia and the Indian Archipelago.
Having now said what I had to say respecting Northern
Queensland and its industries, I will here lay down my P en *
Those who desire to obtain more detailed information will he
able to obtain it from an authentic source at the General Agency
of Queensland, Westminster Chambers, S.W. The decennial
Census of Queensland was taken simultaneously with that of the
United Kingdom but the returns have not yet come to hand.


Will shortly appear as part of the same series,
THE
COMMON-SENSE OF COLONIZATION,
A. G. PERCEVAL.
Being a reprint of an article that appeared in “ The
Industrial Almanack for 1881,” revised and supplemented
by much fresh matter bearing on the same subject.
CENTRAL LABOUR EXCHANGE,
15, Russell Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C.
3 1508 00246297 1


List of Books & Pamphlets relating to
Labour, &c.
PRICE FREE BY POST.
The WAY to WORK ; or, FINGER-POSTS on the ROAD to EMPLOYM ENT i t
The YEaR-BOOK of WOMEN’S WORK, and OUIDE to REMUNERATIVE
EMPLOYMENT, by L. M. H. .. .. .. i <■
WORK for LADIES in ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS. By Louisa M.
Hubbard .. .. .. .. .. .. .. o si
WORK, WAGES, and PRICES of FOOD in EUROPE and AMERICA
COMPARED . .. ~ .. .. .. . 01
STATISTICAL DIRECTORY of LONDON TRADE SOCIETIES .. o 6.J
The COLONIES of COLORADO, in their Relations to English Enterprise and
Settlement. By William A. Bell .. .. .. .. ..03
The GENERAL SERVAN I'. By A. Lady .. -. .. ..o tj
HOW to REPLY to an ADVERTISEMENT .. .. .. .. o 2.)
The GOOD LODGINGS and HOTEL DIRECTORY .. ..'..07
The VILLAGE COOKERY SCHOOL .. .. o i.J
“OFF THE TRACK” in LONDON . .. o 14
HANDY BOOK of the LABOUR LAWS. By George Howell .. ..210
HANDY BOOK for the GUARDIANS of the POOR. By G. C. T.
Bartley .. .. .. ~ .. .. 2 10
BUSINESS. By James Platt .. .. .. .. .. .12
INDUSTRIAL ALMANACK, 1879, and HANDY BOOK on the WAY to
WORK ■ • o.ls
EASY GUIDE to LONDON .. .. .. .. .0
OUR UNEMPLOYED in GREAT CITIES, with Suggestions for the Better
Organisation of Labourers. By Alsager Hay Hill, Editor of the
“ Labour News” .. .. .. .. .. ... .. o 2'
OREGON Facts regarding its Climate, &c. With Two Maps .. .. o 3*5
PUBLIC-HOUSH S for the PEOPLE ; a Plea for Improved Taverns By
M. W. Moggridgk .. .. .. .. .. .. .. o 6i
LOAN OFFICES'. As they Are and as they Might Be. By J S. Howell .. o 1.5
SERVANTS’ REGISTRY OFFICES: the False and the True. By J. S.
Howell .. .. .. .. .. .. . • 0
INDUSTRIAL BIRMINGHAM. By G. Phillips Bevan, F G.S.. .. ..o 3 i
GOING TO SEA ; Or. Under the Red Ensign. A Guide to Parents & Guardians 1 x
PIC fURESQUE TOURIST ; a Handy Guide Round the World .. .. * *2-
IMPERIAL POCKET READER 12
TRAVELS IN THE UNITED STATES. By Peter O’Leary .. .. a 8
CLI MATE and HE ALTH in SOU 1H AFRICA. By James Bonwick .. i 2
RECREATIVE SCIENCE. By David Page • -o ,t$
POWER and INFLUENCE of CO-OPERATIVE EFFORT, By Dr John.
Watts .... ■ •• •• ° l i
LONDt iN IN MY POCKET ; or, Where is the Street I Want. Being an Alpha-
betical Index to every Street, Square, Court, and Alley in the Metropolis
By G. Belcour .. .. .. •• •• •• • ■ 1 3i
HORSEKEEPER’S RECEIPT BOOK. Containing the Art of Breaking and
Managing Horses .. .. .. • • • • ■ • ..12
Migration and Emigration.
THE MIGRATION OF LABOUR. By E. W. Hollond. .. .. o
WHO SHOULD EMIGRATE & WHERE. By James Bonwick, F.R G.S. o si
STEERAGE TO UNITED STATES. By an Ex-Officer of Bureau of Labour
Statistics ... •• •• •' •• •• . o ti
NEW ZEALAND : The Eng'and of the Pacific. By Arthur Clayoen .. i t
NEW ZEALAND. By Rev. J. Berry .. .. .. .. o
HINTS TO EMIGRANTS to the UNITED STATES of AMERICA. By
Charles Bradlaugh .. .. • • .. .. ..it
USEFUL INFORMATION for INTENDING EMIGRANTS to the Western
Prairies of the United States. By James Samuhlson .. .. .. 0 7
On Sale at the “Labour News and Employment Advertiser” Office, 15,
Russell Street, Oovent Garden, London, W.C.


THE CENTRAL
LABOUR EXCHANGE AND AGENCY,
(ESTABLISHED IN 1871).
15, Russell Street, Oovent Garden. London, W.C.
Director, ALSAGER HAY HILL.
Editor of the “ Labour News & Employment Advertiser,” Author
of “The Unemployed in Great Cities, ’ &c., &c.
THE CENTRAL LABOUR EXCHANGE AND AGENCY
UNDERTAKES THE FOLLOWING BUSINESS:—
I. The Registration and Supply of every
Class of Labour —Professional, Com-
mercial, Industrial, and Domestic.
11. Personal interviews on behalf of
Employers with any persons whom
they may desire to engage, & Reports
on the same.
HI The supply of Information relative to
all fields of Migration or Emigration,
at Home or Abroad.
IV. Passages and all other Emigration
arrangements to the United States
and the Colonies.
Terms of the Central Labour Exchange.
Registration of Requirements, whether of Employer or Employe .. dd.
On being suited with Person or Place
Lads. Labourers, and Temporary Jobs .. .. •• •• ••
Annual Subscription, entitling to use of the I ONE
Exchange & Agency in all Departments ( GUINEA.
Hours of Attendance by the Director, 9 a.m. to 12 noon daily.
P. 0.0« to be made payable to A. H. HILL.
