

9ern-i- ?fnc\
\<S 'th
N JL
■
*
7**~- «-* f , / Ptf


.Y, 1864.
Northern territory ot sooth aus-
TKALIA.-SALES of TOWN and COUNTRY SECTIONS of
BAND, under the authority of the Northern Territory Act, passed by
the Legislature of South Australia (assented to on behalf of the QueonJ.
The following are marginal recitals of the clauses of the Act, with
short extracts ; .
Clause 2. 500,000 acres of country land, and 1,502 town lots, may be
sold, as after-mentioned. . .
Clause 3. Governor to appoint officers in London and Adelaide to
receive applications for purchase of land, at 7s. 6d. per acre.
Clause 4. 250,000 acres of country land, and 1,562 town lots only,
to be allotted at 7s. 6d. per acre. Mode of allotment: —
“ A. I. 125,000 acres of country, and 781 town lots, shall only be
allotted by the officer in London, and the like quantity by the officer
> in Adelaide, under Clausa 3.
“ B. 11. If a greater quantity of land be applied for, cither In
London or Adelaide, than mentioned in last subdivision the allot-
ment shall be made pro ratft according to the quantity applied for by
each applicant, provided that no person shall apply for or receive
a less quantity than ICO acres of country land and one town lot.
“C. 111. Any portion of the 250,000 acres of country land undisposed
of under Clause 3 shall be sold at the rate of 12s. per acre as provided
for by the next danse.”
Clause 5. After expiration of period for applications for land under
last clause, 250,000 acres more to b? offered at 12s. per acre, “ Provided
that, no greater quantity of laud shall be sold at 12s. per acre than
250.000 acres in addition to the quantity (if any) undisposed of under
Clause 3. And the course prescribed in the last clause in reference to
the allotment of lands applied for under Clause 3 shall be adopted in
reference to the allotment of lands applied for under this clause.
Clause 6. Land order to entitle purchaser or nominee to select land
within live years.
Clause 7. Person entitled to select one town lot for every 160 acres of
first 250,000 acres purchased.
Clause 8. After sale of 500,000 acres, land to he sold as directed in
Act No. 5, of 21 Viet. Upset price of town lots to ho .£l.
Clause 9. Lands not to be sold of less area than 160 acres “ until after
the sale of such 500,000 acres.”
Clause 10. Appropriation of proceeds “shall be applied to the pay-
ment of the cost of governing the said Territory, and the general im-
provement thereof, provided that 10 per cent, on the gross shall bo
pluced to the credit of the general revenue of the province.”
Clause 11. Governor to make rules.
Clauses 12, 13. Appointment of Government Resident and powers.
Clause 14. Regulations to be laid before Parliament.
REGULATIONS for the SALE of LAND under the NORTHERN
TERRITORY ACT.
1 On or before the 20th day of February, 1854. the officers appointed
for the puiqKise in London and Adelaide shall announce, by public ad-
vertisement, that on the Ist day of March. 1864, they will he prepared
to receive applications from any persons willing to purchase laud ottered
for sale under the above-mentioned Act.
2. Before any application can be received each applicant shall pay a
deposit of £2O sterling, as part payment of the purchase-money tor each
quantity of 160 acres of country land applied for.
3. Every such application must be for 160 acres of country land, and
one town lot, or for some multiple thereof, in the form or to the effect
set forth in the schedule marked A, to bo signed by the appli-
cant, and accompanied by a deposit receipt for £2O for each and
every lot of 160 acres so applied for, as part payment of the pur-
chase money, and the balance must be paid within 14 days from the
day of allotment; but If the applicant shall neglect to pay the balance
as aforesaid, his deposit shall be actually forfeited, and the land so
allotted may be resold, without notice.
4. The officer in London and the officer in Adelaide will each have
power to keep his office open daily from 10 o’clock a.m. to 3 o’clock
p.ra., for 28 days after the first day of March, 18G», for receiving appli-
cations for the 125,000 acres of country land and 781 town lots autho-
rized to be sold under clause 3 of the Act, or to declare tho list closed
at an earlier period, as soon as he shall have received applications from
S s. a iu case Uie whole quantity of the first 125,000 acres of country land
and 731 town lots is not applied for either in London or Adelaide
during the time within which applications may bo received, the-remain-
der must bo withdrawn, and cannot be offered again, at less than 12s.
per acre, pursuant to the Act.
6. As soon as the lists of applications for the first 125.000 acres of
country land and 781 town lots are closed, the officers shall, alter giving
seven days' notice by public advertisement, proceed, at the appointed
times and places, to allot to each applicant 160 acre-s of country land
and one town lot, and the remainder (if any) shall be allotted pro ratA
according to the quantity applied for by each applicant in excess of 160
acres ; provided that every such allotment, pro rata, shall lie 100 acres
of country land, and one town lot, or some multiple thereof.
7. On the allotment of the land sold, under Clause 3 being com-
pleted, and the balance of the purchase-money being paid, the officers
shall respectively Issue, in duplicate, “ Preliminary Laud Orders" to the
persons entitled to receive them, which “ Preliminary Laud Orders”
shall each be for one lot of country land of 160 acres and one half-acre
1 block of town land.


s cants may, at their option, receive back their deposits, or shall, on
, application, be preferably entitled Vo have the remainder of the
1 quantity of country land which they originally applied for allotted to
t them pro rata, at 12s. an acre, before any applications are called for by
[. the officer for purchase of land under clause sof the Act; provided
•, that every such allotment, pro rata, shall be 160 acres of country land,
e or some multiple thereof, and no such applicant shall be entitled to any
i, town lot.
r,, 9. In the event of any portion of the second 125,000 acres of country
land remaining unallotted after supplying the original applicants, as
i provided for in the last regulation, the officers shall respectively give
i. one month’s public notice that, on a certain day. they w ill be prepared to
receive applications from persons willing to purchase the remainder at
1- 12s. per acre.
10. livery such application must be for 160 acres of country land, or
i for some multiple thereof, in the form or to the effect set forth
1 in the schedule marked B, to be signed by the applicant, and
* accompanied by a deposit receipt for X'hj for each and every lot
J of 160 acres, so applied for, as part payment of the purchase-money,
I and the balance must be paid within 14 days from the day of allot-
-0 ment; but if the applicant shall neglect to pay the balance as aforesaid,
0 his deposit shall be actually forfeited, and the land so allotted may be
0 resold, without notice.
h 11. The officer in London and tim officer in Adelaide will each have
■s power to keep his office open for applications for the sale of the land
*• authorized to he sold under Clause sof the Act, or so much thereof as
f* shall remain unallotted to applicants who may have been preferably
y entitled to allotment under Regulation 7, for 90 days after the first
*• day named for receiving such applications; or to declare the list closed
* at an earlier period as soon as he shall have received applications from
as many applicants as will enable him to allot 160 acres of land to each
•'f applicant.
13. As soon as the lists of second applications for land are closed, the
~ officers shall, after giving seven days’ notice by public advertisement,
, proceed, at the appointed times and places, to allot to each applicant
•* 160 acres of country land, and the remainder (if any) shall be alloted pro
? raid, according to the quantity applied for by each applicant in excess
J of 160 acres; provided that every such allotment pro rata, shall be 160
f acres of country land, or some multiple thereof.
1 13. On the allotment of land sold under Clause 5 being completed,
5 and the balance of purchase-money lieing paid, the officers shall respeo-
•J lively issue, in duplicate, “ Land Orders ”to the persons entitled to re-
? ceive them, which “ Land Orders " shall each be for one lot of 160 acres
1 of country land.
“ 14. Ail purchase-money payable in London under the Act shall be
; paid to tho Agent-General of South Australia, or his order; and all
1 purchase-money payable in Adelaide under the Act shall be payable to
’ the Treasurer of South Australia, or his order.
f 15. On the arrival of the Government Resident in the new Territory,
‘ tho site of the principal town will be determined and surveyed, and the
plan of the town mapped out in half-acre lots, and exhibited for public
. inspection, when a General Meeting of the holders of the “ Preliminary
I Land Orders,” or their agents, shall be held at such principal town ;
6 such meeting not to take place earlier than Ist September, 1864, and
> tho order in which they shall select their town-land shall then ba
, decided by lot, and tho selection shall forthwith bo made under the
f superintendence of the Government Resident, who shall, after such
selection, reserve a sufficient number of town lots to meet the require-
-1 raents of the holders of such outstanding “ Preliminary Land Orders” as
shall not have been exercised at such meeting ; and from the lots thus
* reserved the holders of such 11 Preliminary Land Orders” may make
I selection in the order in which they may apply for the same.
16. When the surveys of country land have been completed to a
sufficient extent, another General Meeting of the holders of the
" Preliminary I,and Orders,” or their agents, shall be held not later
than the day aforesaid, when the order in which they shall select their
country lands shall bo decided by lot, and the selection in tho order of
choice must be made under the superintendence of the Government
Resident within one month from the date of such meeting; and any
■ selection not made in the order of choice by the holders of “ Prelimi-
nary Land Orders” within that time, may be. made at any time within
five years from the date of the ** Preliminary Land Order," hut will not
be entitled to any preference over “ Land Orders.”
17. The selection of lands under “ Land Orders" may be made from
any surveyed lands open for selection after the expiration of one mouth
from tho date of the first selection under “ Preliminary Laud Orders,”
and in the order in which application is made for the same.
FIRST or PRELIMINARY LAND SALE, Under
the Northern Territory Act of South Australia.—Notice Is hereby
given, under the authority of the above-named Act, and in conformity
with the regulations in force, that, on the Ist day of March ensuing, aiu
subsequent days till closed, LETTERS of APPLICATION, acoom
panied by the corresponding receipts of deposit, previously paid int<
the Bank of England to the account of the Agent-General of Soutl
Australia, will be receivable at this office from persons willing to pur-
chase land at 7s. 6d. per acre, in the first or preliminary land sale,
containing 781 allotments, each allotment consisting of 160 acres ol
country land and one town lot of half an acre. For such purpose this
jffice will ba kept open daily from 10 to 3 o’clock, and closed on the
!9th day of March at 3 p.m., or as soon as 7SI applications shall have
ceon received.
The printed form of the letters of application may be obtained at
his office, and also copies of the Act, &o.
G. 3. WALTERS, Agent-General of South Australia, the Officer
Appointed for tho Sale of Land under the Act.
No. 5, CoptbaU-court, London, E.0.,15t February, 1864.
<
j
i


*: ..
