

NOT FOR SALE.








NOT FOR SALE;
A SELECTION
OF
Imaginatibe Pieces,
[SUBSCRIBER’S EDITION. J
BY
GEORGE ISAACS.
Adelaide:
SIMS & ELLIOTT, CITY STEAM PRESS, GAWLER-PLACE.
1869.




DEDICATION.
GEORGE HAMILTON, ESQ.,
Commissioner of Police, &c., &c.
My Dear Sir—
Dedicating to you this little book, in the issue of which I
have been so greatly assisted by your interest in its favour, I fear
that I fail to convey any adequate sense of my obligations, but
rather add to them by associating your name with mine.
Pray, however, accept it as the only way open to me of ex-
pressing how faithfully to command,
I am yours,
GEORGE ISAACS.
Adelaide, July 1, 1869.


PRELUDE.
TO
If from my wayward fancy some brief line
May haply win from thee a passing thought—
If with these idle reveries of mine
The semblance of thyself thou see’st inwrought,
Then shall I not have hoped or mused in vain;
But, oh ! how dumb are written words!—
The untutored song of birds
Shames my most measured strain.
As, in the days of old, the devotee
Adored one goddess under various guise,
So pictured thou herein thyself may see,
Under each naming evermore the same—
“ Dora” and “ Grace” are but the portrait’s frame.
Still from the canvas speak thine azure eyes,
Still o’er thy stately neck and shoulders fair
Flows the rich wealth of hyacinthine hair.*
Each perfect charm in one harmonious whole,
Clasped by such sweetness as is thine alone;
The halo of a pure and guileless soul,
Circling thee like a stainless vestal zone.
* “ Hyacinthine locks,” a poetical figure, used by one of our old
Poets (Milton, I believe), has been a difficulty to annotators, and is
by some supposed to owe its origin to the hyacinth flower, the purple
clusters of which might be poetically employed as symbolising
luxurious clustering dark hair. I take it, however, to have been
derived from the jacinth or hyacinth—a gem somewhat allied to the
topaz, of a golden tinge, with a faint gleam of red in it, and in this
sense have used the expression “ hyacinthine hair.”


NOT FOR SALE.
A TALE OF MYSTERY AND MESMERISM.
The circumstances I, Horatius Wogbus, am about to relate
are in themselves so marvellous and so difficult of solution,
that I shall not make them more so by any unnecessary
disguise, either as regards myself or my fair enslaver, and
the position we relatively held towards each other twenty
years back or thereabouts.
For myself, I may say that at that period I was twenty-
one years of age, had completed the terms of my apprentice-
ship to the business of chemist and druggist, was then
assistant to my old master, and, having saved a little money,
contemplated setting up in business for myself; but I desired
to commence shopkeeping and housekeeping simultaneously.
I was in love (forgive me, Mrs. Wogbus) with Agnes
Dibbler, sole daughter of Josh. Dibbler, the great scented
soap man of Holborn Bars.
Agnes Dibbler was a very amiable girl, with round whole-
some face, a luxuriant fleece of golden hair, serious blue
eyes, and a formidable row of white even teeth, set in rather
a large mouth. She was plump; indeed, I may go to the
extent of saying that bodily there was quite enough of her
for any young woman. The materiality of Agnes's charms,
if I may be permitted so to express myself, were greatly


counterpoised, however, by her spiritual gifts. She was—
and as the lady told me so herself I was bound to believe it—
“ all soul;” and indeed it was only over this matter of “ soul”
that there was any interruption to the fair course of our
mutual love.
Our fathers sanctioned the alliance. I was honestly devoted
to Agnes (your pardon again, Mrs. Wogbus) ; and Agnes,
out of what I still (notwithstanding all that's past since)
consider an affectionate regard in my welfare, made earnest
efforts to bring out my “ soul,”
I had taken her for a walk on one sultry evening in June,
when I suggested ice-creams. My Agnes, with a frank
artlessness peculiarly her own, accepted. I ordered two
strawberries and vanille.
After Agnes had disposed of her ice, she contemplated the
spoon—not me, the spoon. I suppose she was in search of
soul, for presently she said, “ Horatius, did any idea seize
you while partaking of your ice ?”
“ Yes, darling,” I replied ; “ I thought it was very small
for the money.”
“ Oh, Horatius !” she replied imploringly, transferring her
regards from the spoon to me ; “ what a very commonplace
remark ! Did it not occur to you, as the fragrant essence
insensibly glided away, that life, like ices, is illusory ?”
I compromised this unfortunate unconsciousness of “ soul ”
by saying that doubtless that idea would have occurred to
me, but the ice being very small, it had vanished before I
could seize it—the idea I meant.
Agnes sighed, and we went out after the manner of young
lovers, choosing the less frequented streets.


After looking all around, as if carrying love about me was
a contraband possession that might justify the interference of
the police, I plucked, up courage, and made the longest speech
I ever made.
I reminded Agnes of the vows I had sworn to her —of the
sanction given by our parents to our union, and I told her
that I was honest, truthful, steady, sober, and would be
faithful (excuse me, Mrs. Wogbus) unto her to the death.
It is true I admitted that I seemed in her view short of soul;
but as marriage was very often productive of great changes,
I might manage hereafter to acquire some portion ; finally, I
pressed Agnes to fix an early day for our union.
I have before said I think that there was no sickly affecta-
tion about my Agnes—no disgusting prudery. Personally,
I believe, she would have yielded, but that meddlesome soul
interposed. “ Horatius,” she said solemnly and with deter-
mination, lifting at the same time her beautiful blue eyes
(I prefer brown ones now, Mrs. Wogbus) to my face, “ in a
matter thus affecting the destiny of two souls immortal
souls 1 feel we must not he too precipitate. Read Bulwer’s
‘ Strange Story,’ George Sand’s ‘ Consuelo,’ Mackay’s
< Salmandrine,’ Goethe’s ‘ Faust,’ Übland’s ‘ Undine,’ and
after then again see me. By that time you will be prepared
for the profounder study of the works of Cornelius Agrippa,
Nostradamus, Paracelsus, Dr. Dee, and the Rosicrusians;
your soul will by then become evolved and soar beyond
terrestrial flights. Dear Horatius, adieu !”—and my charmer
had gone off body and soul.
I went home at once and to bed, not, however, to launch
into the sea of mysteries presented by the works submitted


for my reading, but to ponder over the unreasonable require-
ments of the female disposition.
Here, for instance, was a girl who had many suitors, in
every respect more eligible than myself—of a more com-
manding presence —of larger fortune—with a greater share of
accomplishments than I could pretend to, and she elects me
for her favours—a plain, inconspicuous man, not witty nor
chatty, nor of a gay temperament even. Nevertheless, after
adopting me, she puts in a fresh claim for “soul”—I must
find soul. How can I find “ soul ?” I resolve this problem
over a weak glass of port wine negus.
I had dreams that night, and I presume they were indica-
tive of soul. But, confound it all, what’s the use of a soul if
it reveals itself only when everyone is asleep ?
On the morning after I called upon an old friend, who,
being in the hair and perfumery trade, had many opportuni-
ties of communing with the fair sex; indeed, Alphonse
Millefleurs had the reputation, as most emigre Parisians have,
of being a lady killer. I made him the confidant of my
miserable lack of soul.
“ A has ze soul!” exclaimed Alphonse, abruptly. He was
always abrupt to men, although his conversation with women
crept about them like a mouse. “ Soul it is zis—it is ze
opera—it is ze jellies—ze bon-bons —ze patisseries vat you
call ze pastrycox —soul is ze dance —ze promenade on ze
water —it is srimps at Gravesend. Zat is ze soul of young
girls.”
I could see plainly that Millefleurs was without soul. He
could not understand my angel: I accordingly left him in
disgust.


I did not construe the remarks of Agnes at our last inter-
view as in any degree interdicting those visits which as an
accepted lover I had hitherto held it my privilege to make;
nevertheless, I allowed two or three days to glide by without
calling on her, during which I had glanced over the first
batch of mystic books.
Fortified by passages from them, although unable to attach
any decided meaning to them, I set my soul agoing on a
rumpsteak and pint bottle of porter, and proceeded thereupon
to the abode of my divinity.
She was attired in a plain evening dress—which well
became her youthful charms —and advanced briskly to give
me her hand, which I tenderly pressed. The sweetness of
her reception of me so seemed to light up with radiance all
surrounding circumstances, that I involuntarily exclaimed,
“ Isn’t it a fine day ?”
I felt instinctively that I must relieve the effect of this
too common-place expression by something more suggestive
of soul ; so plunging into Bulwer Lytton’s “ Strange Story”
(edition of 1863, Sampson and Son, page 482), I cried,
“ Earth and air have their armies still faithful to me, and
still I remember the war-songs that summon them up to
confront you.”
Agnes appeared somewhat disturbed by the fire and energy
I had thrown into this quotation, and also slightly puzzled, as
if in my resolve to reveal my soul I had bundled it out head
over heels in an ungraceful attitude. I felt, however, I must
pursue my advantage, small as it was, so I whispered (again
from “ The Strange Story”), “ ‘ Thinkest thou that the agen-
cies are the movements of chance ? The spirits invoked are


leagued with the hosts that assail. Advance ! thou hast
still the light of the soul, and the demons may recoil before a
soul that is dauntless. If not, three are lost. As it is, one
is doomed’ —which thimble is the pea under?”
The last figure, taken from the racecourse to embellish the
impassioned language of the noble romancist, might or might
not have been inappropriate, but my darling Agnes seemed
not to heed it. The revolution in my style of address
appeared to utterly paralyse her. She was too innocent to
think me tipsy, had too much faith in the evenness of my
temper to believe I had gone mad ; perhaps it may have
occurred to her that my soul, having been too long in bondage,
was suffering on its release from that excitement which marks
the liberation of all prisoners.
At this moment Mr. Dibbler came into the room. He was
rather deaf was that progenitor of my Agnes. I ventured to
sustain the equilibrium of my soul in an observation to
that gentleman, but without any marked success. It was
that “on a day like this ail ills seem abolished, and as
regards souls, they were floating in an hyperion of bliss.”
Old Mr. Dibbler scratched his ear, and appeared rather
undecided how to take this. Eventually a bland smile stole
over his benevolent countenance, and shaking me by the
hand cordially, he made this remarkable statement:
“ Yes, as you say, eels are excellent, but soles are the
emperors of fish.”
It was clear that Mr. Dibbler’s deafness was a great impe-
diment to communion of soul.
“ Shall we go into the conservatory ?” I asked my Agnes.
A balcony with about a dozen flower-pots in it hardly


deserved the high-sounding title of conservatory ; but I was
determined to go in for soul, even if I tore the English
language to ribbons.
Agnes took my arm, and we stepped into the balcony.
“ I love this place best at night,” said my sweet girl (pardon
the expression, Mrs. Wogbus), and she bent to caress a
jonquil. “It is then,” continued that dear dreamer, “ I look
up to the stars, and marvel at the links which bind them to
these lovely flowers. But there is affinity in all things. Do
you not deem so, my dear Horatius ?”
I did think so. I instanced currant jelly with venison ;
caper sauce and turnips with boiled mutton ; sage and onions
with roast goose; and fennel w r ith pickled salmon. Good
heavens ! what had become of my soul ?
Agnes turned pale; she muttered “ Horrible I” then
unclasping her hand from my arm, and casting a chilling
glance upon me, she said, “ You must excuse me, Mr. Wogbus.
lam not well; I must go to my room.”
This was the first time since our courtship that Agnes had
formally addressed me as Mr, Wogbus. It was evident I had
grievously offended. Of course I had. What had the soul
to do with the substantial comforts of boiled mutton, venison,
or roast goose ?
I went home with despair in my heart to make another
effort to bring out my fugitive soul.
It was not until after a week had elapsed that I summoned
up courage to revisit the object of my adoration —(say infatua-
tion if you prefer it, Mrs. Wogbus). To my pleased surprise,
Agnes welcomed me ve v y cordially, I might even say gaily.
She handed me muffins to my tea as often as if they were


a provision for the soul and not for the stomach. I sat
entranced, looking into her fathomless blue eyes, until a
curious feeling came over me as if they were the sea, and I
had a maniacal desire to plunge into them. So I sat absorbed,
eating muffins by instinct, until Mr. Dibbler rose, apologising
that an urgent engagement must take him from home.
Agnes maintained silence until the street door was heard
to close upon her venerable parent, her eyes still bent upon
mine.
Then, rising, she approached me with slow and measured
step, and said, “ Silence I”
The admonition was needless ; I hadn’t a word to throw
to a cat.
“ Now is the hour, Horatius,” she said, in a solemn tone,
“when your destiny and mine must be decided. Now soul
to soul, or nevermore to meet.” She then made several
rapid mesmeric passes with her hands towards my face.
I faintly muttered, “ Please don’t.” For my life I could
say no more. Was it muffins or troubled soul that disturbed
me ? (No, Mrs. Wogbus, it was not muffins.)
“ Silence I” whispered Agnes. “ Now or never is it to be
seen whether you possess a kindred soul. My happiness and
your fate is on the die.”
I wanted to wipe my face, from which the perspiration was
copiously exuding. Agnes strictly forbade this.
She then closed my eyes and tapped me gently on the breast.
“ What do you see ?” she then asked.
“ Nothing,” I replied.
“ I command you, say what you see,” she continued, in an
imperative voice.


I felt that my senses were leaving me. I muttered
“ Muffins.”
“ Muffins I” echoed Agnes in a voice of scorn; “ what
else ?”
Making an effort to recover my confused faculties, I ven-
tured to suggest that I should open my eyes and tell her
afterwards.
She forbade me sternly, and told me I was fast falling into
the clairvoyant phase. How long this lasted I cannot tell.
I have only an indistinct remembrance of Agnes leaving the
room with a tall stranger. (I had not been drinking, Mrs.
Wogbus.)
Shortly after reviving from this sleep, state of coma, phase
of clairvoyance, or whatever it might have been, Agnes
re-entered the room. She asked me to describe the sensation
I had undergone in her absence.
Before I replied, I in turn wanted to know something.
“ Who was that tall man, Agnes ?”
“ Did you see him ?” she enquired anxiously. “Was he
a stately, noble-looking man, of commanding presence, with
brilliant dark eyes and superb whiskers ?”
I rather rebelled at this glowing description of the tall
interloper, and said he was nothing of the sort; he was only
noticeable for his extreme and inconvenient length, and not
anything at all to be admired.
“ But he had bushy whiskers ?” asked Agnes, excitedly.
I was forced to admit he had.
“ And dark eyes ?” she continued.
What I said about his eyes I need not repeat.
“Ah I” exclaimed Agnes, softly sighing; “ I have seen


him in my dreams. All is lost and all is recovered. Hora-
tius, that haughty stranger, it is foredoomed, is The Arbiter
op Our Destinies ; my soul predicts it.”
I believe I have not said previously that, being near-
sighted, I always carried with me a pair of spectacles,
although not using them constantly. With these I resolved
to produce an effect. I have early in the progress of this
narrative said that lamof an even temper; but lam not a
worm ; I am not altogether spiritless (you are aware of that,
Mrs. Wogbus); and the idea that any tall man should step
between me and my affianced bride was a little too much
even for a man of small soul.
So slowly releasing my spectacles from their case, 1 put
them firmly astride my nose, and advanced three paces
towards the unhappy girl who had blighted my youth.
“ Sorceress,” I cried, “ avaunt 1 Fly to the hidden haunts
of your supernatural tall man. I adjure thee, and all thy
unholy arts. Go, witch, and tell thy oleaginous parent to
rear a tablet of Windsor soap to the memory of his daughter’s
victim.”
Whether I rushed home or was carried thither on a shutter
I never knew. For three months I was seriously ill. I had
been stricken down by brain fever, and when I recovered I
was as bald as a Dutch cheese.
I need not say that I made no endeavour to see my
enslaver again (on my word of honor, Mrs. Wogbus); but I
made careful and secret enquiries about her, and learned that
she had given out as a reason for our match being broken off
that my ways had for some time past been very eccentric,
until one night I had in the absence of her father broken


through all restraint, and danced an Indian war-dance in
spectacles, to her great alarm. She further stated that in
her terror she placed herself under the protection of a gentle-
man who lived next door—a protection which ultimately
extended to marriage.
Shortly after my recovery —partly because I could not
bear to live in the vicinity of my faithless Agnes, and partly
because the reputation of insanity is not likely to help
a young chemist and druggist into trade, I emigrated to
South Australia, where I prospered and secured a wife
(Heaven bless you, Mrs. Wogbus) with no irregular yearnings
after soul.
AFTER PIECE.
Not very long since Mrs. Wogbus asked me to accompany
her to the Eastern Market.
Good heavens! what did I see there at a butcher’s stall ?
11 The Arbiter op Agnes Dibbler’s fate and mine ”
cutting up joints—Agnes assisting.
Oh! Agnes, where is thy soul? (Is supper ready, Mrs.
Wogbus ?)


LAURA.
O ! Laura of the golden hair;
0! Laura, saucy, debonair;
Driving your lovers to despair,
List to my pleading !
By all that’s lovely I declare,
By all that’s charming I now swear,
That of the fair you are most fair,
And sweet exceeding.
You say for lovers you’ve no care
Your sentiments I fully share ;
But quite a different affair
Is one adorer ;
Just one! —that’s me. Now, Laura, hear ;
Give over laughing, there’s a dear ;
Would’st make me like a fool appear ?
Be serious Laura!
Now, darling—Oh, you dreadful girl ;
Can’t you be quiet—in a whirl,
You all my sober senses hurl
Beyond confession;


You cruel thing, do you discern
In words that throb and hearts that burn—
No ! that’s not it —I’ve lost the turn
Of that expression.
Now, there is Agnes, pretty, too,
With lustrous eyes, nut-brown —not blue ;
Girls with such eyes are always true,
And kind and tender.
And, Laura, if you drive me hence,
No after tears of penitence
May wash away the dire offence
You thus engender.
What, tears ! why, Laura! tears from you ;
Now, let me kiss away that dew ;
Some other one let Agnes woo —
I’ve no objection.
'Tis you alone—’tis you alone,
Laura, to whom I fealty own;
Sole empress, mistress—yours the throne
Of my affection!


TO GRACE.
For five short years one life was ours ;
Apart —the world was desolate ;
How happy were those few brief hours,
When on thy love I pinned my fate!
How hast thou passed the many years,
Since on an evil day we parted ?
Thou in an agony of tears,
I stern of mien, yet tender hearted.
Dost thou, as I, recall those times,
When wandering by the calm blue sea
Of Nice, fairest of Southern climes,
I had no other thought but thee?
While in your eyes so often sought,
I learned that I alone was lord
Of all thy love, thy every thought,
Thy every gentle whispered word :
Dost thou recall those times, mine own ?
Now as at first, my dearest, best;
Shall e’er again thy soft low tone
Subdue the hours of my unrest?
I fear me not; unbound those ties,
Renewed may never be again ;
The wounded dove for ever flies
From that harsh hand that caused her pain.


THE HOUSE OF THE FOUR ROBBERS.
“ You English believe in nothing,” said the Doctor pet'
tishly. (I had been, looking over his cabinet of medals, and
expressed a doubt as to the genuineness of one of them).
“ I believe in this Lachryma Christi ,” said I, smiling.
Dr. Rocabetti recovered his good temper instantly, and
bowing, said, “You honour my wine in your commendation
of it.”
“ I believe,” I continued, “in old wine, in old books, and
in old friends —especially those who have a taste for remains
of the olden times,”
The Doctor accepted as a compliment to himself the last
sentence, and bowed again.
“ Do you believe also in old traditions?” he asked, taking
up a coin and looking at it affectionately.
“ I like, at least, to listen to them,” I replied.
“ There is a history attached to this coin,” he said. “ Per-
haps I should hardly call it a tradition, but rather a road-
side story connected with the old times you have spoken of.’
“ I should like to hear it,” I replied.
“ You shall,” said the Doctor, filling his glass and pushing
the bottle towards me.
“ I remarked,” pursued he, “ that you English believe in


nothing—not even in the holy saints. But,” correcting
himself courteously, “I am no bigot; and you are a highly
practical people.”
It was now my turn to bow.
“ The tale,” resumed the Doctor, “ I am about to relate is
a striking example both of this want of faith and this appli
cation of common sense. But you shall judge for yourself.”
“ On the road to Turin, about two leagues hence” (we were
then at Nice, in the kingdom of Sardinia, since handed to
France), “ there is an ancient edifice known as ‘ The House
of the Four Robbers.’ ”
“The House of the Four Robbers?” I repeated, “ I like
the beginning.” , .
«This building, like many in this neighbourhood, being
built of rubble, presents in itself nothing like architectural
adornment or any feature of antiquarian interest or externa
mark that could fix an exact date to the period of its erection,
but tradition asserts that it was standing in the 16th century,
when it was tenanted by four brothers who had served in the
wars with the Constable de Bourbon, with the Pope, wit
Francis the First of France, and Charles the Fifth of Spam,
by turns according as the respective treasuries of those
princes flowed and ebbed. After a while, tired of this service,
in which alternately they plundered and were plundered, they
bethought themselves that war on their own account against
travellers and civilians offered this adv.ntage-U.at althoug
the field was not so large as that presented y e
Of towns, wherein there were rich churches and jew He
shops, yet what they thus acquired they could s ■
Retiring to this house they commenced the operations which


have won for it its unenviable name. Their mode of con-
ducting affairs was for three of the brothers to scour the
neighbourhood round, one by turns remaining to guard their
citadel. The building presented no marked characteristic ;
but I should have added that it is of the round tower form,
of which there are many examples in this part of the world,
without 'windows, but with loopholes, from which, at the date
I am speaking of, peered the muzzles of the arquebus, the
gun of the period, of which,” continued the Doctor, “ you
will perceive a well-preserved example in yonder corner,”
The weapon to which my attention was directed was well
worth examination. The stock was of walnut, richly en-
crusted with ivory, and was mounted with a clumsy, though
elaborately chiselled contrivance, which at the time of its
make was considered a most marvellous triumph of armourer’s
skill, being an improvement on the more ancient matchlock.
It was entitled a wheelock, having a rachet wheel which,
after being wound up, would run down on releasing a spring,
striking the hammer against the flint.
“ For a long time,” resumed the Doctor, “ the brothers
were the terror of the surrounding country, but the peasant
and trader of that day were very timorous, and preferred
bestowing a portion of the fruits of their labour on their
tyrants, rather than have their houses burnt over their heads
or their throats cut. I must also say,” added the Doctor,
“in justice to the reputation of the four robbers, that they
never took life unless people were very obstinate, and then
what otherwise could they do?”
The Doctor pausing, I could see no other course—extreme
obstinacy is very objectionable.


«Life,” pursued the Doctor, “ was cheap in that age of
violence, and too much is not to be expected from professional
robbers at any time; besides, they never molested the servants
of the Church, but were even generous to them."
I could hardly forbear smiling at this truly Italian exhi-
bition of sympathy with brigands.
“As one after the other of the brothers died,’ continued
the Doctor, “which three of them did in their beds, like
more peaceful people, masses for their souls’ peace were
richly compensated for by the survivors until the last of them
(Guiseppe) left no one to pray for or to bury him, and it was
not for certain known until recently, whether he had left the
place or had died there, for centuries elapsed before the timid
villagers would dare approach the spot. Feared as the
brothers were in life, superstition after their death was even
more potent in preserving from invasion their ill-famed
abode.
“ A few years back, however, an aged couple took up their
residence there—whether legally or not, no one cared to
enquire, for there were none alive to contest their right, or
with any desire to do so.
“ Poverty (remarked the Doctor) gives courage even to
the most fearful, and faith in our venerable religion a shield
and protection. Wretchedly poor, as I have said, and pious,
this old man and woman occupied the house, gaining a scanty
livelihood from cultivating for garden produce the little plot
of ground attached to it.
“At first there were no visitations or evidences of any
supernational character to alarm the inhabitants, but after a
while strange noises were heard in the upper chamber, like a


stealthy shuffling and gibbering, in a weak querulous tone,
and a rattling, as if of chains.
“‘The holy Madonna protect us,’ exclaimed the old
woman.
“ ‘ Blessed Ambrose, of Milan, my patron saint, take us in
thy sacred keeping/ cried the husband.
“ Many months passed away in this manner, until one day
the old man bethought him that he would make a storeroom
of the upper department for his lentils and dried herbs, and
accordingly made his way thither. What do you think he
then discovered ? ”
“ I am bad at guessing,” I said, “ and would prefer your
telling me.”
“ A skeleton, supposed to be that of the last of the four
robbers, and scattered around several old pieces of money !
“ It was clear to the ancient couple that the bones required
burial, and the presence of the coins was in itself sufficient
evidence that the unquiet spirit desired to have prayers
said for its repose. A very holy padre to whom the old man
made known these views, entirely concurred in them, and it
was done. After this the old peasant relinquished his original
idea of using the place as a store-room, for notwithstanding
the dead robber was prayed for in due course, the noises at
night were at intervals repeated, and he prudently, as he
though*, abstained from further trespass on the domain of
his ghostly visitor.
“One night a belated countryman of your own sought
shelter from a storm. Your countrymen, permit me to
observe, have a very singular taste of poking about in out-
of-the-way places and loosing themselves.”


I was obliged to admit that my countrymen do exhibit a
remarkable aptitude in that direction.
“ I can hardly, however, in strict parlance,” said the
Doctor, “call the visitor to the House of the Four Robbers
your countryman, for he was a native of Scotland,”
“ Those are a particularly hard-headed kind of heretic,” I
said.
The Doctor laughed ; “ This one,” he said, “ was at all
events.”
“ The house, consisting only of two storeys, of one room
each, there was some difficulty in affording him the accom-
modation needed, owing to the repugnance of the old couple
to lodge him in the haunted chamber. This obstacle the
stranger soon disposed of. ‘ Troubled spirits do you say ?
Well, I’m rather a troubled spirit, and having travelled half
over the world without seeing anything more frightful than
myself, am not afraid to encounter your visitors. So if you
can give me a truss of hay and the shelter of your roof, I
will gladly accept it with all responsibility.”
“ The request was hospitably complied with, and the two
good old souls refreshing their guest with mulled wine, gave
him some hay and a lantern ; after he had retix*ed to his
dormitory, putting up many prayers for his safety and his
soul’s welfare.
“ The traveller, worn out with fatigue, did not trouble
himself to make any particular inspection of his chamber.
Had he done so he would have found the floor literally strewn
with coins, gold and silver, all bearing date of the early part
of the 16th century.
“ He threw his hat, however, over the lantern, and was


about composing himself to sleep, when his attention was
arrested by a regular scamper over head, and shrill squeaks.
“ ‘ Rats,’ muttered the traveller ; ‘ confound them.’
“Then a ringing sound was heard as if of coin being
rapidly told.
“ 1 Rats playing chuckfarthing,’ growled the traveller:
“ I remark,” interpolated the Doctor, “ that men of his
country have a very acute ear for the sound of coin.”
I admitted it was generally thought so.
“ Nevertheless he went at length to sleep. It appears to
me,” again the Doctor broke off, “ that the Scotch are not a
very exciteable race.”
I did not dissent, but I fancy had the Doctor seen, as I
have, a party of Caledonians, each one with a boot on the
table, singing “ Auld Lang Syne” round whisky punch, he
might have modified his impressions.
u The traveller did not wake until late on the following
morning, and then were presented to his wondering eyes the
several heaps of ancient money to which I have referred.
Some would have secreted this rich treasure for rich it
was, not only in intrinsic value, but for the rarity and
beautiful preservation of many of the pieces ; and it was
perfectly obvious, from the remarks made by the old folk
the night before, that they were unaware of this second
contribution. He, however, contented himself with a
scrutiny of the ceiling, when he at once satisfied himself
that directly over the spots covered by the coins the rafters
had shrunk.
u 1 There’s a hoard of money up there,’ reasoned the
traveller, 1 the deposit of some poor creature in the Italian


wars, and the rats in their gambols have disturbed it.
What a stupid beast an Italian peasant is.’
“ Your countrymen,” added Dr. Rocabetti, “ sometimes
forget courtesy in the directness of their remarks.”
I was compelled to confess that this was too often the case.
“Not but what I prefer their outspoken manner to the
overstrained politeness of our neighbours, the French;
besides,” continued the Doctor, “he was speaking to him-
self.”
I wondered thereon how the Doctor became aware of the
remark, until it occurred to me that the recounter of a tale
had to embellish ; so I was silent.
“ After much expostulation, the aged couple consented to
the removal of the rafters, but only on the express condition
that they should have no part in it. For you see the
Scotchman, being a heretic, it could not possibly be worse
with him.”
I assented.
“ There were then discovered coins to about the value of
5,000 crowns.”
“ Then the aged couple became rich,” I exclaimed.
“ No,” returned the Doctor, “ the State claimed a portion
and the rest was handed to the Church. The old folk were
too pious to touch a coin of this ill-gotten wealth.
“ The State never considers too closely the sources of its
revenue, and the Church devoting to holy purposes such
money it becomes sanctified.”
I congratulated a country the State and Church of which
have such obedient subjects, and, having helped to finish the
second bottle of Lachryma Christi , nothing was left for me


but to thank the Doctor for his hospitality and agreeable
narrative and take ray leave.
I offer you, my reader, the tale twice told. We have no
Lahcryma Christi here, or I would offer you that too.
NIGHT AND MORN.
Methought I supped amongst the gods last night,
And Hebe handed me Jove’s golden chalice,
While jocund Bacchus sat upon my right,
And oft renewed the bowl with pleasant malice.
And rosy Aphrodite smiled her sweetest,
Despite Mars’ frown and Vulcan’s gloomy scowl,
Till Luna fled. The night was of the fleetest;
Then Morpheus, poppy-crowned, upon me stole.
Ah, sad awaking ! —bring me sodawater :
Wrap wetted towels round my aching brow ;
Comes with light step my landlady’s fair daughter,
Sweeter than Aphrodite, seems she now.


FROM THE PARLOUR OPERATTA OF “THE
ENRAGED MUSICIAN.”
Music by Mr. Samuel Needham.
DRINKING SONG.
Life is brief, boys ;
Time’s a thief, boys ;
Drain the cup,
Again fill up.
So fill and drink,
Nor stay to think ;
Fill and drink!
Though girls are fair, boys,
They bring us care, boys ;
Each tear and smile,
Given to beguile.
So fill and drink,
Nor stay to think;
Fill and drink !
In wine alone, boys,
A mistress own, boys ;
It don’t deceive
Or heart-ache leave.
So fill and drink,
Nor stay to think ;
Fill and drink!


LAMENT.
Between the flowery mead gaily the brooklet flows,
Gaily the brooklet flows,
Lightly it flows.
But there where the willow grows,
Sadly the willow grows,
Drooping and weeping for the brooklet that goes.
So like the willow,
I, on my pillow,
Vigil sad keeping, may languish and moan ;
Drooping and weeping,
Vigil sad keeping,
For the truant who never returns to his own.
SOMEONE’S NIGH.
When a maiden does nothing but sigh,
Don’t know whether to smile or to cry,
Conclusively you may rely
Someone’s nigh.
When a maid passes pensively by,
Regardless of earth or of sky,
She feels, though she cannot tell why,
Someone’s nigh.
Now, tho’ maidens are timid and shy,
They are nevertheless very sly,
And can tell without lifting an eye
Someone’s nigh.


THE ORANGE FLOWER.
The perfume of the orange flower—
A subtle glamour even yet —
Distils as in that tender hour
When first I with my Dora met,
Can I forget ?
’Twas by the blue and tideless sea,
Calm as the Heaven that shone above ;
But what was Heaven or earth to me
When I saw Dora, fairest dove,
My only love?
I spoke—she timid turned aside;
I plucked an orange blosom fair.
“ This is the emblem of a bride,”
I said, “ Wil’t wear it in thy hair,
And list my prayer?”
She took the flower as hardly daring,
But yet too gentle to deny,
Then left me utterance forbearing ;
Past sweetly by with no reply,
Save one low sigh.
Again I met the gentle maid ;
Again I culled an orange spray ;
Again, my ardent love betrayed,
She did not this time turn away,
Or say me nay.


WITHOUT A PASSPORT.
Lord Dereham, previously the noted Sir J b A y,
at the age of fifty-five, had gone through the ordinary in-
dustrial pursuits of the fine gentleman of his time. Cele-
brated in his youth for his bonnes fortunes —in middle life
(like his compeer and fellow countryman, Coke, Lord
Leicester), he threw all his energies into agricultural improve-
ments and cattle-breeding | and at the date I introduce him
to the reader tiring of these had settled down into a confirmed
virtuoso.
I had some time previously made his acquaintance in the
antiquarian lumber stores of Wardour-street, and now met
him at the close of 1847 prowling about the Bric-a-brac
shops of Paris, the consequent result being that I was
plunged into the series of perplexing misadventures I am
about to relate.
In the course of his lordship’s ferreting about, he had
fallen across an armourer in the Rue Richelieu , where his
persistent enquiries for ancient armour suggested to the
“ cunning artificer” an ingenious fraud, to which, unless it
had not been for my interposition, his lordship would have
fallen a victim.
A suit of armour for man and horse had been fabricated,


and an antique appearance given to it by the introduction of
several really ancient embossed steel devices of a crowned
Salamander, the badge of Francis the First of France. This
done, the counterfeit relic had been placed in two large cases
artfully, being unpacked in front of the armourer’s shop at
about the usual hour of Lord Dereham’s daily visit.
The bait took.
“ What have you there ?’’ enquired his lordship, who was
a very little man, tip-toeing in order to look into the large
cases.
“ It is little of consequence,” replied Monsieur JBrasdefer,
with affected carelessness, nevertheless continuing to unpack.
“ Ah, ah ! ” exclaimed my lord, his eyes sparkling at the
treasure he supposed he had discovered. “ Ancient armour,
eh?”
“ Not of to be disposed,” returned the artificer, “at the
least to strangers.”
“Not to foreigners! Why not?” asked Lord Dereham.
nibbling at the bait.
Monsieur Brasdefer was armourer to that eminent patriot
and English-hater the Prince de Joinville. It therefore
became him, after the fashion of his patron, to be also
patriotic, and in the French manner sentimental, so folding
his arms dramatically he made a speech. “ The Inglis
and the Russe our beautiful France impoveris of its art
treasures. But although I have not of richesse I have the
honour me to be of Paris, so this grand suit historique I
reserve for the collection nationale of the Louvre , or for the
Musee of the City, the Hotel de Cluny—no nevare shall
this article precious leave the country.”


Alas! even a patriotic armourer —a son of the nation of
great ideas has, like the children of less favoured lands, his
price. The virtue of Monsieur Brasdefer succumbed to
English gold—to 17,000 francs, equivalent to six hundred
and eighty pounds sterling.
It was early on the morning of the following day that
Lord Dereham, in a state of enthusiasm quite refreshing to
witness in so knowing an old worldling, communicated to
me this astounding result of his antiquarian fervour.
I received the information in a very aggravating manner
of cool incredulity as regarded the bona-fides of the armourer.
I sceptically declined to believe that an object of so high
a degree of historical interest as the equestrian armour of
one of France’s most popular kings would have fallen into
the hands of an obscure dealer, or escape the researches of
the gentlemen in charge of the national collections of art
and antiquity.
Lord Dereham, though unconvinced by my arguments,
yet had his faith sufficiently shaken by my doubts to agree
to my proposition that he should delay completion of his
purchase by payment until two experts chosen from the
most experienced antiquaries in Paris had examined and
decided on the genuineness or otherwise of the supposed
antique.
These gentlemen confirmed my suspicions, and the counter-
feit armour was consequently left on the hands of the dis-
appointed swindler. And it was thus that eventually I had
to traverse France without a passport.
A month or two subsequent to my return to London,
brought me from my agent in Paris some very official


documents, informing me that I was made party to a suit
instituted by Monsieur Brasdefer against Lord Dereham, for
the recovery of 17,000 francs.
I handed these papers to his lordship, desiring him to
take such steps as would relieve me from any more trouble
in this matter, reminding him that I had been no further
interested in it than desiring to save him from being im-
posed upon.
His lordship was very indignant with Monsieur Brasdefer,
and threatened, with great emphasis, to “pot the scoundrel,”
through the instrumentality of his friend Lord Normanby,
then British Ambassador to the Court of France.
So far, however, was the “scoundrel” from being “potted”
that in a month or so later I received a second batch of
official papers, intimating in very precise language that
apartments were ready for Lord Dereham and myself for
one year certain in the state prison of Clichy.
This was a matter of no serious import to me while resting
under the “ flag that braved a thousand years,” but might
entail unpleasant consequences on my return to France, to
which I was in the habit of repairing twice or thrice
annually; for the passport system was then in full activity,
and I thought it would be impossible for me to make any
long stay in that kingdom or travel far into the interior
without the authorities becoming aware that I was “ illegally
at large.”
I, nevertheless, made two short excursions to Paris and
back without passport and without molestation; for being
well-known to the landlords of the Marine Hotel at Boulogne,
and the Hotel de la Bourse, Paris, at which houses I was


accustomed to sojourn, I was enabled with tbeir aid to evade
the ordinary police regulations as regarded passports.
In the year 1848 Lord Dereham had failed to take any
steps either to propitiate or defeat the obnoxious Brasdefer;
and the state of my health rendering it advisable, according
to my physician, that I should without delay take up my
residence at Montpellier, in the south of France, the genial
air of which it was supposed would act beneficially on my
complaint, I was rash enough, emboldened by my previous
successes, to repeat my visit to France without a passport.
Then commenced my troubles.
I had safely arrived at Montpellier, having only once
been asked for my passport (in the middle of a bleak night,
while a change of horses was taking place) by a muddled
gendarme, on whose credulity I imposed by taking from my
pocket-book a folded play-bill, and which, feigning to be
half asleep, I fumblingly attempted to open.
“En regie” said the functionary, politely glad to escape
from the chill air to the more congenial atmosphere of a
neighbouring cabaret (pot-house), “en regie, Monsieur.”
I translate for the student en regie into “all right.” Good
for that time.
At Montpellier I passed some very pleasant months.
Reading, fishing, shooting, archaeological pursuits, and
training a learned cat by turns amused and did not weary me.
Then to annoy me Louis Phillipe bolted from his throne,
and became simply Mr. Smith.
All Montpellier was in arms. Republicans, Orleanists,
and Legitimists rivalled each other in inflam atory harangues
and seditious songs.


It was not pleasant to a quiet traveller to walk the
streets when at every step he was likely to be accosted by
a drunken patriot, with a red nightcap on, and loaded fire-
arms going off. It was not, to a person of sedate habits,
agreeable to be for ever invited to join in a dance to the
Carmagnole or the chorus of the Marsellaise.
What the deuce did I care about “ Mourir pour la Patrie.
Living to get out of the country was more in consonance
with my sentiments.
“George,” said I to myself, “you are an unimpulsive
individual, with a British conviction that honour and glory
might not be advanced by your suspension to a lampost.
Nothing could compensate to you for that elevation ; therefore
make tracks. Let Louis Phillipe, alias Smith, Lamartine, and
Henry of Bourbon, the fifth King of that name, and in name
only —let them and their adherents fight if you will ; but
you be a neutral and an absent power.”
This was a confidential communication, which I did not
dare to make public. I did not venture even to divulge it
to an aged lady of 80 years who had been kind enough to
look after my domestic affairs for the modest sum of ten
francs a month, but who at this troublesome period greatly
neglected her household duties in favour of carrying a broom
musket fashion, and indulging in highly intemperate and, for
her time of life, unbecoming language, adverse to the opponents
of Henry V,, of whom she was a devoted advocate.
“ A has les sac-r-r-r-re r-r-r-republicains ,” screamed this
excited politician, with frightful emphasis on the letter “ r ”
—“A la lanterne les cochons d’ Orleanistes.” (Pigs was not
the least polite of the old lady’s epithets.)


I declare that old female, with no more dangerous
weapons than a broomstick and an obscene tongue, made my
blood run chill.
In pursuance of my desire to depart from the vexed
town, I made my way to the Prefet of the Police, an accom-
plished gentleman, whose acquaintance I had formed at the
pleasant soirees of the Sociele Archeoloyique , and placed
before him the details of my position —the why and where-
fore of my being without a passport.
He explained regretfully that holding office under the
Provisional Government, the employees of which were very
jealously watched pending the settlement of rival preten-
sions to the supreme power, he could not assist me.
Aware, he said, of the peaceful character of my residence
in the town, it was nevertheless necessary t<? guard against
arousing the suspicion of its more ignorant inhabitants, with
whom the traditions of Pitt and English gold in the first
revolution were in vivid recollection; and any unusual course
in my favour might create the notion that I was a political
agent of the British Government, and would prejudice him
greatly. He, however, courteously added that the English
Consul at Cette (a small port on the Mediterranean, about
17 miles distant), would dine with him on the day fol-
lowing, and might u arrange my affair,” towards which he
prayed the pleasure of my joining them at dinner.
It was a very pleasant meal that at the Prefet s, but in
nowfise furthered my aim, the Consul explaining that his
powers were limited to the adjustment of differences between
British sailors.
Finally, both these kindly and agreeable Frenchmen


counselled me to make my way to Nice (a frontier town
of the kingdom of Sardinia), to which I proposed going,
calling at Marseilles, near which ray route would take me,
and where Mr. Turnbull, the British Consul, resided, who
had authority to grant me a passport.
Acting on this advice, I travelled as far as the town of
Aix, whence I diverged to Marseilles, and received from
Mr. Turnbull, without much difficulty, the required document,
Thus armed and highly elated, I regret to say that I
made a very cursory examination of the many interesting
memorials of antiquity in that great city of the Mediter-
ranean —the famous entrepot of the ancient enterprise
between the eastern and western worlds, but returned hastily
to Aix, proceeding thence to my destination without inter-
ruption until I reached the Frontier on the French side,
when
But to make what follows clear, I must go back to a
circumstance that occurred at Montpellier.
A native of Cuba, who, like myself, had resorted to that
city on account of his health, and lived for many months
in apartments of the same house where I was resident, had
presented me with a dagger, the hilt and sheath of which
were elaborately wrought in the Cinque-cento fashion. It
was not, as he supposed, a genuine relic of the 15th century,
but I was too polite to depreciate his gift, besides which I
found it useful in digging for worms on my piscatorial
excursions. On quitting for Nice I had overlooked this
article until about to close my portmanteau, when I hastily
thrust it into the inner strap of that travelling companion.
Arrived at Villeneuve, a little hamlet on the French


border of tbe Var —a stream or rather mountain torrent
which divided France from Sardinia, I beheld two and only
two public establishments —an auberge (inn) and Bureau de
douane (Customs office).
The officer in charge of the latter approached, inquiring
whether my luggage contained anything contraband.
Guiltless of smuggling, I handed him the keys of my
baggage with a very tranquil and confident air.
The first packet opened was the portmanteau, and the
first article that presented itself to the suspicious eyes of
the official—the fatal dagger.
When the whole of Continental Europe was heaving with
the throes of impending revolution —shortly after culmina-
ting in the flight of the Pope and the Duke of Tuscany
the revolt of Rome and Tuscany under Mazzini, and the
defence of Venice by Manin—and the war between Austria
and Sardinia —a dagger as an item of a traveller s baggage
was of portentous suggestion.
“Your passport,” said the officer sternly.
I handed it to him with a hurried explanation of the
uses for which I employed the dagger, and a cigar, the
latter of which he waved away with scant politeness.
He glanced at my passport. “ Pas visee par la police
—not countersigned by the police —he said. “ You must
descend, Monsieur.”
I descended. “Am I arrested ?” I enquired, savagely.
I confess I had more reason to be angry with myself than
with him. Familiar with French usages, I had been guilty
of great stupidity in omitting the necessary formality of
having my passport signed by the police at Marseilles.


“ Monsieur cannot proceed,” replied the functionary ; “ you
will not be molested; but under the grave circumstance of
your possessing a poniard, and holding a passport not in
proper form, you must consider yourself under surveillance.”
All my British whiskers stood erect at such an indignity.
I reflected, however, that I had the Times and the Mediter-
ranean squadron at my back, so T asked, with affected sang-
froid and true insular impertinence, “Will the police be
kind enough to attend me at ray meals, or will your paternal
provisional government, which I wish provisionally at the
devil, put their mouchnrds in my bed-chamber?”
The official coloured. The term mouchard (spy) is very
offensive to a Frenchman.
“ Monsieur,” he said, “ must not be offended at proper
precautions being taken at this eventful period. He should
reflect that it is no fault of the authorities that he has
neglected to avail himself of the customary forms.”
I bowed with haughty reserve. My sense of duty told me
he was right—my sense of the abominations of the passport
system made me feel that he and every one administering
under it were wrong—infamously wrong and (atrocious
epithet) un-English.
I revealed my grief to the landlady of the auberge. She
suggested that supper would be shortly ready.
This was practical, and at once appealed to the British
mind. “ But where can I sleep ?” I enquired, looking rather
distrustfully at the shabby surroundings of the inn interior
and its apparently ruffianly inmates.
The landlady was a jolly good-tempered looking dame.
Joviality lurked in every crease and dimple of her fat comely


face and peered from her eyes, where intelligence also lodged.
She saw at a glance what I dreaded.
“If Monsieur permits,” she said, with true provencal
courtesy, “ I shall have great pleasure in accommodating
you at my little Maison de Campagne.”
A. charming little country house it was —embowered in a
mass of roses, clematis, and honeysuckle—clean and taste-
fully furnished.
And, oh, heavens ! what succulent ham and what delicious
eggs I ate there ] and, oh ! what a bed I nestled in, and
I didn’t dream once of passports.
I was interrupted at supper by a long-legged mountaineer,
whom the landlady had sent to me.
It transpired that it was no unusual thing for the travel-
ling English, amongst other absurdities, to neglect having
their papers in form, and this crane-like looking Piedmon-
taise had often been employed as agent from them to Grasse,
a town about fifty miles distant, the Prefet of which had
power to correct such oversights.
He (the mountaineer) informed me that I could not get
my affair arranged at any place nearer than Grasse that a
diligence would leave on the next morning for Antibes, from
which town I should have to proceed by Cabriolet; but that
by taking a mountain track he could, leaving at once, be
back before the vehicle started, and might render possibly
any journey to Grasse unnecessary.
I had no desire, after a long sojourn in a close stuffy
diligence, to encounter another hundred miles.
“ What do you require for this service? I eageily asked.
“ Five francs,” responded the Mountaineer.


11 Va mon brave ” —Go ray brick—l cried; “and if you
return successful by five o’clock in tbe morning you shall
have ten.”
The guide’s long legs receded from view with astounding
celerity.
The Mountaineer awakened me at break of day. He had
not been successful. The times were too grave to visee a
passport unless on personal reclamation.
I am sorry to say that at this early hour I indulged in a
series of Britanic oaths, of overpowering volume, power, and
fluency, which, however, in no degree reconciled me to the
little craraped-up hen-coop of a conveyance by which I was
carried to Antibes.
At that fishy town, famous for its John Dory, it became
necessary, I learned, to have my passport examined, signed,
and stamped by (if my memory serves me) about ten Consuls,
Prefets, and other licensed humbugs, who placed no other
difficulty in my way than that of requiring me to disburse
sundry small coins, varying in amount between the sums
of fifteenpence and three-and-fourpence.
I paid these levies with the outward nonchalance of a
wealthy English “ Milord,” but inwardly I cursed with much
unction the whole system that legalised this plunder of the
unprotected foreigner.
Then I engaged a cabriolet, the driver of which was in no
degree extraordinarily repulsive for a cabman further than a
swelled appearance of head, which was suggestive of much
punching, or severe influenza, or premeditated disposition to
indulge in hydrocephalus.
He contracted to drive me to Grasse and back to Antibes


by the evening for the inconsiderable sum of ten francs, and
in pursuance of this agreement, after I had taken my seat,
left me for about half an hour a victim to the gentlemen of
his profession, who waiting hire felt inclined to while away
their leisure in pleasantries on what they facetiously called a
ros-bif plompuddin jean-houle.
The gist of the cheerful remarks addressed to me was to
the effect that I had engaged a lunatic, and that a dreadful
fate awaited me on the lonely road I was about to traverse.
I was relieved from these unassuring predictions by the
advent of my cabman, who was labouring under an immense
trunk, and accompanied by a stout fresh looking peasant girl,
who took her seat at the side of me, with some remarks
doubtlessly intended to be apologetic, but which were to me an
unintelligible patois ; fortunately, I think limited to that
district.
My driver, with an idiotic grin, informed me she was going
a short distance on my road, and was his cousin, to which I
made no remonstrance, though I regretted that the vehicle
was not more commodious or the cousin less plump.
I hardly thought it consistent with the proprieties that a
staid travelling Englishmen should be partly sat upon and
made obscure by a cabman’s redundant female relative=
No incident deserving remark occurred until I reached
Grasse, though doubtless had my mind been less occupied by
the passport nuisance I should have observed much that I
might have recorded in admiration of the lovely country of
which Grasse itself is the garden, its chief commerce con-
sisting in the cultivation of flowers, and the distillation of
their fragant essences for the use of the perfumer.


Arrived at Grasse, I without delay waited at the Prefecture,
where I was favoured with an interview by a small pursy
man, who, having a snub nose and pale green eyes, I was not
disappointed in ascertaining to be as pompously official as
bumbledom French or English could produce.
He snubbed me to the level of his own nose —he reduced
me through rage and vexation to the pallid hue of his own
sea-green eyes. He was fastly exultant over the perplexity
of a sacre Anglais. I could read it in his swelling waist-
coat —in the defiant straddle of his thick bow legs. He gave
me my conge with the air of a prosperous beadle.
Gathering up my papers—grimly in my heart cursing the
pusillanimity of Louis Phillipe and the imbecility of pro-
visional provincial magistrates—l was about to depart, when
a tall elderly man, with gentleman distinctly marked in his
countenance and manner, entered the bureau ; and I could
detect by the servile air of deference assumed by the fat
bully that the new-comer was evidently a person of
influence.
A question less heard than divined informed me that he
was enquiring the purport of my visit.
Determined that he should know it from myself, I faced
about, and briefly made him acquainted with my difficulty.
The gentleman turned out to be the Prefet —the snob only
the sous-prefet , his subordinate, and what had been contemp-
tuously denied me by the latter was courteously and unhesi-
tatingly granted by the former.
At length 1 possessed a passport en regie.
Are you inclined to be astonished that in the plenitude of
my satisfaction I ordered a dinner, and a bottle of superior


vintage to it, and that I treated my swollen-headed driver to
a like generous fare?
If so, reserve your astonishment for what happened subse-
quently.
“ En route Antoine ,” I shouted gaily.
“ To Antibes ? ” enquired that youth.
“ Where else ? ” I asked.
« To Villeneuve,” responded swollen head, with as much
vivacity as could be squeezed through a snuffle.
“ And can you convey me there by nightfall ? ” I enquired
with eagerness.
Swollen-head so vigorously nodded itself to an accom-
paniment of snorts that I became alarmed. “ Perhaps after
all he may be mad,” I thought.
Swollen-head said, “ Five francs more.”
This attention to finance convinced me he was not mad.
“En avant ,” I cried ; “ forward.”
The afternoon had nearly expired. In one hour hence it
would be twilight, and then nearly immediately after night,
as the twilight is of short duration in these latitudes—when
my driver pulled up —then from the interior of his blouse he
produced a clasp knife—l shuddered —then followed a vast
hunk of bread and an onion, which delicacies he calmly but
resolutely devoured.
I felt reassured —No, he is not mad.
Having completed his edibles, he slowly polished his knife
on his sleeve, and, as I imagined, looked at me furtively.
It’s coming, thought I—he's decidedly mad, and I men-
tally prepared for the anticipated conflict.
We were on the edge of a precipice, in the midst of a


savage-looking alpine country, with not a sign of habitation
or habitant risible.
I wish I was in Bow-street, I inwardly said, my thoughts
reverting to home. Yes, even on a charge of being riotous
and assaulting the police—anywhere rather than here.
I kept my eyes firmly fixed on the driver. It flashed
across me that I had heard lunatics and wild beasts were to
be controlled by the power of a determined gaze.
[Since then I tried it on a terrier bitch, and got bitten in
the leg.]
My driver suddenly began to cry.
I came back immediately on my opinion. He is not mad.
I said to myself—he’s an idiot and drunk. I was a fool to
give him that wine.
“ My poor mother,” sobbed my companion.
“ Ah ! your poor mother,” I responded, in as sympathetic
a manner as I could command. “Ah ! poor woman ; doubt-
less she’ll be alarmed at your continued absence. Hadn’t he
better be pushing along ?”
The lachrymose beast looked at me with his head more
swollen than ever. I thought after having been drained of
so many tears it ought to have dried up, and not retained so
moist and pumpkiny an appearance. This was a reflection I
kept to myself.
“Ah I if I had a home!” resumed Sniveller. “ Ah, if I
had the honor to serve a rich milord! Ah ! if I hadn’t a
mother who will get drunk and beat my head with the
empty bottle I Ah I I wish I never had a mother I”
I agreed with the last sentiment slightly altered—that is,
I wished his mother had never had a son. I thought it


wise, however, to propitiate him—“ Get me to Villeneuve
to night, my boy, and I will endeavour to get you the service
you require.”
Swollen head at these words seemed to regain as much
cheerfulness as such a head could express. He briskly
closed his clasp-knife, and addressed various reproaches of a
scandalous nature to his little Camargue horse, which imme-
diately tingled its bells and trotted vigorously on its way.
We arrived at Villeneuve that night, and on the following
morning I was at Nice—Nice the beautiful—sweetly smelling
of the orange and lime blossoms—where the crimson flower
of the pomegranate contrasts so beautifully with its dark
green leaves —and the tideless Mediterranean emulates in its
calm repose the blue serenity of the unclouded southern skies
—Nice, birth-place of Garibaldi, and for many months my
happy home.
The passport system is, I believe, now abolished in France,
at least as regards British subjects. No doubt the present
Emperor—aware that true blue Britons could not be persuaded
into admiration of that institution, partly in deference to
their stupidity, and partly out of concern for his subjects,
who were officially nearly harried into lunatic asylums by
travelling Englishmen with informal papers—abrogated it.
Be that as it may, it was inconvenient in 1848 to travel
without a passport.


DORA.
What care I for the joys of wine
While love and joy in one combine;
Art thou not, Dora, mine
As 1 am thine ?
Vainly the glowing bubbles swim
In perfumed sparkles to the brim ;
Brighter the light of eyes
Wherein confession lies
That thou art mine,
Art mine.
And sweeter far upon thy lip
The nectar I alone may sip;
Hebe’s cup ne’er held such bliss
As in that clinging kiss
When lips of thine
Meet mine.
Sims & Elliott, General Steam Printers, Gawler-place, Adelaide.








