

f)0) (s j b




~~.
NOT LIKE MAN
BIMANOUS AND BIPED,
NOR. YET
QUADRUMANOUS,
CHEIROPODOUS.
GEORGE BRITTON HALFORD, M.D.
Professor of Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathology in the
University of Melbourne.
MELBOURNE;
WILSON AND MACKINNON, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
78, COLLINS STREET EAST.
18G3.




PREFACE.
The following observations are the result of an enquiry
into the value of the statements lately put forth by Professor
Huxley* respecting the Brain, Hand, and Foot of Monkey
and of Man. Appended to the observations are some most
beautiful drawings, from my own dissections, by two gen-
tlemen attending my class, Mr. Neild and Mr. Morton. I
have to thank them for the pains they have taken to be
accurate.
* Evidence as to Man's Place in Nature , by Thomas Henry Huxley,
F.R.S., 1863.




OBSERVATIONS
ON XHB
DISSECTION OF TWO MACAQUE MONKEYS.
BRAIN.
As in Man the lateral ventricle of each hemisphere of
the Brain, contrary to what is stated in the Edinburgh
Review, even so lately as April 1863, possesses a posterior
comu, in which the hippocampus minor is clearly seen.
The posterior lobe of the cerebrum also overlaps the cere-
bellum. On these points Professor Huxley is strictly correct.
See plate L
HAND.
The Hand of Macaque agrees bone for bone, and with one
singular exception muscle for muscle with the hand of Man,
the exception being that a muscle of the fore-arm correspond-
ing in origin, shape, and position to the extensor primi
internodii pollicis in man, is not inserted as in him into
the first phalanx of the thumb, but into the base of the
metacarpal bone of the thumb, side by side with that of the
extensor ossis metacarpi pollicis. The thumb of Macaque,
with this difference, is otherwise similar to the thumb of
Man. It is a curious fact that the same relation exists
between the kind thumb of Monkey and the thumb of Man !


FOOT.
The Foot of Macacos, and of every Monkey and Man-
like ape which I have seen, and the skeletons and drawings
which I have examined, present us with what must be
called a Fingered Foot. In all, including the Gorilla, the
central digit is the longest, and the thumb can be opposed
to the fingers, in these respects equalling their own hand
and the hand of Man. Further the separate bones of the
digits, called phalanges, are those of fingers and not of toes ;
instead of being stunted, as in the foot of Man, they are
dongated as in the hand of Man. The first departure from
the foot of Man occurs in the internal cuneiform bone, which
is turned away from the other tarsal bones, and presents a
peculiar articular surface, resembling that of the os trape-
zium of the carpus. In the tarsus we have distinct evidence
of the bones of a foot, one only presenting any change from
the similar bones in Man and that one which, without the
intervention of any other hone, supports a digit (for the
so-called metacarpal bone of the thumb is not only in deve-
lopment but in function a phalanx), and this obtains from
Macacos to Gorilla. These are Professor Huxley’s words :
“At first sight, the termination of the hind limb in the
Gorilla looks very hand-like, and as it is still more so in
many of the lower Apes, it is not wonderful that the appella-
tion Quadrumana, or four-handed creatures, adopted from
the older anatomists by Blumenbach, and unfortunately
rendered current by Cuvier, should have gained such wide
acceptance as a name for the Simian group. But the most
cursory anatomical investigation at once proves that the
resemblance of the so-called ‘ hind hand ’ is only skin deep,
and that in all essential respects the hind limb of a Goiilla
is as truly terminated by. a foot as that of a Man.” And
again, after comparing the’H uman with the Simian foot, he


says, “ Throughout all these modifications it must he recol-
lected that the foot loses none of its essential characters.
Every Monkey and Lemur exhibits the characteristic ar-
rangement of tarsal bones, possesses a short flexor and short
extensor muscle, and a peroneus longus. Varied as the
proportions and appearance of the organ may be, the ter-
minal division of the hind limb remains in plan and principle
of construction a foot, and never in these respects can be
confounded with a hand.” “ A cursory anatomical investi-
gation ” is of little value, and, as we shall see, leaves much
unexplored, which the author of “ The Eolations of Man
to the Lower Animals ” should have laid bare ere, by com-
paring the foot of Man and Monkey, he assigned to either
his place in nature.
I will now describe the muscles of the leg and foot of
Macacus.
MUSCLES OF THE FRONT OF THE LEG. —PLATE IV.
Tibialis Anticus. —This muscle arises from the upper
two-thirds of the outer surface of the tibia, from part of the
interosseous membrane, from the intermuscular septum
between it and the following muscle, and from the fascia of
the leg. The tendon passes over the lower end of the tibia
to be inserted into the internal and planter aspect of the
internal cuneiform bone. Its action is to turn the sole of
the foot inward.
Extensor Ossis Metatarsi Pollicis. —Nearly as large as
the former muscle, arises by a tendon from the outer side
of the head of the tibia, from the intermuscular septa, and
from the fascia of the leg. Its tendon passes down close to
that of the former muscle, and is inserted into the inner side
of the base of the metatarsal bone of the thumb. Ihe name
expresses its action.
Extensor JProprius , vet Secundi Internodii, 1 ollicis.


As in Man, this muscle lies hidden between the preceding
and the extensor longus digitorurn, its tendon appearing
between those two muscles, just above the ankle-joint. It
arises from the upper two-thirds of the inner surface of the
fibula and from the interosseous membrane, and is inserted
into the base of the last phalanx of the thumb. In the
fore-limb of Macaque, as we have seen, no muscle is inserted
into the second bone of the thumb.
Extensor Longus Digitorurn. —Arises from the head of
the tibia and from the upper two-thirds of the fibula, from the
intermuscular septa and from the fascia of the leg. It ends
in four tendons which are inserted into the second and third
phalanges of the four outer fingers.
MUSCLES OF THE OUTER BORDER OF THE LEG.
Peroneus Longus. —Arises from the upper half of the
outer surface of the fibula and from the intermuscular septa
between it and the extensor longus digitorurn on the
one side and the flexor longus pollicis on the other ;
the tendon passes to the outer side of the foot, where a
sesamoid is present in it ; from this point it turns inward
to the sole of the foot, where it runs in a groove of the
cuboid bone, covered by the calcaneo-cuboid ligament, and
is finally inserted into the outer side of the base of the first
bone of the thumb. Actions. —lt is a powerful flexor of the
metatarsal bone of the thumb, being, in this respect, the
direct antagonist of the extensor ossis metatarsi pollicis;
its second action is to direct the sole of the foot outward.
Moreover, by making the thumb its fixed point from <which
to act, it would tend to keep the animal’s body in equili-
brium when swaying to and fro in its passage from branch
to branch. Such a muscle, so inserted, would be of little
use for walking, and as it exists, according to Huxley, in
the Gorilla, whose hind thumb is opposable, it affords the


strongest argument that the creature can only walk on the
outer side of its foot, and that not for long, except the hind
thumb has something to grasp, as in passing over branches,
exposed roots of trees, uneven ground, &c.
Peroneus Brevis. —Arises from the lower half of the
outer surface of the fibula, and is inserted into the base of
the fifth metatarsal bone. It is a flexor of the foot upon
the leg.
MUSCLE OF THE BACK OF THE FOOT.
Extensor Brevis Digitorum. —Arises from the annular
ligament and from the upper and outer surfaces of the os
calcis. It ends in four tendons which blend with the ten-
dinous insertions of the extensor longus digitorum. Its
action is to assist and modify that of the long extensor.
The existence of this muscle does not prove the terminal
division of the hind limb of the Monkey to be a foot; true
it is not found in the hand, where the fingers are in the
same line with the bones of the fore-arm, but were the
Creator to place a hand at an angle to the bones of the leg,
whence the extensor longus digitorum arises, a short muscle
would be equally needed and consequently be found.
MUSCLES OF THE BACK OF THE LEG.
It is unnecessary to speak of the Soleus and Gastro-
cnemius, as their tendons do not pass into the sole of the
foot.
Flexor Longus Pollicis. —This muscle, large in Man, is
proportionately much larger in Macacus. It arises from the
whole length of the posterior surface of the fibula to within
one inch of the malleolus, from the middle third of the
posterior surface of the tibia, and from the interosseous
membrane below the origin of the tibialis posticus. The
tendon, very large, passes into the sole of the foot and near


the scaphoid bone unites with that of the flexor longus
digitomm, and is so disposed that its own proper tendon
pierces that of the long flexor of the fingers ; it then runs
its course, as in Man, between the two heads of the flexor
brevis pollicis and is finally inserted into the last phalanx of
the thumb. Next it gives off, in common with the last
named muscle, a tendon to the last phalanx of the second
finger, and two very powerful ones are similarly inserted
into the third and fourth fingers ; a slight slip also goes with
another from the flexor longus digitorum to the little finger.
Action. —Its first action would be that of forcibly bending
the fingers on the foot, after which it would extend the
foot upon the leg. It is obvious that the great development
of this muscle with the co-existence of the peroneus longus
as a flexor of the thumb, renders the foot of Monkey a far
more grasping organ than his hand. This I think is seen
to its greatest extent in A teles.
Flexor Longus I) igitorum. —Arises from the posterior
surface of the tibia below the popliteus muscle, from the
interosseous membrane, and from intermuscular septa,
and passing into the sole of the foot and blending with the
tendon of the long flexor of the thumb is chiefly inserted
into the last phalanges of the second and fifth fingers.
Lumhricales. —Four of these are connected with the
tendons of the last and preceding muscles, and pass to be
inserted into the tendinous expansion on the back of the
first phalanx of the four outer fingers.
Tibialis Posticus. —Lying beneath the last two muscles, it
arises from the upper third of the posterior surface of both
tibia and fibula and from the corresponding portion of the
interosseous membrane ; its tendon passes beneath and
internally to that of the flexor longus digitorum, and is
finally inserted into the scaphoid bone and bases of the
third, fourth, and fifth metatarsal bones.


MUSCLES OF THE SOLE OF THE FOOT.
First Layer.
* Abductor Pollicis. —Thin and tendinous posteriorly, it
arises from the os calcis and from the plantar fascia; from
this point to the metatarsal bone of the thumb it takes
origin from ligamentous tissue along the inner side of the
foot; its tendon is inserted into the inner side of the base
of the first phalanx of the thumb, where it is intimately
connected with the insertion of the inner head of the flexor
brevis pollicis.
Flexor Brevis Indicis. —This, the only representative in
Macacus of the flexor brevis digitorum in Man, arises far
back by a tendinous slip from the os calcis ; the muscle then
lias an elongated fleshy belly, and its tendon, after splitting
to allow of the passage of a long flexor tendon, is inserted
into the sides of the second phalanx of the second finger.
Abductor Minimi JDigiti. —Arises posteriorly by fleshy
fibi ■es from the os calcis and from this point to the base of
the fifth metatarsal bone from ligamentous structure along
the outer side of the foot; its very long tendon is inserted
into the outer side of the base of the first phalanx of the
little finger.
Second Layer.
Flexor Accessorius. —Arises from the annular ligament
and from the outer part of the os calcis, and is inserted into
the upper surface of the long flexor tendons.
Contrahentes Digitorum. —Four small muscles I have
thus named are found arising by a common tendon from the
sheath of the peroneus longus, and are inserted as follows:


The first into the base of the first phalanx of the thumb ;
the second, third, and fourth, into the bases of the first
phalanges of the second, fourth, and fifth fingers. The in-
sertion of each is on that side of the phalanx nearest the
centre of the foot. The action of these muscles is to
draw the thumb and fingers to a point in an imaginary line
running from before backwards through the centre of the
foot. It is obvious that simple flexion of the middle finger
will bring it to that point, consequently no such muscle as I
am now describing is inserted into it. I need scarcely say
these muscles do not exist in the foot of Man, nor in his
hand, neither in the hand of Macacus.
Third Layer.
Adductor Pollicis. —Arises from the plantar aspect of
second and third metatarsal bones, for the lower half of their
extent. It is a triangular muscle, the tendon joining the
insertion of that of the outer head of the flexor brevis pollicis.
This muscle is more like the corresponding muscle of the
hand than of the foot of Man.
Flexor Brevis Pollicis. —Arises by two heads, the inner
from the internal cuneiform bone, the outer from the sheath
of the peroneus longus, and from the bases of the second and
third metatarsal bones. The two parts are separated by the
tendon of the long flexor and are inserted the one into the
inner, the other into the outer, sidg of the base of the first
phalanx of the thumb.
Flexor Brevis Minimi Digiti. —Arises from the base of
the fifth metatarsal bone, and is inserted into the outer side
of the base of the first phalanx of the little finger.


Fourth Layer. —See Plate 11.
Opponent vel Flexor Ossls Metatarsi Polliois. —Arises
from the internal cuneiform bone and is inserted into the
whole length of the metatarsal bone of the thumb. No
such muscle exists in the foot of Man, but a similar one is
found in the hand of Man and of Monkey. The same
observation applies to the following muscle.
Opponent, vel Flexor Ossis Metatarsi, Minimi Digiti. —
Arises from the cuboid bone, and is inserted into the whole
length of the fifth metatarsal bone.
O
Plantar Interossei. —Three in number. The first arises
from the concave surface of the second metatarsal bone, and
is inserted into the outer side of the base of the first
phalanx of the second finger. The second and third arise
similarly from the fourth and fifth metatarsal bones, and are
inserted into the inner side of the bases of the first phal-
anges of the fourth and fifth fingers. Action. —They adduct
the fingers into which they are inserted to an imaginary
line passing longitudinally through the centre of the foot,
i.e. through the centre of the middle finger.
Dorsal Interossei. —Four in number. Each arises by
two heads from the contiguous surfaces of the metatarsal
bones between which it lies, but chiefly from the meta-
tarsal bone articulating with the phalanx into which it
is inserted. They all project into the sole of the foot.
The first arises between the first and second metatarsal
bones, and is inserted into the inner side of the base
of the first phalanx of the index finger. The second
arises between the second and third, and the third
arises between the third and fourth metatarsal bones;
the former is inserted into the inner, and the latter into
the outer side of the base of the first phalanx of the
middle finger. The fourth arises between the fourth and


fifth metatarsal bones, and is inserted into the outer side of
the base of the first phalanx of the fourth finger. They
abduct the fingers into which they are inserted from an
imaginary line drawn through the centre of the middle
finger.
It is in the arrangement of this fourth layer of muscles
that we see the greatest departure from the corresponding
series in the Human Foot. As the hand of both Man
and Monkey is characterised by the presence of fingers
and of special muscles to move them, so is the foot of Mon-
key ; we have now lost all trace of a foot and have before
us the hones and muscles of a hand; and to render the
homology complete no Tranversus Pedis, a muscle of this
layer in the foot of Man, exists in Macaque.
The following tables show the strict homology of the
fingers of Man and of those of both hand and foot of
Monkey. The letters prefixed to the numerals express the
relative lengths of the digits, a being the longest, b the
next, and e the shortest. See Plates 11. and 111.
No. 1.
MAN.
No. 2.
HAND.
FOOT.
MUSCLES OF.
MUSCLES OF.
Ist digit Opponens.
h. Ist digit Transversus Pedis.
a. 2nd „ Two abductors.
c. 3rd „ Abductor, adductor.
d. 4th „ Abductor, adductor.
c. 2nd „ Abductor, adductor.
a. 3rd „ Two abductors.
h, 4th „ Abductor, adductor,
d, sth „ Adductor, opponens.
sth „ Adductor.
No. 3.
MONKEY.
No. 4.
HAND.
FOOT.
MUSCLES OF.
MUSCLES OF.
e. Ist Digit Opponens.
e. Ist Digit Opponens.
c. 2nd „ Abductor, adductor.
a, 3rd „ Two abductors.
h. 4th „ Abductor, adductor.
d. sth „ Adductor, opponens.
c. 2nd „ Abductor, adductor.
a. 3rd „ Two abductors.
b. 4th „ Abductor, adductor.
d. sth „ Adductor, opponens.


Tables Nos. 1,3, and -1 are alike, so that if the digits of
the hand of Man be fingers, so must they be in both Hand
and Foot of Monkey, for “ things which are equal to the
same are equal to one another.” No. 2, however, stands by
itself as the Foot of Man.
Now, Professor Huxley has not shown that Table No. 4
does not apply to the foot of the Gorilla, Chimpanzee, &c.
Indeed it does not appear that he has examined into
this deep, yet truth-telling, layer of muscles. It would
certainly be marvellous if the terminal division of the
hind limb of these did not differ as much from the
Foot of Man as does the terminal division of the
hind limb of the Macaque.
To what conclusion does our dissection lead us ? Un-
questionably to this—that Professor Huxley has fallen into a
grievous error, for these creatures are not “bimanous and biped, ’
neither are they strictly speaking “ quadrumanous ; ” they
are in fact Finger-footed (cheiropodous),*the terminal division
of their hind limb presenting beyond the tarsal bones no
resemblance whatever to the Foot of Man, but being adapted
to different functions is totally different in the proportion of
its parts and in the principles of its construction. Perfect,
exquisitely beautiful in its anatomy, it is yet -for walking an
ungainly, useless member ; for clambering, climbing, run-
ning from bough to bough, sleeping on the unsteady tops of
trees, it is supremely fitted and ever to be relied on.
From the drawings in Professor Huxley’s book and from
the stuffed specimens in England, I have no doubt that the
Gorilla, like every other Ape and Monkey, is cheiropodous,
whilst Man, as was stated by Cuvier, is “ the only animal
truly bimanous and biped.”
• From %G lp, a hand, and Trows, ttoSos, a foot. Name suggested to me by
Professor Irving, after he had carefully examined my dissections. Ido not
think a more appropriate one could be found.


Surely the intricacies of the Monkey's foot were planned,
as was also the comparative simplicity of Man's ! They
could never run the one into the other, or to use a fashion-
ably scientific term be “ developed ’’ the one from the other.
Of a certainty the Man-like Apes are finger-footed
equally with Macacus. How incomprehensible, if they be
not, are the following extracts from the Professor’s work !
How natural if they be !
“ The Gibbons all day long haunt the tops of the tall
trees.” Page 27.
“ The Orang, by day, usually climbs from one tree top to
another, and only at night descends to the ground, and if
then threatened with danger, he seeks refuge among the
underwood.” Page 34.
“ The Chimpanzees avoid the abodes of men, and build
their habitations in trees.” Page 44.
“ The Gorilla’s habits are in general like those of
Troglodytes Niger, building its nest loosely in trees.” Page
50.
Melbourne, July, 1863.


DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.
PLATE I.
Fig. 1 represents a section of the cerebrum, the upper parts of
both hemispheres being removed, in order to display the two
lateral ventricles and their contents. Enumerated from before
backwards they are in each corpus striatum, choroid plexus, optic
thelamus, pes accessorius, hippocampus minor. The anterior cornua
are observed to diverge, the posterior to converge.
Fig 2 is an outline of a section of the basilar and posterior
parts of the skull of Macaque. A b, the basicranial axis; ac,
the occipital plane ; d, the point of attachment of the tentorium.
Below the line, from d to c, the cerebellum lies, above d, the
posterior lobe of the cerebrum, so that the latter overlaps the
former.
PLATE 11.
Shows the fingers and deep layer of muscles of the Foot of
Macaque. These muscles, nine in number, are found on examination
to be three Plantar interossei, as in Fig. 1, with a, the Opponens
Pollicis, b, the Opponens Minimi Digiti, and Four Dorsal Interossei
seen in Fig. 3.
Fig. 4. The Os Calcis and Astragalus of the same Foot.
PLATE 111.
Fig. 1. The Palmar Interossei of the Hand of Macaque with,
a Opponens Pollicis, and b Opponens Minimi Digiti.
Fig. 2. The Four Dorsal Interossei.
It will be seen that Figs. 1 and 2, Plate 111., exactly correspond
with Figs. 1 and 3, Plate 11., and both as regards the length of
fingers and muscles to move them closely resemble the hand of Man.


PLATE IV.
The muscles of the front of the leg. Their relative positions
are shown just above the ankle joint. The most internal is the
Tibialis Anticus, external to this is the Extensor Ossis Metatarsi
Pollicis ; still more external, and appearing only as the lower third
of the leg, is the Extensor Proprius, vel Secundi Internodii,
Pollicis lastly, the Extensor Communis Digitorum is seen giving
off tendons to the four outer fingers. There is no Peroneus
Tertius.
The existence of the Extensor Ossis Metatarsi Pollicis is not
alluded to by Professor Huxley ; it is not present in the ley of Man,
and, is essentially a muscle of a thumb, and not of a great toe.


PLATE 1.
/'V. /
i?


<
' %
■ - / \
■
- ..._- —
UJ
h
<
“N.
CL
__j — : -,
( ‘
- ..^j
"<':|
*
V:
v’N
*.
-— _ji ——
N
— • ‘^ J nKiTi|il rra^*-- >w
““ — — -.,. —
J* V
\^
-? r §.
I s^ zja ’ >
' '■ '


h
<
_l
n










