

NOT QUITE AS OLD AS THE HILLS.
A LECTURE
OK THE
EVIDENCES OF MAN?S ANTIQUITY.
(delivered at robe town.)
THE BEY. JULIAN E. TENISON WOODS,
F K.G.S., F.G.S., F.L.8., &C., &C.
gUlbourm:
H. T. DWIGHT, BOOKSELLER & PUBLISHER,
near parliament houses.
MASON AND FIRTH, PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.


NEARLY READY, by the same Author.
HISTORY OF THE DISCOVERT AID
EXPLORATIOI OE AUSTRALIA.
In Two Vols.
Containing accounts of all the Exploring Expedi-
tions in this Country.
LONDON: SAMPSON, LOW & SON.
MELBOURNE: H. T. DWIGHT,
The delay in the publication of this work has been owing to the great
difficulty experienced in correcting MS., besides revision, &c., of a book
printing in London. Bringing the History down to dates so as to include
the most recent Explorations, has also incurred some loss of time, but
the volumes are now being pushed through the press, and may be ex-
pected shortly.
It has been resolved also to omit a great part of the engravings, so as
to bring the price to about 28s. for the two volumes, Bvo., each containing
about 500 pages.


NOT QUITE AS OLD AS THE HILLS.
A LECTURE
ON THE EVIDENCES OF MAN?S ANTIQUITY
(delivered at robe town),
THE
REV. JULIAN E. TENISON WOODS,
f.k.g.s.,;f.g.s? F.L.S., &c,, &c?
VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE PENOLA, AND HON. MEMBER OF THE GAWEER
INSTITUTES.
gt&katefc to % SUmkrs of tbj (iatokr Institute
MELBOURNE;
HENRY TOLMAN DWIGHT.


MELBOURNE:
MASON AND FIRTH, PRINTERS.


THE EVIDENCES OF MAN?S ANTIQUITY.
I propose this night to deal with the question which should need
no adventitious help to make it interesting ; for it is one of those
subjects which seem to have a charm for every age and every people.
It has been, more or less, a matter for speculation in every
language possessing a literature of its own, and I question
whether, even the most illiterate tribe has not its own notion and
tradition as to the people from whence it has sprung, and the land
which gave it birth. The Red Indian, hunting amid the boundless
plains, the rivers and lakes of the far west; the Negro, pursuing his
rude agriculture amid the dense tropical luxuriance of Africa ; the
Esquimaux, driving his team of dogs across vast plains of snow ; the
Chinese, pursuing their refinements of art amid the picturesque
scenes and glorious climate of their country; every nation, in fine,
no matter how diverse its habits, has its tradition about its origin,
dates back to some time when the race first appeared upon the
earth. But if this is true, another strange truth has, until recently,
been universally admitted, and that is, that in proportion as a nation
is rude and uncivilized, so in proportion its notions about its
antiquity become extravagant and fanciful. Until lately this has
been the general opinion, and it has been reserved for our own times
to witness a complete revolution in the unanimity which used to be
accorded to our history of the origin of the human race. We have
seen a change of opinion which is marvellous and almost inex-
plicable. Ten years ago, no one thought of questioning the Biblical
account of the date of man?s creation, and we derided the attempts
of the Chinese to claim an age of many thousand years for the
human race. At the present day things have changed; such
moderate periods will not by any means meet our requirements, and
we hear men of science and talent saying that 30,000 years at the
very least must have elapsed since man was first placed upon the
earth.
Now, you will readily understand that such a change could not
have been effected in men?s opinions without good cause. Those
who have adopted the new ideas are persons engaged for a lifetime
in weighing facts, and whose tone of mind should lead them not to
take up principles unless guaranteed by strong evidence. It is to
no purpose to urge that a great many do not agree with these con-
clusions, and that in the adverse ranks may be found men as eminent.


There must be some strong points at least in the doctrines, even in
the opinions of their opponents. Probably they may have had an
undue weight with certain minds, or they may partake too much of
inference. It is my opinion that they do; but, still, it is not exactly
with this prejudice that I should wish you to hear me. X wish you,
on the contrary, to give them all the weight and all the force they
are entitled to from those who have only heard one side of the ques-
tion, and I am quite sure what I have to advance will not be one
morsel weaker for having given the question fair play. At the out-
set, I wish to strengthen the case by telling you to look at the
very strongest points of the new opinions, and even then you will
see how they are deprived of that certainty which they should
possess were the weight of evidence on their side. In the first place,
I shall do no more than lay before you the state of the question as
it is at present.
Certain facts have led some persons to conclude that the human
race is of immense antiquity, and some men, equally eminent, have
denied that the facts at present known warrant such a conclusion.
\ ou are doubtless aware of the leading grounds for the first opinion,
if not, I sirail have occasion to mention them, as I proceed. The
other side you could not have heard fairly stated as yet. Perhaps it
may appear singular to many that while much has been published on
the modern side of the question, nothing (or very little) has been
said in opposition. But it should be borne in mind that the new
theory attacks an edifice founded on the literature of the whole
human race for centuries. Its defence has been made already, and
though its antiquity is no proof of its truth, we must not be surprised
if it sees without apprehension the attack, as far as it has yet gone.
I say this much, because it might appear like presumption in me to
pretend to give you an answer to such books as Lyell?s ?Antiquity of
Man,? Bunsen?s ? Egypt?s Place in History,? Lepsius?s ? Egypt,?
or such men as Forchhammer, Worsase, Evans, Prestwich, or
Lartet, Were I to rely alone on the feeble arguments I could
adduce, or stand alone and unaided in the attempt, I should more
deserve pity than applause. But I propose to do nothing of the
kind. Arguments and facts of my own I shall certainly use, but I
am far from relying mainly on these. For the immense bulk of
prools I can lay no claim to originality, excepting as much as it is
made subservient to my view of the subject. I merely hope to show
from this, that there is another side to the question, and how serious,
how worth attention is what it urges.
In the first place let it be stated, that we do not precisely know
the period at which Adam was created, that is to say, we have no
positive figures for saying what is the exact age of the human race at
present. In most Bibles there is a foot-note to the Ist verse of
Genesis, making the creation of 4004 years before Christ, but this is
not a part of the sacred record itself. No continuous chronology


is found in the Old Testament. Its historical books contain a con-
nected narrative from the creation, to the fifth century before the
Christian era; and though there is no connected chronology, the
narrative abounds in notes of , time, by means of which the distance
between not very remote events may be ascertained. Between the
creation and the flood there is a regular series of genealogies, and
therefore the period of the latter event is distinctly stated . After
the flood there is another series of genealogies which come down to
Jacob. There is a blank from this to the exodus, but in another
portion of the narrative this is stated as 430 years. But, even thus
far, dates are not very certain in their mode of calculation, for,
amongst scriptural commentators there are no less than seven different
opinions as to the date of the exodus, the discrepancy between the
first and the last being no less than 1389 years. These differences
arise from the various readings of different versions, such as the
Samaritan and the Septuagint, of which I need not speak, and also
from the periods assigned to the sojourn in Egypt. At any rate, you
will easily gather that even where figures are given, it is not easy to
settle the age of the human race. But after the exodus we have
only a chronology for forty-six years later, and from thence to the
Mesopotanian servitude (Judges iii. 8) there is a complete blank.
How long that blank may have been we cannot say ; we know
nothing more than that all the elders who had entered the promised
land with Joshua had died in the meantime. From the servitude
to the death of Sampson the time is measured again, but is again
discontinued from thence to the accession of David. From thence to
the time when the Jews were carried captive to Babylon the history
is precise enough, and then the sacred record comes into contact with
authentic profane history, so that we can trace the Babylonian
captivity down to our own time without interruption.
It will be seen from this that no principle of revelation is involved
in the age of the human race. It may be also stated that the
principal versions of the Old Testament differ from each other in this
particular to the extent of nearly 1500 years, owing to errors in
copying. But in spite of this uncertainty, I need hardly tell you
that a very reasonable conjecture can be made, and though some
doubt must always remain, yet there is a limit within which we may
be sure. For instance, we may be certain that the age of the world
is not less than 6000 years, and, on the other hand, that an age of
anything over 9000 years is utterly irreconcilable with the best
historical traditions of the human race. We may also believe that
the age of the world was known when Moses wrote, and that so far
from giving an immense antiquity to it, as mythical writers are wont
to do, he stated that man was created about 2500 years previously.
That period would place the creation immensely nearer to him than
he is in point of time to us, and as it would appear to his
contemporaries like a comparatively recent event, we may reasonably


suppose that his narrative wore an appearance of probability from
the state of the world then, or he would not have proposed it to the
Jews. You see, I am supposing that the date of the Pentateuch
has not been disturbed by recent criticisms. Into those questions I
shall not enter. At present I must go on with the immediate
subject in hand.
Now, what has happened to disturb the highest received opinion 1
Simply this : Geology, as a science which burrows much underground,
has found evidence of a nature which seems to throw considerable
difficulties in the way of the whole science of chronology. Amongst
other things it finds some relics of human beings buried in a way
and so associated with other remains, that it is impossible for the
geologist to suppose that man has not been on this earth a great
deal longer than 9000 years. What are these remains and these
evidences ? I admit to you they have a certain amount of force
taken collectively; but let us take them one by one, and no matter
what their number, if they are singly weak and inconclusive, the
inference drawn from them is, to say the least, premature. The
relics of the earth?s ancient inhabitants which have been found may
be divided into many classes. The Danish peat and shell mounds,
the Swiss lake dwellings, the relics in the bed of the Nile, the cave
remains and the flint implements, are all entitled to separate con-
sideration, and I shall take them in the order in which they are
named.
First, there is found in Denmark a deposit of peat or bog-moss,
whose age is concluded not only from its thickness, but also from
the varieties of trees embedded, showing, it is said, that large trees
lived and died while the moss was forming ; and also that there
was at one time a prevalence of pine-trees, another time of oak, and
at another of alder, though on the same spot few except beech trees
are now found. At the bottom of this deposit a stone implement
was found. Others occur at various depths, and in the sand hills on
the coast ? hence it has been concluded that the human beings which
formed them lived an immense time ago. I must confess, at any
rate in this instance, I cannot see why. It is not certain that the
peat took such an immense period to accumulate in the position
where it is found. Such formations are rapid or not according to
circumstances. In a warm climate the growth of peat is slow, but
in cold ones, where decaying vegetable matter is not removed by
insects, peat mosses accumulate in a short space of time. We learn
from Rennie that in the time of Oliver Cromwell a forest in Ross-
shire was overthrown by a storm, which gave rise in so short a time
to a peat moss that the inhabitants dug peat there less than fifty
years subsequently. A similar bog was formed in as rapid a manner
in Dumfriesshire, after the overthrow of the Forest of Drumlanrig,
in 1756. I learn also from Lyell, that Hatfield Moss, in Yorkshire,
was a forest 1800 years ago, and not only has peat been dug there


in immense quantities, but fir and oak trees ninety feet long have
been dug out and sold for the masts and keels of ships. In the
same moss, and in several others, Roman roads have been found
covered by eight feet of peat. Coins, axes, and arms, and utensils
of Roman origin are also found; these bogs at least must
have originated long after the Roman period. De _ Luc ascer-
tained that the site of the ancient forests of Hyrcima, Semana,
Ardennes, and several others, are now occupied by mosses
and fens, and a great part of these changes have with much
probability been attributed to the strict orders given by Severus and
other emperors to destroy all the wood in the conquered provinces.
Several of the British forests, which are now mosses, were cut at
different periods, by order of the English Parliament, because they
harbored wolves or outlaws. Thus the Welsh woods were cut and
burnt in the reign of Edward I, as were many of_ those in Ireland
by Henry 11. to prevent the natives from harboring in them and
harassing his troops (LyelVs Principles). So far, therefore, from
concluding that remains bedded in peat are very ancient, we have
just as much, if not more, reason for saying that they are very
modern. Yes, but says the geologist, we have discovered instruments
of stone, and we find by a comparison of the remains which ancient
inhabitants have left to us, that there has been a time when men
were not acquainted with the use of metals, and all their implements
were made of stone. This is called the stone period, and belongs to
one of the 'most primitive conditions of the human race. This
period was succeeded by one when men came to know the usei of
bronze ; and as we find axe-heads, spears, and arrows made of that
material, we conclude that these must have belonged to a more
modern date, distinguished as the bronze age. Lastly, relics occur
which seem to have a much more modern aspect, and in addition to
their evincing a larger acquaintance with the arts, are made of iron ,
and this we distinguish as the most recent age of all - -the iron age.
Materials of every period are found in the peat mosses ; and when
we find at the bottom of all an instrument of stone, we conclude that
it is most ancient of all, and dates back probably to a very remote
age in the annals of humanity. So you see it is not from its position
in the peat that they conclude its antiquity, for it might have sunk
from the surface to where they find it, but from the material. But let
me urge that this proof stands much in need of confirmation. It is
not so certain that these periods were so clearly marked as the
Danish antiquarian makes out. There may have been a period
when iron was not known, but who knows this ? The stone and iron
implements are found side by side at times, and the only reason for
concluding that they represent separate periods, is by supposing that
once the natives knew the use of iron they could not use stone
implements any more. But were there no poor natives who could
not get iron ; if there were none, would they never have recourse to


stone ?* But granting all the theory demands, granting that the age
of stone was the most ancient, that it ceased with the bronze age, of
which there is no proof whatsoever, and finally that all stone
implements belong to the rudest condition of man. Granting all
this, which I am sure, is a great deal more than is proved, it is rather
too much to urge further that the ages were separated by vast periods
of time. One ship might bring to the natives iron implements, and
teach them their use, and the next year merchants from strange
countries teach them the uses and modes of procuring bronze; and
it is too much to say that in the hypothesis of the stone, bronze,
and iron age, there were no merchants or no civilised countries for
them to come from, because man was slowly emancipating himself from
barbarism all over the earth; you may suppose what men like to
form a theory for their implements; but what is urged should be
somewhat reconcilable with what we learn from history, because it is
more entitled to deference than mere inference. As it is at present it is
a question between archaeology and history, and the evidence offered by
the former is only of a meagre and unsatisfactory kind. We have but to
consult Hindenberg?s History of Danish Archaeology or the Works of
Neilson and Thomson, to see upon what slender foundations the whole
theory had been raised. The stone?s age, according to some, was
preceded by a period when mankind was unacquainted with fire.
Hence it is concluded that the cradle of the human race was
situated in a warm climate. Mons, Flourens (de la Longevetie
Humaine, Paris , 1855) carries this ingenious theory to an amazing
extreme, but, as it appears to me, quite as well warranted as any
which have preceded his. He says, ? Man, from the construction
ot his teeth, his stomach, his intestines, is primitively frugivorous
like the monkey. But, the frugivorous diet is the most unfavorable,
because it constrains its followers perpetually to abide in those
countries which produce fruit at all seasons, consequently in warm
climates. But once the use of fire is discovered, cooking would be
introduced, and man would be able to vary his diet by the use of
meat, and so move his habitation to colder climates.? This is one
specimen of the theories for which we are expected to regard all
history as a myth.
Again, in America, a copper age has to be supposed intermediate,
between that of stone and bronze, and the grounds of this supposi-
tion are, that the Spaniards found bronze among the natives of
Peru and Mexico, but nothing but copper is found in North
America. If we suppose both ages to have been contemporaneous,
we shall destroy this ill-grounded theory. It has been also objected
that, unless the knowledge of metals was contemporaneous with
that of stone implements, rocks could not have been quarried.
* When the Spaniards landed in Central America, they found both stone
and copper implements among the natives. This was only 345 years ago.


To this it is replied that, by lighting a fire over the rock it becomes
so rent and fissured that it is easily managed. This is
rather unsatisfactory if we remember that mineral deposits
only occur among the older and harder rocks. For iron, the natives
are supposed to owe their knowledge, first, to meteoric stones, and
after this discovery our archaeological friends kindly allow history to
be our guide. I shall not stop to question now many points of the
theory which appear to me to be gratuitous assumption. It is a
point of the controversy on which Australians are peculiarly fitted to
judge, as they happen to be thrown into contact with a race of
human beings who are, to all intents and purposes in their Stone
Age. I may say, however, that not one single argument has yet
been advanced which will give a definite and decided proof as to
the age of the stone or bronze period; when we ask for facts we
get inference, and that not of a very philosophical kind.
Turn we now to other evidence. All along the Danish coast
mounds may be seen, consisting chiefly of thousands of castaway
shells of the oyster, cockle and other mollusca, mixed up with the
bones of various quadrupeds, birds and fish. Scattered all through
them are flint knives, hatchets and other instruments of stone,
horn, wood and bone, with fragments of coarse pottery. The stone
implements are less rude than those found in the peat, and there are
never any metal tools among them. Such mounds are three or four
feet high, at times, 1000 feet long and 150 feet wide. Similar
refuse heaps are found in America, and I myself, have seen one in
Australia, but certainly, not of very great antiquity. There are two
reasons for concluding that those found in Denmark are very old.
First, the relative position of land and sea has slightly altered since
they were used by man, but even geologists admit that the evidence
here is not conclusive. Secondly, the shells found in the refuse-
heaps are of a size only found in salt water, whereas the waters of
the Baltic are now nearly always brackish, except during a preva-
lence of gales, which drive in the waters of the sea ; so, that with
regard to these ? shell middens,? as they are called, the whole ques-
tion depends upon whether the shells came from the Baltic before
it was brackish, and if so whether the evidence of such an amount
of upheaval proves immense antiquity.
In the first place I must state, that I do not think these oysters and
scallop shells come from the Baltic at all. It is not hard to suppose
that, when such fish were not to be found in the brackish waters,
the savages would go to a distance for them. And this seems to be
the true explanation of the case, because the mounds are found close
to the edge of the sea, and yet there are places on the Swedish
coast where the peculiar brackish water shells of the Baltic
are found 400 feet above the ocean level. Besides this, geological
research has proved beyond doubt that the Baltic has
preserved its insulated character during a very long series of


geological changes, even when the Swedish peninsula was no more
than a narrow strip of land, and the whole of the east coast, as
evidenced by fossil remains, was submerged. In the most remote
periods oysters and scallops are rare as Baltic fossils. I think we,
after this, should have no difficulty in supposing that those found in
the shell-middens come from the North Sea. But, admitting that
they did come from the Baltic, are we obliged to suppose such a
great antiquity? Not at all. If there is one thing more than
another which geologists must admit, it is the uncertainty of the
rate at which upheaval may take place. I know that the Baltic is
appealed to as a place where the ascertained rise is said to be about
40 inches in a century; but the data for this calculation have only
been collected within the last fifty years. If they were true, the
monastery on the Island of Monkholm, which was built in 1028, must
have been constructed on a rock nearly a fathom under water. But
the fact is that the whole theory is based on an erroneous assump-
tion. Just like saying (as a writer in the Edinburgh Review wittily
remarks) that as A B grew half-an-inch within the last twelve
months, and being now six feet high, he must be 144 years old.
I have now done with the shell-middens, and nothing has been
omitted which can be urged in favour of their immense antiquity.
Lyell certainly says that Denmark is covered with beech trees, and
was so covered 18 centuries ago, and that as only a few such trees
occur in the peat bogs, therefore the features of the country were
entirely different. Supposing we adopt these conclusions, it is yet
debateable in how short a time such a change might be effected.
Skulls also are found in the heaps, with a strong family likeness to
the skull of a modern Laplander.
I pass on now to the lake-dwellings. In most of the Swiss lakes
at a depth of from 5 to 15 feet of water, wooden piles are observed
fixed in the mud, and sometimes worn down level with the surface.
These have evidently supported villages of some unknown people.
Ihey were apparently unacquainted with metals, or more properly
had few metal implements, and took great care of them, for very
few are found in the lakes, while hundreds of stone weapons have
been dredged up from the mud around. Their habitations were
constructed on platforms raised above the lake, resting on piles, and
connected with the shore by a narrow causeway. These very inter-
esting remains would well deserve a lengthened notice, but they
unfortunately have not much to do with our present object.
In the first place, we have pretty authentic historical evidence that
such lake habitations were common in Europe little more that 2000
years ago. It is remarkable that in all the lakes of Eastern Switzer-
land stone implements are found and no others, whereas in the lakes
of Western and Central Switzerland bronze implements are found in
immense numbers. These of course are referred to different periods
y antiquarians, but it certainly seems much more like the remains


of two tribes contemporaneous with each other and differing in their
habits. It might be, also, that as they moved to the eastwards they
became further removed from the sources of metals?thus were
obliged to content themselves with stone implements?and thus the
stone period is more modern. It is also remarkable that some of
the stone instruments are formed of a mineral which must have
come from Asia. In some few lakes as well as in forests and battle-
fields in Switzerland, there is a mixture of bronze and iron imple-
ments together with Greek coins and medals struck at Marseilles.
In the face of this fact it is somewhat puzzling to find an antiquity
of over six thousand years claimed for the Swiss lake dwellings.
Marseilles was founded as a colony by the Phocians, and these
people came from within 200 miles of the country where at that
time, according to Herodotus, large lake villages existed. Would it
be very unreasonable to suppose that some of the Swiss lakes were
colonised by Paonians shortly after the arrival of the Greeks at
Marseilles. If this is considered improbable, let it be borne in mind
that Australia is scarcely 70 years colonised, and though now so
extensively settled, scarcely numbers a million of inhabitants. It is
argued, however, that the stone period must have lasted a long time,
because of the great diversity between the implements found. Some
are of the rudest and simplest manufacture, and these are considered
to be of the most ancient, and others are of the most delicate finish,
and such perfection must have taken ages to have arrived at. But
let me modestly protest against this reasoning. It is taking rather
too much for granted, and arguing in a circle. We cannot be sure
that the specimens do not belong to the same period, nay, may not
have belonged to the same family. We know that savages do not
improve in their manufacture, nor can any one show the slightest
improvement since the manufacture of the oldest boomerang or
spear on this continent. On the other hand, lam sure I could
show in the hut of any black fellow the greatest difference between
the skill of two savages, in making their weapons. Then
as to the argument?they prove that the rough weapons are the
most ancient, because they are the most rude; and they account
for their rudeness by their antiquity, I admit to you that
geologists are of opinion that the bronze age must have extended
over a long period of time, not only because of the state of the
relics, but from their multitude ; and the same reasoning they extend
to the lake villages, but it is not exactly correct to state that an
immense quantity of such remains are found. The quantity if amassed
together would be really inconsiderable ; and, let me add, that even
if they were very numerous, the conclusion as to the time is, I
venture to suggest, considerably beyond the requirements of the
case.
I pass over a great many other facts, which might be treated in
a more convincing manner than those which I have brought before


you. Of course Ido not pretend to give a complete answer to every
fact, to do so would require a very large volume, and not a lecture ;
yet if I do not it must not be imagined that it is impossible or even
difficult to answer them. If in the case of the striking proofs of
man?s antiquity the difficulty disappears, it will easily do so in the
others. I intend, therefore, only to allude to the Indian mounds in
North America. These are of immense size, and show the Indian
to have once lived in cities. The relics of pottery, &c., found on
the mounds, is a proof also that they were better acquainted with
the arts of civilisation than they are now. The question of
antiquity rests upon the fact that there are trees 800 years old on
some of them, and the probability that other trees of equal age have
preceded these. In one case a river has advanced on to the bank of
the mound, and then receded.
Not to delay, I may mention that some antiquaries are of opinion
these cities may have flourished about 2000 years ago. This period
would be quite sufficient, in the opinion of very able men, to
account for all the appearances of antiquity. To speak of
them, therefore, as being 8000 or 10,000 years old is, to
those who judge from the fact without being committed to
any theory, very perplexing. In the same way must we
treat that instance given by Mr; Dowler of the human
remains buried underneath four forests super-imposed upon another.
In the first place, the evidence of the four forests is of the most
doubtful kind, and could not, as far as I am aware, be reconciled
with other appearances of upheaval on the banks of the river ; but
if they were, another and much more probable explanation can be
found. The banks of the Mississippi are formed of a loose alluvial
deposit which has been deposited by the river in the shape of fine
mud. It is of a loose and open texture, so that there are places
where the rains, sometimes in the short space of a few years, cut
down immense chasms and remove thousands of tons of earth.
Again, the river brings down trees and roots in such number that
islands of drift timber are constantly forming. One of the most
interesting features of this river, says Sir C. Lyell, is the frequent
formation of what are termed rafts, or masses of floating trees, which
have been arrested in their progress by snags and logs, and some-
times stretch from one side of the river to the other. The raft of
the Atchalfalaya collected in about thirty-eight years, previous to
1816, and formed a continuous island no less than two miles long
and eight feet deep. The whole rose and fell with the water, yet
was covered with bushes and trees, and its surface enlivened in
the autumn by a variety of beautiful flowers. It went on increasing
until about 1835, when some of the trees upon it had grown to a
height of sixty feet. Steps were taken by the State of Louisiana
to clear the navigation, and this was only effected in the space of
four years. Now, let us suppose that in the year 1777, i.e., a year


before the island commenced to form, that a boat was upset and the
bodies of some men sunk in that spot; and suppose, further, that
the island increased so much at length that it obstructed the channel
altogether. Now, what w T ould be the result 1 The banks of the
Mississippi are higher than the country around, and the pent-up
waters would soon seek another bed. In all probability they would
force an exit just beside the island, and leave a section of it exposed
like a cliff. What should we see 1 A deposit of trees many feet
thick, impressed in thick succession. Above all would be a dense
growth of brushwood and flowers, amid which graceful trees shoot
up high into the air. How we should wonder at the immense
operations of nature, and well we might. How some would speculate
on the immense lapse of time which it took to form such a bed.
Look, they would say, on those trees, one above another. Count
their rings. Why, that thick one with knotted bark is one thousand
years old at least ; and not only must we allow for the age of that
tree, but think how long it must have taken for it to decay. How
long before it fell to the ground. And here, mark, it is not a question
of one, but several placed one above another, and then, above all, a
surface soil and trees more than sixty feet high growing over it.
But what is this 1 In the midst of our speculations we find a jaw
bone of one of the unfortunate boat?s crew. Here man existed, they
say, ages and ages ago. We don?t like to ask how long ago, for the
case looks strong, and we would willingly leave ourselves in the pos-
session of a belief which will be a great comfort to us one day, no
matter how scientific we are, and whose absence causes a desolate void
in man?s heart; for, alas ! even geologists are but human. But the
conclusions are forced upon us. Pointing to the mass of trees, and
taking his stand upon their immense stumps, one more bold holds
forth on this jaw bone, and knocks down centuries with it. Ten
thousand years, he says, are not sufficient for the succession of events
before man came into the world. We timidly venture to suggest six
as chiming in with other facts in other parts of the world, and we
are laughed to scorn, taunted with evading facts and twisting
arguments for the sake of bolstering up an effete moral philosophy.
Well, we are both in the wrong it seems. The wisdom of men is
folly in the sight of God, and there is no one to tell us that the
period of 6,000 years is almost as preposterous as 10,000 ; for the
deposit was formed less than 100 years ago.
I come now to a very important class of facts, which will
require a more detailed consideration, not only because of their
interest, but because they have been the starting points of
all that has been lately said upon the subject of man?s antiquity.
I allude to the borings in the Nile and the flint implements.
First as to the Nile. A series of borings were commenced, at
the suggestion of the English Government, across the valley of
the Nile. Fifty-one pits were sunk near Heliopolis, where the


valley is sixteen miles wide. Twenty-seven were sunk near Memphis,
where the width is only five. For the first sixteen or twenty-four
feet the pits were large, and many entire articles were picked up, such
as jars, vases, pots, a small human figure in burnt clay, and a copper
knife. After the depth above-mentioned only a small bore could be
used, because of the water, and then only fragments of brick and
pottery could be obtained ) but these were found wherever
a hole was dug.
Now two things are concluded from these remains, and these are,
that the depth at which the relics were found was the bottom of the
river when they were deposited ; and secondly, that at the rate at
which the Nile deposits mud it must have taken at least 12,000 years
to cover them to such a depth. But I need hardly tell you that solid
objects will sink in mud, and that they are especially liable to do so
in the loose light mud of the Nile; more so in that river than others,
because of its periodical inundation. I trust I need not explain the
why in such a plain matter, but you may ask, is there any limit to
which they may sink 1 In ordinary cases the limit would be where
the weight of the object would be insufficient to break through the
compactness of the mud. Supposing the force of the current and
the depth of the water to keep the sediment in a loose and oozy
state, an object might sink to a very great depth; and every five feet
of mud which it penetrated would take from the calculations of the
geologist 1000 years. So that, even supposing the rate of increase
of the Nile mud to be six inches in a century, nothing would be
concluded from finding objects at the very bottom of it. They might
have been thrown there a year or two ago.
Now I think you will agree with me that with this simple
explanation the art relics found in the Nile now do not wear such a
serious aspect. The borings were made by Egyptians, without the
superintendence of a European ; and I am perfectly willing to
accept the fact without remonstrance or allusion to the duplicity of
the African character ; but I say that really these relics must not be
urged as proofs of immense antiquity, even supposing that rate of
deposition to be as much or as little as six inches in a century. But
such a calculation, let me tell you, is entirely adverse to facts. Mr,
Horner, the author of one of the most eminent geological works, a
favorer of Lyell?s doctrines, says that no certain calculations can be
made with the faintest approach to accuracy as to the rate at which
the Nile deposits mud. In places it may not be a quarter of an
inch, and others it may be several feet. To say, therefore, that the
bed was filling up at the rate of six inches in a century, and form
a calculation therefrom, is doing more violence to our convictions
than any inference which has been advanced in connection with this
subject.
I pass on to a more important matter, one to which the origin of
the whole controversy may be ascribed. I refer to the flint imple-


merits. The facts are these ; In the gravel pits which abound near
the town of Abbeville flint implements, more or less rude, but
apparently fashioned by human hands, were found at a great depth
below the surface of the soil. The manner in which they occurred
left no doubt that they were really a part of the deposit, and in
considerable quantity; for when the first was dug up and shown
to the workmen they said they had seen many like them before.
The deposit is an alluvium or gravel, containing many bones
of extinct mammalia. So, when the discovery was fairly established,
which it was not until after many years of patient investigation on
one side and apathetic neglect on another, it became a matter of
considerable probability, that the human beings who had fashioned
these implements were contemporaneous with many extinct animals
of which there is at present no human record. And it was not
alone at Abbeville that such remains were found. They have been
discovered in England, but not so extensively as at Abbeville ; and
there are other places in France and Germany where the same flint
implements occur under different circumstances. I need not
particularise all the cases. The matter has been for some time
before the public, and I am sure there are few of those who hear
me now who have not seen something about the digging up of these
wonderful flint axes. Well, then, not to lose time, I suppose you
see the force of the objection which they give rise to. Here are
human remains associated with those of extinct animals ; therefore
they must have existed together. Moreover, the peculiar nature of
the deposit shows that the remains must have been entombed a very
long time ago, for the gravel lies the lowest of the formations of the
valley, and is covered in places by a deposit of peat thirty feet
thick. It is covered above also by a kind of brick earth, and
composed of angular or slightly worn flints. The river, too, cuts
down through the centre of all the beds, and, according to appear-
ances, the gravel once extended right across the valley from side to
side. Now the periods of time which must have elapsed are as
follows : ?First, the flint gravel became deposited by the wearing
down of the chalk strata into the wide valley, about two miles across.
Secondly, while these beds were forming animal remains became
entombed, and, with them, human implements. Then a peat bog
grew in the valley, until it was thirty feet deep, and, last of all,
the river began to flow and cut through all the beds in succession,
until it came to be what we see it now. On the whole, then, says
the writer of a clever article on the subject in the Edinburgh Review ,
considerable changes must have taken place since these deposits
occurred. In the first place the little river which now flows through
the valley would never have hollowed it out a width of two miles,
neither could it possibly have carried down the chalk flints and
deposited them in regular strata in the bottom of the valley, as they
are now found. Therefore, at the very outset, we must suppose it to


have taken an immense time to form, and the mode by which the
beds have been deposited is entirely concealed from us. One author
has suggested that the valley must have been filled by a glacier;
and another, one of the most eminent geologists of France, M. Elie
de Beaumont, says that the beds are chiefly composed of washed
soil, deposited on the flanks of the valley by excessive falls of rain,
and that the age of the deposit was analogous to that of the peat
moss and Swiss lake habitations. Under this view, you perceive
M. de Beaumont would not necessarily regard the animals as
contemporaneous with man. The bones might have lain exposed
on the sides and surface of the cliffs for hundreds of years, and the
flint implements may merely be the washed-down relics of savages
who came to this place to form from the flints in the strata,
weapons of the necessary shape for their wants. At any rate, the
immense antiquity is fast melting away under investigation. Ido
not say that M. E. de Beaumont is right, and, if he were, that
would only account for a very small portion of the implements.
But I do say that we are justified in withholding our consent from
any theory as to the origin of these strange relics, and that, as yet,
whatever evidence has been offered is entirely unconnected with the
claims of the school of Lyell. And if any other proof were wanting,
it has been furnished lately by the discovery of a human jaw amid
the other remains. At first it was treated as a forgery, for I must
caution you that there is more than a strong suspicion of
tampering with these beds.* I believe it is now proved that
more than half of the flint implements exposed have been
clever impositions. But, in the case of the bone, I do
not think there was any imposition. For many precautions
were taken, a committee of savans was sent from Paris and another
from London to investigate the matter, and they were unanimous as
to the genuineness of the relic. But mark one important result.
Two of the French gentlemen declined to commit themselves to any
statement as to the age, while the eminent English physicians, Drs.
Falconer and Busk, stated some doubts they had as to the age of
the jaw. It was then sawn across, and displayed an amount of
freshness inconsistent in their opinion with its being coeval with
the remains of the extinct quadrupeds, so that this monstrous diffi-
culty about the flint instruments is growing a good deal smaller as
investigations proceed. But I have not done with the question
yet, I wish to dwell a little longer upon the nature and forces
which may have produced the valley of the Somme. I wish to
* Mr. Prestwick, in a foot note to a valuable paper on the flint implements,
read before the Geological Society, June 3, 1863, pronounces his deliberate
opinion that very extensive fraud had been practised in the pretended
finding of these relics. Mr. Prestwich was one of the committee of savans
first appointed by the Royal Society to enquire into the matter, and enter-
tained very different opinions some short time since.


show you that, so far from being able to account for these, geology
does with candour profess its inability to deal with these questions,
because of the ignorance of a great many of the vast powers
developed in the earth?s former history. But I shall speak of this
better, when I have treated of the objections brought about the
remains in caves. You are aware that, in England, France, Ger-
many, America and Australia, wherever caves are found, bones are
also found in them. This is due to a good many causes. In the
first place, a good number of these caves are mere open fissures or
cracks, through which surface drainage might enter and carry to the
bottom, not only loam and earth, but also bones, or any objects
found upon the surface. Others, are caves which have been used
by animals as dens, or places of refuge, and then the bones have
been left either by the successive inhabitants, or the prey which they
dragged in to devour. Other caves have been used as residences by
human beings, and even places of sepulture. The bones in that
case are of the most-modern origin. Some way or other, however,
caves which have been any length of time exposed, have become
filled up with bones, some of great antiquity, and some of much
more recent date, and not only caves which have been exposed, but
others as well which time and various changes in the strata have
completely covered in. Thus, in quarrying amid limestone rocks,
it is not at all unusual to break into an opening bridged over by a
stalactite, or some other obstruction. These caves contain bones 3as
already stated,' they belonged to animals living at various dates,
and, as human remains have been found among them, together with
human implements, this has been taken as another argument to
prove the antiquity of the human race. But only lately, for it
must be understood that the same facts received a very different
interpretation up to a recent period. Human remains have long
been famous as associated with those of extinct animals, but it was
always believed that there was evidence sufficient to prove them
widely distinct in point of time. This was Dr. Buckland?s opinion to
the last, and Sir Charles Lyell himself stated, that he did not
believe that they afforded any evidence of man?s antiquity. He has
now altered his opinion, and the reason given is this, ? That of late
years we j have obtained proofs, that the mammoth and other
extinct species which occur in caves occur also in alluvium, imbedded
also with relics of human art.? So that you perceive Sir Charles
Lyell altered his opinion because of the flint instruments in the drift,
for that is the only instance in which I am aware that the mammoth
remains occur as he describes. Here, then, the conclusion must
stand or fall by that arrived at in the case of the flint instruments.
A high French authority says that the two remains may not be con-
temporaneous, therefore the old arguments which convinced Lyell
and Buckland still have their full force. But it may be urged that
further evidence has been obtained. An instance particularly relied


on is, that human remains were once found underneath the skeleton
of a cave bear. The bones were in such a position that it seemed
nearly certain that at least the leg of the animal had been drifted
into the cave in an almost undecomposed state. I confess Ido not
see the force of this instance. If it had been the whole skeleton, the
argument might be entitled to some weight; but how the leg became
detached from the body I cannot conceive, if it had been almost un-
decomposed. Besides, there are so many other ways of accounting
for such an appearance. I know from my own observation that
decomposition goes on very slowly in caverns, for I have witnessed
it in the body of a native in the caves at Mosquito Plains. In that
place the ligaments would have remained, I am convinced, for ages.
They appear to have done so in the case of the natives entombed
in the caves of South America, Amongst a hundred other explana-
tions I take this as good and reasonable in the instance referred to.
Suppose an unfortunate cave bear to have met with his death while
his leg was jammed in a cleft of limestone leading down to the
cave. In the course of time decomposition sets in, and the bones
are stratified in the bottom of the cave except the leg, which holds
fast in the position of its first fixture. Ages roll on until the human
period arrives, and then the remains of man become washed down
among the others. The same force of water which broke into human
sepulchres might also dig up mammoth remains from the drift.
Last of all an extraordinary flood takes down the leg of our cave
bear. Ido not say this is the only explanation, but it is one of many
which may be offered, while it does not violate the limits of reason-
able probability; and as I offer this explanation, I may draw your
attention to an instance which I will now relate to you. In 1852,
a workman employed in repairing the roads at Aurignac (a town
near the foot of the Pyrenees), observed a hole used as a burrow by
rabbits. On reaching as far as the length of his arm, he drew out
to his surprise one of the long bones of the human skeleton. His
curiosity being excited, he dug a trench, and found a cave closed up
by a heavy slab of rock. It was almost filled with bones. The
people of Aurignac, astonished to hear of the occurrence of so
many human relics in so lonely a spot, flocked to the cave, and
Dr. Amiel, the mayor, ordered the bones to be taken and re-
interred in the parish cemetery; but before this was done, having
as a medical man a knowledge of anatomy, he ascertained by
counting the homologous bones, that they must have formed parts
of no less than 17 skeletons of all sexes and ages j some so young
that the ossification of the bones was incomplete. Unfortunately,
the bones have since been lost sight of. M. Lartet, an eminent
French anatomist and geologist, examined the cave minutely. He
found outside the grotto a sloping layer of ashes and charcoal, about
seven inches thick. In it were an immense number of bones and
implements. Amongst the latter were 100 flint articles, knives, pro-


jectiles, sling stones, and chips. Among the bone instruments were
arrows without barbs, and other tools of reindeer horn. Scattered
through the same ashes and earth were bones of cave bears, brown
bears (still existing), badgers, polecats, hyenas, wolves, foxes, an
elephant, one rhinoceros, horses, asses, pigs, buffaloes, and others too
numerous to mention.
The bones of the grass-feeding animals were the most numerous,
and they appeared to have been split open either to obtain the mar-
row, or else gnawed and bitten by the beast of prey. I cannot share
the opinions of those who say, that there was positive proof that the
bones had been gnawed or scraped, as if by human beings. When
we know the changes to which these remains are subject, it seems to
me somewhat unreasonable to take such appearances as proofs that
these extinct animals were contemporaneous with man.
If this cave proves anything, it is that some of these extinct ani-
mals were in existence at a much more recent period than we
imagine. The explanation I take to be simply this : the cave had
been used by wild animals, probably hyenas, who had brought the
herbivorous animals there to feed upon. Long subsequently it was
used as a place of sepulture by human beings, who scraped out the
animal remains, and then closed the den by a slab. I consider the
closing of the door of the grotto as rather strong proof that it was
never used more than as a place of interment during the human
period. You see from this instance how different persons may, from
the same facts, arrive at entirely different conclusions.
The cave at Aurignac has been regarded by antiquarians as very
strong evidence that the human race dated back into the most
remote and absurdly distant periods. My opinion is just the reverse ;
and though there is an equal weight of fact on both sides, I have all
history and the whole traditions of the human race to back me out.
And observe, I do not violate any fact, or stretch the evidence to
support my view. Even supposing that we admit the claims of all
the antiquarians, they cannot give us a circumstance nor a clue
which would guide us to form an idea of the age of the Aurignac
relics. They cannot tell us to what age flint implements belong, or
when, from the appearance of the implements, they have been made.
They cannot be sure that the cemetery was not finished 2000 or 3000
years ago. The only fact upon which they build is the association
of the bones of extinct animals, and this I have shown is far from
being satisfactory. But it may be urged there is a more convincing
evidence than this. In Auvergne there were numbers of extinct
volcanoes, which have not been known to be in activity within
historic periods; and underneath the lavas of the most recent
eruptions a human skeleton has been found. In the same deposit,
but not in the same place, have been found the bones of the hyena
and the hippopotamus. Now, it is argued that man must have been


contemporaneous with these two animals at least, for they were both
by .eruption at the same time. In the first place,
h ? de *\ th  genuineness of the human remains, for this has
been denied by far abler men than myself. But I should be sorry
to evade the argument in that manner. I will at once admit its
genuineness, and proceed to explain its association with the extinct
animals as quite compatible with the assumption that they were not
brot e en P r ne r- the firSt Place Volcano in question has
brolcen through certain tertiary rocks in the course of its eruption,
and it is not at all uncommon to find fossils from those beds or the
lava totally unchanged?blown up, as it were, by the eruption and
deposited there. It is admitted that the eruption is recent and
anTfwtb IS l not di ? CU , lt t0 3u PP ose that man existed at the time,
f d tliat tb. e bones of the other animals were derived from other
/ hIS I s one explanation, not a very improbable one. as I can
testify from having had an opportunity of examining the country
where the remains are said to have been found. But is it so very
different to reconcile the existence of man and the extinct hippopo-
tamus and hyena at no distant period? Not at all. Let it be
remembered that there are two classes of extinct animals. There are
the very ancient ones the Elephas meridionalis, Hippopotamus major,
Rlnnocerus megatherium, and fourteen of the genus antelope
wS a flint rSe, i X ? Sta ?? goa l tlger ? noneof which are found associated
? mentS -! i Pley occur onl y in tke old drifts, and are
* pposed to have completely passed away before the advent of man.
, 18 very u ? cessar y. to make this distinction. Many think that
because man s remains have been found in connection with some
extinct animals, that therefore he is asserted by eminent geologists to
have been contemporaneous with all those found in the drift. But
ey assert nothing of the kind. Human remains are found only in
modern dnfts >. and these contain very different animals
?f./ 111 , h  anClCnt  neS ? The modern animals are ?one
elephant (Mephas pnmigemus), one hippopotamus, one rhinoceros
(n Innocents tichormus) , one horse (Equis fossilis) , one bull (Bos
pnmigemus), two deer, a wild cat, a hyena and a bear, the later, how-
ever, not being found among the drift implements. Out of all these
animals there is only one of which there is any record, and that is the
Bos pnmigemus, or extinct buffalo; but I do not think it at all
unreasonable to say that every one of them may have become extinct
within the last three thousand years. It is true that we have no
record of them, but we have no historical record of a great many
things which we know to have existed. We have no historical record
of the discovery of Australia. We have no historical record of the
founders of the ancient cities whose magnificent ruin now gives such
splendid and mysterious charm to Central America.
And, mark, it is only by the merest accident that we have


any record of the buffalo. Caesar in his history speaks of it,
and it is urged against ns that if there had been elephants and
mammoths, and hippopotami, he would have mentioned them too.
But it does not at all follow. Caesar did not see everything, neither
did he write down everything. He did not intend to give a complete
natural history of Northern Europe ; and even if he did, he was not
in a position to give a complete catalogue. In the course of his wars
he would only go to the inhabited parts, and those were not the
places in which to see the wild beasts of the country. Besides, we
may admit that these animals were extinct then, and still have been
contemporaneous with man. The buffalo survived long after Cresar?s
time, and yet is extinct now. In fact, the more we look into the
matter, the more we shall be convinced that if the recent discoveries
prove anything, they only prove that man is found to have existed
along with a great many animals which are now extinct. I know
there is collateral evidence, but this proves nothing. Take, for
instance, the extinct volcanoes of Auvergne. There it is said there
are volcanoes of which there is no record of any activity within
historic periods; in fact, we have evidence that they were
much in the same state at the time of the Romans as they are now,
and if they have changed so little from those times to the present
day, the last outburst of the craters must date back into the most re-
mote antiquity. Yet, we have an instance of human remains and ex-
tinct animals buried under the ashes. And it happens, very fortu-
nately for the argument, that Strabo and Pliny, writing of geography
and natural history, mention nothing of the craters of Auvergne, and
if they had been burning mountains then, such phenomena would
hardly have escaped mention. But neither Strabo nor Pliny include
Vesuvius in the list of active volcanoes, because at that time the
crater was in a state of tranquility, and the interior was overgrown
with wild vines. Vesuvius, however, became active subsequently,
and so it may have happened here. So it did happen in the case of
the volcanoes of the Vivarrais, a series of craters visible from the moun-
tains of Auvergne, because I find that the author of an article on the
Norman Conquest, in the Quarterly Review for October, 1844, cites
two passages in proof of it. The first, Sidonius Appolinaris, writing
in the fifth Century after Christ, says, that in his time earthquakes
demolished the walls of Vienne, when the mountains opened and
vomited forth torrents of inflamed materials, and when the wild
beasts, driven from the woods by fire and terror, retired into the
towns, where they made great ravages. I draw your attention to the
wild beasts mentioned, which I consider a significant and important
fact, for, unless we concede the existence of some of the extinct ani-
mals, I cannot conceive any others which would be likely to commit
great ravages. Sidonius goes on to speak of the mountains being
burned in ashes, showing that some very destructive eruptions must


have taken place at that time. Neither is he the only author. There
is another passage, from the person to whom Sidonius?s epistle was
directed, in which immense fires, earthquakes, explosions, and fiery
hail are spoken of. St. Gregory of Tours also speaks of a great
earthquake which shook the Bay of Auvergne, in the sixth century.
-Now, from all these testimonies, it is very certain that volcanic tracts
of country were in activity within very recent times, and so far from
dating back into the most remote antiquity, nothing can prevent
our seeing that these mountains tell very much against the calcula-
tions of Sir Charles Lyell. But, it is said that, the evidence from
the volcanoes is far from being all that is relied upon. Take for
instance, the changes which have occurred to the strata since 5 the
human remains were deposited in them. Some have been upheaved
to a considerable height above the level of the sea. Places are
shown, where rivers have cut down deep channels in their beds
since the flint implements became untouched. Large valleys have
been torn asunder, and, altogether, great changes have taken place
m the configuration of the land. And, what are we to conclude
1-?) , ' simply, these causes have been in operation,
which are far from reconcileable with immense antiquity, as they
manifest violent and sudden convulsions in nature which must have
been accomplished in a very short space of time. For, you must
know that, within a very recent period, a very great change has
taken place in the opinions of geologists with regard to the manner
in which changes are effected on the earth?s surface. It used to be
the fashion to refer everything to a great series of operations, such
as we see going on around us at the present day. Thus it was
supposed that upheaval went on at a very slow rate, because no-
thing very rapid was observed now. Six inches in a cen-
tury was _ thought _ very rapid, and every other change was
explained in a similar w r ay, because it was believed that we had
no right to explain an effect by unknown causes, or attribute them
to changes of which we saw no instance. But there were also very
considerable difficulties in the way ; because there were many things
which could not be explained by anything we saw going on around
us now. Granite, for instance, is a substance of whose origin we
know nothing, and yet most of the mountain ranges of the world
have been formed by the pushing up of masses of granite through
the superincumbent strata, and all the experiences of naturalists, amid
all the changes which have been recorded, nothing like to the push-
es up of a hill of granite has ever been observed. Other difficulties
of a similar kind were found, which were all quite averse to the
umforraitarian theory, as it is called. There are many rivers flowing
through valleys, whose beds, were they many times larger, would be
perfectly inadequate to have scooped out a valley one quarter the
size. The valley of the Somme, where the flint implements are


found, is a case in point, and geologists have come to the conclusion
that changes must have been more rapid in former times, and that
causes have been in operation which we cannot explain by any facts
now at our disposal. If this be the case, no argument in favour of
antiquity can be founded upon the mere face of change.
Many operations, which in the present quiet state of the earth are
inexplicable, probably have been due to causes not now in activity,
which may have effected in hours what now take years to accom-
plish. Upheaval is one of them. Sir Charles Lyell adduces in-
stances out of number where upheaval has gone on so irregularly,
that while some parts of the strata have been raised several feet,
other portions have been quite still. Again, many eminent geologists
are of opinion that the cold of which there is evidence during the
glacial period could not have been due to any possible disposition
of land or climate, as far as our present knowledge of the earth goes.
So from all these facts and a great many more, which time alone
prevents me from adducing, we may gather that the theory as to the
slow rate of upheaval is any thing but clearly established,
I may add, also, that in one respect it is positively contradicted.
Those who refer all changes to the earth?s surface to the slow cooling of
the centre are at variance with astronomers. They assume that the
earth?s crust has continued comparatively thin during the whole series
of geological mutations, and this view is not in accordance with con-
clusions derived from the precession of the equinoxes. Geologists are
also at variance with natural philosophers on the same subject.
Professor Tyndall, in his lecture on Heat, points out that in the
hypothesis of a central nucleus of fused matter, the laws for the
cooling of heated bodies do not correspond with the present state
of the earth?s surface.
But with this instance I must close my lecture. lam conscious
that I have exceeded the limits of the time allotted me, but I trust I
have not equally exceeded the limits of your patience. What I have
said I believe has achieved the object I proposed to myself. I did
not wish to disprove or deny anything alleged as a new discovery,
but only to show that the facts were quite open to two interpreta-
tions, both, as far as mere inference goes, equally probable, but one
more consonant with the traditions of the human race. No one has
the hardihood to deny the value, the force, or the certainty of
true science. We might as well deny our own existence. But
we are most unphilosophical if we give to every conclusion of
scientific men the deference and the weight which we give to
truth. The latter is a harmonious whole, not one portion of
which will be found to clash with another. The very fact that
some modern inferences tend to clash with all that the human
race has considered hitherto as unshaken truth, shows that there
is something wrong somewhere. We can hardly think it is on


174985 8
our side when such an enormous amount of consistent history
and tradition is opposed to mere conjecture. Let us then read
our conclusions again, and see whether we can make them agree
better, for it would be ill for the cause of truth that we should
continue in error through reverence for a name. It will be a
sad disappointment indeed if the magnificent structure we call
the temple of knowledge, should owe its adornment to imagina-
tion, should be less permanent than the dazzling splendor of a
sunset cloud, and finally melt like a palace of snow.
3 1508 00074985 8
MASON AND FIRTH, PRINTERS, MELBOURNE,


NOW READY, by the Same Author,
AND MAY BE HAD OF H. T. DWIGHT.
GEOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS IN
SOUTH ATJSTBALIA.
Handsomely Illustrated , with Views and Catalogues
of Fossils.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
? Information and entertainment have seldom been so successfully and
agreeably blended.? ?Morning Post.
? Written with great spirit and precision.?? Edinburgh Review.
? A charming volume.?? Mining Journal.
?Elegantly classical in its style, and full of profound research.??
Morning Star.
?Accurate and abundant data, discussed in a careful philosophical
spirit. ? ? ? Parthenon.
?We can highly recommend this work.?? Argus.
?A forerunner of scientific productions, which will do more to elevate
us in the estimation of worthy men at home than any other agency at our
command. ? ? ? Herald.
? We know no book by an Australian writer which will bear comparison
with the work of Mr. Woods.?? Observer.
Price 14s,


.
.
?
?
?
*
,
.
?
