



From a Sketen, by the La J. M. Skipper, Esq.
GLENELG, HOLDFAST BAY, S. A., 1837


NOTABLE
SOUTH AUSTRALIANS;
OR,
Colonists—Past and Present.
BY
GEORGE E. LOTAU,
(AUTHOR OF “THE REPRESENTATIVE MEN OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA;” “TALES IN VERSE;
“AUSTRALASIAN SKETCHES AND REMINISCENCES;” “PERSONAL ADVENTURES;”
“HISTORY OF GAWLER;” ESSAYS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS,
ETC. ETC.)
Dedicated, by Permission,
TO
HIS EXCELLENCY SIR W. C. F. ROBINSON, K.C.M.G., F.R.G.S.
Published under the Author's own immediate Supervision .
Adelaide:
CAREY, PAGE & CO., PRINTERS, WAYMOUTH STREET,
MDCCCLXXXV,


Dedicated
BY PERMISSION TO
ji IS pXCELLENCY jSIR J/. fi. fi.fi.JA.fi
GOVERNOR OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
WITH EVERY TOKEN OF SINCERE RESPECT FOR
HIS MANY VIRTUES,
BY
HIS HUMBLE, BUT SINCERE WELL WISHER,
THE AUTHOR.


Copyright, 1885,
By GEOKGE E. LOYAU,
Author and Publisher,
Adelaide,
South Australia.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Allen, Capt. Thomas ... 182
Andrews, F. W. ... ... 51
Andrews, Walter Boyd Tate 18
Angus, Rev. John Hall ... 123
Anthony, Capt. Thos. ... 165
Appendix ... ... 287
Babbage, B. Herschel ... 85
Bacon, Lady Charlotte Mary 216
Bagot, John Tuthill ... 233
Bagot, Ulysses ... ... 116
Bagshaw, John Stokes ... 244
Bailey, John ... ... 62
Baker, Arthur John, J.P. ... 201
Baker, Rev. E. ... ... 78
Barclay, J. J. ... ... 140
Barrow, John, C.E. ... ... 215
Bartels, A. H. F., J.P. ... 172
Bayer, Frederick Charles, m.d. 228
Benson, Samuel ... ... 133
Bertram, Carl Julius ... 139
Bews, David, J.P., M.P. ... 260
Bickford, William ... 116
Black, William Edwin ... 39
Bonney, Charles ... ... 87
Bonwick, James, F.R.G.S. ... 68
Bonython, John Langdon ... 166
Boothby, Benjamin, C.E. ... 57
Boulger, E. Vaughan, M.A.,
D. Lit., ... ... 262
Bourband, Louis Edward ... 23
Bowden, Jacob ... ... 50
Brook, James ... ... 221
Brown, John Ednie, J.P.,
F.LS. 69
Bundey, William, Mayor of
Adelaide ... ... 251
Bundey, William Henry ... 14
Burford, William Henville 199
Burt, Adam George ... ... 275
Buttfield, James P. ... 129
Carlton, Mrs. Caroline ... 272
PAGE
Carson, Captain ... 187
Catlow, E. J. ... ... 68
Cliarnock, W. H. ... ... 88
Cliinner, William Bowen ... 99
Coglilan, Rev. Francis Robert,
B.A. 143
Compton, C. H. ... ... 56
Cook, H. J. 53
Cooke, William Ernest, B.A. 73
Cooke, William Robert Smith 40
Coombs, Yen. Canon W. H. 58
Contents ... ... ... v
Cotton, Hon. G. W., M.L.C. 102
Cross, Charles ... ... 179
Crozier, Hon. John, M.L.C. 154
Cunningham, William John 280
Daly, Dominick Core ... 271
Daniel, Rev. James ... ... 279
Davis, John ... ... 87
Davy, Edward, M.R.C.S. ... 113
Dawson, Henry ... ... 119
Day, Rev. E. G 142
Dedication ... ... ... hi
Denholm, William ... ... 205
Dickens, John ... ... 261
Dobbie, Alexander Williamson 117
Dodgson, Robert ... ... 273
Donaldson, Alexander ... 106
Driffield, Frederick Simeon
Cams ... ... 36
Duff, Capt. John Finlay ... 167
Duffield, Walter, M.L.C., J.P 31
Dumas, Victor ... ... 240
Duncan, Handasyde, M.D. ... 169
Dungey, Thomas ... ... 245
Dunn, Hon. John, M.L.C. ... 47
Edmunds, A. J,, S.M, ... 263
Ehmcke, Heinrich Wilhelm 274
Elliott, James, J.P. ... 49
Elliott, Joseph, J.P.... ... 49
Ellis, John ... ... 270


English, Hon. Thos. M.L.C. 1 101
Epilogue ... ... 288
Evans, Henry, J.P. ... ... 247
Ferguson, Capt. James Croker,
J. 194
Finke, William ... ... 264
Einlayson, Mrs. William ... 37
Fisher, Haniel, J.P. ... ... 63
Fiveash, William ... ... 37
Flood, John Wellesley, 8.A.,
M. 8., L.R,,C.5.1. ... 19
Forster, Hon. Anthony,M.L.C. 141
Forwood, Hr. Frederick ... 100
Fotheringham, Robert ... 223
Frankis, Hr. Benj. F. ... 46
Frame, John ... ... 115
Freelmg, Major-General Sir
Arthur Henry, B art., R.E. 80
Fullarton, William James ... 138
Gale, Thos. Friend ... ... 64
Gall, Havid ... ... 165
Galt, Peter ... ... 25
Gardiner, John ... ... 252
Gell, Harry Hickson, J.P .... 122
Gerrard, William ... ... 67
Gething, Hr. Robert ... 113
Gibson, John ... ... 264
Gilbert, Thomas ... ... 267
Gilbert, William, J.P., M.P. 79
Giles, Christopher, sen. ... 108
Gill, Reuben ... ... 61
Gilles, Lewis W. ... ... 27
Gliddon, Arthur Edward ... 251
Glynn, P. McM., 8.A., LL.B. 245
Goodchild, W. ... ... 180
Goode, Thos., sen,, J.P. ... 35
Gordon, Adam Lindsay ... 209
Gosse, Hr. Charles ... 11l
Gosse, Hr. W. ... ... 112
Grundy, F. jj. ... ... 145
Cunson, Hr. John Michael,
K. ... ... 16
Guy, Lieut. Michael Stewart,
R.N. 248
Haddy, Stephen ... ... 196
Hailes, Nathaniel ... ... 204
Hall, Hon. George, M.L.C 236
Hall, George Hubert .. 185
Hall, John Thomson ... 184
Hansen, J. C. ... ... 109
Hanson, William, M.1.C.F.... 280
PAGE
Hawker, Edward William ... 20
Heberlet, James William ... 149
Henning, Rudolph Willielm
Emil ... ... 33
Heydecke, Theodore... ... 229
Higginson, Rev. Henry ... 268
Hill, William, J.P. ... ... 188
Hill, Charles ... ... 124
Holden, James Alexander ... 191
Hope, Rev. Thomas ... ... 50
Hotham, Rev. J. ... ... 78
Howard, John ... ... 255
Howard, F., Commander,R.N. 265
Howell, John, J.P. ... ... 90
Hiihbe, Hr. Ulrich ... ... 156
Hutchinson, Capt. John, R.N. 249
Hutchinson, Young Bingham 223
Hutton, W. S. M 273
Hyndman, John Lloyd ... 142
Introductory ... ... 1
Ives, Joshua., Mus. Bac.,
Cambridge ... ... 230
Jagoe, Richard ... ... 106
Jamieson, Captain Alexander 255
Jemson, W. ... ... 198
Jenkinson, J. W., A.M.I.C.E. 114
Johnston, Captain George Bain 59
Jones, Rees ... ... 72
Jones, Thomas, J.P. ... 237
Jones, Thomas Henry ... 246
Joyce, Hr. John E. ... 177
Keen, Rev. Samuel ... ... 266
Reunion, the Right Rev. G.
W., H.H 217
Kestel, Ralph Wheatley
Odgers ... ... 125
Keynes, Joseph, J.P. ... 74
Kidner, S. ... ... 7l
Kither, William ... ... 110
Kleinschmidt, F. W., J.P. 53
Knox, W. R. ... ... 77
Lampard, Thomas ... ... 254
Lee, Richard Egan ... ... 66
Lencioni, Rev. M., R.C. ... 85
Lewis, J. W., J.P. ... ... 206
Lindsay, Havid ... ... 93
Linger, Herr ... ... 193
Linklater, Frederick Harvie 150
Linklater, James Munro, J.P. 231
Loyau, George E., A Bio-
graphical Note on ... 281


PAGE
Lyall, Rev. James ... ... 46
MacDermott, Marshall, J.P. 172
Maclaren, Rev. Peter ... 144
Maclntyre, Dr. Andrew ... 188
Martin, John ... ... 87
Maturin, William Henry, C. 8.,
D.A.C.G 75
Maughan, Rev, James ... 256
Maurice, Price ... ... 28
McDonald, John ... ... 222
McEwin, George, J.P. ... 134
McFarlane, Allan, M.P. ... 272
McKay, Captain George ... 203
McMinn, William ... ... 13
Mead, Rev. Silas ... ... 164
Meeks, Alfred William ... 197
Melville, Henry Dudley ... 31
Mellor, Joseph ... ... 143
Mespes, James ... ... 34
Mildred, Hiram, J.P. ... 126
Mildred, Hon. Henry, M.L.O. 70
Mitchell, John, J.P. ... 41
Moore, Dr. R. W., M.R.C.S. 78
Morehead, R. A. A. ... 72
Morier, Dr. J. W., J.P. ... 248
Morris, Charles Stocker ... 189
Mortlock, William Ranson ... 92
Muirhead, Henry McKinnon 76
Muirhead, Charles Mortimer,
J.P. 76
Murray, Hon. A. 8., M.L.C. 94
Kelson, Thomas ... ... 123
Korman, Linly ... ... 186
Kovice, William ... ... 161
Kowland, John ... ... 107
O’Donnell, Henry ... ... 178
O’Halloran, Capt. W. L. ... 104
Old Colonists’ Festival ... 8
Old Colonists’ Banquet ... 158
Oldham, W. ... ... 120
Ormerod, George, J.P. ... 259
Oughton, George ... ... 168
Page, James ... ... 108
Patchell, Rev. G. W., M.A. 65
Peterswald, W. J. ... ... 155
Phillipps, William Herbert 121
Pile, James, J.P. ... ... 145
Platts, Charles ... ... 259
Poole, Rev. F. Slaney, M.A. 19
Puttmann, Herr Carl ... 153
Randall, William ... 207
PAGE
Randall, David ... ... 274
Rankin, Oliver ... ... 186
Raphael, Samuel ... ... 269
Rees, Rowland, M.P. ... 181
Reid, Thomas Sadler ... 120
Reimers, Herr Christian ... 162
Reimann, Immanuel Gotthold 130
Rennie, Edward IT, D. Sc. 167
Robinson, Sir W. C. F. ... 3
Roberts, Joel ... ... 52
Rounsevell, W. ... ... 278
Sabine, Clement ... ... 26
Sawtell, Edwin ... ... 223
Schramm, J. F,, J.P. ... 279
Scott, E. 8., J.P 257
Scott, Henry James ... 220
Searle, Rev. Frederick ... 42
Sewell, Henry ... ... 213
Seymour, Henry, J.P. ... 253
Shepherdson, Johnßanks, S.M. 225
Sheridan, John, M.D. ... 277
Sheridan, Frances Keith ... 277
Simpson, Captain Henry ... 242
Skipper, Francis Amelia ... 9
Skipper, Mary ... ... 10
Skipper, Spencer John ... 152
Smith, H. J. ... ... 27
Smith, Captain J. W. ... 176
Smith, James Walter, LL.D. 136
Smith, Matthew, J.P. ... 229
Smyth, Very Rev. John ... 234
Solomon, Mrs. ... ... 276
Spence, Catherine Helen ... 30
Spietschka,William ... ... 279
Squarise, Signor Raphael ... 135
Squibb, W. R. ... ... 90
Stevens, John ... ... 256
Stilling, Joseph ... ... 89
Stocks, E. D. ... ... 74
Styles, George ... ... 110
Sweet, Samuel White ... 103
Syme, J. T, ... ... 190
Symonds, Francis, J.P. ... 189
Symonds, R. G. ... ... 258
Tanner, Charles ... ... 252
Thomas, Robert George ... 21
Thomas, Mary ... ... 65
Trapmann, C. W. F. ... 171
Turnbull, James T., J.P. ... 24
Turner, Richard James, S.M. 17
Twopeny, Archdeacon J. K. 187


PAGE
Underwood, Capt. Emanuel 271
Valentine, Charles J., J.P. ... 12
Varley, John, S.M 265
Walker, Dr. John, J.P. ... 270
Ward, Ebenezer, M.P. ... 83
Ware, Charles ... ... 179
Ware, William Lawes ... 236
Waterhouse, G. M. ... 50
Waterhouse, Thomas Greaves,
J.P. 129
Watsford, Rev. John ... 127
Watson, Archibald, M.D.,
F.R.C.S, Eng., ... 238
Watts, Alfred ... ... 11
Watts, Capt. John ... ... 269
Webb, Rev. Allan W. ... 81
PAGE
Whinham, John ... ... 43
Whinham, Robert ... ... 45
White, Samuel ... ... 232
Whitridge, William Oswald 39
Whitridge, W. W. R. ... 192
Wickes, Edward Walter ... 254
Wigley, James F. ... ... 41
Wilson, Rev. Percy ... 21
Wilson, Charles Algernon ... 54
Witherick, William ... 140
Woodcock, Yen. Archdeacon 175
Woods, Rev. J. C., B.A. ... 235
Woolley, J. M. ... ... 208
Wragge, Clement L., F.R.G.S. 95
Wyatt, George Duck ... 65
Ziliani, Faustino ... ... 240


Introductory.
F is generally admitted that prefaces to boohs are now out of
place , and recognising this , the author does not intend to
inflict on his patrons lengthy or superfluous remarks. The
title of the work indicates its objects , and preliminaries are
therefore dispensed with.
One by one the pioneers of South Australia pass away ,
and a few years hence there will be none remaining. Surely ,
then , some record of those who in their lives were instrumental
in forwarding the interests of this Colony is commendable !
As the biographies herein reached the author at irregular
intervals , it was found impossible to attempt any alphabetical
classification , and an index has been inserted to supply this
defect.
The author is indebted for much information to Messrs.
Hiram and Henry Mildred, B. T. Finniss, Holden,
SJ. Skipper, A. G. Burt, F. S. Driffield, J. Allen, and
other authorities on matters relative to the early days. He also
tenders his thanks to the proprietors of the “ S. A. Register ”
and “ Advertiser ” ivho courteously gave him access to their
files , thus enabling him to obtain correct data.
GEO. E. LOYAU.
Adelaide, September , 1885.
B


NOTABLE SOUTH AUSTRALIANS.
Sir Wm. Cleaver Francis Robinson, K.C.M.G.,
was appointed the Queen’s representative in South
Wv Australia, arrived in Adelaide on February 19 th,
1883. He is the fourth son of the late Admiral Hercules
Robinson, of Rosmead, County Westmeath, Ireland, and a
brother of that most popular of Australian Governors, Right
Hon. Sir Hercules Robinson, G.C.M.G. He first entered
official life in 1855 as Private Secretary to Sir Hercules
Robinson, then Governor of St. Kitts, and accepted the like
office at Hongkong on his brother’s removal to the Chinese
empire. Five years after, in 1862, he received the appoint-
ment of President of Montserrat, in the Antilles, and entered
upon his duties in that flourishing locality. At the close of
1865 he was made Administrator of the Government of
Dominica, and continued in that office for nine or ten months.
In 1866 he was appointed Governor of the Falkland Isles,
and in 1870 of Prince Edward’s Island, where he remained
three years, and at the end of his term of office was nomi-
nated C.M.G. In 1874 he was nominated to the govern-
ment of the Leeward Islands, but subsequently accepted
instead the Government of Western Australia. After suc-
cessful administration of affairs in that settlement, he went
to the Straits Settlements to succed Sir W. F. D. Jervois,
who had received directions to proceed to Australia and
report upon colonial fortifications. Before entering upon this
new sphere of duty he was created a K.C.M.G., and whilst
still Governor of the Straits Settlement, was entrusted with
b 2


a special mission to Bangkok, to invest the King of Siam with
the insignia of the order of G.C.M.G. For this service His
Siamese Majesty created him a Knight of the Grand Cross of
the Order of the Crown of his kingdom. Sir William returned
to Western Australia in 1880 as its Governor, and by his
progressive policy, good judgment, and high administrative
ability, speedily became a favourite with all classes. The
financial condition of the colony was then in a very depressed
state, complaints existed as to the public accounts, the audit
was in arrear, and there was a debt on current account of
£79,000. At the close of the session of 1881 it was gratify-
ing to find that the financial equilibrium had been restored,
without any stoppage of public works. At the close of the
session of 1882 the financial condition of Western Australia
had so much improved through the exertions of Sir Wm.
Robinson, that he was congratulated on all sides by the
colonists, and received a well-merited eulogy on his endeavours
from the Secretary of State, Lord Kimberley.
Sir William Jervois was, undoubtedly, an able Governor,
but his successor will, if I mistake not, ere his term of office
expires, win equally golden opinions. In these progressive
times Governors act a different part to that some were wont
to do in the early colonial days. The Governor now, like the
king, may justly claim the title of “Father of his people;’’
he no longer “ sits at home at ease,” revelling in a life of
indolence, and drawing his salary without showing something
in return. He goes hither and thither, interesting himself in
all pertaining to the welfare of the colony over which he
presides, evidencing by his presence, his counsel, and judicious
conduct a worthy example for many to follow. Since his
arrival, Sir William has not been idle; he has visited every-
thing of note in the metropolis and environs, whilst country
townships have been honoured with his presence, to the no
small satisfaction of the residents, who have in every instance
shown their appreciation of his coming in a marked degree.


It is gratifying to find that in a land like this, where little
encouragement has been offered to ait, and its companion
poetry, a patron and friend to these should arise in its
Governor. Being himself a composer of no mean order, he is
naturally attracted towards all that is beautiful and excellent
in the realm of art or song; and with this fact before us,
may we not hail it as an omen that a healthy feeling in
favour of what has an elevating and ennobling tendency will
now set in, and encouragement given to genius he more pro-
mising than heretofore ! Sir William Robinson’s best known
composition here is entitled “ Unfurl the Blag.” From the
time this song was first sung, and its accompaniment played
in the Town Hall (on the day His Excellency was sworn in),
it has been a favourite in many households, and invariably
given by vocalists in every town where demonstrations in his
honour are made.
UNFURL THE FLAG.
(Words hy Mr. Francis Mart.)
Australia’s sons, your flag unfold,
And proudly wave the banner high,
That ev’ry nation may behold
Our glorious standard in the sky.
CHOEUS.
Unfurl the flag that all may see
Our proudest boast is liberty.
Rejoice in fruitful, teeming soil,
In fleecy flocks and noble kine ;
Rejoice in fruits of manly toil,
For honest labour is divine.
Unfurl the flag, etc.
Rejoice in treasures ’neath the earth,
In precious gold, in store profuse ;
Grant us to know its noblest worth,
Its object and its fitting use.
Unfurl the flag, etc.


In visions hopeful, fair, and bright,
Our country’s future shines afar,
When as a nation we unite
’Keath Freedom’s blest and beaming star.
Unfurl the flag, etc.
Rejoice, Australia’s sons, but ne’er
Forget your fathers’ native land —
Dear England, glorious and fair,
She claims your heart and willing hand.
Unfurl the flag, etc.
To England, Queen, and Austral clime
Unite in true and loyal toast;
And let it be your song sublime
That freedom is our country’s boast.
Unfurl the flag, etc.
Lady Robinson is a daughter of the late Right Rev. Bishop
Townshend, of Meath, and united her lot with that of Sir
William in 1862, before his departure for Montserrat. Her
ladyship is known as a friend of the deserving, and greatly
interested in all charitable and philanthropic movements.
Sir William is the patron of several clubs and societies, and
his patronage is seldom withheld from any worthy object.
His second son, Mr. Douglas Robinson, is a midshipman on
board H.M.S. “ Nelson.”
A few of the most important of Sir W. C. F. Robinson’s
colonial services may be thus summarised. Whilst President
at Montserrat, in September, 1872, he prepared a Bill which
was an undoubted improvement on the existing constitution,
as this enactment prevented the creation of fictitious votes,
by which two or three persons were able to control the
elections of almost every parish, and render the Executive
Government powerless. K. B. Hamilton, Esq., Governor of
the Leeward Islands, in writing on this matter, informed
President Robinson that “he had rendered a great service to
the island by causing this measure to be passed.”


Whilst Administrator of the Government of Dominica in
1865, Sir William was instrumental in arbitrating judiciously
between contending parties in the Assembly, when a Bill for
the change of constitution of Dominica was being passed, and
he was highly complimented by the Secretary of State for his
coolness and prudence; Lord Cardwell signifying to him at
the same time “Her Majesty’s entire approbation of his
conduct.”
Governor Robinson’s support of the claims of Captain D.
Miller, R.K., an officer of Lloyd’s Salvage Association, whilst
engaged in protecting their interests from illegal sales of
maritime property at the Falkland Isles, in July, 1868, is a
matter of history; but the facts of the case will bear revival.
A vessel named the “ Coquimbana,” with a cargo of copper of
considerable value, was wrecked there, and illegally sold for
a merely nominal sum. Captain Miller was engaged by
Lloyd’s Association to recover the same for the Committee,
but encountered so much opposition from the residents of the
islands, that he would have been unable to resist it success-
fully but for the prompt assistance of the Governor. It is
gratifying to note that this valuable cargo of copper was
secured to Lloyd’s Association, and the Duke of Buckingham
expressed his approval of the “energetic and successful”
measures taken by the Governor to have the case thoroughly
investigated.
When Lieutenant-Governor of Prince Edward Island, in
May, 1873, Sir William was instrumental in bringing about
a political union of that island with the Dominion of Canada,
and received the congratulations of Lords Kimberley and
Dufferin for the ability and judgment displayed in effecting
that object.
In 1881, Sir William, whilst Governor of Western
Australia, made certain regulations under “ The Pearl Shell
Fishery Regulation Act,” by which the lives and freedom of
the aboriginal natives were better protected, and justice more


J. H. Fisher
G. S. Kingston
B. Thomas
Chas. Maim
Br. Wright
Capt. Lipson
0. Grilles
Jno. Woodforde
S. Smart
J. Brown
G. Stevenson
B. T. Finniss
Thos. Gilbert
T. Y. Cotter
Judge Cooper,
Judge Crawford,
Capt. Sturt.
T. C. Bray
I. Lazar
G. Boran
Capt. French
— Tod
G. Shepherd
G. Griffin
B. McGeorge
L. Boe
P. Golding
E. Lance
H. Mildred
E. Beck
0. Lines
E. N. Emmett
N. Hailes
W. V. Brown
P. Gumming
G. Dehane
Bobt. Hall
J. Hornabrook
E. J. F. Crawford
C. Tanner
J. Emery
S. K. Crawford
— Briggs
J. T. Byke
S. G. T. Crawford
J. H. Fisher
J. Adams
Capt. Crawford
Capt. J. Finniss
J. Allen
Capt. Simpson
G. F. Angas
J. Abbott
C. Calton
B. Torrens
W. Williams
E. B. Gleeson
W. Wyatt
W. Paxton
W. H. Clarke
C. Bonney
Capt. Buff
— Stewart
H. B. Wigley
A. H. Bavis
— Bench
A. Tolmer
A. Wren
Br. Kent
H. Alford
G. So ward
T. White
effectually administered in the outlying districts of that
colony.
Sir William C. F. Robinson is one of the most popular
Governors South Australia has ever had, and the earnest
desire of our colonists is, that he may long be spared to
exhibit that marked ability which has hitherto been instrr *
mental in conserving their rights, and making this portion o c
Her Majesty’s dominions a field for enterprise and coloni-
zation.
Old Colonists’ Festival,
Held March 27, 1851, at rear of City Bridge Hotel,
Morphett Street, Adelaide, to commemorate the first
sale of Town Lands, March 27, 1837.
Pioneer Government, 1836.
Governor H. E. F. Young.


John Michael Skinner.
"j
\\
Born in Norwich, Norf 10/6/1813. He was son
of Mr. Join; Skipper, Solicitorto the Duke of
Norfolk, a well known lawyer practising in the
ecclesiastical courts and who was a descendant of
Sir Martin .Skippe who came over from Holland
with William of Orange. His mother was a sister
of James Stark one of the leading landscale painters
of thaLay who with Old Grome, Cotrnan and Vincent
have hade the name of Norwich renowned in the
Hoistory of English Art. For generations the
Skippers had been the leaders of Norwich Society
and doubtless young John Michael had inherited
who at an early age became deeply imbuded with
the family traditions. Under his father at an early
age M studied the Law but during his leisure
hours he would betake himself to his uncle l s
studio, from whom he took lessons in prospective
and landscape drawing. When If Stark formed 9 .
high opinion of his artistic facilty and urged < V X * WV4
him to adopt an artist’s profession. In-T833 he
joined the crew of the E, I, G. vessel "Sherbourhe"
in a foyage from London to Calcutta and back. On
this voyage he made many-sSfetches. In 1836 we
find him in Adelaide*-'" He embellished "Wilkinson’s
South Australia" with numerous thumbnail sketches,
illustrations of Adelaide and its vijlcinity, £«a?t
Adelaide Married the eldest daughter of Mr, Robert
Thomas the founder of the Press in South Australia.
He wps articled to Mr., practiced as a
Solicitor until the Diggings Fever broke out in 1831-
when he joined the search for gold. He received an
appointment in the Civil Service and continued in
it foi over twenty years when he resigned. He was a
large contributor to early Colonial Literature.


Frances Amelia Skipper
the eldest daughter of the late Mr Egbert Thomas
and singularly gifted, being a clever linguist, a good
artist, and more than ordinarily skilful in the literary line, as
her translations from French and Italian, and her writings in
prose and poetry, testify. She arrived here with her parents
in 1836, and attended the proclamation ceremony. She grew
up with the colony, and took an active part in every move-
ment that needed woman’s helping hand, especially in schemes
of charity and in matters of domestic duty. She married a
congenial artistic spirit in Mr. John Michael Skipper,
solicitor, whose reputation as a colonial artistic genius was so
well established by his marvellously faithful representations
of Australian scenery. She accompanied him on many
excursions into the wild bush in search of the picturesque,
helped him in his sketches, and was so proficient with the
pencil and brush, that she often finished a picture he began,
or produced sketches which he worked out. Portrait painting
in water-colors was her forte, and specimens of her skill now
in possession of her family bear indisputable testimony to her
talent. In conjunction with her husband she executed a
series of original representations of the principal characters in
the satirical novel, “Ten Thousand a Year,” such as Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap, Tittlebat Titmouse, the Earl of Dredling-
ton, etc. These productions are remarkable for witty con-
ception and delicacy of drawing. Mrs. Skipper’s name was
associated with numerous deeds of unostentatious benevolence
and practical usefulness. She died of decline in 1855, a good
daughter, a faithful wife, a wise mother, and a true woman
pioneer, of whom in after years her son, Mr. S. J. Skipper,
wrote —
“ They cheered us on our weary way,
They shared our hopes and fears ;
They stood unflinching by our sides—
Those women pioneers.


They wearied not upon the way,
But smiled amid their toil,
And with us won this noble land,
Australia’s virgin soil.
They helped us with unselfish love,
They shrank not from our cares;
They aided us with hopeful words,
And armed us with their prayers.
They ne’er repined at trouble’s cast,
Nor saddened us with tears ;
They were a worthy sisterhood —
Those women pioneers.”
Mary Skipper,
§HE second daughter of the late Mr. Robert Thomas
(founder of the Press
born August 30, 1823, in London. She arrived in this
colony in 1836, with her father, in the “ Africaine,” and was
present at the proclamation of the colony. Her literary
tastes were of no mean order; she wrote some clever poetical
and prose productions and was also skilful with her pencil.
A journal of colonial experiences, dating from the earliest
history of the province, and carried on up to a few years ago,
by her, is still in existence, and valuable from a historical
point of view, as she was a keen observer and shrewd reasoner.
In her youth this lady was a fearless horsewoman, and
delighted to make long excursions into the hilly country, a
rather hazardous undertaking, as it required some nerve to
penetrate into the roadless regions surrounding the Adelaide
of thirty or forty years ago. In 1856 she married the late
J. M. Skipper, and died on the anniversary of their silver
wedding. As one of that small band of “ women pioneers,”
who went through all the vicissitudes of those early hard
times, and saw the progress of this young colony from its
commencement, she took a deep, intelligent interest in the


march of events, and had she been spared, could have con-
tributed much reliable and valuable information concerning
the first settlement. Of the old pioneers she wrote the
following: —
“ I can but sing in mournful strain,
When I recall those earlier years,
And those we ne’er shall meet again—
The lost and loved bold pioneers.
Who marked the track ? who broke the soil ?
Who shared our mingled hopes and fears,
’Mid nights of peril, days of toil,
But those old dauntless pioneers P
There’s scarce a scene I can retrace
Without some sad regretful tears
For each familiar form and face
Of those fine brave old pioneers.”
Alfred Watts,
TfMJ'ELL known in commercial and social circles, died on
November 29, 1884. Arrived in the colony in 1838,
as accountant to the South Australian Company. Married
the second daughter of Mr. William Giles, Manager of
the Company. In 1857 Mr. Watts joined the well-known
firm of P. Levi & Co., and after remaining there for a num-
ber of years joined the firm of Watts & Wells. The latter
gentleman (Mr. Percy Wells) will be remembered as the
agent for some prominent English engineers connected with
the construction of several South Australian lighthouses and
jetties. In 1855 Mr. "Watts was elected a member of the
mixed Legislative Council, as the representative of Flinders,
one-third of the members being nominees, and the remainder
elected. He took part in the framing of our present Con-
stitution, and was a member for Flinders in the third and
fourth Parliaments under the new regime. On account of his
financial knowledge he was appointed a member of the Royal


Commission formed to enquire into the state of the public
accounts, and gave material assistance in drawing up a valu-
able report on the subject. For many years he was a local
Director of the Bank of Australasia. He was a man of quiet
demeanour and gentlemanly deportment. In Parliament he
spoke seldom, and never took up time in referring to subjects
which he did not thoroughly understand. Owing, it is
believed to business troubles, Mr. Watts’s intellect became
weakened, and for some time prior to his death he disap-
peared from the commercial world, to the sorrow of a large
circle of friends and well wishers.
Charles J. Valentine, J.P.,
December, 1834, at Woodbrooks, Chailey, Sussex,
' England. Is the youngest son of the Rev. C. P.
Valentine, Unitarian Minister, of Lewes. During the gold
mining fever in Victoria, he left England with his elder
brother and landed in Melbourne, November, 1852. After
a few months stay in the neighborhood, not being tempted
by the attractions of the gold diggings, they left Victoria, and
settled in the south-eastern district of South Australia, then
more popularly known as Mosquito Plains. He was engaged
in pastoral pursuits (with the exception of a few months) up
to the year 1865, when, on the retirement of Mr. H. T.
Morris, J.P., the Chief Inspector of Sheep, he received that
appointment. During his term of office the flocks have been
completely cleaned of scab, and have remained free for over
fourteen years. The duties of the department have expanded,
as at present cattle, horses, swine, dogs, and camels are all
brought under the supervision of the Chief Inspector. Acts
have been passed for the regulating and registration of brands
and marks on stock, also for the prevention of mutilating the
ears of cattle and sheep. Quarantine depots for both foreign


and colonial stock have been established and constructed in
a practical manner under his supervision. Mr. Valentine
will have completed his twentieth year of office during 1885.
He is at present in Europe, in which quarter it is supposed
his abilities and judgment will be materially exercised for the
benefit of the colony. Prior to Mr. Valentine’s departure
from the colony he was presented with a handsome gold
watch and chain by a number of leading stock holders, as a
token of their appreciation of his good qualities.
William McMinn,
BORN May, 1844, at Newry, County Down, Ireland ; died
at North Adelaide, February 14, 1884. Arrived with
his parents in South Australia in 1850 : was for a time
engaged in studying architecture in the office of Mr. J.
Macgeorge, and afterwards entered the Government service.
In June, 1864, the first expedition to the Northern Territory
was organised, the Hon. B. T. Einniss being the leader of the
party, which Mr. McMinn accompanied as surveyor. During
the time of Mr. Finniss’s government, the well known “For-
lorn Hope ” voyage took place, when Mr. McMinn and others
accomplished that perilous trip of 2,000 miles in an open
boat, from the Northern Territory to Champion Bay. In
1870 he w T as appointed Government Inspector of the Port
Darwin end of the contract for constructing the Overland
Telegraph line, but acting under instructions annulled the
contract, which led to Mr. Patterson, Assistant Engineer,
being sent to Port Darwin, and afterwards to the establish-
ment of the Roper River party, under Mr. C. Todd, C.M.G.,
Superintendent of Telegraphs. On his return from the
Territory Mr, McMinn practised his profession as architect in
Adelaide, and was severally associated in that capacity with


Messrs. D. Garlick, E. J. Woods (Architect-in-Chief), and
I. G. Beaver. He superintended many extensive works —the
Adelaide University was built from his designs—and he also
gained second prize for designs for a bridge over the Torrens.
His death in the prime of life was a source of great regret to
his widow and family, and he will be long held in affectionate
remembrance by many friends to whom his estimable qualities
and amiability had endeared him. His brother, Mr. Gilbert
McMinn was, till lately, Acting Government Resident at
Palmerston, an office at present held by Mr. J. L. Parsons,
M.P.
William Henry Bundey,
BAWYER, Politician, and Judge of Supreme Court of
South Australia; second surviving son of the late James
Bundey, Esq., of Bashley Manor, near Lymington, Hamp-
shire. His mother was the daughter of James Gower
Lockyer, Esq., a gentleman of independent means, residing at
Exbury, Hampshire. Bashley was an old and extensive
estate, which had been much neglected. In its restoration
and improvement his father spent all his means, and his wife’s
jointure, and by a series of misfortunes lost the whole. His
parents removed to Inchmerry Yilla, Leap, nearly opposite
Cowes, at which lovely place he acquired that taste for yacht-
ing which he so strongly displayed in after life. It was
found impossible to retrieve the family fortunes, and
emigration to South Australia was determined upon, the
eldest son only remaining in England, where he was for many
years Inspector of Police in Scotland Yard, London. His
father never recovered from the shock occasioned by his
losses, and died within a fortnight of arrival in Australia in
1849. His mother, an intellectual woman, left with a family
of five children, without means or friends, displayed remark


able courage and self-reliance, and throughout an honoured
life infused the same qualities into the minds of her children.
At ten years of age the subject of this notice entered a
solicitor’s office; at the age of eighteen years he filled the
position of Clerk of a country Local Court, and became
Captain of Volunteers. In 1865 he was called to the bar,
and in the same year married Ellen Wardlaw, second
daughter of the Honorable (now Sir) William Milne. He
entered Parliament in 1872, representing the district of
Onkaparinga, and in 1874 joined the Blyth Government as
Minister of Justice and Education. He resigned in January,
1875, when he declined re-election until 1878, in which year
he was again returned (for the same district) to Parliament.
Was appointed Queen’s Counsel, and joined the Morgan
Administration as Attorney-General. In 1881 he was
compelled to resign this responsible portfolio in consequence
of failing health, and was ordered to take a prolonged voyage
to recruit; he did so, but did not again enter Parliament.
The title of Honorable was conferred upon him in 1882, and
he was appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court in July,
1884. He has always been an ardent supporter of Land
Reform, Law Reform, Education, Railway Construction, and
other public questions; and by his earnest and enthusiastic
temperament succeeded in carrying several useful measures,
and obtained the confidence of his contemporaries and the
public. At all times a lover and supporter of manly sports,
he was in his early career a successful cricketer, and sub-
sequently a leading yachtsman. In 1869 he was one of the
founders of the now flourishing S. A. Yacht Club. He was
first elected Vice-Commodore, and eventually Commodore,
which latter position he held for ten consecutive years,
resigning it in 1883.


Dr. John Michael Gunson, K.G.G.,
at his residence, Kensington Park, near Adelaide,
May 3, 1884. Born in Limerick, Ireland, in 1825,
and received the elementary portion of his education at a
private school in that city. Subsequently entered the
medical schools of Paris and London, and afterwards
qualified himself in the latter city for member of the Royal
College of Surgeons. Later on he obtained the degree of
Doctor of Medicine. In 1852 Dr. Gunson came to South
Australia, and entered into practice, and by attention to his
professional duties was very successful. In 1866 he paid a
visit to England, where he was married. The late Dr. But-
ler carried on his practice in his absence, and after spending
a short holiday in the land of his birth Dr. Gunson returned
to this colony, and re-entered upon his professional labours.
In 1879, he disposed of his connection and took up his
residence at the Acacias, Kensington, which he had erected
prior to his retiring from practice. After a short time he
determined to once more visit Europe, and accordingly dis-
posed of the Acacias, and went with his wife and family to
England. He was absent from the colony for two years,
most of the time being spent on the Continent. During that
period His Holiness Pope Leo XIII. conferred upon Dr.
Gunson the order of Knight of St. Gregory the Great, but
his installation did not take place till his return to the
colony, when the ceremony was performed in the Catholic
Cathedral by his Lordship Bishop Reynolds. Dr. Gunson
was an accomplished linguist, a member of the senate of the
University of Adelaide, and on numerous occasions conducted
the French examinations at the University. He may be
considered our leading Catholic colonist, as he always
identified himself with any movement connected with that
body. He was president of the Catholic Young Men’s
Society, and when the Hibernian Catholic Benefit Society
was organised, generously attended, free of charge, as lodge


JOHN STOKES BAGSKSW.


surgeon, its members for the first two years of the society’s
existence. He was also a director of the Catholic Building
Society. By his unassuming ways and charitable acts, Dr.
Gunson endeared himself to a large number of the poor, and
numbers of good deeds which he has done to alleviate distress
are only known to recipients of his bounty. When any
public charity required assistance, he was always to the fore,
and his acts of benevolence and kindness will be long
remembered. For a considerable time Dr. Gunson had been
in failing health, suffering principally from heart disease.
He was constantly visited by all the leading medical men of
Adelaide, who in his case were unable to effect a cure. He
left a widow and three sons.
Richard James Turner, S.M.,
« REIVED in South Australia in the “ Sophia Moffatt,”
Capt Woodward, in 1850, and at once took charge
of the Victoria Mill in Grenfell-street for Mr. W. E. S.
Cooke, with an arrangement for a partnership, which was not
carried out owing to Mr. Cooke’s death in 1852. He then
went to the goldfields at Forest Creek, Victoria; joined the
late Walter Duffield in 1854; appointed first Mayor of
Gawler in 1857, and was elected, and served in that capacity
during the three following years. After the dissolution of
the partnership by effluxion of time, was associated with the
late E. E. Mitford (Pasquin), Sir Wm. Morgan, Daniel
Harrold and others, in the discovery of the celebrated copper
mines at Moonta, and in the litigation which resulted in the
vesting of that splendid property in other hands. In
February, 1858, he was appointed a J.P., and on January 1,
1862, a special Magistrate, and acted as locum temens for the
late Henry Dundas Murray, S.M., during that gentleman’s
absence from Gawler on a visit to Europe. On March 1,
1864, took permanent charge of the district, which he presided
c


over until February 21, 1870. After the removal of Mr.
J. S. Browne, S.M., from Kapunda, Mr. Turner took charge
of that district, in addition to that of Gawler for some time,
until Mr. J. Yarley, S.M., was appointed. On February 1,
1870, was removed to Mount Gambier, where he remained
until the end of the year 1878, when he took the Mount
Barker district, in succession to the late Mr. Castle, S.M.
Over this district he presided until February 1, 1880, when
he was sent to Port Adelaide, to succeed the late Captain
Dashwood, S.M., and where he still remains. Like many
old colonists he turned his hand to the first employment that
offered, although at that time he had not the remotest idea of
what a flour mill was like, and had never even seen the
interior of one. In his official character Mr. Turner is con-
sidered one of the ablest and most judicious of South
Australian Magistrates, whilst in private life he enjoys the
confidence and respect of a wide circle of friends.
Walter Boyd Tate Andrews,
gOBIST in London, 1823, and arrived with his parents in
Western Australia in 1830. Entered Government
service there in 1840, as clerk in the Colonial Secretary’s
office. In 1847 removed to South Australia, and in April
1848 was appointed sth clerk in the Chief Secretary’s office.
In 1851 promoted Deputy Registrar of Births, Marriages,
and Deaths, in Registrar-General’s Department. Sub-
sequently promoted to the office of Deputy Registrar-General
of Deeds, and in 1858 on the coming into force of the Real
Property Act (commonly known as Torrens’s Act) received
the additional office of Deputy Registrar-General, Lands
Titles Office. In 1865 succeeded the late Sir R. R. Torrens
as Registrar-General, which office he still holds. He is also
Registrar of Building Societies. In private life Mr. Andrews
is highly respected for his many amiable qualities.


John Wellesley Flood, B.A., M.B., L.R.C.S.I.,
a native of Dublin, and educated at Potosa and
Stockpool Schools. It was his desire to join the
Royal Horse Artillery, but owing to a slight defect in his
hearing, he was disqualified, and subsequently entered the
Dublin University, where he became a distinguished scholar.
In the School of Physic, Trinity College, he successfully
competed for the medical scholarship and other prizes during
his under graduate career, and obtained with much credit his
surgical degree at the University. Qualifications of so high
a character entitled him to hold no ordinary position in the
ranks of his profession, but on account of his health not being
robust, he was induced to leave, and as Surgeon of the
u Eaton Hall” emigrant ship, he arrived at Port Adelaide in
1878. Feeling that in the country his professional duties
would be less laborious than in Adelaide, he purchased the
practice of (the late) Dr. Bailey, of Yorketown, where he
resided till within a few weeks of his death, which occurred
on February 15, 1884, at the early age of thirty-two years.
He was greatly esteemed by all who had the pleasure of his
acquaintance. He was a descendant of Henry Flood, the
orator, (contemporary of Henry Grattan) and Member of the
Irish House of Commons. His uncle, George Moyers, J.P.,
LL.D., was the last conservative Lord Mayor of Dublin.
Rev. F. Slaney Poole, M.A.
iJjjSjOKN at Maidstone, Kent, in 1845. At an early age
went with his parents to Manchester, where he
attended the ancient Grammar School of that city, presided
over by Mr. F. W. Walker, the present Head Master of St.
Paul’s School, London. After passing from the lowest form
to the highest, Mr. Poole obtained a sizarship and Somerset
c 2


Exhibition at St. John’s College Cambridge, where he
graduated as B.A. in 1866, and M.A. in 1875. After hold-
ing an assistant mastership at Stockport Grammar School, he
turned his attention to South Australia. Arrived here in
1867, and was ordained in 1868. The rev. gentleman has
held the following appointments : —The incumbencies of St.
Peter’s, Kobe ; Christ Church, Strathalbyn; and St. John’s,
Adelaide. He conducted for a short time the Grammar
School at Mount Gambler, and was interim lecturer in classics
at the Adelaide University in the year 1878. He has now
been the incumbent of St. John’s Church for a period of
ten years, and also held a prominent position amongst the
Freemasons, as the Grand Chaplain of that order in South
Australia.
Edward William Hawker.
MLUEST son of the Hon. George Charles Hawker. Born at
M Bungaree, near Clare, S. A. Educated at St. Peter’s
College, and at Harrow, and Trinity College, Cambridge.
Took LL.B. degree in Law Honors in 1873, and B.A. degree
in Natural Science Honors in 1874. Called to the English
Bar in 1874, having kept his terms at the Inner Temple.
Returned to the colony in 1875. Admitted to the South
Australian Bar in 1880. Was in partnership with Messrs.
Bundey & Dashwood for three years, after which he joined
Mr. John Nicholson, with whom he is still in partnership.
Stood for the district of Stanley (in which lies his birthplace)
at the general elections in 1884, and was returned at the head
of the poll. He and his father are the first instance of a father
and son being in the Legislative Assembly of this colony at
the same time.


Rev. Percy Wilson.
*HE first Head Master of St. Peter’s College, to take
which position he came out with Bishop Short. He
returned to England, where he held a living near Shrewsbury,
and afterwards at Pavenham, Bedfordshire, where he died.
He is well-known to temperance advocates as the author of
“ Frank Oldfield,” a prize tale of great merit, and the scene
of the story was laid in this colony. Through the late C. A.
Wilson, his brother, the sons of the Rev. P. Wilson, who are
recognised in literary circles as possessing much ability, have
from time to time contributed most interesting accounts of
their travels and experiences to the Adelaide press.
Robert George Thomas.
in 1820 ; died at Unley, April 14, 1884. Eldest
son of the late Mr. Robert Thomas, of the Register ,
and also elder brother of the late Mr. William Kyffin Thomas.
On May 1, 1836, he left England in the “Rapid,” which had
on board Colonel Light and Mr. George Kingston. The
Colonel had just been appointed Surveyor-General for the
new colony of South Australia, and Mr. Kingston was the
second in command. They took out a staff of surveyors and
draftsmen, and Mr. Thomas was one of those engaged for
some years in surveys of Adelaide and the Port, and he was
the draftsman of the original plan of the City. After remain-
ing in Adelaide for some time, he returned to England and
completed his education as civil engineer and architect. He
became a Fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects,
and was an active member of that institution. He practised
his profession in Newport, Monmouthshire, and was architect
of churches and buildings of considerable note. He was a
great admirer of the Gothic style of architecture, and New


port still contains some of the best examples of his work.
There are others in Adelaide—Stow Church, the Elinders-
street Baptist Church, the Register Chambers, and many
others. While in Wales, Mr. Thomas designed and
superintended the erection of the Gothic entrance to, and the
Mortuary Chapels in, the Cardiff Cemetery. He returned to
the colony in 1860, and practised his profession on his own
account. In November, 1864, he received the first prize
offered by the City Council for the best essays and designs
having reference to a drainage and sewerage system for
Adelaide. In July, 1866, Mr Thomas was appointed
Assistant Architect under the Government, second to Mr.
W. Hanson, then head of the department as Engineer and
Architect. Soon after this, there was a re-arrangement of the
office, and Mr. Thomas took the chief position of Architect.
Retrenchment having been forced upon the Government, in
December, 1870, the office was abolished, and Mr. Thomas
left the Service. Whilst engaged as Government Architect
he designed the Supreme Court Buildings, the Magill Orphan-
age, the Sailors’ Home at Port Adelaide, and the Parkside
Lunatic Asylum, superintending their erection, as well as
that of the General Post Office. Mr. Thomas had to modify
the plans prepared by Messrs. Wright, Woods & Hamilton,
as the Government, after the building had been commenced,
discovered that they could not afford to run it up to the
altitude which the designer intended. After leaving the
Government service he resumed private practice, and carried
out various buildings, amongst which was the Institute at
Port Adelaide. Apart from his artistic profession, he was an
amateur artist*of ability, his taste being directed to water-
colour painting. His sketches from nature were characterized
by clearness of detail and boldness of execution, but he
simply painted for amusement or his productions might have
been better known. In 1873 the Health Act was passed, and
on January 7, 1874, he began his duties of Secretary to the


Central Board of Health. That position he held till the time
of his death, which came not unexpectedly, as he had been
seriously ill for weeks. He took his place in the first rank
of his profession ; in private life he was much esteemed ; and
his active efforts as an officer of the Unley Anglican Church
received a deserved recognition.
Louis Edouard Bourbaud,
80RN at Cognac, in the Department of Charente, France,
in 1838, where he passed his youth amongst vine-
growing pursuits. Entered the navy at an early age, and
whilst holding the office of Lieutenant of the ship “ Ulme,’ >
took part in the bombardment of Sebastopol by the allied
fleet. For his services in the Crimean war he received two
medals from Queen Victoria, with other honors. During the
Franco-Prussian War he held a captaincy in the National
Guard at Paris, and when the Communists obtained possession
of the capital, commanded the 75th Regiment at the siege
instituted by the National Assembly. In 1875 M. Bourbaud
was sent to the colony by Mr. Dutton, the then Agent-
General for S.A., under engagement to the Government to
promote the wine-growing industry here. This he succeeded
in doing, and about a year after his arrival established the
S.A. United Vineyards Association, the management of which
he retained for a year and then resigned. His next venture
was the Franco-Australian Alimentary Company, which was
disposed of to Mr. Conrad. Subsequently he started the
S. A. Winegrowers’ Association, the management of which he
retained till the time of his decease. In addition to this, he
had charge of the vineyards of wines of Sir Thomas Elder, at
Birksgate, Mr. S. Davenport, at Beaumont, and Mr. C. B.
Young, at Kanmantoo. He was probably the cleverest
expert in blending and treating wines the colony has ever had,


and during his residence here contributed in a practical degree
to our viticultural literature. In addition to this he wrote
and published several interesting pamphlets on the wine-
producing interests, olive cultivation, and kindred subjects.
M. Bourbaud was indefatigable in his endeavours to promote
commercial relationship between South Australia and his
native land, and to a certain extent he was successful. His
death took place at Adelaide, February, 1883, in his forty-
fifth year, and he left a wife and four sons.
James T. Turnbull, J.P.,
80EJST in Leith, Scotland, August 28, 1830. Arrived in
the colony in 1856. After being a short period in the
Port Adelaide establishment of Messrs. Elder & Co. he visited
Hew South Wales and Victoria, returning from Albury to
Goolwa, some 1,700 miles, by way of the river Murray, in com-
pany with the late Capt. Cadell. Entered the employment of
Messrs. W. Younghusband, jun., & Co. in 1857, and in 1865
went for that firm to America and Europe. Returning to the
colony in the year 1867, he began business on his own
account, and continued same until the end of 1882, when he
was joined by Messrs. J. Gilbert Boothby and William Little.
In 1870 he was appointed Consul for the Netherlands, and
shortly afterwards Consular Agent for Italy; the former
appointment he still holds, the latter he resigned in 1878.
On his arrival in Rome in that year, His Majesty the King
of Italy, in recognition of Mr. Turnbull’s services at Adelaide,
conferred on him the Cross of Chevalier of the Royal Order
of the Crown of Italy. Mr. Turnbull has visited the old
country four times; once in 1865, via San Francisco and
Panama; once in 1878 through America and Canada, and
twice by the ordinary overland route in 1874 and 1883. It
may not be out of place to remark that Mr. Turnbull is an
ardent lover of the fine arts.


Peter Galt,
t NATIVE of Alloa, a pleasant river port of Scotland, in
__ the County of Clackmannan. He went to Portugal at
an early age, and was for some years engaged in superintend-
ing important railway works on behalf of the eminent con-
tracting firm of Waring P>rothers. Whilst in Portugal he
had a sunstroke which affected him somewhat seriously,
though upon relinquishing his work there and on arrival in
South Australia he seemed to have quite recovered from its
effects. He was engaged as resident engineer on the Rose-
worthy and Burra Railway, parts of which were opened in
1869 and 1870. He remained in this position from the
beginning of the work till its completion, and the conspicuous
ability and energy which he displayed led the Government to
appoint him Resident Engineer for the Hope Valley Water-
works and the Aqueduct Channel. When these works were
finished, he retired from the Service and purchased a flour
mill at Allandale, near Kapunda, where he remained till
about four years ago, when he left the business, at which,
unfortunately, he had not been successful. About this time
the contract for the first section of the Adelaide and Nairne
Railway was let to Messrs. Walker & Swann, and upon Mr.
Galt applying for the position of Resident Engineer under the
Government, he was at once appointed. Mr. Galt’s tempera-
ment was such, and his energy so great, that he often over-
exerted himself, and perhaps needlessly exposed himself to
the weather. Hence, beside the sunstroke in Portugal, he
suffered another on the Burra railway works, and a third at
Hope Valley. From this last he took months to recover, and
there can be no doubt that these repeated attacks, preceding
work entailing so much physical exertion as the difficult
engineering of the Hills railway, completely broke down his
health. On the occasion of the formal opening of the line to
Aldgate, he was strangely excitable, though as warm-hearted


and kindly as ever. On March 28, 1883, he passed away at
the early age of 48. Mr. Galt was married to a daughter of
the Hon. A. B. Murray, M.L.C., and left a widow and four
children.
Clement Sabine
WFAS BOEN January 17, 1833, at Bury St. Edmunds,
if/?/ being the second son of John Sabine, of that town;
educated at Bracondale, Norwich ; apprenticed to Cowell A
Co, com and coal merchants, and maltsters, of St. Clements,
Ipswich, Suffolk. After learning this business he removed
to Bristol, where for a short time he was employed as clerk
in the Bristol Steam Navigation Company’s office. Left
England with his parents 9th November, 1852, in the barque
“ Derwent,” arriving in South Australia 14th March, 1853.
In the same week of his arrival he obtained employment as
clerk in the mercantile house of F. J. Beck & Co. In
November, 1853, removed to Port Adelaide, where he carried
on business as a Custom House and Shipping agent until the
end of January 1857. On February 1, 1857, was engaged
by Mr. Price Maurice, with whom he has continued subse-
quently, being superintendent of the various sheep runs and
property of that gentleman in this colony. Mr. Sabine was
Hon. Secretary of the first Pastoral Association of South
Australia (established November 24, 1859) till it ceased to'
exist, November 24, 1865. Secretary of the Northern
Territory Company Limited, from the time of its formation,
November 19, 1864, till it was wound up in 1869. Was
one of the Promoters of the Glenelg Eailway in 1871, and
for a time held office as Director of that company ; Councillor
for New Glenelg Ward in 1872, and again in 1884, and 1885 ;
is member of the Committee of the “ Koyal Agricultural
Society of South Australia,” and one of the Committee of the
“ Stock-breeders’ Association.”


H. J. Smith
tRRIYED in the colony as a boy with his father, the late
Mr. Matthew Smith, Commissioner of Insolvency.
Engaged in pastoral pursuits near Port Lincoln, but not being
successful, abandoned this on receiving appointment of Return-
ing Officer for the Electoral District of Flinders in July, 1861.
On December 22, 1864, was appointed Stipendiary Magis-
trate of the province, serving successfully in that capacity
at Port Lincoln, Port Augusta, Mount Remarkable, and
Narracoorte. Remained at the last-mentioned town for a
long period, where he was much esteemed as an upright and
painstaking magistrate, while his genial temperament and
pleasant manners made him universally popular. For some
time prior to his death, in December, 1884, Mr. Smith had
been wholly incapacitated for the discharge of his magisterial
duties. He made many friends and few enemies, and was
much regretted in the district in which he had so long resided.
He was in the sixty-third year of his age when he died.
Lewis W. Gilles,
t WELL-KNOWN pioneer colonist; died at Woodley
__ House, Glen Osmond, Jan. 2, 1884, aged 84. He came
to Tasmania in 1822, with Messrs. Horne, Leake, and others,
and married the only daughter of the late Mr. Benjamin
Horne. To Messrs. Horne and Gilles is due the credit of
being the first to introduce the Merino sheep into the Island.
Mr. Gilles carried on farming, but success did not attend him
in that calling, and he accepted the managership of the Tamar
Bank in Launceston, holding the position until the arrival of
the projectors of the Union Bank, when an amalgamation
took place, and the Tamar was merged into the Union Bank
of Australia, the deceased gentleman being still manager.
Afterwards he, in conjunction with other affluent men,


started a private Bank, under the title of Archer, Gilles, &
Co., hut through over-speculation the concern got involved,
finally paying, however, 20s. in the pound. Mr. Gilles in
1844 came to Adelaide with his family, in the “Will Watch,”
from Launceston, and shortly after arrival arrangements were
entered into to float the Glen Osmond Silver Mines, when he,
to further the scheme, went to England. He succeeded in
his object, and the mine was worked for five years with good
results; but at the expiration of the lease Mr. 0. Gilles, his
brother, refused a renewal for twenty-five years, on the
ground that he was getting too old. Mr. L. W. Gilles held
several important positions ; among others, Secretary to an
Insurance Company, and Trustee of the Savings Bank, and
when the goldfields of Victoria attracted attention he was
appointed by the Government as Colonial Storekeeper under
Mr. C. J. Latrobe, the then Superintendent. He also
accepted the office of Under-Secretary, under Mr. Forster.
After this he was sent to Warrnambool as Resident Magistrate,
which position he occupied for about fourteen years, and drew
his pension from 1866 under the Pension Bill until his death.
Mr. Gilles made a voyage to England by the first steamer on
the Panama line (the “ Kaikoura”) from Sydney, about 1866.
He married a second time four years ago. His eldest son
resides in Adelaide.
Price Maurice,
]||QRN at Wrexham, England, November 16, 1818 ; and
educated there at the Grove. Declined a commission in
the East India Company’s service, and came out to South Aus-
tralia, August 9th, 1840, per “ Caleb Angas,” with the object
of devoting himself entirely to pastoral pursuits, in preference
to any other avocation. Began in a small way in 1843 or
1844, and eventually acquired leases from the Government


of the runs known as Pekina and Oladdie, comprising 671
square miles in the north, where the greatest number of
sheep and lambs shorn in one year was 118,000, yielding
2,003 bales of wool. These runs are now entirely occupied
as agricultural settlements. Mr. Maurice became lessee of
the Warraw, Lake Hamilton, and Bramfield runs, 943 square
miles, on the Port Lincoln Peninsula, where the sheep and
lambs shorn in one year amounted to 97,000, yielding 1,553
bales of wool. These runs are now cut up and devoted to
agricultural and grazing purposes, and settled upon by selectors.
On the gradual resumption of the runs, Mr. Maurice deter-
mined to adhere to the fixed purpose of his life and remain
a sheep farmer, or squatter. In 1874 he took up a block of
country, distant 270 miles north-west of Port Augusta, known
as Mount Eba run, comprising 5,358 square miles of land.
Here, the rainfall up to the present time has been uncertain,
and in common with all new pastoral country in the interior,
great difficulties have had to be surmounted; 83 wells have
been sunk—36 of which yield a water supply. This run is in
course of development at enormous expense. In 1870 Mr.
Maurice introduced the Angora goat, and purchased, in the
hills near Adelaide, the Castambul estate, for the purpose of
establishing the breeding of these animals in Australia,
on a scale sufficient to prove their adaptability, by forming a
large stud flock. This estate contains 5,288 acres grazing
land, abundantly watered, and possessing magnificent features
of mountain scenery. Mr. Maurice, consequent upon inces-
sant struggles in the early days of the colony, and battling
with vicissitudes of seasons in outlying districts, was com-
pelled when somewhat broken down by over-anxiety, to seek
in England the change he so much needed. For some years
he has been absent from the province, unable to return, owing
to continued ill-health, but is in regular communication
with this country, directing the various operations with
which he keeps up constant interest. Every movement


connected with pastoral matters and the development of the
interior engages his marked attention —no other business but
that of a sheep farmer, pure and simple, having been for
forty-two years the aim and object of his life.
Catherine Helen Spence,
SORN at Melrose, Scotland, 1825. Emigrated with
her family to South Australia in 1839, and has
ever since been identified with most movements calculated to
benefit the land of her adoption. As an authoress, Miss
Spence takes no mean stand, and her contributions to English
periodicals and colonial literature are marked by force and
clearness exhibiting a thorough acquaintance with human
nature. She has published the following works: —“ Clare
Morison,” in 1854; “Tender and True,” in 1856;“ Mr.
Hogarth’s Will,” in 1865 ; “The Author’s Daughter,” in
1868. The two last works were previously contributed to
the Adelaide weeklies, and the first appeared in the Mail
under the title of “Uphill Work,” and the other in the
Observer as “ Hugh Lindsay’s Guest.” More recently
“ Gathered In ” appeared simultaneously in the Adelaide
Observer and the Queenslander . Miss Spence has always
taken a strong interest in political and social matters, and her
“ Plea for Pure Democracy,” published in pamphlet form in
1861, an argument from the Radical side in favour of equal
representation, will be familiar, doubtless, to many of our
readers. She is the corresponding member of the “ Repre-
sentative Reform Association,” and has taken an active share
in the movement for placing out of the children of the State in
ordinary homes, and their supervision in such homes. Miss
Spence is the sister of the Hon. J. B. Spence, M.L.C., of the
South Australian Legislature.


Henry Dudley Melville,
®KE of the pioneers of the colony, having arrived a pas-
senger by the “Lalla Rookh,” in August 1840. He is
now probably the oldest public servant in harness, and has
served in very many capacities; notably, Sub-collector of
Customs, Receiver of Wrecks, and Harbour-Master of South-
East Ports. He did good service at the wreck of the
“AdmeHa” in 1859; and in 1861, with the aid of the life-
boat crew at Rohe, he saved the crew of the “Alma ” (twenty-
four lives) when stranded on the rocks in Guichen Bay, by
means of the rocket apparatus. In other wrecks on this part
of the coast he was also instrumental in saving life and pro-
perty. In 1872 he was appointed Chief Warden of the
Northern Territory Gold Fields, and here contracted a disease
in the eyes (cataract), which obliged him to resign his
position in the Territory and return to the South. In 1877
he was appointed Secretary to the Forest Board, and still
retains that position in the Forest Department.
Walter Duffield, J.P.,
BHOSE death occurred Hov. 5, 1882, in the 66th year
of his age, though not one of the first arrivals in the
colony, had, nevertheless, an experience of it extending over
forty-three years. He landed in 1839, and first settled near
Echunga. Remained there until 1847, when he removed to
Gawler, with which town he was associated up till his death,
and played an important part in all movements calculated to
benefit its interests, and those of the colony at large. His
name has long been a household word in milling operations.
He established the Union and Victoria Mills, the latter of
which was burnt down and rebuilt no less than three times;
two of the fires being attributed to incendiarism, and one to


the accidental breakage of a portion of the machinery. The
present Victoria Mill is one of the most complete in Australia.
As agricultural settlement extended, he established mills at
Wallaroo, Snow town, and Port Pirie. The whole of the
milling property was recently disposed of to the Adelaide
Milling and Mercantile Company, Limited. Mr. Duffield was
elected as one of the representatives of the district of Barossa
in the first Parliament, April 22, 1857, and was re-elected
to the second, third, and fourth Parliaments, being thus
continuously one of the members for Barossa from April,
1857, to March, 1868. He was re-elected for the same
district in 1870, and sat until the dissolution on November
23, 1871. He held office as Treasurer in two successive
Cabinets, viz., the Hart Ministry (the fifteenth since the
inauguration of responsible government here), from October
23, 1865 till March 27, 1866 ; and in the first Boucaut
Ministry, from March 28, 1866, to May 2, 1867. He
introduced the Dog Act, and succeeded in carrying that
measure, and many of the colonists are under an obligation
of which they are unaware to the deceased gentleman for
what he did in this matter. After serving as local represen-
tative for many years, Mr. Duffield on July 25, 1873, first
took his seat as member of the Legislative Council. He
applied himself with assiduity to his Parliamentary duties,
until failing health compelled him, during the latter part of
1878, to seek leave of absence. He participated to some
extent in the work of the following session, but at length
found himself unable to continue his service to the country.
His resignation was accepted May 27, 1880. Mr. Duffield
was local Director of the Bank of South Australia, and held
that office until 1873, when he accepted a position on the
Adelaide Board. He was also a Director for many years of
the Adelaide Marine and Fire Insurance Company, and
occupied several other posts of importance, all of which he
had to resign in consequence of ill-health. He was owner,


ALDERMAN WILLIAM KITHER, J.P.
CAREY. RAGE A CO., LITHO


CAPT. S. W. SWEET.


with Mr. T. S. Porter, and latterly with his son-in-law, Mr.
F. Makin, of Koonoona (an extensive freehold station near
Burra Burra), and was for years largely interested in squatting
pursuits in the northern portion of this colony and in the
Darling district. The Para Para Estate at Gawler, his late
residence, is one of the most attractive spots in the southern
hemisphere. Mr. Duffield was regarded as a shrewd, straight-
forward, honest man; bore the highest character amongst
those with whom he was brought in contact, was thoroughly
respected in the district where he had spent so many years,
and his retirement into private life was universally regretted.
In his political career he was considered a strictly conscientious
representative, and was what may be termed a Liberal Con-
servative in politics. He left a widow, one son, Mr. D.
Walter Duffield, J.P., and five daughters, of whom three are
married. One is the wife of Lieut-Colonel Makin, another
of Dr. J. Davies Thomas, and a third of Mr. H. T. Bowen.
Rudolph Wilhelm Emil Henning,
■EMBER, of the House of Assembly for the District of
Albert since the beginning of the new Parliament in
1878. Arrived in the colony in the “Paulina” from Ger-
many, in December, 1849, with his parents. For fifteen years
was engaged with his father (the proprietor of a furniture and
mattress-making warehouse in Morphett-street,) and continued
the business on his own account for four years in Bundle-
street. Subsequently he became landlord of the Globe Hotel,
remaining there for five years. Afterwards he purchased,
with the Hon. R. D. Ross and the late Hon. J. Baker, the
Angipena, Motpena, and Artemar Stations, in the North.
The three partners sold the runs on September 21, 1883, to
Mr. J. Whyte, of Whyte, Counsell, & Co. In February, 1884,
became a partner in the firm of Aldridge & Bruce, and was
D


connected with it at the time of his death, the business
being conducted under the style of Henning, Eruce, & Al-
dridge. As to Mr. Henning’s public life, the only position
of consequence he filled was that in the Assembly as a thrice-
elected member for Albert. He was a somewhat prominent
man in the House, and took great pains in the preparation of
his speeches, which were well-considered and instructive.
All his sentences bore evidence of the possession of a
thoroughly logical mind. He was generally criticised as one
holding pessimistic views concerning the future of the
colony, but there was not the slightest doubt entertained by
his bitterest opponents regarding the perfect honesty of them.
He was gradually advancing in influence, and in due time
would probably have held a seat on the Treasury benches.
He died at Park Lodge, East-terrace, Adelaide, November 24,
1884, leaving a widow and family of eight.
James Mempes,
at Hover, Kent, England, August 1, 1818;
arrived at Port Adelaide by the “ Mary Ann Moffatt,”
in 1839 ; entered into business there, and was very successful,
till 1857, when the great fire occurred, and he was burnt out.
Euilt the large and commodious shops in St. Yincent-street,
near the railway-station, and also Cypress-terrace inWakefield-
street. Retired from business in 1866, and in 1875 left
South Australia with his wife, son, and two daughters. He
at present resides in the neighbourhood of London, and has,
since his sojourn there, developed a talent for painting.
Amongst specimens of his genius, three have recently arrived
in the colony, and embrace the following subjects : —“ The
Grand Canal, Venice,” “ A Port in Normandy,” and “An
Ideal Landscape.” They were exhibited for several weeks in
the Port Adelaide Art Gallery, and attracted the attention as


well as called forth the admiration of old Portonians, amongst
whom Mr. Mempes had so long lived, and by whom he was
so much respected. One of the daughters of Mr. Mempes is
married to the Rev. J. Hall Angas, the Presbyterian minister
of Port Adelaide, and his second son (Mortimer L.) is (like
his father) an artist of no mean capacity, he having gained
several prizes for his etchings, &c., in various competitions in
London, and, amongst others, one in connection with the
Crystal Palace.
Thos. Goode, Sen., J.P.
BORN in the West of England in 1816, arrived in South
Australia, 1851. In the early days of the Murray
River Steam Navigation Company’s existence he pitched his
tent at Goolwa, and opening a general store, watched patiently
for results. Owing to his untiring industry, he prospered,
and as Goolwa grew his business grew with it. There being no
medical practitioner, Mr. Goode, who was a thoroughly prac-
tical chemist, having had great medical and surgical experience
in the old country, became the friend and adviser of everyone
who had ailments of any kind. He turned his medical know-
ledge to account without fee or reward, as many owners of
broken legs and arms could testify. Mr. Goode erected
large and convenient premises for business, and threw him-
self heart and soul into every project for the advancement of
the South and benefit of the river trade. He was frequently
urged by numerous friends to allow himself lo be nominated
as representative in the House of Assembly, but as he never
courted popularity, and feeling that he could serve the dis-
trict better in a private capacity, declined to come forward.
Was placed on the Commission of the Peace, and exercised
his functions with moderation and uprightness. Believed in
the practicability of the Goolwa canal scheme, and advocated
d 2


its formation with energy, gathering a great deal of informa-
tion, and making valuable diagrams and models, illustrating
the manner in which the work could be carried out success-
fully. In philanthropic movements he was ready with sym-
pathizing heart and hand to afford relief and assistance.
Several years since, owing to an internal complaint, Mr.
Goode retired from business, leaving it to be conducted by
his sons, Messrs. Thomas and Edward Goode. Even then
his active mind could not rest, for he was invariably
engaged either in directing farming operations or making
improvements in his residence and grounds near Goolwa. He
was one of the trustees of the Wesleyan Church, and a
liberal supporter of its funds. He died at Goolwa, October
25, 1882, aged 66. Mr. Goode was the brother of Messrs.
M. & C. H. Goode, merchants, of Adelaide.
Frederick Simeon Carus Driffield,
son of the late Rev. C. G. T. Driffield, Vicar of
lH Prescot, Lancashire; born 1825, came out to South
Australia in the “ Posthumous” in 1849, in partnership
with his brother and James H. Parr, with whom, soon
after their arrival, he built a flour mill near Woodside ;
went to the Victorian diggings in 1851, returning in 1853;
became Secretary of the Agricultural and Horticultural
Society in 1856, which he held for nearly ten years, during
which time he started, and brought to a verv successful issue,
* o o /
the West Adelaide Building Society; was the manager of the
Adelaide Lloyd’s, afterwards the Adelaide Insurance Com-
pany for eight or ten years, giving it up in 1872, when
he became the Secretary of the Chamber of Commerce.
Married a daughter of the late Joseph McMinn, by whom he
has one daughter and six sons.


William Fiveash,
at North-fleet, Kent, England, Dec. 24, 1825,
arrived in South Australia, July 12,1852. Wasformany
years traveller for the firm of Jos. Skelton & Co., and while
so engaged, became connected with the late Mr. J. E. Seppelt
(father of the present Mr. B. Seppelt), of Seppeltsfield, and
through that connection was mainly instrumental in building
up one of the largest wine businesses in the Australias.
Has always avoided politics, although often solicited to come
forward as a candidate for Parliamentary, as well as Municipal
honours. Was one of the founders of the Masonic body
under the Irish constitution in this colony, and held the
position of first Deputy P.G.M. for fourteen years, under the
late Hon. J. T. Bagot, and the present P.G.M. W. J. Crawford,
Esq. It is mainly due to his energy that that body owes the
erection of their handsome building in Way mouth-street,
known as the Alfred Masonic Hall, he having originated the
idea, and collected over £1,500 towards the fund to build
—a fact that body recognized when paying him the compliment
of appointing him Chairman of their Trustees, and by the
gathering which took place on the occasion of his laying the
commemoration-stone, November 26, 1883. He was appointed
a Justice of the Peace Oct. 10, 1883.
Mrs. William Finlayson,
S REIVED in South Australia, with her husband, in the
“John Renwick,” in February, 1837. These were
primitive times, and the hardships which the young couple
had to endure, in common with the few score other persons
who had then reached these shores, were not small. All
their privations and troubles were, however, borne with a
fortitude and hopefulness which some immigrants of more


recent days might emulate. Mr. Finlayson wished to act as
missionary to the natives, but he was unable to carry out
his design except to a modified extent. He for a year or two
resided in Adelaide, and assisted the Eev. T. Q, Stow, the
first Congregational minister here, in the erection of the little
reed-thatched place of worship in which he began his minis-
trations. Entering the employ of the South Australian
Company, he and his wife took up their quarters a few miles
from Adelaide, and often, in the absence of her husband,
whose name is to be found in the list of the early explorers,
Mrs. Finlayson found herself alone with hundreds of savages,
who, however, never attempted to molest her, but treated her
with profound respect and submitted themselves implicitly
to her directions, Hot long after coming to the colony, Mr.
and Mrs. Finlayson settled on a farm near Mitcham, to which
the name of Helenholme was given, where they continued
for something like a quarter of a century. As their children
grew up the parents removed to Adelaide, but three or four
years ago returned to their former residence. The deceased
lady studiously avoided taking part in public movements, but
much of her time was devoted to deeds of kindness and
charity. Her motto throughout life was “ Better are the
blessings of the poor than the praises of the rich,” and scores
of those who have been the recipients of her kindly counsel
and generous help affectionately cherish her memory and
genuinely mourn the death of one ever ready with consola-
tion and succour. Mrs. Finlayson had reached her 73rd
year when she fell a victim to an illness beginning with in-
flammation of the lungs, which kept her a prisoner for five
months. She left a husband, four sons (Messrs. R. K. Fin-
layson, W. Finlayson, J. Harvey Finlayson, andE. Finlayson),
five daughters, and twenty-four grand-children.


William Oswald Whitridge,
WILDEST son of W. W. R. Whitridge (at one time news-
paper proprietor, author, and one of the editors of the
South Australian Register). Born at Kensington, S.A.,
August 14, 1853. Educated at the Adelaide Educational
Institution, by Mr. J. L. Young. Left school when fourteen
years old, and was apprenticed at the Register office, where
he has been employed ever since, and has passed through the
various stages of newspaper work. Has always taken the
liveliest interest in colonial cricket affairs, and was once one
of the leading players here. Has represented the colony on
several occasions in Intercolonial and International matches 1
in one contest, Eeb. 1876, particularly, bowling with remark-
able success against a Victorian team, securing eight wickets
for twelve runs. Has been identified with the Norwood
Cricket Club for twenty years, and for some seasons past has
filled the position of Secretary. Is the compiler and proprietor
of “ The South Australian Cricketer’s Guide,” first published
in 1877, and is the Australian correspondent for some foreign
publications. In 1884 was chosen the first selector of teams
to the South Australian Cricketing Association.
William Edwin Black
SRRIYED in South Australia by the ship Coromandel,
__ January, 1837. Took part in the survey of Adelaide
under Colonel Light, and assisted in defining the chief roads
of a settlement which he lived to see become a large and
important city. He always maintained a deep interest in the
politics of his adopted country, and was intimately associated
with many benefit societies in their infancy. For years he
was the Tyler of a number of Freemason’s Lodges, and was
Grand Tyler for the District to which they belonged. He was


Treasurer of the Hope Lodge, M.U. of Oddfellows, for twenty-
seven years; for two years Treasurer of the Perseverance
Lodge, 1.0.0. F., and was the founder of the Allied Lodge
U.O.A.D. To him belongs the distinction of being the
father of the first white boy born in South Australia. This
first of native-born South Australians came into the world on
Feb. 22, 1837, and was named “ William Josiah.” This fact
is borne out by an entry in the diary of Sir. J. H. Fisher, as
follows . —“ The first white boy born in this colony was bom
of hlach parents. ” William Josiah Black was killed at
Currency Creek in Hov. 1846. Mr. Black died on Feb. 17,
1884. Apropos of this subject it may be mentioned that Mrs.
Morgan, the eldest daughter of the Hon. B. T. Finniss, was
the first female child of European descent born in South
Australia. She died at Horwood, May 30, 1865, aged twenty-
eight years.*
William Robert Smith Cooke,
§HE of the earliest of South Australian settlers, and well-
known amongst surviving old colonists as the head of
the firm of August Cooke & Co., Merchants, of Adelaide.
He was a man of great perseverance and energy, and these
qualities were most prominently shown during the great
depression of 1843, when he, in common with others in com-
mercial pursuits, suffered losses. He was afterwards connected
with the brewing interests, and next came to the front as a
wheat speculator and miller. He built the Victoria Mill in
Grenfell-street, now a part of Messrs. Milne & Cods wine and
spirit store; and died in the year 1852.
* Mr. Hiram Mildred informs me that the first white boy born in
South Australia was the son of a Mr. Hoare, and that he is still living.
What construction then can be placed on Sir J. H. Fisher’s statement
on the same matter ? — Author.


James F. Wigley,
fIETH son of the late Mr. H. R. Wigley ; arrived in the
colony from England in 1848, where he had gained
first honors at the Mathematical School, Christ’s Hospital.
Was for some years with Messrs. Montefiore and Sons, mer-
chants, hut at the time when the diggings in Victoria were
prospering, he went thither, and started business as a mer-
chant. Returned to Adelaide in 1865, and entered with
•great vigor into Exchange business. He was a shrewd man,
a fortunate speculator, and one of the first to turn his atten-
tion to the prospects of the Northern Territory. He never
took any specially active part in public matters, though he
was twice an unsuccessful candidate—once for the Legisla-
tive Council, two or three years ago, and later on for the New
■castle district. His death, which was very sudden, occurred
in his 54th year, at North Adelaide, in June, 1884. He left
a widow, three sons, and two daughters. Mr. W. R. Wigley,
■solicitor, of Adelaide, and Mr. T. Wigley, of New Zealand,
are his brothers. Mr. J. F. Wigley was a large shareholder
in several of our dividend companies, but would never hold
non-paying dividend shares. In commercial transactions his
word was his bond, and he was one of the most popular
members of the Adelaide Club.
John Mitchell, J.P.
ft'f
■'B) CRN in Glasgow, June 17, 1832; arrived in Melbourne,
JS Victoria, in 1852, where be for a time engaged in
mining pursuits; came to Adelaide, South Australia, in
January, 1853 ; associated with the town of Gawler from
the year 1858, a resident of it for 26 years, and identified
with all movements for its benefit. Entered the employ of
Messrs. W. Duffield & Co., afterwards became partner in the


firm, and subsequently a partner with Messrs. Mitchell, Fox,
and Co. He was a first-class accountant, a man of strict
integrity, and although somewhat irascible in temperament, of
such thoroughness of heart and purpose fhat JjejDOssessed a
large circle of friends. He was a keehljSfipporter of the
Institute, and one of the most active honorary secretaries it has
ever had. He exhibited great activity in getting up enter-
tainments on its behalf, helped to place it on a firm basis,
and was made a life member. He identified himself with
the Corporation, for some years was a councillor, and also
occupied the position of Mayor. During his term of office the
new post-office was erected, and the foundation-stone laid by him.
As a recognition of his services he was made a J.P., and his
actions in that capacity gave general satisfaction. Several
years ago his health failed, and, in spite of sea voyages, he
gradually grew worse, and expired at his residence, Gowan
Brae, June 18, 1884, aged 52. Mr. Mitchell was a P.G. of
the Oddfellows, a member of the Foresters, and a firm sup-
porter of the Presbyterian Church. He left a widow, two
daughters, and a son, who still carries on the business of the
firm of Mitchell & Co., at Gawler.
Rev. Frederick Searle,
B|O]SrGREGATIOHALIST. Born July 24, 1848, at Tavis-
} tock, Devonshire, England; died at College Park, July
24, 1883, aged 35. Educated in Somersetshire. Even as a
boy he evinced strong religious tendencies, which, matured by
time, brought him to the front as an earnest and zealous
minister. He arrived in Adelaide in 1864, under engagement to
Messrs. G. & B. Wills & Co., wholesale drapers, and by his
diligence and business-like qualifications w T as ultimately ap-
pointed manager of one of the most important departments
by the firm. Entered the ministry in 1876, being actuated


to take such a step by the belief that be could there do much
good. For some time previously he was engaged in lay-
preaching, but the better to qualify himself for a clerical
position he went to England in April, 1876, and there became
a student at New College, under Dr. Newth. Returned
to South Australia in October, 1879, to take charge of the
pastorate of the College Park Congregational Church, and
retained this position until April, 1883, when failing health
caused him to resign. Mr. Searle was an advocate for funeral
reform, and his funeral, in accordance with his request, was
not marked by the usual symbols of mourning. He left a
wife and three children, a brother (Mr. R. Searle), and a mother
(Mrs. Searle) well known in connection with philanthropic
work in Adelaide.
John Whinham,
IEIOUNDER of that scholastic institution, Whinham Col-
li 5 lege. He has been all his life an educationist, and is
probably the oldest schoolmaster in the colony, if not in the
Australian colonies. Born in 1803, at Sharperton, Nor-
thumberland, he at an early age evinced a decided bent for
the acquisition of knowledge. He would walk miles to hear
a scientific lecture, and thought no exertion too great and no
toil too hard, so long as he could thereby add to his stores of
learning. He displayed an almost equal taste for mathematics
and the classics, and under a scholarly Roman Catholic priest
qualified himself, by the time he was nineteen years of age,
for taking a degree in the University of Dublin; but the
sudden illness of a sister and friend, both of whom subse-
quently died, led him to abandon his intention as he was on
the eve of starting for Ireland. He then devoted his attention
to teaching, and had a good school in the quiet rustic village
of Ovingham, by Newcastle-on-Tyne. His abilities as a
teacher were in due course recognised, and he had some


tempting offers to open a school in Newcastle, but always
resisted them, preferring the simplicity of a rural town to the
noisy turmoil of a large city. After pursuing the even tenor
of his way for nearly a quarter of a century, during which he
married and became the father of five daughters and two sons,
he was a victim of the financial disasters which in 1848-9
ruined so many persons in England. His savings, invested in
collieries, steamboats, and banks, were swept away, and after
waiting a long time for liquidation of the various companies,
he gathered sufficient out of the general wreck to pay for the
passage of himself and family to Australia, and reached
Adelaide in the year 1852, beginning the world again at a
period when most men have passed the meridian of their
strength and life. He brought wdth him agricultural
implements, thinking that possibly farming would be the
only pursuit to which he could successfully devote his attention
in the colony, but fortunately for the cause of education, he
was led to resume his old work. He was teacher of Mathe-
matics at St. Peter’s College, and after a while left the college
to start a school himself at North Adelaide. He brought
letters of introduction to Colonel Freeling, Mr. Anthony
Forster, and other leading colonists, but was so independent
and determined to succeed only upon his own merits, that he
would not make use of a single adventitious aid to advance the
prospects of his school. Thus he began with one scholar and
added others as his fame as a teacher spread. Solidly was
his establishment founded and built up, for without the help
of patronage, without the tempting bait of endowment, he
.competed successfully with institutions which had these
inducements. Thousands of youths, now living in all parts
•of the colony—some successful squatters and farmers, some
holding high position in the mercantile community, and
.others winning fame as lawyers and journalists, have passed
through his hands, and upon all of them he ever sought to
impress the force and beauty of those principles of conduct


which were illustrated by his own simple and blameless life.
He retired a few years ago from the active duties of his pro-
fession, after a scholastic career of over half a century ; and in
his cheery old age had the satisfaction of seeing the same
principles which he inculcated, the same system, and the
same discipline which he observed, carried out in their
integrity by his son Robert, who, until the sad and fatal
accident which deprived him of life occurred, was the Principal
of the establishment.
Robert Whinham,
of the above, whose sad death took place at North
IP Adelaide, on the 10th October, 1884, by a fall from his
horse, was a young man eminently respected by all classes for
his sterling qualities and kindly disposition. His long asso-
ciation with the educational institution of which for some
years he had been Principal, gave him a position of com-
manding influence, and he was fully alive to the importance
of his work, and with characteristic energy and conscious-
ness fulfilled its responsible duties. Numbers of scholars
who have been under his training and that of his respected
father, occupy, with credit to themselves, responsible posi-
tions in this colony. While teaching was the work of his
life, Mr. Whinham ungrudgingly gave valuable help at enter-
tainments for religious and charitable purposes, where his
exceptional gift as an elocutionist (the knowledge of which
he acquired from his mother) were a source of pleasure to all
who heard him. His death in the prime of life, and at the
early age of 37, was much deplored, and its sad tidings came
on the community like a shock. The Hon. W. B. Kounse-
vell, M.P., and other old scholars of Whinham College, have
interested themselves in establishing a scholarship, entitled
the “ Kobert Whinham Scholarship,’ 5 and a monument or
tablet is to be erected over the grave of the deceased.


Rev. James Lyall,
BOKH in 1827, at Edinburgh, Scotland. Studied at the
> Universities of Edinburgh and Glasgow, and at the
Divinity Hall, United Presbyterian Church, in the latter
city. Engaged for about ten years in mission work in
Edinburgh. Arrived in South Australia in 1857, where he
took charge of the Presbyterian Church in Couger-street, and
afterwards in Flinders-street, in 1875. He is still the minis-
ter of that church, and, notwithstanding his advanced age,
active in mind and body. In June, 1884, Mr. Lyall, who
had acted as Hon. Clerical Secretary to the Adelaide City
Mission for a number of years, resigned that office, in conse-
quence of “ heavy domestic affliction, and the paramount
duties of his pastorate and Presbytery,” requiring his con-
stant attention.
Dr. Benj. F. Frankis,
m NATIVE of Bristol, where his father held a leading
-A-| position as a solicitor. Studied medicine in London,
filling his course at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital; took his
degrees, and was for some time connected with the Infirmary
of his native town. Bemoved to the neighborhood of Surrey,
but finding his health failing, he obtained an appointment as
surgeon of the ship “ Spartan,” carrying emigrants to Hew
Zealand. The climate of the Australias appearing to agree
with his health, he returned to England to secure a second
appointment as ship’s surgeon, and this was effected on the
“William Hyde,” bound for Adelaide and Sydney. On
arrival in 1852, after a short trial of the goldfields, he finally
settled in Adelaide, at the south end of King William-street,
where he soon established a large and lucrative practice, and
remained many years, gaining the warm affection of his


numerous patients, and the respect of his professional brethren.
He was held in high esteem by all classes, his quiet, unas-
suming manner and kindly disposition making him a favourite
with the poorer community. He has long since retired from
practice, and is now enjoying in his native land the well-
earned reward of a long and useful professional career.
Hon. Jno. Dunn,
WAS a lad of ten summers when he arrived in
Adelaide, in 1840, with his father, who then had
to avail himself of his aid in building the first windmill. In
1843 a second mill was built and started, and as Mr. Dunn
appeared to possess much of his parent’s genius for designing,
plans for future mills were entrusted to him. He was admit-
ted a partner in the business in 1852, and in ten years
acquired a competency, which enabled him to carry out a long-
cherished desire, viz., to devote his life and energies to Chris-
tian missions. Accompanied by his noble young wife, he
embarked for the South Sea Islands, under the auspices of the
Wesleyan Missionary Society, but after a year’s trial he was
compelled to abandon his enterprise on account of ill-health,
and return to Adelaide. Being too energetic to remain idle,
Mr. Dunn erected the well-known large and powerful mill
at Port Adelaide, and on its completion arrangements
were made for a re-union in business between father and son.
Since then the sphere of operations has widened considerably
and to-day the subject of this sketch is a partner of the largest
milling firm in the Australias. Mr. Dunn first entered Par-
liament in 1875, when he contested a seat with Dr. Hiihbe
for the Assembly. He was returned at the head of the poll
in 1880 for the Upper House, with more votes (6,375) than
any member sent to the Council prior to this election. A
leader in one of the dailies had the following remarks: —■


“ Mr. Dunn is a practical gentleman, and a good man of
business; a man of plain common sense, without any crot-
chets, and he may be expected to vote right as a rule,”
&c. Mr. Dunn’s extensive business engagements prevent
him from taking any prominent part in Parliament.
A parliamentary critic, in commenting on the individual
members of the House, says : —“ The Hon. J. Dunn is a
capital story-teller. You would hardly think it to look at
him, but he has a keen appreciation of humour. He speaks
so quietly and so quaintly that you do not expect jokes from
him till you know his style. You would as soon expect a
facetious remark from the statue of Carlyle; but with those
who are familiar with Mr. Dunn there are current traditions of
many a jolly trip with the unassuming Miller Prince.’ 7
Though his time is devoted to business, he also renders good
service to the public interests in many ways, and with hand
and purse is ever ready to give assistance when and where it
is really needed.
James Elliott, J.P.,
MDITOR and part proprietor of the Kapunda Herald .
JM Arrived with his brother in Adelaide, in 1852. Was
chairman of the Hospital Board, Vice-President of the In-
stitute, member of the School Board of Advice, the Horti-
cultural Society, and Dutton Park Committees, and Director
of the Marble and Building Company, all of Kapunda. He
was closely connected with the Friendly Societies, and Past-
master of the Masonic Lodge. Mr. Elliott devoted himself
with great zeal and intelligence to the work of conducting
the paper of which he was editor, and his articles were always
well written and distinguished by their smartness and
piquancy. He was the real founder of Dutton Park and the
Kapunda Hospital; both institutions owing their origin to


WM. HILL, J.P.


his correspondence with Mr. Dutton, which led that gentle-
man to give liberally towards them. There can be little
doubt that his life was shortened by his ceaseless activity of
mind and body. He suffered from prolonged attacks of ill-
ness, but as soon as he was able to resume work was ever at
the post of duty, Mr. Elliott’s life was in harmony with his
public career. True and steadfast as a private friend, he
was one who could be relied on for sympathy and help when
really needed. Those who knew him best, esteemed him
most. He was in his 47th year of age when he died, on
April 22, 1883.
Joseph Elliott, J.P.,
in 1834, died at Strathalbyn, May 21, 1883, aged
49. Arrived in the colony by the “Temora,” in 1852.
First employed on the staff of the S. A. Register , and sub-
sequently in the jobbing department of that office, where he
remained for some time. He ultimately opened two printing
offices on his own account in Adelaide, and published the
Musical Herald and Adelaide Miscellany. He was not suc-
cessful with these, and shortly after removed to Strathalbyn,
where he had purchased the Southern Argus , of which he
continued proprietor and editor till his death. He was a
great lover of music, and a pleasing composer. The songs —
“Bygone Days,” “ Unforgotten,” “The Song of the Bell,”
“Visions of Youth,’ 7 with several dance and sacred pieces
are still popular, and exhibit his skill in this direction. Mr.
Elliott was twice married, and left a grown-up family. He
was a member of the Strathalbyn Town Council, Secretary
of the local Railway Committee, and member of the Free-
masons, Foresters, and Oddfellows’ Orders. His decease was
doubtless hastened by the intelligence of the death of his
brother James, of Kapunda.
E


Jacob Bowden,
A NATIVE of Cornwall, where he was horn, April 1,
1809. Arrived in the colony by the “ Eoyal Admiral,”
January, 1838. Established business as an herbalist in
Gilles-street in that year, and continued the same till 1882,
when he retired in favour of his son. Many most successful
cures have been effected by his treatment, and during a long
and successful practice he has epjoyed the confidence of the
public. Mr. Bowden is now in his 77th year, and is a
veritable type of the South Australian pioneer colonist.
Rev. Thomas Hope,
BOEN in Manchester, 1846. Studied at Owen’s College,
and at Lancashire Independent College, with a view
of preparing for the ministry. In 1872 was ordained, and
accepted the charge of the Congregational Church, Bungay,
Suffolk. His health failing, was recommended to try the
colonies. Arrived in South Australia in 1874, and in May
of that year accepted the pastorate of Clayton Church, Ken-
sington, at which place he still continues his ministry.
G. M. Waterhouse,
BORN at Penzance, Cornwall, April 6, 1824. Son of the
Rev, John Waterhouse, of that town. Educated at the
Wesleyan College, Kingswood, near Bristol. His father and
family left England for Hobart and arrived there February 2,
1839, where the subject of this notice was employed in a
merchant’s office. This gentleman having business relation-
ships with Adelaide, Mr. Waterhouse was led to turn his
attention to South Australia, and early in 1843 came here


and commenced business on bis own account. He was a
successful merchant, ultimately retired, and turned his
7 O 7
attention to politics. He represented East Torrens in the
first Parliament (July, 1851), and held office in several
successive Ministries. He voted against the first reading of
the Bill to legalize State Aid to Religion, in August, 1851,
and was instrumental in bringing about many excellent
measures. He was a member of the Central Road Board in
1852, but resigned towards the close of the same year. He
left for blew Zealand in 1864, where he is now located. He
is connected with the Legislative Council of that colony, and
was recently Acting-Governor of the province.
F. W. Andrews,
HWAXEDERMIST, was about sixty years of age at the
<Jy> time of his death, which occurred on the 19th October,
1884, near Mount Jagged, Willunga. He is supposed to
have lost his life by falling into a waterhole whilst suffering
from the effects of sunstroke. He was engaged as a collector
for over thirty years in this colony, having been “inducted ”
to that office by Mr. Waterhouse, late Curator of the Adelaide
Museum. For a considerable time he was stationed at Port
Lincoln, and afterwards accompanied the late Mr. Lewis on
his expedition to Lake Eyre, where he made discoveries of
two species of birds new to science, besides gathering a large
and valuable collection of the fauna of that locality. When
Mr. S. White projected his unfortunate expedition to Cape
York and JSTew Guinea, he secured Mr. Andrews’ services,
and he obtained an immense collection of rare and valuable
specimens of natural history, which, upon Mr. White’s decease,
were placed in charge of the Curator of the South Australian
Museum. Although at first Mr. Andrews had but slight
knowledge of natural history, he, during the thirty years of
e 2


active collection, acquired an almost profound acquaintance
with the fauna of Australia, and especially of that of the back
country to the westward and north and north-eastward of
Adelaide. He was an acute observer, and knew the habits
of nearly all of our native birds and other animals. He was
also very quick as a taxidermist, and collections of specimens
of natural histor} r of South Australia made by him may be
found in museums all over the world. Prior to arrival in the
colony, he was one of the band of the Coldstream Guards
when that regiment was at Dublin, Ireland, and was an
excellent performer on the ophecleide. It is satisfactory to
know that the majority of the specimens collected by Mr.
Andrews were secured for the S.A. Museum, where they can
be inspected by those curious in such matters.
Joel Roberts,
IS of Yorkshire descent, and in early life associated with
the woollen industries of Huddersfield. Arrived here by
the brig “ Arab ” in August, 1843, and immediately entered
upon sheep farming, which he pursued for some years. On
leaving the country he settled in business in the city, and
took considerable interest in establishing the Mechanics’
Institute, which developed into the South Australian Insti-
tute, recently divided into the Public Library and Circulating
Library. For several years he was actively engaged in
mining ventures, especially in searching for coal. The dis-
covery of gold in Victoria having stopped mining enterprise
in South Australia, he went to West Australia, and started
business at Perth for a short period. Returning to this
colony he entered into manufacturing pursuits at Thebarton
and Hindmarsh, until failing health compelled him to rest for
a time. He next commenced business in Adelaide as a land


and commission agent, being one of the earliest licensed
brokers under the Real Property Act, and one of the oldest
members of the Exchange. In former years, when the con-
test was waged in regard to State Aid to Religion, he warmly
espoused its abolition. He has one son, James P. Roberts,
in business in Adelaide.
H. J. Cook,
9RESIDEXT of Payneham, South Australia, for up-
wards of thirty-five years, up to the time of his
decease, which took place October 25, 1884. Mr. Cook was
the local postmaster, and highly respected by a large circle of
friends. He took an active interest in local matters, was Presi-
dent of the Volunteer Fire Brigade, member of Court
Foresters’ Call, A.0.F., P.C.R.’s Percy and Morphett, Court
Perseverance, and other courts, and one of the committee of
the Payneham Institute.
F. W. Kleinschmidt, J.P.
BEW of the early pioneers of South Australia have had a
more varied experience than the subject of this notice.
He was born near Bremen, in 1810, and left his native land
in 1836, under engagement to the South Australian Company
at Kangaroo Island. The hardships and privations endured
by the early settlers are said to bear no comparison to those
which had to be endured by first arrivals at Kangaroo Island.
Water was scarce and food scant, the chief means of subsist-
ence being kangaroo and the few edible roots to be obtained.
Shortly after the South Australian Company left the island
and transferred their operations to the mainland, Mr. Klein-
schmidt quitted its service, and entered into business on his


own account. He was by trade a sugar-boiler, but having
learned the art of building, he contracted for and built the
first Government offices erected in the colony. He did
fairly well at his business, and acquired land in Rundle-street.
This he sold, and started farming at Hahndorf, remaining there
till 1843, when he removed to Lobethal. Imbued with
strong religious feelings, he conceived the idea of erecting a
church in connection with the Lutheran Mission, and with
his own hands built one at Lobethal, known as the “ Wein-
berg Christi.” In 1851 he, with others, started a brewery,
which was conducted till 1872, when he sold the connection
to Messrs. J. A. & G. Johnston, of Oakbank. In 1873 he
started the Lobethal Tweed Factory, and lost no inconsider-
able amount. In 1869 he commenced hop-growing, and
when the tweed factory failed, threw his whole energy into
the hop plantation, and was very fortunate ; he not only paid
off all liabilities in connection with the tweed factory, but
also placed himself once more in a substantial and flourishing
position. He was chairman of, and for several years a coun-
cillor in, the Onkaparinga District Council. He died at
Lobethal, December 10, 1884.
Charles Algernon Wilson,
§ORX and educated at Turnham Green, near London, and
_ 1 on leaving school entered as clerk in the Bank of Ire-
land. Arrived in South Australia with his parents by the
ship “Duke of Roxburgh,” July 1838. His father, Mr. Thos.
Wilson, became a prominent colonist, and was for many years
a member of the legal firm of Smart, Wilson & Bayne.
He served one year, between 1842 and 1843, as mayor of the
city, being the second occupant of that office. He was a
Fellow of the S.A. Society of Arts, which flourished here
some forty years ago, and an active friend of educational and


scientific movements. Mr. C. A. Wilson’s first appointment
dates back to September 9, 1846. He was appointed Regis-
trar of Probates and Commissioner of Inland Revenue in 1858,
and as Chief Clerk at the Supreme Court in 1876. He was,
in fact, the first Clerk to the Supreme Court, and during Mr.
Justice Cooper’s absence from the colony acted as Master.
Altogether, he spent thirty-eight years in the Government
service, and during the whole of his connection with the
legal profession had to the fullest extent their confidence on
the one hand, and on the other that of the public who were
brought into contact with him. He was a kindly, unassuming
man, having a good word for almost every one, and enjoying
the personal friendship of a wide circle of people. Apart
from official work, Mr. Wilson took great interest in scientific
and educational matters. He was one of the earliest mem-
bers of the Adelaide Philosophical Society, wdiich was the
forerunner of the present Royal Society, and contributed to it
numerous valuable papers. He was a frequent and valued
contributor to the Press, and his principal theme was the
favorite science of entomology, to which he was devotedly
attached, and of which he wrote under the nom de plume of
“ Naturae Amator.” Many will remember his practical
series of articles published in the Farm and Garden twenty-
two years ago, upon “Insects injurious to our Native Eu-
calypti.” His style was pithy, and he loved the homely
Saxon to set off the necessary technical terminology. He
was a keen observer, and his writings were those of an ex-
pert, whose knowledge was well grounded, and whose opinions
were entitled to respect. In this he was no unworthy kins-
man of his relative Wallace, the great naturalist, author of
“ The Malay Archipelago ” and many other equally delightful
and instructive books. In 1883, Mr. Wilson received twelve
months’ leave of absence on account of ill-health, but was not
again able to attend to his official duties. He died at Ken-
sington, June 20, 1884, aged 66 years.


C. H. Compton,
BORN in Devonshire, England, in 1831, and at an early
age was a pupil in the Royal Academy of Music. He
was for many years organist to Her Majesty, and officiated at
the Chapel Royal, Savoy, London. In 1861 he came to
South Australia, following the occupation of a teacher of music
for about three years. He then left for Melbourne, where he
was for some time engaged on the Press of that city, and
acted as organist of St. Patrick’s Cathedral. In 1868 Mr.
G. B. W. Lewis, of Melbourne, proceeded to India with a
dramatic company, Mr. Compton accompanying him as leader
of the orchestra. He accepted the position of organist of St.
Paul’s Church, Calcutta, which he kept for some time,
surrendering it to carry out a contract for supplying the
Indian Government with Western Australian timber for
railway sleepers, and in pursuance of this business travelled
for some time between Calcutta and Perth. Mr. Compton
was not fortunate in the speculation, for in the following year
he settled in Perth, engaged in teaching music and officiated
as organist of St. George’s Cathedral. In 1875 he returned
to Calcutta, where he accepted the post of leader of the
orchestra at the Corinthian Theatre. The members of the
orchestra were all Italians, left there by Signor Cagli, and
they objected to be conducted by an Englishman. His
engagement was cancelled by the management, and Mr.
Compton commenced a suit for salary for the balance of the
season, which terminated in his favour. He then left Calcutta,
and returned to Western Australia, where he remained until
some four years ago, when he again visited Adelaide,
embarking in commercial pursuits, and also resumed the
position of organist of Christ Church, North Adelaide, which
he had filled before. He occasionally appeared before the
public as a pianist, his last engagement in that capacity being
with Dr. Sylvester at Garner’s Assembly Rooms. At length


cancer in the stomach, to which he finally succumbed,
manifested itself, and he sank quickly. Mr. Compton’s last
days were soothed by the kind offices of Mr. and Mrs. Wood-
man and Mr. Joseph Bennett, who were untiring in their
attention to the sufferer. He died September 21, 1883, at
North Adelaide, leaving a brother in Western Australia and
one in Melbourne.
Benjamin Boothby, C.E.,
SECOND son of the late Mr. Justice Boothby, and born in
_) Nottingham in 1829. He served his articles as an
architect and surveyor with William Rogers, Esq., of Lambeth,
during which time he had charge of numerous important
works. He came to the colony in the year 1853, and during
the next year was appointed Superintending Surveyor of the
Southern District of the Central Road Board. He occupied
this position for about six years, and accepted the office of
Manager of Waterworks on March 11, 1861. On February
19, 1868, he returned to the Central Road Board service as
Superintending Surveyor of the North-Eastern District, and
remained there until December 31, 1870, when the office was
abolished. He practised his profession for a short time, and
in 1872 he, with the assistance of some friends, formed the
Glenelg Railway Company, and superintended the construction
of the Railway, 'which was successfully opened in 1873. He
occupied the position of General Manager and Engineer of
that line until 1879. Mr. Boothby was of a quiet and
retiring nature, and did not come prominently before the general
public, but he enjoyed the highest esteem of a large circle of
friends. He died at Glenelg, August 13, 1884, and left a
widow and six sons. His several brothers are well knowm in
official and commercial circles.


Ven. Canon W. H. Coombs,
INCUMBENT of St. George’s Church, Gawler, Canon of
Adelaide, and Rural Dean, horn at Marlborough, Wilt-
shire, England; educated at St. Bees’ College, and ordained
by Bishop Bloomfield at St. Paul’s Cathedral, London.
Arrived in South Australia in 1846, as missionary of the
Society for Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts to
Gawler, Lyndoch, and the northern districts. The Rev.
Canon Coombs may he regarded as one of the pioneers of
Gawler, and his ministrations in connection with that town
extend over thirty-eight years. His kindly disposition, com-
bined with liberal opinions, have secured him a large number
of friends, and his intellectual and bodily vigor is such that
many young men may well envy his capacities for work.
In movements of a political or philanthropic character, either
for the benefit of the many or the individual, he is ever ready
to counsel or succour those in distress. He still officiates at
St. George’s, and it is the desire of the residents of the
Modern Athens that he may long be spared to conduct the
duties of the church with which he has been so long and
honorably connected. Three of Stuart’s exploration parties,
on their departure and return, attended divine service in this
church, when special sermons on their behalf were preached
by the incumbent. It may not be out of place to mention
that St. George’s accommodates 400 worshippers, and that
upwards of 4,000 children have been baptized, and some 800
couples married in it. It has several memorial windows of
very elegant designs, the principal one containing Colonel
Gawler’s crest and motto, with a suitable inscription under-
neath. The splendid silver communion service, presented by
that Governor to Canon Coombs for the use of the congregation,
is still regarded as an interesting souvenir of hy-gone days.
Several important additions and alterations have recently
been made to this church, at a cost of upwards of £2,000.


Captain George Bain Johnston
WAS bom at Cockenzie, in the county of Haddington,
Scotland, on the 26th November, 1829. He was
educated at Steel’s Hospital, parish of Tranent. At the age
of 15 he became an apprentice on board the schooner “ Mary
Donaldson,” and served four years in the foreign trade. At
the expiration of this time he went to England, and in 1852
came to Australia. His first voyage was with Captain Cadell,
in the River Murray Navigation Company’s steamer “Lady
Augusta.” In 1855 he became captain of the “ Albury ,r
steamer, newly launched from Glasgow. On arriving at
Moama he met with a serious accident, caused by the punt
rope not being slackened down at the report of the whistle,
consequently he was thrown into the stokehole, breaking his
leg and two ribs —this being the third time the same limb
was broken. The residents of Albury were overjoyed at
seeing Captain Johnston and steamer arrive, gave him a ban-
quet in honor of his great achievement, and also presented
him with one hundred sovereigns, which were expended in a
magnificent silver cup suitably inscribed. After continuing
in this trade for some years, he joined partnership with Mr.
Charles Murphy, and purchased the steamers “ Moolgewanke ”
and the “Albury.” By their strenuous efforts they prospered
and became large steamboat proprietors and merchants on the
Murray and its tributaries, and the firm of Johnston and
Murphy was favourably known far and wide in connection
with the river trade. In 1864 they built the “ Maranoa,”
and in 1866 Captain Johnston went to Scotland to superin-
tend the building of a paddle-wheel steamer named the
“ Murray.” After being loaded there, she sailed under canvas
to Port Victor, and thence to Port Adelaide. In 1873, the
firm of Johnston & Murphy dissolved partnership, the
business being carried on by Captain Johnston alone. Desi-


Tons as ever of seeing the river traffic carried through the
river mouth, he again sailed for Scotland in 1877 for the
purpose of superintending in person the construction of a
suitable vessel. “ The Queen of the South ” (on arrival of
which Captain Johnston was presented by his fellow-towns-
men with a handsome silver epergne) did good service in the
trade during the seasons of 1878 and 1879, and many will
long remember the pleasant voyages made in her with her
brave, skilful, and kind-hearted commander. He built the
“ Cadell,” one of the finest of the river fleet, fitting her up
with engines brought out in the “ Queen of the South ” ; and
later on constructed at Goolwa the “ Monarch,’ 5 said to have
the largest carrying capacity of any barge on the rivers. The
business during the last few years has been carried on in
partnership with Mr. Kirkpatrick, of Wilcannia, under the
style of Geo. Johnston & Co. By his death the river trade
lost one of its most successful navigators, and South Aus-
tralia a loyal, intelligent, and enterprising colonist. Captain
Johnston’s courage and skill are well known. He saved no
less than fourteen persons from drowning, and was a recipient
of the Royal Humane Society’s medal. He married Eliza-
beth, daughter of Mr. James Barclay, of Cockenzie, who,
with four sons and three daughters, is left to mourn an irre-
parable loss. A brave, kind spirit has gone from among men,
but those who enjoyed his intimate friendship will cherish
his memory till life’s latest hour. When the fell disease
that terminated his earthly career began to show its effects,
though persuaded to rest from toil, he struggled manfully
against the rising tide, till labour became a weariness, and
he sought a change in Victoria, Tasmania, and Kew Zealand.
At the latter place, in Queenstown, Otago, he died, on May
29, 1882, aged 52 years. His remains were brought to
Goolwa for interment, where he, w r ho w T as an attached and
liberal supporter of the Wesleyan Church, found his last
resting place on the spot he loved so well.


Reuben Gill,
SONG and favourably known as an earnest advocate of
temperance principles, and an energetic worker among
the Eechabites, died at New Thebarton, January 11, 1884,
aged 56. He was a Cornishman and a miner, and, like those
born of poor parents in Cornwall sixty years ago, received but
a scanty education. On reaching manhood, however, he saw
the advantage of being able to read and write, and, by dint
of hard study and a little friendly help, managed to master
“the three E’s,” and secure a fair smattering of scientific
knowledge. On arrival in South Australia he settled at the
Burra, where he worked for some years. Subsequently he
went to Victoria, but came back to this colony, and was
employed at the Moonta Mines. About ten years ago, when
what is known on the Peninsula as “the great strike ,r
occurred, the miners looked to Mr. Gill to come to the front
and advocate their cause. This he did with great warmth
and effectiveness, and when delegates were appointed to
bring the grievances of the miners before the directors of the
Moonta and Wallaroo Mines, he was selected as one. In his
advocacy of the working man’s claims, though very zealous,
he was much more moderate than others who took part in the
proceedings, and when the miners were wrought upon to take
extreme measures, “ Eeuben,” by his good-humoured
addresses and jocular remarks, caused them to be less
unreasonable in their demands. He was a good-tempered and
earnest speaker. His rough eloquence would fall from his
lips in a rapid stream, and apt metaphor and racy extempo-
raneous rhyme follow each other with almost lightning-like
rapidity, while the attention of his audience would remain
enchained throughout his speech. Mr. Gill was regarded as
one who might always be reckoned upon to take part in
public meetings when matters affecting the interest of the
community were discussed; consequently at the Hall’s shaft


meetings, held at Moonta Mines, at which the miners’ griev-
ances were ventilated, “ Reuben” was one of the stock
speakers. Among the last meetings of this kind which he
attended were those at which the “ dynamite question” was
discussed. He was an ardent opponent of the use of dyna-
mite in blasting underground, and regarded the ill-health
which he suffered from as due to inhalation of the
fumes of that compound. He came to Adelaide, where,
after working for some time as a mechanic, he took the position
of a life assurance agent, in which occupation he was engaged
at the time of his decease. Mr. Gill was a consistent advocate
of teetotalism, and by his speeches and lectures did good
service for numerous Rechabite tents in the colony. He was
a power for good in the sphere in which he moved, and his
death is regretted by thousands of people in the colony.
John Bailey,
SHE first Colonial Botanist of South Australia, under
Colonel Gawler, at a salary of £BO per annum, which
sum was afterwards retrenched by the Grey Government in
1841. Was the founder of the Hursery, now better known
as “Bailey’s Gardens,” at Hackney, an eastern suburb of
Adelaide. Mr. Bailey was born at Hackney, near London,
November, 1800, and after leaving school entered the service
of Messrs. Conrad Loddiges & Sons, proprietors of the most
extensive Botanical Nursery in England. He remained there
until 1838, when he left his native land with his family by
the ship “ Buckinghamshire,” and arrived in Holdfast Bay,
March 22, 1839. Prior to leaving he was presented by his
employers with a purse of 150 sovereigns, and they also gave
him several cases of plants, containing the vine, date, damson,
olive, and other trees. Most of these arrived in good con-
dition, and formed the nucleus of the large number at present


found in this colony. Mr. Bailey was an indefatigable horti-
culturist, and introduced here more varieties of useful plants
and trees than any other man of his time. He died in 1864.
His second son is now the Colonial Botanist of Queensland,
and the author of several highly scientific works on the flora
and fauna of that colony. His eldest son resided at Gawler
for many years, always occupying honorary positions in the
Institute of that town, such as Committee-man, Secretary,
Treasurer, and President. Mr. Bailey was contemporary with
J. C. Loudon, Mr. (afterwards Sir) Joseph Paxton, and others
in the botanic world.
Daniel Fisher, J.P.,
'jfSiORN in Wiltshire, England, in 1812, arrived in South
Australia in 1847, and commenced business in Eamdle-
street as a cornfactor and exporter of grain. His brother,
Mr. Charles Fisher, J.P., joined him in 1848, and other
branches were added to the business, until Messrs. Fisher
Brothers carried on a most extensive export and import trade
between this colony, Victoria, and Tasmania. He was a
member of the City Council in 1852-3 and 4, and retired
from business in 1856 ; went to England in 1861, and re-
turned after an absence of twelve months. In 1865 he con-
tested the election for the representation in Parliament of the
district of East Torrens, but was defeated by Messrs. C. H.
Goode and Neville Blyth. On Mr. Goode’s retirement, how-
ever, two years afterwards, he was returned, and sat in the
House of Assembly for five years. He also filled the posi-
tion of Mayor of Kensington and Norwood for two years.
He contested elections for the Mayoralty of Kensington and
Norwood, and for the representation of East Torrens, but was
unsuccessful. He fairly revelled in the excitement connected
with an election and was rarely absent from any gathering


of ratepayers or electors of Norwood and Kensington, where
he lived almost from the time of his arrival, and was re-
cognised as one of the old identities of the place. He was
kind-hearted and generous to a fault, and most popular with
those who knew him best. About six vears a£o Mr. Fisher
i O
sustained a paralytic stroke, which deprived him of the full
use of his limbs, and he was compelled to retire from active
public life. He died in June, 1884, at Glenelg, at the age
of 71, leaving a family of five sons and two daughters, a
brother/Mr. Charles Fisher, J.P., and two sisters, Mrs. G. P.
Harris and Mrs. A. Pickford.
Thomas Friend Gale,
S NATIVE of the United States of America, where he
was born in 1841. He early exhibited a taste for
mechanical and scientific pursuits, and his talents were fos-
tered by his father, the late Lieutenant Gale, of aerostation
celebrity. He evidently inherited much of the enthusiasm
and daring of his parent, as shown in some of the remarkable
balloon ascensions he made in each of the Australian colonies
On more than one occasion, rather than disappoint the
public, he quitted terra firma in a balloon minus the car, and
with merely a couple of bags of ballast under each arm. His
preservation from death was simply miraculous, and although
he had many narrow escapes, never met any serious accident.
He arrived in South Australia about thirteen years ago, and
accomplished the first balloon ascent that ever took place in
this colony. The last balloon he exhibited was destroyed
through coming into contact with a gum tree while he was
making an ascent with it on the Exhibition Grounds. Up to
the date of his last illness he was always considering and
working out schemes for fresh balloon ascents. Mr. Gale
w r as of ardent temperament, simple-minded, and industrious.
He died at Parkside, November 10, 1884, aged 43 years.


F. ZILIANI, PROF. OF SINGING.


Rev. Geo. W. Patchell, M.A.,
BORN in Ireland, April, 1832. Entered as probationer
into the miuistry of the Wesleyan Church, in Ireland,
in 1857. Arrived in Adelaide in 1866, and was from that
period np to the time of his death fully employed in preach-
ing in the several Wesleyan circuits of this colony. He took
part in the proceedings of the Conference of January 9,1883 ;
and whilst speaking in favour of Bihle-reading in State
Schools, was suddenly seized with apoplexy, and shortly after
expired. After his decease a Patchell Relief Fund was
initiated, with good results, to aid the widow and family of
the deceased.
Geo. Duck Wyatt,
t COLONIST of thirty-two years, having landed at Port-
land in 1853. He was for twenty-seven years a resi-
dent of Mount Gambier, occupied a seat in the Gambier
West District Council, was member of the first and second
Town Councils, and served as Mayor in 1878 and 1879,
since which period he has taken but little part in public
matters. He died March 14, 1885, aged 67 years.
Mary Thomas,
BELICT of the late Robert Thomas, was a true type of
the dauntless, faithful, and patient sisterhood who
followed their enterprising husbands from comfortable homes
in the old country, to form a habitation in the wilderness.
She came out in the “ Africaine,” with her husband and
family in 1836, and proved herself, throughout a long and
eminently useful life, a woman of noble nature and purest
aspirations. Patient, pious, and high-minded, she was
regarded with filial affection by the young, and reverenced
p


by the adults of the little community of colonists amongst
whom she moved as a kind, sympathising counsellor, and
firm friend. Her acts of benevolence were dictated a
generous heart and ruled by a judicious spirit. She
belonged to the best type of womanhood, and her virtues
kept her memory fresh in the regard of her descendants,
who had known her worth and benefited by her tender
acts. She had a sterling old-fashioned, English education,
and was a rare example of a truly good, wise, and energetic
woman —a fit helpmate for a brave pioneer colonist. Even
in her essentially busy life she found time to cultivate the
muse, and published a volume of poems, besides contributing
clever articles to colonial literature. She died February 10,
1875.
Richard Egan Lee,
ONE of the most versatile of Australian litterateurs. A
native of New South Wales, he early made his mark
as a compositor in that colony, whilst his contributions to
the press in prose and verse had many readers. His happiest
efforts were in the comic vein, and he possessed wit and
humour in the highest degree. He was of respectable
parentage, and at different times occupied responsible and
important positions in connection with journalism. He was
also returned as one of the representatives in Parliament for
the Lachlan district. Somewhat Bohemian in tastes, Mr.
Lee was nevertheless respected, not only by members of the
“ craft” to which he belonged, but by all who had the
honour of his acquaintance. After a somewhat chequered
career in Victoria, in which colony he was the proprietor and
editor of a weekly newspaper, he came to Adelaide,
landing here in 1877. From this period he was associated
with the press of the city, and his contributions to country
and inter-colonial journals were very voluminous. Some of


his comic pieces in the Lantern and Punch would have done
credit to the genius of a Hood or Smollett, and it can but be
regretted that their author was, by an anonymous nom de
'plume , comparatively unknown to the public. Mr. Lee was
modest and retiring, and this possibly caused him to defer
any appeal to friends to assist him in the distressing circum-
stances in which for some months prior to his death he
existed. He was a sufferer from consumption and an internal
complaint, and these ultimately carried him off at the early
age of 38 years. His death took place in Adelaide, April 1,
1883.
William Gerrard,
®HE pioneer breeder of blood stock in South Australia.
He owned 6,000 acres of freehold land at Rapid Bay,
and in 1861 turned his attention to the breeding of thorough-
bred horses, an industry which till then had not been under-
taken here, except on a small scale. Having a thorough
knowledge of blood stock, and with means to purchase the
animals he considered best suited for the purpose of a first-
class stud farm, it is not to be wondered at that Mr. Gerrard’s
venture proved successful. The names of some of his horses
are doubtless familiar to the reader, especially as they have
come so prominently before the public at race time, —South
Australian, Union Jack, Ace of Clubs, Xing of the Ring,
Ace of Trumps, The Ace, Argus Scandal, Irish King,
Southern Cross, Talk-o’-the-Hill, Tregeagle, and Pride of the
Hills, which last magnificent steed won for South Australia
her first champion race. Mr. Gerrard disposed of the Rapid
Bay stud in 1880; fifty-eight lots were offered, and the sum
realised was £11,360. From that time until his death he
confined his attention to sheep, but always had a hankering
after the more noble animal, and would probably, had he
lived, have again returned to his old pursuits. He died at
Glenelg, July 30th, 1884, aged 45 years.
f 2


James Bonwick, F.R.G.S.,
WILL be well remembered by many Adelaideans
whose residence here dates back to a period ante-
rior to the year 1852, when the rush to the Victorian dig-
gings became universal. In that year Mr. Eonwick, who was
then engaged in teaching, joined in the exodus, and never
returned to South Australia. He is a prolific writer, as the
following list of his works shows : —“ Discovery and Settle-
ment of Port Phillip ;” “ William Buckley, the Wild White
Man;” “John Batman, the Pounder of Victoria;” “The
Pirst Twenty Years of Australia ;” “Port Phillip Settlement;”
and a “ Geography for Australian Youth.” The latter, pub-
lished here in 1845, has met with approval from those inte-
rested in educational matters. Mr. Bon wick is now resident
in Surrey, England, and engaged, as heretofore, in adding to
the popular literature of the day.
E. J. Catlow
t HELVED in Adelaide in 1855 ; died at Mount Gambier,
in March, 1885. He was an accomplished Latin,
Prench, and German scholar; and his translations from the
German poets were much admired when they appeared in
the daily press. Mr. Catlow was of a singularly active turn
of mind, and shortly after his arrival in the colony he turned
his attention to the construction of magic squares, and after
much research discovered a method of forming them of any
required dimensions. These rules were so ingenious that a
paper on the subject, written by him, was read by Mr. C.
Todd before the Adelaide Philosophical Society. Mr. Cat-
low was a teacher under the Education Department for many
years, and master of the Pinniss Vale, Yankalilla, and Comp-
ton Downs Schools.


John Ednie Brown, J.P., F.L.S.
IfS the son of Dr. Jas. Brown, LL.D., author of The Fores -
J| ter (one of the best and most comprehensive works on
forestry of the present day), late Deputy-Surveyor of H.M.
woods and forests in Great Britain, and of late years the
most eminent authority on arboricultural matters in Europe.
The subject of this memoir was educated in Edinburgh, and
on leaving school in 1863, was dedicated to his father’s pro-
fession, and spent three years with him in the practical
management of nursery and forest work, and in reporting
on the management of the woods and forests in England and
Scotland. After learning his profession as assistant agent'
and forester upon the Invercauld Estate in Aberdeenshire
(on which there were 20,000 acres of woodlands, and planta-
tions of over 1,000 acres in extent formed in one season),
Mr. Brown went to the Wass Estate, in Yorkshire, where he
laid out plantations and surveyed a property of about 8,000
acres. He was then next employed in managing the woods
of Lady Manxe, in Sussex. In 1871 and 1872, he visited
the U.S. of America and Canada, gathering much valuable
information on the forests of those countries. Appointed
Conservator of Eorests for South Australia in 1878, a position
which he still holds with satisfaction to the Government and
the public. Mr. Brown has received many testimonials from
those who appreciate his abilities, and among the honors he
has gained, the following may be enumerated: —He is Gold
Medalist of the Highland and Agricultural Society of Scot-
land, for “Report upon Trees found in California,” Silver
Medalist of the Scottish Arboricultural Society, for “ Report
on Trees found in the Canadian Eorests,” holds silver medal
and diploma from the International Forestry Exhibition of
Edinburgh, held in 1884, for exhibits in botanical specimens
and forest literature. Is author of works on “Tree Culture
in South Australia,” “The Forest Flora of South Australia,”
and “ Canada as a field for the farmer and laborer.”


Hon. Henry Mildred, M.L.C.,
§ORH at Portsea, England, March 9, 1795 ; one of the
earliest settlers in South Australia, and a strong advo-
cate for its colonisation. He bought 500 acres of land in
Hew Zealand, intending to settle there with Baron de
Thierry’s party of colonists, but the colony of South Australia
offering greater attractions, he dispatched his son Hiram in
the surveying brig “ Hapid,” and had arranged to follow,
when the South Australian Company engaged him to pro-
ceed to the North of England to purchase the appliances of a
ship-building yard, to which was attached a patent slip, steam
saw, and corn mills. This he accomplished, and proceeded to
the colony, with the manager, Mr. David McLaren, in the
barque “ South Australian,” arriving at Kangaroo Island
April 22, 1837. After some delay in the landing of this
machinery and plant, the South Australian Company resolved
to remove the whole to the main land, as Adelaide was then
called. The engine and corn-mill were transferred to Park-
side, and erected at the “ Company’s Mill,” on the River
Torrens. It was afterwards pulled down and removed, in
consequence of the falling-in of the banks of that stream.
Finding that their plans could not be successfully carried out,
the South Australian Company made other offers to Mr.
Mildred, which he declined, and retired into private life. He
held a seat in the Municipal Council in 1841, which he
occupied for this and the two following years, taking also
a leading part in most of the public questions that agitated the
community. Among these may be mentioned the project to
introduce the “Parkhurst” prison boys into the colony,
which Mr. Mildred, with other leading colonists, resisted
so strenuously that the scheme was abandoned. About this
time he was defeated in a hard contest for the Burra repre-
sentation in Parliament. In 1850 he was chosen one of the
Commissioners of Main Roads, and in November of the same


year was appointed a Justice of the Peace, to which, in 1858,
was added that of Special Magistrate. On the establishment
of Representative Government, in 1851, Mr. Mildred was a
candidate for the Legislative Council, but was not returned.
In 1857, he was a candidate for the district of JSToarlunga in
the Assembly, and was returned; and in April, 1860, he was
returned for East Torrens at the head of the poll. Two years
later he was again elected as member for East Torrens, the
number of candidates being three, as on former occasions.
In 1866 three vacancies occurred in the Legislative Council,
when Mr. Mildred, with ten other candidates, went to the
poll. The contest was severe, but he was placed second on
the list, having polled 2,024 votes. He retained his seat
until the year 1871, when it became vacant by efflux of
time, after which he lived in retirement. At his death he
had attained the ripe age of 82 years. His public career was
that of a thoroughly independent and honest man; his
character was irreproachable, and to this may be added, he
left no enemies. Mr. Mildred left two sons and a daughter ;
the eldest, Hiram Mildred, lately a member of the City
Council; the second, Henry, who some years ago represented
East Torrens in Parliament, is a solicitor in Adelaide ; and
the daughter is the wife of Mr. J. Yarley, S.M., of Kapunda.
S. Kidner,
BORN in London in 1809, died at Hindmarsh, Adelaide,
August 11, 1883. Well-known for many years as a
prominent homoeopathist in London, where he practised
until 1857, when he sailed for Victoria and established him-
self in Melbourne. Arrived in Adelaide in 1860, and finding
his services in great request, decided to remain here, and was
eminently successful. Mr. Kidner will be long remembered
for the warm interest he took in the young, and for his
benevolent disposition.


Rees Jones
BIED April 4, 1884, at Hindmarsh, aged 91 years. Saw
a great deal of service with the 43rd Regiment of Foot,
and had several clasps for his courage in action at Cuidad
Rodrigo, Badajoz, Salamanca, Yittoria, Kivelle, and Toulouse.
He was in the reserve forces at Waterloo, though the
regiment did not reach the battlefield in time to take part in
the action. He was also in the expeditionary force that was
sent to America, and on returning thence the regiment was
ordered to Paris, and remained there some time after the
capitulation of the city. Mr. Jones arrived in South Aus-
tralia about forty years ago, but did not take any active part
in public affairs. At the time of his death he was in receipt
of a well-earned pension from the War Office Department.
R. A. A. Morehead,
WHO died in Sydney, Y.S. W., January 11, 1885, aged
72 years, was one of the most energetic, popular, and
highly-esteemed citizens of that place, and equally well
known here. He came to South Australia about the year
1845, as Manager of the Australasian Investment Company,
which had then just been formed in Aberdeen. Amongst
other enterprises, the Company acquired the Bon Accord
Mine, near the Burra. As Resident Manager of this pro-
perty Mr. Morehead, by his urbanity and prompt business-
like proceedings, made many friends ; and satisfactory returns
were received by the Company for outlay of capital. The
town of the Burra is still supplied with water pumped from
the main shaft of the Bon Accord Mine. On Mr. Morehead’s
health failing, he retired from the service of the Company,
and in recognition of his long, valuable, and faithful services,
they gave him an allowance of £l,OOO per annum for life.


William Ernest Cooke, B.A.,
BORN at Payneham, S.A,, July 21, 1863. Educated at
the Port Adelaide Grammar School, Mr. T. Caterer’s
Grammar School, Norwood, and at St. Peter’s College, oc-
cupying in every instance a leading position as a scholar. At
the latter emporium of learning, he began on the fifth form,
obtained scholarships for classics and mathematics, and ulti-
mately the Farrell Scholarship, of the annual value of £5O.
In November 1878, the Government Astronomer desired the
services of a cadet at the Observatory, and Mr. Cooke ob-
tained the position. In 1879 he entered for the Civil Service
Examination, and passed with credit at the head of the list,
and also at the Matriculation Examination. He next entered
his name on the roll book of the University, obtained
exemption from lectures, and devoted his spare time to read-
ing up the necessary subjects. In 1882, he passed the final
examination for the B. A. degree, obtaining the senior position,,
and at the same time competed for the South Australian
Scholarship, open to all the young men in the colony. He
succeeded in obtaining this coveted prize, but just at that
period the then Assistant Astronomer left the colony for
New Zealand, and as the Government offered the place to
Mr. Cooke he accepted it, thereby, of course, forfeiting his
claim to the scholarship. Since his appointment he has co-
operated more practically with the Government Astronomer
in the scientific duties assigned him; and the annual meteoro-
logical reports, which have earned a world-wide reputation
as some of the best in the southern hemisphere, have been
rendered more useful than ever. Great care has been be-
stowed upon reports from outstations ; the pluvial statistics
have been vastly improved, and astronomical observations
have been more systematically conducted. During Mr. Todd’s
absence in England, Mr. Cooke acted as Government
Astronomer.


Joseph Keynes, J.P.,
1811. Died at Locksleys, May 14, 1884, in the
I 73rd year of his age. Arrived in the colony Sep-
tember 23, 1839, under engagement to the late Mr. G. F.
Angas. Subsequently took up a squatting run under lease
from the Government, and eventually obtained the freehold
of the greater part of it, whilst another portion was cut up
into the township of Keyneton, which was named after him.
He devoted himself to pastoral pursuits, more particularly to
the improvement of the Merino breed of sheep, and in this
respect his labours were known, even in the adjoining colonies.
He took no active part in politics, but was for many years a
Justice of the Peace and Chairman of the first District
Council at Keyneton. This position he held for seven years,
and was presented with a testimonial from the inhabitants
on resigning, when he had attained his 70th year. He took
a genuine interest in the district, and exerted himself in
local educational matters. He was a nephew of the famous
English Congregationalist, John Angel James. His father
was minister of the same Church, and his brother is still
connected with that ministry.
E. D. Stocks.
THIS gentleman, though South Australia be not his
adopted country, yet, from his late uncle’s, Mr. Samuel
Stocks, and several other relatives’ residence here, as well as
his endeavours to forward the intellectual and agricultural
interests of the colony, besides his close art connection with
the beauties of its natural scenery, is fairly entitled to rank
among “ Notable South Australians.” He was born in
Manchester, England, 27th March, 1840, and at an early age
came to these colonies. He at first adopted a somewhat


desultory, wandering mode of life; but seeing the likely
unfruitful issue of this, devoted himself to the work of teach-
ing. As a child he had felt the burnings of the artistic soul
within, and at length this capacity stirred in a way not to be
resisted. He threw himself entirely into the life of an artist,
and at the present time has reached the position of one of the
leaders of that profession in the colonies. As a demand is
now setting in for his pictures in England, he is likely to take
a similar position there. His forte lies among rolling
brooks, placid, overshadowed waterholes, or snow-capped
mountains, with their precipices or mantling of forest, the
trembling beauties of foliage, the variations of atmospheric
appearances, and the wonderful realizations of cloudland. In
these, with all their multitudinous combinations and effects,
he seems “to live, move, and have his being.” Wonderful
are the effects of his brush already, but the promise is of
better things to come. His best known pictures are “ Ade-
laide, from the Torrens Lake ;” “ The Valley Lakes, Mount
Oambier;” “ Port Pirie, from the River “Port Augusta,
from the West;” and a variety of other hue views of scenery
in Hew South Wales, Victoria, and Tasmania.
William Henry Maturin, C. B., D.A.C.G.,
fa REIVED in Adelaide June, 1843, by the brig “ Eliza-
JjyL beth Buchanan,” and succeeded Mr. Deputy Darling
in the Commissariat Department. Believed June 1, 1857,
by Mr. mpuffC' MmiGSioner Monk, and retired on half pay.
He returned to England after a time, when the British Govern-
ment gave him full pay, and appointed him Commissariat-
General of the United Kingdom. During Sir H. E. Fox
Young’s administration of the Government in South Aus-
tralia, Mr. Maturin acted as his Private Secretary. He is
still living, and resides in England.


Henry McKinnon Muirhead,
A NATIVE of Glasgow, and of one of the oldest and
most respected families in Scotland ; arrived in South
Australia in 1850, and having brought out capital, established
a jeweller’s business in Adelaide, which he conducted from
the time of his arrival till 1880. Although he obtruded him-
self but little in politics, he was always distinguished as a
gentleman of unimpeachable integrity, and deservedly held
in the highest respect by those with whom he came in con-
tact in business, and personal friends. He was one of the
early members of Chalmers Scotch Church, and for many
years held the office of Elder; he was also a member of the
first Municipal Council for Glenelg, at which place he resided,
and built a number of residences there. He was ever ready
and willing to aid the poor and distressed in an unostenta-
tious manner, and assisted in many ways in making tho
sports held on the anniversary of the colony a success. He
paid several visits to the old country, but always returned to-
this, the land of his adoption. He died at Glenelg, February,
1880, after a short illness, much regretted. He married a
daughter of the late Dr. Chas. O’Reilly (Vice-President of
the Royal College of Physicians, Ireland), and left a widow*
three sons, and two daughters, surviving him.
Charles Mortimer Muirhead, J.P.,
©|ON of the above, and a rising and prominent member of
8P the South Australian Bar; born in Adelaide in 1857,
but spent several years in England, and was educated partly
at St. Peter’s College and by private tuition. Was articled,,
and completed his profession at 21 years of age; admitted
to the Bar in 1878, since which period he has worked up a
large and successful practice. Appointed to the Commission


of the Peace in 1882, and is one of the youngest Magistrates
in the colony. Mr. Muirhead occupies a leading position in
yachting circles, and held office respectively as Treasurer and
Secretary of the Glenelg Yacht Club. He is also Vice-
Commodore of the Holdfast Bay Yacht Club. Elected at the
head of the poll a Director of the South Australian Insurance
Company, one of the oldest companies in the colony. Mr.
Muirhead resides at Glenelg, and, as will be surmised, takes
;an active interest in all that concerns the prosperity of that
popular watering-place. He was lately requested to stand
for the District of Sturt; and is in partnership with Mr.
P. F. Bonnin, Solicitor, of Adelaide.
W. R. Knox
IS a native of Adelaide, where he was bom July 21, 1861.
Evinced a talent for music at an early age, and, under
the tuition of Mr. Landergan and Signor Paola Giorza (the
eminent musician and composer), developed this gift in a
remarkable manner. As a token of appreciation of his pupil's
proficiency, Signor Giorza, on leaving Adelaide, presented
Mr. Knox with a highly-flattering testimonial, in which it is
•stated that “he is a most accomplished musician.” At the
age of 18 Mr. Knox made his dehut in public as a performer
on the organ and piano at the leading concerts in the city,
and gained high encomiums for his artistic playing. He is
organist of the Flinders-street Presbyterian Church, and on
every occasion on which he has presided at his favourite instru-
ments has been listened to with rapt attention. The merito-
rious task of familiarizing the public with gems from the
repertoire of Schubert, Chopin, Mozart, and other great com-
posers, appears to have fallen to Mr. Knox’s lot; and South
Australians have reason to be proud that one of the native-
born is thus early rapidly rising to fame.


Rev. E. Baker
tEEIYED in the colony about forty years ago, and was
for a considerable time pastor of the Independent
Church at Maclaren Yale. Was a staunch member of the
Anti-State Aid League, and materially aided its efforts by
tongue and pen. Died at Morphett Yale, January 20, 1885,
aged 78. A man of liberal opinions and advanced views, he
was eminently esteemed.
Rev. J. Hotham,
@OH GEEGALTONALIST, died May 26, 1885, at Port
Elliot, where he had been for thirty years stationed. As
a preacher he enjoyed an excellent reputation, and his
style was polished and marked by much earnestness. He
was elected Chairman of the Congregational Union some years
ago, and filled the position for the usual term in a creditable
manner.
Dr. R. W. Moore, M.R.C.S.,
BO EH in Cork, Ireland, in 1819; died at Horth-terrace,
Adelaide, December 6, 1884, aged 65 years. He
began the study of medicine in the South Infirmary at Cork,
in 1835, and in 1840 proceeded to the Charing Cross Hos-
pital, London, where two years later he was appointed
Demonstrator of Anatomy. In August, 1842, he became a
member of the Eoyal College of Surgeons, and studied in
various hospitals in London. Took his degree as Doctor of
Medicine in 1845, and in the following year accepted the
appointment of Medical Officer to an emigrant ship for
Sydney, H.S.W. Eemained in that city until 1847, when
he came to South Australia, and located at the Burra Mines,


where he was Medical Officer. His ability and geniality made
him a general favourite, and when he removed to Adelaide,
his departure was much regretted by numerous friends. He
was married in Adelaide to Miss Dutton, niece of the late
Mr. F. S. Dutton, once Agent-General of this colony. In
1858, Dr. Moore was appointed Colonial Surgeon (vice Dr.
Gosse), and also filled the offices of Superintendent of the
Lunatic Asylum, President of the Medical Board, and mem-
ber of the Vaccine Board. In 1869 he resigned the office of
Colonial Surgeon and was succeeded by Dr. Paterson. He
then entered into private practice, but continued his connec-
tion with the Medical Board as its President, and with the
Lunatic Asylum as an official visitor. He was associated
with the Orphan Home from its commencement, and rendered
valuable services to it in the capacity of consulting physician.
He was a Governor of St. Peter’s College, Honorary Surgeon
of the Female Refuge, and a Member of the Linnaean Society.
Dr. Moore was a clever botanist, and long acted as a judge at
our Horticultural and Floricultural Shows. He took con-
siderable interest in literary matters, and gathered together
one of the best and most voluminous libraries in the colony.
He had an excellent practice, and his thorough worth secured
him the esteem of all with whom he was brought in contact.
William Gilbert, J.P., M.P.,
BORH in Bucks, England, in 1829, and educated at a
boarding-school in the same county. Followed the
business of his father (engineering and millering) for many
years. During his residence in his native land Mr. Gilbert
took an active part in political and religious matters, and
since coming' to this colony has interested himself in all
movements having for their object the elevation of his fellow-
men. He arrived here in 1869, and entered political life in


1881, when he was returned as member for Yatala at the
head of the Poll; and also headed the poll at the election
for the same district in 1884. Mr. Gilbert formerly held
radical opinions, but is now a liberal conservative. Among
many useful measures which he has been instrumental in
carrying, the repeal of the Totalizator Bill, in 1883, is the
most notable. Mr, Gilbert was a Councillor for Rohe Ward,
North Adelaide, during the mayoralty of Messrs. Scott and
Buik; has been a member of the Destitute Board for the
past five years, and a J.P. for upwards of four years. As a
politician he is deservedly popular; and though his speeches
are not characterised by great brilliancy, they are at least
logical and forcible.
Major-General Sir Arthur Henry Freeling,
Bart., R.E.,
HAS probably passed almost out of the memory of the
present generation here, as it is more than twenty years
since he left Adelaide for England. He was horn in July,
1820, and at his death, which occurred during the present
year, had reached the proverbial three-score epoch allotted to
men. At the age of 17 he entered the Corps of Royal
Engineers, and retired, after forty years’ service, in 1877, as
Lieutenant-Colonel, with the honorary rank of Major-General.
In January, 1849, soon after his marriage with a daughter of
the late Sir H. Rivers, Bart., he came to South Australia,
and Avas appointed Surveyor-General and Colonial Engineer,
as successor to Colonel Frome. He had then risen to the
rank of Captain, and in September of the same year was
appointed one of the five paid Commissioners charged with
the management of city affairs. He also for some time
occupied the position of a member of the Central Road Board,
and in 1855-6 was an official member of the Government,
under the old Constitution. The first Parliament was elected
in 1857, and Sir A. H. Freeling was chosen among others as


Hon. THIS. EBGKUSG, M.L.C.


member of the Legislative Council. On March 20, 1857, he
resigned the Commissionership to Sir. S. Davenport, and in
April, 1859, he retired from Parliament. In 1861 he gave
up the Surveyor-Generalship, and shortly after left for Eng-
land. In 1871, as fifth Baronet, he succeeded to the title
and estates of Ford and Hastings, in Sussex. Since that
period he has lived retired, but never lost his interest in
South Australia. He was a Resident Fellow of the Royal
Colonial Institute, and a most earnest worker on its behalf.
He was of amiable disposition, and eminently respected for
his kindness and affability.
Rev. Allan W. Webb,
BiORbT June 17, 1838, at Leamington, Warwickshire,
J where his father was a portrait painter of good repute.
His early education was obtained at Yicar’s Grammar School,
in that town. Left an orphan at thirteen, he went to reside
with his uncle, Dr. Allan Webb, a physician of eminence in
Calcutta. In India he to La Martiniere College, and
there received a good classical and mathematical education,
with instruction in the vernacular languages of India. When
barely seventeen years of age he had to leave India in con-
sequence of a total break-down in health, and sought its
restoration in the more genial climate of Australia, landing
in Adelaide in May, 1855. He here passed through the
severely trying experiences of a youth seeking employment
in a strange land, and ultimately found it as junior clerk in a
merchant’s office. When nineteen he left the Church of
England, to be associated with the Wesleyan Church. Be-
coming convinced of the Scriptural view of baptism, he was
immersed, and joined the Baptist Church. Continued to hold
the position of book-keeper in the establishment of Messrs.
J. Colton & Co., but spent much of his leisure in study, and
G


in preaching round Adelaide as a lay preacher. In 1860 he
was employed in Bush Mission Work, and for fully eighteen
months preached from the extreme north of the settled dis-
tricts to Mount Shanck in the South-east. Binding the toil
of incessantly riding over the vast pastoral areas of South
Australia too exhausting, he resigned, and accepted an invita-
tion from the Baptist body to place himself under the tuition
of the Rev. Silas Mead, LL.B., for special theological train-
ing, with a view to the ministry. Having qualified himself
for this purpose, he initiated the Baptist Church at Alberton,
where his labours were eminently successful. He here mar-
ried Janet, youngest daughter of an old colonist, Captain
Underwood, and removed to Sydney, KS.W., where he acted
as assistant minister to the Rev. S. C. Kent, of Camden
College. In conjunction with this he had charge of the Inde-
pendent Church at Petersham, and was registered as its first
pastor. This arrangement lasted a year, when he went to Mait-
land, to take the pastorate of the Baptist Church, and com-
menced open-air preaching. Left Maitland at the end of
three years, and took charge of a Baptist Church of fifty
members in the Masonic Hall, Sydney. In six months the
prospect became sufficiently encouraging to begin building
the Harris-street Church, and here he laboured over nine years,
enjoying the esteem and co-operation of the people. For
eight years he was Co-Secretary of the Sydney City Mission.
In 1876 he took the Wellesley-street Baptist Church, Auck-
land, K.Z. During his ministry the membership of the
church was doubled, and the influence of the denomination
greatly consolidated. He was instrumental in setting on foot
a fund for building a new church, now grown to respectable
proportions. During his residence in Auckland he took
active interest in most of the social and benevolent institu-
tions of that city, especially in the Young Men’s Christian
Association, Industrial Home, and Young Women’s Institute.
Left Auckland to occupy the pastorate of the Baptist Church,


North Adelaide, in which sphere he exhibited that energy,
force of character, and ability, which had long marked his
varied career. He was Chairman of the Baptist Association,
editor of a denominational magazine, Truth and Progress ,
and the first President of the Blue Ribbon Army in South
Australia. He is now in Victoria, having accepted the pas-
torate of a church in that colony.
Ebenezer Ward, M.P.,
BOEN in 1837, in Essex, England, son of the Eev.
Joseph Ward, the well-known Baptist Minister. On
reaching his eighth year he was sent to Dumpton Hall, near
Eamsgate, an establishment for the education of the sons of
Baptist Ministers. He remained there till March, 1849,
when he left the school, and began life as a proof-reader’s hoy
in a printing office, and entered the office of the Morning
Post newspaper, where he filled a similar position for three
years, acquiring meanwhile a knowledge of shorthand. Left
England, and arrived at Melbourne, Victoria, in 1859. Asso-
ciated with the Morning Herald , under Mr. Geo. Collins Levy,
C.M.G., as proof-reader and reporter, until 1860, when he
came to Adelaide with G. V. Brooke, the tragedian, and
played as an amateur in his troupe, in the Old Victoria
Theatre. On his return to Melbourne he rejoined the Press,
working again for the Herald and the Age. In 1861 he
returned to Adelaide, and joined the “Hansard” staff until
1863. Visited and described all the orchards and vineyards
in the colony, and subsequently published on these a small
volume. In 1863 he joined the late Mr. Sinnet as sub-
editor of the Daily Telegraph , then published in Adelaide.
A year afterwards was appointed clerk and accountant to the
Einniss Northern Territory Expedition. Eevisited Adelaide
in January, 1865, and resumed his position on the Telegraph
G 2


Upon Mr. Sinnett’s departure for Melbourne, Mr. Ward was
promoted to the editorship, and six months later received in
addition the appointment of Parliamentary shorthand writer.
Resigned the other position, and coupled with the shorthand
writing the work of Secretary to the Agricultural Society.
In 1868 he wrote a little book, under the title of “The
South-Eastern District of South Australia; its Resources and
Requirements.” He has displayed a good deal of newspaper
enterprize at one time and another, and started the Gumeracha
Guardian , the Southern Argus at Port Elliott, and other
papers in Clare, Kapunda, and Adelaide. Mr. Ward first
essayed to enter Parliament in 1868, when he offered his
services to the electors of Gumeracha, but was beaten by a
few votes. In 1870, however, he was elected with Sir
Arthur Blyth, and for three successive Parliaments im-
mediately following was re-elected at the head of the poll.
In 1880 he resigned his seat, but at the general election in
1881 was chosen by the Burra constituency, which he repre-
sented during the term of last Parliament. Returned at the
head of the poll by the District of Erome, for which he is
now the senior member. He has been twice a Minister of
the Crown, sat as Minister of Agriculture and Education in
Mr. Boucaut’s first Ministry from June 3, 1875, to March 25,
1876 ; and again in the same position in the Colton Adminis-
tration from June 6, 1876, to October 26, 1877. He intro-
duced the present Education Act in a speech of great power
and effect. Whilst a Minister of the Crown he, with Sir
Henry Ayers, in 1877, represented the colony at the Eighth
Intercolonial Conference, which met in Sydney, to devise a
scheme for the duplication of telegraphic cable communication
between Europe and Australia. On July 1, 1884, he was
elected Chairman of Committees, a position he appears emi-
nently qualified to fill.


Rev. M. Lencioni, R.C.,
TfCT'AS popularly known among his own denomination as
“Father Maurice.” Born at Lucca, Italy, June 11,
1814, and died at Morphett Yale, April 6, 1864. He was
liberally educated, and at the age of 18 devoted his life to
the service of the Church, and joined the Congregation of
the Passion of Our Lord in Yiterho. He here greatly sig-
nalised himself by his urbanity of manner and the progress
made in his ecclesiastical studies. Completed his education
in Ancona, where he was ordained a priest. In 1841 was
employed in ecclesiastical works of importance and trust in
connection with the Convents of St. John and St. Paul, at
Home; appointed missionary priest for Australia in 1843,
and arrived in Sydney, N.S.W., during the same year.
Laboured for four years among the aborigines in Moreton
Bay, and became thoroughly acquainted with their language.
Arrived in Adelaide in 1847, and resided here upwards of
seventeen years. He was an unostentatiously learned
divine, a zealous priest, and a good man.
B. Herschel Babbage,
gift NEAR relative of the celebrated inventor of the cal-
JSL culating machine. Educated as an engineer, he, for a
considerable time, followed his profession in Europe. He was
Assistant-Engineer at the Bristol end of the Great Northern
Railway for four years, and subsequently for two years on the
works between Chippenham and Swinden, of the same rail-
way. He was afterwards engaged in superintending the con-
struction of the Bristol half of the Bristol and Gloucester
Railway, and laid out for Mr. Brunei a railway across the
Appenines, from Genoa to Milan. The laying-out of this
work and preparation of plans occupied four years, during


which Mr. Babbage held a commission from the Government
of Piedmont to report upon a line across the Alps, by way of
Mont Cenis. After reporting on this and many other gigan-
tic works, he was appointed Engineer-in-Chief in laying out
and constructing a railway from Florence to Pistoga. He
resided in Tuscany for four years, when the progress of the
line was interrupted by the revolution, and he returned to
England. The line was afterwards completed by Italian
engineers. Soon after arrival in England he was appointed
Engineering-Inspector under the General Board of Health, to
report upon the water supply, sewage, and sanitary condition
of English towns. Arrived in South Australia by the ship
“Hydaspes,” November, 1851, and received the following
appointments :—Commissioner to issue Gold Licences, Geo-
logical and Mineral Surveyor, Government Assayer, and Jus-
tice of the Peace. He was also Corresponding Member of the
Philosophical Society until his death. He will be well
remembered as the first Engineer of the Port Pailway. He
was an explorer of some note, having, in December, 1856,
been to Lake Torrens, when he discovered the McDonnell
Piver, St. Mary’s Pool, Blanchwater, and the surrounding
country. Elected to the first Parliament, under the new Con-
stitution, when he represented Encounter Bay in the Assem-
bly, in conjunction with Mr. A. E. Lindsay. He retained
this position for nine months, and resigned in December,
1857, to take the command of a Northern Exploring Expe-
dition. He was a candidate for membership for the Council
in 1878, but was not elected. Mr. Babbage resided for
many years at St. Mary’s, South-road, Adelaide, where he
had an excellent vineyard, and devoted a great deal of time
to winemaking. Died October 22, 1878, aged 63 years.


John Martin
IS a native of Surrey, England, where he was horn in 1799.
_ Came to South Australia by the ship “ Anna Robinson,”
in September, 1839. Landed at the Old Port and took up
his residence in Gilles-street, as landlord of the “ Berresford
Arms ” Inn. Leaving this after seven years, he went to Sturt-
street, and carried on the business of a general grocer for
thirty-six years, and in 1882 retired into private life. Mr.
Martin is now 86 years of age and resides in Norwood.
John Davis,
MXPLORER, died at Payneham, S. A., June 16, 1885,
aged 56 years. He came to this colony from India,
where he was in affluent circumstances, and accompanied
McKinlay in his expedition across the continent. The
details of that trip have been handed down to posterity in an
interesting book written by him, which faithfully portrayed
the character of the country passed over. In McKinlay’s
party Mr. Davis had charge of the camels, his previous
experience with the “ Ship of the Desert” in India admi-
rably fitting him for the post. At the time of his decease he
was connected with the Civil Service. He left a widow and
three daughters.
Charles Bonney.
§HIS venerable South Australian pioneer arrived in
Sydney, X.S. Wales, in 1834, to occupy a Government
appointment. In 1836 he went into the country, where his
first hush experience was an attempt to find a route for stock
from the Murray to the new settlement of Port Phillip. In
consequence of the flooded state of the rivers he was com-
pelled to return, hut went out in December in the same year,
and safely reached his destination early in 1837. In the
following March he took the first sheep, (a mob of 10,000)


overland to the new settlement. In January, 1838, Mr.
Bonney accompanied the first overland expedition with stock
to South Australia, and in the following year went in charge
O o
of an expedition with cattle to open a direct road from Port
Phillip to this colony through the Portland Bay district.
After encountering difficulties from want of water, he suc-
ceeded in reaching Adelaide. In 1842, Mr. Bonney accepted
the office of Commissioner of Crown Lands, and held it until
the establishment of responsible Government in 1857. Was
a member of the House of Assembly in the first Parliament,
and held the position of Commissioner of Crown Lands until
1858, when the Ministry went out of office, and he visited
England. Returned to the colony in 1862, in connection
with a Mining Company, and in 1865 was elected a member
of the Legislative Council. Accepted the office of Manager
of Railways in 1869, and in 1871 became Inspector of Lands
purchased on credit. Mr. Bonney finally retired from the
Public Service in 1880. He at present resides in Sydney,
Hew South Wales, but, as of yore, takes great interest in
South Australia. Recently his portrait was placed in the
Town Hall, Norwood, the Corporation of which have taken
this step to show their appreciation of one who was the first
and most popular Mayor of that Municipality.
W. H. Charnock,
joined the firm of Stilling & Co. (the General
Commission Merchants and Shipping Agents) as a
junior partner, arrived in Adelaide in 1849, and is now its
sole representative. He was born in 1824, in Lancashire,
England, and being possessed of considerable mercantile
experience, has, by his business capabilities and honorable
conduct, made himself extremely popular. He has been
identified with many Societies and Companies, and among
the offices he has held or now holds, has been Chairman of


the Chamber of Commerce, the Adelaide Underwriters’ Asso-
ciation, and is at present a Trustee of the Savings Bank, a
Director of the Adelaide Steamship Company, the Adelaide
Steam Tug Company, the Mutual Life Assurance Association
of Australasia, Chairman of the Commercial Union Fire and
Marine Insurance Company, President of the Sailors’ Home,
and a Director of the Bushman’s Club. The very fact of Mr.
Charnock’s filling these important positions is a guarantee to
members of English Commercial circles that business con-
ducted through his firm will be on a satisfactory basis, and
it is on such lines that a great future will be built up in this
part of the Australias.
Joseph Stilling,
WHO was born in 1823, arrived in South Australia in the
twentieth year of his age, and until his death, on
August 30, 1863, was known in the commercial world as a
man of strict integrity and good ability. He visited
England in 1855, when he was married in Manchester
to the lady who was left on his decease to lament
her loss. After his death it was decided that the
original title and style of the firm should remain unal-
tered, and thus it is at the present time. In conclusion,
Messrs. Stilling & Co. are agents for the Orient line of
steamers, and for the “ Stilling ” Line of packets trading
between this colony and London.
W. R. Squibb,
i NATIVE of London, and resident in this colony from
actor, preacher, and school-master, and was a profound classi-
cal scholar. After his arrival here he was employed in the
Government School in Adelaide for about four years. He


then went to Houghton, and continued to follow educational
work there for some years, combining therewith the role of
an earnest preacher. On leaving the school, he accepted the
position of local Postmaster and Registrar, and held it till
about twelve months ago, when illness necessitated his giving
his duties up. He will he long remembered as a staunch
believer in religious tracts, and he always kept a bundle ready
for delivery to passengers by each coach, and is thought in
this way to have circulated thousands. With all his eccen-
tricity he was universally liked, and died “ full of years and
honors,” at the age of 79, in May, 1885.
John Howell, J.P.
BAZLITT describes poetry as “ The high-wrought enthu-
siasm of fancy and feeling.” He says, “ Whenever
there is a sense of beauty, or power, or harmony, as in the
motion of a wave of the sea, in the growth of the flower
that spreads its sweet leaves to the air and dedicates its
beauty to the sun, there is poetry in its birth.” The sub-
ject of this memoir is one who evidently feels this; whose
thoughts and sympathies are in unison with nature, and who
is fully alive to all that is beautiful and wonderful in its
domain. John Howell is a true poet, in the fullest accepta-
tion of the term. He does not merely jingle rhymes together
without due consideration as to their meaning; and we recall
many pleasant moments afforded in perusing his latest con-
tribution to South Australian literature : “ Rose Leaves from
an Australian Garden,” a work which commends itself to all
lovers of poetry. Want of space alone prevents making
copious extracts, but we can at least give the following with-
out wearying our readers. In “The Pilgrim of Venus” the
poet has risen above the earth, into the fathomless expanse
of stars, and in one of those mysterious worlds meets with
quite a galaxy of bards, among whom are Chaucer, Shake


speare, Milton, Dryden, Goldsmith, and others long since
departed :
“ In those bright halls no harp was strung
To sweeter notes than those which rung
To Shelley’s wierd majestic tongue ;
The joyous sound
Was like the strains Prometheus sung
When first unbound.”
The poem is altogether above the common run of metaphor, and
well worthy perusal. “ The Poet’s Ambrosia,” is an elegant
piece of word-painting, as will be seen by this :
“ His ideal joy of all created things
Is lovely woman, beautiful, serene ;
Her eyes the fount of intellectual springs ;
Her face the impress of the great Unseen ;
Her voice the echo of an angel’s hymn ;
Her smile a gleam of sunshine’s rippling light ;
Her footfall like a seraph journeying ;
All seem a dream of heaven to his enraptured sight.”
John Howell is a native of Bath, Somerset, where he was
born July 4, 1832. He was educated at a Grammar School
in Bristol, in the immediate vicinity of a large shipping in-
dustry. At the age of 14 he entered the Navy as naval ap-
prentice, and served on board H.M.S. “ Ganges,” 84 guns,
in the Mediterranean, and afterwards in H.M.S. “ Kodney,”
92 guns, attached to the Channel Squadron. Quitted the
Navy at the expiration of his indentures, and joined the
Merchant Service as second officer, trading between Bristol
and the African gold coast, and Liverpool and Savannah, U.S.
Was cast away in the barque “ Ellen,” of Liverpool, in the
Bay of Biscay, and rescued and taken to Liverpool. After-
wards sailed thence to Sydney, N. S. Wales, arriving there
in 1854. Traded between that port and Newcastle, and was
cast away on The Nobbys. Rescued and returned to Sydney,


and traded to the Clarence River and to Melbourne. Came
to Adelaide in the brig “Flash,” and entered the Govern-
ment service, as convict guard at Yatala, in 1856; promoted
to Chief Warder in 1857, and to the keepership of Port
Augusta gaol in 1868. Appointed Governor of the Adelaide
Gaol in 1873, and Justice of the Peace in 1882. In his
public capacity Mr. Howell is regarded as one of the best
and most affable men in the Government service ; and, as he
tempers justice with mercy, is invariably spoken well of by
those unfortunates consigned to his care. The composition
of poetry will probably be deemed out of place in the
Governor of a gaol, but the Divine afflatus is no respecter of
persons, and from sources unthought of and least expected
does it exhibit itself with no uncertain sound. Mr. Howell
will, if we mistake not, yet be heard of in the far future,
when his ideas are strengthened by time and experience, as a
poet of the highest order, and one of whom South Australia
need not be ashamed.
William Ranson Mortlock,
A VERY old colonist and prominent pastoralist, died at
Yvenel House, Medindie, on May 10, 1884. He
arrived in Australia in 1843, and, after visiting the adjacent
colonies, bought a squatting property near Port Lincoln,
where he settled for some years. He was also an extensive
holder of land in the North. Mr. Mortlock first sat in Par-
liament in 1868, when he represented the Flinders district
in that and the two remaining sessions. He was absent from
the next Parliament, being on a visit to England, but on his
return to the colony was again elected for the Flinders elec-
torate. Shortly before his death, at the general election he was
rejected by his old constituents, and in speaking at the sub-
sequent formal declaration of the poll he was deeply affected
by his defeat. Many of his friends sympathised with him, and


took an opportunity of expressing their appreciation of his
services. He was to have been banquetted at Port Lincoln,
on May 28, 1884, but the invitation to the festival reached
him just before he died. Mr. Mortlock was a native of Mel-
bourne; England, where he was born in 1820. He was a
man of liberal views, and regarded as a very useful member
of the South Australian Parliament.
David Lindsay,
[fjpJHE youngest son of the late Capt. Jno. Lindsay; born
at Goolwa, June 20, 1856 ; educated at a public
school, and by the late Rev. Jno. Hotham ; entered the Govern-
ment service in 1873, and went to the Northern Territory as
junior surveyor in 1878, where he surveyed and reported upon
the Mount Wells tin mines, and acted as senior-surveyor and
supervisor of works during Mr. McMinn’s absence. Ex-
plored the Mary River, and, by his observations of its over-
flow, proved that this was the stream which Stuart was
following to the north coast in his memorable journey across
the continent. After carefully examining the country
between Palmerston and Pine Creek, Mr. Lindsay proposed a
route for the railway, quite distinct from that surveyed in
1878, which, although longer by about fifteen miles, would
touch the best agricultural land, and go close to all the
known gold and tin discoveries; added to this, as the line
would be on the watershed it would cost much less, the
estimate being between £5,000 to £6,000 per mile. This
route has since been surveyed and adopted. In May, 1882,
Mr. Lindsay resigned his position in the service, and devoted
his time to private business ; but at the desire of the S. A.
Government he, in 1883, undertook for them the exploration
of Arnheim’s Land, a journey of 1,916 miles, which, though
successful, was full of remarkable incidents and hairbreadth
escapes. Mr. Lindsay acted with much intrepidity and skill,


and safely brought his party hack to civilization. Among
other important discoveries made by him was that of the
“ Gwendoline Falls,” on the Baker Range, about sixty miles
from Southport, N. T. These falls are upwards of 195 feet
in height, and present a romantic and awe-inspiring appear-
ance. Mr. Lindsay is a member of the S. A. Institute of
Surveyors, and a member of the Sydney Branch of the Geo-
graphical Society of Australasia. He is considered an autho-
rity on matters connected with the Northern Territory, and in
1882 had the honour of conducting the Parliamentary party
on their visit of inspection.
Hon. A. B. Murray, M.L.C.,
IS a native of Dumfrieshire, Scotland, and spent six years
in the Highlands of that country prior to coming
to South Australia. Arrived in Adelaide in 1839, and,
with a view to taking up land, explored the districts,
north, south, and east, within sixty miles of Adelaide. This
he had to do on foot, horses then not being procurable by
him. Had an interest in the Barossa special survey, and
settled on his own property as an agricultural farmer, near
Mount Crawford, in 1843. Wheat was then fetching but
from Is. 6d. to 2s. per bushel, and Mr. Murray, like others,
experienced reverses in consequence of this depressed state of
things. Having a thorough knowledge of sheep-breeding, he
next turned his attention thereto, and resolved to acclimatise
the merino breed, and make it constitutionally suited to
South Australia. These animals combine a heavy fleece of
good quality with excellent constitution and weight of
carcase, all in keeping to recommend them as profitable sheep
for this colony. Mr. Murray’s plan was not to change blood,
but to strictly adhere to what is known as breeding in and in ;
and, with careful annual selection, his success is proved by
the fact t hat his sheep have been sought after at high prices


by the principal flock masters in South Australia, Victoria,
New South Wales, Queensland, Western Australia, New
Zealand, and the Cape of Good Hope, to the thorough improve-
ment of the flocks. Though at first averse to being a lessee of the
Crown (squatter), Mr. Murray ultimately ventured to take
an interest in this, and now holds (unprofitably, he says)
about 2,700 square miles of Crown leases. Shortly after
arrival here he was appointed to the Commission of Peace ;
and although not a keen politician, was, by requisition, asked
to contest the election for the Gumeracha district. He was
returned for the Assembly by the same constituency, three
times, and ultimately, on resigning that position, was elected
as member of the Upper House, which seat he now holds.
Mr. Murray is well known as the earnest advocate of all
measures which are calculated to benefit the land of his adop-
tion, and his opinions always command that respect from his
colleagues that their liberality deserves.
Clement L. Wragge, F.R.G.S., F.R. Met. Society.
September 18, 1852, at Stourbridge, Worcester-
shire. His parents died during his infancy, and he
was taken to Oakamoor, a village in the romantic and lovely
valley of the River Churnet, in North Staffordshire, and the
family home, where he was reared by his grandmother, to
whose memory he owes a continual debt of gratitude. As
his father, a solicitor, was a Staffordshire man, he regards
himself as of Staffordshire extraction. During childhood,
amid the wild scenery of the moorlands and Churnet valley,
he acquired a strong love for the beauties of nature, so much
so that by the time he had reached his tenth year he had a
small museum of natural history and geology, containing
many objects of his own collecting. His early education was
at Uttoxeter Grammar School, Staffordshire; and, after com-
pleting it, he removed to London, where he was educated for


his father’s profession. His keen love for geography and
travel, fostered trebly by all the surroundings, proved too
strong for his sedentary occupation in the dingy chambers of
Lincoln’s Inn; and so powerful did this become after vaca-
tions abroad that, having private means, he gave up the law,
with the intention of visiting every country of the world ;
following, however, humbly in the footsteps of Humboldt,
and devoting himself to a comprehensive study of scientific
geography, of which, in its many branches, he was pas-
sionately fond. During his earlier travels he gave his atten-
tion mainly to ethnographical and zoological observation, and
made extensive collections, sending home treasures from time
to time. He has thrice been in the colonies, and travelled,
apart from vacations spent on the continent, in Syria, through
Palestine, Egypt, and North America, and has also visited
India, Ceylon, the Cape of Good Hope, and other places
en route to and from Australia. He came to Adelaide in
1876, and whilst here was engaged in the Surveyor-General’s
department on surveys in the Flinders Ranges and Murray
Scrub. Whilst thus employed he added largely to his museum,
studied and gained information of the customs of the natives,
aided considerably by the kindness and experience of Mr.
Jno. Ewens, of Morgan, and the late Mr. Taplin, of Point
Macleay. This enabled him to take home a fine collection of
their weapons, &c. He also, through his valued friend, the
late Mr. Jno. Howard Clark, obtained specimens of nearly
every shell found on the South Australian coasts. So exten-
sive had his museum become that, after returning to Eng-
land by the “ Hesperus” in 1878, he offered it to the town of
Stafford. It was accepted, and later a fine building was
erected for its reception, adjoining the Borough Hall. The
corporation of Stafford hold the “ Wragge Museum” on lease
for twenty-one years, Mr. Wragge subscribing towards its
maintenance, and being honorary curator; and if during that
time due care is taken of the collection, it is to become the


MR. ROBT. WHINHAM.


property of the town and county of Stafford, Mr. Wragge
being life trustee. It has been classified by him (on Cuvier’s
method, as regards the Zoological department), and he has
illustrated Sir Chas. Lyell’s “ Students’ Elements of Geology.”
The Ethnographical division he has arranged to illustrate
ethnographically Mercator’s Chart of the World. During his
voyages he made numerous zoological and meteorological
notes, and obtained valuable and curious results relative to
ocean currents from his practice of casting adrift bottle-
papers. For instance, in the case of Kennel’s current, which
sets from the Bay of Biscay to the Irish coast, his bottles,
cast adrift at various positions and at different seasons,
have invariably drifted to, and been picked up on, the coast
of France ; seeming to indicate that Maury did not attach
sufficient importance to the influence of the winds on current
bottles. On the other hand, papers cast adrift by Mr. Wragge
in the region of the Sargossa Sea have followed the current into
the main equatorial stream, and been found at Hayti and on
the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. After returning
from his second visit to Australia, Mr. Wragge devoted his
attention specially to meteorology, and established three obser-
vatories at different heights in the Churnet valley and moor-
lands of North Staffordshire, chiefly to investigate problems
in climatology. Very valuable results were obtained as to the
problem of the increase of temperature with altitude. One
instance may be cited. During the famous frost of January,
1881, at his station on Beacon Stoop, 1,216 feet above sea
temperature, at 9 a.m., it was 20 '7; at his Farley observa-
tory, on the watershed, 640 feet above the sea, 16*4; and at
Oakamoor, in the valley, 350 feet above the sea, 3*6, simul-
taneously. In 1881 Mr. Wragge established and worked,
mainly with his own instruments, under the auspices of the
Scottish Meteorological Society, during summer and autumn,
the first observatory on the summit of Ben Nevis, 4,406 feet
high, and a station in connection at Fort William. There
H


was then no house on the summit, and so this involved
climbing the mountain daily in all weathers. Many a battle
he fought with the storms and snow-drifts of the Ben, and
the work was continued with the addition of six intermediate
stations in 1882, and carried on until the storms of winter
absolutely compelled him, at much risk to life, to desist from
his arduous ascents. Very important information was
obtained relative to the vertical distribution of atmospheric
pressure, and its bearing on the cyclonic and anti-cyclonic
types of weather, and his work was rewarded by a special
gold medal given by the Society, and high commendation by
Sir William Thomson. In 1877 Mr. Wragge had married,
in Adelaide, a South Australian lady, daughter of the late
Edward Thornton, Esq., solicitor, of Kensington, and in con-
sequence of his wife’s failing health, he returned to the colony,
with his family, in 1883, by the “ Maranoa,” having first
arranged his museum and re-organised the work at
Ben Kevis, which he left in assistant’s hands. An
observatory-house now crowns the summit of that moun-
tain, to the erection of which nearly every class sub-
scribed, from the Queen downwards, and his work is
permanently continued by the Scottish Meteorological So-
ciety. He made many observations during his voyage out
in the “ Maranoa,” and shortly after arrival here established
the Torrens Observatory at Walkerville (Jan. 1, 1884), pur-
chased the land on which it stands, and settled his family
thereon. This observatory is equipped with the best observ-
ing instruments, including barograph and thermograph, which
constantly record by clock-work every variation of atmos-
pheric pressure and temperature. A new form of hygrometer,
registering by electricity, is a great feature in this observatory.
There is also a fine astronomical equatorially-mounted tele-
scope, with object glass of best quality, by Wray, of London,
besides a small altazimuth, and numerous other instruments
and appliances. Valuable records have been obtained bearing


upon meteorological problems , and in the climatic details pre-
vailing on the Adelaide plains. On Oct. 1, 1884, he established
a meteorological observatory on the summit of Mount Lofty,
and placed self-registering and self-recording instruments
there in connection with the Torrens Observatory. As at
Ben Nevis, so here residts have been obtained which throw
much light on vertical barometric gradients , and especially on
the local climatology of the Mount Lofty ranges and Adelaide
plains. Some of these have been published in the Adelaide
papers, and the full details are sent to England. In 1875,
on the recommendation of Mr. Clements Markham, C. 8., and
the late Sir Bartle Frere, K.C.M.G., Mr. Wragge was elected
a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. He is also a
Fellow of the Royal Meteorological Society, and of the Royal
Society of South Australia. Mr. Wragge considers that life
on this beautiful planet is an inestimable privilege, and one
that should be turned to the very best account. To give a
full description of all that he has accomplished in the cause
of science would in these pages be simply impossible; but
sufficient has been educed to show that Mr. Wragge is no
ordinary man, and one ever ready to impart to others the out-
come of his experiences, gained often under the most unto-
ward circumstances, without fee or reward. He is just the
class of men we want in South Australia, and though at
present visiting Queensland, it is hoped that he will ultimately
return to make this colony his permanent home.
William Bowen Chinner,
in Adelaide, in 1850. Educated at St. Peter’s
College, under Canon Farr, M.A., LL.D., and earned
distinction by gaining a scholarship for classics, given by the
late Bishop Short. Received his first musical instruction
from his father, the late G. W. Chinner, who was well known
h 2


in the early days of the colony as an experienced authority
on musical matters. He afterwards studied the piano, &c.,
with Signor Giorza, the eminent Italian maestro. Mr. Chin-
ner has long been engaged in teaching various branches of
the art, and has for fifteen years been Organist at the Pirie-
street Wesleyan Church. He has opened, and taken part in
the opening of many of the church organs in and around the
city, and on several occasions acted as Organist for the Phil-
harmonic Society and Musical Union. Several of Mr.
Chinner’s compositions for piano, organ and choir purposes
have been published, some of which have acquired popularity,
and met with a favorable reception from choirmasters and
musicians of standing in England and the Colonies.
Dr. Frederick Forwood,
'jf®.OßN at Southwark, England, in 1808. His ancestors
were for many years employed in the Naval and Mili-
tary Service, and his father was first Lieutenant of H.M.
145th Royal Marines. Educated in Devonshire and at St.
Olives, Southwark ; and on completing his scholastic studies,
entered for instruction at the London and St. Bartholomew’s
Hospitals, Practised for some years in London, and in 1853
left England, with his wife and family, in the ship
“ President Ram,” for South Australia. On arrival here he
practised in Adelaide and at Unley, but ultimately removed
to Port Adelaide, in 1856, and resided there upwards of
twenty-six years. During his long association with the
Port he was universally esteemed, and made many friends.
He was on several occasions pressed to take a prominent part
in public matters, but always declined. He died at Queens-
town, June, 1882, aged 74 years, leaving one daughter and
three sons.


Hon. Thomas English, M.L.C.
80RN at Maryport, Cumberland ; died at Parkside, S.A.,
December 17, 1884, in his 65th year. Arrived in Ade-
laide, January 11, 1850, in the barque “ Richardson,'” com-
manded by his brother, Captain Jas. English, and accompanied
by Mrs. English and his brother-in-law (Mr. Henry Brown).
Shortly after, in company with Mr. Brown, he erected a
builder’s workshop in Carrington-street, and subsequently
purchased a corner acre in Hindmarsh-square, where their
business was considerably extended. After sixteen years,
Mr. English, in consequence of being elected a member of
the Legislative Council, was compelled under the Contractors
in Parliament Act to sever his connection with the firm, and
on his resignation was presented by his employes with an
address and handsome epergne. Messrs. English & Brown
opened the Glen Ewin Freestone Quarries at Teatree Gully,
and some of the finest buildings in the province were erected
by them. Among these may be mentioned the Town Hall,
Parliament Houses, Chalmers’ Church, the National Bank,
the Flinders-street Baptist Church, and others in Ade-
laide. On leaving his previous business, Mr. English prac-
tised as an architect, and ultimately took Mr. Rowland Rees
as partner. This firm was dissolved after three years, and he
was next associated with Mr. G. K. Soward, who was his
partner at the time of his death. On February 25, 1878,
prior to his departure for Europe, Mr. English was enter-
tained at a banquet in the Town Hall. The late Mr. W.
Townsend, M.P., presided, and the company included most
of the leading citizens of Adelaide. On this occasion Mr. Eng-
o o
lish was presented with a beautifully-illuminated address, nume-
rously signed by prominent colonists, recording their apprecia-
tion of his services. His Parliamentary career dates from
March 1, 1865, when he was elected to the Legislative
Council. He held this until February 2, 1869, when his


term expired. He was, however, re-elected soon after, and
retained his seat till July 30, 1878, when he resigned. He
was last elected to the Council on May 29, 1882, and was a
member of that body till his death. He first took office in
1865 as Commissioner of Public Works, and retained the
same position, notwithstanding rapid ministerial changes, until
May 1867. Although not a brilliant orator, Mr. English was
essentially a thoroughly practical man, and his opinions
were of a very liberal type. Though not a Protectionist, to
use his own words, he believed “we ought to have a sort of
protection and free-trade tariff for the encouragement of
colonial industries. ,, The first elections under* the new
Municipal Act were held on December 16, 1861, when Mr.
English was elected Councillor for Gawler Ward, and in the
following year was a successful candidate for the Mayoral
Chair. He filled the position with credit during that and
the next year, and several reforms conducive to the general
welfare were undertaken and carried out. Mr. English was
a member of the Friendship Lodge of Freemasons, and some
years ago an active member of the Order. He left a widow,
four daughters, one son, and a brother, Captain English, J.P.
Hon. G. W. Cotton, M.L.C.,
IjS a colonist of about thirty-seven years, and has seen some
[ of the rough work of the early days of South Australia.
In 1881 he was a successful candidate for the Upper House
of the Legislature, being one of the six elected by the vote of
the whole colony, chiefly, it is believed, on account of his
constant advocacy of the essentials of the Keal Property Act
being maintained intact. Conservative in views, he has,
since his advent in Parliament, upheld the rights of the
masses, or “ fifth estate,” as they have been called ; and he
claims, in order that these, like other classes of the commu


nity, may be represented by members chosen from their
own ranks, that members of Parliament must be paid for the
time they devote to public affairs. He has shown much pub-
lic-spiritedness by forwarding, as far as possible, the cause of
education, believing that by such means alone the natural quali-
fication of each individual may he turned to the best account,
whether for himself or for the general good of the country.
He has been for twenty years Hon. Secretary of the Prince
Alfred College, having held this office from the commence-
ment of that institution. His steady support of the right of
working men to have suitable holdings of the waste lands of
the Crown, at moderate rent and for a long term, so that
they may have a home, and be able to find profitable employ-
ment when work is scarce elsewhere, has made him very
popular. Born in 1821, it is not likely that he will, at this
period of his life, take a more active position in politics than
he does at present.
Samuel White Sweet,
BCRN8 CRN at Portsea, England, May 1, 1825; joined H.M.
Navy in 1844, and served on the China Station till
1849, chiefly in the signal department. Studied navigation,
astronomy, and meteorology, and then joined the merchant
service. In March, 1857, he was appointed to the command
of the ship “ Pizarro,” and kept the meteorological log for
the Board of Trade for three years, registering every four
hours night and day, receiving from Admiral Fitzroy letters
of Honorable Mention, especially in reference to forty sets
of Lunars taken during one passage of seventy days. He
was also presented with a large volume full of valuable
information to seamen, with the wind-current and thermal
charts of the world. During one of Captain Sweet’s voyages
in the “ Pizarro,” the crew mutinied, and the outbreak was
only quelled by the prompt steps taken by their Commander.


In 1861 Captain Sweet surveyed the harbour of “ Pena
Blanca ” in South America, and had the honor of seeing the
result of his labors placed on their charts by the British
Admiralty. He gave up a sea-faring life in 1863, and emi-
grated to Queensland with his family with a view to embark
in cotton growing. Failing, however, in that object, he came
to Adelaide in 1867, and in February 1869, received from
the Government of South Australia the appointment of Com-
mander inH.M.C. Havy. He surveyed the Boper River from
its entrance for a distance of 100 miles; piloted steamers
up and down this river, plotted a chart of the survey,
fixed the latitude and longitude of the mouth of the river,
and then returned to Adelaide. He next served three years
as master mariner in the Black Diamond line, and in 1875
finally retired from the sea and settled in Adelaide. Since
that period Captain Sweet has devoted his attention almost
wholly to photography, and the views of scenery taken by
him are unequalled in their fidelity and beauty; in fact, as a
landscape photographer he is unequalled in the colony.
Capt. W. L. O’Halloran.
AT the ripe age of 80 years this gentleman, who may
truly be called one of the pioneers of the colony,
passed away at Glenelg, on July 15, 1885. Born in Ireland
in 1806, he, at the early age of 18, entered the army as an
ensign. The regiment to which he was attached did good
work in India, and in 1825-6 the young officer gained dis-
tinction during the siege and storming of Bhurtpoor, in
Bengal, and received a medal for his services there.
His gallant conduct attracted the attention of his
seniors, and a vacancy occurring during action in the lieu-
tenancy of his company, he was advanced to the position. In
1828 and the following year he, with his brother, the late


Major O’Halloran, was attached to the staff of his father,
Major-General Sir Joseph O’Halloran, G.C.8., in the Saugor
Divison, Central India. Soon afterwards he returned home,
and was for several months engaged in recruiting duty in
Ireland, In those days it was a rare thing for promotion in
the British army to he granted as the reward of merit, and
it was not until 1838 that Captain O’Halloran obtained his
company, and then only by purchase. He did not retain his
position in the 38th Regiment long, and in 1840 he reached
South Australia, having retired from military service. In
1843 he secured a position upon the Civil establishment of
the colony, and in that year was appointed a member of the
Audit Board, and shortly afterwards Private Secretary to
Governor Grey, and Clerk of the Executive Council. These
he retained for some time, hut in 1851 he received the
appointment of Auditor-General, in succession to Mr. E. C.
Singleton, who exchanged duties with him. In this import-
ant office he remained for close upon seventeen years. The
work devolving upon him was most arduous and responsible,
and it was performed with a conscientiousness and ability
which ensured for him the confidence of a long succession of
Governments as well as of the public at large. Captain
O’Halloran’s retirement from the service took place early in
1868, since which he has resided in South Australia, taking
no active part in public affairs, but still exhibiting an
intelligent interest in the progress of the colony. In his
official capacity he had the reputation of being a strict disci-
plinarian, his military training having evidently left its
impress upon his mind. At the same time he could unbend
to those who won his regard, and there are many outside of
his family circle who will remember him with respect and
cherish his memory. There are few old colonists who have
not a vivid recollection of Captain O’Halloran, whose tall,
upright figure, military bearing, and courteous address marked
him out for what he was —a soldier and a gentleman.


Alexander Donaldson,
®HE senior partner of the firm of Donaldson, Andrews,
and Shari and, warehousemen, died at Surrey, England,
March 18, 1883, in his 50th year. He came to this colony
about forty years ago, and first began business with Messrs.
Peter Gumming & Sons, of Adelaide. In 1853, he entered
the service of Messrs. G. & R. Wills & Co., and remained in
their employ until 1865. He was one of the first commercial
travellers in South Australia, and was considered one of the
most successful men in that capacity. In connection with
Messrs. Andrews & Sharland, he founded the firm in 1866.
He went to England shortly afterwards, and has since spent
most of his time in that country. He was noted for his
genial good humour, for his energy and straightforwardness in
business, his gentlemanly manners, and other good social
qualities.
Richard Jagoe.
TF sheer hard work and dogged perseverance deserves a
H place in this record, it has been well earned by the sub-
ject of this memoir. Born at Truro, Cornwall, in 1833. Prior
to leaving England he engaged first in a collier schooner and
then in a fruiting cutter, as an introduction to sea-faring pur-
suits. Arrived with his parents in this colony in 1849, he
commenced his colonial career by working as farm laborer or
drapers’ runner, as occasion demanded. Later on he took
another turn at sea-faring, and made several intercolonial
voyages, but the life was not to his taste, although a most
profitable employment in the days of the diggings’.
On returning from Forest Creek he served with an
auctioneer in Adelaide, and obtained an introduction to
newspaper life, and a favorable opportunity arising he was
placed on the Adelaide Times to collect the shipping news.


He ultimately changed to the Register , and in this service
he has continued for over thirty years. In early days he
was appointed Sanitary Officer, to prevent the introduction of
contagious diseases, and has carried out the duties of that
vocation with universal approbation. The boat service at the
Semaphore having attracted attention from the want of efficiency
displayed, the shipping reporter was again thrown into the
breach, and by the powerful aid of the Daily Press overcame
all obstacles, and changed the Beach Service from whaleboats
to sailing cutters. As the colony progressed he had the honor
of working up the important and efficient Steam Service
which has developed into a Company, leaving the subject of this
notice still reporter for Shipping and Assistant Health Officer,
and in all probability he will some day die in harness. Mr.
Jagoe has a most positive and intimate knowledge of all cir-
cumstances connected with Port Adelaide for over thirty
years, and is referred to on every occasion when the old
customs are alluded to. Although his vocation of night and
day work precludes his mixing with the haut ton , it is said
that on sundry birthdays there are celebrations held at the
“ Sandhill Savage’s” lair which are as pleasant and jovial as
those in the circle of “ Society.” It may be mentioned that
the original name was Trejago y and in the time of Edward
YL, his ancestor, Jahn de Trejago, of Fentgallan, was high
Sheriff of Cornwall.
John Nowland
OAME to South Australia in the “ Lysander” in 1839,
and took part in the founding of the Total Abstinence
Society, in January, 1840. He was the first Eechabite who
landed in this colony, and in his house the first Tent was
opened. He was elected a City Councillor in 1841, and held
a seat in the Council until September, 1843. He died July
19, 1885, aged 79 years.


Christopher Giles, Sen.,
OIED in April, 1884. Arrived in this colony with his
family in 1849, and imported a considerable quantity
of merchandise and other property. He settled first on a
block of 400 acres on the Upper Wakefield, in which place
he was some years afterwards the first Chairman of the Dis-
trict Council. Subsequently he embarked in pastoral pur-
suits, taking up country as early as 1852 in the North-Eastern
District, now known as Ketchowla. In this run he was
joined by Messrs. Boucaut, but severe droughts rendered the
undertaking a losing one, and in 1864 the run was sold.
After that Mr. Giles led a very retired life in Adelaide,
though he was well known at the Exchange, where he might
often be met. Notwithstanding his advanced age he retained
his faculties unimpaired to the last, being only a few weeks
before his death engaged in a long and intricate audit. He
left a widow and six children, all of whom are settled in the
colony.
James Page,
¥ ICE-CONSUL for Switzerland and Consular-Agent for
Erance, is a native of London. Resided about nine
years in France and Germany, when he returned to England,
and shortly after left for South Australia, arriving here in
February, 1850. First engaged in the office of the late John
Newman, Port Adelaide, but ere long joined in partnership
with Mr. R. Cleland, the firm being known as Cleland, Page,
and Co. In 1867 he left the Port business to Mr. Cleland,
and joined the firm of W. Morgan & Co., in which he con-
tinued until the death of the senior partner. During his
residence at the Port Mr. Page took an active part in political
and municipal matters, and was Chairman of the first Dis


trict Council of Alberton and Queenstown. He may also be
considered the originator of the Volunteer movement,
since, on the declaration of war with Eussia in 1854, he
immediately posted a placard calling the people to arms, orga-
nised a public meeting, and drew up the resolutions for
forming a Volunteer Corps. In consequence of these prompt
measures, three companies were formed at Port Adelaide, and
continued even when the colonial forces were disbanded.
Mr. Page was an officer of volunteers until 1867, when he
applied to be placed on the “ Eetired List.” He is a mem-
ber of the Lodge Adelaide 341 of Freemasons, SC., and in
1851 was Deputy Provincial Grand Master of the Scotch
Constitution, with the late John Hart as Provincial Grand
Master. He is also one of the oldest members of the Vic-
torian Lodge of Oddfellows, M.U. Olive cultivation has
long found in him a strong advocate, and he personally,
during the planting season of 1871, distributed throughout
this colony upwards of 100,000 plants and trees, with a view
to give this industry an impetus.
J. C. Hansen,
WHO died on May 16, 1885, at Jardelund, in Schleswig-
Holstein, was born at Osterby, in the same Duchy,
in 1815, and arrived in South Australia about the year 1848.
He was for several years engaged in the work of tuition, but
ultimately removed to Unley, where he was known as a
musical instructor of some note. He was a highly cultured
man, and particularly excelled in the more abstruse depart-
ments of geometry, algebra, and fluxional analysis. He left
this colony for his native land in 1877, but there are many
of his old friends yet living who greatly respected him, not
only for his talents, but for his sterling worth.


George Styles,
WHO was about 75 years of age at the time of his
death, in 1884, was a colonist whose perseverance
and energy rendered him eminently successful, and whose
honesty and straightforwardness might form an example for
others to follow. He was a native of Amersham, Bucking-
hamshire, England, where he followed the trade of a baker.
He married early in life, and it was not until he found him-
self head of a household, including three stalwart sons and
an equal number of daughters, that he decided to come to
Australia, to give them greater scope for their energies than
they possessed in the old country. Shortly after arrival here
Mr. Styles entered into business as a baker and storekeeper
at Unley, and from a small beginning worked up a large
concern, from which he retired about five years since. He
was a member of the School Board of Advice for Unley
and Mitcham, and as a Justice of Peace on the Adelaide
Bench often assisted Mr. Beddome in his judicial work.
Mr. Styles was also a leading member of St. Augustine’s
Church, Unley, and widely respected.
William Kither
WAS born at Bow, London, in August, 1843, and is the
second son of the late Wm. Kither, a much-respected
tradesman of that place. Arrived in Adelaide in October,
1855, by the barque “ Constance,” and has carried on his
business as a butcher in Bundle-street (with the exception of
a few months) ever since. He succeeded his father in 1870,
and has been very successful. He rebuilt, at a large cost, the
extensive premises which bear his name, in 1880; was
elected a member of the City Council in 1881, and an aider-
man in 1883; opened a soup-kitchen for the distressed poor
of Adelaide in the winter of 1884, when bread and soup were
daily dispensed gratis for many weeks. Mr. Kither is a


Justice of the Peace, Governor of the Children’s Hospital,
and has been a large subscriber to the Blind and Deaf and
Dumb Asylum, and to other institutions. He is of a genial
and charitable disposition, and deservedly respected by all
classes of the community.
Dr. Charles Gosse,
KHOSE death was the result of an accident, was a
native of Adelaide. He was bom here on Dec. 26,
1849, and educated at Mr. J. L. Young’s school. Destined by
his father for the medical profession, he was at an early age sent
to England to pursue his studies at Clifton College, and after a
preparatory course went to Moorfield Hospital, London, where
he filled the position of Clinical Clerk and gained most of
his medical experience. In 1870 he received the diploma of
M.E.C.S., England, and then proceeded to Aberdeen, where,
in 1872, he passed as Master of Surgery and took the degree
of Bachelor of Medicine. In 1875 he took the full degree
of Doctor of Medicine. During the whole of his time he
paid special attention to diseases of the eye, and when he left
England for his native land he bore the reputation of a skil-
ful oculist. On arrival in the colony in January 1873, he
became associated with his father in his practice, and on May
26, 1876, he was, on the resignation of Dr. W. Gosse, unani-
mously appointed Honorary Medical Officer of the Adelaide
Hospital. In 1877 he was placed on the Board of Manage-
ment, and in September 1881, it having been deemed advis-
able to place the ophthalmic cases under special treatment,
he was appointed honorary ophthalmic surgeon for five years,
which appointment he held till his death. He was also a
member of the Medical Board in the latter part of 1884, but
on the amended Hospitals Act being put into operation, he
courteously retired in favor of Dr. Mayo. In October 1884,


he opened the Gosse wing of the Home for Incurables —an
institution in which he and his father both took deep interest.
He was a prominent member of the Adelaide Literary Society,
and did it good service by his lectures on various topics.
The busy life he led, however, precluded him from taking an
active part in public matters, though he had every induce-
ment to do so. He was greatly attached to athletics, and
well-known in the cricket field as a prominent player. Dr.
Gosse was married to a daughter of the Hon. G. C. Hawker,
M.P., and left one child, whom he was endeavoring to save
when he met with the injuries which led to his death. He
died July 1, 1885, aged 36, and it is inexpressibly sad that
a life so full of promise, and which teemed with acts of
kindness and skill, should have been thus briefly cut off. He
will long live in the memory of men as one whom calumny
could not touch, and who was prompted by a desire for the
happiness of others.
Dr. W. Gosse, M.D.,
AW ELL-KIS T OWU and deservedly-esteemed member of
the South Australian medical faculty. He arrived in
the colony with his family in 1850, and in 1852 received the
appointment of Colonial Surgeon, and also that of Superin-
tending Surgeon to the Lunatic Asylum. In March, 1857,
he was appointed Honorary Medical Officer to the Adelaide
Hospital, and in 1874 became President of the Central Board*
of Health. He held the office of Public Yaccination Officer
to the Government from 1880 to the time of his death. He
was one of the Governors of the S. A. Institute, and Warden
of the Senate of the Adelaide University. Dr. Gosse was an
able physician, and his kind manner endeared him to all with
whom he was associated in his professional duties. He died
in Adelaide at an advanced age, in July, 1883.


W. W. R. WHITRIDGE.


Edward Davy, M.R.C.S.,
WHOSE name has been before the public recently as
the discoverer of the “ relay” system, which had an
important influence in developing the electric telegraph, died
at Malmsbury, Victoria, Jan. 26, 1885. He was born at
Ottery, St. Mary’s, Devon, June 16, 1806. His father was
a surgeon, practising at that place, and he received his educa-
tion there. In his sixteenth year he was articled to Mr. C.
Wheeler, resident medical officer at St. Bartholomew’s Hos-
pital, with whom he lived three years. He gained
the prize for botany at the annual herborising in 1825, passed
the Apothecaries’ Hall in 1828, and the Royal College of
Surgeons in 1829. The next few years of his life were spent
in the practice of his profession. In 1836 he first experi-
mented in electric telegraphy, and attracted considerable
attention by his early inventions, and their importance in
developing its practical use. In 1839 Mr. Davy emigrated
to South Australia, going out in medical charge of an
immigrant vessel. He contemplated pastoral pursuits, but
soon abandoned the idea, and in 1843-4-5 was engaged as
editor of the Adelaide Examiner. In 1848 he undertook the
management of the Yatala Smelting Works (copper), and
carried it on successfully for about three years, when the gold
discoveries in Victoria caused an exodus of the population, and
the closing of this as well as other establishments. In 1852
the Government Assay Office was established in Adelaide,
and Edward Davy had the operative charge. Gold tokens
were here coined, the first of the kind in Australia. Their
circulation was an important fiscal advantage, and kept up
the value of gold in Australia. The great success of this
establishment caused Davy to be invited by the Victorian
Government to organise and take the management of a similar
establishment in Melbourne. The offer, unfortunately for
him, was too tempting to be refused. He only enjoyed the
I


liberal salary attached to the office—£l,soo a year —from July,
1853, to the end of the following year, when the assay
department was abolished. He afterwards started farming
near Malmesbury, combining it with the practice of his pro-
fession, but the farming enterprise proving pecuniarily
unsuccessful, he removed to Malmesbury, and devoted him-
self exclusively to his medical practice and the education of
his family. He also took an active part in local affairs, was
for many years a member of the borough council, several
times mayor, and for more than twenty years an active
justice of the peace.
J. W. Jenkinson, A.M.I.C.E.,
WHO died at Pernambuco, on March 10, 1885, was a young
man of great engineering talent and for some years
on the staff of the Hydraulic Engineer’s Department in this
colony, where he had charge of the outside works. He
began his professional career in the establishment of Messrs.
Simpson & Co., the celebrated makers of pumping machinery
and waterworks appliances in London, and in 1879 came to
South Australia, having, at the request of Mr. Oswald Brown,
the late Hydraulic Engineer, been engaged by the Government
as draftsman. Whilst here he made himself so useful in the
department, and displayed such great practical knowledge of
all the details of water supply, that his position was soon
improved, and at the time of his leaving the colony he was
in receipt of a salary of £525 per annum. By his aid the
Adelaide water works were made a remunerative undertaking.
He left the colony with a view to devote his time to more
extensive works, in September 1884, and on arrival in
Brazil was placed in charge of the construction of important
reservoirs for the supply of water to Pernambuco. This under


taking, estimated to cost £1 20,000, was designed by Mr.
Oswald Brown, who spent three months in Pernambuco in
1884. Although this place is said to be one of the healthiest
in Brazil, yellow fever occasionally prevails, and it was to
this that Mr. Jenkinson succumbed at the early age of thirty.
He had fully intended to return to settle in South Australia,
as he had made many friends during his sojourn in this
country.
John Frame,
t well-known South Australian agriculturalist in the Mount
Barker district. Born at Glasgow, Scotland, April 28,
1799; arrived in Adelaide, August 14, 1839. He first turned
his attention to agriculture in 1843, when he, in conjunction
with Mr. Allan Bell and the late Mr. Patterson, took up three
sections at the Bald Hills, near Mount Barker, and began the
cultivation of wheat. He was very successful, and five years
later removed to a larger farm, which he occupied at the time
of his death. The land being admirally adapted for the suc-
cessful growth of all kinds of cereals, Mount Barker wheat
soon won a name for itself in the market, and ultimately a
sample of it sent to England by Mr. Frame gained the gold
medal at the first London International Exhibition in 1851.
From that date he has received many valuable awards from
Commissioners of British and Foreign Exhibitions and at
various Agricultural Shows in this and the neighbouring
colonies. He was a member of the Koyal Agricultural
Society of South Australia from its foundation, and hardly a
Show was held under its auspices at which he has not taken
one or more prizes. His long and useful labours were recog-
nised in his being made a life-member of the Society. In
1853 he was, in conjunction with Mr. John Dunn and others,
appointed a member of the first Mount Barker District
I 2


Council, and was also instrumental in starting the Mount
Earker Agricultural Society. Mr. Frame was just the stamp
of colonist required here, a practical farmer, who knew how
to make the best of the land at his disposal. His death took
place in July 1885, at the advanced age of 86 years.
William Bickford,
in the colony in 1839 with the intention of
starting sheepfarming. Before leaving his home in
Devonshire, England, he had received glowing and utopian
accounts respecting South Australia, but on arrival failed to
find the realization of his hopes. The high prices asked by
owners of sheep and cattle caused him to turn his attention
to the business he had followed in the home country—a
chemist —and he sent to England for a stock of drugs and
other requisites and then opened the first druggist’s shop in
Adelaide. He was eminently successful, and very many of
the preparations which he introduced are made up and sold
to this day. At the early age of thirty-five years, after three
days’ illness, he died, leaving a wife and five children. After
his decease the business was carried on for some years by the
widow, when it ultimately passed into the hands of her sons,
William and Harry Bickford, who have extended it until it
is known as the leading wholesale druggist and sundry firm
in South Australia, under the style and title of A. M. Bick-
ford & Sons.
Ulysses Bagot,
BROTHER of the late Hon. J. T. Bagot, arrived in the
colony in 1851, and was for upwards of twenty-eight
years engaged in various positions in the Civil Service. Died
November 8, 1882, aged 62 years.


Alexander Williamson Dobbie
IS of Scottish parentage, and was born at Glasgow, Nov.
_ 12, 1843. His father was a skilful engraver and arrived
in this colony in 1851 with his family. His mother was a
cheerful, energetic, and well-informed woman, and her
judicious management had the best effect on the character of
her son. Mr. A. W. Dobbie received several years of school-
ing from Mr. J. Bath, at Port Adelaide, and when fourteen
years of age was apprenticed as a brassfounder to Mr.
Schwann, of Gawler Place. Before he was nineteen he
entered into business on his own account. His taste for the
more delicate branches of mechanics led to his undertaking
the ordinarv work of a machinist, and his liking for ingenious
* o o
contrivances induced him to cultivate a trade in American
inventions. This was greatly expanded by his visit to
Philadelphia at the time of the Exhibition in 1876, when he
made a tour around the world. As a lad he was fond of
electrical experiments, and the knowledge of electro-plating
thus acquired was utilised in his business, and thus another
extension entered into. His establishment has now grown
to considerable dimensions, and affords employment to a large
number of worknfen. Mr. Dobbie married at the age of
twenty-one, and made himself a home, first in the city, and
then at College Park. His garden there displays his skill as
a florist, whilst his love of the beautiful and the wonderful
are to be seen all over the premises. At exhibitions he is
always a prize-taker for flowers. Few private houses receive
a greater variety of visitors, or afford more interest. The
garden and green-houses are generally gay with blossoms,
electricity pervades the rooms, for there are telephones and
microphones everywhere, and outside, on fine evenings his
large telescope opens the wonders of the heavens to admiring
gazers. Though never a scientific astronomer, Mr. Dobbie,
as an observer, has won a good reputation. From descriptions


in the English Mechanic he made a splendid reflecting tele-
scope, having a speculum of six and a-half inches diameter,
but not content with this, he constructed one still more
powerful, and after devoting his spare time to it for upwards
of ten years, had the satisfaction of possessing one of the
finest instruments in the Southern world, with a speculum
of twelve and-a-quarter inches diameter. Electricity had
a great attraction for him as a youth, and instead of spending
his leisure in the common recreation of lads he investi-
gated the phenomena of this subtle force. It also induced
him to study the construction of the telephone when Bell's
discovery was published. He had no other guide than
drawings in the Scientific American , but used them to such
good purpose that he has the honour of being the first to
construct a successful telephone in these colonies. He made
numerous useful and amusing experiments with microphones
of various kinds, and constructed a phonograph, with the
conviction that it would never be more than a scientific toy.
About 1878 Mr. Bobbie turned his attention to mesmerism
in its various forms, and his abundant vitality made him a
most successful operator. He has been instrumental in
alleviating a large amount of suffering, for he pursued his
studies with that specific end in view. Some of his patients
have developed considerable clairvoyant powers, and their
statements while in the mesmeric trance were marvellous.
Mr. Bobbie became a member of the Wesleyan Methodist
Church in his 18th year, and has been an active worker in
connection with that denomination up to the present. He
has found congenial work among the young, having been
Superintendent of a Sabbath-school for upwards of ten
years in the city and suburbs. Besides this, he has
held various official positions in which his business capacity
has enabled him to render valuable service. While on his
tour round the world, Mr. Bobbie wrote a series of descrip-
tive letters to the Methodist Journal and on his return these


were re-published in a racy and readable volume. His
lectures on “ Electro-metalling,” “ The Telephone,” “ Micro-
phone,” “‘ Phonograph,” and “Mesmerism” are in great
request, and readily given for philanthropic objects or for
Young Men’s Societies. Mr. Dobbie is an active member of
Agricultural and Horticultural Societies, the Chamber of
Manufactures, Prince Alfred College, the Stranger’s Friend
and Charity Organization Society, and others of a religious
or denominational character. He enjoys the respect which
intelligence, energy, and integrity always command.
Henry Dawson,
WHO lost his life by the capsizing of a yacht in St.
Vincent’s Gulf on February 8, 1884, was but a lad
when he arrived in the colony, his father being one of the
earliest pioneers and settlers at Brownhill Creek. He was
apprenticed to Mr. Phillips, saddler, of Adelaide, and after
completing his term started business at the Burra. He
was the original contractor for the mail from the Burra to
Outalpa, which he carried on for several years. By his
frugality and thrift he acquired a large property at Mount
Brian Flat, which he leased to tenants with right of purchase.
He finally disposed of this, and bought the Coroona Run,
thirty miles H.E. of the Burra, which he, after holding for
some years, also sold. At the time of his decease he resided
at Parkside. Mr. Dawson was a good friend in private life,
and very energetic in discharging the many public duties
which he undertook. He was one of the members of the
first Burra Council, and a Justice of Peace for several years.
He was widely known and consulted on all kinds of subjects;
a man of great energy and perseverance, a member of the
Masonic fraternity, and a staunch supporter of Oddfellows
and other kindred societies.


Thomas Sadler Reed
IS the son of the late Charles Reed, Esq., Mall, Clifton.
_ Came to Adelaide in the ship “ Orient ” in November
.1866, and was appointed Chairman of the Destitute Board,
February 3, 1867. He left the colony on account of ill-
health in January 1876 for a sojourn in England, and re-
signed his appointment in March 1877, which was subse-
quently filled by the late J. M. Solomon until the death of
that gentleman, when Mr. Reed was re-appointed as Chair-
man in October 1880. The system of boarding out neglected
and orphan children was commenced by Mr. Reed in 1872,
since which period upwards of two thousand children have
been placed out in various homes, of which number one
thousand children have been adopted without charge to the
colony.
W. Oldham
'jjMfP AY be called the founder of Kapunda, seeing thai he
was for forty years connected with the town and inti-
mately associated with so many of its useful institutions. He
was born in Dublin, Ireland, February 9, 1811, and educated
at Trinity College. For some time he was employed as con-
fidential clerk in Guinness’s brewery. He emigrated to South
Australia in 1838, and shortly after arrival filled the position
of Protector of Aborigines, and in that capacity compiled a
grammar of the Adelaide aboriginal tongue. He subsequently
opened schools in Light-square, in Gawler, and Angaston.
In 1847 he was appointed Purser to the Kapunda Mine, and
on the retirement of Captain Bagot succeeded to the
managership. He was for twenty years actively
engaged in this work, during the flourishing days of the
copper industry. He resigned in 1867 a post in which he
had given general satisfaction as an arbitrator when disputes


arose amongst the people, and engaged in business on his own
account as a surveyor, architect, &c., and acted as clerk to the
Kapunda District Council. Mr. Oldham took great interest
in the volunteer movement, and organised the well-known
Mines Rifle Company, in which he held in succession the
position *of Captain and Major. He was also an earnest
preacher, and, as a Congregationalist minister, did much good.
As a Magistrate for several years, and more recently a Free-
mason, his name was distinguished, and his character, if only
for its ingenious versatility and wealth of resource, was
worthy of admiration. He died at Kapunda, July 3, 1885,
aged 75.
William Herbert Phillipps,
BORN in Adelaide, December 3, 1847, and educated at
Mr. J. L. Young’s and Fellenberg’s Commercial
school, which he left in his fourteenth year to occupy a place
in the office of the late Justice Wearing, the then Crown
Solicitor ; made rapid progress, and was urged by
Mr. Wearing to enter the legal profession, but preferring a
a mercantile career, was transferred to the office of Messrs.
Stilling & Co., in October 1864, as junior. Ere many years
Mr. Phillipps became manager of the extensive shipping and
insurance business of that firm. On the founding of Union
College he became one of the first students, passed the mathe-
matical examination successfully and was going up for exami-
nation in other subjects, when his health gave way from over-
study and he was reluctantly compelled to withdraw. Mr.
Phillipps married, on December 18, 1877, the second daughter
of the Hon. R. A. Tarlton, M.L.C., and in November 1878
resigned his position at Messrs. Stilling & Co., to commence
business on his own account as agent for several insurance
companies. He gradually extended his mercantile relations,


till, in 1881, on returning from a visit to Europe, he founded
the firm of George Wills & Co., of London, Adelaide, and
Port Adelaide, of which he became and is still the managing
partner in South Australia.
Harry Dickson Cell, J.P.,
T£|)ORN in England in 1845, and arrived with his parents
iJ) in this colony in September 1849. His father was for
some time connected with the celebrated iron firm of More-
wood & Rogers, and after establishing the business in Leigh
and Hindley-streets, attracted by the gold-fields of Victoria,
he left for the sister colony. Not being favored by fortune,
the subject of this notice had early to fight the battle of life.
A considerable portion of his time was spent in the Wallaroo
district, before and after the discovery of the Moonta Mines.
After filling several engagements he came to Adelaide, and in
1874 took the position he now occupies as Secretary to the City
Permanent Building and Investment Society. He was elected
to the Town Council of Glenelg in 1881, and returned as
Mayor for that municipality in December 1884. He is a
warm supporter and advocate of Improvement and Literary
and takes a lively interest in their establishment
in various districts. He has also been an active worker for,
and supporter of country and suburban institutes, and is
greatly interested in the early closing movement. Twenty-
five years ago the period of labor was excessive ; averaging
fourteen hours per diem. Finding it impossible to obtain an
earlier time for closing, Mr. Gell with others agitated until
the boon of a Wednesday half-holiday was conceded. This
useful relaxation from labour has been applied with marked
success to many of our country towns and places of business
in the city.


Thomas Nelson,
«|l NATIVE of England. Born July 16, 1814. His father
JiL was a builder and contractor, and for many years held a
responsible position in connection with the powder mills of
Harvey & Co. Emigrated to Sydney, New South Wales, in
1839, and after entering into business there as a bread and
biscuit baker, came to South Australia, landing here in April,
1840. Like most other early colonists, he had to contend with
many ups and downs, but was fairly successful, and in the
evening of his days is still resident near Adelaide, and im-
pressed with a belief in the prosperous future in store for this,
the land of his adoption. Mr. Nelson has reared a large
family in a respectable manner, and contributed in no small
degree to the population of South Australia, his grand-
children numbering no less than forty-six. With such
colonists as this, immigration from the old country might
almost be discontinued, and a grant of land be given by the
Crown to each of their descendants.
Rev. John Hall Angus,
1 NATIVE of Cramlington, Northumberland. Born July
“ Olivia,” and arrived at Port Adelaide, November 17, 1853.
Educated at the Fellenberg Commercial School under the late
Mr. John Martin, and on reaching his 13th year entered the
office of Mr. W. A. Wearing, Crown Prosecutor of the Pro-
vince, with whom he remained until the latter was elevated
to the Bench on the removal of Mr. Justice Boothby. From
Mr. Wearing’s he was transferred to the office of S. J. Way,
Esq., the present Chief Justice, and shortly after was
accepted as student of the Presbytery of the Presbyterian
Church, (August 3, 1869), and pursued his studies in the


professorial classes at the S.A, Institute until May 19, 1873,
when the Church at Mount Pleasant having become vacant
through the death of the Rev. Jas. Roddich, Mr. Angus
received a call to that pastorate, and was ordained on August
19 in the same year. On the death of the Rev. P. Maclaren,
of Port Adelaide, Mr. Angus accepted the position, and was
inducted by the Presbytery, May 19, 1879. During the life
of Mr. Maclaren steps had been initiated for the erection of
a new church, and Mr. Angus had the satisfaction of seeing
the present handsome and commodious edifice in St. Vincent-
street completed and opened on February 5, 1882. Since
1878 he has been clerk of the Presbytery, vacating the
position for one year in order to take the Moderator’s Chair
at the request of his brethren. Mr. Angus is at present
associated with Sir S. Davenport and J. Howard Angas, Esq.,
in administering the estate of that well-known colonist, the
late Geo. Fife Angas, Esq.
Charles Hill,
c |®ORN August 13, 1824, in Coventry, England. As he
Bv evinced at an early age a taste for art, he was articled
for seven years to an engraver at Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Entered the Academy of Fine Arts in 1840, and continued to
study in the same institution after it was transformed into
a School of Design and Arts, under Mr. W. B. Scott, A.M.
This gentleman subsequently availed himself of Mr. Hill’s
assistance in preparing the posthumous works of his late
brother, David Scott, R.A.S. After filling other important
positions in England, Mr. Hill left for South Australia*
arriving here by the ship “Historia,” July 28,1854. He
started in business as an engraver, but finding little to do,
applied for, and obtained the appointment of Professor of
Drawing to St. Peter’s College and other educational establish


merits. Having inaugurated a School of Arts at his own residence,
preliminary meetings with a view to increase its usefulness
were held, and a society to promote its interests formed. It
was not, however, till 1860 that the School of Design, of
which this was the nucleus, was opened, with Mr. Hill as
master. This post he filled in a creditable manner till Sep-
tember 30, 1881, when the school was handed over to the
Governors of the South Australian Institute. Since then he
has continued to use his graver and brush in that beautiful
occupation that takes so little yet gives so much. In 1861
he obtained a special prize of five guineas for portrait paint-
ing, and also the gold and silver medals for painting at the
Intercolonial Exhibition, Adelaide, 1881. Mr. Hill is a
member of the Bohemian Club, and president of the Adelaide
Sketch Club.
Ralph Wheatley Odgers Kestel,
BORN at Portreath, Cornwall, July 28, 1838; arrived in
South Australia, with his parents, in February 1848,
and was first employed at the Kapunda mine in dressing ore.
In 1849 he went to the Burra mines where he was engaged in
various works, ultimately turning his attention to the
building trade, and locating at Kooringa. Left for Victoria
in 1852, and made altogether six trips from South Australia
to the Victorian and New South Wales diggings, and when
not so engaged worked as a builder in and around Port Ade-
laide, at which place he at length settled, and entered into
partnership with Mr. Henry Burge. Many of the principal
buildings in the locality were erected by this firm, notably
the model school, Stilling & Co’s store at the new dock, the
Bank of Adelaide, and other important structures. Mr.
Kestel was elected councillor for Centre Ward in 1877, 1881,
and 1883, holding office until May 1884, when he resigned


to carry out the extension of the Town Hall buildings. He
was instrumental in doing much good for Port Adelaide
during his councillorship. He introduced a drainage scheme
for the sanitary improvement of the town, but, although it
was not adopted, it found much favour and led to prompt
action by the civic body. He took a prominent part in the
purchase of the land for the Corporation Wharf, and also in
securing 1,000 feet of wharf frontage to Tam o’Shanter
Creek, and strongly supported Mr. H. W. Thompson when
mayor in introducing asphalt footpaths. Mr. Kestel was
popular as a councillor, as shown by his representing a ward
in which he held rateable property for more than seven
years. He is a member of the Institute Committee, and
connected with the S. A. Yacht Club.
Hiram Mildred, J.P.,
Bi CRN at Portsea, England; eldest son of the Hon.
Henry Mildred, M.L.C., and one of the four remaining
old colonists who arrived in South Australia with Colonel
Light in the surveying brig “Rapid,” August 18th, 1836.
After visiting Sydney he spent his early years in pastoral
and agricultural pursuits. In 1844-5-6 he was in the Customs
and agency business at Port Adelaide with the late W. R. S.
Cooke, and joined in the exodus to the Victorian gold dig-
gings in February 1852. Returning to Adelaide at the end
of the same year, he spent some time in farming ; but finding
this unprofitable he settled at Goolwa in the milling and
general agency business. In 1858 he received an appoint-
ment under the S. A. Government as Sub-Collector of Cus-
toms at Port Augusta, to which were afterwards added those
of Harbour Master, Superintendent Mercantile Marine, Clerk
of Local Court, Chairman of Destitute Board, District Regis


trar of Births, Deaths, and Marriages, Secretary, Cashier, and
Accountant of the North District Hoad Board, and several
other subsidiary offices. These he resigned in 1877, after
close upon twenty years’ service, and now resides in North
Adelaide. As one of the surviving quintette of the party
who pitched the first tent where Adelaide now stands, and
who has “ borne the heat and burden of the day,” Mr.
Mildred deserves more than a passing notice. Few officials
in the S. A. Civil Service have held at one time and con-
ducted satisfactorily so many appointments as he. In addi-
tion to this, he, with his late wife (daughter of the Rev.
Henry Cheetham), was instrumental in raising the first
established church and Sunday-school in Port Augusta. In
1881 Mr. Mildred contested an aldermanship for the city,
but was beaten by a small majority. In 1882-3-4 he was
elected for two years as councillor for Robe Ward. Standing
again for alderman, he was defeated a second time. At an
advanced age, he possesses more activity than many younger
men, and his physique, after an almost continuous residence
of forty-nine years, is indicative of the healthy character of
our South Australian climate.
Rev. John Watsford.
flllS distinguished minister of' the Wesleyan Methodist
Church was horn in New South Wales about the year
1821 ; entered the ministry in 1843, appointed by the Con-
ference to South Australia in 1862, and arrived here in the
same year. He immediately set to work, and evinced great
enthusiasm in the training and advancement of the young,
and mainly for this object gathered the means of erecting the
Lecture Hall attached to the Pirie-street church, Adelaide.
He made efforts to found a college for the higher education
of colonial youth, but these failed until 1865, when, hearing


that the present site of the Prince Alfred College was for sale,
he rallied the friends of the movement, and the thirteen acres
of land were purchased and the fine building which forms so
attractive an ornament near the city was erected thereon.
Mr. Watsford watched over this undertaking with much inte-
rest until it became one of the leading academical institutions
of the day. He was elected President of the Australasian
Wesleyan Methodist Church held in Adelaide in 1871. In
1868 he was transferred by the appointment of the Confe-
rence to Victoria, and in 1878 became President of the
General Conference held in Sydney. Mr. Watsford has
resided in Victoria up to the present time, and sustained with
high honours various prominent official positions in the reli-
gious body to which he belongs. Among recent commissions
committed to his charge, was the deputation to
Tonga to endeavour to settle the differences between the
government of that island and the society of which he is so
prominent a member. A brief account of Prince Alfred
College will not here be out of place. It was first practi-
cally started on September 18, 1865, when, in accordance
with a resolution passed at a meeting held that morning, the
site for its erection was bought at auction for £2,750. The
persons present at this meeting were the Revs. John Watsford,
J. Cope, and IST. Bennett, Messrs. Jno. Colton, T. G. Water-
house, G. P. Harris, T. Padman, Wm. Rhodes, James Scott,
Wm. L. Roach, and G. W. Cotton. After a considerable
amount of preliminary work the foundation-stone of the
edifice was laid on November 7, 1867, by H.R.H. the Duke
of Edinburgh, who very graciously consented to perform the
ceremony. His Excellency Sir Dominic Daly, the then
Governor of the colony, heartily concurring in the request of
the committee, the school was opened in January, 1869,
and the central College buildings were inaugurated by His
Excellency Sir James Eergusson, Bart., in June of the same
year. The first head-master was Mr. Samuel Eiddian, 8.A.,


JAMES A. HOLDEN.


of Cambridge, under whose tutorial control, followed by that
of Mr. J. A. Hartley, 8.A., E.Sc., of London, and the present
head-master, Mr. F. Chappie, 8.A., B.Sc., of London,
aided by a numerous and influential committee, the
attendance at the College has steadily increased till it has
reached some 400 pupils ; and more than a thousand of its
alumni are taking positions in almost every department of
business life.
James P. Buttfield
JOINED the Government service in 1866 as Sub-
Protector of Aborigines for the Northern District of the
Province; appointed a Special Stipendiary Magistrate (his
duties being confined to the Far North) on April 1, 1869.
He held these positions at the time of his death, which took
place at Blinman, July 14, 1885. In his magisterial capa-
city he acquired the confidence of the public by the fairness
of his decisions and sterling qualities of heart.
Thomas Greaves Waterhouse, J.P.,
IS a native of England, and came to this colony when about
29 years of age, in 1840. Early engaged in mercantile
pursuits, he soon took a foremost position among business
men for sound judgment and prudent foresight, so that his
lead was readily followed. Had he chosen to enter public
life, he would have found no avenue closed against him. He
was an original shareholder in the once famous Burra Mines,
and sat for several years on the Board of the Association.
He was also on the first Board of Directors of the Bank of
Adelaide. Mr. Waterhouse heartly entered into the project
for the establishment of Prince Alfred College, which he has
K


been heard to say was an object worthy of his life’s work.
In this institution he has taken a lively interest up to the
present time, and his donations to the building fund have
much exceeded in amount those of any other single sub-
scriber. This circumstance has been acknowledged by the
Committee on various occasions: notably at the laying of the
foundation stone of the College, when he was chosen to pre-
sent the trowel to H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, and the
south-east portion of the edifice has been named “ The
Waterhouse Wing.” For some years past Mr. Waterhouse
has resided in England, but it is well-known that he largely
assists many colonial institutions. He is represented in
South Australia by his son, Mr. Arthur Waterhouse.
Immanuel Gotthold Reimann
WAS born in 1859 at Hahndorf, and educated at
Hahndorf School. After having devoted some
time to the study of music, he was appointed music-master
to Hahndorf College in 1875, and in the following year took
up his residence in Adelaide as a teacher of music. Later on
Herr Reimann left for Europe, and was for some years a
student at the Berlin Academy of Music, conducted by Prof.
Dr. Th. Kullak (Pianist to the Emperor of Germany), and at
the Berlin Conservatory of Music, directed by Prof. Xaver
Scharwenka (Pianist to the Austrian Emperor). From both
institutions Herr Reimann holds very flattering diplomas,
Prof. Dr. Kullak repeatedly offering him a situation as
teacher at his Academy. After having successfully passed an
examination in Musical Pedagogy under Dr. Bischoff, Herr
Reimann studied Musical Theory with Professors Dorn,
Rhode, Wiierst, P. Scharwenka, and Alb. Becker. In
October, 1883, he opened the first College of Music in this
city, and so far the support accorded to the enterprise has
been very encouraging.


Dr. Robert Gething
WAS born at Newport, Monmouthshire, in 1826, and
received his early education at the local Grammar
School; transferred to King’s College, London, and became
a medical student. Obtained the diploma of the Royal
College of Surgeons and of the Apothecaries 5 Hall, and sub-
sequently gained the Doctor of Medicine degree of the
University of Edinburgh, at the early age of 23. His
exceedingly youthful appearance prevented his commencing
the practice of his profession at once, and his health not
being good decided him on travelling. After visiting Wes-
tern Australia, China, India, and Java, and returning
to England, he resolved to visit South Australia, and arrived
here in February, 1854. About this time one of the medical
men at Port Adelaide died, and this afforded an early oppor-
tunity for Dr. Gething to commence practice. He was
appointed Health Officer in succession to Dr. Duncan in
1878. How much he was appreciated will be best shown
by a quotation from the obituary notice in the press on his
decease, in October, 1883 : —“ A dark shadow has fallen
upon Port Adelaide in the death of one of its foremost and
most valued citizens, Dr. Gething. The blow is one that is
keenly felt in many a South Australian home where the
name of the true-hearted, genial doctor had become a house-
hold word. His removal from amongst us cannot alone be
regarded as a painful domestic bereavement, or even a local
misfortune; it is a great national loss. Placed by his
eminent attainments in the first ranks of his profession, Dr.
Gething devoted his talents to alleviating the suffer-
ings of others, and in his efforts to minister to them enter-
tained no thoughts of self. Summer and winter, day and
night, sunshine or rain, he was ever the same, ready to obey
the call of duty, to which he made himself the absolute slave.
His energy was enormous and his labour herculean, which
K 2


it seemed as though nothing in the form of work could daunt
or subdue. Alas ! though the noble spirit was thus willing,
the flesh could not withstand the severe strain upon it, and
the universal mourning to-day, as the mortal remains of the
indefatigable toiler are borne beyond the reach of toil,
is the sacrifice at which society has received services
which it has been the lot of few to render. There are few of
whom it would be more difficult to write an obituary record
than Dr. Gething. His kindly face, his frank, impulsive, but
hearty, genial manner, his generous disposition are so familiar
to all Portonians that they need no mention. Of some we
may charitably say, ‘De mortuis nil nisi bonum ,’ but in the
present case we need plead for no such charity from man.
To err is human, for none are perfect ; but his failings were
such as still more endeared him to those around him. His
epitaph is written in the tears of those who knew him, and
in the gloom in which more than a whole town has been
plunged. He has gone from amongst us. hTo more shall
his kindly face and cheery manner carry comfort to hearts
sick with sorrow and suffering, and infuse sunshine into the
gloom of the chamber of sickness ; no more shall the poor
find him ready to minister to their ailments with his skill,
and aid them freely with his purse ; no more shall we have
the benefit of his valued counsel, —a deep grief has fallen
upon us ; yet the dark cloud is illumined with a silver lining.
In sorrow for our loss we may desire consolation by contem-
plating the noble life so bravely lived, and by the knowledge
that amongst all sorts and conditions of men not one will be
ready to breathe one unkind word, or cherish aught but
loving thoughts of Robert Gething. In his charitable acts
the doctor was always assisted by his wife, and by those
whom they helped the two were regarded as one kind
assistant. Hundreds of pounds have been raised and subscribed
by his wife and himself in special cases, and it was only
necessary for the charitably-disposed to find that Dr. Gething


favoured any object to insure its success. Except, however,
in public subscriptions, his good deeds were not noised abroad
and known only to those whose calling or chance brought
them in contact with the poorer classes. 5 ’ It remains but to
say that he was most anxious for the proper representation
and protection of his profession in South Australia, and
worked earnestly to secure a Bill for this purpose. Though
called away before this end was attained, it is hoped the
advance he made may be followed by others, and result
favourably. A memorial amounting to a considerable sum-
was raised for the purpose of founding a University Scho-
larship, which was to take the form of a prize, to be given
to the most successful student of medicine in the district of
Port Adelaide, and belonging either to St. Peter’s or Prince
Alfred’s College.
Samuel Benson.
HUNDREDS of visitors to Adelaide, as well as residents
here, who have passed through the Government Offices
in King William-street, have greatly admired a most delight-
ful miniature garden in the centre, known as “ Benson’s
Quadrangle,” but few are aware that a spot ever green in the
hottest days in summer has been made thus attractive by one
man, viz : —Samuel Benson, with the simplest appliances,
and in a manner which is a wonder even to experienced
gardeners. He is an intelligent, though self-taught individual,
and evidently possesses great taste. He arrived in Western
Australia in 1851, with his parents, and was connected with
the Government service of that colony. In 1861 he joined
the Mounted Police in Victoria, and was regarded as a most
useful man in the force. Returned to Western Australia in
1863, and in 1865 was Corporal and Acting Superintendent of
Water Police at Camden Harbour. During this period the
“ Forlorn Hope ” voyage party arrived there, and were


hospitably entertained by him. Came to South Australia in
1866 ; was appointed orderly to Governor Paly, and held a
similar office to succeeding Governors till December 1879,
when he left to take the position of keeper of the Govern-
ment Offices in Adelaide. During the visit of H.R.H. the
Duke of Edinburgh Mr. Benson was his orderly, and attended
him during his stay in the colony. On the Duke’s leaving,
Mr. Benson received his thanks and those of his suite for
the manner in which he had performed his duties.
George McEwin, J.P.,
BORN in Scotland in 1815 ; arrived in South Australia
by the ship “Delhi,” in 1839 ; died at Glen Ewin,
Houghton, August 8, 1885. He settled at Glen Ewin in
1845, and introduced there fruit and other trees suitable for
Australian cultivation. He was for many years connected
with the Agricultural and Horticultural Society ; a frequent
contributor to the Press of articles bearing upon the culture
of various trees and plants, and was also the author of a work
entitled “ The Yigneron and Gardener’s Manual,” which
passed through several editions. About twenty-five years ago
he began the manufacture of jams at Glen Ewin, in which
pursuit he was assisted by his son, and was very successful.
He was early appointed to the Commission of the Peace ;
for many years acted as Returning Officer for the district of
Gumeracha ; held office as member of the Central Road
Board and Forest Board, and in connection with both did
good service. He was a skilled botanist and microscopist,
and fond of scientific pursuits. Generous and kindly in dis-
position, he was much esteemed in the neighbourhood in
which he resided, and by a large circle of friends throughout
the colony. His son, the Rev. J. McEwin, is editor of the
Christian Colonist , Adelaide.


Signor Raphael Squarise
IS a native of Yicenza, Italy, where he was born November
13, 1856. At the age of 13 he was placed in the
School of Music in his native town, and commenced the
study of the violin in the bow department. In 1870 he
entered the Musical Academy of Turin, where he remained
six years, during which time he obtained a Diploma as violin
instructor, and assisted in the orchestra of the Royal Theatre
in that town. In 1876 he returned to Yicenza, and studied
harmony and composition for two years under the celebrated
maestro Cannetti. In January, 1878, he was conductor
of a band in Contarina, but had to resign the position in
consequence of ill-health. From 1879 until August 1882
he conducted the orchestra and brass band at Arzignano, in
Italy. Arrived in Melbourne, Yictoria, in August
1883, and accepted engagement with the Williamson,
Garner, & Musgrave Opera Company, as leader of their
orchestra. Was also leader of the orchestra of the Cagli
and Paoli Opera Company at the Theatre Royal, Melbourne,
until the Company was dissolved, when he came to Adelaide
with the Hey wood Minstrel Company, and remained with
them until the end of that season. Finding inducements to
follow his profession in this city, Signor Squarise established
himself here as a teacher of the violin, and within six months
of arrival brought together a strong combination of talented
musical artists, now well known as the “ Squarise Band.”
Of this he is still conductor, and on all sides he has gained
encomiums from the Press and the public. He is also leader
of the orchestra at the Academy of Music. His Excellency
the Governor has recognised Signor Squarise’s ability as a
musical instructor by placing his daughter under his tuition,
and several of the best families in Adelaide have accorded
their patronage in a like manner. The S. A. Register of
Dec. 8, 1884, thus speaks of Signor Squarise’s talent as a


composer : —“ The facility in composition of Signor Squarise,
the violinist and band-conductor, is well-known in Adelaide,
although his residence here has been but brief. Violin
concertos, played by himself on a single string, caprices for
the pianoforte, waltzes, dramatic compositions like ‘ The
Battle of Sedan,’ not to mention arrangements of operatic
selections for his brass band, have proceeded from his pen
in a manner which does credit alike to his industry and his
musical taste. His last composition is an 1 Ave Maria,’ and
was sung for the first time publicly at the morning service
at the Roman Catholic Cathedral on Sunday. It was really
a fine composition. The somewhat novel effect in a church
of a harp obbligato was introduced, the harmony being filled
in by the organ. The composition was so well worth hearing
that it is to be hoped it will form an item on a concert
programme at no distant date.” Signor Squarise is at present
engaged in composing an English Grand Opera, entitled
“ The Magic Dice,” in conjunction with Mr. Rudolph Menz.
James Walter Smith, LL.D.,
IS the son of a country gentleman, and was educated at
Shrewsbury School, and at Balliol College, Oxford.
He graduated B.A. at that University in 1852, and during
the next year took the degree of LL.B. in the University of
London ; was called to the Bar at the Inner Temple, and
entered upon the practice of his profession. In 1856, when
but 25 years of age, he took the Degree of Doctor of Laws
at the University of London, being awarded the Gold Medal
for special proficiency, (an honor which had only been twice
previously conferred). In the long vacations and intervals
of leisure permitted by his practice, he wrote and published
a series of short popular treatises on various branches of the
law, all of which enjoyed an unprecedentedly large sale in


England and the colonies, whilst some were translated into
foreign languages. Among the subjects treated were : —“ Bills,
Cheques and Notes,” “Partnership,” “The Law of Husband
and Wife,” “ The Law of Public Meetings,” and “ The Law
of Joint Stock Companies.” He also wrote a work con-
taining 250 precedents with introductions and notes, entitled
“ Legal Forms for Common Use.” Though their circulation
increased his practice, and brought him pupils, Dr. Smith
at intervals brought out new editions of each, and was fre-
quently engaged on the daily press in writing upon the legal,
constitutional, and international questions of the day. He
has devoted much time to general literature, and has published
“Twelve True Tales of the Law,” and a translation into
English rhyming verse of the two first books of Horace’s
Odes, each ode being translated in no more lines than the
original; a feat which, as was remarked by the Intellectual
Observer , “no previous translator had either achieved or
attempted.” The leading reviews also spoke highly of the
book. Great exertions were made by Dr. Smith beyond his
practice, in the cause of Law Reform, especially that branch
known as “ Procedure-reform.” Deeply imbued with the
ideas of Bentham, he did much to secure the appearance
before the Judge as the first step in the cause; the assign-
ment of each cause to one Judge, who should deal with it
throughout; the ascertainment of the issue without written
pleadings; continuous sittings, as in a Police Court; the con-
centration of the Courts and their offices, and the admissi-
bility of the evidence of accused persons. In furtherance of
these objects he wrote articles, letters and pamphlets, and
read papers before societies interested therein. He also
■originated a proposal favored by Lord Westbury, to codify
the whole law of England and Ireland en bloc instead of
piecemeal, and lay it before a Committee in a printed form.
When the fusion of law and equity was attempted in 1873,
some of Dr. Smith’s suggestions were adopted; but the


essence of what he advocated still remains as the goal of the
law reformer. Being recommended a warmer climate, after
travelling in Southern Europe, he resolved on resorting to a
colony where he could do, though on a smaller scale, the
work to which he was accustomed, and accordingly in 1875
he went to Natal, at the capital of which he edited the
leading journal, the only paper representing the views of
the Colonial Office, and practised at the Bar. When the war
broke out he came to South Australia ; practised as a lawyer,
and wrote for the Press, and has brought out several tales in
the Observer and Australasian. Here he is well-known, both
as a leader-writer and as the author of a popular series of
humorous articles, which appear under a nom de plume,
and are intended for subsequent publication in England.
From March 1883 to March 1885, Dr. Smith was employed
as Parliamentary Draftsman to the Government; an occupa-
tion for which his previous experience had well suited him.
During this period he drafted 73 Bills, revised six more
drawn by others; drew seven sets of “ Regulations,” and
advised on fifteen matters not arising upon Bills. In March
1885 the office of Parliamentary Draftsman was abolished,
but whether the step thus taken was for the public weal
time must determine.
William James Fullarton,
@NE of the founders of the Adelaide Chess Club, and a
clever exponent of the game, arrived in the colony in
1855, and entered into partnership with Mr. McFarlane Heriot
as a general merchant. He left this in 1868, and was for
some years engaged in general agency business and as secre-
tary to several companies. He was for nine years connected
in this capacity with the Southern Insurance Company, and
resigned in 1884 through failing health. His death took
place at East Adelaide, August 3, 1885, in his 53rd year.


Carl Julius Hans Bertram
IS tlie son of Herman Bertram, a German merchant, and
a native of Brunswick. He commenced the study of
music under his mother at the age of seven, and four years
afterwards was placed under the tuition of Herr Winckler,
with whom he remained several years. During this period
he studied the principles of harmony, counterpoint, and
thoroughbass; and acquired the art of performing on the
organ and pianoforte. Though partially blind from infancy,
at the age of 12 he became totally so through the unskilful
treatment of an oculist. But this calamity appears to have
stimulated his active mind to further exertions, and quickened
his perceptions of the ideal beauties and sublimities of the
art of which he is such an accomplished proficient. He first
appeared in public as a pianist in his eleventh year, and
shortly after commenced his career as a composer. At 16
he passed an examination with credit at the Berlin Conserva-
toire, and during this time he acted as organist of St. Peter’s
Church at Brunswick, in place of Herr Rebelling, who was
absent. In 1881, he gave a farewell concert in his native
city and arrived with his mother in South Australia the
same year. In the following January he had the great mis-
fortune to lose his parent by death, but his talent procured
for him many kind friends. He has composed upwards of
thirty-six Sonatas, fourteen Nocturnes and Romances, a num-
ber of Songs, &c. Of these the following among others
have been performed in public : —Sonata in E flat minor,
Nocturne in B flat minor, Concert Study in E flat minor,
Organ Prelude and Fugue in E flat major, and the fine
descriptive song, “ The Wind in the Trees.” During his
residence in Brunswick Herr Bertram became personally
acquainted with Rubinstein, Abt, and some other musical
celebrities. His memory is wonderfully quick and retentive,
as an illustration of which it may be mentioned, that a few


days after his arrival in the colony the writer of this sketch
heard him perform one of Beethoven’s Sonatas, and though
his visitor had the music before him, he could not detect a
single false note. Though Herr Bertram’s past career is
marked with success, it may certainly be predicted that his
future in this colony will be of that triumphant character
which the genius and ability of such a talented composer and
musician undoubtedly deserves.
J. J. Barclay
A REIVED in the colony by the “ Catherine Stewart Forbes,”
October, 1837, having been deputed by the British
and Foreign Seamen’s Society to form a branch of it in South
Australia. He commenced business as a tailor and clothier,
and occupied the first building with a brick floor in Adelaide.
He was well known as a lay preacher in connection with Mr.
W. Giles and the Rev. T. Q. Stow, at Glenelg, Brighton, &c.
He was an Alderman of the Glenelg Corporation, and Mayor
of that municipality for three years. He died May 21, 1867.
William Witherick
jk REIVED in this colony May 16, 1839, by the
“ Planter,” in the capacity of mate. Shortly after
landing he located in the hills at “ The Tiers,” and engaged
in woodsplitting, an occupation then followed by many now
prominent and leading colonists. In 1852, attracted by the
rush to the Victorian diggings, he travelled overland
thither, enduring those hardships which so long a journey in
primitive times and the absence of regular roads entailed.
He was fairly successful, and as his health was becoming bad


he returned to Adelaide, where he has resided ever since. On
January 21, 1867, he received an appointment in the Post
and Telegraph service ; a position he has held for nearly
twenty years, thus being one of the oldest servants in the
department. His eldest son is a partner in a well-known
firm of coachbuilders in Adelaide.
Hon. Anthony Forster, M.L.C.,
WAS for twelve years managing proprietor of the S. A,
Register and Observer newspapers, but severed his
connection with those journals on October 1, 1864. His con-
nection with the Press had a beneficial influence on journal-
ism in South Australia, his constant aim being to keep it free
from scurrility, personal or party feelings, and in this he, to a
great extent, succeeded. His career as a politician dates
from 1855, when he entered the old Legislative Council as
member for West Adelaide ; and on all occasions he held a
straightforward course. Liberal in opinions, though not
always on the popular side, Mr. Forster invariably acted for
the public good. His exertions relative to the Real Property
Act were unwearied, and he was a strong advocate of that
measure and assisted Mr. Torrens in bringing his proposed
reform of the law under the notice of the colonists. The Bill,
as will be remembered, was carried through the Legislative
Council in the face of much opposition. His duties as a par-
liamentary representative were discharged with zeal and
ability; as a public man he served the colony well, whilst as a
private citizen he left behind, in various directions, many warm
friends. Mr. Forster is a native of Northumberland, and was
born in 1813 ; he arrived in South Australia in 1841, and
left it in November 1864. He is now located in England, but,
as heretofore, is greatly interested in all that concerns the
colony.


John Lloyd Hyndman,
ARRIVED in Adelaide in 1862, and first practised pri-
vately as a surveyor. Entered the service of the City
Council in 1866, and under his supervision many important
public works were carried out to the satisfaction of the civic
body. In early life he was a midshipman on hoard a man-of-
war, and engaged in surveying in the Persian Gulf and
towards Kurrachee. He was subsequently employed by the
Indian Government to superintend the construction of railway
w r orks above Bombay. He died at Eelixstow, August 1,
1878.
Rev. E. G. Day,
BORN in London, June 30, 1810; received the elemen-
tary principles of his education from his father, and
was afterwards comparatively self-taught. Having early
acquired a taste for literature, he read much on a variety of
subjects, and especially acquired a great liking for the
writings and teachings of Emanuel Swedenborg, of whose
views he is at present an advanced and earnest exponent. He
arrived in Adelaide by the “ Countess of Yarborough” June
20, 1850, and was first engaged as assistant lay preacher to
Mr. Jacob Pitman, of the New Jerusalem Church. On Mr.
Pitman leaving the colony in 1859, Mr. Hay was appointed
his successor. He was ordained in February 1878, since
which period he has continued his gratuitous services to this
church in Adelaide. Mr. Day has been a voluminous con-
tributor to the Press, and has published several interesting
theological works. He has also given lectures, and entered
into much controversial correspondence with those opposed to
his views. As the oldest and only public-teaching represen-
tative of the Swedenhorgian Church in South Australia, he is
certainly entitled to a passing notice in this work.


Rev. Francis Robert Coghlan, B.A.,
WELL known as the Incumbent of St. Bedes, Sema-
phore, and one of the most eloquent of divines, died
June 7, 1885. Educated at an Oxford College, he possessed
those qualifications which betoken the accomplished orator,
whilst to these were added true kindliness of heart and sym-
pathy for the deserving. Shortly after his arrival he was
first engaged in the curacy of Christchurch, North Adelaide,
and there established the Christchurch Collegiate School, in
which his eminent abilities secured him many pupils. On
the death of the late Eev. Jas. Pollitt, Mr. Coghlan was
appointed to the incumbency of St. Luke’s, Whitmore-square,
and this he retained until compelled to resign it by failing
health, when he left this cure and went to the Semaphore,
where he was associated with the Eev. Mr. Young in a
Collegiate School. He was only 40 years of age at the time
of his decease.
Joseph Mellor,
BOEN at Elland, Yorkshire, September 9, 1808; arrived in
South Australia June 27, 1840, with his wife and one
child, by the ship “ Fairlee.” Adelaide was then covered
with timber, though the streets were laid out, but not
formed. He first worked at his trade (carpenter and joiner)
for Mr. Pitman, builder, of Kundle-street, receiving from 16s.
to 20s. per day ; but in consequence of the high rates charged
for all necessary commodities, it was, even with such wages,
hardly possible to make ends meet. Mr. Mellor next
took a farm at Goodwood, but with seed wheat at 21s. per
bushel, and the crop when reaped only fetching 2s. 6d. per
bushel, it was evident to him that to continue farming would
result in serious loss; so he gave it up. He was of an
inventive and speculative turn of mind, and undertook several
Government contracts, one of which was to cleai the trees


and stumps off the South Park Lands. He also contracted for
several up-country mails, and had conveyances running
between Port Adelaide, Gawler, Xapunda, the Burra, and the
city. Mr. Mellor was the founder of the Agricultural Imple-
ment Factory in Adelaide, now conducted by his sons,
Mellor Bros., with its branches at Kapunda, Jamestown, and
Quorn. The implements turned out at these establishments
are favourably known and in great request, not only in South
Australia, but the adjacent colonies. He introduced a great
many new ideas and novelties, and was the first here to
suggest wood-paving, by sending a wheel tire to the Corpora-
tion filled in with wood blocks about the year 1860, but the
idea was not entertained. He won the first gold medal for
his reaper in a match in 1856, and has manufactured several
hundreds of the Ridley Reaper and Thresher combined. He
was an active, industrious, and honourable man, ever ready to
welcome new arrivals to the colony ; and he, with his worthy
wife, entertained them hospitably under their roof, and did
much to cheer and help them on their way. Though he
took small interest in politics, he contested one election with
the late F. S. Dutton for the County of Light, but was an
unsuccessful candidate. Mr. Mellor died at the Semaphore,
December 28, 1880, aged 72.
Rev. Peter Maclaren,
NATIVE of Scotland, and for several years minister
of the Presbyterian Church, Port Adelaide. He died
on board the s.s. Garonne on his homeward voyage, May 31,
1878, aged 52. Mr. Maclaren, who was a profound student
of theology, arrived in Sydney, New South Wales, in 1871,
and after about a year came to South Australia. He was the
author of several religious works, which were characterised by
great vigour and thoroughness, and exhibited traces of a
ripened scholarship and forcible style.


ROWLAND REES, M.P.


Jas. Pile, J.P.,
IDENTIFIED with the town of Gawler for many years,
and resided there at the time of his death, which took
place March 19, 1885, in his 85th year. He was a Councillor
of the Gawler Corporation, a strong supporter of the Presby-
terian Church, and did much good privately, both by giving
sound advice and rendering monetary assistance. Mr. John
McKinlay, the explorer, married one of his daughters, who
still resides in Gawler. Mr. Pile was a successful squatter,
and his name is quite a household word in the colony. He
was born at Beverley, Yorkshire, in 1800, but was a true
Scotchman at heart, having been brought up in Scotland.
In early life he was engaged in mercantile pursuits in partner-
ship with the late Mr. James Pender, of Glasgow, and made
a fortune, but lost it. He arrived in South Australia in
November, 1849.
E. L. Grundy.
Jan. 21, 1875, death garnered home from the Modern
Athens, at the ripe age of eighty, the last of a choice
few who lived and spent a great portion of time in Gawler;
and with his demise passed away the ablest Athenian once
residing in that picturesque little town. He was a polished
scholar, and might aptly have been termed the local Socrates,
as his knowledge of the departed heroes of Grecian history
was extensive and profound. But with all his information
he was no pedant; his bonhomie and good nature made him
accessible to all, whilst sufferers of every grade found in him
a ready champion for any just cause, and no knight errant of
olden time ever entered the lists with greater ardour and
more determination to see the wrong righted than he. His
geniality as a speaker was proverbial, and his speeches were
L


noted for conciseness and polish. No matter when and
where the speech was made, either in the House of Assembly
or in furtherance of some charitable movement, none received
more attention than Edward Lindley Grundy. His face and
form betokened a man endowed with uncommon gifts. An
English gentleman of the good old school, with a deep-rooted
faith in the supremacy of the Church, and the strong insular
vanity that he was an Englishman. The local Bunyip thus
mentions him : —“ His knowledge of the world was deep and
varied, gained in a chequered life. He was blessed with keen
perception of affairs, such as is seldom found; full of kindly
courtesy, always ready to aid by his help and advocacy the
widow, the orphan, the wronged and oppressed. Few will he
more missed from innumerable homes, and lamented with the
honest and hearty tribute of general regret than is accorded
his memory. The pleasant, genial, gentlemanly old man;
the friend of the little child and of the most scholarly in the
land; alas ! we shall see him, hear him, meet him no more !
The hand that long wielded the pen with such peculiar force
and ability is now powerless in the chill hand of death. We
give this humble and imperfect tribute to the memory of the
gifted dead ; hut no words of ours can render more sacred the
memory of Edward Lindley Grundy in the minds and hearts
of his townsmen.” He was horn in Nottingham in 1795, of
which town 'he was a burgess. Entering the collegiate
institute there, he exhibited an aptitude for classics and
antiquarian lore, which he retained to the close of his life.
At twenty-three he entered into mercantile pursuits at Man-
chester as a shipper and broker, and carried on an extensive
and successful business with South America and the Brazils,
hut relinquished this for literary pursuits more congenial to
his views. Mr. Grundy married a daughter of Dr. Charles
Mason, of Carlisle, a lady of cultivated tastes and accomplish-
ments, and an able linguist. The union was exceedingly
happy and felicitous, the only shadow crossing their fair


horizon being the parting on his leaving for Australia. His
marriage brought him additional wealth through the family
relations of Mrs. Grundy, that lady being connected with
some of the best circles in Carlisle. Like many prosperous
Manchester men, he was induced by the railway mania to
invest a considerable portion of his fortune in that stock, and
was one of the victims of the 1846 panic. During his
residence in Manchester he was identified with many
philanthropic movements for the benefit of that town, and,
in conjunction with others, was instrumental in getting Peel
Park opened on the Sabbath by the Corporation for the pur-
pose of recreation for the poor Lancashire operatives, which
step brought him into collision with several strict Sabbatarians ;
and to those who remember the drudgery and hardships of
factory life of forty years ago, they will conceive what an
inestimable boon was conferred on the working classes. He
was intimately connected with various public works and
political movements, and had for a coadjutor the late Kichard
Cobden. Mr. Grundy was the originator of infant schools in
Manchester; and also the Christian Institute, and he took a
prominent part in the Agricultural Drainage Association.
As an authority and essayist on agriculture he was awarded a
silver medal with this inscription : —“ Institute, Manchester,
1767. Society for the Improvement of Agriculture. To
Mr. E. L. Grundy, for an essay upon Destructive Insects,
1829.” The activity of Mr. Grundy was of unostentatious
simplicity, and no one was more desirous of realizing the
maxim of doing good by stealth and blushing to find it fame
than he ; but any man might nurture a pardonable degree of
pride in feeling he had done the State service, and that he
was likely to leave behind him in the hearts of some a kindly
feeling for his honest endeavours. Misfortunes in railway
speculations induced him to turn his attention to the colonies,
and South Australia was selected as his future home. He
thought it advisable not to bring Mrs. Grundy with him, but
l 2


intended to send for her as soon as he saw what the colony
was like. His youngest son —F. E. Grundy—was taken from
college to accompany him, and they arrived here safely. He
had completed his arrangements for Mrs. Grundy to join him,
but they were not carried out as she succumbed to an attack
of bronchitis. He remained a widower, mourning in silence
to the end of his days the loss of a worthy and affectionate
partner. He began business here as a broker, and subse-
quently started the Standard newspaper, which had a tolerably
prosperous career, but the difficulty experienced in getting
in his subscriptions determined him on relinquishing this
venture. He next took a house at Brighton, which he
ultimately gave up and went to Gawler, where in 1859 he
established himself as an auctioneer, accountant, and com-
mission agent. He eventually resumed his literary pursuits,
and became associated with the Bunyijp , which under his able
management enjoyed a high reputation. He could turn a
pathetic sentence that did not fail to arrest attention, or
verses, “to point a moral and adorn a tale.” His readiness
to investigate any question of oppression and imposition
secured for him the good-will of the passengers of one of the
emigrant vessels. They had been badly treated during the
voyage, and he was instrumental in having the conduct of the
captain inquired into. The passengers gave him a handsome
silver snuff-box, bearing this inscription:—“Presented to
E. L. Grundy, Esq., by the immigrants per “Indian,” in
grateful acknowledgment of his humane efforts on behalf
of the emigrant stranger. Adelaide, October 3, 1849.”
Having long advocated the interests of the colony, he had
the honour conferred upon him by the constituency of Barossa
of being returned to Parliament. The illness preceding his
death was of short duration, and three days after an attack of
erysipelas it proved fatal. Nothing serious was anticipated
at the outset, but the inhabitants were shocked to hear of his
decease at the mellow age to which he had arrived. He was


a diligent worker in many capacities, and a man of many
parts, all of which were well played. His remains rest in the
family vault at West Terrace Cemetery, and the grief of those
he left might be well expressed in the lines on the cenotaph
of Euripides at Pella—
“ To Hellas’ bard all Hellas gives a tomb ;
On Macedon’s far shores his relics sleep;
Athens, the pride of Greece, was erst his home,
Whom now all praise and all in common weep.”
James William Heberlet
WS the youngest son of Andrew Heberlet, Esq., Register
in the Military Department of the H.E.I. Company;
born in Calcutta, and closely associated with some of the
earliest settlers there. During a complete collegiate course
he applied himself at an early age to the piano and singing,
under Professor C. Howard, a leading musician, and attained
great proficiency. On leaving college, after a brief applica-
tion to business, he was attracted to the colonies, and arrived
in Adelaide in 1853, en route to Victoria. Finding, however,
inducements to remain here, he devoted his time to the
management of an academy in the city, previously conducted
by Mr. Whinham, sen. After nearly three years’ scholastic
duties and private tuition in French in ladies’ academies,
Mr. Heberlet turned his attention wholly to music, and from
the encouragement received from that eminent pianist, the late
Linly Norman, entered heart and soul into the matter. He
became musical instructor to several ladies’ schools, and
since the year 1858 has followed that profession successfully.
Many hundreds of persons of both sexes have been instructed
by him, and are a credit to his teaching. He has had a
varied, though comparatively successful career, and has also
held the position of organist to several of the city and subur-
ban churches of various denominations.


Frederick Harvie Linklater
IM[AS born in 1847, and is the son of a well-known solicitor
Iff in the City of London, who had the largest bankruptcy
practice in that city. The subject of this memoir commenced
his education at Eton, where he remained till 1866, when he
matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, and, in Novem-
ber 1869, graduated B.A. of that University. In addition
to the ordinary curriculum he devoted himself with great
zeal to the study of Divinity, which he pursued under Mr.
Jackson (afterwards Bishop of Lincoln and of London), and to
the learning of Hindustani from two fellow-students, natives
of India. He evinced an early taste for the drama, and
became a prominent member of the Amateur Dramatic Club,
whose performances were largely attended by residents
and visitors. Mr. Linklater was greatly distinguished in
athletics and games of skill. He rowed for two years in the
“ First Trinity,” when that boat was at the head of the river,
and for one of those years rowed the stroke oar ; he won
the golden foils in the fencing tournament with the Uni-
versity of Oxford, and played second to Mr. Richardson for
the prize billiard cue. Leaving the University in 1869, he
entered his father’s office, but was rescued from drudgery by
his knowledge of Hindustani, a qualification which induced
Sir George Jessel, the Master of the Rolls, to send him to
India as Commissioner to take evidence in a cause. This
duty required him to visit Delhi, Madras, and Ceylon. He
also made a trip to America, and joined the forces of the
States then engaged in the Sioux war. He fought through
the campaign and was wounded in three places; and was
rewarded for his services by being made a citizen of the Great
Republic. During this trip Mr. Linklater, with three com-
panions, rode through the old Spanish settlement up the
Colorado, across the Great Desert to the mountains. Two of
his comrades were American citizens, one of whom was a


trapper, and tlie third was an Englishman. The country was
in a disturbed state, and the travellers were taken prisoners
by the Mexicans on the charge of treason. They were incar-
cerated and chained to the wall of their prison and were only
taken out to learn the result of their trial, which had been
by lot and without their knowledge. They were drawn into
the square of the fort; one American and the Englishman
were shot, and Mr. Linklater and the trapper were set free.
This was as fair a trial as could be expected from a Mexican.
Returning to London Mr. Linklater gave up attorneydom for
the more ambitious profession of the Bar and entered at
Lincoln’s Inn. Partially suspending his studies during the
Eranco-Prussian war, he followed the campaign with the
second Daily News pass and was present at Worth, Metz,
and the siege of Paris, and at the opening of the gates of
the city was one of the first batch of Englishmen who
passed in. Here he rescued his sister, Mrs. Girdlestone, and
found her jewels in a manure heap, where she had hidden
them. Mr. Linklater pursued his legal studies under Mr.
Rowland Yaughan Williams (whom he aided in the drafting
of the famous Judicature Bill), Mr. Marcus Martin, the convey-
ancer, and Mr. Kekewich, and was called to the Bar in 1873.
During his studentship and afterwards, while practising in
the Court of Chancery, he was appointed dramatic and
operatic critic to the Pall Mall Gazette , a position which he
occupied for two years and a-half, contributing also to
Routledge's Magazine and other periodicals. Mr. Linklater
left for Hew South Wales in 1876; joined the Bar there,
and had a considerable practice, wrote a treatise on the Law
of Divorce, and was Government reporter in the Supreme
Court. But, in spite of these engagements, which would
have exhausted the energies of a less zealous litterateur , he
found time to serve the newspapers as dramatic critic and to
furnish contributions based on his experience as a traveller
and a soldier. Leaving Hew South Wales in 1880, he came


to South Australia, where he practises his profession in spite
of the dramatic taste which has resulted in some theatrical
successes, and which has earned him the confidence of the
editor of the leading London theatrical journal, whose corre-
spondent he is. His contributions to dramatic literature in
Adelaide include “ Pinbehind,” which was produced at the
Academy, “My Uncle’s Wife,” in which Bland Holt acted
at the Royal; an adaptation of the “Field of the Cloth of
Gold ” played at the same theatre; the “Debutante,” and a
Pantomime which came out at the Academy. This last was
a great feat, for the order was given on one Friday, and the
rehearsal took place on the next. On the following Friday
the Pantomime was exhibited, and alas! on the fourth
Friday the Academy was in ashes, and the Pantomime extin-
guished. And now we have brought down to date a very
active, diversified and romantic career, which before its close
may attain to the brilliancy which it has narrowly missed.
Spencer John Skipper
IS the eldest son of the late J. M. Skipper, and a native
of Adelaide. He was educated for the law, but his lite-
rary instincts led him towards journalism, and some satirical
verses from his pen, which appeared in that trenchant paper
Pasquin , having attracted the attention of the witty editor
(the late E. R. Mitford), Mr. Skipper became a constant
contributor to it. Subsequently he secured a position on the
literary staff of the Register , where he is now well known as
a versatile writer. Very enthusiastic in manly sports, he has
interested himself greatly in yachting, cycling, and rifle-
shooting, and to his exertions, in conjunction with the late
Captain Gray, the Rifle Volunteer Force mainly owes its
existence. He has always been a strong supporter of the
defence movement in the colony.


Herr Carl Püttmann,
*|®OIIN at Cologne, Prussia, November 14, 1843. His
father, poet, journalist, and art critic, was at that
time engaged on the editorial staff of the Cologne Gazette
(Koelnishe Zeitung). After the political troubles of 1848-9
the family removed to England, and subsequently to Australia,
where, in Melbourne, Mr. Puttmann, senior, for many years
took an active part in German (local) journalism, and edited,
shortly before his death in 1874, a “ History of the Franco-
Prussian War.” His third son, Carl, the subject of this
notice, studied music under the best Victorian professors, and
took part professionally as early as 1858 in all Philharmonic
and other concerts, in company with his teachers, Strebinger,
Pringle, Jacobs, C. E. Horsley (a pupil of Mendelssohn’s),
and others. Accepting an engagement with the Lyster Opera
Company, Herr Puttmann accompanied them on their first
grand tour through New Zealand and Australia, remaining in
Adelaide in 1865 and establishing himself here as a teacher
of the pianoforte, violin, and singing, and in this capacity he
is still successfully engaged. In 1866 he married the
daughter of the late Rev. Dr. Loessel, and in 1867 was
elected conductor, and subsequently honorary member of the
Adelaide Liedertafel, a Society which is probably the oldest
in the colonies and holds an honoured place among the
musical institutions of Adelaide. The first ‘performance
under his baton was a comic opera, “ The Mordgrund Bruch,”
at the Theatre Royal, and was followed by hundreds of other
successful appearances in public, in many of which the most
prominent artistes who have visited Adelaide—Ketten,
Wilhelmj, &c., took part. Among the friends and patrons
of the Adelaide Liedertafel was the late eminent composer
Franz Abt. Herr Plittmann’s eldest daughter and pupil, Miss
Franziska, has gained distinction in the competitive
examination for a scholarship in the Royal College of Music,


London; being one of the first in pianoforte, and selected
for final decision out of thirty-three candidates. Having
passed the University Matriculation Examination, this young
lady is now a student for the M.B. Degree under Professor
Ives.
Hon. John Crozier, M.L.C.,
BORN August 12, 1814, in Roxburgh, Scotland, near
Hawick. Came to New South Wales in 1838, under
engagement to Dr. Anderson, of Paramatta, to manage his
estate of Redesdale, near Braidwood. Most of the men there
were convicts or assigned servants from the Government. He
left at the end of three years, and engaged with Captain
Dobson, R.N., as manager of the Sandhills Station, nearßun-
gendore, Lake George. (Mr. Challis, of the firm of Flower,
Salting & Co., who died lately and left £IOO,OOO to the
University of Sydney, was the person who carried on the
commercial business for Captain Dobson in Sydney, and with
whom Mr. Crozier corresponded.) In 1846 Mr. Crozier left
the Sandhills and in conjunction with Mr. George Rutherford
commenced squatting on the Edward River, and subsequently
on the Murray, near Wentworth. He at length bought out
Mr. Rutherford’s interest in Kulnine, and purchased Moorna
and other stations on the Murray. On becoming proprietor
of Oaklands he went to reside there in 1867. He was a
candidate for the Legislative Council in August of that
year with the late Sir W. Morgan and Emanuel Solomon,
and returned at the head of the poll. He was again elected
for the Council in 1876, and returned second on the poll;
and in 1885 was returned in a similar manner. In 1867
Mr. Crozier was appointed a member of the Brighton Dis-
trict Council, and has been in it ever since, most of the time
as Chairman. Mr. Crozier’s colonial experiences have a wide
range, and embrace New South Wales, Victoria, and South


Australia; for each of which he is a Justice of the Peace.
He remembers the man William Scott, who was allowed the
first horse to go after cattle in the colonies by his master
•(Captain J. MacArthur, of Camden), and he also had the
honour of riding on George Stephenson’s first passenger rail-
way, between Stockton and Darlington, before it was opened
for public traffic. Mr. Crozier is one of the most useful men
in the South Australian Legislature, and has been instru-
mental in doing much good. In private life he is regarded
as possessing many virtues and few faults.
W. J. Peterswald.
I HIS well-known Commissioner of Police in South Aus-
tralia was born in Jamaica, in 1830. His father was a
West India planter, who, after the slave emancipation, sold
■out and settled in Edinburgh. Mr. Peterswald was educated
•at the Edinburgh and Military Academies, in that city. He
came to this colony in the ship “ Charlotte Jane,” Captain
Lawrence, in 1853, and he embarked considerable capital in
farming pursuits, of which he had had no experience,
and in consequence lost all in a few years. Whilst
in the country he embodied and commanded the “ Munno
Para East Rifle Company,” 100 strong, and, as drill instruc-
tors were scarce, drilled and trained them personally without
.assistance. They were considered the smartest company of
volunteers in those days. He afterwards came to Adelaide,
•and became clerk-assistant to the House of Assembly, and in
1862, when Inspector Pettinger was murdered, he took his
place in the Police Force ; resigned in 1866, and became
Warden of Gold Fields, which position he occupied until 1874,
when he was re-appointed to the Police Force as Inspector
•and Superintendent. On Mr. Hamilton’s retirement in 1881
Mr. Peterswald was appointed Acting-Commissioner, and in


1882, Commissioner. The South Australian Police Force
will hear favourable comparison with that of any other part
of Her Majesty’s dominions, and there is little doubt that its
present efficiency is mainly due to the energy and ability dis-
played by its representative head. Since taking office the Com-
missioner has made many important reforms, all being for the
public weal; and the citizens of Adelaide, as well as the
colony at large, may be congratulated in possessing in him a
most active and zealous advocate for the maintenance
of law and order. Many criminals who thought to pursue
their nefarious calling in our midst have been promptly
brought to justice, and the celerity with which the machinery
of the law has been set in motion has doubtless had a deter-
ring effect on their associates.
Dr. Ulrich Hübbe,
WHO has rendered great services to this colony in con-
nection with the Real Property Act, is a native of
Hamburg. He was but a youth when the French, under
Hapoleon, attacked the town and gave it over to pillage, but
even yet he retains lively recollections of this episode. He
has spent the greater part of his life in South Australia, and
at the present time, having completely lost his sight, is almost-
wholly dependent for his incoming on his son. This is not
as it should be, and Dr. Hubbe deserves better treatment at
the hands of our colonists. Though the working of the Real
Property Act is now universally known, few of those most
benefitted thereby have the slightest idea of the prominent-
part which Dr. Hiibbe played in its construction. He it was
who explained to Sir R. R. Torrens the form of certificates of
title and encumbrances in force in the Hanseatic towns of his
native land; and Sir Robert was so much pleased with the


simple way in which the charges were detailed that, with Dr.
Hiibbe’s assistance, he transferred the idea as far as was prac-
ticable into the Bill. From this source in particular was
embodied the principle that mortgages should not change the
freehold property, but that they should simply be charges on
the property in priority one over the other. The result of
the disclosure of these facts led to the re-drafting of the
Bill by Mr. E. B. Andrews; but on its being submitted to
Dr. Hiibbe, he expressed his disapproval of it, chiefly on the
grounds that it did not contain an efficient repeal of the old
system, the absence of stringent provisions for bringing equi-
table estates and interests under the Act, and the necessity
that existed for providing more definitely that no estate or inte_
rest on such lands should pass at all by deed or any documen-
tary evidence, but exclusively by registration of each special
transaction in the public books of the colony. He thereupon
drew the very comprehensive repeal clause printed in the
Act, and he subsequently spent several days in remodelling
the whole draft. He submitted his alterations to Sir E. E.
Torrens, and the draft Bill thus revised was placed before
Parliament; but no compensation was given him for his
services. Dr. Hiibbe has written much on a variety of sub-
jects, and also taken an active part in many public matters.
Though, like all men, prone to err, his intense independence
and thorough love for his adopted country have made him an
earnest advocate on the side of reform. Since his retirement
from active life he has spent a great portion of his time in
writing an epic poem descriptive of the progress of civiliza-
tion in Germany in connection with free trade. This work
has been sent to Germany, and been favourably criticised by
those to whom it has been submitted, but owing to pecuniary
difficulties it has never been published. A recent Govern-
ment voted him a sum of money, but of so small an amount
that it cannot be said he has been compensated for his services
in connection with the E.P.A.


A Record of the Past.
Old Colonists who attended the Banquet given by thb
late Mr. E. Solomon.
{S.A. Register , Dec. 29, 1871.)*
G. F. Angas, G. Alston, Hon. H. Ayers, J. Anthony, T*
P. Addison, E. W. Andrews, J. Allen, T. Austin, J. W.
Adams, J. Aylmore, G. Aylmore, C. Aubert, W. Ayling, T,
Adams.
J. Bullock, A. H. F. Bartels, J. Beck, Hon. A. Blyth, T.
C. Bray, Eev. W. L. Binks, Jno. Brown, J. Brown, W. Y.
Brown, W. Brown, Captain Bickers, B. Bankhead, Hon. J.
Baker, R. C. Baker, T. Baker, A. Baker, R. Baker, Job Baker,
J. S. Bagshaw, J. Bowden, R. Blackler, J. H. Barrow, M.P.,
J. M. Bailey, Capt. Bagot, E. M. Bagot, C. Burnet, T. Brink-
worth, W. Bush, A. Bell, S. Beddome, R. W. Beddome, J.
F. Bottomley, R. Bliss, J. W. Bushell, W. C. Bean, J. W.
Bull, H. E. Brookes, J. Brewer, H. Bate, J. Beer, H. Briggs,
H. Briggs, jun., E. H. Botting, F. J. Botting, W. Biggs, E.
L. Biggs, T. Bennett, G. Bennett, W. T. Bennett, M. Benja-
min, P. Benjamin, A. Burford, S. A. Burford, J. Burford,
G. Burford, W. H. Burford, R. Burford, W. Black, T. Black,
J. J. Bowman, IST. Bowman, Rev. A. T. Boas, Dr. Blood,
G. Birrell, Chas. Bonney.
H. Cox, W. I. Cox, W. C. Cox, G. W. Cole, Hon. J. Carr,
J. Condon, J. Caust, sen., W. Caust, W. Cook, J. Cummins,
G. Clisby, H. Chandler, J. Coward, Hon. J. Crozier, B. H.
Conigrave, W. R. Cave, P. B. Coglin, W. E. Coglin, A. Cocks,
A. M. Campbell, S. Clark, G. Catchlove, R. Cornelius, H.
Cawley, E. Crampton, J. Chambers, S. Chapman, J. B.
Chapman, W. Collins, sen., J. Collins, J. H. Clark, W.
Crawford, sen.
# Note, — This interesting record will doubtless recall to old colo-
nists the remembrance of many now dead, with whom they were
associated in the early days of South Australian colonization.


H. L. Dußieu, H. J. Dußieu, J. T. Dyke, G. F. Dash-
wood, J. S. Duncan, S. Davenport, K. H. Dodswell, J. E.
Davis, Dr. C. Davis, F. C. Davis, J. Dench, W. Deacon,
H. Dawson, J. Dawson, W. Duffield, R. Davis, J. W. Dow-
ner, H. E. Downer, A. G. Downer, T. Day, J. D. Day, G.
Dew, C. Dawes, W. Dawes, sen., S. Darwent, John Dunn,
sen., John Dunn, H. P. Denton.
R. J. Eagle, R. Eagle, T. Elder, W. Easther, P. H. Earle,
J. Earnshaw, Dr. Everard, W. Everard, E. B. Edgcombe, T.
Elliott, W. Everett, C. Everett, J. Eldridge, Rev. W. W.
Ewbank.
H. R. Fuller, B. Fuller, H. Figg, C. Farr, W. Foreman,
B. T. Finniss, Sir J. H. Fisher, T. Fisher, J. Fisher, C. Fur-
ler, J. Frew, T. Fax, W. Field, W. R. Fordham, G. Fowler,
W. Fergusson, C. Fenn, W. H. Formby, J. Formby, J.
Francis, C. J. Fox, Rev. A. Fiedler, E. Fry, J. Fry.
T. Gilbert, E. L. Grundy, T. Gepp, F. K. Gerner, L. Groves,
D. Garlick, S. Goldsack, B. Gollin, W. Greser, H. Gawler, J.
Gregory, B. Germein, G. Gray, W. H. Gray, W. Giles, H.
Giles, T. Giles, C. Giles, J. F. Giles, Justice GWynne, W.
Goodwin.
W. Harcus,(W. Hinde) F. Hobbs, J. Hindmarsh,(W. Hele,\
Captain Hughes, Hon. John Hart, J. Hardman, J. B. Hack,
J. Hance, G. Hance, J. Harvey, S. Harvey, J. Harvey, P. L.
Hunter, L. Hanson, C. S. Hare, G. Hamilton, R. Harrison,
J. C. Hawker, F. Hodding, J. Harris, W. Humphries, J.
Hundt, Hon. T. Hogarth, W. Hay, H. Hersey, G. W. Her-
ring, E. Holthouse, Father Horan, F. Harriott, W. Hodges.
J. Ind, E. L. Ifould, G. Isaacs.
J. JeHett, T. Jellett, G. James, £T. Jaques) W. Jessup, H.
Jackson, T. Jones, R. Jones, J. Jacobs, Y. Jolly, A. G. John-
ston, J. Johnston, W. Johnston.
Sir G. S. Kingston, J. Kiteley, W. King, G. King, S.
King, J. Kelly, R. S. Kelly, W. D. Kekwick, D. Kekwick,
J. Knight.


P. Levi, E. Levi, C. Lovelock, J. Lawrence, G. Linn, J.
Lee, 0. Lines, A. E. Lindsay, C Lilhrs, W. Lean, A. Lazar,
S. Lazar, J. Laffer, W. Langman, J. Lyons, J. W. Lewis,
S. Lewis, G. Lewis, K. B. Lucas, J. G. Lamb, G. P. Liptrott,
A. Lorrimer, J. M. Linklater, E. Lawson, T. Lawton, T.
Laughton, J. Leary.
Hon. A. B. Murray, Dr. Mayo, W. R. Mortlock, H. D.
Melville, Sir J. Morphett, T. Mugg, jun., P. Martin, J. Martin,
R. Martin, Hon. C. Mann, J. Mann, J. Moncke, A. Murray,
T. Magarey, Hon. H. Mildred, H. Mildred, T. F. Monteith,
C. Merritt, J. Moss, T. F. Mellor, J. Mellor, J. Merrick, J.
McDonald, B. J. McCarthy, G. Marshall, S. Marshall, W.
Marshall, J. Mail, J. Monroe, H. J. Moseley, sen., J. Masey,
G. F. Mills, G. Munton (2), J. B. Myles, H. T. Morris, G.
Milton, J. Mempes, P. Mullaney.
J. Howland, W. Hewland, E. A. Horton, J. Hixon, M.
Hicholls, H. Horth, T. A. Haughton, J. Hiall, P. Higler, J.
Hewman, Hon. J. B. Heales, W. Heale, T. Hewman.
Capt. O’Halloran, D. O’Leary, T. Oldham.
W. H. J. Pain, W. Pritchard, W. Patching, W. Peacock,
J. B. Pauli, T. Pole, T. Pierce, J. Pitcher, T. J. Poole, J.
Parsons, G. Pelk, S. Price, J. H. Perry, C. A. Perry, J. Perry,
sen., G. Perry, 0. Philp, W. Packham, W. Pyhus, J. Pan-
rucker, Hon. W. Parkin, Rev. J. Pollitt, G. Porter, J. Por-
ter, J. Primrose.
H. Quin.
W. H. Roberts, J. Roberts, H. Robinson, W. Rogers, M.
Raven, Hon. T. Reynolds, W. H. Randall, J. Randall, H.
Ricketts, J. Rowe, sen., J. Rowe, jun., Jos. Rowe, Ridgeway,
W. Ross, R. Richardson, J. Rundle.
R. Stuckey, E. B. Scott, H. J. South, P. Shanks, E.
Spiller, J. Shand, J. Scandrett, W. K. Simms, M.P., J. Stead,
J. Sladden, J. Solomon, J. M. Solomon, M.P., J. S. Solomon,
S. Solomon, jun., W. Sanders, J. M. Sanders, J. Smart, Y.
Smart, C. Smart, R. I. Stow, J. P. Stow, A. Slow, S. R.


SIGNOR R. SQOHRISE.


Shillabeer, P. Santo, J. Stace, Capt. H. Simpson, R. Sadler,
J. B. Shepherdson, W. Sansom, sen., C. W. Stuart, W.
Snoswell, R. B. Smith, L. H. Smith, J. Smith (2), R. Smith,
H. Smith.
R. G. Thomas, W. K. Thomas, G. Tucker, W. W. Thwaites,
J. L. Tuxford, S. Tyrell, H. Thorpe, W. Tully, J. S. Turner,
H. Taylor, T. Tompkins, R. Tompkins, J. Thorne, D. Tree,
Hon. W. Townsend, W. Thomas, J. Thompson, W. Trenery.
E. Underwood.
J. Virgo, E. L. Virgo, J. C. Verco, A. E. Varden.
T. Worsnop, W. S. Whitington, H. Watson, W. Winey,
G. Wells, G. White, K White, C. White, J. Woodhead,
J. Westcombe, H. R. Wigley, E. Wicksteed, C. A. Wilson,
W. Whitfield, A. Wilson, W. Walkley, A. H. Weir, B.
Wickham, J. Wackley, T. Welbourn, T. Wilkinson, T. Wal-
lace, sen., C. Wilkey, A. Weaver, W. N. Wauchope, H.
Ward, A. Ward, S. Walkley, Williamshurst, S. Whit-
more, Capt. Walker, M. Walker, J. Walker, R. Walker, W.
Witherick, J. Wyatt, G. Wyatt, Dr. Wyatt, W. R. Wool-
dridge, J. Warren, jun., T. Whittaker, Rev. J. C. Woods.
G. Young, J. Young.
William Novice,
JS a native of London, where he was horn in 1831. He
arrived in South Australia in 1862, and entered into
pastoral and farming pursuits at Booborowie, where he was
fairly successful, in spite of the difficulties which beset the
husbandman in those primitive times. Possessed of a logical
mind and inventive talent, Mr. Novice has endeavoured at
various times to interest the Government and capitalists in
his numerous discoveries and inventions, but up to the present
has received small encouragement. He has been a voluminous
contributor to the press, and his most notable productions are
M


“The Condition of the Working Classes in the Bush;” “The
Burra and its Peculiarities“ Farming Jumbles
“ Farming Colloquies,” and many others. Who knows
that the suggestions which these contained may not have led
to the establishment of the Bushmen’s Club, or even of the
now flourishing Agricultural College 'I Mr. Novice considers
that in the latter the core of South Australia's future stability
is forming. He is now devoting his leisure to experiments
with the steam-engine, and is writing up the theory to expose
with other errors that “ air pressure ” is only attraction , and
that gravity , or weight, will be only density in future
scientific teachings.
Herr Christian Reimers
IfWAS born in Altona (near Hamburg), June 19, 1827, and
received his musical instruction from a plain but
practical master, and by concerted playing with other pupils
developed his talents as Violoncellist, principally in chamber-
music. With equal abilities in the drawing-class and sculptur-
ing (which latter elicited the attention of the celebrated
Dannecker) he struggled on until the success of his first
public solo on the violoncello decided his musical career.
The sudden death of his parents required the careful use of
means left at his disposal, and he went in his 19th year to
Leipzig. Here he was connected with all the principal
celebrities, except Mendelssohn. His drawing created a great
sensation, as he exhibited much skill in producing portraits
from memory. After a half-year’s concert tour with an
eminent pianist (H. Enke), he was invited to Diisseldorf by
Rob. Schumann, whose warm and friendly sympathy brought
him in contact with the most famous artists, such as Jenny Lind,
Franz Liszt, Joachim Brahme, Sterndale Bennett, and others.
In 1854 Ferd. Hiller took him as Prof, of the ’cello to the


Conservatoire at Cologne. His early inclination for the
mysterious found a vivid impulse in Rob. Schumann, who
was an enthusiastic spiritualist. In 1856 he settled at
Uppingham (England) as music master to the college, where
choruses of his composition were well received, and for a
long period were favorites. Longing for wider scope, he
moved to Sheffield, where his continued study of spiritualism
found in Dr. Rob. Chambers (of Edinburgh), whom he met
there, great encouragement. In 1857 he settled in Manches-
ter, where the eminent Charles Halle and his band attracted
and revived the best recollections of his past career, A
nervous affection (fiddler’s cramp) contracted by over-study,
interfered with further aspirations, and the most marvellous
experiences in a regular private spirit circle alone saved his
mind from despair. The reports of phenomena witnessed
by him under crucial test-conditions led to his appointment
as honorary member of the chief Psychological Societies,
and Prof. Zollner received his visit with brotherly welcome.
Losing all his savings by a partnership with a patentee, he
tried a new start in Belfast, but in spite of most sanguine
prospects the necessity of a thorough change induced him to
visit this colony, to join his brother-in-law, Mr. Gottschalk,
of Sultana House, Edithburgh. He was not long here before
he was forcibly drawn to a wider sphere of activity, and
having achieved considerable success in the String Quartett
Concerts, he came to reside in Adelaide, where his spiritualistic
influence led to several lectures, and was the subject of much
comment. A hostile party concocted a plot with a view, as
they asserted, to expose Herr Renners’ fallacious beliefs, but
the affair ended in a fiasco, and in the discomfiture of all
concerned. The press also commented strongly on the
matter, and showed that, whatever Herr Reimers’ convictions
as to spiritism may be, he is at least entitled to the merit of
being an earnest and zealous seeker after truth. As a musician
he is thoroughly original, and has probably few, if any, equals
m 2


on his ’cello, the sweet sounds of which have often been heard
large and admiring audiences in our Town Hall. On
visiting Melbourne recently, he was warmly received by the
leading artists in his profession, and although inducements
were offered to cause his stay, he resolved to return and locate
permanently in South Australia.
Rev. Silas Mead
IS the pastor of the Flinders-street Baptist Church. He
came to this colony at the request of the late George Fife
Angas and a committee, with a view to establish a Baptist
Church in South Adelaide, upon the basis of church prin-
ciples commonly held by the Baptist Churches of Great
Britain. A small band of twenty-six were first formed into a
society under the designation of a Baptist Church, in 1861,
and Mi. Mead has continued as its pastor until the present
time. More than 1,500 persons have entered into the
fellowship of this church since its establishment, and the
pastor has immersed in this colony one thousand persons at
the date of this writing. As a prominent minister among
his co-religionists, he has held the highest offices in the deno-
mination, and has had the pleasure of seeing it multiply ten-
fold. He is now one of the Professors of the Union College,
which embraces the four denominations—Presbyterian, Con-
gregational, Baptist, and Bible Christian. Mr. Mead has
taken an active part in the Bible-in-Schools movement, which
aims to re-introduce Bible-reading in Public Schools, with
explanatory observations by the teacher. Mr. Mead holds
the degrees M.A. and LL.B. of the London University, and
was also the recipient of honors from that institution, in being
Prizeman in the Second Scriptural Examination. He
received his college training in the Kegent’s Park Baptist
College. His early life was spent in the West of England,
where he was engaged in agriculture.


Capt. Thos. Anthony,
SWELL-KNOWN mining manager, and a native of
Hayle, Cornwall, where he was horn in May, 1830.
In 1862 he came to South Australia under a five years’
engagement with the Blinman Company to manage their
mines in the north. On the termination of this period,
having had to contend with much hardship, he went to
Yorke’s Peninsula and took charge of the Kurilla Mine,
remaining there until the mine was stopped, when he went
to the Yelta, and afterwards to the Wallaroo Mines. He
ultimately returned to Kurilla, where he carried on work
uninterruptedly for ten years, in spite of the great depression
prevailing in the copper market. He was held in high
esteem by all classes, and well beloved by his men, to whom
his conduct was more like that of a brother than a master.
Capt. Anthony possessed a keen sense of humour, and great
resource and experience. He was a Justice of Peace for the
Province, and a member of the Wallaroo Board of Advice.
He died at Kurilla, in the present year.
David Gall,
PRINTER, is a native of Woodbridge, Suffolk, where he
was apprenticed. After working for three years in
London, he came to Adelaide in 1850, and continued at his
trade. In 1855 he joined Messrs. Hussey & Shawyer, and
eventually the business fell into his hands. In 1867 Mr,
Gall propounded the question and reply : — “ What shall we
DO WITH OUR BOYS ? ENCOURAGE LOCAL INDUSTRIES, SO AS TO
give them profitable employment.” He started a monthly
journal, The Comet , which was the first South Australian paper
to advocate a protective policy. Its principles met with much
ridicule and opposition from the Press of that day, but ere
its discontinuance in 1881 a marked change had come over


public opinion in favour of the views it so consistently and
persistently advocated for sixteen years. Though frequently
asked to occupy public positions, Mr. Gall declined to do so,
on account of failing health, which led him to retire from
business in 1873, leaving it in the hands of Mr. Reginald
Sheridan, his then partner. As a frequent correspondent to
the Press, his pen is ever ready to aid in calling attention to
public abuses, or in suggesting improvements, and his letters
in the daily papers have been marked by telling terseness.
Prevention of cruelty to animals and preserving the park lands
for the use of the people were objects for which he personally
struggled hard, and to a large extent succeeded. He has been
an active member of the Chamber of Manufactures from its
commencement, and an earnest worker in connection with
the Christian Church, Grote-street, for several years. As a
private gentleman and a citizen Mr. Gall enjoys the esteem
and friendship of many of his fellow-colonists.
John Langdon Bonython,
WHO was born in London on October 15, 1848, is the
descendant of an old English family, the Bonythons
of Bonython and Carclew, Cornwall. He received his education
in Adelaide, under Mr. (now School Inspector) Burgan, and in
1864 entered the literary department of the Advertiser and
associate papers. Having occupied different positions on the
reporting and editorial staff, he became, in 1879, one of the
proprietors, joining the firm of Barrow & King, which has
since become Burden & Bonython. In 1881 Mr. Bonython
was appointed a magistrate, and on the formation of the
Adelaide School Board of Advice was selected a member.
On the retirement in 1883 of the Hon. D. Murray, Mr.
Bonython was chosen chairman, which position he now occu-
pies.


Captain John Finlay Duff
WAS associated with some of the earliest and most
memorable incidents in South Australian history.
His ship, the “ Africaine,” arrived here June 1, 1837, and
sailed in August of the same year for Tasmania. He will he
well remembered as a leading merchant and ship owner, and
he was for some years Harbor-Master at Glenelg. He was a
man of great public spirit, and took active interest in all that
concerned the land of his adoption. His death took place at
Glenelg, on May 15, 1868, in his 73rd year.
Edward H. Rennie, D.Sc.,
IS the son of Edward A. Rennie, Esq., Auditor-General of
New South Wales. He was born at Balmain, near
Sydney, in 1852, and received his early education at the
Fort-street Public School and the Sydney Grammar School.
He graduated B.A. at Sydney University in 1870, taking the
medal for chemistry and experimental physics, and first-class
honours in mathematics. He graduated M.A. at Sydney in
1876, taking honours in chemistry and the medal for
mathematics. Erom 1871 to 1875 he lectured on chemistry
and experimental physics in the Sydney Grammar School,
and from 1876 to 1877 in the Brisbane Grammar School.
In July, 1877, he went to London, and in June, 1882,
graduated a D.Sc. at the London University, taking organic
chemistry as the principal subject and inorganic chemistry as
the subsidiary subject. During 1879 and 1880 Dr. Eennie
was Demonstrator of Chemistry in St. Mary’s Hospital
Medical School, and in 1881 acted as Demonstrator of
Chemistry in the Science Schools, South Kensington. In
1882 he acted as assistant to Dr. H. E. Armstrong, F.R.S.,
at the London Institution. Dr. Rennie is a Fellow of the


Chemical Societies of London and Berlin, and of the Institute
of Chemistry of Great Britain and Ireland. He received the
appointment of Professor of Chemistry at the Adelaide
University (the chair of which was endowed by John H.
Angas, Esq.) at the end of last year, and arrived in Adelaide,
February 2, 1885. For twelve months prior to his arrival
Professor Rennie, who acts as Government Analyst, virtually
superintended the various duties of the Government Analyst
in Sydney.
George Oughton,
BORN February 20, 1842, at Kingston, Jamaica, West
Indies, and is the youngest son of the late Rev.
Samuel Oughton of the same place. He early evinced a
talent for music, being able to play psalmody on the fine
organ in his father’s church. He went to England and
received his education at the collegiate establishment at
Oundle, Northamptonshire,then conducted by the late Pro-
fessor Newth; here, in addition to his classical and other
studies, he devoted his attention to music, having as his tutor
the organist of the parish church. Before leaving England
for Australia he resided for some time in London, where he was
closely associated with Mr. Ebenezer Prout, the eminent Pro-
fessor and Composer. Mr. Oughton arrived in Melbourne dur-
ing 1859, and whilst there studied harmony and instrumenta-
tion under Mr. Bandmaster Johnson, of the 40th Regiment,
whilst he still continued his studies at the organ. Upon the
breaking out of the New Zealand war at Taranaki in 1860, Mr.
Oughton was ordered with his regiment into active service, and
served till the conclusion of the Waikato contest in 1864. He
waspresent in the principal engagements, for which he received
the war medal. After leaving the army he engaged in busi-
ness in Auckland with considerable success, identifying himself


with all the leading musical organizations and occupying
various responsible positions. Mr. Oughton arrived in Adelaide
in August 1870, when he immediately received an important
position as organist, and also an appointment in the Civil
Service. He conducted the Musical Union for several years,
and also formed the fine Military Band, which he still directs.
Of this band much might be written, for it has done good
service in the community; suffice it to say, that on every
occasion when it has performed it has been listened to with
much pleasure and satisfaction. Besides arranging for this
band, Mr. Oughton has scored several entire works for
orchestra. He also occupied the honorary position of city
organist to the Adelaide Corporation for a lengthened period.
Handasyde Duncan, M.D.,
WAS born at Glasgow, Scotland, November 13, 1811,
and passed his boyhood in that town. He received
the first part of his medical education at the University of
Glasgow, and obtained his degree of M.D. in 1831, before he
had attained the age of 21. He passed some time in Paris,
where he learned the use of the stethescope, then a new dis-
covery ; travelled through the south of France on foot, and
later on continued his studies in Germany. In 1836 he became
a Fellow of the Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons of Glas-
gow, Licentiate of the Eoyal College of Surgeons of Edin-
burgh in 1839, and a Member of the Royal College of Physi-
cians of Edinburgh. He settled in Bath for two years, and
there he married, but the damp climate of England affected
his health, and he sought the more genial climate of Aus-
tralia, with the intention of abandoning his profession and of
devoting his attention to farming pursuits. He took passage
by the “Katherine Stewart Forbes” to Port Adelaide, and
arrived in Holdfast Bay, March 21, 1839. Having bought a


small farm at St. Mary’s, South Road, near the River Sturt,
Dr. Duncan put up a Manning’s Cottage, which he had
brought from England, and, with some servants, began
farming operations. He remained here for some years, but
owing to the scarcity of medical men he returned to medical
practice. In 1845 he became a member of the Medical
Board of South Australia, and in 1849, after having acted as
locum tenens for a year, he succeeded Captain Butler as Immi-
gration Agent at Port Adelaide. In the same year he was
appointed Health Officer to the colony, a position which he
held until his death. From this time he continued to reside
at Port Adelaide and to identify himself with the interests of
the place. He took an active part in the establishment of
the first Church of England there, a wooden building on
piles, afterwards replaced by the present stone building. Mrs.
Duncan conducted the music and singing here, and Dr.
Duncan also took a keen interest in the discussions of Synod,
and represented St. Paul’s Church for many years. In 1855
an immigrant ship, the “ Taymouth Castle,” arrived off the
Semaphore, having on board several cases of smallpox, but by
a judicious mode of quarantine the disease was stamped out.
Again in 1877 the ship “ British Enterprise” brought small-
pox, measles, typhus, and scarlatina, and great difficulty was
experienced in enforcing the laws regarding infected ships,
as there was no shore quarantine station. The “ Fitzjames,’”'
now used as a reformatory hulk, had been fitted up as a tem-
porary expedient, but it was necessary to charter several
more vessels to enable the medical attendants to divide the
healthy and convalescent from the sick. The ships remained
in quarantine for some time, and the expense to the colony
amounted to between ten and twelve thousand pounds ; but
although there were several fatal cases within a mile of the
shore the disease was eradicated, and none entered the
colony during Dr. Duncan’s term of office. He spent much
thought and time upon the question of a suitable site for a


quarantine station, and in August 1873 was sent by the
Government to Melbourne to collect information and report
upon the management and details of the institution in Vic-
toria. He was of opinion that complete isolation could be
best insured by quarantine ships ; but this method had many
disadvantages, and Torrens Island has since been judged a
suitable site for a quarantine station. The office of Immi-
gration Agent was abolished in 1868 or 1869, when immi-
gration was discontinued, but in Feb. 1873 it was resumed,
and Dr. Duncan took his old position, which he held until
his death. The strain of the anxiety and trouble in connection
with the “ British Enterprise’ 7 proved too great for Dr.
Duncan’s never robust, and at that time failing health. When
the ship was released from quarantine he applied to the
Government for twelve months’ leave of absence ; but the rest
came too late, and, after being confined to his room for weeks,
he died on February 24, 1878, aged 66. Dr. Duncan was a
man of sedentary tastes, and although his duties brought him
much into active life, his preference was for that of a
scholar. His reading was extensive, and comprised, besides
professional and modern works, an intimate acquaintance with
the Latin and Greek classical authors, and he also took much
interest in chemical studies and experiments. Dr. Duncan
was one of the Governors of St. Peter’s College for many
years .
C. W. F. Trapmann,
WHO was for many years in business as a brewer and
beer bottler at Hindmarsh, and three times Mayor of
that town, arrived in this colony in 1849. He was in the
Y.M.F., and held the rank of Major. He was also a promi-
nent Freemason, and connected with the St. Andrew’s
Lodge of the Scotch Constitution. He died at Hindmarsh,
June 14, 1885, aged 46.


A. H. F. Bartels, J.P.,
WHOSE career was an instance of what a man may
accomplish by industry and perseverance, was a
native of Hanover, and arrived in South Australia in 1848,
under engagement to the late Mr. Seppelt, of Seppeltsfield.
He visited Victoria during the gold fever of 1852, but re-
turned to the colony, and entered into business in Adelaide.
Married Mrs. Uhlendorf, of the King of Hanover Hotel, and
carried on the business of an hotel-keeper successfully, for
about ten years, when he entered into partnership with Mr.
G. H. C. Meyer, as general agents and grain merchants, a
connection which existed up to the time of his death. In
December 1866, he was elected by the ratepayers in Hind-
marsh Ward for a seat in the City Council, and held that
office four years. Was returned as Mayor of Adelaide in
December 1871, and filled the position for two years, to the
satisfaction of the citizens generally. He was a Director of
the Permanent and Equitable Building Society and other
public companies. Mr. Bartels was a man of much ability,
and universally liked for his sterling qualities. After the
death of his first wife he married Miss Weidenbach, who
was left his widow. He died on November 9, 1878.
Marshall MacDermott, J.P.,
HELD a Commission in 1808 in the 2nd Battalion of the
Bth Regiment of Foot stationed at Chester. Anxious
to be employed on foreign service, he, in the same year,
joined the Ist Battalion of the Regiment at Halifax, Nova
Scotia, and embarked with a division of troops under Sir G.
Prevost to attack the French Islands of Martinique, Guada-
loup, &c., in the West Indies. In this locality some sharp
fighting occurred for fully six weeks, during which Mr.


MacDermott had the honor of carrying the King’s colours of
his regiment, and the additional satisfaction of being present
at the surrender by the garrison of Fort Bourbon, Martinique.
In 1810, as war with America was imminent, Mr. MacDer-
mott accompanied his regiment to Quebec, and saw no incon-
siderable service in that quarter, being severely wounded, but
almost miraculously preserved from death. During the
campaign the total loss in his regiment alone was 45 officers
and over 900 men. He returned to England in 1815, when
his regiment relieved the Coldstream Guards at Windsor, and
he remained there for two years, when he embarked at Ports-
mouth for Malta. During a tour which he made in his leave
of absence from the regiment he visited France, Switzerland,
and Italy, seeing all places of interest in those countries
“ famed in song and story,” including Mount Vesuvius and
the ruins of Herculaneum and Pompeii. Mr. MacDermott
thus records his impressions of Mount Vesuvius in 1819, at
a period when it was very active: —“From the hermitage,
half-way up the mountain, the ascent is very rough, over
sharp-pointed heated lava; a stream of which, six feet wide,
and four miles long was then flowing, falling over a cliff, and
filling a valley beyond. Seen in the dark it was of bright
red colour, but in daylight was dull and dark. The crater
was nearly a mile in diameter, and threw up large stones and
ashes to a great height, accompanied by a fearfully roaring
noise. The travellers were enabled to look down towards
the bottom of the crater, but from the confusion of flames,
gases, and smoke no correct idea could be formed of its
depth. , . . The ascent of the Mount occupies several
hours, but the descent on this side is effected with great
rapidity. The travellers agreed to attempt it. You step
with one foot on deep fine ashes, which slide down with you
twenty or thirty feet; you then put down the other foot,
sliding down in like manner, and so on alternately until you
reach the bottom. The danger consists in overbalancing


yourself, when you must roll down some 5,000 or 8,000 feet,
but by holding your head and shoulders well back you avoid
this.” Mr. MacDermott rejoined his regiment at Corfu,
lonian Islands, during the Greek insurrection, and had a
lively experience of earthquakes in various towns of the
Archipelago. At Argostoli Lord Byron was met, and the
record of Mr. MacDermott’s impressions with regard to that
famous poet are too interesting to he omitted. He says :
“ Lord Byron arrived in his yacht from Italy, accompanied by
Mr. Hamilton, Mr. Trelawny, Count Gamba, and an Italian
medical gentleman. He retained his yacht about three weeks
and frequently entertained the officers of the regiment on
board, sometimes until late hours. He was very temperate
on such occasions, drinking claret and water, or soda water.
His conversation was usually full of interest. One evening
some one referred to Lord Byron having swam the Helles-
pont from Sestos to Abydos; but Trelawny made light of it,
and challenged Lord Byron to swim with him across the
Channel from Cephalonia to Ithaca. The challenge was
accepted, but Trelawny drew back. At the end of three
weeks Lord Byron discharged his yacht, and took a villa four
miles from the town. He usually rode in the afternoon,
and took wine at the mess, after which he frequently joined
small parties of officers in their rooms to smoke cigars. At
this villa Lord Byron received a letter from Lady Byron
informing him of the illness of his daughter Ada. He shed
tears on that occasion, and appeared deeply affected.” On
Mr. MacDermott’s return to England Lord Byron entrusted
him with the manuscript of the last portion of any poem he
ever wrote, viz, the last three cantos of “Don Juan,” for
delivery to Sir John Cam Hobhouse, and he faithfully ful-
filled his trust. To follow Mr. MacDermott through all the
numerous ups and downs he encountered would far outstrip
the bounds we can here accord, suffice it to say that in 1829
he retired from the army after a military service of twenty


two years, purchased a vessel in Sweden, and sailed in her
for Western Australia, arriving there in June 1830. His
wife, to whom he had not long been married, accompanied
him, and the union proved an exceedingly happy one. In
April, 1846, Mr. MacDermott arrived in Adelaide, to assume
the charge of the Bank of Australasia, he having been associ-
ated with the same institution in Western Australia. It was
during his administration of affairs that the “ Bullion Act ”
was introduced, and it, in common with other measures for
the public good, received his earnest support. In 1855 he
was nominated for a seat in the Legislative Council, and
was shortly after elected Chairman of Committees. On the
dissolution of the mixed Council Mr. MacDermott was
elected for the District of Flinders, in the Assemblv, and in
1857 held a portfolio as Commissioner of Crown Lands. In
1859 he was appointed a Special Magistrate under the Local
Court’s Act, and on his retirement, after ten years’ service,
received the usual retiring allowance. Mr. MacDermott’s
long and useful career was brought to a close by his death in
1877.
Ven. Archdeacon Woodcock,
WHO died at North Adelaide, May 25, 1868, in his
60th year, was one of whom it may well be said,
“He was a most worthy colonist, and a man whose whole life
was imbued with the spirit of catholicity, true nobleness, and
goodness.” He came out under the auspices of the S.P.G.,
and arrived in South Australia with Mrs. Woodcock and
family on May 7, 1846. He preached his first sermon in
Trinity Church, and it was apparent to all who heard him
that the ecclesiastics of the colony had received a valuable
addition to their numbers. Prior to his arrival here he
laboured for some time in New Zealand, and the East and


West Indies, and it is probable that the enervating influence
of the climate in these mission fields was the cause of his
failing health at a comparatively early age. On Archdeacon
Hale being created Bishop of Perth, Mr. Woodcock was
advanced to the Archdeaconry. He was a warm, earnest,
and zealous worker, his efforts not being confined to his own
congregation, as Pulteney-street School, St. Peter’s College,
and various organizations and mission objects were indebted
to him for help. His widow, Mrs. Woodcock, a lady
possessed of much amiability of character, resides at present
near Adelaide.
Captain J. W. Smith,
§ORN in London in 1816; and entered the merchant service
in 1830, principally in the South American trade.
Arrived in South Australia in 1847, between which time and
1849, whilst in command of the ship “David Malcolm,”
trading between Great Britain and this colony, he introduced
upwards of one thousand emigrants to these shores. He
finally settled here in 1851, and engaged in mercantile pur-
suits, principally at Port Adelaide. Appointed Consular
Agent for the United States of America in 1857, a position
he still creditably fills. Elected Mayor of Port Adelaide,
and occupied the civic chair for six years between 1859 and
1866. He is the oldest member of the Marine Board, having
with a years’ interval in 1868-9, held a portfolio since May
1861. In 1866 he was returned as member for the House of
Assembly to represent Port Adelaide. At that time all the
wardens were nominated by the Government, but his election
to Parliament did not invalidate his position on the Marine
Board, as he remained in the House till its dissolution in
1868. During a long and honorable career, Captain Smith
has been universally esteemed by all who have had business
transactions with him.


HENRY MCK. MUIRHEAD.


Dr. John F. Joyce,
IT3)ORV near Victoria Park, London, August 6, 1840;
m arrived in the colony with his father in 1849, but on
account of family differences he left home with a firm deci-
sion, though but young, to fight the battle of life in an inde-
pendent manner. He entered into farming pursuits, and
became so skilful a ploughman tliaPat some of the up-country
ploughing matches he succeeded in taking no less than three
prizes. Being of a studious character, he devoted not only
his leisure, hut even his hours of labour to reading, and often
turned a furrow with a hook fastened between the handles of
the plough. Resolved, however, to he a professional man, he
directed his attention to matters of a higher order and more
congenial to his tastes, and studied classics under the Rev. J.
Hotham, of Port Elliot. In spite of difficulties and hard-
ships he was at length successful, and to the astonishment of
many who had tried to divert him from his purpose,
reached a premier place in the ranks of the medical
profession. After being for some time associated with Dr.
Ferguson, of Glenelg, he went to Glasgow and commenced
his medical studies, with the result that he obtained a
diploma from the Royal College of Physicians and the Royal
College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, and was complimented for
obtaining a percentage seldom reached in that city. Although
devoting much attention to general medical practice, Dr.
Joyce made a special study of the eye, and many persons
previously pronounced incurable have received their sight by
his agency, in fact so remarkable appear some of his cures as
to approach the miraculous. The Adelaide Eye Infirmary and
Queen’s Hospital, established under great opposition and
founded by Dr. Joyce for treating eye diseases and other
complaints, deserves support, and in a colony where
ophthalmia is prevalent it should insure that extensive
patronage to which such institutions are entitled. It may not
N


be inappropriate to mention that Dr. Joyce is a strong tem-
perance advocate, and that his motto is, “ Certavi et vici ” (I
Dave fought and conquered).
Henry O’Donnell,
BORN in London, May 1847. When but a hoy he came
to Australia with his parents, and landed in Melbourne.
After remaining at St. Mark’s, Collingwood, for some time
(then the leading public school in the city), he went to
Ballarat, where his education was completed at the Grammar
School and Grenville College. He afterwards read with
private tutors, one of whom was Michael Callinan Howe,
LL.D., formerly Professor of Classics in the University of
Toronto. Mr. O’Donnell’s intention was to enter at the
Melbourne University, but he abandoned the project. Subse-
quently he was appointed to the important position of Trea-
surer of the city of Ballarat, in which he gained the esteem
of all with whom he was associated. Resigning this office
he entered the service of the English, Scottish, and Austra-
lian Chartered Bank, and was employed as accountant at the
Haymarket branch of that institution in Melbourne. Hav-
ing from boyhood displayed a passionate love for literature,
it is not surprising that the hard facts and figures of com-
mercial life had no charm for him, and he resolved to devote
himself entirely to journalistic pursuits soon after his arrival
in South Australia, about nine years ago. He has been a con-
tributor to all the leading papers of this colony, and many of
his productions in prose and verse have appeared in all the
other colonies. For about three years he conducted the
Adelaide Punch , which was afterwards amalgamated with the
Lantern. It is by his work in the last named journal, that
Mr. O’Donnell is chiefly known in South Australia, some of
the satirical products of his pen being regarded as among
the best in Australia.


Chas. Ware,
t PRACTICAL horticulturist, and an early colonist,
having arrived here in 1838. He had reached four-
score-and-ten years at the time of his death, which took
place at Balaklava, in November 1884.
Charles Cross.
AMOXG those who have distinguished themselves in
colonial life few are so well known as Mr. Charles
Cross, of Gawler. Through his “Indigestion Drops” his
name has become a household word and achieved more than
an Australian reputation. He was born in London, October
15, 1545, and landed in South Australia in 1853. Having a
natural turn for chemical and medical enquiries, he entered
the employment of Mr. Scammell, chemist, of Port Adelaide,
and subsequently, upon that gentleman becoming a partner
in the firm of Paulding and Co., he was transferred to
Adelaide. During the time of his long engagement with this
firm he devoted himself to the study of drugs and the various
■diseases to which the human frame is liable; having acquired
a thorough knowledge of the former, his enquiring mind was
•directed to the cause of disease, and he became satisfied that
Here must be a primary origin for all complaints. In the
■course of his studies he encountered the subject of
homoeopathy, then attracting much attention, and with a
view to widen his experience he entered the employ of
Mr. E. S. Wigg, homoeopathic chemist, remaining there some
years, and having the management of his pharmacy. During
this period he had frequent opportunities of observing the
treatment pursued by Drs. H. Wheeler and Allan Campbell,
Esq., M.L.C., from which he derived increasing knowledge
and a fresh stimulus to his studies. Having purchased a
first-class old established business at Gawler, with his usual
n 2


energy it rapidly improved, enabling him to devote time to
the careful watching of the action of the various drugs and
herbs he was constantly prescribing. Being convinced that
there was a primal cause for all disease, he did not cease his
efforts until he had made the discovery, and with it the
remedy required. Mr. Cross, besides being a student, is a
thoroughly practical and energetic man, and at once proceeded
to make his discovery known. His “ Indigestion Drops’ 7
have found their way into various parts of the globe, and by
a strange coincidence his first wholesale order was executed
upon the anniversary of his birthday. This remedy has now
been before the public for several years, and its benefits have
been acknowledged by a large number of sufferers cured.
Letters have been received from His Excellency the Governor,
Sir W. C. F. Kobinson, K.C.M.G., and from all classes of
society, recommending the “ Indigestion Drops.” Mr. Cross
is a great believer in advertising, and may be called the
“Holloway of the Southern Hemisphere;” many thousands of
pounds he has expended in bringing his Drops before the
public by advertising and in various ways, and this year he lias
issued a pamphlet, making nearly three-quarters of a million
copies for free distribution. The demand for his remedy has
so extended, that he will doubtless have to devote all his
time to its manufacture. The record of his life has run so
smoothly that there are no salient points from which to
construct a lengthened biography, and from the first it has
been one of progress, interrupted by few failures. He is a
member of the Homoeopathic Pharmaceutic Society of Great
Britain, and a life member of the Pharmaceutical Society of
Australasia.
W. Goodchild,
IDENTIFIED with the town of Kapunda for many years.
Died January 1884, aged 39.


Rowland Rees, M.P.,
SOX of Mr. Alderman Rees, J.P., ex-Mavor of Dover,
i y y t/ 7
' was born 25th September, 1840, at Gibraltar, where his
father, an officer of the Royal Engineers, was then stationed.
He received the rudiments of his education at Hon" Kon"
O O'
under the care of Dr. Gutzlaff, the celebrated Oriental scholar,
and subsequently under Professor Allen, P.H.D. ; hence he
proceeded to Wesley College, Sheffield, where, under the
tutilage of Dr. Waddy and Dr. Shaw, he attained the
highest position in that well-known institution, winning the
first open scholarship and a very large number of prizes.
After leaving Sheffield he was for some time with Professor
Adams, the philologist. Directing his attention to his future
walk of life, he entered upon engineering and architectural
work as a pupil of the late well-known author of scientific
and other works, Thomas Baker, Esq., G.E., and subsequently
.served his articles in the offices of Henry Edward Kendall,
Esq., E.R.S., E.S.A., one of the founders of the Royal Insti-
tute of British Architects, and Thomas Hawksley, Esq., C.E.,
ex-president of the Royal Institute of Civil Engineers.
After practising professionally in England he resolved to
adopt South Australia as his future home, and arrived at
Port Adelaide, in the ship “ Duke of Sutherland,” on
Christmas Day, 1869. Early in 1870 he entered into
partnership with the late Hon. Thomas English, M.L.C., but
at the end of three years the partnership was dissolved, and
Mr. Rees has since that time practised his profession with
much success, and has carried out extensive works of an
architectural character, besides being the Engineer of the
Holdfast Bay Railway. Erom his first arrival in the colony
he has taken a very active and prominent part in public
affairs, and he has always been especially active in connection
with education, fine arts, the schools of painting and design,
sanitation, and other matters of great public interest. Mr.


Rees early aspired to Parliamentary honors. He unsuccess-
fully contested West Adelaide at the general election in
1871 ; but the death of Captain Hart, January 28, 1872 r
creating a vacancy in the representation of the Burra, Mr.
Rees successfully contested that district, and was returned
as its representative. He represented the Burra during three*
Parliaments. In 1881 at the general election he was-
unsuccessful, hut on the retirement of Mr. F. E. H. W.
Krichauff, in 1882, he was elected in his stead for the district
of Onkaparinga, and he has since continued to represent Onka-
paringa in the House of Assembly. Mr. Rees held the
position of Minister of Education in the Hon. Sir William
Morgan’s Ministry, which took office in 1878.
Capt. Thomas Allen
one of the oldest shipmasters connected with South
Australia. He “joined the great majority ”at Alber-
ton, on Sept. 14, 1885, in his 69th year; and those
acquainted with him at Port Adelaide will long remember
his affable manners, and kind cheery visage. He was a man
brim full of information on nautical subjects, and never more-
in his element than when recounting some of the strange
episodes in which he had been the chief actor. One of these,,
vouched for as true, will bear repetition here. “He took
the last batch of convicts hence to Hobart, and as the vessel
sailing previously with prisoners—the Lady Denison—was-
never heard of after leaving Port Adelaide, Capt. Allen took
such precautions that he delivered his freight in good order
and condition, though his vessel had a narrow escape from
being taken charge of by the prisoners on board. Among the
convicts committed to Capt. Allen’s charge was a well-known
resident in Adelaide, who had formerly held a responsible-
position in the city. He, however, violated the trust reposed


in him by embezzling a large sum of money, and his guilt
being clearly proved he was transported for life. His wife
also embarked in the convict vessel, ostensibly with a view
of taking out her husband as an assigned servant on arrival
at Van Diemen’s Land. On the passage, however, her inter-
course with the prisoners was so frequent that the captain’s
suspicions were aroused, and as the lady had an immense
chest in her cabin this fact added to the captain’s mistrust of
his passenger. After mature consideration, he requested the
lady in a polite manner to be allowed to inspect the contents
of the chest. She, however, indignantly refused; but the
skipper, resolving at all hazards to have his mind set at rest,
called the carpenter aft, and commanded him to force the
cabin-door open, which the lady had previously locked, defy-
ing the captain to touch her property. On the door being
forced the carpenter was ordered to break open the chest, and
on the lid being removed the captain’s suspicions were more
than verified, for, instead of its contents being lady’s wearing
apparel, arms, ammunition, charts, sextants, and other
essentials necessary for the capture and navigation of a vessel
were revealed. It was useless for the lady to protest any
longer, and the secret came out. It was her intention to
release the prisoners, and supply them with the necessary
arms to take the vessel, and after capturing the craft the
convicts intended sailing for some unknown port. It is need-
less to add that the prisoners were doubly ironed and the lady
was not allowed to hold any further intercourse with them.’*
Subsequently Capt. Allen had a brigantine of his own, and
did well in the Indian trade. He next bought into the
Schah Jehan, but never ceased to regret it as an untoward
circumstance which was attended with much loss. Later on
he navigated the barque Conquest for a time, and then joined
the pilot service, which proved too much for his weight.
Capt. Allen’s death removed from our midst one of those
“ old identities ” who are now but few in South Australia.


John Thomson Hall.
IT is somewhat remarkable that Australia has produced, or
_ attracted to its shores to settle permanently, some of the
best musical talent in the world. South Australia especially
appears singularly favoured in this respect, and if we review
the history of music here from its commencement, quite a
galaxy of artists are recalled to memory. Among those who
stand forth prominently to our mental vision, John Thomson
Hall occupies premier place ; a born musician with soul in
every touch of his master hand; a genius, pouring forth from
his instrument a flood of melody like the songs of British
birds at eventide, thrilling the heart with every note. Such
was Mr. Hall as we remember him at the Theatre Royal,
Adelaide. He was born in Sydney in February, 1841, and
commenced to study the violin when but seven years of age.
His progress was rapid, for he loved music, like the true poet,
for its own sake, and ere he reached his twelfth year, he had
played, in public, many difficult solos, such as Ernst’s
“ Carnival de Venice.” New South Wales was visited about
that time by a distinguished violinist named Caranzani, bearing
a noted Italian reputation, and Mr. Hall was placed under him
and received lessons for two years, when he joined Winter-
bottom’s orchestra (an orchestra, which, if heard now, would
shame many of those which theatrical audiences are compelled
to listen to nightly). It consisted of thirty performers, each
an artist capable of performing the most difficult composi-
tions, and Mr. Winterbottom, the conductor, was the best
bassoon player in the world. Mr. Hall continued playing in
orchestra for many years, and at the same time studied
theory under that eminent and inspired interpreter of
melody, the late Charles Packer. At the age of 24 he was
appointed leader in Lyster’s Opera Company, occupying that
place for nearly five years, when he was elevated to the
proud position of Musical Director, and produced some of


the grandest operas that have been represented in Australia,
viz.— “ William Tell,” “ Ernani,” and others. About the
year 1869 he arrived in Adelaide, and obtained the director-
ship of the Theatre Royal, and in this he remained until his
death, which occurred in December 1883. We have had many
musical celebrities here, hut the familiar and sweet tones of
John Hall’s violin gained for him with the public of that day
the right to rank as first of all his contemporaries.
George Hubert Hall,
of the above, was born in Sydney, in
November 1860. On completing his education, he, at
the age of fifteen, took his first lessons on the violin from
Mr. John Gibbs. He next was a pupil of Mr. W. Rice, and
later on of Charles Packer. Under the able tuition of the
latter, with whom he remained three years, he became pro-
ficient in piano and theory ; so much so, that he was con-
sidered by his instructor one of his most advanced pupils.
He was next associated with the eminent violinist, Herr Joseph
Kretchman, and became a prominent member of that gentle-
man’s quartette. Being offered an engagement with Lyster’s
Opera Company to come to Adelaide, Mr. Hall accepted it,
and arrived here in 1880, remaining about eight months,
when he returned to Sydney. He was there connected with
the Montague-Turner Opera Company as leader for two years,
when, in consequence of his brother’s illness and subsequent
death, he was sent for to take his place as director of the
Theatre Royal Orchestra, Adelaide. He has held that posi-
tion ever since ; with what success we leave the theatre-
going public to determine, though it is an undoubted fact
that the dramatic orchestra he conducts is one of the best in
the colonies. Mr. Hall is leader of the Adelaide String
Quartette Club, and has for the last three seasons played


many of the Lest works of the old masters, taking part also
at intervals with the most famed of our visitors in the-
musical world, such as Remenyi and others.
Linly Norman.
eminent musician and composer arrived in Adelaide-
in 1856 with the English Opera Company as musical
director. He was a pupil of Sir Geo. Smart, and subse-
quently enrolled in the Royal Academy. Leaving with
honors he passed a second course under Mendelssohn, whose
first six books of “ Lieder ohne Worte ” one of his surviving
pupils, now here, heard him during repeated sittings in one-
day recite from memory without omission of a single phrase.
He left Adelaide, but returned in 1861, and remained five
years. He was a peculiarly gifted instructor, extremely quiet-
in his teaching attitude, and those who studied under him
yet testify how completely a lesson was imbibed in merely
witnessing his performances, and catching his appropriate-
remarks and suggestions. This gifted son of genius removed
to Tasmania, where a brief illness in October 1869 bereft-
our southern hemisphere of one of the most enlightened,,
unobtrusive and cultivated artists.
Oliver Rankin
BLED in Adelaide, December 15, 1880, aged 57. A
native of Londonderry, Ireland; settled in South.
Australia in 1848. He was a member of the City Council
for upwards of six years, a Director of the Equitable
Insurance Company; connected with the Friendly Societies,,,
and took great interest in the welfare of the working classes.


Archdeacon J. N. Twopeny,
®HE singularity of whose name has often been the source
of remark, was a native of Little Casterton, Rutland-
shire, of which parish his father was rector. The family were
of French extraction, Twopeny being undoubtedly a
corruption of the word “ Tupigny.” He was educated at
Uppingham Grammar School, and at Oriel College, Oxford.
He arrived in South Australia in 1860, and was first stationed
at Mount Remarkable, where he created for himself one of
the largest parishes ever undertaken by any clergyman. His
regular visitations extended as far westward as Port Augusta,
and over all the settled country of the far north, and he
made periodical tours in the Port Lincoln District. As a
bush missionary he was devoted to his work, having no
ambition beyond that of evangelizing from hut to hut amon<g
lonely shepherds. As a preacher he was very eloquent and
forcible, and he reluctantly quitted the mission field when
the bishop bestowed upon him a most appropriate recognition
of his services by making him Archdeacon of Flinders.
From Melrose he was transferred to Christchurch, Mount
Gambler, and thence to Riverton, when his title was changed
to Archdeacon Broughton. He possessed great self-denial,,
unobtrusive piety, and zeal, and was singularly well informed
on all subjects. His useful life was brought to a sudden
close by heart disease, as he was travelling with Governor
Sir Jas. Fergusson en route to Port Wakefield, on Kov. 3,.
1869. He had only just reached his 49th year.
Captain Carson,
rOR some years engaged in marine surveying at
Kangaroo Island, up Spencer’s Gulf, and along the
western coast, in the Government schooner “Yatala.” Died in
May 1885.


Dr. Andrew Mclntyre
OIED at Glasgow, Scotland, October 1883. A highly
respected colonist, and identified with South Australia
for upwards of thirty years.
William Hill, J.P.,
ejt.N enterprising colonist, who, for upwards of thirty-two
years, was connected with the well-known milling firm
of John Dunn & Co., of Adelaide. He was a native of Corn-
wall, horn in 1830, and arrived in South Australia at an early
age. Mr. Hill was respected for his energy, urbanity, tact,
and general business ability; and from the first day he
entered the service of Messrs. Dunn & Co., until the close of
his useful career, exhibited these qualities in a marked
degree. He was placed in charge of their Adelaide store,
and in course of time admitted into partnership. Though
widely known and esteemed in commercial circles, Mr. Hill
had but little to do with public life. He was for a while an
acceptable lay preacher, and afterwards, for a period, a mem-
ber of the Glenelg Municipal Council. In his various
relationships in private life he was admired, and his loss as a
member of the firm to which he belonged was deeply
deplored by his partners. On the thirtieth anniversary of
his connection with the establishment, his confreres presented
him with a valuable gold watch to show the sense they
entertained of his services. About five years ago he visited
England, returning by way of America. Mr. Hill was
married to Miss Dunn, a daughter of John Dunn, sen., Esq.,
J.P., of Mount Barker, and sister of the Hon. John Dunn,
jun., M.L.C. ; of a family of five, three daughters survive.
He was one who externally appeared likely to live to the
age of three score and ten, but he died somewhat suddenly
at Glenelg, on September 11, 1885, in his 55th year.


Francis Symonds, J.P.,
BIED at the Chain of Ponds, March 13, 1885, aged 90,
Came to the colony in 1848. Was a member and
chairman of the Para Wira Council for many years, and
most strenuous in his endeavours to advance the interests
of the district in which he resided.
Charles Stocker Morris.
®HIS well-known litterateur , whose contributions to the
South Australian press under the nom-de-plume of
“Dick Jervois ” and other appellations are familiar to many,
is a native of this colony, and was born near Auburn, Sept.
11, 1851. His parents died when he was very young, and
he was brought up by his grandfather, a pioneer colonist, who
initiated him into the art and mystery of farming, had him
educated at the Commercial School, Queenstown, and then
apprenticed him for six years to Messrs. Parrow & King, of
the S. A. Advertiser. During this period he made the best
use of his spare time, and took every opportunity in reading
up and making himself familiar with current literature and
Pitman’s Phonography. He occasionally wrote miscellaneous
letters and poetic effusions for the press, and at the expiration
of his apprenticeship left the Advertiser to occupy the
position of book-keeper in a leading drapery firm, but finding
the continued confinement injurious to his health, he applied
for and received the appointment of commercial traveller for
a wholesale fancy goods house, remaining for some time in
that capacity. He next transferred his services from the
fancy line to the more common-place one of 9 x 3 deals and
stringybark, at Messrs. Lake & Keynolds, timber merchants,
of Port Adelaide, but severed his connection with their firm
to start a printing business. In conjunction with a practical
printer, Mr. Morris established and edited a weekly journal


(the Port Adelaide Post), which during its short but brilliant
career was well spoken of by the contemporary press of the
day. Quitting this sphere of labour he endeavoured to form
a company to bring out a penny morning paper; but for
want of encouragement the project was abandoned. Like
most men who have devoted their energies to literature,
Mr. Morris has had a most chequered career; but he has
nevertheless maintained a prominent position in the com-
mercial world. He has contributed largely to colonial press
literature, and the best of his efforts are the tales “ Under
False Colors,” and “ Marie,” and the sketches, “ Eambles,”
■“ Notes on South Australia,” “Adelaide Opinion,” and others
more or less of a racy and readable character. Mr. Morris’s
poetic efforts evidently run in the comic vein, and in this he
seems to excel; in fact, he appears most to advantage in
writing up abuses, and satirising the follies and failings of
the “unco’ guid.” We have, however, read far worse pathetic
poetry than his from poets who have been extolled in this
particular. In 1883, in conjunction with Messrs. Hay ter &
Barry, Mr. Morris compiled and published “The Commercial
and Trades Directory,” which commanded a ready sale, and
attracted favorable attention from the metropolitan and
provincial press. For the past three years he has been con-
nected with the Mutual Life Association of Australasia, as
Iheir special agent, in which capacity he has been very
successful. Mr. Morris’s experience, literary or otherwise,
has been gained by keen observation of men and things
during his journeyings over the greater part of New South
Wales, Victoria, Queensland, and South Australia.
J. T. Syme,
fOR many years connected with the brewing interests in
Adelaide. Arrived here in 1857; died at Edin-
burgh, Scotland, April 1883, aged 63.


James Alexander Holden, J.P.
I HIS enterprising and popular colonist was born at
Walsall, Staffordshire, in April 1835, and after spend-
ing some time in America came to South Australia, arriving
here in 1854. He entered into business in Adelaide as
merchant, coach and saddlers’ ironmonger, &c., and
in a short time worked up a most profitable and lucra-
tive concern. For some years Mr. Holden has been
assisted in the several departments of business by his
son; and so extensive are now its relationships in this
particular, that the firm of J. A. Holden & Co. may rank as
-one of the largest establishments in the colonies. Recently,
however, Mr. Holden, whose illness has prevented his con-
tinuing his place as head of the firm, severed his connection
therewith, and the business is now in the hands of his son
.and partner. Ever since his arrival in the colony Mr.
Holden has taken a warm interest in all movements calculated
to benefit his fellow men, and by his liberality and disin-
terestedness has been instrumental in doing much good. The
Baptist cause owes much of its success here to his exertions,
as he with four others first moved in the matter. He was
a Commissioner at the various exhibitions held in London,
Paris, Melbourne and Sydney, a position he appeared
■eminently qualified to fill. He may be regarded as the
founder of the Adelaide Chamber of Manufactures, one of
the most useful and prosperous of South Australian institu-
tions, and which is doubtless the nucleus from which kindred
associations in the sister colonies have sprung. 111-health
.alone has been the deterrent to Mr. Holden’s bodily activity,
and it is much to be regretted that one whose mental capa-
cities still fit him to occupy the highest political or social
positions should thus early be compelled to retire from a
sphere in which his judicious counsels have long been
effective.


W. W. R. Whitridge,
was a native of Oswestry, England, was born
M/v December 26, 1824, and died at Enfield, South
Australia, May 26, 1861, aged 36 years. In early life he
went to London, and was connected with some of the leading
periodicals of the day. In 1847 he returned to his native
town, and established a magazine called Oswald's Well , which
realized a tolerable sale for fifteen months, and in which he
wrote the principal articles. In January, 1849, Mr. Whitridge
issued the first number of the Oswestry Advertiser , a news-
paper which has a large circulation at the present day. This
he edited for about eighteen months, and then, long before
the tide of immigration had set in, he sailed for Adelaide.
Soon after his arrival, in conjunction with Mr. Garran (a
student from Spring Hill College, Birmingham), Mr. Whit-
ridge started a paper under the title of The Austral Examiner ,
but a sudden depression in trade ruined the speculation, and
Mr. Garran got an appointment on the staff of the S. A.
Register , and the subject of this sketch abandoned literature
for a time and commenced farming. He had, however, made
for himself a name amongst the literati of Adelaide, and after
the lapse of a few months was offered the appointment on the
Register held by Mr. Garran, that gentleman having accepted
the position of editor of the Sydney Morning Herald. In a
very few months Mr. Whitridge was appointed one of the
editors, which position he held to the day of his death. He
took a warm and practical interest in the public institutions
of the colony, and was for some time one of the two Presidents
of the Society of Arts. He was one of the committee of the
“ Adelaide Philosophical Society,” and frequently lectured in
the public halls of the colony ; his last lecture, on “ Words-
worth,” being delivered shortly before his death before the
members of the South Australian Institute, His Excellency
the Governor being in the chair. His spare hours, however,


HON. JOHN CROZIER, M.L.C.


were not altogether devoted to pursuits of this nature. He
was a moderate sportsman, and a successful shot in the “South
Australian Free Rifles.” Although he was necessarily fully
occupied by his duties as editor of a daily journal, he found
time for farming, of which he was passionately fond, and to
the last managed a plot of land of ninety-two acres about five
miles from Adelaide, where he resided, and chiefly worked
between the hours of five and nine in the mornings. Mr.
Whitridge died of pleurisy after only a fortnight’s illness, and
South Australia mourned for one of her most useful colonists.
Herr Linger,
« NATIVE of Berlin, where he was born in March 1810.
His father was an engraver of some eminence, and
observing that he early manifested great taste for music, had
him taught its rudiments. So rapid was young Lingers
progress that, at the age of twelve, he had obtained sufficient
proficiency to be able to give lessons on the pianoforte.
Placed under Reissiger and Klein, from whom he obtained
a thorough insight into the theory of counterpoint and the
general principles of composition, he made rapid strides, and
soon was almost the equal of his teachers. He then com-
menced his career as a composer, and amongst the first-fruits
of his genius were six sacred songs, dedicated to the Princess
Royal of Prussia. These established his reputation in his
native land, and induced him to aim at higher attainments.
He visited Milan, Venice, and other cities in Italy for the
purpose of obtaining practical acquaintance with the
Italian school of music, and then returned to Berlin, where
he composed various musical pieces, regarded by competent
judges as possessing great merit. Amongst these were two
entire operas, entitled, “ The fight with the Dragon” and
“ Alfred the Great,” three or four masses, several symphonies,
o


cantatas, and other concerted pieces. His extreme modesty
led to a tendency in him to depreciate his own attainments,
and thus deprived the musical world of many of the fruits of
his genius. He arrived in South Australia in 1849, and was
induced to invest the savings of years in farming, in which, as
he was unsuccessful, he sold out, and established himself in
Adelaide as a music teacher. By his active exertions he
created a taste for music. He was for several years leader of
the Adelaide Choral Society, one of the originators of the
Liedertafel, and always ready to assist any undertaking
having for its object the cultivation of an art in which he
pre-eminently excelled. As a composer he was probably un-
equalled here, and his “ Song of Australia,” which took the
prize given by the Committee of the Gawler Institute, is
likely to live long as a national air. Herr Linger died in
Adelaide, February 16, 1862, aged 52 years.
Capt. James Croker Ferguson, J.P.,
@KE of the most expert riflemen in the colony ; arrived in
Adelaide in 1848, with a commission from H. M.
Government as Landing Waiter of Customs in South
Australia. In consequence of deaths or removals from the
Service during the time of the exodus to the Victorian gold
fields he rose rapidly, and in 1855 attained the position of
Assistant Landing Surveyor, an appointment within one step
of that which he now holds, viz., Landing Surveyor and
Deputy Collector of Customs. Old residents at Nuriootpa,
Angas Park, and Tanunda well - remember the raids made
by him on the illicit distilleries once so numerous in those
districts, and the seizures of stills, etc., for which he received
the thanks of the Government. Captain Ferguson’s services
as a volunteer officer date back to the Crimean War, when
the scare in this colony was at its height, and he was


appointed to the command of a troop of cavalry formed at the
Reedbeds. Volunteering was then expensive, as officers and
men had to find their horses, uniforms, and accoutre-
ments, the only concession by the Government being the
loan of some heavy cavalry swords and breech-loading rifles.
This corps comprised among its members many well-known
men ; it speedily became popular and took a conspicuous part
in the reviews and sham fights of its seven years’ existence.
Eventually the whole volunteer force was disbanded, but
many members of the old troop, including their late captain,
in conjunction with Captain Scott, Lieut. Gray, Mr. Skipper,
and other enthusiastic riflemen, got up a semi-military rifle
club called “ The S. A. Rifle Association,” which existed
for several years and formed the parent of the present R. Y.F.
In 1866, another war scare arose, and volunteers were called
for; troops of cavalry were raised, and Captain Ferguson was
again offered and accepted a command in B troop, and the
squadron was named “ The Duke of Edinburgh’s Light
Dragoons ” by H.R.H., who was then on a visit to the colony.
About eighteen months after accepting his commission Capt.
Ferguson was thrown from his horse and had his arms and
wrists broken. He was thereby incapacitated from using a
sword, but yet not prevented from using a rifle. He retired
from the cavalry, but not before he had fired for and won the
£SO brigade prize, the £lO prize for the best shot in the
troop, and the £3OO prize Challenge Cup, given by Sir W. W.
Hughes. The volunteers were again disbanded, and quiet
xeigned until anew war scare came, when the present Y.M.F.
was raised by the Government, and an auxiliary force (the
Rifle Volunteers) also established, Capt. Ferguson being
unanimously appointed to take a command in the No. 1
Adelaide Company. The pains he took to instruct them in
Tifle-shooting was attended with excellent results, 36 out of
the 40 men comprising the company becoming marksmen, but
finding that his Civil Service duties prevented his devoting
o 2


sufficient time to volunteer matters, he resigned his commission,
and was transferred to the Eeserve Force of the Y.M.F. as
Captain, an appointment he still holds. For many years he
has held office in the D. Grand Lodge of Freemasons, English
Constitution, and is one of the few who declined to secede
from the old flag or join the proposed new Constitution of
South Australia, preferring to serve as District Grand
Secretary under the parent institution.
Stephen Haddy
’IWAS horn in Plymouth Dock, now Devenport, in the
year 1800. He received an excellent English educa-
tion, and on leaving school was apprenticed to the trade of a
cabinetmaker. As a hoy he had shown a fondness for work-
ing in wood, and so persistent was his application, persever-
ance, and industry that on completion of his engagement
his proficiency readily procured him employment with one of
the best firms in London, where he assisted in preparing a
suite of rooms for the Queen of Wurtemburg, who was at
that time visiting at Windsor Castle. Mr. Haddy mar-
ried, in March 1828, Miss M. B. Stenlake, of Plymouth,
who for nearly forty years was a most exemplary wife and
mother. She was well known at Port Adelaide, where she
resided till her death, which took place in 1867. In 1830
Mr. Haddy accepted an engagement in the County of
Wicklow, Ireland, and resided there seventeen years. During
this time a great potato-failure and famine occurred. It is
customary with tradesmen as well as farmers to plant
annually a crop of potatoes, and among those which escaped
the devastating blight was the crop of Mr. Haddy, who then
showed his sympathy by distributing it among the needy,
regardless of creed or character. Indeed, his large-heartedness
won the respect and gratitude of all who knew him, whether


Protestant or Romanist. Though loyal to the faith of his
fathers, he recognised the right of every man to hold his
own honest convictions in religion or politics. Returning to
Devonshire in 1846, he established a lucrative business. He
arrived with his family in South Australia by the barque “Jenny
Lind,” June 13, 1850, and was warmly welcomed by his
brother Joseph, who had preceded him hither fourteen years
previously. He lost no time in starting business at Port
Adelaide, where he also acted as agent for the late Charles
Simeon Hare. In 1854 he accompanied two of his sons to
the Victorian diggings, where the party were fairly successful,
and, after some rather remarkable adventures, returned to
Port Adelaide. He here continued to follow his trade, which,
by the aid of his sons, he brought to great perfection. His
death took place on August 8, 1875, and was the result of
an accident whilst he was on a visit to his son at Mintaro.
Mr. Haddy’s whole life was exemplary, and a proof of what
practical excellence can exist with the necessities of constant
hard work to bring up and place out respectably in the world
a large family. His truth, benevolence, charity, and kind-
ness have never probably been exceeded by any one, even in
the highest walks of colonial life. His sons still reside at
Port Adelaide, where they are well known and eminently
respected.
Alfred William Meeks
born at Cheltenham, England, and at an early age
arr ived in Victoria. He received his education at
St. James’ and other prominent schools, and graduated as a
teacher. He entered the employ of a mercantile house,
from which he was transferred to more important
appointments, becoming salesman and manager of a large
Victorian import business; here arrangements were made for
his admission to the partnership, but circumstances arose


which necessitated the principal residing in England,
whither he went, and ultimately retired from business. He
was next appointed manager of Messrs. Gibbs, Bright & Co.’s
(then Bright Bros. & Co.) indent and sales department, in
which he was very successful. In 1883, upon the London,
house (Messrs. Antony Gibbs & Sons) deciding to establish
a branch in Adelaide, Mr. Meeks was selected for this
important duty. Under his direction this branch has grown
very rapidly, and already assumed a foremost position in
mercantile ranks. Since his residence in Adelaide he has
occupied a prominent place in mercantile affairs, as witnessed
by his appointment to a seat on the Committee of the
Chamber of Commerce, S.A. Corn Trade Association, and
other kindred societies. Mr. Meeks has also taken an active
part in the working of some of our religious and charitable
institutions, such as the S.A. Sunday School Union and the
Industrial School for the Blind. A few remarks relative to-
the firm of Messrs. Gibbs, Bright A Co., with which Mr. Meeks
is so actively connected, will not be out of place here. This
firm is a branch of the well-known London house of Messrs.
Antony Gibbs & Sons, and although but a comparatively
short time established here, it has for many years occupied
one of the leading positions in Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane,
and Dunedin. The other houses are Messrs. Antony Gibbs y
Sons A Co., Liverpool and Bristol, and Messrs. Gibbs & Co. y
Valparaiso and Iquique (S. America). As shippers and
owners of the celebrated steamship Great Britain the name
of Gibbs, Bright & Co. has become a household word in
many lands.
W. Jemson,
tWENTY-SEYEE" years master of the Brighton Public
School, and a colonist of thirty-seven years. Died
June 21, 1885, aged 58.


William Henville Burford.
®HIS enterprising colonist, who was born in England in
1806, arrived in South Australia by the “ Pestonjee
Bomenjee,” October 11, 1838. He thus recounts his experi-
ences after landing at Glenelg, and the recital is interesting
when compared with the facilities which our colonists at
present enjoy in transit and accommodation. He says :
“ We landed in water up to our waists, and were for two days
andniglits on the beach guarding our luggage. Conveyed
thence to Emigration-square and Jodged in a rude wooden
shanty, without a single article of commerce, and only Is. 6d.
in cash to begin colonial life. Wife invalided, and two
children of three and five years of age to support.” These
were really “hard lines,” but Mr. Burford evidently would
not sit down repining, and with commendable energy he
worked at the first thing which offered, viz., excavating a
cellar. Mr. Richardson had just then built an auction-room
on North-terrace, and Mr. Burford having some experience in
painting and glazing applied for and got the job, and so
successful was he that ere long he was able to start for him-
self, and employ several “ hands ” at from 10s. to 14s. per
day. Things went on well for a time; but at length the
credit of the colony was stopped at the Home Colonial Office,
and great depression ensued. Much inconvenience having
been experienced by the colonists from a scarcity of candles,
Mr. Burford, who had in England gained practical knowledge of
candle and soap-making, obtained the necessary plant and
started into that business. At first he had to compete against
the Tasmanian exportations with which the colony was
deluged, but his perseverance was ultimately rewarded, and
his endeavours were successful, as he undertook large
contracts for supplying the Burra, Kapunda, Moonta, and
other mines with candles. He next added the manufacture


of soap, and these two important industries were introduced
and maintained by him up to the present time. The firm of
W. H. Burford & Sons have also manufactured stearine
candles and toilet soaps, articles in great request, and for
which they were prize-takers at many exhibitions. Mr.
Burford has long striven for the best interests of South
Australia. He was a member of the first Adelaide Corpora-
tion, which died of inanition, and was succeeded by a
Commission or Board of three members. He united with
his fellow-citizens in opposing the attempted encroachment
upon Yictoria-square for cathedral purposes. He was elected
one of the first six members for Adelaide, under the present
constitution of responsible government, and by his strict
attention to Parliamentary duties was instrumental in saving
the Beal Property Act (a measure which met with much
opposition). The late Sir B. B. Torrens acknowledged this
in a letter to Mr. Burford, in which he commented on his
services and action in the matter; and although his career in
the House was but short, in this instance it proved a blessing
of untold value to many colonists and communities.
Begarding Torrens’s Act Mr. Burford says : “It must be ever
watched over and cared for, to prevent infringements on the
part of some of the legal profession, who would much prefer
their gains under the old regime” In his 79th year Mr.
Burford is a hale and hearty man, his chief infirmity being
deafness; he is one of a class of earnest pioneers rapidly
passing away, and leaving only the recollection of their good
deeds in the hearts of their fellow-men. Did space permit,
this record might be extended, for could we not relate the
strenuous exertions of William Henville Burford with Mr.
Joseph Allen and other advocates for the abolition of capital
punishment 'I Time alone can determine whether capital
punishment shall be abolished, and whatever may be said
against its advocates, it is certain that here they are only
actuated by a sense of justice and right.


Arthur John Baker, J.P.,
IS a native of Devonshire, and received his education in
that county. At seventeen years of age he entered the
E. I. Company’s service as a midshipman, and sailed from
London for Calcutta in 1833. After encountering a number
of vicissitudes, and remarkable escapes from fire and ship-
wreck, he settled in Upper Canada, where for some time he
led the life of a genuine backwoodsman. He returned to
England in 1837, and married in 1838. In October of that
jear he returned with his wife to Seymour, U.C., where he
•engaged in farming. In conjunction with two others he built
the “ Precursor,” the first steamer that navigated the lakes
from Toronto to Montreal, via the St. Lawrence River over
the rapids. He purchased land on the Rice Lake, U.C., in
partnership with another person, laid out a township, and
built steam saw mills. The venture was successful, but Mr.
Baker being prostrated by fever and ague was compelled to
sell out, and left penniless. On his recovery he went to
Halifax, Uova Scotia, and thence to St. Johns, N. 8., where
he was engaged in various callings, the most important of
which was as manager of some extensive saw mills on the
Musquash River. These mills and a large general store were
managed and worked to great advantage for the London
owners from 1847 to 1850. He returned to England in
1851, and sailed in that year as supercargo for Sydney,
IST. S. Wales, in the ship “Harriet.” Left Sydney with his
wife and family in the “ Asa Packer ” for Adelaide, and
reached that port July 11, 1853. Shortly after arrival he
was engaged as storeman to Messrs. Dacomb & Co., but was
soon after appointed their traveller in the country districts.
It is asserted that Mr. Baker was the first traveller in the
isoft goods line sent out in South Australia. On August 1,
1854, he was appointed clerk in H.M. Customs, Port
Adelaide, and held that office until February 1, 1856, when


he entered into business on his own account as cattle and
stock agent at Hindmarsh-square. In June, 1856, Mr. Baker-
received the appointment of manager of the horse depart-
ment at the Burra Burra mines, hut in consequence of an
inability to dispose of his Adelaide business he was compelled
to resign the appointment, and continued as before. It was-
in the October of this year that Mr. Baker and his wife-
suffered a great bereavement by the accidental drowning of
their only son Arthur, an intelligent youth, then nearly six-
teen years of age, in endeavouring to ride across the Biver
Torrens at the Frome Bridge ford, at the time of a freshet.
Mr. Baker next turned his attention to the running of’
omnibuses on the Bay road, and continued this till 1858, in
September of which year he joined Major Warburton’s-
exploring party, and was out three months with them. He
afterwards took Mr. Peter Ferguson over the same-
ground, and assisted in driving in cattle to stock the country
taken up. In 1859 he made another trip to the N.W. of
Stuart’s Creek, and on his return took up some fine country
for squatting purposes. Interesting and remarkable as Mr.
Baker’s adventures undoubtedly were up to this point, it is-
his long connection with the South Australian Fire Brigades
that has rendered his name familiar throughout the land. In-
December, 1859, he accepted the offer made by the Fire
Insurance Companies through Mr. H. Scott, of organising;
and working a fire brigade in Adelaide, and was appointed
Superintendent of Fire Brigades January 1, 1860, and drew
up rules and regulations for the working of same. He also*
drafted a short Fire Brigade Bill, which was passed through
both Houses of Parliament and was assented to by His-
Excellency, Sir Dominick Daly, on 21st October, 1862. Im I
December, 1862, he was elected councillor for Gawler Ward
in the Adelaide Corporation, and served till 1864. On 15tk
October, 1878, Mr. Baker, whose health had suffered from
injuries received during twenty years’ active service at fires,.


received a year’s leave of absence, and left for England,,
returning in June the next year, when he resumed duty, and
in September 1879 perfected a model for a fire escape on the*
Lazy-Tongs’ principle, on a scale of one inch to the foot, and
presented it to the Adelaide Chamber of Manufactures..
From that period till the new Fire Brigade Act 273 of 1882'
was passed, he was constantly employed, having fifty calls per
annum to fires within the city, and attended to and managed
nine fire brigades in country towns. The new Act, 273
of 1882, brought Mr. Baker’s twenty-three years’ connection
with the fire brigades of the colony to an abrupt conclusion,,
and he retired and did not apply to be re-appointed
under the new Fire Brigades’ Board. Mr. Baker’s long
public services were by this means summarily dispensed with,
and his long services to the whole community in which
he has been instrumental in saving life and property have
never been fairly or adequately compensated. The Register
of 12th February, 1882, remarks, “It will be generally
admitted that Mr. Baker, in spite of often very insufficient
appliances, always discharged the duties devolving on him as
Superintendent of Fire Brigades with promptness and intelli-
gence. Besides this, he has spent the best years of his life
in this service.” In 1883 Mr. Baker was gazetted a
Justice of the Peace, and in the same year was appointed a
member of the “ Koval Lunacy Commission,” and was also a
member of the Fire Brigades’ Board from January 1884 to
January 1885, when he resigned in favor of Mr. Hack.
Capt. Geo. McKay,
A NATIVE of Scotland; born 1801; arrived in S.A.
1838; died at Port Adelaide, May 19, 1883. Well-
known as instrumental in developing the coasting trade of
the colony.


Nathaniel Hailes,
WHOSE career was marked with more than ordinary
vicissitudes, was one of the most prominent of
pioneer South Australian colonists. His life may be divided
into two parts, the one half spent in England, the other
other half in this colony. Born in London in 1802, and
dwelling there for thirty-six years, he was so situated as to
he acquainted with the circumstances of some of the most
remarkable events of his time, and to he on intimate terms
with many of the greatest minds of the past generation. He
was on sufficiently friendly relations with Lady Byron as to
dissuade her from publishing a treatise she wished to issue
on female education, and he had the privilege of seeing Mrs.
Siddons in the zenith of her popularity as an actress. He
was intimately associated with Hazlitt, the well-known critic,
the Rev. Rowland Hill, Allan Cunningham, De Quincey,
Edward Irving, Dr. Chalmers, Sir Walter Scott, and other
celebrities of a by-gone age, and perhaps no one at the
antipodes knew more of the great minds which ruled the
literary and theological w r orld during the first forty years of
the present century. At the close of 1838, Hr. Hailes was
appointed superintendent of emigrants by the “Buckingham-
shire/ 5 which left Portsmouth in that year, and arrived at
Holdfast Bay in March, 1839. In his “ Personal Recollections
■of a Septuagenarian,” a series of papers contributed to the
S. A. Register , he relates how “he beheld the conversion of
a wilderness into the abode of an intelligent and prosperous
■community,” and the record he thus left has supplied a
chapter in the history of the colony which would otherwise
Lave been lost. Mr. Hailes carried on the business of an
auctioneer for some time, and his advertisements rivalled in
their eloquence the best literary efforts of the celebrated
‘George Robbins, of London. He was also a regular con-
tributor to the press under the nom de plume of “Timothy


Short,” and at one period started a newspaper —The Adelaide
Free Press ; which only lasted a brief period. On retiring
from business in 1842, he was appointed to the office of
Secretary to the Government Resident of Port Lincoln, where
his official duties brought him into close contact with the
aborigines, and the newspapers of those days contained many
interesting productions from his pen on aboriginal customs,
life and manners. When the Government establishment at
Boston Bay was broken up, Mr. Hailes lost his position, but
afterwards filled the post of Secretary to the S. A. Institute
Library, which he held for some years, and then received an
appointment to the Labour Prison at Dry Creek. In 1841-2
he was a member of the City Council, and in 1842 a member
of the provisional committee of a society formed to secure
religious freedom As a writer, both of prose and poetry,
Mr. Hailes exercised considerable influence, and his memory
is not likely to be forgotten here in the present generation.
His death took place at Adelaide in his 76th year, on July
24, 1879.
William Denholm
WAS born in Edinburgh, in 1847, and went to the
Highlands of Scotland at an early age, where he
received his first lesson in dancing. Desirous of following
the trade of a mason, he served an apprenticeship to it, and
was afterwards for two years in an architect’s office in Edin-
burgh. Having carried off* several prizes for dancing in his
native land, and having been favoured with the patronage of
royalty, he visited England and America, where he was
equally successful. He arrived in New Zealand in 1874, and
received the appointment of Clerk of Works on the railway
from Port Chalmers to Oamaru, and filled that position very
creditably. During his leisure Professor Denholm gave
instruction in dancing, and in competition he secured first


honours against all comers. He arrived in Victoria in 1876,
where he was also famed for his dancing abilities; his
superiority in this respect was admitted by both press and
public, and having won 2,000 first prizes, he may certainly
be regarded as the “Champion Dancer of Australia.” He
came to Adelaide in 1881, and has taken part in the leading
events in the Caledonian sports, usually securing first prizes;
•and on one occasion winning the chief’s gold medal. Mr.
Denholm is favorably known as a teacher of the art in
which he so eminently excels, and many of the leading
scholastic establishments here have availed themselves of his
services.
J. W. Lewis, J.P.,
EIOR many years a prominent officer in the South Austra.
i 9 lian public service, died July 2, 1879, aged 59
years. He arrived in the colony by the ship “ Cleveland ”
in 1839, and was at first employed by the late Emanuel
Solomon as his managing clerk. He received an appoint-
ment under Government, January 1, 1846, as chief clerk in the
General Post Office, and on January 1, 1856, in consequence
of the illness of Capt. Watts, the then Postmaster General,
was appointed Deputy Postmaster General. On the death of
his predecessor he was promoted (July 1, 1861) to his place.
In the different offices he held, Mr. Lewis showed himself
possessed of much business ability, and his administration
gave general satisfaction. On the amalgamation of the Post
and Telegraph Departments, 1869, under Mr. Todd, Mr.
Lewis’s services were dispensed with. He was appointed
Collector of Customs on May 22, 1870, and held that position
up till his decease. Mr. Lewis possessed much histrionic
ability, and occasionally, as an amateur, took part in
theatrical performances. He was a great lover of music, and


few were more hospitable to the musical artists who visited
the colony. He took a prominent part in the founding of
the Mechanics’ Institute, from which sprang the present S. A.
Institute, and occupied the post of lieutenant in the late
Hon. W. Younghusbands’ Volunteer Company. He was
unostentatious and unassuming, and it is recorded of him
that he was a faithful friend to the deserving.
William Randall,
T£IORN at Idlicot, Warwickshire, December 9, 1820. Emi-
JP grated from the county of Northampton to South
Australia in 1846, and arrived here in December of that year
"by the “Duke of Richmond.” In conjunction with his
"brother, Mr. David Randall, who had reached this colony in
1845, he brought capital with a view to investment. He
first settled on a section to the east of Kensington, purchased
land from the S. A. Company, and laid out a portion of
College Town, He next bought a preliminary section from
fhe same Company, and laid out the beautifully-situated
township of Burnside, a place where many of our well-to-do
-citizens are now located. He then took a lease from Mr. Auld
of Home Park and the adjoining sections, and commenced
dairying operations, and entered into land and mining specu-
lations ; the latter unfortunately being attended with serious
loss. His next venture was the purchase of Mr. H. Jones’
property, now known as Randalsea, to which he removed with
his family, dairy plant, etc., and in course of time so
-extended operations by further purchases from the S. A. Com-
pany and the Government, that his estate was one of the
largest in that locality. Combining the pastoral, agricultural,
and dairying interests, he produced cheese of a first-class
quality, considered by competent judges nearly equal to
English, and commanding a ready sale in Adelaide. The soil


being suitable for cultivation of the vine, be devoted much
time and attention thereto, and by irrigation achieved in a
vineyard of thirty-four acres excellent results. Although never
coming prominently before the public, Mr. Randall gave his
support and influence for the furtherance of the material,
moral and religious welfare of the district. He was appointed
as councillor to represent Rapid Bay in the first District
Council in the county of Hindmarsh, and on a new District
Council being declared for Rapid Bay, he was elected chair-
man, and filled that office for nine years. He also took great
interest in the volunteer movement, was appointed captain
of the “Finniss Yale Rifles,” and held this position till the
volunteers of that period were disbanded. He was appointed
to the Commission of the Peace, and diligently performed the
duties of that office for many years. He will be remembered
by the residents of Glen Para and the South Rhine, as he
resided there until 1878, when he left for Port Pirie, where
he had been appointed to the Local Courts of that place and
Redhill.
J. M. Woolley,
CONNECTED with the Public Service of this colony for
upwards of thirty years. He came to Victoria in 1839,
from England, and brought with him a large stock of general
merchandise, intending to devote his attention to a mercan-
tile career. He entered into partnership with Mr. Bacchus,
of Bacchus Marsh, but as the success of the firm was very
indifferent, he retired from the business in 1845, and went
to England, returning to Sydney in 1848. Erom that place
he brought horses, cattle, and sheep overland to South Aus-
tralia, arriving here in the same year. He joined the
Customs Service in 1850, and remained in it until 1858,
when he left to take the appointment of Inspector of Sheep


HON. R. B. MURRAY, M.L.C.


in the South-east. He remained there three years, and
then rejoined the Customs, and was appointed Sub-Collector
at Blanche town, on the opening of that port. He afterwards
held a similar position at Morgan, but resigned in 1883 in
consequence of ill-health, and returned to Adelaide. From
that date till his death, which took place in January, 1885,
in his 70th year, he resided at the Semaphore.
Adam Lindsay Gordon.
IHE sad fate of Hugh Miller, the accomplished scholar
and enthusiast in all relating to the mysteries of Nature,
did not strike a deeper chord in the hearts of the sons of
Scotland, than did to Victorians a few years since the news
of the death of that sportsman, litterateur and poet—Adam
Lindsay Gordon. Cut off in an instant, rushing as it were
without a care to seek the depths of a mystery of which we
know so little, he, a bright star in the firmament of Southern
literature, disappeared, leaving many a sympathetic soul
mourning the extinction of one of its fairest ornaments. He
arrived in South Australia in 1853, and entered the mounted
police, where he was known as a smart rider. He represented
the Victoria District in the Legislature for two sessions. As
a politician, however, he was not very effective, and he has
not left on record any measures which he was instrumental
in passing. It is solely by his poetical efforts that he will be
remembered, for it is beyond dispute that Gordon was the
poet of the Australias. No bard on these southern shores
(not even Henry Kendall) has struck so bold a chord in
poesy; none have equalled and few approached the efforts of
his genius. Leaving South Australia he located in Victoria,
where he followed pastoral pursuits, and notwithstanding the
task of breadwinning, found time to write much and well.
His best compositions are “ The Lady of Pain,” “No Name,”
P


“The Ride from the Wreck,” “How we beat the Favourite,”
and the “ Sick Stockrider.” As the latter is considered the
finest of Gordon’s compositions we make no apology for
quoting it here :
41 Hold hard, Ned ! Lift me down once more, and lay me in the shade.
Old man, you’ve had your work cut out to guide
Both horses, and to hold me in the saddle wdien I swayed
All through the hot, slow, sleepy, silent ride.
The dawn at ‘ Moorabinda ’ was a mist rack dull and dense,
The sunrise was a sullen sluggish lamp ;
I was dozing in the gateway at Arbuthnot’s boundary fence,
I was dreaming on the Limestone cattle camp.
We crossed the creek at Carricksford, and sharply through the haze,
Quite suddenly the sun shot flaming forth ;
To southward lay ‘ Katawa ’ with the sandpeaks all ablaze
And the flushed fields of Grlen Lomond lay to north.
Now westward winds the bridle path that leads to Lindisfarm,
And yonder looms the double-headed Bluff;
From the far side of the first hill, when the skies are clear and calm,
You can see Sylvester’s woolshed fair enough.
Five miles we used to call it from our homestead to the place
Where the big tree spans the roadway like an arch ;
here we ran the dingo down that gave us such a chase
Eight years ago —or was it nine ? —last March.
s Twas merry in the glowing morn among the gleaming grass
To wander as we’ve wandered many a mile,
And blow the cool tobacco cloud, and watch the white wreaths pass,
Sitting loosely in the saddle all the while.
’Twas merry ’mid the blackwoods, when we spied the station roofs,
To wheel the wild scrub cattle at the yard,
With a running fire of stockwhips and a fiery run of hoofs;
O ! the hardest day was never then too hard !
Aye ! we had a glorious gallop after ‘ Starlight ’ and his gang,
When they bolted from Sylvester’s on the flat;
How the sun-dried reed-beds crackled, how the flint-strewn ranges
rang
To the strokes of ‘ Mountaineer ’ and ‘ Acrobat!’
Hard behind them in the timber, harder still across the heath,
Close beside them through the tea-tree scrub we dashed;


And the golden-tinted fern leaves, how they rustled underneath!
And the honeysuckle osiers how they crashed!
We led the hunt throughout, Ned, on the chestnut and the gray,
And the troopers were three hundred yards behind,
While we emptied our six-shooters on the bushrangers at bay,
In the creek with stunted box-trees for a blind!
There you grappled with the leader, man to man and horse to horse,
And you rolled together when the chestnut reared ;
He blazed away and missed you in that shallow watercourse —
A narrow shave —his powder singed your beard !
In these hours when life is ebbing, how those days when life was
young
Come back to us ; how clearly I recall
Even the yarns Jack Hall invented, and the songs Jem Roper sung ;
And where are now Jem Roper and Jack Hall ?
Ay ! nearly all our comrades of the old colonial school,
Our ancient boon companions, N ed, are gone ;
Hard livers for the most part, somewhat reckless as a rule,
It seems that you and I are left alone.
There was Hughes, who got in trouble through that business with the
cards,
It matters little what became of him ;
Hut a steer ripped up MacPherson in the Cooraminta yards,
And Sullivan was drowned at Sink-or-swim ;
And Mostyn —poor Frank Mostyn —died at last a fearful wreck,
In “ the horrors ” at the upper Wandinong,
And Carisbrooke, the rider, at the Horsefall broke his neck ;
Faith! the wonder was he saved his neck so long !
Ah ! those days and nights we squandered at the Logans’ in the Glen —
The Logans, man and wife, have long been dead,
Elsie’s tallest girl seems taller than your little Elsie then j
And Ethel is a woman grown and wed.
I’ve had my share of pastime, and I’ve done my share of toil,
And life is short—the longest life a span:
I care not now to tarry for the corn or for the oil,
Or for the wine that maketh glad the heart of man.
For good undone and gifts misspent and resolutions vain
’Tis somewhat late to trouble. This I know—
I should live the same life over, if I had to live again;
And the chances are I go where most men go.
p 2


The deep blue skies wax dusky and the tall green trees grow dim,
The sward beneath me seems to heave and fall;
And sickly smoky shadows through the sleepy sunlight swim,
And on the very sun’s face w~eave their pall.
Let me slumber in the hollow where the wattle blossoms wave,
With never stone or rail to fence my bed ;
Should the sturdy station children pull the bush flowers on my
grave,
I may chance to hear them romping overhead.”
Since his death imitators of his style, and adapters of some
of his ideas have arisen, and among them a Mr. Mowbray
Morris, once aide-de-camp to Sir Jas. Fergusson, published,
under the title of “A Voice from the Bush/’what looked
very much like plagiarism of “ The Sick Stockrider.” This is
not the place for a critical review or contrast between the
two compositions, but even the late John Howard Clarke was
almost deceived in awarding to Mr. Morris the palm justly
due to Gordon. In much of the poetry of the latter
mysterious forebodings as to an early death appear. In
“Doubtful Dreams ” he thus alludes to the grim topic—
“ There is an end to all things ; a season to every man,
Whose glory is dust and ashes, whose spirit is but a spark
That out of the darkness flashes, and flickers out into the
dark.”
Mr. Gordon was of retiring disposition, and subject to fits of
melancholy; he was also strongly imbued with the doctrine
of fatality. Death had no terrors for him, and a pistol-shot
terminated his existence in June, 1870. He died by his own
hand on the sea shore, amid the surroundings of wind and
wave, though the motives which led to this rash act have
never been made clear ; those who saw him an hour before
it occurred observed nothing in his demeanour to infer that
he contemplated self-destruction. After his decease sundry
notices of the talented genius thus lost to the colonies


appeared in the press, and among them was an “In Memoriam,”
by Henry Kendall:—
“At rest! Hard by the margin of that sea
Whose sands are mingled with his noble verse
Now lies the shell which never more shall house
The fine strong spirit of our gifted friend.
Yea ! he who flashed upon us suddenly—
A shining soul, with syllables of fire —
Who sang the first great songs these lands can claim
To be their own, the one who did not seem
To know what royal place awaited him
Within the temple of the Beautiful,
Has passed away ; and we who knew him sit
Aghast in darkness, dark with that great grief
Whose stature yet we cannot comprehend.”
So sad an ending to a life of promise has probably never
before occurred in the colonies. A. man who is in want of
nothing, and calmly seeks death merely to ascertain what
lies beyond its pale, is as great a mystery as the secret he
tries to fathom. Little is known of Gordon’s early life, but
it is said that his father was a military man, and he was an
only son. He failed to pass his examination as a cadet at
Woolwich, which caused a quarrel with his father, and led
to his emigrating to Australia.
Henry Sewell,
EIOUNDER and proprietor of the Payneham nursery
P gardens, is a native of Thame, Oxfordshire, where, under
the tutorship of his father, he acquired the rudiments of
gardening. As a young man he came to South Australia
about twenty years since, and having first experienced an
introductory “ roughing,” settled down under Mr. F. T. C.
Driffield, of North Adelaide, then a prominent amateur
exponent of the art of plant cultivation. As the single


handed caretaker of a truly multum in parvo establishment,
and under the guidance of an experienced, practical-minded,
enthusiastic and ingenious employer, Mr. Sewell became an
expert professional and thorough business-going colonist. A
strong desire to master as fully as possible the knowledge
requisite to qualify him for an important undertaking led to
a change, and the Botanic Gardens became the scene of Mr.
Sewell’s labours. It will be readily understood how important
a step this was by all who have had the opportunity of labor-
ing with Dr. Schomburgk, or of seeing the universally admired
garden to which he has so devotedly attached himself, and
with which his name is indissolubly connected. Here Mr.
Sewell made the best use of his time; the botanical side of
horticulture became a new and fascinating study ; and the
field an ample one. When he had matured his plans he
removed to Payneham, and converted a worn-out paddock
into a bright and smiling garden replete, as it now is, with one
of the best collections in any private place on the Continent.
The necessity of a public nursery garden was almost unknown
a few years ago, but gardening has taken wonderful strides,
and the great convenience and direct benefit which these
nurseries have been to the colony are freely recognised. The
very high compliment which Mr. G. A. Sala, the eminent
journalist, pays to S. A. gardens and to the extraordinary
variety and beauty of their contents is to a great extent due
to the spirited enterprise of nurserymen who have spared
neither expense nor ingenuity in adding anything likely to
be in the most remote degree horticulturally valuable or
botanically interesting. When Mr. Sewell started nursery
work nearly every pound spent in this way went to Melbourne
or Sydney, and Adelaide could only boast of such new plants
as came through the Botanic Gaidens. Now we introduce
more than our share, and not only supply our own wants, but
those of our neighbours. Mr. Sewell has introduced from
Europe and elsewhere some of the* finest fruits and flowers


beside adding many new vegetables to our list in his capacity
as a seedsman. He has long taken an active part in the
management of our chief horticultural societies and been a
judge of products at shows all over the colony. He was one
of the original members of the Gardeners’ Mutual Improve-
ment Society and is still a member of the succession to that
body, the S. A. Gardeners’ Society. As a member of the
Acclimatisation and Zoological Society he is both active and
enthusiastic. Although he was for some time a member of
the Council of the district in which he resides, he has not
deemed it desirable to withdraw to any great extent his
personal supervision from business to attend to purely public
matters.
John Barrow, C.E.,
t USEFUL and respected colonist who arrived in Adelaide
in 1850, and died at Mount Gambier in September
1872. In July 1850 he was appointed Engineer of the
South Road under the Central Road Board, and held that
position till the breaking out of the Victorian gold-fields, when
all departments were disorganized, and he followed the stream
to Melbourne. Arriving there in December 1852, he was
appointed by the Engineers’ Department to examine and
report upon the best means of improving the Western District,
and was engaged in that capacity for three years. He
examined various harbours and superintended the construction
of roads, bridges, and public works. Mr. Barrow was
appointed engineer to the Portland Road District in 1856,
and retained that office till 1867, when he resigned, and
settled at Mount Gambier in 1868. He entered warmly into
most schemes for the development and improvement of the
district, and among other things made a careful survey of
Port Mac Donnell, and showed the feasibility of making docks,


etc. He also prepared plans and estimates for supplying
Mount Gambier with water from the Blue Lake, and made an
excellent and useful plan of the town, which he published.
For fully two years before his death he was incapacitated by
ill-health from taking prominent part in public matters.
Lady Charlotte Mary Bacon (née Harley),
WfHIRD daughter of Edward, sth Earl of Oxford and
Mortimer; widow of the late General Bacon, a
Waterloo veteran, of the 11th Hussars. After the General’s
death, Lady Charlotte went to South Australia to see her
three children, who had been some time settled in Adelaide
(Mr. Edward Bacon, Mr. Harley Bacon, and Mrs. C. B.
Young). Admiring the want of ceremony of colonial life,
her ladyship remained in the colony for twelve years, taking
a lively and active interest in most matters, and her genial
and affable manners made her a general favourite. During
this period she was engaged in a tedious Chancery suit,
which terminated in putting her into possession of her late
father’s estate of Eywood, in Herefordshire, and a large
amount of London property. She only lived three years in
England to enjoy her large fortune, and she often looked
back to the time spent in Australia as the happiest of
her life. She left Adelaide in 1877, and died in 1880. Her
son, Mr. Edward Bacon, inherits the estate, and the Earldom
of Oxford has become extinct. Lord Byron was a great
admirer of her ladyship in her early youth, and his celebrated
verses “ To lanthe,” in the opening of the poem of “ Childe
Harold,” were addressed to her. On her death two
admirable likenesses of her as “ lanthe,” and one taken
shortly before her death appeared in the Illustrated London
Neics,


The Right Rev. G. W. Kennion, D.D., Lord
Bishop of Adelaide.
THE vacancy in the See of Adelaide caused by the resig-
nation of the late Bishop Short having been offered to,
and accepted by the Rev. G. W. Kennion, D.D., Yicar of
All Saints, Horton, that gentleman left the parish in which
he had so long and faithfully laboured, much to the regret of
all classes, and embarked by the R.M.S. Parramatta for South
Australia, which he reached on March 10, 1883. From the
Bradford Daily Telegraph we extract the following account
of Bishop Kennion’s history : —“ He is the eldest son of Geo.
Kennion, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P., and of Catherine Elfrida,
second daughter of John Fordyce, Esq., of Ay ton Castle,
K. 8., and was born at Harrogate, in 1845, and educated at
Eton and at Oriel College, Oxford. At the latter he took
the B.A. degree in 1867, and that of M.A. in 1871. The
degree of D.D., honoris causa , was recently conferred upon
him by the University on his appointment to the Bishopric.
On leaving college, Mr. Kennion was in 1869 appointed
chaplain and private secretary to the Bishop of Tuam, but
did not continue in this position long, becoming the following
year curate at Doncaster under the Rev. Dr. Pigou, then
vicar of that town. Shortly after going to Doncaster he was
ordained priest in the parish church there by the Archbishop
of York, and in 1871 was chosen diocesan inspector of
schools, on the occasion of the Education Act of 1870
coming into operation. His duties in regard to this office
were discharged with ability until 1873, when on the nomi-
nation of Mr. Gladstone he was appointed by the Crown to
the vicarage of St. Paul’s, Sculcoates, Hull, to which was
attached a rapidly growing parish with a population of over
12,000. In 1876 he was nominated to the living of All
Saints, Horton, by the patron and builder of the church,
Mr. F. S. Powell. After going to Bradford Mr. Kennion


worked hard, not only in connection with his own parish, but
also with the Church Institute and ecclesiastical work
generally. In the more immediate labour of the parish he
was assisted by four, and at times by six curates, public
school men and old Etonians. But with all these auxiliaries
he nevertheless found sufficient to do in looking after the
well-being of the numerous institutions connected with the
church, all of which, at the time he severed his connection
with the parish, had been brought into a flourishing condi-
tion. Some idea of the improvement effected under Dr.
Kennion’s ministration will be readily observed by the follow-
ing statistics. The number of candidates for confirmation, a
crucial test of a church’s life, rose to an average number of
100 each year for five years, and the total number of com-
municants in 1877 was 2,524, and in 1881 5,785. The
baptisms in a somewhat proportionate ratio rose in the same
period of time from 201 to 318. In addition to these grati-
fying results there was also a corresponding improvement
in other respects, such as mothers’ meetings, a Bible class, a
sick club, a Church of England Temperance Society with a
membership, juvenile and adult, of nearly 500, together with
Sunday-schools, all in an exceedingly flourishing condition.
In the latter there were about 1,700 scholars, and Dr.
Kennion personally acted as superintendent of the boys'
department, proving himself quite as much in his element
there as when ministering to the older portion of his flock
from the pulpit. The day schools, in which he also took
interest, were left likewise prospering. Mission work in
connection with the parish was vigorously and successfully
prosecuted by Dr. Kennion, by whose exertions a mission
church was built at Dirk Hill in 1877, and several other
missions also received great impetus. He was one of the
most active members of the Church Institute, and conducted in
connection with it a Sunday-school teachers’ class and lay
readers’ class, and gave several lectures on popular subjects.


He was appointed president of the local church centenary
gatherings in 1880, and it was through the influence he
exerted that their Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess
of Wales were induced to he present at the opening ceremony
of the bazaar in St. George’s Hall in 1881. Amongst the
general church work in which he has been engaged were
several missions undertaken with or for the Bishop of Lichfield
at Weymouth, Hull, and Edinburgh. He was also one of six
clergymen chosen to conduct a “ retreat ” for the clergy of
the diocese. Had he been desirous of improving his own
worldly means by accepting a better living, many opportu-
nities were afforded during his six years’ residence in Bradford.
Amongst those who recognised his abilities were the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York, and Earl
Fitzwilliam, Lord Lieutenant of the county, who offered him
the post of private chaplain and the living of Wentworth.
He uniformly refused all offers, having, as he then stated, no
ambition to leave Horton for any other parish in England.
When, however, the Bishopric of Adelaide was offered him r
he considered he would be wanting in duty and courage if he
shrank from the grave responsibilities and heavy labour which
the acceptance of this See would entail. The honour of the
preferment came entirely unsought and unexpected. The
Synod of Adelaide, thinking that the vacant bishopric in
which Bishop Short had exercised his episcopal functions
from 1847 could be better filled up from England than from
any colonial appointment, nominated five bishops there, to
whom they deputed the task of choosing a successor. These
five were the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishops of
Winchester, Durham, Truro, and Bedford, and their choice
unanimously fell upon Dr. Kennion. He was consecrated
on Hov. 30, 1882, at Westminster Abbey, by the Bishop of
London; and married on December sin the same year
Henrietta Eergusson, third daughter of Sir Chas. Fergusson,.
Bart., Kilkerran, Ayrshire, and sister of the Right Hon. Sir


Jas. Fergusson, some time Governor of South Australia,
to whom he was related on his mother’s side. 77 Dr.
Kennion is apparently peculiarly fitted by nature for the
■delicate and onerous duties which fall to the lot of a minister
desirous of faithfully discharging his duties. His polished
-eloquence serves to inculcate both from the pulpit and in
privateconversation the lessons he desires to teach, and has
gained him many admirers here and elsewhere. Open and
straightforward in character, liberal in opinion, and an
.advanced theologian, this colony may be congratulated on the
possession of such an ecclesiastic, who has already in his life
and work given abundant evidences that he will faithfully
t/
keep the charge committed to him, and in course of time
-show equally satisfactory results to those which his predecessor
accomplished.
Henry James Scott,
THE only son of Daniel Scott, of Aberdour, Eifeshire, born
January 13, 1848, and arrived here May 28, 1880,
accompanied by his wife and family. Shortly after his arrival
the private exhibition of M. Joubert was held inAdelaide, and
many representatives of the national industries of Europe
were then on their way home from the Sydney and Mel-
bourne Exhibitions. To most of these gentlemen Mr. Scott
was known, and by their advice, and at the request of
.some of the principal business firms here, he undertook to
represent South Australian exhibitors at the Exhibition held
in Perth, Western Australia. In the following year he again
successfully represented South Australia at the New
Zealand Exhibition, Christchurch, to the satisfaction of the
exhibitors, and so gained their confidence, that when the
Commission appointed for the Calcutta International Exhibi-
tion in 1883 met, he was unanimously nominated the “ Agent
for South Australia at the Exhibition/ 7 and the Government


confirmed the nomination by issuing a Commission to him to
act as such, and represent the colony in India. Seldom had
the capabilities and resources of South Australia been so well
placed before the world as at this exhibition. Much time
and careful thought had been devoted by him to our natural
resources, and to the industries which could be encouraged
and extended by trade between Australia and the East,
especially the rearing and breeding of horses for India, with
the advantages of Port Darwin as a depot and shipping port
for the future trade of Australasia and the Eastern world.
Mr. Scott has, during the last two years, imported camels
from India, suitable for work on stations and for survey and
railway construction purposes. These animals are rapidly
coming into use by surveyors who may require to enter upon
new country to peg out runs for stock in our Northern
Territory, and for the conveyance of station stores to those
places in the interior of the country which from difficulty of
access would be practically useless without the aid of these
animals, which subsist upon mallee, saltbush, and other food
which horses would starve upon. The services of Mr. H. J.
Scott are now being utilized by the Royal Commission for
South Australia for the coming Colonial and Indian
Exhibition in London, in 1886.
James Brook,
@F the legal firm of Messrs. Way & Brook, died on August
24, 1872, at Unley Park. At the time of his decease
he was in the vigour of life; of genial and courteous dis-
position, sterling integrity, and of marked ability in his pro-
fession. He was born in Edinburgh, Jan. 12, 1840, where
his father, who possessed considerable scientific attainments
and literary ability, was a supervisor in the Inland Revenue
Service. He was educated principally at the Bristol Gram


mar School, where he attained good classical knowledge,
which he developed in after years by careful study. He
arrived in this colony in December, 1853, and entered Mr.
Atkinson’s law office in May of the next year. After the
dissolution of the partnership between Messrs. Atkinson &
Andrews, he went into the service of Messrs. Andrews &
Bonnin. In 1862 he revisited England, and on his return
here was articled to Mr. Way, and admitted as a practitioner of
the Supreme Court in March 1868. He was received into
partnership by Mr. Way, and during that gentleman’s absence
in England in 1869 Mr Brook managed the entire business
and appeared prominently in the Supreme Court, where his
ability as an advocate attracted great attention, and for so young
a man he was considered a profound lawyer, with great grasp
of mind in mastering difficulties and intricacies. On his
partner’s return to Adelaide, in April 1870, Mr. Brook visited
the old country a second time to recruit his health. He
returned in 1871, after which he devoted all his time to his
profession. He was a man of varied attainments, fond
of music, and possessed a rare fund of humour. He was
also distinguished for great industry, as evidenced by the
Common-place Book and voluminous MSS. he has left. He
occasionally contributed to the press as a correspondent, and
was a regular leader-writer for the Telegraph , now out of
existence. He edited the first volume of the S. A. Law
Reformer , and great interest was taken by him in the status
of his profession. He was also President of the Law Society.
Jno. McDonald
|®|EEIYED in this colony in 1839. Well-known as the
originator of the public conveyances between the city
of Adelaide and Glenelg. Was one of the founders
of the Mac Donnell Lodge of Freemasons. Died September
1884, aged 67.


Robert Fotheringham,
TMfHOSE untimely and sudden death took place at
Kapunda on Sept. 19, 1885, was born at Alloa,
.Ayrshire, Scotland, in 1831, and was first engaged under his
brother, who was a banker in his native town. In 1855 he
sailed for Melbourne by the “ Oliver Lang,” and thence came
to Gawler, where he joined his brothers in the brewing
business. He subsequently removed to Kapunda, where he
the Spring Brewery for seventeen years. He was
wfidely known and respected for his sterling qualities, and
ever ready to assist, by advice and means, the needy and
helpless. Every local institution received his support, and
Troth in Gawler and Kapunda he was “the life of the place.”
It will be many years ere he will be forgotten in both localities.
Edwin Sawtell,
fHE oldest watchmaker and optician in Adelaide, was
born in Bristol. As a child he was predisposed to
“ making things,” and his parents, allowing his natural bent
of mind full play, apprenticed him to the trade in 1831. At
that time nearly everything was hand-made, particularly
watches and watch work; many of the tools even being
constructed by the apprentice before he began his work. Mr.
-Sawtell says : “ What is now called labour-saving machinery
is considered by those experienced in the trade antagonistic
to the full development of a boy’s natural mechanical
ability.” Notwithstanding the long hours of duty, from 7
:a .m. till 8 p.m., he devoted his spare time to the invention of
many mechanical novelties, and one of the most successful of
his endeavours was a model steamboat, which was considered
a real wonder in those days. He also invented a peculiar


gas stove, one of the first made in England. During the last
two years of his apprenticeship he was occupied in repairing
and rating of ships’ chronometers, adjusting scientific instru-
ments, etc., particularly those used in meteorology.
Although legally out of his time at the age of 21, so fond was
he of his trade and master, that he determined to serve his
full term, and in consequence worked eight months for
2s. 6d. a week. In these days, when boys are educated by
the State, as well as expecting to pay no premium, this wage
is often asked for in the first year of apprenticeship. A very
different state of things to that of fifty years ago. On
leaving his apprenticeship his skill and care as a workman
led to his services being availed of by the leading establish-
ments in Bristol, and he ultimately started in business for
himself. Advancing steadily for some years, the news of
“ gold ” in Australia made him anxious to visit this part of
the world, and although his passage was paid to Melbourne*
on the arrival of the vessel in South Australia he abandoned
his intention of going there, and settled in Adelaide in 1853.
He commenced business in Port Adelaide, where he erected a
beautiful transit instrument, and in conjunction with an
astronomical clock he and his son Alfred for many years
determined the true time by observation with these instru-
ments. This proceeding was absolutely necessary then for the
rating of chronometers, as there was no real public time or
Semaphore time ball instituted. During the early days of
the Port, Mr. Sawtell supplied the leading daily paper with
the barometer and thermometer records, just as Messrs. Todd
and Wragge do now. His last invention is a patent tell-tale
clock, and he has accomplished the somewhat difficult task of
grinding lenses, including the spherico-cylindrical form now
in request by oculists for the correction of astigmatism. His
establishment is always a delight to those of a scientific turn,
as it abounds in novelties, and the proprietor is still as
enthusiastic as ever in the scientific branch of his business.


THOS. JONES, J.P.


John Banks Shepherdson, S.M.,
at East Heslerton, near Scarborough, in the East
1 Riding of York, on May 22, 1809. Educated under
the Rev. Thomas Farrow, of West Hestlerton, and the Rev.
Jahez Banks, Vicar of Bempton. After a voyage to Jamaica
in 1824, and a stay there of three months, at the time of
the sanguinary insurrection of the negro slaves, he returned
to England, and was engaged in tuition up to the time of
his leaving for South Australia in May 1837. In 1836 the
South Australian School Society, of which the late George
Fife Angas was chairman, was established in London. While
in the Training School of the British and Foreign School
Society, Mr. Shepherdson was engaged as “Director of Schools
in South Australia,” for the purpose of organising educational
establishments and training teachers; and as it was the original
intention of the Society that these should be conducted on the
system of Baron Fellenberg’s labour schools in Switzerland, he
was instructed to proceed thither for the purpose of making
himself acquainted with the principles upon which they were
based. It was, however, afterwards decided that he should
instead visit and inspect the schools at Lindfield, Sussex,
established and conducted at the sole expense of the late
William Allen, Esq., F.R.S., of London and Lindfield. He
spent some time at this establishment, where the boys were
(in addition to the elements of a sound education) taught
farming, gardening, tailoring, shoemaking, printing, &c.,
under competent masters. From the press here was issued a
weekly serial called the u Lindfield Reporter,” a creditable
publication, set up by the boys. Mr. Shepherdson arrived
with his family at Kingscote, Kangaroo Island, in the ship
“ Hartley,” on October 14, 1837 ; his fellow passengers being
the late Rev. T. Q. Stow, Mr. William Giles, afterwards General
Manager of the South Australian Company, Mr. W. B.
Randell, afterwards stock manager of the Company at
Q


Gumeracha, and their families. Mr. Shepherdson thus
records his first impressions of the infant colony : —“ On
our arrival at the ‘ Main,’ as it was then called, Adelaide had
just been laid out, and the few people living there were
located in tents, reed and pisey huts, and wooden erections;
Government House, occupied by Captain Hindmarsh, R.H.,
was of reeds. At the time of our arrival serious quarrels
had taken place, the result of the divided authority between
the Governor and the Resident Commissioner (Mr., after-
wards Sir James Fisher) and their respective adherents, Mr.
Gouger, the then Colonial Secretary, was just proceeding to
England for the purpose of appealing to the Home Govern-
ment for a settlement of the unhappy differences, and Mr.
Randell and myself took Mr. Gouger’s tent for our families,
at a rental of £1 per week. In accordance with my instruc-
tions, I got up a public meeting in a temporary erection,
which then did duty as Trinity Church, and the Governor at
my request promised to take the chair. On the night
appointed I proceeded to Government House to accompany
His Excellency to the meeting, but on learning from me on
our way down that Mr. Fisher, Mr. Mann, the Advocate
General, and others of their friends were to take part in the
proceedings, he declined to enter the place. After using all
the persuasion of which I was capable, he at length gave
way, adding, ‘ Well, as Governor, I suppose I must counte-
nance the thing, but as Jack Hindmarsh I’ll do little.’ As
the result of the meeting, a committee was appointed, to/
co-operate with me, and as soon as a temporary wooden
erection on the park lands, opposite and near Trinity Church,
was vacated by the Bank of South Australia, I organised a
school, and we proceeded with its erection. It comprised a
dwelling-house and a girls’ department on one side, and a
boys’ department on the other. Before its completion, how-
ever, my health gave way from the intense heat and limited
accommodation.” Mr. Shepherdson was next appointed


secretary and then manager of the South Australian Cattle
Company, in which he held shares. He went to reside at
the station near Echunga, in 1839, and commenced farming
on his own account. In 1840 he took a farm on the Bald
Hills, near Nairne, where he continued until 1847. He gave
from 21s. to 255. per bushel for his first seed wheat, and after
the harvest sold it at 125., which was of course ruinous. In after
years he as well as other settlers had to dispose of their
produce at 2s. 6d. per bushel, and in order to effect a sale
had sometimes to take part of it out in black sugar and
coarse tea. In October 1847 the Governor, Major Kobe,
was visiting the district, and Mr. Shepherdson was asked to
take the clerkship of the Mount Barker Bench, with the
promise of promotion as soon as possible; on this under-
standing he accepted the office, and was appointed on the
Ist November in that year. In 1850, the first Local Court
Act was passed, and he received the additional appointment
of clerk of the Local Court. In 1858 he published a book
on the “ Practice of the Local Courts,” which he dedicated
permission to His Excellency, Sir Kichard Graves
McDonnell. It was favorably reviewed by the Press, and
considered a useful text book for the legal profession. On
March 6, 1861, Mr. Shepherdson was made a Justice of the
Peace, and appointed a Special and Stipendiary Magistrate at
Wallaroo. The other offices he has held or now holds
are Commissioner for taking Affidavits in the Supreme
Court; a Commissioner for taking the Acknowledgements of
Married Women; Visiting Justice of the Wallaroo Gaol;
Chairman of the Auxiliary Destitute Board at Wallaroo;
Acting Commissioner of the Moonta Insolvency Court, in
addition to being Special Magistrate of the Local Courts of
Wallaroo, Kadina, Moonta, Port Wakefield, Balaklava, and
Snowtown; Keturning Officer of the Electoral District of
Wallaroo, and Chairman of the Peninsula Licensing Bench.
At his advanced age it is really wonderful that he can so
Q 2


creditably fill these multifarious offices. Mr. Shepherdson
has been twice married, and has a large family ; among his
descendants are sixty grandchildren, and six great grand
children.
Frederick Charles Bayer, M.D.,
KIORN at Munich, Bavaria, and studied at the University
JEJ of Erlangen. He subsequently visited several of the
German Universities, with a view to perfect himself in the
various branches of the profession to which he devoted his
life. The circumstances which led to his leaving his native
land show in a marked degree excellent traits of character,
and the nice sense of honour which actuated him. Having
attended a duel in Bavaria as a medical man, and refusing to
give up to the authorities the names of the principals, he was
denied any official employment in his native country, and
resolved to emigrate to South Australia. He arrived here in
the “ Heloise,” March 17, 1847, as surgeon superintendent of
the vessel, and shortly after settled in Adelaide. Though he
laboured under the disadvantage of being a foreigner, and had
but a scanty knowledge of the English language, he speedily
took a good position as an accomplished and skilful medical
practitioner. His fame spread rapidly, and his practice
increased to an inconvenient extent. In 1859 he re-visited
his native land, and spent some time in the continental
hospitals, where his active mind was ever on the alert to make
his own whatever was new and valuable in his profession.
On his return from Europe his popularity and practice
increased, and his energies were stretched to their utmost
point of tension. He may be truly said to have died in har-
ness, as within a short period of his decease by apoplexy he
was giving advice to patients. The sad event occurred on
August 15, 1867, in his 52nd year of age. Dr. Bayer married


a daughter of the late Dr. Kent, and left behind a large
family. He was a man of large heart and wide benevolence.
Dor any cause of charity his generous aid might be confidently
reckoned upon, whilst his professional skill was ever at the
service of the poorest and humblest.
Theodore Heydecke,
IfifFHOSE death at the early age of 35, on January 29, 1867 5
Wv was niuch regretted in musical circles, was a native of
Brunswick, and arrived in the colony in 1857. He occupied
the position of bandmaster to the Volunteer Band, and con-
ductor of the Catholic Band. He was a most accomplished
musician, and as well acquainted with the theory as the
practice of his art. As a clarionet player he has never
probably been equalled here, and the masterly style of his
performances on his favourite instrument will not be soon
forgotten by those who heard them.
Matthew Smith, J.P.,
(ARRIVED in the colony by the “ Africaine ” in November,
1836. He resided for a short time at Kangaroo Island,
and afterwards practised the profession of the law in Adelaide.
On the early settlement of Port Lincoln Mr. Smith was
appointed a Resident Magistrate. He ultimately returned to
Adelaide, where he continued to conduct a respectable practice,
and filled at intervals the important offices of Stipendiary
Magistrate, and Acting Commissioner of Insolvency. On his
retirement from the public service, Mr. Smith was the
recipient of a testimonial from the members of the legal
profession in Adelaide. He died at Prospect, Nov. 18, 1858,
aged sixty-four years. He was a man of great intelligence,
and much liked by all classes of the community.


Joshua Ives, Mus. Bac., Cambridge,
fHE Professor of Music for South Australia, is a native of
Manchester, where he was horn in 1854. He was
educated at Owen’s College, under Dr. Bridge, who held the
College lectureship on Harmony in conjunction with the
organistship of Manchester Cathedral. Subsequent to Dr.
Bridge’s appointment as organist of Westminster Abbey, Mr.
Ives studied under Dr. Henry Hiles and under Dr. Chipp,
organist of Ely Cathedral. Whilst in Manchester he held the
appointment of organist first at St. James’s Parish Church*
Gorton, and then at St. Stephen’s, Hulme. In 1878 he was
invited to become a candidate for the vacant post of organist
and choir-master at Anderston Church, Glasgow, and after a
severe competition he was successful. Shortly after his
arrival in Glasgow he obtained the post of Lecturer on Har-
mony and Musical Composition at the Glasgow Athenaeum
the directors of which testified to the high reputation which
Professor Ives had won, and the improvement which had been
effected in the department over which he presided by his
earnest and steady work, so that it had attained an efficiency
superior to anything in its previous history. In addition to
this the directors stated :—“ This success is manifested by the
increased attendance (the number of students having been
more than doubled since Mr. Ives came), as well as by the
rapid progress made by the students in their work. In the
senior class the course of study is such as is required for the
Cambridge University degree examinations ; in the junior
classes the course is arranged to suit the requirements of the
different local examinations. One of the most remarkable
features of Mr. Ives’ work is the very high position which his
students have taken at the examinations. During the last
two years all the students he sent forward passed, and about
75 per cent, of this number were placed in the first class.”
During the stay of Professor Ives in Glasgow, in addition to


the work of his appointment he was busily engaged in teach-
ing, and had from overwork to refuse many pupils. Several
musical students who had the advantage of his tuition now
hold good organ appointments. Professor Ives arrived in
Adelaide by the R.M.S. Parramatta, on March 1, 1885.
Prior to his departure from England he visited the different
Universities, the Royal College of Music, the Royal
Academy of Music, and other kindred institutions, to observe
the various methods of teaching adopted, and the result is
that he is now able to introduce similar systems to those in
vogue at those places. Since he has been located in our
Professor Ives has won golden opinions from both public and
press by his lectures and organ recitals. The latter are given
weekly, and are a source of much delight to all hearers. The
advent of Professor Ives may be regarded as inaugurating a
new era in music at the antipodes. Prior to his arrival the
popular taste for the works of the great composers was but
meagre, but now we are gradually beholding a people imbued
with somewhat of the same spirit which actuates the Professor
himself. He does not play for effect, his sole desire evidently
being to faithfully interpret the intention of those composers
whose works he performs ; and in this he succeeds so well that
the interest of his hearers is maintained throughout all his
recitals. It may not be out of place to remark that the
University of Adelaide was the first to have a Professor of
Music, and that its example is now being followed by most of
the cities in the neighbouring colonies.
James Munro Linklater, J.F.,
@AME of a family long located in the Orkney Islands.
He arrived in this colony in the early part of 1840,
and in conjunction with his brother-in-law, Mr. W. Elett,
commenced business as grocers, etc. After working up a
large connection, he quitted this sphere of action and entered


into squatting pursuits in the Fowler’s Bay district. He was
here very unsuccessful, and for some time his fortunes were
chequered, and he suffered many reverses. Ultimately, how-
ever, a season of prosperity came, and he realised handsome
returns from his runs. As an instance of his rigid integrity,
high conscientiousness, and true sense of honour, it may be
mentioned that his first act, so soon as fortune began to smile,
was to pay in full all the creditors who some years before had
accepted a composition and relieved him of liabilities which
he had then been unable to meet. For this rare commercial
generosity, his creditors presented him with a handsome
testimonial. Mr. Linklater took a lively interest in political
and municipal affairs, and was duly elected a councillor in
the City Corporation. Although he had little ambition to
fill public positions, his name stood high in popular estimation,
and so far back as 1852 he held the post of a Trustee of the
Savings Bank, and later on that of a member of the Marine
Board. He was one of the founders of the S.A. Insurance
Company, of which institution he was for some time a
director. He held the office of elder in Chalmer’s Church at
the time of his decease, which took place in Adelaide, on
December 17, 1882, in his seventy-third year. Mr. Linklater
is still often referred to in the commercial world as one
whose straightforwardness, integrity, and other sterling
qualities made him a worthy example for his fellow-men to
follow.
Samuel White,
A WELL-KNOWN resident of the Reedbeds. Went to
New Guinea in the early part of 1880, in the
schooner Elsea, for the purpose of collecting specimens of
natural history and making scientific researches. Died in
Sydney, N.S.W., November 10, 1880. Mr. White was an
ntelligent and highly cultured man.


Young Bingham Hutchinson
tKRIVED in South Australia in 1836, and was present
at the inauguration of the colony. Died at Hindmarsh
Valley, August 3, 1870. He was a gentleman of
independent means, and one of the first created a Justice of
the Peace. He also held the office of Emigration Agent from
September 1837 to February 1838. He was present at
the proclamation of Queen Victoria in England, and took part
in the celebration here of the first proclamation of South
Australia, besides being actively engaged in the early affairs
of the colony generally. He purchased at the first land
sales several town lots and country sections, and after leaving
the colony for about twenty years returned to Adelaide and
took up his residence on his property at Hindmarsh Valley.
He was the first to make the ascent of Mount Lofty, which
he did on July 6, 1837. In his early life he was an officer
in the navy. Mr. Hutchinson was a man of no mean classical
.and literary attainments ; and a most voluminous contributor
to the Press. He was a lineal descendant of Colonel Hutchin-
.son, the well-known follower of Cromwell. Under a rough
exterior he had a warm heart, and many settlers in the district
in which he resided received from him substantial aid in a
time of emergency, when much needed.
John Tuthill Bagot
iD|AME of a very old family; the Bagot’s of Kilcoursey,
King’s County, Ireland. Was the son of the late
'Charles Bagot, Esq., J.P. Born Eeb. 15, 1819. Studied at
Middle Temple, England, and was called to the Irish Bar.
Arrived in Adelaide in November 1850, with his brother
Ulysses. On the death of his father Mr. Bagot revisited
Ireland to take possession of the ancestral estate, and returned
to Adelaide after a short stay there. He was for many years


in partnership with his brother-in-law, Mr. Lahatt; was
concerned in many important lawsuits, and acted as leading
counsel for the claimants in the celebrated Moonta case.
After the passing of the Constitution Act of 1855, Mr. Bagot
became a Member of the House of Assembly for the district
of Light. He sat in the House during the two succeeding
Parliaments, and was returned as member for the Legislative
Council, and had a lengthy experience of political life. He
held the position of Solicitor-General in Mr. Baker’s Ministry
from August 21 to Sept. 1, 1857, of Commissioner of Crown
Lands in the Reynolds’ Ministry from May 1860 to May
1861, and of Chief Secretary in Mr. Strangways’ Ministry
from November 3, 1868 to May 6, 1870. The aggregate
number of days for which he held office was 960. He was
Provincial Grand Master of the Freemasons, Irish Constitution,
and through a period of twenty years’ residence in South
Australia took a prominent part in public affairs. Mr. Bagot
was of a cheerful disposition, urbane in manner, and possessed
most of the amiable traits of the Irish character. Hi&
death, in his 52nd year, occurred suddenly from pulmonary
apoplexy at North Adelaide, on August 6, 1870, and was
universally regretted by a wide circle of friends.
Very Rev. John Smyth,
f ICAR-GENERAL of the R. C. denomination, died irk
Adelaide, June 30, 1870, aged 47. Born in 1824 at
Kilmore, Westmeath, Ireland. Received his elementary
education at Mr. Brady’s classical school, Cavan, from which,
he went to the Diocesan Seminary of Navan in 1846. In
the following year he entered the college of the Propaganda
at Rome, and was ordained as priest on June 10, 1852. He
arrived in South Australia in May 1853. After the death,
of Dr. Geoghegan he was appointed Administrator Apostolic,
which important position he retained until the arrival of Dr.


Shiel as Bishop, who made him his Yicar-General. He was
stationed in Adelaide, hut often visited the country districts
on the occasion of the opening or the laying of the foundation-
stone of churches, and he accompanied the Bishop to the
Provincial Synod at Melbourne in 1868, where he was
appointed Secretary. By his conscientiousness, uniform
kindness and tender regard for the feelings of all with whom
he came in contact he won the affection of every member of
the clergy and laity. Yicar-General Smyth was known and
respected beyond the pale of his own church, having taken
an active part in matters affecting the well-being of the colony.
As a preacher and platform orator he possessed an amount of
eloquence and earnestness that were always effective.
Rev. J. C. Woods, B.A.,
Ij S a native of Woodville, Bangor, Co. Down, Ireland, and
J the son of the late Rev. Hugh Woods, A.M. He was
born in 1824, and received his early education under private
tutors. In 1839 he graduated at the University of Edin-
burgh, and in 1843 took the degree of B.A. and obtained
prizes in Greek and Moral Philosophy. After studying
theology at Belfast, Mr. Woods directed his attention to
medicine, and spent a year in a medical establishment in
Norfolk. On leaving this occupation he was for some time
engaged in teaching in Cheshire. Believing, however, as a
minister he could effect more good, he adopted that as his
future profession and officiated at Devonport, Northampton,
Edinburgh, and the Isle of Wight. Mr. Woods arrived in
Adelaide in 1855, and with the exception of a two years’
visit to the old country, has resided here ever since. He is
the representative head of the Unitarian Church in South
Australia, and highly esteemed by all classes for the liberality
of his opinions. His discourses are eloquent and forcible,,
and as an orator he is much admired.


Hon. George Hall,
80RK at Bromley, Kent, March 2, 1811, died at Mitcham,
S. A., January 28, 1867, aged 55 years. He entered
the mercantile navy at an early age, and was still young when
he obtained the command of a ship. He was chiefly engaged
in the East and West India trade, and continued in it till
1842, when he settled in South Australia. He first entered
into pastoral pursuits near Angaston, but soon relinquished
these to start in business at Port Adelaide. In July 1851,
at the first general election for the single House which then
formed the Legislative Council of South Australia, he was
-elected for the Port, and in March 1857 was further elected
a member of the Upper House, a position he retained until
his death. Mr. Hall held several important offices in the
•community, and as a director of the Burra and other mining
companies, and as chairman of the Chamber of Commerce,
his name will still be familiar to many. In 1860, finding his
health failing, he retired from business, and in 1865 paid a
visit to England. He returned to the colony in 1866, not
much improved by his trip, and soon after succumbed to his
iate.
William Lawes Ware,
BORK at Exeter, Devon, England, October 24, 1847.
Left England at an early age for South Australia,
where he arrived in March 1850. For nearly twenty years
Mr. Ware has followed the profession of accountant and
financial agent, in which capacity he has not only acquired
the confidence of his principals, but been very successful.
He first entered into business on his own account in 1872,
und has since then been identified in a great degree with the
mining industries of the colony, and connected with many
mines on Yorke’s Peninsula, Echunga, Waukaringa, and


other places. He became a Fellow of the Royal Society of
South Australia in 1878, and was elected by his fellow-citizens
Auditor for the City of Adelaide in June 1878. In the-
following year he was re-elected to the same office by 2,250
votes, and has since then occupied the position continuously
by re-election at the stated periods. Mr. Ware is well known
in connection with Freemasonry, and has for many years-
been a prominent officer in that order. He is now Grand
Treasurer in the Grand Lodge of South Australia, and one of
the Trustees of its property. He has had considerable practice
in the administration of trust estates and financial business.
Ostrich farming, an industry most suitable to our soil and
climate, has been materially assisted by him in its introduc-
tion and establishment in this colony.
Thomas Jones, J.P.,
I£|ORN at Cowbridge, Glamorganshire, Wales, in 1809 y
arrived in the colony on July 7, 1840. As recorded in
Worsnop’s “ History of the City of Adelaide,” he designed
and erected the first City Bridge over the River Torrens,,
which was opened by the Mayor of Adelaide on June 17,
18421 Tie was the chief mover in founding (on the 23rd
Kovember, 1840) the first Lodge of Oddfellows, M.U., in the
colony, which was named “ Jones Well Wisher,” and of which
he was N.G. This name was changed on July 10, 1843, to
“Adelaide Lodge,” on receipt of the formal dispensation,
from Manchester. He suxveyad and superintended the con-
struction of the Port Elliot and Goolwa Railway, and also the
Port Elliot Breakwater, and other Government Works to
open the trade of the River Murray. The railway was com.
menced on June 21, 1852, and opened in May 1854, and
Mr. Jones was theW appointed Engineer and Traffic Superin


tendent, which position he retained until the railway was
leased in 1871. On retiring from the position, he was pre-
sented with a public testimonial. In 1872 he was appointed
Town Surveyor of the Municipality of Moonta, and also
Superintending Surveyor of the Peninsula Road Board, which
position he now holds. His eldest son, Mr. James W. Jones,
horn in the colony, is in the Government Service as
Conservator of Water.
Archibald Watson, M.D., F.R.C.S., Eng.,
fROFESSOR of Anatomy at the Adelaide University,
is a Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of
England (exam.), Doctor of Medicine of the Faculties of
Paris and Goettingen, Corresponding Member of the
Anthropological, Clinical, and Anatomical Societies of Paris,
Australian Editor of the International Journal of Anatomy
and Physiology ; Pathologist to the South Australian Govern-
ment and the Adelaide Hospital. He is the eldest son of Mr.
Sydney Grandison Watson, of Tintaldra, Upper Murray,
Victoria,and was born in Riverina in 1849. Dr. Watson
received the principal part of his education at the
Scotch College, Melbourne, under Dr. Morrison, where he
invariably carried off all the Scriptural prizes, obtaining also
in one year the first prize for Gymnastics, Chemistry, Mathe-
matics, and Natural History. Charing Cross Medical School,
likewise the mater gloriosa of Professor Huxley, President of
the Royal Society, was that also of Dr. Watson, who dates his
love of anatomy to the viva vox of his former teacher, Dr.
James Cantlie, M.A., etc., of Aberdeen, surgeon to Charing
Cross Hospital, so well known as a public lecturer and in con-
nection with the Volunteer Ambulance movement in
England. In London Dr. Watson enjoyed also the privilege
of sitting at the feet of Sir Joseph Lister and Mr. Jonathan


Hutchinson, sen., F.R.S., as well as of being clinical
assistant to Mr. J. W. Hulke, F.R.S., President of
the Geological Society of Great Britain. The
medical schools of the Continent, on account of the
greater facilities they afforded for the study of operative
.surgery and practical anatomy, were not neglected by Dr.
Watson, who spent many years of his busy life abroad,
Being at one time private assistant to Terrier, the leading
French ovariotomist, and surgical dresser to the celebrated
anthropologist, the late Professor Broca, of Paris, to whom
he afterwards dedicated his Thesis. It was, however, in
Goettingen (scene likewise of Bismarck’s academical labours
more than forty years previously) under Professors Leber and
Koenig that Dr. Watson acquired a bias for German methods
in the treatment of eye affections and wounds. It was there
also that he came under the cegis of the greatest of living
anatomists, the venerable Henle. The latter scientist
strongly advocated his cause with Sir Arthur Blyth and
Professors Flower and Humphry in their selection of
a candidate for the Professorship at the Adelaide University.
Professor Humphry presented Dr. Watson, on his nomination,
with a very valuable collection of books, amongst which
were several works of the Cambridge Professor himself,
accompanied by his portrait. Dr. Watson knows hospital
life from a patient’s as well as from a surgeon’s point of
view, having been treated nosocomially both for blood-
poisoning and other diseases incident to his calling,
necessitating interruptions in his studies and subsequent
travels in Spain, Italy, Morocco, and Egypt ; in the latter
country he applied, along with Dr. Honman, of cholera
fame, now of Williamstown, Victoria, and their mutual friend
the late Dr. Leslie, for a Surgeoncy with Hicks Pacha’s
Soudan force, Leslie, whose heroic death became afterwards
matter of Egyptian history, receiving the appointment.
After the cholera epidemic of 1883, Dr. Watson,


encouraged to further exertions nearer home by Mr. W. Fane
De Salis, late of Sydney, returned to England, where he
remained till his present appointment to the chair of
Anatomy at the Adelaide University, founded by Sir Thomas
Elder, who, boarding the R.M.S. Pekin in which Dr. Watson
arrived, was the first to welcome him back to his native land
and extend to him an Australian hospitality.
Victor Dumas,
ONE of the pioneers of the Mount Barker district, died
December 27, 1882, aged seventy-six. Coming as he
did from the French nobility, and being well educated, first
at Merchant Tailor’s School, and subsequently at Cambridge,
he was admirably fitted for the position of a public instructor
of youth, and when he fell on troublous times in Iris native-
land he came to South Australia, took up his abode in the
then sparsely populated town of Mount Barker, and followed
the natural bent of his inclination, namely, the profession of
a teacher. He was a man of great intelligence, well read,
and regarded quite as an authority on times, events, and
histories. As a Latin scholar he was probably unequalled in
the colony, and he carried off a widely contested prize in a
competition in Latin verse. It is stated that he was related
to the famous novelist Dumas.
Faustino Ziliani
IS a native of Brescia, Italy, where he was born March
27, 1848. Although he had exhibited great interest
in music, it was not until his ninth year, through delicate
health, that his elementary studies commenced. His first
preceptor was the celebrated Maestro Alessandro Soletti,
under whose tuition he made considerable progress. Having
a good contralto voice his services were much in request in


WM. BUNDEY, J.P.,
MAYOR OF ADELAIDE.


the church choir of his native town, and at the age of seven-
teen, his voice then being very powerful, acting on the
advice of Signor Soletti, he was sent to Milan to finish his
studies. In this city he was readily admitted to the Royal
Conservatorio of Music by Professor Lauro Rossi, who was
considerably surprised at the manner in which young Ziliani
passed the required preliminary examination. He here
studied vocal music under Professor B. Prati, and the Solfeggio
system under Professor G. Hava. In the examination at the
end of the year 1867 he received the “ Great Menzione ” (an
honour only bestowed upon superior students), and was also
exempted from payment of school fees for the following year.
In 1868 he was the recipient of the “Great Menzione” in
the first grade, and of the pension given by the Government
to enable pupils to proceed with their studies. In 1869 he
took another first prize, and his pension was increased. He
took part in the Academy of 1869-70, and for three years
held the responsible position of instructing pupils in the
Conservatorio. At his final examination he sang with great
success the “ Romanza dell’ Ebrea d’Alevy,” was awarded
the diploma of professor of singing, and given a final first
prize and a medal. For seven years Signor Ziliani gave sing-
ing lessons in Milan, and during that period had the satisfac-
tion of preparing several of the most notable vocal artists for
the stage. Many of these are still following their profession
in the leading theatres of Europe, viz.—Signori Antonio
Puto, and Emilio Isamat (baritones); Signorine Maddalena
Porta, and Enrichetta Lasauca (sopranos); Eausto
Bellotti, Astorre Stucci (tenors); Celeste Saccardi, and
Abulcher Leoni (bassos). Signor Ziliani was instructor of
the chorus for the Royal Theatre of St. Carlo, at Lisbon,
Portugal, and spent one season in that capacity. He was
highly complimented by the press for the effective manner in
which the chorus sang their part in all the great operas, and
especially in Yerdi’s fine mass, and he was asked to accept
R


further engagements in places where this mass was repeated.
He, however, declined, and went to the Theatre of Buenos
Ayres, Kio de Janeiro. He had here double duty to perform,
being instructor of chorus, and conductor of orchestra. In
December 1879 Signor Ziliani returned to Italy, and filled
other positions in the musical world. In 1881 Signor Cagli
(impressario) engaged him as conductor of orchestra for Java
and Australia, and he accompanied the well-known Italian
opera company of that gentleman through each of the colonies,
finally arriving in Adelaide, where, at the termination of the
opera season, acting on the advice of the late John Hall he
settled down as a teacher of music and singing. It will be
needless to extend the eulogium which might be written of
Signor Ziliani’s merits as an instructor : nor need we refer to
his successful conductorship of the Cagli opera troupe ; the first
is best known to his numerous pupils, and the latter will not
be speedily forgotten by those who visited the Theatre
Hoyal, Adelaide, during the opera season of 1882-3.
Captain Henry Simpson,
WHO may be regarded as one of our earliest South
Australian colonists, arrived here in August 1836,
as second officer of the “John Pirie,” of which vessel he subse-
quently became master. He was a native of Hull, England,
and was born in 1815. From the time of his first connection
with the colony, up to the day of his death, he was well
known as one of our most enterprising shipowners, and his
name is still a “ household word ” at Port Adelaide, which
was for so many years the scene of his labours and his
successes. To enumerate all the vessels with which he was
connected would occupy more space than we can here afford,
but it may be stated that on leaving the “John Pirie” he took
charge of the barque “ Lord Hobart.” He next purchased a
cutter, and established a trade between Port Adelaide,
Hing George’s Sound, and Fremantle, W. A. He was


subsequently appointed wharfinger at the old port under the
South Australian Company. From this position Captain
Simpson was at a later date transferred to the new port,
when the road from Alberton to the Flagstaff was constructed
by the S.A. Company. He was associated with Messrs.
Phillips andDeHorne in the formation of a shipping and agency
company, which, however, collapsed at the time of the gold fever
in Victoria, and Captain Simpson, affected by the prevailing
disorder which led so many South Australians to leave for
Victoria, went thither, and worked as a digger for six months.
On his return to Port Adelaide he engaged in the coaling
trade. For a long time the traffic between this colony and
Newcastle was carried on by means of sailing vessels, and
Captain Simpson decided to introduce steamers for the coal
trade, and imported the “ Birksgate,” “Tenterden,” and other
vessels for the Port Adelaide trade. From the commencement
of the Wallaroo Smelting Works he was the contractor for the
coal supply, in which employment he had many ships
engaged. During recent years he was greatly assisted by his
son in the work of the firm with which he was connected,
and was thereby to an extent relieved of business cares. He
always manifested deep interest in local matters at Port
Adelaide, where the news of his death, on April 26, 1884,
from a paralytic fit, caused the most profound regret. Kind
and benevolent in disposition, a gentleman in every sense of
the word, the decease of Captain Simpson may be regarded
as somewhat of a national calamity. He had nearly reached
his seventieth year, and the greater part of his life was spent
in South Australia, but he paid a visit to England with his
family in 1875, and remained there two years. Few men have
done more to advance the interests of this colony than he; few
of his contemporary pioneers have accomplished so much good
in a long and useful lifetime. The firm of Messrs. H. Simp-
son & Sons is still extant; the sons of Captain Simpson being
now the managing partners and representative heads.
r 2


John Stokes Bagshaw,
IJIOEN at Chetwynd, Shropshire, in 1808. He early
Mg) evinced mechanical tastes, and was apprenticed to the
millwright and engineering business, learning these trades
in all their branches. He arrived in this colony in June
1838, in the ship “Eden/ 5 and settled down in the western
part of what was then but a primitive settlement. He at
first engaged in work uncongenial to his tastes, but ultimately
established himself in what has since proved a remunerative
and prosperous business, viz., the construction of agricultural
and other implements. His works, which are known by the
appropriate name of “Pioneer,” have gradually grown with
the colony, and are kept constantly at work in the construction
of machinery for mills, horse-works, and threshing machines,
chaff-cutters, winnowers, etc. The latter, which are in
general request in the agricultural districts of South Australia,
are a speciality with Mr. Bagshaw, who spent much time and
labour ere they reached the perfection they have now attained.
These implements are widely used on account of their utility
and durability, and have often served as models for other
makers. Mr. Bagshaw’s elevators and baggers attached to
winnowers are most substantial articles. The Eidley Eeaper,
which did such good service in the early times, the name of
which has become a “ household word ” here, owes much of
its success to the exertions of Mr. Bagshaw, who was one of
the first makers of the patterns for it, and has constructed
several of these useful adjuncts to the farmer’s homestead.
In the evening of his busy life it must be a great satisfaction
to him to know that he has three sons able to continue the
work he has earnestly followed in spite of vicissitudes and
ups and downs. Mr. Bagshaw is one of the founders of the
Ancient London Order of Oddfellows in South Australia, and
also holds several honorary offices in other societies. He
was elected to the Adelaide Municipal Council in 1870, as
member for Gawler Ward, which he represented for about


six years, and was, during his term of office, instrumental in
effecting great improvements. He was connected with the
building of some of the first water, steam, and windmills in
the colony.
Thomas Dungey,
relinquished business in Kent, England, in 1839,
through the great depression in trade caused by the
successive hop failures in that county, emigrated to South
Australia, and arrived at Holdfast Bay early in February
1840, bringing his wife and family with him. Mr. Dungey’s
kindred were mostly engaged in manufacturing pursuits in
Kent and the adjacent counties, as millers, curriers, hatters?
fellmongers, etc., and he opened in business in Adelaide,
commencing to manufacture tobacco in 1843, and pursuing
other mercantile vocations for several vears, until failing health
caused him to remove into the country. He died at Happy
Valley in August 1853 ; Mrs. Dungey surviving him many
years. His sons are Mr. John Dungey, of Dungey, Ralph
and Co., Limited, of this city, and Mr. Andrew Dungey,
Agent, of Port Pirie. The remaining sons and daughter are
settled in Victoria and Kew Zealand.
P. McM. Glynn, B.A., LL.B.,
BORK in Gort, Ireland, August 25, 1855. Educated at
the French College, Blackrock ; and on leaving there
was apprenticed to a solicitor practising in Dublin. After three
years the indentures were cancelled, and Mr. Glynn joined the
King’s Inns as a Law Student, and entered the Dublin Uni-
versity, in which he graduated in arts in July 1878, and subse-
quently took the degree of Bachelor of Laws; obtained a
certificate for oratory from the College Historical Society,
Dublin University, and a silver medal for oratory from the


Law Students’ Debating Society of Ireland in 1880. In the
discussions of these societies he always supported the
cause of Land Law Reform and the principle of Local
Government. He spent a year and a half in London, study-
ing law in the Middle Temple, and was called to the Irish
Bar in April 1879. In September 1880 Mr. Glynn left for
Melbourne, and was called to the Victorian Bar in December
following. He both wrote and spoke upon the Irish question
in that city, and published, with an introduction, the speech
of the late Mr. A. M. Sullivan on behalf of the Land
Leaguers during the Irish State Trials in 1880-81. He
arrived in South Australia July 2, 1882, and from the follow-
ing August has practised law in Kapunda, having been
admitted a practitioner of the Supreme Court in July 1883.
Since the death of Mr. James Elliott, in April 1883, he has
been editor of the Kapunda Herald , and was one of the
founders of the Land Nationalization Society in May 1884,
for which he has lectured and written with much ability.
It would be somewhat impolitic here to enter into particulars
of the principles of the S. A. Land Nationalization Society, of
which Mr. Glynn is so able a representative, the more especially
so, as they are now being widely disseminated, from both pulpit
and platform, week after week by logical and earnest orators.
Suffice it, everything shows that the day is at hand when the
victory for which Mr. Henry George has so ably striven will
be won, and Land Nationalization become an established fact.
Thomas Henry Jones,
®KHO may be regarded as one of the most accomplished
of South Australian organists, was born at Williams-
town, Victoria, September 20, 1856. At an early age he
exhibited a strong taste for music, which was encouraged
his being placed under the most competent masters for piano
and harmony ; his finishing tutors being Mons. Jules Meilhan,


and Mr. S. P. Needham. Mr. Jones has been instrumental
in developing a love for music in Adelaide, and in his capacity
of organist was the first to introduce a series of “ Recitals ”
upon our city organ. These performances, which extended
over a period of three months, were attended with immense
success, and several English musical papers referred in terms
of approbation to the efforts thus put forth. On this subject the
London Musical Times of February 1, 1885, has the following
remarks : —“Mr. T. H. Jones, purely with a desire of foster-
ing a taste for classical music, has arranged to give a series of
Recitals on the Town Hall organ, Adelaide; the first of
which took place on the afternoon of October 21. The
programme contained Mendelssohn’s Third Sonata, an Adagio
by Schubert, Chopin’s Funeral March, Lemmens’s ‘ Storm
Sonata,’ and Handel’s Concerto, No. 2. All these works were
excellently played, and considering that Mr. Jones bestows
his services gratuitously, we cannot but think that his efforts
in the good cause deserve to be recorded and warmly
acknowledged, even outside the colony, the musical education
of which he has done and is still doing so much to advance.”’
Mr. Jones is organist of the North Adelaide Congregational
Church, and has likewise occupied during the last few years
a similar position in connection with the leading musical
societies. His numerous compositions embrace works for the
piano, organ, and voices.
Henry Evans, J.P.,
\M[AS connected by marriage with the family of the late
wW George Fife Angas Esq., and in the district of Angaston
he was highly respected; his genial nature and generous
liberality winning for him general esteem. He rendered
great assistance at times to numbers of residents of Angaston
by his skill in the art of medicine, to which he had devoted
considerable study with no small success. The estate of


Evandale was laid out by Mr. Evans, and proved very fruit-
ful ; it also gained a high reputation for the production of
first-class wines, which were greatly appreciated in Europe.
He arrived in this colony with his family, and accompanied
by Mr. J. H. Angas, in the “Madras,” on Sept. 12, 1843.
On Nov. 3, in the same year, the foundation stone of the
Angaston Chapel was laid by Mrs. Evans, and Mr. Evans
himself delivered an address on the occasion. Much of the
prosperity of Angaston in its early history is due to the efforts
of this worthy man, and his amiable partner, and he lived suffi-
ciently long enough to see it a thriving and important township.
Mr. Evans died at Evandale, on April 14,1868, aged 56 years.
Dr. J. W. Morier, J.P.,
professionally connected with the Yoarlunga and
Reynella Lodges of Oddfellows, and associated with
Morphett Yale since September 1878. In early life he was
in the Royal JSTavy, and followed the sea until his arrival in
this colony. He identified himself with every movement
having for its object the advancement of the district with
which he was connected, and to his agency many local
improvements owe their existence. Dr. Morier, who died on
October 13, 1885, was universally esteemed. He was a
Justice of the Peace, a District Councillor, and a member of
the Willunga Board of Advice.
Lieutenant Michael Stewart Guy, R.N.,
JOINED the Navy at fourteen years of age; served in the
“Rodney” and “Stromboli” in the Black Sea and Sea
of Azoph during the Crimean War, and was present at the
taking of Kertch and bombardment of Sebastopol. He was
afterwards engaged in marine surveying in the Hebrides.
Lieutenant Guy arrived in Tasmania in 1861, and was there
employed under Commander Brooker, and in Sydney under


Commander Sydney. He arrived in this colony in 1866, and
was associated with Captain Hutchinson in marine surveys
•on the coast. He was in the “Beatrice,” when she made her
first trip to the Northern Territory. Exposure and hardships
■endured in that locality hastened his end, and brought his
useful career to a close at North Adelaide, on July 4, 1869,
in his 29th year. Military honours were accorded by the
•citizens at his funeral.
Captain John Hutchinson, R.N.,
was for some years the Commander of the South
Australian Survey Station, died in the prime of life
at North Adelaide, July 9, 1869, a few days after the decease
of Lieutenant Guy, who had been associated with him in
marine surveying. The services rendered hy Captain
Hutchinson, and other officers similarly engaged, have been
invaluable to shipmasters frequenting these waters ; and the
Admiralty authorities as well as Colonial Governments have
not hesitated to acknowledge the value of the coast surveys
-effected. Captain Hutchinson entered upon a naval career
in the early part of 1842, when a mere lad of thirteen years
of age, and was employed exclusively in the exploring and
survey departments of the service, where his tastes and quali-
fications had ample scope. He was first engaged on the
Hnglish and Irish coasts, under Admiral Bullock and Captain
Wolfe, remaining there until 1845, when he joined H.M.S.
41 Herald,” on board which he served until the vessel was paid
off in 1852. During this period the “ Herald ” was survey-
ing in the Pacific Ocean and in the Arctic Seas, where it was
sent on a search for the ill-fated Sir John Franklin and the
members of his expedition. For services thus rendered
Captain Hutchinson received the Arctic medal. In 1852 he
again rejoined the “ Herald,” which had been fitted out for
an exploring and survey cruise among the South Sea Islands.
She sailed for some time in the Coral Sea, and then returned


home after a nine years’ absence. During the greater part
of her commission, Mr. Hutchinson was First Lieutenant-
In August 1861 he was promoted to the post of commander,
and placed in charge of the Admiralty Survey of the sea.
hoard of this province. After the trip to the Northern
Territory, which impaired his strength, he invalided home,,
but returned to the survey schooner “ Beatrice ” during the
following September in renewed health. In January 1869
his hard and incessant duty was rewarded by further promo-
tion to the rank of Naval Captain, a distinction he did not
live long to enjoy. On April 5, 1864, the “Beatrice ” with
Commander Hutchinson and Lieutenant Howard (now of
Sydney) proceeded to the Northern Territory, returning in
December of the same year. She was dispatched in March
1865, under the direction of Lieutenants Howard and Guy,,
R.N., and after remaining on active service for many months,
returned to Adelaide, September 26, 1866. She was engaged
in survey work during the whole time that Mr. McKinlay
was in the Territory, and the reports of Commander
Hutchinson contained a vast amount of valuable information
to navigators of the rivers and seas of the new settlement on
the other side of the continent. The charts drawn out as the
result of these surveys were as follows Adam Bay and
the entrance to the Adelaide River for the whole of its course
Yernon Islands, and channels leading into Adam Bay;
coast line from Cape Croker to Point Brogden, including
islands in Mountnorris Bay; entrance and course of the
Liverpool River as far as navigable by boats ; coast line from
Liverpool River to Cape Stewart; Limen Bight and Maria
Island, Gulf of Carpentaria, coast line from Blaze Bay to>
Anson Bay ; coast line from Anson Bay to Point Pierce-
Commander Hutchinson was of kindly disposition, gentle-
manly manners, and as may be expected, well-informed on
most subjects. “ A man, take him all in all, of whom we
shall see few of the like again.”


Arthur Edward Gliddon
] PILED at Silverton in May, 1885. He was for many years
_l f associated with the town of Laura, and instrumental in
advancing its interests. The Laura Institute, one of the
finest in the Northern Areas, was the work of his untiring
labours, and the Great Northern Racing Club also developed
under his energy as secretary. He took an active part in
promoting the railway to Laura, and in the formation of the
local Rifle Corps, of which he was captain. Mr. Gliddon was
for some time the manager of the Bank of South Australia,
but resigned that position to take a partnership in the Laura
Brewery. He was not, however, very successful in this
venture, but bore up bravely under a succession of reverses.
He removed to Silverton, where fortune seemed about to*
smile on his endeavours, when he was suddenly taken ill and
died.
William Bundey, Mayor of Adelaide,
5l||)ORN January 26, 1826, at Beaulieu, in the New Forest
Hampshire. He served his apprenticeship in London
to a carpenter and builder, and shortly after completion of
his time left for South Australia, where he arrived on
November 19, 1848. He worked at his trade for some time,
and on the gold diggings breaking out visited Victoria, where
he was fairly successful. He returned to Adelaide and com-
menced business on his own account as a builder. He has
been for some time an active member of the Order of
0.F., M.U., and held the office of Grand Master in South
Australia in 1856. In 1867 he was one of the founders of
the City Permanent Building Society, and was elected Chair-
man of the Board of Directors at the first meeting of this
society, which office he has held since without interruption.
Mr. Bundey entered the City Council in December 1861,
when he was elected Councillor for Robe Ward. He was


re-elected to this office in 1864, and again in 1866, retiring
from that office in December 1868. In 1881 he again entered
the City Council, being elected to fill the office of Alderman
on December 2 of that year. This office he held until
December 1883, when he was elected Mayor of the City, and
was re-elected Mayor in the following December for a second
year of office. During the time he has been connected with
the City Council, the Town Hall has been erected, the
sewerage of the city has been effected, the water supply vastly
improved, and the rates on the two last greatly reduced, the
Park Lands have been planted and wonderfully improved,
and the city has become a model of cleanliness and beauty.
Of affable manners and kindly disposition, Mr. Bundey com-
mands the esteem of a large section of the community.
John Gardiner,
IfM HO was for many years secretary of the Mount Gambier
Institute, was a man who had passed through the
most varied experiences. He was in the 9th Koyal Lancers
for a long time, and subsequently in the German Legion.
Served fifteen years in India in the Punjaub, at Chillianwallah,
and Sobraon, and received for services rendered numerous
decorations. He was an able taxidermist. At the time of
his death, which took place at Mount Gambier on June 28,
1869, he was in his 49th year of age.
Charles Tanner.
t MOISTG the celebrated characters who have from time to
time resided in this colony, few have attracted more
attention, or are still better remembered than the far-famed
“whip” Charles —or as he used to be familiarly styled,
“ Charley ” Tanner. His father was the proprietor of aline of
coaches running between London and Peckham Rye, so that


from a very early age “ Charley’s ” experience with horses
commenced. He arrived in South Australia in 1840, and
made his first essay as a driver on the Port-road; at that time
a locality sacred to hills and hollows, and requiring no little
skill to avoid a capsize. He was next heard of as manager
for Cobb & Co., and used to drive up the crack coach at 9 in
the morning from Glenelg. During the visit of the Duke of
Edinburgh, Mr. Tanner was appointed one of his coachmen,,
and had the honour of giving His Eoyal Highness his first
lessons in driving four-in-hand. On the prince leaving the
colony he paid “ Charley’s ” expenses to Victoria, where he
remained a short time, and then returned to this colony. He
next drove a coach between Adelaide and the Port. Mr,.
Tanner was universally liked, not only for his ability as a
coachman, but for his courtesy to passengers. He was for
twenty-two years a member of the M. U. Hope Lodge of
Oddfellows. Many interesting anecdotes are still floating
about respecting this “ old identity,” which, if true, border
almost on the miraculous. He was fifty years of age at the
time of his death, which took place in Adelaide on Jan. 10,.
1869.
Henry Seymour, J.P.,
BORN in Ireland, and at an early age devoted himself to
the legal profession. He practised for a lengthy period
as an equity lawyer in Dublin and Queenstown, and took a
high stand in the law courts of those places. He arrived in
South Australia in 1840, where, instead of following the law,,
he commenced agricultural pursuits at Blakiston, near Mount
Barker. After a residence there of seven years, he sold the
estate in 1847, and removed to Mosquito Plains; where, and
at his runs near Guichen Bay, he became largely interested
in pastoral property. Mr. Seymour occupied in the S. E,
District an influential position as a magistrate. Though an


attached and warm supporter of the Church of England, his
sympathies and pecuniary aid were freely accorded to other
denominations. His hospitality was unbounded, and public
and private charities found in him a liberal and good friend.
He died at Mount Benson, near Robe, Dec. 16, 1869, aged
seventy.
Edward Walter Wickes
SAS a native of Stepney, England, and for many years
known in the country districts as a lay preacher. His
career as a teacher commenced in 1816, and he continued in
that profession until 1845, when he left his native land for
South Australia. During his scholastic career in England he
published a grammar, which was extensively used, and after
he came to this colony he produced several elementary works
which were largely circulated. Shortly after his arrival, in
conjunction with the Rev. J. B. Titherington, he opened a
school at North Adelaide, and continued it until 1854. Mr.
Wickes was a member of the first Board of Education, and
soon after its formation became the secretary, retaining that
post for fourteen years, till failing health caused him to
resign. He acted as lay preacher at Hindmarsh and other
suburbs of Adelaide. He died at North Adelaide, August
30, 1868, aged 73.
Thomas Lampard,
aNE of the pioneers and oldest residents of the Murray
River district. He was well known among colonial
sportsmen in the early years of settlement as a man of fearless
disposition and adventurous character. In 1843 he took up
his abode on the banks of the Murray, and was one of the
first to put a plough into what was then truly a wilderness,
though by no means an uninhabited one, as the aborigines


were numerous and ferocious. Mr. Lampard formed the
first garden in that locality, and devoted his attention to
horticulture. He was a shrewd, intelligent man, and a
prominent character at public meetings, at which his
straightforwardness and dry humour made him a popular
favourite. He died on July 18, 1868, aged 71, and left
numerous descendants, who still occupy land in the vicinity
•of the Murray River.
Captain Alexander Jamieson,
TfMfHO was associated with Port Adelaide for upwards of
IlnP sixteen years, and died there from accident on August
•3, 1868, in his 80th year, was born in Aberdeenshire in
1788, and took his first command of a vessel in 1808. He
was for upwards of forty-five years a captain of ships to
various parts of the world, and brought many thousands of
passengers to this and the neighbouring colonies. His first
voyage to South Australia was made in the immigrant ship
“Trusty,” in 1838, and he returned soon after with his family
in the schooner “ Rosebud,” and settled down at the Port.
He was a sociable, kind man, and regarded as an authority
on nautical matters; his long experience as a shipmaster
-causing him to be considered as one eminently qualified to
give an opinion respecting them.
John Howard,
WHO died at North Adelaide, on Feb. 3, 1869, in his
70th year, was in the early days of the colony
known as an active advocate of manufactories, and a
voluminous contributor to the press respecting these and
kindred subjects.


John Stevens,
« PIONEER South Australian colonist, who in 1838
started in business with Mr. S. L. Phillips at the
original port. The firm was shortly after increased by the
accession to it of Mr. J. W. De Horne, and was known as-
“ The South Australian Shipping Company.” Having been
brought up to the milling trade in England, Mr. Stevens soon
added to the business of the firm that of a small windmill in
Adelaide, and in 1842 started a steam mill at Noarlunga.
The flour bearing his brand was in great request here and
elsewhere. The company eventually separated, and the
partnership was dissolved. Mr. Stephens was a good type of
the old colonist, and much respected for his honour and
integrity. He died at Port Adelaide, May 9, 1871, aged
fifty-four.
Rev. James Maughan,
§HE founder of the Methodist New Connexion Church in
this colony, was, from his earliest life, associated with
that body in England, and became a minister when little over
twenty years of age. He laboured successfully in Bradford,
Macclesfield, Derby, London, Leeds, Bristol and other places;
left England in 1862, and arrived in South Australia, via
Melbourne, in September of that year. He was attracted
hither by finding a wide and congenial sphere for his
endeavours, and soon established himself as an eloquent
preacher and able lecturer. Mr. Maughan, by his liberal
opinions, gained the respect of many outside his denomination,
to whom his amazing activity of mind and body was a source
of surprise. He took great delight in scientific and
philosophical pursuits, and his lectures on these subjects were
deservedly popular. Mr. Maughan was born at Hebburn,
Durham, in October 1826, and died in Adelaide on March 8,
1871.


THOS. GREAVES WATERHOUSE.
REV. JOHN WATSFORD
HON, C. W. COTTON, M.L.G.


E. B. Scott, J.P.
SHIS well-known South Australian pioneer settler is a
native of Kent, England, and was born in the year 1822.
He arrived in New South Wales in 1838, with a view to
entering into squatting pursuits, but left soon after for Port
Phillip, where he spent some time on a friend’s station with
a view to learn squatting. He accompanied the late George
Hamilton overland to South Australia in 1839, and shortly
after arrival joined Eyre, the explorer, on an expedition to
Western Australia with cattle and sheep. On his return to
Adelaide, Mr. Scott again accompanied Mr. Eyre as his com-
panion and assistant on an expedition to explore the northern
interior and western portion of this province. Having left
Mr. Eyre at the Great Bight, Mr. Scott returned to Adelaide,
and for a short period was employed as assistant to Lieutenant
Pullen in the survey of the sea mouth of the river Murray.
While attached to this service he accomplished the
hazardous feat of a pull with a boat and crew up and
down the Murray for about 800 miles. This service had
reference to a survey ordered by Colonel Gawler. Mr. Scott
subsequently joined Mr. Eyre in the formation of the Govern-
ment station at Mooroondee, established for the purpose of
protecting overlanders from the hostile attacks of the aborigines.
At this period he voluntarily sailed the Government cutter
“ Waterwitch ” from the lake to Mooroondee, and she was the
first vessel of any size navigated on the Murray. In 1843 Mr.
Scott joined Mr. Eyre in an expedition to connect Major
Mitchells first survey of the Darling with his second, and
defined the Anna Branch. He next formed a cattle station
at the North West Bend, the first establishment of the kind
on that part of the Murray. In 1847 he succeeded to the
post vacated by Mr. Eyre at Mooroondee as Magistrate, Sub-
Protector of Aborigines, Inspector of Native Police, and
Eeturning Officer and held these offices till they were
abolished by the Government in 1857. After an interval of
s


squatting, being nearly ruined by droughts, Mr. Scott quitted
a sphere in which he had endured so much misfortune, to
take the appointment of Protector of Aborigines, and he was
also in the Sheep Department for a short time. In 1869 he was
appointed Superintendent of the Stockade, a position he has held
ever since, and which he appears eminently qualified to fill.
R. G. Symonds
WAS born of British parents on December 21, 1810, in
the Island of Madeira, where his father, a London
merchant, up to 1834 had a branch house. Mr. Symonds
arrived in South Australia by the “Cygnet,” as an assistant
surveyor, appointed in London by the S. A Commissioners, in
Sept., 1836, and was present at the proclamation of the colony.
He commenced in January 1837 with Mr. G. S. Kingston,
the Deputy-Surveyor General, to measure off the main lines
of the then proposed city of Adelaide, Colonel Light personally
starting the parties from the point at the N. W. corner of
South Adelaide, but on account of the dispute relative to the
site of the proposed capital, the survey was discontinued for
some days. Mr. Symonds was then directed by Colonel
Light to measure off the bends of the river between the hills
and the Eeedbeds, but did not further assist in laying out
the Adelaide allotments. With Messrs. B. T. Finniss and
other surveyors, in April 1837, he commenced the survey of
the country sections, and in September 1838 Mr. Symonds
left the survey department. In December of the same year
he selected and purchased Port Adelaide sections C.F. and
H., five sections on the Torrens, two sections near Glenelg,
and other sections, in all 1,088 acres. He visited Tasmania
in 1842, and remained until 1848, when he returned to
Adelaide, and with a view of extending the town of Port
Adelaide, laid out his section H—(North Arm) for the pro-
posed township of Newhaven. Although in one sense, a
“ successful colonist,” Mr. Symonds has not been enriched


by his outlay and incessant endeavours to promote the
advancement of the land of his adoption. In the evening of
his days he is well-known as a teacher of bookkeeping in
Adelaide, and it is much regretted that something cannot be
done to aid the interests of this old pioneer colonist, who in
England was intimately associated with Sir Geo. Kingston,
Thos. Gilbert and others, who were instrumental in establish-
ing the colony of South Australia.
George Ormerod, J.F.,
9NE of the pioneer settlers of the South-East District,
and the founder of Narracoorte. On the opening of
Guichen Bay as a port, he sold his property at ISTarracoorte
and settled there. He was a man of untiring energy and
perseverance, who, aided by these qualities, worked his way
up to a position of comfort, honour, and influence. Mr.
Ormerod was a member of an old Lancashire family, and
born at Rochdale in 1822. He arrived in Victoria in 1842,
but shortly after came overland to South Australia. He took
up land at ISTarracoorte about the year 1846, and was instru-
mental in advancing the progress of this and the surrounding
district. He was a Justice of Peace, and chairman of the
Local Road Board of Guichen Bay. His death took place on
April 10, 1872.
Charles Platts,
for over thirty years was a bookseller in Adelaide,
was bom in London, and arrived here in 1839.
Prom a small beginning he worked up one of the largest
businesses in South Australia, and retired on a competency.
He was an accomplished church organist, and his services
were often in request. Mr. Platts was universally liked for
his genial temperament and bonhomie , and his death, which
took place at Mitcham, near Adelaide, on November 14, 1871,
was i*uch lamented.
s 2


David Bews, J.P., M.P.,
®HE junior member in the Assembly for the district of
Wallaroo, is a living example of what energy and well-
directed enterprise will do for a man in South Australia.
Privately he is deservedly esteemed for his benevolent and
genial disposition. He is regarded as one of the most
popular public men in the colony; and as he possesses youth,
vigorous health and ability, he has every prospect of occupying
a very prominent position. Mr. Bews was born near Kirk-
wall, Orkney Islands, in 1850, and came to South Australia
on July 28, 1851, in the ship “ Marion.” His parents went
to the Victorian diggings in 1853, whither he accompanied
them. They returned in 1854, and his father undertook
agricultural operations, first at Port Elliott and subsequently
on the Adelaide Plains. The present Member for Wallaroo
began work on a farm when he was a mere child and when
there were not then the educational facilities now provided
in the county districts, and he had absolutely little or no
schooling as a boy, except what he received from his mother,
who still lives, and to whom he has always been most fondly
attached. He remained working as a ploughman and at
other farm occupations until his 21st year, when he went to
Wallaroo; and in 1872 entered the employ of the Kadina
and Wallaroo Railway and Pier Company as clerk. He soon
rose to the position of manager of the Goods Department,
which he successfully conducted for nearly seven years.
Subsequently, after the Government purchased the lines, and
when they gave no promise of placing the old officers upon the
fixed list in the Government Service, he resigned his position,
and joined the firm of D. & A. F. Taylor, the partners in which
are his brothers-in-law. Though possessing no previous
journalistic experience except that given to him as a most
valued representative of the Register on Yorke’s Peninsula,
he showed great ability in the editorial management of the
Wallaroo Times , which he still efficiently conducts. Imme


diately upon leaving the railway department he took an active
share in the public concerns of the town of Wallaroo, in
which he lived. From 1879 to 1881 he served as a
councillor, and thenceforward was thrice chosen mayor. His
civic duties were performed with characteristic energy and
success, and at the same time he held the positions of
Commissioner of the Yorke’s Peninsula Local Hoad Board,
the Licensing Bench, and the School Board of Advice. He
was one of the foremost promoters of the Wallaroo Rifle
Company, and for years was a representative on the Council
of the R.Y.F., of which in 1885 he was elected Vice-
President. He paid great attention to drill, and was an
expert marksman. At the general election in 1884 he was
an unsuccessful candidate for the representation of the newly-
divided district of Wallaroo, but a year later was elected.
Upon his entering the House Mr. Bews created a highly
favorable inpression by his speech in moving the “ Address
in Reply.” He has since intelligently debated important
subjects, especially directing his attention to public works.
In fact, he is looked upon in the smoking-room (which he
enlivens by many racy yarns —for he is a humorist with a
wonderful memory) as a coming Commissioner of Public
Works.
John Dickins,
WHO was a shipowner and merchant in Plymouth
arrived in South Australia by the “ Pestonjee
Bomangee ” in 1836. He held a prominent position in con-
nection with the South Australian Company for many years,
when, having relinquished this office, he turned to literary
pursuits, and from 1843 almost to the time of his death
(which took place on March 4, 1871, in his 79 th year), was
engaged on the staff of the S. A. Register . He was a quiet,
unobtrusive, plodding man, possessing many estimable
qualities, which made him a general favorite.


E. Vaughan Boulger, M.A., D. Lit.,
IS the only son of Persse Boulger, Esq., Solicitor, of Dublin,
_ and grandson of Major Persse Boulger, 93rd Highlanders,
of Loughrea, Co. Galway, Ireland. He was born at Dublin
in 1846, and from an early age exhibited striking evidences
of that refined taste and culture which in later years
combined to render him one of the foremost men of his time
as a philologist and lecturer. As a student at Trinity
College, Dublin, he was in every year of his academic
career a first-class prize-man. In 1869 he obtained the prize
for English essay-writing, honours of the first rank, a Senior
Moderatorship, and gold medal (the highest distinction possible
for him to attain) in History, Political Science, and English
Literature. At the same time he obtained First Senior Modera-
torship and a medal in Classics. His energy and zeal in extend-
ing his circle of culture were untiring, since to an intimate
knowledge of Greek, Latin, and English, he added that of
modern continental languages and of Sanscrit. He occupied for
eight years the Chair of Greek in the Queen’s College, Cork,
and whilst in that capacity was eminently respected for his
abilities, taste, and superexcellence as a Classical and English
scholar. In 1883 he was elected to the Chair of English
Literature in the University of Adelaide, and before quitting
a sphere in which he had so long and earnestly laboured, was
presented with a most enthusiastic and sympathetic address,,
signed by all the graduates and under-graduates. The arrival
of Professor Boulger and his location in this city is likely to
have a beneficial effect on society; his eloquent lectures—of
which he has delivered several on “ Shakespeare ” and other
subjects popular with cultured minds—have been well
attended and much appreciated. As in his University work
in the old country, so here, most of his students are in a fair
way to obtain the highest distinctions, and have profited
much by his valued counsel and advice. In addition to his
academic distinctions, Professor Boulger has achieved great


literary success, and his compositions both in English and
Latin have been favorably received by the critics. He is
one of the contributors to the Dublin Translations , a collec-
tion of Greek and Latin verse, published at the University
Press, Dublin, under the editorship of Professor Tyrrell.
Professor Bo,ulger married, in 1871, Lizzie, second daughter
of John Denham, Esq., M.D., President of the Royal
College of Surgeons, Ireland.
A. J. Edmunds, S. M.,
80RH in London, England, July 25, 1833, and arrived
with his parents in South Australia by the ship
“ Surrey,” in 1838. His father came out as a tenant
farmer under the South Australian Company, and settled on
land now forming part of Burnside, where Mr. Edmunds
resided with them until 1851, when he visited the Victorian
gold diggings, and spent two years there. He returned to
this colony, and in 1855 was articled to Mr. J. E. Moulden,
solicitor, of Adelaide, with whom he served portions of a
term which was concluded with Mr. Wren (also solicitor, of
this city). In 1860, having passed the necessary examina-
tions, Mr. Edmunds was admitted to the bar as a practitioner
of the Supreme Court, and commenced the practice of his
profession at Port Adelaide. In the same year he was
appointed Town Clerk of that important town, and occupied
it for about eight years, during which period he was mainly
instrumental in getting the present Town Hall built. In
1854 Mr. Edmunds joined the Port Adelaide Artillery
Volunteer Force, and continued in it until its disbandment
in 1873 ; serving as Sergeant, 2nd Lieutenant, Ist Lieutenant,
and Captain. In 1876, having then been in practice as
a solicitor for sixteen years, he received the appointment of
Stipendiary Magistrate, and after acting as locum tenens for
Mr. J. B. Shepherdson, of Wallaroo, during his leave of
absence, he was further appointed to preside over the Port


Pirie Local Court Circuit, comprising eight Local Courts,
and also over the Gladstone Insolvency Court. He was
subsequently appointed Returning Officer for the Northern
Electoral District for the Legislative Council, and the
District of Gladstone for the House of Assembly, all of which
important positions he still holds, and for which his practical
legal knowledge eminently qualifies him. In 1860 Mr. Edmunds
married a daughter of the late Mr. Nicholas James, assayer,
and has now a family of five sons and five daughters.
John Gibson,
«HO died at Bowden, Jan. 2, 1872, in his 78th year,
was a colonist of thirty-two years. He belonged to
Northumberland, England, and in early life was head game-
keeper to Lord Frederick Fitzclarence, on the Etal Estate,
and after serving eleven years in the same capacity to Sir
Francis Tit well, of Barmah Castle, left for this country.
Shortly after his arrival in Adelaide he was appointed Park
Ranger, and held that office till it was abolished. Mr.
Gibson was for many years an elder of Chalmers’ Church, and
highly respected for his large-hearted hospitality and benevo-
lence. On the formation of the Hindmarsh District Council
he was elected a member, and held office in it for some years.
William Finke,
WHO was intimately associated with the late James
Chambers in pastoral and mining interests, died in
Adelaide, January 17, 1864, aged forty-eight. He will long
be remembered by our colonists as one who bounteously
assisted the cause of exploration ; and was the friend and
patron of John McDougall Stuart, the explorer, who named
several places in the interior after him. In the time of
Governor Gawler the section on which Glenelg now stands
was offered for selection, and about 1,500 persons tendered.
It was decided by lot, as then usual, at £1 per acre, and Mr I
Finke was the successful tenderer. 1


John Varley, S. M.,
SS a native of Tattershall, a market town in the county of
Lincoln, where he was horn in October 1830. His
father, a near relative of John Yarley, the well-known artist
in water-color painting, —for many years carried on an
extensive business as a brewer, maltster, and corn and coal
merchant. Mr. Yarley, was educated at Lincoln, by the late
George Boole, LL.D., who in 1850 was appointed Professor of
Mathematics at Queen’s College, Cork. He evinced great
proficiency in various branches of learning, but more
especially excelled in navigation and nautical astronomy.
On attaining his 15th year he went to sea, and made
rapid progress, but in 1854 he was compelled to relinquish
the profession he had chosen, in consequence of a prolonged
attack of intermittent fever and ague, contracted in Batavia,
and quitted a sphere in which he might have achieved success,
to seek in this new land of ours scope for his endeavours in
another direction. In February, 1855, he entered the
Public Service of this colony, and remained in Adelaide until
April, 1868, when he was appointed Stipendiary Magistrate
at Kapunda, and Returning Officer for the Electoral
District of Light. In March 1883, he was also appointed
Returning Officer for the Legislative Council, North Eastern
District. Mr. Yarley married, in 1854, the youngest
•daughter of the late Hon. Henry Mildred, M.L.C. His
two sons, Messrs. H. W. and C. G. Yarley, hold high positions
in the legal profession in Adelaide, and are practitioners
of the Supreme Court of South Australia.
Commander F. Howard, R. N.
WYHIS well-known naval officer, who was for some time
engaged in marine surveys on our coasts, commenced
his sea life at an early age, and after four years’ general
service joined “H.M. S. Elerald” in 1852. This vessel,
which had been fitted out in England for an exploring and


survey cruise among the South Sea Islands, was absent about
nine years and then returned to the home station. During this
period, and thenceforward up till the time of Commander
Hutchinson’s death, Lieutenant Howard served under him*
and eventually succeeded to the command of the surveying
schooner, “Beatrice,” and finished the coast survey in 1881.
Being unable to support his family on half-pay in South
Australia, Commander Howard left for Sydney, Hew South
Wales, where he is now engaged in coast surveys for the
Government of a similiar character to those he so creditably
made in this colony. As Commander Howard’s career was intD
mately associated with that of Commander Hutchinson, to avoid
repetitions, the reader is referred for further information to*
his biography on page 249, and to which may be added the
following particulars, kindly supplied by Commander
Howard. “ Capt. John Hutchinson was a son of Captain W.
Hutchinson, who served with distinction in the war
with France, and was for many years Queen’s Harbour
Master at Kingston, near Dublin. Capt. J. Hutchinson wa&
a good surveyor and officer, and of a most amiable disposition..
At his death he left a widow, now resident at the Chelten-
ham Ladies’ College, England, and one son, a sub-lieutenant
in the Koyal Havy. His remains rest in the Horth Adelaide
Cemetery.”
Rev. Samuel Keen,
§OEH in Devonshire in 1818, and passed some time at the
Theological Institution in that county. In 1848 he
entered the Bible Christian ministry, and travelled in con-
nection with the South Devon Mission, and in the Chatham
Circuit for two years, and in these localities evinced much
energy and zeal. Arrived in Adelaide in March 1853, and
was first stationed at Gawler Plains, where he opened a circuity
and remained seven years. In 1860 he removed to the city,.


and became pastor of the Central Circuit, retaining that position
until 1864, when he went to Auburn, and had oversight of
the circuit there for three years. In 1867 he was again
stationed on the Gawler Circuit, where he remained a similar
period. In 1870 he removed to Willunga, and undertook
the charge of Port Elliot, Willunga, and Clarendon circuits.
Mr. Keen occupied a very prominent position in the
administration of the church affairs of the Bible Christian
denomination in this colony, and was a member of the
district committee. As a preacher and platform speaker his
orations were characterised by vigour and effectiveness. He
died at Willunga, aged fifty-three, on June 21, 1871.
Thomas Gilbert,
SKE of the early pioneers of South Australian colonization.
In company with his brother they carried on the
business of opticians to the Hon. East India Company in
London, and their experiments for the improvement of glasses
were so extensive that the Government assisted them by a
suspension of the Excise supervision, so that their large outlay
should not be increased by the payment of duty. When first
the project of colonizing South Australia was mooted, Mr.
Gilbert entered into it with great energy, and from March
1834 up till his departure from England two years afterwards,
devoted to it his entire time, and no small amount of money,
acting in conjunction with Mr, (afterwards) Sir R. D.
Hanson, Sir Geo. Kingston, Dr. Everard, Mr. John Brown,
and other early colonists, who were endeavouring to bring
into action the plan suggested by their coadjutor, Edward
Gibbon Wakefield. In March 1836, the Act for the
establishment of the colony being passed, Mr. Gilbert sailed
in the “ Cygnet,” (Capt. Rolls) with other pioneers and a
large party of surveyors and labourers. On Sept. 10 of the


same year they landed at Kangaroo Island, where they
remained until sent by Colonel Light to Holdfast Bay. Mr.
Gilbert, who had charge of the Government stores on board
' O
the “ Cygnet,” received the appointment in England, on March
3, 1836, of Colonial Storekeeper, and he also acted as Post-
master until December 13, in the same year. The former
position he retained till Dec. 31, 1854, when he retired with
a pension of £2OO per annum, which he enjoyed for the
remainder of his life. He was one of the earliest appointed
magistrates, and a regular attendant at the meetings of the
Bench. Perhaps no man in South Australia had a larger
circle of attached friends, and he was really beloved by all
who had the pleasure of his intimate acquaintance. At the
time of his death, which took place in Adelaide on May 30,
1873, he was in his 87th year.
Rev. Henry Higginson
educated for the Unitarian Ministry at Manchester
w w New College, England, but after a few years
relinquished his ministrations and studied the profession of a
civil engineer, for which he had naturally a great aptitude.
He came to Adelaide in 1849, and was soon after appointed
one of the surveyors under the Central Road Board, but was
subsequently transferred to the Draftsman’s Department under
Captain Ereeling, then Surveyor-General, where he was
largely employed in compiling maps and plans. He was
afterwards appointed secretary to the Port Adelaide Railway
Company, and held that position for several years. In 1860,
on the occurrence of a vacancy in the pulpit of the Melbourne
Unitarian Church, Mr. Higginson offered his services, which
were accepted, and he continued to act in the capacity of
preacher until ill-health caused him to retire. As a minister
he was singularly thoughtful and original. He died in
Melbourne on April 17, 1873.


Captain John Watts,
was for over twenty years Postmaster-General of
South Australia, died at North Adelaide March 28,
1873, aged 87. He was a native of Ireland, and the son of a
clergyman. At an early age, with several of his brothers, he
entered the military service during the long war with
Napoleon, and first served in the West Indies, where he was
located for several years. He next accompanied Governor
Macquarie to Sydney as his aide-de-camp, and occupied that
position until the Governor left, when Capt. Watts returned
to England, where he married, resigned his commission in
the 73rd Regiment of the Line, and retired into private life.
He arrived in South Australia on March 8, 1841, by the
“John Cooper,” and shortly after received the appointment
of Postmaster-General, in succession to his brother who had
previously held that post. He retained this position until
July 10, 1861, when he relinquished it, and was succeeded
by Mr. J. W. Lewis. On his retirement his subordinates
presented him with a handsome testimonial. He had the
misfortune to lose his wife, to whom he had been married for
fifty years, only three weeks before his death.
Samuel Raphael,
3/jyHOSE association with the Adelaide Municipal
Council extends hack to primitive times in the civic
body, arrived in this city from Sydney, New South Wales,
in 1848. He established himself in business as a money-
lender, and was universally recognised as a shrewd man.
After about fifteen years he retired with a fair competence,
acquired house property, and possessed no small influence as
a ratepayer. He first entered the City Council in 1865, and
remained one of its most enthusiastic members until 1870,
after which for several years, though he contested every
election, he was unsuccessful as a candidate for office. In


1877 he was again re-elected, and retired by effluxion of time.
In the present year he was returned for Grey Ward, and held
the position of councillor at the time of his death, which
took place in Adelaide on October 30, 1885. Mr. Raphael’s
eccentric speeches on what he considered popular subjects
will not be speedily forgotten, nor the remarkable exhibitions
of platform oratory with which he enlivened many a dull
meeting. He was always a strenuous advocate for the rights
of the citizens, and advocated what to him appeared their
best interests.
John Ellis,
BETTER known as “ Captain Ellis,” arrived in this colony by
the “ Buckinghamshire,” on March 22, 1839, in com-
pany with the late Capt. Wm. Allen, and in conjunction with
him made large purchases of land, conspicuous among which
was the Milner Estate from Mr. G. M. Stephen, which
occupied such a prominent position in the Courts at that
period. Mr. Ellis entered extensively into pastoral pursuits ;
and his stations extended from the Little Para to the
Hummocks, which country was first stocked by him. In
August, 1851, he was returned Member for Flinders in the
Legislative Council, and after some time sold a portion of
his properties and returned to England. He died in London,
March 22, 1873, aged 70, leaving a widow, the eldest
daughter of the late Rear-Admiral Sir John Hindmarsh, and
o J
eight children by a former marriage.
Dr. John Walker, J.P.,
gift COLONIST of many years’ standing, died at Adelaide,
JJ| Sept. 26, 1868. He carried on practice at Strathalbyn,
and took great interest in all movements connected with it.
In 1861 he held the position of Protector of Aborigines.


Dominick Gore Daly,
fHE eldest son of Sir Dominick Daly, was born in Canada
in 1827, and educated as a barrister, but did not
practise his profession. He resided for some time in England,
where he belonged to the East Kent Militia. He also joined
the Waikato Regiment of Volunteers. Soon after his
father’s arrival as Governor of South Australia, Mr. Daly
came to this colony and acted as his Private Secretary, and
continued to hold the same office during a part of Colonel
Hamley’s administration. In 1866 he married the youngest
daughter of the late Hon. W. Younghusband, once Chief
Secretary of South Australia. He had a large circle of
friends, who lamented his early death, which took place on
December 30, 1871, at the age of 44 years.
Capt. Emanuel Underwood,
career has been of the most adventurous character,
(SflfnP was born in Essex, England, in 1806. In 1815 he
visited Holland, Ostend, and Bruges, and in the following
year was placed at school in France with a view to learn the
language of that country. In 1819 he was apprenticed to
the sea in the coasting trade, from which period, up till 1864,
when he settled in this colony, he visited the following
places : —Gibraltar, the city of Bahia and Maranham in the
Brazils, Malaga in Spain, Rio de Janeiro, Genoa, Leghorn,
Buenos Ayres, Monte Video, in the Argentine Republic,
Bombay, Kew Orleans, Mobile, Canada, Singapore, Calcutta,
Whampoa, Canton, Cape of Good Hope, Mauritius, Java,
Callao, Cape de Verde Islands, St. Helena, St. Michael,
Tasmania, Kew South Wales, Queensland, Victoria, and
Western Australia. He first took his command as a captain
in 1832, when he was appointed to the brig “ Ardgowan”
bound for Richeburto in Canada ; and in 1833 to the brig


“ Doctor,” of Liverpool, and subsequently to the ships
“ Albion,” “ Theodosia,” and other crafts, with all of which
he showed remarkable and skilful seamanship. He arrived
in South Australia, from England, in 1840, in the ship
“ Baboo,” and brought with him the frame of a small craft
of fifteen tons register with spars, sails, etc. This small
vessel was put together at Port Adelaide, where she was
launched and named the “ Governor Gawler,” and in her for
fully seven years did Capt. Underwood make many voyages,
some of them attended with much peril and danger, and
terminating at last with the loss of the brig at the Sir Joseph
Banks group of islands, and the narrow escape of her gallant
commander from a watery grave. Since he has quitted the
sea Capt. Underwood has settled at Edwardstown, where he
is greatly respected and much esteemed for his liberal
opinions and affable manners. In his 80th year he is still
hale and hearty, and never wearied of recounting the true
but remarkable events which have taken place in his romantic
career. A recital of some of these, had space permitted,
would here have been given.
Mrs. Caroline Carlton,
fHE widow of Mr. C. J. Carlton, who once held the
position of Superintendent of Cemeteries, died at
Wallaroo, July 11, 1874, aged fifty-four years. She was
well known as a contributor to the South Australian Press of
poetry and tales, and her “ Song of Australia,” which secured
a prize, is still popular.
Allan McFarlane, M.P.,
tU old and respected colonist, who died at Kensington,
March 11, 1864, aged seventy-two. His death occurred
during the time he was the representative for the Mount
Barker District in the House of Assembly.


GEORGE E. LOYALU,
AUTHOR.


W. S. M. Hutton,
was connected with the South Australian Civil
yjnP Service for over twenty years, died in Adelaide on
November 30, 1870. He held the following appointments :
—Clerk in the Customs Department from 1850 till 1855;
promoted to the inspectorship of foot police in the January
of that year, and retained that position until May 1856, when
he was appointed clerk in the Registry Office, and shortly
after transferred to a first-class clerkship in the same depart-
ment. In May 1860 he was appointed secretary to the
Commissioner of Public Works, and in July 1869 gazetted
Under-Treasurer by the Strangways Government. After the
decease of Mr. Haining he filled the position for nearly two
years, when ill-health caused him to resign. He visited
Tasmania in the hope that a change from his arduous duties
would bring about a restoration to health, but all was in vain,
and he returned to his adopted land to die. Mr. Hutton was
regarded as one of the most efficient officers in the Public
Service, and his courteous and gentlemanly manners caused
him to be much esteemed by all with whom he came in
contact.
Robert Dodgson
A REIVED in this colony by the “ Orleana” in 1839. He
was a most energetic man, and took part in various
public movements. The formation of the Volunteer Force
in 1854 was mainly due to his efforts, when he joined the
artillery corps, and was elected captain of the No. 1 Company.
He was a prominent member of the Order of Freemasons and
the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows, and with Messrs. J. H.
Allen and J. Manson founded the Albion Lodge in May
1844. Mr. Dodgson died at Norwood, near Adelaide, on
Nov. 3, 1870, aged fifty-eight years. Strange to state that
his wife, who was devotedly attached to him, died in a
fortnight afterwards, and that her age also was fifty-eight years*.
T


Heinrich Wilhelm Ehmcke,
BORN in Hanover in 1817. Removed to Hamburg, where
he followed the trade of builder and cabinet-maker.
Arrived in South Australia in 1848, and engaged in
agricultural pursuits. Visited the Victorian diggings during
the gold fever, after which he returned to this colony and
established the Hindmarsh-square saw-mills and timber-yard
with which his name was so long and intimately associated,
and by his tact, perseverance, and energy, from a small beginning
he worked up a most successful business. He was a member
of the Oddfellows, Liedertafel, German Club, and various
other societies, and gave his support to all public movements
in a liberal manner. His death took place in Adelaide on
August 14, 1877, in his sixtieth year. As showing the
manner in which he was eminently respected, it may be
stated that his funeral was one of the largest ever witnessed
n Adelaide, and was attended not only by the fraternity of
which he was a prominent member, but by people of every
nationality. The eldest son, Mr. J. W. Ehmcke, in conjunction
with Mr. F. C. Gaetjens, his son-in-law, are still carrying on the
business which he so successfully established, under the style
and firm of W. Ehmcke & Gaetjens.
David Randell,
JMI WELL-KNOWN and respected South Australian colonist,
JJL who died in London on October 29, 1874, in his 56th
year. He arrived in this colony by the ship “ Templar ”in
1845, and not long after he settled in Adelaide was presented
with a requisition inviting him to stand for the representation
of Yatala. This he declined, and entered into agricultural
and dairying pursuits at Mount Crawford, where he had
purchased land from Mr. Flaxman. Subsequently he added
sheep-farming and the cultivation of cereals, and bought
additional valuable property on the South Rhine, where he


had in time eighty acres of vines and fruit-trees. His wines
commanded a ready sale, and he was awarded several medals
for their excellence. Mr. Randall was a persistent advocate
of Australian federation and intercolonial reciprocity. On
these and kindred subjects he was never tired of writing or
speaking. In advocacy of his views on free trade in natural
products between the various provinces of the Australian
group, he visited most of the colonies, and by letters to the
press, the production of pamphlets, and interviewing
leading politicians and mercantile men, sought to advance
this object which was very dear to him. He was instrumental
in a great degree in developing the South Australian wine
trade, and sought to introduce our produce into the Home
markets. On visiting England he tried to establish there a
Limited Liability Company, with a capital of £IOO,OOO, to
purchase suitable, already-established vineyards, and engage
in all the usual operations of the vigneron on an extensive
scale. As manager of such a Company he hoped to return to
this colony, but whilst his plans were being matured he died.
One of his latest public acts was to interest himself in
promoting the comfort of departing emigrants to South
Australia. There is little doubt that had he lived to reach
this, the land of his adoption, that the energy and perseverance
he had exhibited relative to its interests would have met with
substantial recognition at the hands of his fellow-colonists.
Adam George Burt
ARRIVED in South Australia by the ship “Rajahstan,”
Nov. 16, 1838, and was in the Government service
under Mr. Ormshy, the Deputy Surveyor General, in laying
out Gumeracha, Cudlee Creek, and Mount Gould country.
In 1843 he purchased a farm at Strathalbyn (now owned by
Mr. L. Stirling) and in 1845 travelled overland to Port
Phillip, returning with a herd of cattle for the Adelaide
t 2


market. In 1848 he rode overland to Sydney, bringing down,
a mob of horses. In 1870 he was second in command of
the central construction party of the Overland Telegraph, and
in 1871, according to instructions, travelled with one white
man and a native to meet the northern party. He reached
the Catherine, and brought the first message through
from R. C. Patterson, Esq., then chief in command. On
returning to Adelaide Mr. Burt was appointed by Sir Thomas
Elder on express service with camels, and afterwards as second
in command with Colonel Warburton to proceed to Western
Australia, but the latter arrangement was cancelled. At the
present time he has been appointed by the Queensland
Government to take up camels for their service in the back
country. Mr. Burt is regarded as an authority on all matters
connected with the colonization of this province, and his
association with it from the earliest times, and practical
experience, have eminently qualified him for the position he
now fills. Of affable and genial manners, ever ready to
advance the interests of others, even at the expense of his own,
there are few pioneer settlers who have done more real good
for society at large than the subject of this notice.
Mrs. Esther Solomon.
§HIS lady, who was the widow of the late Samuel Moss
Solomon, arrived in Sydney in the ship “ Enchantress,”
in May 1833. She came to South Australia about the year
1852, and died on July 13, 1875, at Norwood, aged 100
years and six months. Mrs. Solomon is the only centenarian
we have heard of in this colony, and she evidently came of a
long-lived family. Her sister, who resided in London, died
at the age of ninety-one years, and her aunt at the age of
105 years. Such remarkable instances of longevity are rare
at the antipodes. Mrs. Solomon was of cheerful disposition
and very witty and original in conversation.


John Sheridan, M.D.,
EIORMERLY editor of the London Morning Advertiser
r arrived in the colony in December 1849. His name,
with those of Messrs. 0. K. Richardson, M. Moorhouse, and
others, appears on the provisional committee for the establish-
ment of the North Adelaide Mechanics’ Institute in 1851,
which afterwards developed into the S. A. Institute in 1855.
His pen was for some time employed on the various topics
of the day, until at last succumbing to long failing health
he passed away in April 1858. By the testimony of his
contemporaries he was “a man of a high order of ability and
character.”
Frances Keith Sheridan,
of the above, was a daughter of the Rev. Daniel
Mev Keith, D.D. Her motto was : —“ To work is to
pray,” Having established a school at Mackinnon-parade,
she continued her labours there, and for a period of seven-
and-twenty years encountered many difficulties and hardships
—common, it is true, to most early colonists, but more
particularly trying to one of her tastes and attainments, whose
experience had been of refined literary circles in England—
by an invincible spirit, energy, and brightness of disposition
which neither years nor suffering could wholly subdue. Her
contributions to the press were chiefly on political subjects,
and these, with school duties, her devotion to her children,
and a variety of literary pursuits, completely filled every
interval of an unceasingly active life. To her pupils, while
seeking to encourage talent, she strove to communicate an
■elevated tone of thought and feeling. Her reward (small
indeed pecuniarily, self-seeking being one of those elements
most foreign to her noble nature) was rather in the esteem
and affection of those with whom she was brought in contact.


Having seen her children occupying honourable positions in
the colony (her son, Mr. J. B. Sheridan the eminent jurist-
consult, and the late lamented Mr. Reginald Sheridan), she
died in January 1882. Of her it may be said —
“ ’Tis not to die ,
To live in hearts we leave behind.”
William Rounsevell, J.P.,
9NE of the early colonists, and a member of the staff of
the South Australian Company. He was a native of Corn-
wall, and born on April 30, 1816. Arrived in South Aus-
tralia by the ship “ City of Adelaide” in 1839. He held
several offices in the Police Force, but resigned in 1852 to go
to Victoria. He returned to the colony in the same year, and
commenced operations in the livery and coaching line, which
eventually assumed gigantic proportions, as he for many
years contracted for carrying nearly all the mails dispatched
in the colony. Subsequently he sold the business to the
firm known as Cobb & Co., and retired upon the considerable
property he had realized. He was an enthusiastic sportsman, and
a crack shot, both here and in England, and the interest he
took in field pastimes led him to stock Corryton Park with
various kinds of English game, which he was successful in
acclimatizing. Mr. Rounsevell revisited England in 1869-71,
and on his return resided chiefly at Glenelg. He was a most
successful colonist, and gained the respect of all with whom
he came in contact. On his death, which took place
at Glenelg, on October 5, 1874, in his fifty-eighth year, he
left a widow and two sons —the elder, Mr. John Rounsevell,
formerly a member of the House of Assembly, and largely
engaged in Government contracts, now Town Councillor, and
Mr. W. B. Rounsevell, M.P., at present a leading member of
the South Australian Parliament.


J. F. Schramm, J.P.,
4K old and well-respected resident of Kapunda, in which
town he carried on an extensive business for a number
of years. He took an active interest in all public matters,
and for a term represented East Ward in the Town Council,
and also held the position of Town Auditor. Subsequently,
with his family, Mr. Schramm removed to Carrieton, where
his interest in public affairs was still maintained, and here,
as at Kapunda, he soon won and retained the esteem of all
who knew him, and his name was added to the Commission
of the Peace. Mr. Schramm was a native of Germany,
where he was born in 1822. His death occurred at his
daughter’s residence, Kew Parkside, near Adelaide, on Sept.
11, 1885, in his sixty-third year.
Rev. James Daniel,
AK earnest, unobtrusive preacher, and an old colonist
He was for many years the pastor of the Clarendon
Baptist Church, in which capacity he was highly esteemed.
He died at Morphett Yale, June 24, 1874, aged seventy-one
years.
William Spietschka,
§KE of the most talented of musicians and teachers who
have ever been associated with South Australia. He
was born at Liebenau, Bohemia, in 1841, and by the death
of his father, the owner of extensive glass works in that
country, inherited a large fortune. He was educated at
Leipsic, and afterwards held a commission in the Bohemian
army, in which he saw much active service. He arrived in
this colony in 1862, and soon established himself as a teacher
of music, whilst as leader of the German Liedertafel he was
very popular. His death occurred from accident on January
22, 1867, at the early age of twenty-six years.


William John Cunningham
t REIVED in Adelaide in 1857. Joined the public service
of this colony as an operator in the telegraph office in
1858, and from that period till his death from apoplexy on
August 26, 1875, was employed in various capacities in con-
nection with the telegraph department, all of which he
carried out to general satisfaction. He was considered by
Mr. Todd “a most accomplished officer and valued coadjutor,”
whilst as Assistant-Superintendent of telegraphs by his
assiduous care he did much to bring the department over
which he presided to a state of efficiency.
William Hanson,
BROTHER of the late Sir R. D. Hanson, arrived in the
colony in 1855, and was shortly after appointed Engineer
to the Adelaide and Gawler Railway Commissions. Whilst
occupying this office he superintended the construction of the
line to Gawler, and subsequently its extension to Kapunda.
In December 1860 Mr. Hanson entered upon the duties of
Engineer, Colonial Architect and Inspector of Railways, and
in June 1865 he was made Acting-Manager of Railways.
111-health led to his retirement from the Government service
in 1867, and his death took place at Glenelg on July 14,
1875, in his sixty-fifth year.


A Biographical Note
ON
GEORGE E. LOYAU.
BY ATHA.
BACON has left it on record, that the most
humble author takes precedence of all crafts, callings,
or professions, be they civil, military, or tribunal. It is by
our writings that foreigners have been taught most to esteem
us, and this fact is the more noticeable in the expression of
Gemelli, the great Italian traveller, who told all Europe in
Hie year 1700, that he could find nothing amongst the
Anglo-Saxons, but their writings, to distinguish them from
the worst of barbarians. To be an author is to be allied with
poverty, and to form one of a grotesque race of famished
buffoons, whose calamities cannot, or will not, be understood
in these commercial times of money-getting. Australian
authors especially, or the best of them —are either unknown
or neglected. One or two there are who have made money,
but these loved not their art, and only wore the literary
mask, for the advancement of literature was not the first
object of their designs. Dr. Johnson had a notion that there
existed no motive for writing but money, and though crowned
heads have sighed with the ambition of authorship, this great
master of the human mind supposed that on this subject
men were not actuated either by love or glory. These are
commercial times at the antipodes, and the hope of profit has
always a stimulating influence even if it is a trifle degrading.
Habit and prejudice will reconcile even genius to the task of
money-making. And why not h In a country composed for
the most part of seekers after wealth, where there is no public
provision for men of genius save the Destitute Retreat, an
author need not be a more disinterested patriot than others.
If his livelihood lies in his pen—why not use it *1 He is no


worse knave than he who uses his tongue for the same-
purpose. But is there a livelihood in the pen 1 Perchance
the subject of this notice can answer that question more fully
than any man on this side of the Equator. If drudging on
in patient obscurity, and suffering the slights and “ stings of
outrageous fortune,” may be worth the designation of a
“livelihood,” then has the author of “Australian Wild
Flowers ” indeed lived. Far from me is the desire to degrade
literature by the inquiry—is there not some stone-breaking-
to be had in the place of a profession of letters 1 Perhaps the-
question may be useful to many a youth of promising talent?
who is impatient to abandon a lucrative post for the author’s
quill. Let such consider that the press is the only opening
for their productions, and even here they may be ousted by
the army of English scribes who invade the columns of
colonial newspapers year by year. Nevertheless, if we are to
have an Australian literature pure and simple, someone must
make a beginning. A man may labour with his pen like a.
horse in a mill till he becomes as blind and as wretched, but
his work is not forgotten, and if he has but laid one small
stone in the foundation of the noble edifice, he has accom-
plished more than Dives with a million at his bankers.
Amongst those who have toiled long and honorably in
the cause of Australian literature, Geo. E. Loyau may take*
first rank. For thirty years he has been connected with the
colonial press, in the capacity of editor, leader-writer, and
general contributor; whilst in poetry, essays, and fiction, he
has produced more than any other living Australian
author. Twenty-three years ago he published his first poem,.
“ The Australian Seasons,” in book form. It was reprinted
by several of the English newspapers, and received most
favourable notices in the colonial press. In quick succession
followed “ The Pleasures of Friendship,” “ Australian Wild
Flowers,” “ Colonial Lyrics,” “Tales in Yerse,” and many
more of a less ambitious order. To a man with such.


Bohemian tastes as he evidently possessed at that time, one
is at fault to guess how his mind found play to work out the
airy images of the brain in song. Bushmen and bullock
drivers some thirty years ago were certainly not famed for
refined imagery of thought or expression, yet Loyau was
more at home with these rough denizens of the bush than in
the elegant circles of city life, and his most expressive poems
were written while wandering, Bohemian fashion, the length
and breadth of Australia. From extensive rambling through
nearly every town and hamlet in the land, Loyau took to-
himself a wife in 1875. To the influence and judicious
counsel of his better-half, a far-seeing and amiable lady, the
author of this volume owes his safe anchorage in the harbour
of domestic happiness. Doubtless the incidents of his long
wanderings had furnished him with many of the quaint
characters depicted in his tales and sketches of colonial
experiences and adventure. Some of these are weird,
romantic pictures, but they are none the less true to nature,
and will be valuable to posterity, as showing what manner of
people comprised the bush pioneers of blew South Wales,
Queensland, and Victoria. The longest and best of Mr.
Loyau’s stories were written after his marriage : “ Leichardt
the lost Explorer,” “ The Early Days of New South Wales,”
“Out on the Flinders,” “The Castaways,” “ Affection’s Test,”
“The Bargunyah Eecords,” “Australian Press Experiences,”
“Types of Colonial Life,” “A Eemarkable Life,”
“Jollimonts’ Legacy,” “The Lifer,” “ The Victim of Circum-
stances,” etc., together with “Essays on Fifty Subjects”—
went through the columns of the press in the various
colonies. If the whole of these were gathered together for
publication they would comprise more than twenty volumes
of 200 pages each. Later on he wrote the “ Gawler Hand-
book,” “ The Eepresentative Men of South Australia,” and
“ Personal Adventures,” all of which were published in book
form in Adelaide.


Apart from liis undoubted right to rank as one of the
founders of Australian literature, Mr. Loyau has been con-
temporary with the best men in the field of letters that these
colonies have produced. He was the friend of Charles
Harpur (the father of Australian poetry), Henry Kendall,
Rev. Dr. Lang, Rev. W. B. Clarke, R. Hengist Horne, Frank
Fowler, R. P. Whitworth, FT. D. Stenhouse, F. S. Wilson,
Daniel Henry Denihey, Garnet Walch, and others, some of
whom have joined the great majority, but whose names will
live in the annals of Australia as pillars of its infant literature.
Loyau in one of his many letters to myself complains that he
found the literary life arduous and ill paid. For some years,
though editing a first-class country newspaper, and con-
tributing regularly to several magazines, he could only eke
out a bare existence, and the higher form of poetry was a
drug in the market. Thatcher, the comedian rhymster, made
more money out of his local songs in one town in Victoria
than Henry Kendall with his grand and soaring genius. Time,
however, is on the wing. Time will revenge the dead poet,
the sweetest of all Australian singers. The story of ten years
ago is the story of a bygone age. The recognition of true
worth must surely come ; and
“ What though thy muse, whose fount is in thy heart,
Doth sadly flow beneath a darksome shade !
Yet flowerets richly bloom in that deep glade,
Illumed by rays that from thy genius dart.
The vulgar come not to that lonely dell
Whose waters sweetly chime or louder swell.
Which are a mirror set in emerald case,
Reflecting fairy forms, and Virtue’s face.”
In this brief note friendship cannot show his honest face,
else could I recount that which were worthy of its name.
The poor help the poor, not perhaps so much in a pecuniary
way as in broad sympathy and love. Xone so poor as the
scribes of this new land; but they are, as a rule, a com


passionate brotherhood, ready to assist one another with
purse and pen. Sic vos non vohis.
Of Mr. Geo. Loyau’s efforts in poetry and prose the Town
and Country Journal , one of the oldest and best papers on
this side of the Atlantic, says :—“ In this hard, prosaic age y
when dress and show are regarded as the chief end of man-
kind, it is quite refreshing to find a man like the author of
“ Wild Flowers” and the “ Australian Seasons ” wooing the
muse in the midst of poverty and trial. If Mr. Loyau were
not both a bold and fearless writer, he would not dare to
publish poem after poem, and story after story, amongst a
population who have never shown much partiality for native
talent in letters. Some of his “ Wild Flowers ” are fair to
look upon, and exhale the grateful odour of the blossoms of
poetry. In all he has written Mr. Loyau is purely Australian.
In the city, or away in the far bush, he translates what he
sees, hears, and feels unaffectedly, but with great vigour and
expression and graceful ease of language.”
lam no prophet —a man cannot be one in his own country
—but through the vista of time I see the forms of a vast
throng that will surely fill this new land and raise it into one
of the great nations of the earth. To these shall the pioneers
of Australian letters look for that due right and recognition
which is lacking in our day. From these, not Loyau alone, but
I, together with the few who love their art above all con-
sideration of place and pay, shall undoubtedly obtain the
reward due to hard work and patient obscurity.
Oh, birds that sing such thankful psalms,
Rebuking human fretting,
Teach us your secret of content —
Your science of forgetting.
For every life must have its ills —
You, too, have times of sorrow—
Teach us, like you, to lay them by,
And sing again to-morrow.


For gems of blackest jet may rest
Within a golden setting,
And lie is wise who understands
The science of forgetting.
Ob, trees that bow before the gale
Until its peaceful ending,
Teach us your yielding, linked with strength,
Your graceful art of bending;
For every tree must meet the storm,
Each heart encounter sorrow :
Teach us like you to bow, that we
May stand erect to-morrow.
For there is strength in humble grace,
Its wise disciples shielding—
And he is strong who comprehends
The happy art of yielding.
Oh, streams which laugh all night, all day,
With voice of sweet seduction,
Teach us your art of laughing more
At every new obstruction ;
For every life hath eddies deep,
And rapids fiercely dashing,
Sometimes through gloomy caverns forced,
Sometimes in sunlight flashing.
Yet there is wisdom in your way,
Your laughing waves and wimples;
Teach us your gospels built of smiles,
The secret of your dimples.
Adelaide, S.A., November 1885.


APPENDIX.
the care taken by the author,
errors have crept into this work, and it is deemed
advisable to correct them here, and also add any additional
particulars really essential to make the biographies as complete
as possible.
Introductory. —For “J. Holden” read “W. Holden,”
and for “S. Skipper” “ S. J. Skipper.”
Page 41. — John Mitchell. —For “ Glasgow” read
■“ Kincardine,” Scotland; after the word “supporter” read
Trustee.”
Page 75. —William Henry Maturin, C. 8., D.A.C.G. —
Instead of “ Mr. Deputy-Commissioner Monk ” it should be
■“ Assistant-Commissary General Monk.”
Page 110. —George Styles.— lnstead of “he was born at
Amersham,” it should be “ Little Messenden.” He was the
■originator and one of the founders of the London Master
Bakers’ Pension Society, now an extensive Association. So
greatly was he esteemed by that body that his health was
drank at every anniversary dinner up to the time of his
■death, after an absence of thirty-seven years. He was also a
hard-working member of the Anti-Corn Law League, and was
thus brought in contact with Cobden, Bright, and other
members of that organization.
Page 129. Thomas Greaves Waterhouse, J.P.—The death
of Mr. Waterhouse occurred at Sunnyfield, Hampstead,
England, on October 8, 1885, in his 74th year. He left this
colony for the home country in consequence of failing health
in 1866, and before going was entertained at a public break-
fast in Pine-street Wesleyan Lecture Hall, when he was


presented with an address expressive of appreciation of his
munificent donations to religious and other institutions.
The kindly acts of Mrs. Waterhouse to the poor and the sick
were at the same time mentioned in high commendation.
They both especially interested themselves in the Draper
Memorial Church, and Mr. Waterhouse has, on many occasions
since his departure for England, given largely to churches and
benevolent societies all over the colony.
EPILOGUE.
aT last! At last this work is completed, it is hoped, to the
satisfaction of all interested. For two years the
author has been engaged in its compilation, and the difficulties
which have beset his path whilst endeavouring to procure
information were not trivial. Notwithstanding that the
biographies of many old colonists figure in its pages, there are
others equally important of whose history it was impossible
to obtain any reliable accounts; hence their omission from
the book. To render a work of this character complete it is
absolutely necessary that each year a similar volume with
additions or alterations should be issued. It is needless to
write eulogistic “In Memoriams ” over the dead, yet this is
what biographers generally are expected to do ; better far to
“ speak a good word for the living,’’ especially the old colonists,
many of whom need our sympathies here. The Old Colonists
Association is never heard of now. Why 'I In Victoria a
similar institution is a great success, and there is no reason
that it should lack support in South Australia.
FINIS.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
COALS, COKE, FIREWOOD.
Best New South Wales
HOUSEHOLD, STEAM, or SMITHS’
COALS, COKE, and MALLEE FIREWOOD
Delivered anywhere at LOWEST CURRENT PRICES.
I
Mii m
COAL MERCHANTS, SHIP OWNERS, A SHIPPING AGENTS,
27 Currie Street, Adelaide,
And MCLAREN WHARF, PORT ADELAIDE.
Messrs. E. GifEen and A. G. Lee represent us as Travellers and Collectors,
Telephone \o. £5O.
GUARDIAN
FIRE AND LIFE
ASSURANCE COMPANY,
x,o3sriDo3sr.
1 IM I
Subscribed Capital
Capital Paid-up
Total Funds
Total Annual Income
£2,000,000
£1,000,000
£3,903,000
£758,000
FIRE RISKS INSURED AT CURRENT RATES.
Offices —Grenfell Street, Adelaide
U


ADVERTISEMENTS.
w*
i
NEW IMPORTATIONS,
Are Now Unpacked and on View.
i
>*
. PC
m
o
b o
1 B
2 g
S 3 O
SB £
b o
S 85
Sr Hp*
.
CO
o S
Pu
£3
M*
-,*s
sa
* 'a'
:U; ;
p ilk
,S*Z;
A'
;■ A v -: w
Sir:
»
5*3
? V
i-a
w
A
<<
C/3
W
J
0
E
£
d
N
<
h
H
fl
Awarded the GOLD MEDAL for the Largest and best
Exhibit of Imported Articles of Artistic Taste
and Elegance
AT THE
ADELAIDE -EXHIBITION, 1881.
AGENT EOS THE
SJiICiITEB t CARBON t fliTEflS,
Cheavm’s, Doulton’s, aisd. other Makers.
ALL, SIZES KEPT IN STOCK.
ESfaBLISBEO l@@3.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
CHARLES AUBREY,
ESTATE AGENT,
ACCOUNTANT, ARBITRATOR, AUDITOR,
FIRE, LIFE, & PLATE-GLASS INSURANCE AGENT,
HOUSE, LAND, LOAN, & GENERAL COMMISSION AGENT.
Offices—MERCANTILE CHAMBERS, VICTORIA SGIUARE, East Side,
ADELAIDE.
JUST ISSUED—SECOND EDITION,
66 Rose Leaves from an Australian Garden;”
A Collection of Original Poems by
JOHM 3EE o’ 'W BIN J-. .
In Fancy Binding, 3/- per Copy, or if posted 6d. extra. The
versification in this interesting book is in Mr. John Howell’s best
style, and has received the highest encomiums from the South Aus-
tralian Press. Orders for copies should be sent to Me. GtEO. E.
Uoyau, the only recognised, Agent for Mr. John Howell, at the
Gr. P. 0., Adelaide.
South Australian Tobacco Factory.
Tobacco, Cigar, and Cigarette Manufacturers
AND IMPORTERS.
Proprietors of the Celebrated “EXGELSIOL” and BROAD GAUGE Brands of Tobacco.
HURTLE SQUARE, ADELAIDE.
Co.,
CHEMISTS <& IDIEUXJGG-ISTS,
The IiIKDLEY STMIET DISPENSARY,
Adelaide.
MEDICINES, BWS % CHEMICALS
At nearly ENGLISH PRICES.
“Telephone” connected with City, Port, and Suburbs.
U 2


ADVERTISEMENTS.
& WALTON,
LATE
PttOTOCTAPttIO ARTISTS,
BY SPECIAL
APPOINTMENT
( Sir W. F. D. Jervois, K.C.M.0., C.B. )
< Sir w. F. C. Robinson, K.C.M.O. >
(. Sir F. Napier Broome. )
TO THEIR
EXCELLENCIES
Portraiture in all its brandies turned out equal to the best London
and American Houses, and cannot be surpassed in the Colony.
PORTRAITS OF CHILDREN A SPECIALITY.
Cartes, 10s. 6d. Cabinets, 17s. 6d.
65 BUNDLE ST., ADELAIDE.
CHURIT S.
T. P. WELEOTJEFS Patent Propeller Dash Chums
Are now proved to be quicker, easier worked, and will
give fully lO per cent, more Butter than any other.
li Floeeie asks : —‘ Can you tell me any way of properly turning
cream into butter this weather P It will only come about half, and
will not come any thicker.’”— B.A. Chronicle , Saturday, Jan. 24,1885.
“ Floeeie. —With reference to your question as to butter not
coming, Mrs. Campbell, of Petersburg, writes : “If ‘ Floeeie ’ will
get a Welbourn’s Propeller Dash Churn she will have no more trouble
on that account. I have had one for some time, and the butter is
never longer than five or ten minutes in coming.”— B.A. Advertiser ,
Friday, Feb. 6, 1885.
T. P. Welbourn received the only Prize Medal for COOPERAGE\
Adelaide , 1867; First Order of Merit for Cooperage and
WHEELBARROWS, Adelaide , 1881; also , Special Men -
,tion for WELL BUCKETS and CAMEL CASKS.
ALL ORDERS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.
T. P. WELBOURN, Cooper,
GILLES ST. WEST, NEAfi KING WILLIAM ST. SOUTH, ADELAIDE,


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE UNIVERSAL AMERICAN MEDICINE
(A Perfect Chemical Compound),
WESTON’S WIZARD OIL.
From all Chemists, price Half-a-Crown.
ESTABLISHED IN AUSTRALIA IN 1864.
Read the following from a Sydney Gentleman , well known in official circles:
Mr. FRANK WESTON.
Dear Sir—Looking back at the days and nights of intense suffering
from the acute pains of Neuralgic and Inflammatory Rheumatism, it is
with no inconsiderable pleasure I record my testimony in favour of your
Wizard Oil and Magic Pills. By the persistent and prodigal use of your
Medicines I am restored to perfect health. I hope all who suffer the
tortures of Rheumatism will use your Wizard Oil and Magic Pills, when,
I am sure, their thanks and gratitude v. ill prompt them to do as I have
done. Wishing you long life and happiness,
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Very truly yours,
North Macquarie-st., Sydney, Nov. 16, 1883. JOHN O’LOUGHLIN.
Mr. FRANK WESTON. October 3, 1883.
Dear Sir—Recently sojourning in Australia to recruit my health, I
was completely cured of Rheumatic Fever and Liver Complaint by using
your Wizard Oil and Magic Pills, and cannot too freely express my grati-
tude for the benefit derived from the use of your medicines. I laid in a
stock from Rocke and Tompsitt before returning to India, but now learn
that your medicines are obtainable at Treacher & Co.’s, Limited, Bombay.
I am constantly recommending your Wizard Oil, etc., in this remote part
of India, and would advise you to make a local agency here. With
profound personal respect, I am, gratefully yours,
Commissariat Department, J. R. WILLIAM STARK.
Peshawur, Punjaub, India.
From a World-renowned Circus Proprietor ,
Mr. FRANK WESTON.
Dear Sir—Your Wizard Oil and Magic Pills have effected many
surprising cures of liver and kidney complaints, neuralgia, rheumatism,
and sprains. My company of athletes and horsemen are subjected to many
falls, sprains, bruises, and various accidents, but your celebrated medicines
subdue them all. lam never without your Wizard Oil and Magic Pills,
which are now nearly as well known throughout India as in Australia.
Great World Circus, Calcutta, Very truly yours,
10th Nov., 1883. JOHN WILSON
WESTON’S WIZARD OIL,
In Bottles Only, with Glass Stoppers, PRICE HALF-A-CROWN .
Sole Proprietor— FRANK^WESTON,
.Regent Street, Fitzroy, Melbourne.’


ADVERTISEMENTS.
11
48 & 50, King 1 William Street.
THREE COURSES , Is. - LADIES 9 ROOM .
:0:-
JJ :
WA XXxVuxX\> WWCCWv' •X\"\\Vv»\\
213 & 215, RUNDLE STREET.
Visitors will find the comforts of Home at the Eastern Coffee Palace.
:0:
Y. M, O. A. DINING ROOMS,
THE LARGEST IN THE CITY.
LUNCHEON TICKETS, 11s. 6d. per dozen.
Fresh Bill of Fare every Day. Ladies’ Boom.
J. JACKMAN, Proprietor.
VICTORIA ©Vi WORK'S*
162, RUNDLE STREET, ADELAIDE
(Opposite the York Hotel).
Gentlemen’s Suits, Ladies’ Dresses, Feathers, etc.,
o x* m Am mm
Every kind of work connected with the business carried on by experienced assistants,
GLOVES CAREFULLY CLEANED.
ADELAIDE LABOUR EXCHANGE.
BUNDLE PLACE,
A. E. USHER & CO.
Clerks, Drapers’Assistants, Watchmakers, Jewellers, Carpenters,
Cabinetmakers, Masons, Painters, Plumbers, Ironworkers, Printers,
Butchers, Bakers, Grocers’ Assistants, Agricultural Laborers, Gardeners,
Reapers, Shepherds, Shearers, Cooks, Boundary Riders, Station and
Farm Hands, awaiting engagements.
No expense incurred to employers of labor sending us
which will meet with prompt attention.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
M?SL, eo sJiLsSj
Practical Watchmaker, Jeweller, Gold and Silversmith,
Inventor, Importer, &c.,
85i BUNDLE STREET, ADELAIDE.
Watches of all descriptions from the Best Masters.
An Assortment of Silver and Electroplated Ware of
Beautiful Designs.
NORWOOD PHARMACY.
PRESCRIPTIONS and Family Recipes carefully prepared with the Purest
Drugs.
A good assortment of Hair Brushes, Tooth Brushes, Combs, Sponges, Perfumery,
and other Toilet Requisites.
Evans’ “ Neueialgia Specific” gives immediate relief to that distressing and
most dreaded of complaints. Sold only by
WHITE <Sk
FAMILY and DISPEKSITO CHEMISTS, PARADE, (Opposite Baptist Chapel),
In bottles at 2s. 6d. and Is. 6d, each.
W. R. LEWIS,
Sulmtar Htxtr llotarn Ijirhlk,
IMPERIAL CHAMBERS,
MTJRRA.T STREET,
Office of the Gawler Permanent Building & Investment Society.
■—l mi I 111 Hi I ————— ——EamaMß—————MWl
W. H. BURFORD & SONS,
GRENFELL STREET, ADELAIDE,
MANUFACTURERS OF
Mill fill®!, IWIIIIM, Mi met WIN,
OF LASTING PERFUME.
STEARINE CANDLES, all sizes, for House and Carriage use,
SUPERIOR TO IMPORTED.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
HENRY OLIVER,
CaWttd Ifefr, I'liliolstqcr,
4PULTENEY STREET,*-
Corner of Flinders Street,
FACTORY: WAKEFIELD STREET, CORNER OF CYPRESS STREET,
ADELAIDE.
W. L. WARE,
Corner of King William and Pirie Streets,
Money Lent on Mortgage , or Advances made on Shares
or other Security .
Transfers of Land, Leases, Mortgages, &c., effected under the
Real Property Act.
THE BUSINESS OF PUBLIC COMPANIES CONDUCTED.
ESTABLISHED IST2.


BRANCHES:
KAPUNDA, JAMESTOWN, AND QUORN.
0
P
H
♦
PRICES TO MEET
TIMES.
THE
Sii
S 3
iiiliiii
umvzxrnbSvtto
I
p
Reapers, Mowers, Wagons, &c..
Stump Jump Ploughs, Scarifiers, Harrows,
Windmills, Mangles.
Hd
t-«
td
POOP" 45 PP7ZPS POPP SPWS, 7555.
td
i-3
tz|
C=l
t»
o
i-a
cl
fed
td
W
GQ


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Oiß SPOT ttOTEi,
RICHARD JAMES,
IN returning sincere thanks for the patronage accorded to this old-
established and well-known Hotel, desires to announce to Travellers
and the General Public, that the
MURRAY STREET, GAWLER,
Has been greatly improved to meet the requirements of the times ;
additions of a first-class order have been made, which will enable him to
supply every want in accommodation for Visitors.
The COMMERCIAL and SAMPLE ROOMS are specialities in this
establishment, and Commercial Travellers and others will find their com-
fort has been studied in this respect.
Families can rely on good accommodation, with civility and attention
to their wants.
The Liquors are of the best quality, and the character which the
House has hitherto maintained for these will be strictly adhered to.
The charges are such as to place them within the reach of
and for cheapness and excellence in all its departments the “ Old Spot ”
will compare favorably with any hotel out of Adelaide or in Gawler.
The Cuisine and Victualling Department are under the supervision
of the host and hostess,"whose extensive experience is sufficient guarantee
for everything being carried out in first-class style.
BILLIARDS. .
The Room is Well Lighted, and has one of the best Tables in
the Colony.
GOOD STABLING under the supervision of an experienced Ostler ,


ADVERTISEMENTS.
CAPT? SWEET’S
COLLECTION OF
#
m
m
s VJ
ARE THE
FINEST IN THE COLONY,
*9mm
Q)o 7l\ ff'Q.jo C-pA
w J§ii wm»m
SEE AND JUDGE FOR YOURSELVES.
99 KING WILLIAM STREET,
ADELAIDE.
EDITHBURGH. EDITHBURGH.
BDITHBUEGH.
Second to none as a Watering- Place in South Australia,
“piifflip Heap”
THIS Fashionable BOARDING HOUSE, the largest establishment "of
its kind in the Colony, containing about Fifty Rooms, IS NOW
OPENED to the Public.
No trouble nor expense has been spared to make u Sultana House ”
a pleasant seaside resort ; and as the health-inspiring air of the Peninsula
is well known, the public ought to make arrangements to visit Edithburgh
during the season.
Traps always on hire. Splendid Bathing, Good Fishing and Boating.
Moderate Terms, and strict attention to the wishes of visitors, will
enable the Proprietor to merit the satisfaction of the public.
A conveyance will be at the jetty on arrival of steamer.
Telegrams and letters promptly attended to.
J. GOTTSCHALCK, Proprietor.
The new and fast steamer Warooka sails twice per week from Largs
Bay to Edithburgh, Saturday and Wednesday, at 9 a.m. Fares 7s. Gd.


ADVERTISEMENTS
ASHANTEE AND CANVAS HAMMOCKS.
JOSEPH ALIEN,
Tent, Tarpaulin, and Flag Manufacturer,
48 TOJDiE ST.# frbtlMftt'
Hi
: ;
'w'
■
sp
D
m.
C
css
SsJ
m
»
»
rn\
ii
&
v<?
il
sg?
m
m
A
,v 4
%
m
m
Wa
'M
m
'i
i
A VERY LARGE ASSORTMENT OF
TENTS, TARPAULINS,
FISHING TACKLE, DUCK, CANVAS, DRILL,
VERANDAH BLIND MATERIAL,
GUNS, REVOLVERS, and
GENERAL IRONMONGERY,
BEST MANILLA ROPE, &C,
TiN)T§, TARPAUIUNS, AM® PLAdS @5B MBBi*
PEACOCK AND BUCHAN'S PAINTS IN ALL COLORS.
SAMPLE CARDS ON APPLICATION.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
The Best and Newest Remedy for
KSEDUATISM, IOMBiM, SCIATICA, TIC COW
AND ALL INFLAMMATORY ACHES AND PAINS, IS
$
Pllf IR’g
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN OILS
■
Testimonials from residents of Adelaide and Suburbs as to the Efficacy and Curative
Properties of this Valuable Remedy
COUNCILLOR KLAUER, Hindley-street, Adelaide, a sufferer from Lumbago for
some time, and after trying many remedies, Carpenter’s South Australian Oils
gave him so much relief, that he desires to recommend it to his friends.
MR. COULTAS, Tailor, King William-street, suffered from Rheumatics; he used
Carpenter’s South Australian Oils, and was so much benefitted that he considers
they surpass all other remedies.
MR. JNO. ANDERSON, Wheelwright, Halifax-street.—Broken leg, from which after
being set suffered great weakness for years. Found more real benefit from
Carpenter’s Oils than all other remedies, as it strengthened the limb.
MRS. STEWARD, Gouger-street.—Neuralgia for some time. Found immediate •
relief by use of the Oils.
MR. ALDRIDGE, Freemasons Hotel.—Rheumatics, Wonderful benefit.
MRS. MILLER, Wright-street.—Neuralgia. Great relief.
MR. G. SAMPSON, Unley.—Rheumatics. Great benefit.
MR. MASS, Butcher, Angas-street.—Rheumatics. Wonderful relief after being
laid up for a long period.
MRS. S. TREEBEY, Central Market.—Neuralgia. Failed to obtain rest until she
applied the Oils. Will now have no other remedy.
MR. WARE, Exchange Hotel, Hindley-street.—Suffered for many years with an
injured leg. Experienced wonderful relief from its use.
MR. MURRAY, Terminus Hotel, North Terrace. —Rheumatics and gout. Found
great benefit.
MR. WIEDEMANN, Mount Barker.—Rheumatic Gout. Received immediate relief.
MR. DRURY, Plumber, Hilton. —Rheumatic Gout. Says Carpenter’s Oils are a
wonderful remedy.
MRS. STEVENS, Baker, Angas-street.—Unable to move without pain. Tried all
other remedies for Rheumatics, and after using Carpenter's Oils was able to •
walk with ease in two or three days.
MR. CHAS. BROOKS, London Hotel, Flinders-street.—Sprained knee. Immediate
relief after one or two ai
Other Testimonials if Space Would Admit.
Sold Everywhere, or by the Proprietor,
9
COLBY PLACE,
HALIFAX STREET, ADELAIDE.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
ESTABLISHED 1838.
J, S, BAGSHAWsSON,
Makers of
Li
gHI
i HU' —jsjwps&g
f L
m
m
■3t
• H A
SON
T
«-A
; ;: 'A'
D'A
SI
mm
tm si
W/
SBe
im
PC1I«
Ifi
-
357
aJ? : S3. X.
m.
ss
y
sS
::
W \
A V a
: /
A'
IlSstf
Ml
MX
V
m
mr*
■t
J. 5
Elevators with Double Bag Jumpers,
2 and 4 Horse-Power Works,
Steel-Mouth Three-Knife Chaffcutters, Nos. 4 to 7,
Nos. 1 and 2 Corn Crushers, and Grinders,
Chafl Mill Requisites and Knives
Always on Hand.
HAVING- NO AGENTS, PLEASE ADDRESS
ELIZABETH STREET, ADELAIDE.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
EARL OF ZETLAND HOTEL,
Corner of FLINDERS & FREEMAN STREETS.
ADELAIDE.
JOSEPH JENE, Proprietor.
(L?I¥E 0F ¥JIE ROTEIi EUROPE.)
This Hotel is Centrally Situated.
A Conveyance from the Hotel will meet every North Train.
Visitors and Travellers will be conveyed from and to the Railway
Station Free of charge.
BEST BRANDS ONLY KEPT OF WINES, SPIRITS, ALES, PORTER, AND LAGER BEER.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL.
First-class Stables and Yard.
HENRY S
OTA
L L,
SOLICITS YOUR PATRONAGE FOR ALL KINDS OF
FRUIT TREES, FLOWERING PLANTS,
ORNAMENTAL TREES,
GARDEN SEEDS, FLOWER SEEDS,
And every thing connected with Gardening. Write for Catalogues.
Special Quotation for Quantities.
Y
PAYNEIIAM NURSERY, and at
77 BUNDLE STREET, ADELAIDE.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
As the JUBILEE EXHIBITION Is approaching,
Money can be saved by patronising the
Tailoring Establishment and Photographic Gallery of
B. HARRIS,
164 Bundle Street, Adelaide.
WELL, here is friend HARRIS once more to the fore,.
He’s still at the head of the trade !
He sells just as cheaply as he’s done before,
His suits are the best that are made.
He envies no tradesman his share of good luck,
Though he scorns petty tricks in the trade,
He never “ sells off,” but just keeps “selling on,”
Good clothing that’s faithfully made.
If e’er you should drop into his neat shop,
Delighted you will be, I’m sure,
The stock that is there is both choice and rare.
And suited for rich or for poor.
The prices are low, so don’t further go,
Try HARRIS’S Trousers and Vest;
For years they will wear, without patch or tear,
His Lobethal Tweed is the best.
He a fit guarantees, and you’ll feel quite at ease
In a suit that by HARRIS is made,
Unlike the rough slops, now sold at some shops
Where they cut down and ruin the trade.
If an article’s good, it must be understood
That it cannot be sold under cost;
He’s no shoddy and sham, no humbug or flam,
HARRIS makes it his pride and his boast,
That although he does not sell trousers at 9/0,
he can nevertheless give a good pair of
them for 13/6, which will give satisfaction and
comfort to the wearer •
HARRIS’S TAILORING ESTABLISHMENT k PHOTOGRAPHIC GALLERY
ARE AT
164 Rundle Street, Adelaide.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
CM.TOWIE ttOTEt,
CALTOWIE.
ARTHUR W. CARLIER
Having taken this well-known Hotel, offers Superior Accommodation
to Commercial Travellers and Visitors.
CHOICEST BRANDS WINES AND SCI BITS.
Good Stabling.
For PUKE and FIRST-CLASS
\\\\\\\\\\\ WWWVvN!
E*v
ao to
STEVENS & AMBROSE,
4 Hindley Street & Pitt Street, off Franklin Street
ADELAIDE.
To Patrons of Literature in South Australia.
Mm
AUTHOR of “The Representative Men of South Australia/’ “Gawler
Handbook,” “Tales of the Early Days of Settlement in New
South Wales,” “Notable South Australians,” “Diamonds and Paste,”
“ Types of Colonial Life,” “ The Secret Organizations of Pennsylvania,”
“Victim of Circumstances,” “Jollimont’s Legacy,” “Ormonde the
Reformer,” “ Leichhardt the Lost Explorer,” “ Pounds, Shillings, and
Pence,” “ Colonial Press Experiencse,” “ The Bargunyah Records,”
“Tales in Verse,” Poems, and Essays on various subjects, &c., &c., here-
with announces his intention of PUBLISHING QUARTERLY a
Volume of
Original Tales anil Sketches of Life and Character in Australia.
Pour Volumes will be issued Annually, and bound at the end of the year.
ISO Rages. Colored Covers. Price Two Shillings per Copy.
No. I.—To be issued in March next. “Australian Tales and
Reminiscences.”
No. 2. —“ The Bargunyah Records,” or the Fortunes and Misfortunes
of a Colonial Newspaper Proprietor.
No. B.—“ The Lifer,” and other Tales of Early Days in New South
Wales.
No. 4.—“ Tales in Verse,” “ The Australian Seasons,” “ The Pleasures
of Friendship,” and other Poems.
Intending Subscribers will please forward their names early to the Author,
GEO. E. LOYAu, at the General Post Office, Adelaide.
W


ADVERTISEMENTS.
That it will CUKE INDIGESTION there is not
the slightest doubt.
Gross’s Indigestion Drops,
A CERTAIN CURE
For Indigestion, Flatulence, Spasms, Wind in the
Stomach, Colic Fains, Sich, Nervous and Bilious
Headache, Liver Complaint, Sc.
It gives INSTANT RELIEF, and quickly CURES the worst forms of INDIGESTION and
evils arising therefrom.
His Excellency Sir W. C. F. Eobinson, writing of Cross’s
Indigestion Drops, says “ that the preparation is highly spoken of.”
Key. J. Nicholson, Wesleyan Minister, writes: —“ Several times
when having occasion to use them [Cross’s Indigestion Drops] I
obtained distinct and sensible relief. I have also met numerous
persons in the district who have acknowledged being benefited.”
T. Fotherinoham, Esq., J.P., G-awler, says : —“ Your Indigestion
Drops have effected a remarkable change for good. I have suffered
with Indigestion for years, and am very pleased to testify to the great
benefit that I have derived from their use.”
Hey. J. Foster, Bible Christian Minister, writes: —“I am
grateful for the relief I have obtained from the use of your invaluable
Drops, which have done me more permanent good than all other
medicines I have had for the same complaint.”
Cross’s Indigestion Drops have been awarded at Exhibitions
Silver Medals and Certificates of Merit (which I shall be extremely
pleased to show to any person who may favour me with a visit). At
New Zealand, Western Australia, Mount G-ambier, Adelaide, Q-awler,
and Calcutta, the commissioners recognised this cure for Indigestion,
and awarded the proprietor accordingly. It is pleasant to the taste,
and guaranteed not to contain anything injurious to the most delicate
constitution of either sex.
Can be obtained from all respectable Colonial and Foreign Agents .
Sold Everywhere, in Bottles 2s. 6d., 4s. 6d., 7s. 6d., 12s. 6d.
SOLE PROPRIETOR, MANUFACTURER, AND PATENTEE :
CHARLES GROSS,
Life Member Pharmaceutical Society of Australasia ;
Member Homoeopathic Pharmaceutic Society, Great Britain;
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE OLDEST AND MOST EXPERIENCED
Watchmaker and Optician
IN ADELAIDE.
Knowledge of the trade gained from seven years’ apprenticeship in
England, and fifty years’ experience in either actual working at the
hoard or superintending others doing so.
Inventor of Several Mechanical Novelties.
High-class Watches, Clocks and Physical Apparatus in Stock,
and repaired, under E. Sawtell’s personal supervision, by skilful
workmen who have faithfully served their apprenticeship in England,
Spherico-cylindrical Lenses actually ground on the premises to the
Adelaide Oculists’ Orders,
Spectacles'fitted on the Dioptric System.
Patronised by Royalty, the South and West Australian Grovern-
ments, and specially appointed to their Excellencies the Governors of
both these Provinces.
3 RU NDLESIR EE T.
CHAR Z* ES HILL,
Professor of Drawing,
A 3 jl 1N TJS Si cf EJSTQ- < 31jl'VE ( R,
ALIX HOUSE, SOUTH TERRACE,
ADELAIDE ;
Or Victoria Chambers, Flinders Street.
Bindmarih Squats Saw Mills aid link W
W. EHMCKE & GAETJENS.
A Large and Well-Assorted Stock of Building Material, Corru-
gated and Plain Galvanized Iron, Cement , Zinc,
Nails, Screws , Gutters , &c., always on hand.
TURNERY, SPOKES, SHAFTS, NAYES, FELLOES.
Ready-made Doors and Windows. Country Orders executed with Despatch.
w 2


(arey, Page (a
H PRINTERS, STATIONERS, S LITHOBRAPBERS,
%
TOW
B
s
■ 1
Orders for Ornamental and General Printing Promptly Executed at Moderate Prices.
THE PERSONAL ADVENTURES
OF GEO. E. LOYAU:
A true and interesting narrative of the Author’s remark-
able experiences during the past thirty years in four
of the Australian Colonies.
Illustrated Covers ; 105 pages.
Copies, Pric© One Shilling, to be had only from
GrEO. E. LOYAU,
General Post Office, Adelaide.
JF m wzuEixraoxr,
G- A W Tj IE JR .
Auctioneer and Valuator,
:o:
STOCK BOUGHT AND SOLD PRIVATELY.
Sales of Horses, Cattle, Sheep, Pigs, Implements, &c., &c., at the
Old Bushman’s Yards, G-awler, every Saturday, at 2 o’clock, and
at Willaston, on the Second and Last Thursday in each Month.
:o:
Agent for Insuring Haystacks, Growing Crops, & Buildings.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE
imp ip,
'-9-K<r
(6 abler (Times,
AND
tantmrtr,
ARE NOW INCORPORATED.
WILLIAM BAPNET, Proprietor,
G- _A_ W Hi IE JEI _
Is the Oldest and Best Provincial Paper in
South Australia.
LARGE CIRCULATION IN TOWN AND COUNTRY,
0
Scale of Charges for Advertisements.
rjWO Lines, One Shilling; Three Lines, One Shilling
-L and Sixpence; Four Lines, Two Shillings; Five
Lines, Two Shillings and Sixpence; Six Lines, Three
Shillings; and every additional line, Fourpence. Liberal
Discount on repeated insertions.
Subscription.
Single Copy, Id.; per Quarter (in advance), Is.; ditto
(booked), Is. 6cL; per Annum (in advance), 4s. Postage
extra.
Advertisers.
All orders should be legibly written on the face or
back of Advertisements; and where no order is given,
Advertisements will be continued until countermanded or
out of date. Orders for discontinuance cannot be
attended to after Thursday morning.
x


« L
- 3
at
sc
uu
N B
E®
- >-.
gMWttt
yss=
HI U £
= >
S a
WHINHAM CQLX.EQE, KTORTH ADEI.AID:
ESTABLISHED BY MR. JOHN WHINHAM IN 1854.
ADVERTISEMENTS


COLLEGE is situated at the corner of Ward and Jeffcott Streets, and occupies
two-and-a-half acres of Land. The position is select and central, and in close proximity to
the Park Lands and Torrens Lake. Great care has been taken in the construction and internal
arrangement of the buildings ensure both the health and comfort of the inmates. A Handsome
Lecture Room and Commodious Class Rooms, together with all the latest appliances, combine to
render the College well adapted to promote the aims of the Management, which are to develope —
Ist. MORAL TRAINING.— Every care is exercised to foster a high moral tone
and sound principles.
2nd. PHYSICAL TRAINING, which is promoted by Drilling, Gymnastics,
Athletics, Swimming, &c.
MENTAL TRAINING. —This department is both thorough and compre-
hensive, embracing—
1. A solid grounding in the rudiments.
A Commercial Training.
The higher branches of Mathematics.
Greek and Latin.
Modern Languages (French, German, etc.)
Music (Vocal and Instrumental) and Drawing.
Classes for preparing Students to pass the Matriculation,
Primary, and other University, as well as the Civil Service
Examinations.
JOHN WHINHAM & SONS.
3rd.
IL
111.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
ADVERTISEMENTS


ADVERTISEMENTS.
TO NEWSPAPER PROPRIETORS and PUBLISHERS,
IN THE
COLONIES, AMERICA, or ENGLAND.
A ILL MY PBOBOGTIOHS,
WHETHER IN
PROSE OR VERSE,
ARE
COPYRIGHT,
THOSE desiring to REPRODUCE them in News-
papers or Book Form, are requested first to
communicate with the Author, to prevent infringement
of the
COPYRIGHT ACT.
A LARGE NUMBER OF
Christmas and lev Tear Stories,
Australasian Tales and Sketches, &c.
FOR DISPOSAL AT CHEAP RATES.
Faithful pictures from real life, and founded on the
remarkable experiences of the Author.
Letters Addressed —
GEO. E. LOTAH,
General Post Office, Adelaide,
will have immediate attention.
Carey, Page & Co., Printers, Waymouth Street, Adelaide.




