

Pet'H PPm -y / A:
l€qc| t r» v v / Oj ■ i
/)
. /<■ '*"**' ' —
:. : • . / ■ ■
/ / / /
• *
♦
6/' • ; v, ■. ■ ■:■
»> ' i , ,, , - , I {, , , H I I I I , I I I
I " >’••■■ .;
I




YI. — Notes on the Dulce of York Group, New Britain, and New
Ireland. By Rev. G. Brown.
I arrived at Port Hunter, Duke of York Island, on August
15th, 1875, in the missionary brig John Wesley, and left by the
same vessel on August 31st, 1876. During the months I
resided there we were in constant daily communication with
the natives, and by steam-launch and whale-boat made many
journeys to New Ireland and New Britain, visiting the people
and residing for some time amongst them.
The Expedition, which was placed under my charge, was
organised by the Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Missionary
Society, for the purpose of establishing a mission in those
islands, if found practicable; and for this purpose I was accom-
panied by eight Fijian and two Samoan native teachers, with
their wives and families.
On landing at Port Hunter, a small house was cut and
erected by the crew of the mission vessel and the teachers;
coals and a few stores were landed, and then the vessel sailed
for Sydney, leaving us a small steam-launch and boat for
exploring and visiting the adjacent islands. It formed no part
of the original plan that the writer should remain on the group,
and no suitable provision was made for such purpose; but on
arrival in the group it was deemed best for some European to
remain with the teachers. Had this been foreseen, some
supplies, stores and instruments, of which we often felt the want,
would have been taken with us.
Duke of York Island, as it is improperly called on the charts,
is really a small group of twelve islands, seven of which are
inhabited. Makada, the furthest island' to the N.w., lies in
4°-7 s. and about 152° or 153° E. long. I had no chart by me
from which to obtain the correct longitude; but a chart was
prepared during our residence in the group by Mr. Blohm, and
was forwarded by me to the Admiralty. Makada is about
2J- miles in length, and is the highest land in the group. It is
separated from the Duke of York Island by a channel or lagoon
about a mile and half in width, and averaging from 6 to 17
fathoms in depth. Two small islands, called Maiit, lie off the
n.e. entrance to this lagoon, and are only separated from each
other and from the two larger islands of Makada and Duke of
York by narrow channels. The lagoon thus formed is called
Port Ferguson. It is well sheltered and protected from all
prevailing winds. There is another entrance to it from the
west side, with good channel for ships. The soundings between
the reef of Makada Island and the small island of Maiit were


from to 17 fathoms, averaging 11 fathoms in the harbour,,
and from 14 to IT fathoms at the west entrance. There is also
a good channel, with from 7 to 10 fathoms, between the two
small islands called Maiit. Between the s.E. island of Maiit
and Duke of York Island the channel is not more than 3
fathoms deep, and very narrow.
The principal island is called Duke of York Island, but the-
natives have no general name for the whole island, each district
having its own peculiar name. The Port Hunter natives have
adopted the name Duke of York, but they also restrict it to-
their own particular district. The island is about 8 miles in
length, and about 5 miles in width. A reference to the chart
will show that at Waterhouse Cove and at Port Hunter the
island is very narrow, and native tradition asserts that there
was formerly a channel into Port Ferguson at both these
places, and that the high land to the north-west of Waterhouse
Cove, and that between it and Port Hunter, were islands like
the two now called Maiit, but higher and larger. The tradition
is probably correct, as the land on both these isthmuses bears
evidence of comparatively recent formation.
At the south end of Duke of York Island there is another
large lagoon, called Port Wesley, which is formed by the
islands called Mauke, Utuan, Meoko, and Mualim. These lie
off the south end of the island in a semicircle, and enclose a fine
sheet of water, quite sheltered from all winds, with good
anchorage in almost every part of it, and having two safe and
easy entrances east and west. The eastern entrance is between
Mualim and Meoko; the western one is between Mauke and
Duke of York Island. Depth of water in lagoon from 6to 10-
fathoms ; sandy bottom.
All the islands have shore or fringing reefs, but these rarely
extend for more than 100 yards from the beach; whilst on
many parts of the large island the water is quite deep to within
a few feet of the cliffs. In Port Hunter the largest vessel
might be moored in smooth water so close to the reef that a
short plank alone would be necessary to enable any one to pass
from the ship to the shore.
The tides are very irregular, and seem to be much affected
by the prevailing wind and currents. A change of wind was on
some days sufficient to counteract almost entirely the usual ebb
of the tide. There is only one tide in the twenty-four hours.
The flood tide in the channel between New Ireland and Duke of
York sets to the north along the coast of the latter island, and
the ebb to the south.
During the whole of the north-west monsoon, or from
November to the end of April, the current in the channel sets-


strongly to the south-east. During some of these months, espe-
cially January and February, it was very strong indeed, and
the channel between Duke of York Group and New Ireland was-
covered with trees, which, from the number and size of the.
barnacles adhering to them, and the quantities of Crustacea and
fishes in and about them, must have been a long time in fire-
water. The current, I believe, changes during the south-east
monsoon, setting north-west in that season, but not running so-
strongly as during the north-west monsoon.
There are few permanent springs on the large island, but on
Makada there are several, one at least of which reaches the sea
as a small running stream, and has been long used by whaling-
vessels as a watering-station. Water may be found on the
beach below high-water mark at several places, but the only
appearance of anything like a large spring or small stream ou
Duke of York Island was observed in exploring the inlet from
Port Wesley, which we were not able to follow to its head, nor
to describe the course of accurately, from having no compass-
in the canoe. The inlet seemed to terminate in thick man-
grove swamps, with a small stream of fresh water issuing from
it at low water. The natives, however, report another stream of
good water as issuing on the beach outside the western entrance
to Port Wesley. The islands in this group consist of coral
limestone, and rise at most parts abruptly from the water in
steep perpendicular cliffs. The whole of the islands are densely
wooded and very fertile, though the soil is not at all deep.
_ On New Ireland we visited some of the villages on many
different occasions, and examined a line of coast extending from
Metlek, near Cape Bougainville, on the east coast, to a point to
the north of Cape Gevry, on the west coast. This is about 130
miles of coast-line. We also crossed the island from west to east,
at a point bearing n.n.e. from Duke of York Island, reaching
the east coast at a place called Kudukudu; the island of Gerrit
Denys, bearing n. J av. ; and another island, supposed to bo-
one of the Caen Islands, bearing e. by n. \K. The west coast
consists of a mountain range, rising in most places abruptly
from the beach, with jagged and broken peaks, and intersected
with deep gullies and ravines, which seem to terminate in
many instances inland at the centre of the range, at the base
of steep peaks, on which the marks of landslips are plainly
visible. The mountains are all well wooded, and the whole of
the coast examined was well watered by numerous small
streams and rivers, the beds of most of them showing that in.
seasons of flood large bodies of water find their way down them
to the sea. There are very few fringing or shore reefs on that.


part of the west coast examined by us. In most parts the
beach is formed of water-worn shingle or gravel, brought down
by the rivers and heaped up by the swell from the prevailing
trade-winds. In most places the water is quite deep close
inshore, and we could rarely find anchorage for more than a
few boat-lengths from the beach.
The principal part of the range examined by us is formed of
a “ compact light grey limestone, somewhat crystalline, no coral
or fossils of any kind visible to the naked eye.”
On New Ireland I obtained some large carved figures, which
seemed to us to be composed of chalk or burnt coral lime.
They were kept in a large house, enclosed with reed fence, and
made quite “tabu” to women and children, who were not
allowed to go near the place, or to look at the figures if carried
outside. Dances were performed in their honour, but they did
not appear to be objects of worship. Concerning the material
of which they are composed, Professor Liversedge writes: —
“ The rock from which the figures brought from New Ireland
are carved is a true chalk; in composition it consists essentially
of calcium carbonate, and on examination under the microscope
it is seen to be made up almost exclusively of the shells of
innumerable foraminifera, those of the well-known globigerina
being particularly abundant. By brushing the chalk under
water with a moderately hard tooth-brush or nail-brush, count-
less numbers of the almost microscopic shells of these rhizopods
can be seen, even without the aid of a lens, to at once stand out
in bold relief. On treating it with dilute hydrochloric acid, it
dissolves with great effervescence, and leaves a slight insoluble
residue, consisting mainly of silica. Under the microscope a
few siliceous spicules of sponges, and what is very like the
broken frustule of an occasional diatom, are seen mixed with
grains of sand in this residue.
“ Dana mentions, in his work on £ Corals and Coral Islands,’
that the only known locality for chalk in the Pacific is the
•elevated coral reef of Oahu, near Honolulu; but he states that
Professor Bailey found, on microscopical examination, no trace
of foraminifera or other characteristic organic bodies; hence
this limestone from Oahu is by no means of so typical a chalk
rock as that from New Ireland.”
Since submitting these specimens to Professor Liversedge, I
have received some information about the material from which
these figures are formed, which, if proved to be correct, will
explain the presence of this chalk on an island like New Ireland.
I am told by my native lad from the Duke of York Group,
nho is with me, that there is no regular deposit of the chalk on
the mainland, but that it is hove up on the beach in large


blocks by the tidal waves after any severe earthquake, when
the natives of the -particular district ivhere alone it is so found
take it and carve these figures from it, which they afterwards
sell to other tribes.
The island is not well delineated on existing charts. Thu
range from Kalil (n.x.e. of Port Hunter, Huke of York Group)
gradually slopes down to the north, and when near Cape
Givry is much narrower than described on the chart; in fact,
at a place called Kurumut it is not, I believe, more than one
mile in width. To the north of Cape Givry the land rises
again very abruptly, and trends away to the north-west.
On expressing my intention to cross the island, I was strongly
advised by the coast natives not to attempt it; and most fearful,
accounts were given us of the ferocity of the natives, and the
difficulties and dangers of the way. I was assured that the
natives on the opposite side of the island would certainly attack
us, even if we escaped the Bush tribes. lam inclined to believe
that, though they certainly exaggerated the dangers, probably
from a disinclination for us to go to any other district than their
own, they themselves really believed in them, and thought it
very unwise for us to attempt to cross to the opposite side.
They live in such constant hostility to each other, and are so
afraid of the Bush tribes, that they themselves rarely go out
of their respective districts, and would most certainly expect to
be attacked by any tribe through whose country they should
attempt to pass.
One of our teachers stationed at Kalil, failing to induce any
of the people there to go with him, went in company with a
man who had some family connection with some one in the
interior and on the opposite side, and on his return we started.
Our company consisted of J. Holmes, a seaman from the mission
vessel, who had stayed with me; W. Hicks, a half-caste young
man from Fiji; four Fijian teachers, and several Duke of York
and New Ireland natives. We started from Kalil and followed
up the bed of the Matakin Eiver for some distance, and then
struck across the range which rises abruptly from the coast.
The range was very rough and broken, and the ascent very
abrupt, necessitating some actual climbing in several places.
We reached the table-land in about seven hours. From the
mountain scale on a small pocket aneroid the highest elevation
reached would be a little more than 2500 feet. The reading on
the beach was 29 • 95, and the lowest reading in crossing was
27 * 20. After reaching the summit of the range we travelled
along a pretty regular table-land for several hours, the readings
of the aneroid only varying from 27'80 to 27 • 95; and then
we descended regularly through a country where the road


passed alternately through thick hush, and open land covered
with thick high coarse grass. The land on the east side consists
•chiefly of a “ light porous clay-coloured soil, probably derived
mainly from the decomposition of the trachyte,” though in the
•open spaces the clay seemed to be much stiffer than the soil in
the bush and far inland. The ascent from the coast is much
more gradual on the east side than it is on the west. We
experienced no opposition from the natives in the interior, or
trom those on the east coast, but, on the contrary, had a most
friendly reception by them, and were well supplied with food.
We reached Kudukudu on the evening of the same day, having
been about twelve hours on the way. On our way back we saw
more of the Bush people than we saw on our going over. They
had heard of our visit, and so were looking out for us on our
return. From the number of adult males we saw, it was very
•evident that the interior is well populated. Some few attempts
were made to stop our way, but a few small presents speedily
removed all obstacles. We saw very few birds, though we
heard the large hornbill several times. A¥e had abundant
proofs of the cannibalism of the natives. In one house I counted
thirty-five human lower jawbones suspended from the rafters,
most of which were blackened with smoke; but some of them
were quite clean, and had not been long there. A human hand,
smoke-dried, was hanging in the same house; and just outside
I counted seventy-six notches in a coco-nut tree, each notch of
which, the natives told us, represented a human bodv, which
had been cooked and eaten there. The name of the chief was
Sagina, which means “ Smelling of,” or a “ Strong Smell,” and
was given him because the smell of cooked pork, or human
flesh, was said to be always perceived in his village.
A most singular and barbarous custom prevails here in the
f reatmeut of some of the young girls. When about six or eight
years of age they are taken to a large house, which is well
fenced round, and made strictly tabu. Inside of the house are
a number of conical structures, about seven feet in height, and
.about ten or twelve feet in circumference at the bottom and for
about four feet from the ground, when they taper off to a point
at the top, so presenting something like the appearance of
large candle-extinguishers. These rooms or cages are made of
the broad leaves of the pandanus, which are sewn quite close
together, so that no light and very little air can enter. On one
side is an opening or doorway, which is closed by a double door
•of plaited coco-nut leaves and pandanus-leaves. In each of
these cages a young girl is placed when she is about six or
eight years of age, and she has to remain there until the
mammas are fully developed, when she is taken out and her


marriage feast is celebrated. We were told that these houses
are strictly “ tabu ; but in our case a few presents gained us
admittance, and by a few more we persuaded the chief to allow
the cages to be opened, that we might see the inside of them,
though the old woman who was sent for to undo the fastenings
was at first very unwilling to do so. After a little more talk,
the chief allowed the girls to come out to receive a few presents
-of beads which I held out as an inducement to them, and we
then saw the inside of the cages, of which there were three,
each containing a girl. About three feet from the ground there
was, in each structure a small stage of bamboo erected, and on
this the inmate had to sit or crouch, as there was not room to
lie down. There was nothing in the cages except some joints
of bamboo, filled with water, of which we were told the girls
drank a large quantity. The atmosphere inside was hot and
stifling, and it seems so incredible that human beings could
■exist for any length of time in such places, that it was only
after repeated inquiries that I could believe it to be a fact.
When the girls got out to come for the beads I held out, the
old woman who attended them placed pieces of bamboo on the
ground for them to walk upon, as their feet must not touch the
ground all the time they are in confinement. When they told
us that one of the girls had been so confined for more than five
years, and had never been outside the house during all those years,
I could scarcely credit the assertion, and it was only after-
repeated inquiries and cross-questionings that I found that
such was actually the case. The conclusive testimony was
that they bad fished the Palolo five different seasons, and as
we know that that annelid is only obtained at intervals of
twelve months, it was quite certain that they meant five of our
years, and not five seasons of six months each. The girls only
come out of these cages into the large house once a-day to wash
in a small wooden bowl placed near each doorway. I asked
if they never died during their confinement; but the people
said “ JSTo.” On asking again if they were not allowed outside in
case of sickness, they said, “ No; that sick or well they must stay
there until their breasts were large.” The eldest girl, they
told us, would soon be taken out, but the other poor little
creatures would have a long time to remain. When we con-
sider that these three structures were inside a house with closed
sides, standing on sandy soil, and surrounded by a reed fence
through which very little wind could pass, we may form some
idea of the state of the atmosphere inside of them in such a
latitude as this.
When we came outside again, I saw some girls with deep
fringes crossed over the breasts and back, quite covering


the mammae. These fringes have to be worn until the breasts
are fully developed. This custom is followed by those whose
parents cannot, or are unwilling to, hear the expense of the
feasts which the other barbarous custom entails.
The natives tell me that a similar custom, in a modified
form, prevails also on the west coast of New Ireland.
On New Britain I have examined the coast from Cape Orford
and Spacious Bay to Cape Palliser, then round Blanche Bay
and as far as Port Weber, at the head of a deep bay, about
20 miles east of Cape Lambert. The coast from Cape Orford
to Cape Palliser presents no remarkable features. It consists
of a low mountain range, rising, as in New Ireland, abruptly
from the beach. The island is, however, much wider than New
Ireland, and some lofty peaks are visible far inland. The
shore reefs are very small, and in many places are altogether
wanting, the water being quite deep close inshore. Blanche
Bay has evidently been formed by the upheaval of the three
volcanic mountains called Mother and Daughters. Between
the “ Mother ” and the N.w. “ Daughter,” there is a crater, which
is of comparatively recent origin, and is still smouldering. It
was, I believe, seen in action by one of the early navigators.
The sides are still hot, and in many places it is impossible to
remain for any length of time. On the day we visited it there
was a cloud of smoke issuing from the bottom of the crater near
to a large mass of sulphur. On the beach there are several
springs of hot water. I had no thermometer with me in the
boat, but imagine that the temperature of some of the springs
must be near the boiling point, as it was quite impossible to
bear the hand in them. The whole of the country round
Blanche Bay seems to be formed of volcanic ashes.
General Remarks.
Food is plentiful in all the islands, but the Duke of York
natives seem to depend on the two large islands of New
Ireland and New Britain for their supplies of taro and yams.
Bananas, _ yams, taro, sweet potatoes, with the fruit of several
nut-bearing trees, form the principal food of the people. The
coco-nut palm is plentiful in some parts, but not nearly so
abundant as in Tonga and Samoa. This, however, is simply
owing to the indolence of the natives, as the tree fruits very
well. The mango is indigenous. The papaw has been recently
introduced and, as usual, thrives well. The pine-apple has also
been introduced, but Is not much valued. Pigs and fowls, the
natives say, were not introduced by whites, as they were in the
islands before any vessels visited them.


The People of these islands are very much alike, and are
evidently of Papuan origin. The men of Duke of York Group
are not so fine a race as those of New Ireland and New Britain.
They vary in colour somewhat, but are principally of a dark
brown colour, with matted, curly hair, which varies from light
to dark brown colour. It forms strong matted curls, and these
they stiffen and daub with red paint and clay, and occasionally
with black paint. The average stature of the males is about 5 feet
6 inches, though many of the New Ireland men were over 6 feet
in height. They are well made, lithe, athletic-looking men, of
spare build, very few of them being inclined to corpulence.
The women are generally of a stunted appearance, and are
not nearly so tall as the males. They are married very early,
and have to bear heavy burdens when young, and these, no
doubt, account for their stunted growth. Some few of them
have pleasant features, especially when young. They do most
of the field work and all the cooking. _
At Spacious Bay, on New Britain, I noticed a marked
difference in the people. They were much lighter in colour
than any we had before seen in these islands; their hair also
was straighter, and their weapons were very different; notably
from their using the large wooden shield which is unknown on
New Ireland, Duke of York, or the north end of New Britain.
Their language, also, was quite unintelligible to any of the
natives from these places ; nor could any of us who understood
Fijian, Samoan, and Tonguese, detect any resemblance to an
Eastern Polynesian dialect. Our visit was, however, a very
hurried one. Both men and women wore a slight covering,
and the women were much finer than any we had before seen,
and seemed to occupy a better social position. With the
exception of the women of Meoko, a small island in the
Duke of York Group, the women on New Ireland, and the
men and women at Spacious Bay, all the people are completely
naked. On all the islands the natives are nearly always at
feud with each other, and very few indeed ever go far from
their own districts, except to a few villages with which they
establish trading relations. The Duke of York people visit
several districts in New Britain and New Ireland in this way.
They rarely move from their houses without arms; but they
do not seem to have any regular system of warfare, nor do they
often meet in open fight, but depend principally on surprises,
surrounding and conquering some few of the enemy by over-
powering numbers. Their usual arms are clubs, spears, toma-
hawks, and slings and stones. On New Britain stone-headed
clubs are much used. They do not use the bow and arrow.
Their houses are low, miserable huts, about eight feet in
length by five feet in width, and contain no mats or furniture
VOL. xlyit. L


of any description. There is a small fire-place in the middle,
and the inmates lie on each side of it on a few plaited coco-
nut-leaves, or a small piece of board. On New Ireland we saw
some large houses with raised sleeping benches round the sides,
in which the yonng unmarried men of the village lived.
Language. —The dialects spoken differ so widely that a native
of one district can very rarely understand that spoken by the
people of another district only a very few miles away. The
languages, both in words and construction, differ much from
the Samoan and Tonguese, which may be regarded as the
typical dialects of Eastern Polynesia. lam well acquainted
with Samoan, having resided more than fourteen years in that
group; and I understand Tonguese, and can also speak Fijian
with some degree of fluency, having been lately compelled to
study that language in order to be able to communicate with
our teachers from that group.
In construction, the language spoken on these islands is more
like the Fijian than the Samoan, especially with regard to the
prominent affixes, which are not used in Samoa: e.g.—
English. Samoan. Fijian. Duke of York. Tongan.
Father. tama, tama. tama. tamai.
My father. o lou tama. tamazu. tamag. hoku tamai.
Your father. o lou tama. tamamu. tamam. hoo tamai.
His father. o lona tama. tamana. tamana. hono tamai.
These pronominal affixes are continued in the dual, triad, and
plural numbers. The triad number is found in all the dialects
here as in Fijian, but is wanting in all the purely Eastern Poly-
nesian dialects.
I have as yet found very few Eastern Polynesian words, but
the few noticed are interesting.
English. Samaon. Fijian.
Father. tama. tama.
Hand. lima. lima.
Five. lima. lima.
Pace. mata. mata.
•rjj (mate (of mate (men and
\ animals). animals).
Sea - fsamfT} wai tui -
G l°and d ’ } fanua - vanua -
Heaven. lagi. lomalagi.
Cry. tagi. tagi.
Fly. lago. lago.
Duke of York.
tama.
lima.
mata.
mate (men and
animals).
/maua (but lagi
\ in one dialect),
tagi.
lag.
tamai (Tongan).
(also in New Ireland,
New Britain),
(also in Maori, New
Ireland, and Now
Britain).
(also in Maori, New
Ireland, and New
Britain).
| (also Tongan).
tahi (Tongan).
/founa (Tongan),
\ whenua (Maori).
tagi (Tongan).
lago (Tongan).
N.B. —Newels pronounced as on the Continent: g sounded as ng.


Father.
tama.
tama.
Mother.
tina.
tina.
Head.
ulu.
ulu.
Leg.
yae.
yava.
Face, eye.
mata.
mata.
Sun.
la.
siga.
The few words just given are found in many other dialects
of Eastern Polynesia. The Samoan has simply been selected
for comparison, because it is the dialect with which. I am most
familiar. In Eijian, Samoan, Tonguese, Maori, and all the
languages in Eastern Polynesia, of those called the Malayo-
Polynesian, with the exception, perhaps, of Ilotuman, all
syllables and words must end with a vowel; but in these islands
this is not the case, and our teachers have great difficulty in
pronouncing many of the words.
Like all Papuans, I believe, the natives here count to five
only, whilst all Eastern Polynesians count to ten; e.g.—
English. Duke of York. Samoan,
One. ra. tasi.
Two. ruadi. lua.
Three. tuludi. tolu.
Tour. watdi. fa.
Five. limadi. lima.
Six. limadi ma ra. ono.
Seven. limadi ma ruadi. fitu.
Eight. limadi ma tuludi. valu.
Nine. limadi ma watdi. iva.
Ten. naina, or limadi ma limadi. sefulu.
But it is a singular fact that in counting couples they count to
ten (couples), and the words used are nearly the same as those
used in Eastern Polynesia, e.g.—•
English. Samoan. Fijian. Duke of York.
One. e tasi. e dua. te kai. = 1 couple, i.e. 2
Two. e lua. e rua. u rua. = 2 ~ 4
Three. e tolu. e tolu. u tul. =3 ~ 6
Four. e fa. e va. lu wal. = 4 ~ 8
Five. e lima. e lima. ti lira. = 5 ~ 10
Six. o ono. e ono. na nom. = 6 ~ 12
Seven. e fltu. e vitu. ma wil. = 7 ~ 14
Eight. e valu. e walu. ti wal. = 8 ~ 16
Nine. 6 iva. { e }ti wur. = 9 „ 18
Ten. e sefulu. e tini. ti kino. =lO ~ 20
I am engaged, with the assistance of the teachers, in forming
vocabularies of the different dialects, and have got many words
from all the islands, but some further time and study are
required before deciding on the written forms. I give examples
of a few words, about the pronunciation of which there can be
no difficulty:—
English, Samoan, Fijian. Duke of York. New Ireland.
tama. mama,
nakug (my). makai.
lorig (my). aualuku.
kakig (my). kakig (my),
matag (my). matag (my),
make. kesakesa.
Moon. masina. vula.
kalag. teka.
Stars. fetu. kalokalo. nagnag. pabeka.
Light. malamalama. rarama. keke, kesakesa.
Hark. p&uliuli. bulobuto. marum. bug.
L 2


English. Samoan.
Fire. afi.
Water. vai.
Hot. vevt
Cold.
Dog.
Kat.
Pig.
To sleep. moe.
To run. momoe.
To walk. savali.
Dulte of York. New Ireland.
Fijian.
buka. ougan. otia.
wai. danim. ataha.
vevela. katakata. kalap.
malili. liliwa. amudian. madoan.
maile, or uli. koli. pap. lebur.
imoa. kalavo. koupwa. giro.
pua‘a. vuaka. boro. borei.
moe. Moce (pron. motile), nenep. sua.
momoe. Oici (pron. thithi). kala.
savali. lako. wan.
To talk. tautala. vosa. piripiri. agaiago.
To bear. logona. rogooa. logoroi.
Drink. inu. gunu. inim. moma.
See. vaai. raica. boboi.
I.' o au. koi an. iau.
Thou. o oe. ko iko. ui.
He. o ia. ko koya. I.
I cannot as yet find the reciprocal form of the verb which
forms so prominent a feature in Eastern Polynesian dialects.
All verbs seem to admit of many prefixes, and inflections,
especially in the plural form; but we have not yet been able
to reduce them to rule.
The power of the chiefs is very small indeed; in fact, they
seem to have little or no authority over the people, except so far
as the possession of shell money enables them to purchase help
to punish any individual or district who may have offended or
injured them. The rank, so far as we know at present, is not
hereditary. The rule here also seems to be “ the selection of the
fittest and the survival of the strongest.” The man who has
the most shell money and is the best fighter appears to be
acknowledged chief.
Polygamy is extensively practised, the women being bought
with cowrie money. These sales are often effected when the
party sold is yet quite a little child. In these cases she remains
with her parents for some years until the husband wishes her
to go to his house.
A singular custom prevails here with regard to the sons of
many chiefs. About the time of their attaining the age of
puberty they are taken into the bush, where a large house is
built for them and their attendants. Here they remain for
several months, and during this time they are well fed with
pork, turtle, shark, and anything else they please. They are
then initiated into certain ceremonies, and after this they
never again taste either pork, turtle, or shark during the
remainder of their lives. So scrupulous are they on this matter,
that I have known a young man to suffer acutely from hunger
rather than eat a piece of taro which had been cooked in the
same oven with a piece of pork.
Another popular institution is that of Duk Duk. This seems
to be the privilege of chiefs. Duk Duk is a masked figure,


which is invested by the people with some very mysterious
powers, but what these are we have not as yet found out. It
is a man dressed in a very high conical mask, and with his body
quite covered by large leaf girdles. Some weeks are spent in
preparing for the ceremonies connected with this affair, and
during all these weeks the roads and grounds near the Duk Duk
house are tabu to all women and children. At stated intervals
the Duk Duk comes dancing out of the bush into the village
square, when all women and children flee out of his way, as he
has the privilege of beating or stoning them if he can do so.
After some weeks there is a great feast, and all these Duk Duks
exhibit themselves. Then one or two of the chiefs advance and
challenge the crowd with spears, and then take their stand with
one of the Duk Duks at one end of the square, with large sticks
■or rattans in their hands. Numbers of the people then rush
out one by one and challenge the chiefs, and seem as if about
to dart their spears at them, and then they stoop down in front
of the old chief (or one of the Duk Duks) who at once gives
them a hard blow with his stick, or rattan, over the back.
Some of the blows seemed very heavy indeed, and must have
caused some pain to those who received them. After a great
many had been thus honoured with the old chief’s rattan, the
ceremonies closed by feasting and distributing shell money.
All the people in Duke of York Group, New Ireland, and
New Britain, so far as we have been, are divided into two
distinct classes, called, respectively, Maramara and Pikalaba,
and the custom is that a Maramara must marry a Pikalaba,
and vice versa. It is considered to be a very vile thing indeed if
this rule is ever broken. In fact, there were only two instances
known where two chiefs on New Ireland had dared to disregard
this prohibition. The children are all of the same class as the
mother, in all cases, and as they must all marry into the other
class, intermarriages are thus in a great measure prevented,
though in addition to this there are also prohibited degrees even
between Maramara and Pikalaba. The land, coco-nuts, and
fruit-bearing trees also in all districts are apportioned between
these two classes, so that on the death of the father, the children
in most cases go to the mother’s village, where alone they have
land or coco-nuts. lam inclined at present to think that this
custom, in some varying forms perhaps, will be found to be
one of the distinguishing marks of Papuan origin; whilst the
■custom called Tama-sa, or Tamafafine in Samoan, Tamaha
in Tonga, and Yasu in Fijian, will be found to be the distin-
guishing mark of what are called the Malayo-Polynesian races.
This last custom is that of attaching a semi-sacred position
and giving peculiar privileges to the sister and sister’s children.


A large number of objects of natural history was collected,
specimens of which have in most cases been transmitted to
England for examination. I hope to return to the group next
year, leaving Sydney probably in April.
Yll. —Colonel Sosnoffshy’s Expedition to China in 1874-5.
[Abridged and tabulated from the Russian, by Capt. F. C. H. Claeke, b.a.,
Member of the Geographical Society of St. Petersburg.]
From the time of the cessation of trade in Ruldja and
Chugucbak, the Russian Government has turned especial atten-
tion to the opening of fresh markets for Russian enterprise
in other parts of China. But the disturbed state of affairs, and
the lack of information with regard to the trading towns in the
interior, did not permit of any decisive measures being adopted.
At the commencement of i 874 it was, however, resolved to
equip an expedition, (1) for the purpose of exploring a road
from the Zaisan Post, in the Semipalatinsk district, to the south-
west provinces of Trans-mural China; (2) to report upon the
prospects of trade in this direction, and, if satisfactory, to
decide at which points it would be desirable to establish con-
sulates and factories, or trading agencies; and (3) to collect as
complete information as possible concerning the so-called
Dungan movement, with a view to determining the future poli-
tical fate of the localities involved in the insurrection.
The command of this expedition was intrusted to Lieut.-
Col. Sosnoffsky of the General Staff. The other members were
Doctor Piacetsky, Captain Matusofsky as topographer, Mr.
Andriefsky of Irkutsk, a photographer, a Chinaman in the
tea-trade, and three non-commissioned officers of Cossacks.
The cost of the expedition was defrayed partly by the Govern-
ment and partly by private subscription.
On the 12th of July, 1874, the Expedition passed the frontier
at Kiakhta and reached Pekin on the 19th of August. From
this place it proceeded by sea to Hankow, where it arrived
towards the end of October,
Then came the knotty question whether the members of the
expedition should proceed as private individuals, or in an official
capacity. The latter alternative was ultimately decided upon.
It having been agreed beforehand to follow the diagonal
leading to the valley of the Black Irtysh, the Expedition
ascended the Han-kiang, at the mouth of which river lies
Han-kow. The river district of Han-kiang embraces three of
the richest provinces of China—Hoo-pei, Shen-si, and Ho-nan
In the lower part of Hoo-pei the river is navigable for steamers


*
\
3


' I
i
fl
. ■W
* c
