

PRICE SIXPENCE.
. V '' .-V'; f r - £;


‘. ;v ; ,■ ■' .;- v i . ■ . ■rV' ’‘ „ ' h ■-
;C' • '■ ' \ I V ,v ' v ■-
;


s'A V pPrws
*\ A. ■
;: ef ‘ NOTES of
TWO VOYAGES
AUSTRALIA.
T. SHOWN,
LATE OF BACUP.
ROCHDALE;
W. A. SCOTT, ‘OBSERVER’ OFFICE;
AND THE BOOKSELLERS IN BACUP AND STACKSTEADS.


■ »
L
■


THE INHABITANTS OF BACUP AND ITS VICINITY,
THE FOLLOWING PAGES
respect fu Hi) pebicatcb,
In grateful acknowledgment of the numerous expressions of good-
feeling received by him, from all classes, on his late visit to
Bacup ; which he hopes ever to remember with pleasure, as a proof
of their esteem after twenty-five years passed in business amongst
them—with sincere wishes for their welfare, by their
Obedient Servant,
T. BROWN.
March, 1876.




PEEFACE.
The writer of the following short Notes of Two Voyages —the
first undertaken before his residence in Bacup, the second after he
had ceased to reside there —has been induced to publish them, thinking
they may possibly interest his friends and the public. A part relating
to the first voyage was written several years since, and then laid aside
in consequence of his having other matters to attend to.
He has had before him the Journal kept during each voyage,
and has endeavoured to write so as to be easily understood. When
it was told Dr. Johnson that Goldsmith was writing a Natural His-
tory—as if it were a subject unsuitable for him —the reply was,
‘ Sir, Goldsmith will make it as entertaining as a Persian fable.’
Wanting the ability to do this, the writer has introduced a few
subjects which he thinks likely to give interest and afford informa-
tion not altogether without value.
He also begs to say, that he is indebted to Professor C. W.
Thompson’s valuable work on the { Depths of the Sea,’ for interesting
information on that subject, the Gulf Stream, &c.


■
4
>■
■
VI


CONTENTS.
FIRST VOYAGE.
From Gravesend to Plymouth 2
In Plymouth Harbour .. 6
The Eddystone Lighthouse 7
At Sea—No Land in Sight 9
Near to the Island of Madeira 12
The Canary Islands 13
The Cape Verde Islands—A Vessel Spoken at Night 15
Appearence of the Stars at Night ... 15
Cross the Line.—Sunrise and Sunset in the Tropics
The Tropics: Vegetation, Animals, &c 17
Distribution of Fishes in the Sea ... 18
Pass the Cape of Good Hope.—Oceanic Birds 20
Incidents of the Voyage 21
The Australian Coast 22
xxuoixvaiAum
Port Phillip ... 23


From Port Phillip to Sydney 23
The Great Barrier Rebp ... 24
SECOND VOYAGE.
The ‘Hawkesbury’ in the London Dock 26
From London to Gravesend 27
Going down the Channel,—Land Birds .. 28
The ‘Tweed.’—Divine Service on Board 29
How WE OBTAINED OUR FRESH WATER 29
Madeira.—Depth op the Sea.—The Trade Winds 31
Cross the Line. —Fall of Dew. —The Gulf Stream, and its
Origin 33
The Sun Vertical.—The Rainy Season in India 34
Ascertaining a Ship’s Position at Sea.—An Unusual Sight 36
Whales in Sight.—An American Whaler 37
A Southerly Course. —An Iceberg.—The Magnetic Poles 38
Tasmania.—Becalmed.—Port Jackson 40
Return Voyages.
New Zealand , ... ... 41
Cape Horn ... . ... 45
Rio de Janeiro ... 46


NOTES OF TWO VOYAGES
TO AUSTRALIA.
FIRST VOYAGE.
In the month of February, 1840, in the period depicted
by the poet as
‘ In life’s morning march, when my bosom was young,
I heard my own mountain goats bleating aloft,
And knew the sweet strain that the corn reapers sung,’
I bade adieu to my parents, sisters, and a comfortable homo
at Catterall, near Gars tang, with the intention of sailing from
London, for Sydney, the capital of the colony of New South
Wales. On my arrival in London, after paying the cost of
my passage, which was £lB, I proceeded to join the vessel I
had fixed upon, then lying in the Thames off Gravesend.
She was a bark of 500 tons burden, named the Andromache
(An-drom'-a-ke), chartered by Mr. Marshall to proceed first to
Melbourne, and then to go on to Sydney. I got safely on
board the same evening. The majority of the passengers, as
I afterwards found, were free emigrants, whose passages were
paid by the Australian Government; but there were others,
—cabin, intermediate, and steerage, who went out at their
own expense. Amongst these was the writer. Captain
Thomas New was the commander, and Mr. Gibson the dhief
officer or first mate. Perhaps every reader may not be aware,
that Andromache, after whom the ship was called, was the
wife of Hector, who was slain by Achilles in the Trojan war,


and his dead body, attached to the chariot of his victor, was
dragged three times round the walls of Troy, some 1200 years
before the birth of Christ.
FROM GRAVESEND TO PLYMOUTH.
At the commencement of the voyage we had wfliat sailors
call a foul, that is, a contrary wind, which blew up the river
for several successive days. There were but few passengers
on board, and there was much confusion; the weather also
was cold, with snow falling at times, so that we were far from
comfortable. The main body of the passengers were to join
the vessel at Plymouth, to which port we had first to proceed.
The pilot came on board, and we sailed from Gravesend on
Sunday, but having to cast anchor at each flood tide, it was
the evening of Wednesday before w'e found ourselves opposite
the town of Margate, a long line of its gas-lights being plainly
visible; and at midnight we succeeded in passing the North
Foreland, which is the most easterly point of the county of
Kent, and is at the mouth of the Thames. We were now
relieved from the disagreeable attendants of a head-wind,
which are, little progress and more or less violent pitching
of the ship from head to stern. To the south of the North
Foreland, and opposite to the town of Deal, is the famous
roadstead called the Downs, where a whole fleet of merchant
vessels, outward or homeward bound, may often be seen at
anchor, waiting for a favourable wand. The anchorage
receives its protection from the Goodwin Sands, several miles
in length, which lie between it and the ocean. There is a
tradition that these sands are the remains of an island, the
property of Earl Goodwan, which was destroyed by the sea
at the close of the eleventh century of our era.
Close to the town of Deal is supposed to be the spot where
the Romans, under the command of Julius Caesar, on the
27th of August, 55 years before the birth of Christ, first
landed on the English shores. This famous commander,
afterwards the first of the Roman emperors, was great in
peace as well as in war, and amid the turmoil and anxieties
of a soldier’s life, found time to cultivate literary studies,
which have proved a monument to his fame more noble than
that of his career as a conqueror. His commentaries on the
Gallic War, written in his clear and lucid style, detail the


exploits of the legions which he led in his contests with the
uncivilized and barbarian Gauls, a nation at that time
inhabiting the present countries of France and Germany.
Having determined to bring over a part of his army into
Britain, under the plea that the inhabitants had furnished
aid to his enemies the Gauls (which indeed they had done),
he tells us he set sail from the opposite coast about the third
watch, or near midnight, with the infantry of two legions.
These would amount to about 10,000 men, who were em-
barked in eighty transports; and he left orders that a body
of cavalry should follow as soon as they could be conveyed
over. At about ten o’clock the following morning, he prepared
to effect a landing in the face of a multitude of armed Britons,
who covered the shore and cliffs, with a determination to
oppose him. The Britons, we are told, fought resolutely in
the water, though assailed by the arrows, slings, and war-
engines of the Romans, and the result of the contest was long
doubtful, until the standard-bearer of the tenth legion set
an example of self-devotion which turned the scale in favour
of the invaders. ‘ Leap down, fellow-soldiers ! ’ he cried,
1 unless you wish your eagle to be delivered to the enemy.
I, truly, will promptly discharge my duty to the republic and
my commander.’ He then leaped into the water and was
followed by his fellow-soldiers, who drove back the Britons
and made good their landing. In his description of the
inhabitants of our country, Caesar says, that ‘ the most civil-
ized are they who inhabit Kent, nor do they differ much in
their customs from the people who inhabit Gaul.’
The Romans commenced their permanent occupation of
Britain in the year 43, finally conquering the greater
part, but not the whole of the country. They withdrew from
the island in the year 420, after the lengthened occupation
of 377 years. They won the goodwill of the people by the
clemency of their rule and the civilization they introduced.
The roads which they made, in various directions, and always
carried in straight lines across hills and valleys, are said to
have been the best the country ever had, until the formation
of our present iron roadways. The names of those of our
towns and cities which end in ‘ Chester,’ or ‘ cester,’ were
fortified stations or camps of their army,—from the Latin
word castra, a camp; as Chester, Manchester, Winchester,
Bicester (two camps), Ac. There appears to be no reason to
doubt but that they * were the means, through converted


soldiers in their army, of introducing into our native land
‘ the glorious gospel of the blessed God ; ’ as we know there
were a godly £ Cornelius, and a devout soldier of them that
waited on him continually,’ in that position of life in the
earliest days of the Christian era.
About 270 years before the birth of Christ, a numerous
body of Gauls had migrated into the territory of Asia Minor,
under Brennus their king, crossing the Hellespont in their
course, —that arm of the sea which in part connects the
Mediterranean and Black Seas, —and there formed a settle-
ment. After the occupation of their new country, they
received the name of Gaul-Asians, or Galatians. Nearly 600
years after this event, Jerome says they still spoke the Celtic
language, such as is now heard in Ireland and the Highlands
of Scotland. The miraculous gift of tongues enabled the
Apostle Paul and his companion Timothy {Acts xvi. 6) to
preach the glad tidings of salvation to these rude people in
their own language, and many became obedient to the faith.
It was to the churches of Christ which became established
among them, that the same apostle addressed his Epistle to
the Galatians, in which he applies to them words of mingled
surprise and reproof, for their departure, in so short a time,
from the truths in which he thought they had been estab-
lished. ‘ I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that
called you into the grace of Christ, unto another gospel.’
The falling away seems to have been general, for he addresses
his epistle to the £ Churches of Galatia.’ (Csesar says, that
fickleness of mind was a characteristic of the Gauls even in
his day.) Their departure from the truths and liberty of
the gospel seems, however, to have been but a temporary
alienation, for the apostle Peter, some twelve years afterwards,
writes to the believers in that and the neighbouring countries-,
as £ the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, &c.,
elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father,’
For their comfort he tells them, and all true believers, not
that their faith stood in the strength of their own will, but
that they were £ kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation.’ They were absent members of the family in
heaven, and Jesus their elder brother had passed his word,
that those Benjamins should be brought in safety from the
spiritual Earvpt of this world to their Father’s house above.
Gen. xl. 9.
It was upon the coast of Kent, which we were sailing by.


that the Saxon adventurers, Hengist and Horsa, who were
cruising about in the Channel with three ships, are said to
have landed, and formed the first settlement of their country-
men in England. The figure of a horse was the national
emblem of their country, as it is now of the kingdom of
Hanover, from which part of Europe the Saxons came. The
numerous hop-sacks and reams of paper the produce of Kent,
are still marked with its figure.
This county was also the birth-place of that eminent
minister of the gospel, William Huntington. He was born
in the weald of Kent, a part which was formerly an immense
forest, inhabited only by wild hogs and deer. From the
menial occupation of unloading coal barges at Ditton on the
Thames,—from which he became afterwards generally known
as the Coalheaver, —he rose to be a preacher in London, where
a chapel was built for him, with two sets of galleries, the one
above the other, and where, during the greater part of a
period of forty years, he was listened to by an attentive and
admiring audience of about 2,000 hearers. He became
eminently useful, but had notwithstanding many enemies
among those who formed what was considered the religious
world. Amongst his friends was the excellent William
Romaine, an eminent minister in the Established Church;
and to him he resorted when he wished for information con-
nected with the original languages of the Scriptures. The
writer has stood by his tomb, which is behind Jireh Chapel,
at Lewes, in Sussex ; and in the same tomb are also the bodies
of some of Mr. H.’s dearest friends, all awaiting that day
when, to borrow an expression of his own, ‘ the trumpet of
the archangel shall silence that of the gospel.’ His valuable
works were printed by his friend and executor, Mr. Thomas
Bensley, in 20 vols., and to him a few days before his death,
which took place July Ist, 1813, he dictated the following
epitaph to be placed on his tomb :
‘ Here lies the Coalheaver, beloved of his God, but abhorred of men.
The Omniscient Judge, at the grand assize, shall ratify and confirm this
to the confusion of many thousands; for England and its metropolis
shall know, “that there hath been a prophet among them.” ’
One of his dying expressions was, ‘ Oh how I long to see my
dear Redeemer! ’
The dullish-white chalk cliffs which extend along a great
part of the southern coasts of England, are said to have given


the name of Albion to our country (alius, white). Near to
Dover is one which was formerly nearly four hundred feet
high, and at that time overhung the sea. A great poet writes
of it, —
* Come on, Sir, here’s the place : Stand still, how fearful
And dizzy ’tis to cast one’s eyes so low ! _
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
Show scarce so gross as beetles : halfway down
Hangs one that gathers samphire ; dreadful trade !
The murmuring surge,
That on the unnumbered idle pebbles chafes,
Cannot be heard so high. I’ll look no more,
Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight
Topple down headlong.’
Pevensey Bay, on the coast of Sussex, where William the
Conqueror landed with his army, has now only the appearance
of a desolate marsh, and is interesting only from that great
The weather being cold, with sleet occasionally falling,
myself unused to being on the water, and everything in
confusion on board, made the trip to Plymouth anything but
a pleasant one. It was therefore an agreeable surpiise when,
on Saturday morning, before daybreak, lying awake in my
bed, I perceived the tossing of the vessel to cease suddenly.
We had got within the breakwater of Plymouth harbour.
IN PLYMOUTH HARBOUR.
When daylight appeared and I went on deck, the ship was
at anchor, and the view around struck me as a beautiful
one; the hills sloping gradually down towards the harbour.
Mount Edgecombe, the seat of the Earl of Mount Edgecombe,
was opposite to us, surrounded with fine woods, and near the
western end of the breakwater. Devonshire, in which county
Plymouth is situated, is known to have a very mild climate,
which is shown by myrtles standing the winter out of doors;
and even orange trees doing the same in sheltered spots. In
a short walk into the country, I perceived the effects on
vegetation of a more genial atmosphere than what I had been
accustomed to in Lancashire.
To the north of Devonshire is the county of Somerset,
which reaches to the Bristol Channel. It contains the ranges
of hills named the Quantock and the Mendip, which in many


parts arc covered with coppice wood to their summits, and
are said to be exceedingly beautiful. There is a tradition
that the former received their name from an expression of
Julius Caesar’s, who, on ascending one of them, exclaimed
with surprise, on beholding the prospect before him, 1 Quan-
tum ab hoc ! ’ How much may be seen from hence ! The
river Tone runs near to them, and is mentioned by Wordsworth
in his little poem of ‘ Euth’:—
£ Among the fields she breathed again,
The master-current of her brain
Ran permanent and free ;
And coming to the banks of Tone,
There did she sit, and dwell alone
Under the greenwood tree.
That oaten pipe of hers is mute,
Or thrown away ; but with a flute
Her loneliness she cheers :
This flute, made of a hemlock stalk.
At evening, in his homeward walk,
The Quantock woodman hears.’
The remainder of the passengers now joined the vessel,
a large number coming from Ireland by steamboat; passengers
and crew making a total of 220 persons on board. The
anchor was weighed at two o’clock in the afternoon of Friday,
February 28th ; the sails were one by one unfurled; and the
ship’s head being directed to the entrance of the port, which
is at the eastern end of the breakwater, we proceeded on the
voyage. At five o’clock we were opposite the Eddystone
lighthouse, one of the noblest structures ever erected by man.
THE EDDYSTONE LIGHTHOUSE
is situated in the open sea, and is nine miles from the coast
of Devonshire, and fourteen from the flagstaff at Plymouth.
It is built upon a reef of granite rocks, about a mile in length,
which had formerly been the destruction of a great number
of vessels. It received its name from the eddying of the
waters about the rocks. The first lighthouse erected upon
the reef was swept away in a dreadful storm which occurred
in November, 1703, (the year in which Mr. John Wesley was
born) only three days after its builder had publicly declared,
that he was so confident of its strength, that he wished he
might be in it during the most dreadful storm that ever blew.


The poor man’s wish was realized during that awful night,
but the return of morning’s dawn revealed no traces to the
■eye of the structure which had been the object of his vain
boast. A short piece of chain, which had been caught in a
cleft of the rock, was the only memorial remaining; all besides
had been swept away, along with the inmates. The next
building was of wood, which accidentally caught fire, and was
entirely consumed, in December, 1755 ; the men being taken
off it in time to preserve them from immediate death. One
of the two men, however, declared that in looking upwards
he had swallowed some molten lead. Though his statement
was at first disbelieved, he died twelve days after, and a piece
of the metal a little over seven ounces in weight was found
in his stomach. The present building was erected by Mr.
Smeaton, being finished in the year 1759, and was for some
years afterwards lighted only by tallow candles. The lower
part is solid for the distance of twelve feet from the rock,
and is formed of large stones dovetailed into one another;
the bottom course being let into the rock. Its shape is like
that of the trunk of an oak tree, broad at the base, and
becoming narrower in the upper part, to give greater resis-
tance to the fury of the waves. A staircase inside leads to
the principal room at the top, called the lantern, which is
entirely surrounded with plate-glass. In the middle of this
room is a round platform, four feet high, near the edge of
which are placed two circles of lamps, the one above the other,
so as to face every point of the compass. Each lamp has
behind it a copper reflector, plated with silver, and kept
brilliantly polished. The lamps are lighted at sunset, and
extinguished at sunrise every day, a man being in the room
the whole of the time they are burning; a regulation which
has been enforced ever since the second building was destroyed
by fire. There are openings at the bottom of the window
frames, which can be closed at pleasure, to furnish air for the
lamps. The building is ninety feet high, but at times the
waves strike against it with such violence, that it is entirely
covered with the surf, and the lights have even been put out.
On the outside, cut in the solid stone, in contrast to the
boastful wish of the first builder, are the words of truth,
‘ EXCEPT THE LORD BUILD THE HOUSE, THEY LABOUR IN VAIN
THAT BUILD IT.’
This lighthouse stands as a solitary sentinel in the watery
waste; and at the distance of ten, fifteen, or twenty miles,


according to the state of the weather, amid the gloom of the
murky winter’s night, or when assailed by its fiercest blasts,
its warning beams direct the anxious seaman to avoid the
destruction which, unseen but sure, would await him but for
its friendly aid. Everything within the upper room is spot-
lessly clean; the windows as crystal: the floor covered with
oilcloth; and the mirrors purely bright, from the daily care
they receive. Outside, but a little below the level of the floor,
is a gallery surrounded by an iron railing. Step out, reader,
in imagination, and take a walk, circumscribed though it be,
and behold at your feet and far around you, the fabled realms
of old Titan !
‘ Far as tbe breeze can bear, the billows foam,
Survey my empire, and behold my home.’
It is a singular fact, that birds are frequently found dead
in the morning on the platforms or galleries of lighthouses.
Not only seagulls, but larks, partridges, and other land-fowl,
which seem to have lost their way, and attracted by the light,
as moths are by that of a candle, strike the glass with such
force as to kill themselves. Three men are on duty at a time ;
formerly there were only two ; but one dying suddenly, and
stormy weather preventing a boat from coming from the shore,
his dead body remained for some weeks along with his living
companion, who was afraid to commit it to the deep for fear
of the suspicion which might rest upon him. The dwelling-
room is immediately beneath the lantern, and is thus always
dry. Under it is the kitchen, and below a room for heavy
stoi’es.
The shades of evening were now beginning to fall upon
land and water alike; a moderate but favourable breeze was
fast taking us out to sea; and soon a majority of those on
board had taken their last view of the shores of Old England.
AT SEA—NO LAND IN SIGHT.
When I went on deck in the morning, there was no land
to be seen. The air felt rather cold, and there was what
sailors call a stiff breeze, which kept the sails well filled,
assisted by the rain which had fallen in the night, and well
soaked them. Wherever one’s eyes were turned, only innu-
merable curling waves were to be seen, —‘ white horses,’ as


they are called, —crested with foam. We were going at about
ten knots an hour; a knot being rather more than a mile.
The scene reminded me of the poet’s lines, —
‘ Oli for a soft and gentle wind !
I heard a fair one cry ;
But give to me the snoring breeze,
And white waves heaving high,—
While like the eagle free.
Away the good ship flies, and leaves
Old England on the leed
We were crossing the outer part of the Bay of Biscay, which
lies between the western coast of France and the northern
coast of Spain, and takes its name from the adjoining Spanish
province of Biscao. In the forenoon we were only a few miles
distant from the vessel in which Frost and Williams, the
chartist prisoners, were being conveyed to Yan Dieman’s Land.
Our captain ventured the opinion that we should be in
Australia before them. Port Phillip has never been a penal
settlement.
The slight sea-sickness I had experienced in coming down
the English Channel was now exchanged for a greater degree
of it, which continued for two or three days, and then troubled
me no more during the voyage. The passengers became more
comfortable, when the stipulated kinds of provisions were
supplied, properly cooked; and order gradually became more
apparent throughout the vessel. I may here say that the
Andromache was a three-masted bark, with but little cargo
except provisions and water, of the latter there being about
500 tons in casks. The live stock consisted of two cows,
wdiich supplied milk chiefly for the cabin passengers. There
was a house for each cow, on either side of the upper deck;
about twenty sheep in the long boat, on the upper deck; a
dozen or so of young pigs confined on the deck, under the
boat; and a quantity of fowls in coops forming seats upon
the poop, —wdiich is the hinder part of the vessel, appropriated
for the exercise of the cabin passengers. The live stock
were fed every day, either by the butcher or one of the
steerage passengers who acted as his assistant; and were kept
almost entirely for the use of the cabin passengers. The
upper deck was washed by the sailors every morning before'
breakfast, wdth sea water, and was soon sufficiently dry to
walk about upon. The log, wdiich is a line wdth a piece of
flat board at the end, was run over the ship’s side at intervals-


during the day, there being knots upon it at certain distances ;
the number of knots run out in a given time (noted by a sand-
glass) showing the rate at which the vessel was going. The
distance a ship runs by the log in the twenty-four hours is
reckoned up every day, and is called the ‘ dead reckoning,’
in distinction from another method, which is more complete,
as, if correctly worked out, this not only shows the distance
run, but the exact spot on the chart or map where the ship
is. It is done by the captain or the chief officer (generally
both together) taking the height of the sun every day at noon;
the method of doing which I purpose to explain hereafter.
The whole of the crew, —officers, men, and boys (if any), are
divided into two watches, each of which is on duty four hours,
and off four hours throughout the twenty-four, day and night.
The hours are struck upon the ship’s bell; never exceeding
■eight bells. The captain takes no watch, neither do the
steward, cook, carpenter, or their assistants. Each able
seaman (in ships in which there are no quartermasters)
takes the helm or wheel, as steersman, for two hours at a
time, and always stands with the mariner’s compass before
him, placed in the binnacle, a sort of upright box or case,
lighted at night by a lamp. As we were clear of the land,
the anchors were hauled on deck; and the chain cables, with
much noise, passed below to their lockers, where it was hoped
they would remain until we approached the Australian shore.
Divine service was held every Sunday forenoon on the
upper deck, seats being provided for all who chose to attend.
The ship’s flag was spread on the top of the capstan (an
upright post turned by spokes, and chiefly used to wind the
rope upon when a vessel is going in or out of dock), and the
captain read the service from the prayer-book. The sailors
were not required to do any work on Sundays, except what
w r as absolutely needful. On other days those on duty in the
daytime were kept fully employed in repairing the rigging
mid doing other work.
In the evening of the day we left Plymouth, the phos-
phorescent state of the sea was very remarkable. The vessel’s
sides, as it rushed through the water, appeared to be bathed in
fire, and its track through the water, as well as the courses of
fishes, could be plainly distinguished by the furrows of light
left behind. The phenomenon is said to be caused by the
presence of innumerable minute insects in the water, but is
not always perceptible.


As already stated, we left Plymouth on Friday, the last
day of February; and as the ship’s course was almost due
south, by the following Monday the air was perceptibly
warmer. For nearly the whole of the first month of the
voyage, there was a gradual increase in temperature.
During the second week of our being at sea, the first shoal
of porpoises was seen. These fishes weigh from two to three
hundred-weight each ; have a head shaped like that of a pig;
and are often together in companies of several hundreds. As
they come close to a vessel, and swim only a little under the
surface of the water, they form a rather attractive sight, and
relieve the monotony of the day. When near the ship they
keep about the bows; swimming swiftly past in the course
of the vessel; and perhaps in ten minutes are away in some
other direction. Two or three were secured during the
voyage, by a sailor standing under the bowsprit, and striking
them with a harpoon, to which a rope was attached. When
being hauled upon deck, the noose of a rope was also passed
round the tail, and at last the victim was laid upon the deck,
bleeding profusely. Their flesh has the appearance of beef,
but is darker in colour and not ill-tasted.
NEAR TO THE ISLAND OF MADEIRA.
We passed a live turtle floating upon the water, and on the
eleventh day were opposite the island of Madeira. It was
easy for us to realize the delightful climate for which this
island is celebrated. Less than a fortnight had elapsed since
we were experiencing the cold days of an English February,
and now were in the enjoyment of this most genial atmosphere.
When occasionally a cloud was seen, perhaps overhead, the
pure white gossamer-like threads of which it was composed
did not conceal the blue sky beyond it. Madeira is 660 miles
distant from Portugal, to which country it belongs, and is
thirty-one miles in length, and twelve in breadth. The
orano-e-tree, coffee-plant, vine, banana, and other tropical
fruits, grow there in abundance. A writer gives the following-
truthful description of its climate and vegetable productions:
< There is a peculiar clearness in the atmosphere, with a
transparency which seems to bring out fresh hues from every
object; and the sky, of a deep and stainless blue, is often
unsullied by a cloud. The air is soft and delicious, fanned


by a refreshing breeze from the ocean. But the beauty of
its climate is the equability of its temperature, which in Jan-
uary, the coldest month, is at an average of 64 degrees, and
in August, the hottest month, 75 degrees. The myrtle, the
geranium, the rose, and the violet, grow around in the wildest
profusion; and the geraniums in particular are so common,
that the honey of the bees, which is far more pure and tran-
sparent than that of England, becomes almost a jelly of that
flower.’ A dry and parching easterly wind, which is some-
times felt, is the only drawback to this favourable picture of
the climate of the island. Madeira is now only a five-days’
sail by steamer from England, and is often the resort of our
wealthier classes, when any members of their families are
suffering from consumptive diseases, to alleviate which the
mildness and salubrity of the climate are so well adapted.
Funchal, the chief town, is situated on the sea-coast. We
passed at too great a distance for the island to be visible •
but in the following voyage I had a pretty close view of it.
THE CANARY ISLANDS.
Our course took us past the Canary Islands, but they too
were not in sight, though they are often seen from vessels
bound for Australia. These islands are about 300 miles
■south of Madeira, and belong to Spain, One of the number
is Teneriffe, rising in a lofty peak to the height of 12,172
feet, or more than two-and-a-quarter miles, which has been
seen at sea, from the deck of a ship, at the distance of one
hundred and fifteen miles. The base of the mountain covers
nearly the whole island, while the top is said to be oidy three
feet across. Viewed by the passing or approaching voyager,
robed for some distance downward from its summit in the
unsullied snows of a thousand years, under the fervid rays of
an almost equatorial sun, it glistens afar upon his eyes, and
is said by many to be the most magnificent object they
ever approached.
These islands are supposed to have been the ‘ Fortunate
Isles ’ of the Greeks and Romans, wdiere were the Elysian
Fields, which they pictured in their imaginations as the abode
of the blessed after death. In these happy seats of ever-
enduring peace, abundance without satiety was the free
measure of nature’s gifts to man for the supply of his every


need. Here tlxe thorn of care was never found in the pillow
of repose, and the civil contentions of kingdoms and states
were also unknown. It was from the latter point of view
that Horace, the Roman poet, addressed his countrymen, at
a time when there was every reason to be afraid that their
state was again about to be plunged into the anarchy and
strife from which it had but recently emerged. ‘A fresh
scene of bloodshed was now approaching. A feeling of
uncertainty at the issue of the contest between Octavianus
and Anthony filled them with alarm; and a remembrance of
the preceding wars collected into one point of view all the
horrors which they had produced. The poet, amid these
scenes of terror, proposes to the Romans a desertion of their
country, and a retreat to the Fortunate Islands.’ Arva,
beata, petamus arva, —‘ Let us seek the fields, the blessed
fields, and the rich isles,’ &c.
‘ For earth-surrounding sea our flight awaits.
Offering its blissful isles and happy seats,
Where annual Ceres crowns th’ uncultured field.
And vines unpruned their blushing clusters yield ;
Where olives faithful to their season grow,
And figs with nature’s deepest purple glow.
From hollow oaks where honey’d streams distil.
And bounds with noisy foot the pebbled rill;
Where goats untaught forsake the flowery vale,
And bring their swelling udders to the pail.’
Such were the longings of the natural bosom, which sought
a peace that nature knew not the way to, for the light of the
gospel had never illumined their path. It is by that alone
we know, that the meek shall yet ‘ inherit the earth, and shall
delight themselves in the abundance of peace.’
The weather became warmer as the sun appeared daily to
rise to a higher meridian. The moon, too, shone brilliantly at
night. Along with the English winter we had also left behind
us fogs and cloudy skies; for after any showers the clouds
passed away, and the sky immediately resumed its bright
appearance.
We now saw a number of flying fishes for the first time.
They are about the size of a herring, and rise from the water
sometimes singly, but generally in shoals of from a dozen to
a hundred or so. After flying from fifty to a hundred yards
they fall again into the water. It is not an unusual thing
for one or more to be found in a morning upon the deck of a
ship, across which they had been flying, when they struck
against'the rigging or bulwarks.


THE CAPE YERDE ISLANDS.—A VESSEL SPOKEN AT
NIGHT.
On the 17th of March we came in sight of St. Antonio, one
of the Cape Yerde Islands, which belong to the Portuguese.
Like the other islands I have mentioned, they lie at no great
distance from the coast of Africa. This one, from the distance
at which we passed it, —which was perhaps a dozen miles, had
the appearance of a huge brown rock, rising almost perpen-
dicularly to a great height. It is said to export salt, and a
large kind of mules bred on the island. This was the only
land we saw during the voyage. In a few hours we had left
it astern, and out of sight. A few days afterwards a water-
spout was seen at the distance of a mile or so from the ship.
The moonlight nights added much to the agreeableness of
the fine weather Ave were now favoured with. The bulk of
the passengers too, to add to their diversions, formed them-
selves into two dancing companies, and every evening except
Sunday two fiddles were playing, the one on the poop, the
the other on the maindeck; the dancing continuing till about
ten o’clock, when all £ turned-in ’ for the night. How strange,
that from a lovely ship passing over the ocean, bound to a
far off, distant land, such sounds should be heard, and such
an occupation be engaged in. But our English race soon
learn to make themselves at home on the sea.
In the afternoon of March 18th Ave sighted a vessel bound
from Whitehaven to the Cape of Good Hope ; and gradually
approached each other, until about eleven o’clock, when, the
moon shining full upon her ordinary canvas and outstretched
studding-sails, Ave Avere sufficiently near for the captains to
speak to one another through their trumpets. The sight Avas
a remarkably pleasing one, the evening being very fine, with
a gentle breeze. After a few questions asked on either side,
among which Avas that of the latitude and longitude, they
bade one another good night, and we were soon separated by
a gradually-increasing distance. On the 13th of April we also
spoke a small vessel bound from Eio Janeiro to Italy,
probably laden with fruit and sugar.
APPEARANCE OF THE STARS AT NIGHT.
As we approached the equator the north star, so familiar
an object in England, gradually sank towards the horizon;


and when we had crossed the line, became invisible, while
constellations, or groups of stars, which we had never before
seen, began to present themselves to our view. Amongst the
most conspicuous of these was the Southern Cross, formed of
four bright stars, the two largest being the one at the top, the
other at the foot. ‘At certain seasons of the year the Cross
is erect at midnight, and more or less inclined to the horizon
at other intervals.’ ‘No other group of stars,’ says Humboldt,
‘ exhibits to the naked eye an observation of time so easily
made. How often have we heard our guides exclaim in the
savannahs of Venezuela, or in the deserts extending from
Lima to Truxillo, —“Midnight is past, the cross begins to
bend !” ’ The length of the days gradually diminished as we
approached the equator; and when there we had what is
experienced throughout the year, about twelve hours of day
and twelve of night; the sun rising at six in the morning and
setting at six in the evening. In the tropics, which is that
portion of the earth’s surface situated 231 deg. north, and the
same south of the equator, there is little or no twilight, the
sun appearing to go plumb down when it sets; not skirting
the horizon, as in our English summer, until its early appear-
ance again, after a few hours, in the morning; so that in
England, at midsummer, there is no real darkness during the
night. From the day of twelve hours at the equator, the
length of the longest day increases gradually towards the
poles, north and south, at each of which there is only one day
and one night throughout the year, each six months long.
At the Lizard Promontory, in Cornwall, the most southerly
point of England, the longest day continues 16h. Bmin.,
and at Dunnet Head, Caithness, the most northerly part
of Scotland, it is 18h. 48m., being a difference of two
hours and forty minutes. The heat is also nearly uni-
form in the tropics throughout the year. The highest
marked on board by the thermometer has been 85 deg.,
which is not felt to be inconvenient if there is any brcese
at the time. At sea, it is well known, the heat is never so
oppressively felt as on land, unless during a calm.
CROSS THE LINE.—SUNRISE AND SUNSET IN THE TROPICS.
AVe crossed the line, or the equator, which is 3,(00 miles
in a direct line from London, in four weeks and a day from


leaving Plymouth, and were favoured in not being becalmed
more than two or three days in the whole, while within the
tropics. At such times the sea is as smooth as a sheet of
glass; the vessel has no headway, and does not answer her
helm; the only motion she has being a turning first to one
part of the horizon, then to another. The sails hang straight
down, flapping against the masts ; and a feeling of sickness
is sometimes felt, owing to the oppressive heat.
At sea, within the tropics, the sunrises and sunsets are often
very magnificent. Before daylight is fully visible, and when
the morning star may be shedding its brilliant radiance over
the scene, dark masses of clouds frequently extend themselves
along the horizon. As the sun gives signs of his approach,
these become suffused with the varied colours of green, yellow,
gold, amber, and purple; their hues often extending half
round the circle of the horizon, while the more scattered red
clouds rise to the zenith. At length the great created mon-
arch of the day rises in his majesty, breaks through the
obstacles which curtain his approach, and pours the all-pern
vading influence of his beams over the face of nature. How
apposite then are felt to be the lines of Milton, as spoken by
Satan, the great enemy of God and man, on his first beholding
the sun :
‘ Oh thou that with surpassing glory crowned,
Look’st like the God of this new world ;
At whose sight all the stars hide their diminished heads,
To thee I call, hut with no friendly voice,
And add thy name, to tell thee how I hate thy beams !’
And the still more poetic description of the Psalmist: — 4 In
the heavens hath he set a tabernacle for the sun, which is as
a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a
strong man to run a race. His going forth is from the end
of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it; and there
is nothing hid from the heat thereof.’ The Lord Jesus Christ
is called in scripture the Sun of Righteousness; and in the
epistle to the Hebrews is said to be the brightness or beaming
forth of his Father’s glory. The natural sunrise is from
below; the spiritual one, which enlightens the time Christian’s
mind, is from above; therefore it is called 4 the day-spring
from on high which hath visited us.’
THE TROPICS : VEGETATION, ANIMALS, &c.
It is within the tropics that the sun seems to be the pro-


lific quickener of the vegetable, which in its turn affords
nourishment to the animal world. On the Isthmus of Pan-
ama, during the formation of the railway, men had to be kept
constantly employed in cutting down the shrubs and brushwood
which would otherwise soon have again over-run the line. In
India and the neighbouring islands, the bamboo, which is a
species of gigantic grass, grows to the thickness of a stout
man’s arm, and of a corresponding height. The talipat palm
of Ceylon has leaves eleven feet long by sixteen broad,
fifteen or twenty men finding complete shelter under a single
leaf. The gigantic water-lily, now called Victoria Regina,
was discovered in the Berbice river, in British Guiana, in
1837, its leaves floating on the surface, each leaf being from
five to six feet in diameter. In like manner the karroos or
plains of South Africa are in their season clothed with the
most luxuriant verdure, intermingled with flowers of every
hue, in an endless profusion; and afford pasture to countless
thousands of springboks, antelopes, gnus, zebras, quaggas,
and camelopards. The pampas and llanos of La Plata and
Buenos Ayres, in South America—also extensive plains—
likewise support millions of horned cattle, horses, and sheep,
in a wild state. This exuberance of vegetable and animal
life gradually diminishes as we go towards the poles, north or
south. In Greenland the Esquimaux are seldom more than
five feet in height; while vegetation is represented only by
mosses and lichens, which, buried under the snow for the
greatest part of the year, form the food of the reindeer when
it has scraped away the covering with its feet. There is not
a trace of moss, lichen, seaweed, or of any vegetable life, nor
are any land animals to be found, in the south polar regions ;
while the cold is more intense than in the north. Maranham,
within the tropics, on an island off the north coast of Brazil,
appears to have the greatest rainfall of any spot upon the face
of the globe, its mean fall being 276 inches yearly; that of
London is 24- in.; the average for the tropics being 95| in.;
for the temperate zone in. Massowah, also within the
tropics, in Abyssinia, near the Red Sea, is supposed to be
the hottest portion of the globe’s surface, its mean temperature
being 87 deg. 3 sec.
DISTRIBUTION OF FISHES IN THE SEA.
The number of fishes to be seen in the open ocean is


generally small; days together sometimes passing, in a voyage,
without one being visible. Next to whales in size are the
‘black fishes,’ (perhaps the grampus,) which swim slowly,
only a few together, with their backs partly out of the water.
Porpoises are the most numerous and lively in their motions,
a shoal of several hundreds of them often appearing, leaping
out of the water, and making for the ship, close around which
they swim for ten minutes or a quarter of an hour, and then,
make off, A few bonita, of the size of a small salmon, are
sometimes seen swimming at the head of the vessel, but can
seldom be caught. Fishes which seem intended for the food
of man are, by the wise provision of the great Creator, found
only near the coasts of the continents and islands the wants
of the inhabitants of which they are fitted to supply. The
Banks of Newfoundland, which are 600 miles in length and
200 in breadth, s\yarm with almost every variety of fish suit-
able for the food of man. These are not banks of sand, but
are composed chiefly of masses of solid rock, parts of a vast
submarine mountain, of which the island is the highest part.
The dense fogs often found over them are caused by the meet-
ing of the warm Gulf-stream and the cold current from the polar
regions. The Dogger Bank off the coast of Holland, and the
waters adjoining the shores of Great Britain and Ireland,
abound with shoals of mackerel, herrings, pilchards, and other
varieties of fish, none of which are ever met with in the open
sea. The herring is no doubt the most valuable to man of
all the finny races, and nowhere is it so abundant as around
the shores of Great Britain. In 1868 there were 12,000
undecked boats engaged in the Scotch herring fishery; and
500 decked vessels in that of Yarmouth; a Yarmouth lugger
being of 30 or 34 tons register, 55 feet in length, and with
its nets (now generally made of cotton) costing from £ i 00 to
£l,OOO. The ‘delicacy of afresh herring’ is but little known
elsewhere than in Britain; the Dutch and Germans pickling
all theirs, and eating them raw, in which state they are said
to be very good.
The Faroe Islands, which belong to Denmark, to the
north-west of the Shetlands, have valuable fishing-banks
near them, which are much frequented by English and
Foreign fishermen. Many of the English smacks are ‘welled,’
that is, have the middle portion of the vessel made into a large
square tank, into which the water freely pours, through holes,
from the outside, so that it is always pure. The finest of the


cod are put into it, and are thus brought to the London
market alive, and in the best condition. ‘lt is curious,’ says
a visitor, ‘to see the great creatures moving gracefully about,
like gold-fish in a glass globe. One of them will take a crab
quietly out of one’s hand, and by a slight movement transfer
it down its capacious throat into its stomach.’ In Setubal
Bay, off the coast of Portugal, a considerable deep-sea fishery
for sharks is carried on, in a depth of 500 fathoms. The
fish are always dead when brought up by the long lines, on
reaching the surface.
PASS THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.—OCEANIC BIRDS.
After passing the Cape of Good Hope the weather, and the
appearance of the sea, changed considerably. The air became
cool and bracing • while the wind being constantly from the
west, and no land intervening to break its force, had immense
power upon the sea, which it drove before it in vast sweeping
billows to the east, —the line of our course. From the crest
of the wave we were upon to the one before us there appeared
a space of many square acres, the vessel sailing between the
two as a cork upon the water. One of the boats, hanging
upon the ship’s quarter, valued at about £3O, was struck by
a wave which tore it from the davits, and it was soon lost
sight of astern. On the 2nd of May, at breakfast-time, a sea
struck the side of the ship with great force, passing over the
bulwarks, flooding the deck and pouring a great quantity of
water down the main hatchway amongst the emigrants. We
had, however, no positive storm during the passage.
In the warm parts we had passed through, the birds seen
had been few ; now they were numerous. There were Mother
Carey’s chickens, of the size and appearance of a swallow;
Cape pigeons; Cape hens; whale birds; and Albatrosses. It
was pleasing to see them in their continual motion round
the ship, which they followed for days and weeks together,
on the look-out for anything thrown overboard. It was but
seldom they were seen to settle upon the water, though they
are said to do so every night, and resume their flight after
the ship at daybreak. Some of the cabin passengers amused
themselves with the somewhat cruel sport of throwing a line
with a hook baited with a piece of fat, over the ship’s stern,
and thus caught a few albatrosses and Cape pigeons. Their


flesh is unfit for food. A writer says,—‘The great long-winged
oceanic birds often appear to float rather than to fly. The
stronger is the gale, their flight, though less rapid, is all the
more easy —so easy indeed as to appear buoyant; because
the blasts which strike against their wing are enough to sustain
the bird with comparatively little exertion of its own, except
of holding the wing vanes stretched and exposed at proper
angles to the wind. This is a constant action with all the
oceanic birds. Those who have seen the albatross have
described themselves as never tired of watching its glorious
and triumphant motion :
* Tranquil its spirit seemed, and floated slow-
Even in its very motion tliere was rest.
‘ Rest—where there is nothing else at rest in the tremendous
turmoil of its own stormy seas ! Sometimes for a whole hour
together this splendid bird will sail or wheel round a ship in
every possible variety of direction without requiring to give
a single stroke to its pinions. Its wings are immensely long—
about fourteen or fifteen feet from tip to tip, and almost as
narrow in proportion as a riband. Our common gannet is an
excellent, though a more modified, example of the same kind
of structure.’
INCIDENTS OF THE VOYAGE.
In the sixth week after our departure from Plymouth, a
child died on board, and was buried in the deep the following
morning, the captain reading the burial service from the
prayer-book. Unless when becalmed, the speed of the
Andromache was from two to ten or eleven knots an hour,
day and night alike. It is never so dark at sea as it is on
land. When the wind is aft, or from the stern, the ship does
not sail so quickly as when it is on the quarter.
In our twelfth week out, the wind at the time being
moderate, three whales of the spermaceti kind, were in sight
at the same time, at the distance of about half a mile; all
the three spouting a stream of water into the air, which fell
again in a spray upon the sea. They went astern of the
vessel, and were then lost sight of. During a calm on the 9th
of June, a boat was lowered for some of the cabin passengers
to shoot sea birds. While out a breeze sprung up, and they


had a difficulty in again reaching the ship. On the 12tth of
June, when in another calm, a vessel was sighted in i the
morning, which proved to be the “ Platina, from Londoon to
New Zealand, having a house for the Governor onboard, nmade
of wood, no doubt,—and a large quantity of bricks. Inn the
forenoon, when she was about six miles distant, Captain New
had a boat lowered, and with some of the cabin passenngers
went on board the Platina, returning in the afternoon.
Some of the provisions now began to run short, but this
did not give material inconvenience, as other kinds were
substituted for those wanting. The appearance of the sea,
too, indicated our approach to land, the waveshaving beciome
like the ripples of a millpond, in comparison with such ass we
had previously.
June 16th. The decks had this day a thorough scournng;
the sailors being on their knees, scrubbing and singing. It
was expected that in the morning we should see
THE AUSTRALIAN COAST.
June 17th. Many of the passengers,—myself amongst the
number, were up early, anxiously looking out foi land, of
which we had not had a glimpse since we passed the Island
of St. Antonio, three months previously. Nor had we long
to wait, for within a few minutes of eight o’clock the cheering
sound of “Land ho!” was heard throughout the ship. I
believe the practised eye of a sailor is in discerning
distant land, than is that of a landsman, and is more to be
relied upon; as it is often difficult to distinguish the exceed-
ingly faint appearance of far-off land from the clouds which
are about the horizon. The land before us was supposed to
be Cape Otway, about two hundred miles from Port Phillip.
The captain seemed to be in doubt as to the position of
the vessel and the entrance to Port Phillip. At daybreak
next morning I found, on going upon deck, that the \ essel
was ‘ lying to,’ at a short distance from the coast, a rocky
headland being before us. When a vessel is laid-to, the yards
and sails are swung so that the wind strikes the fi out of some
and the back of others, the ship in consequence being without
motion. The head of the vessel was then turned to the
westward, and we went back along the coast, having passed
the entrance to the harbour. On Friday, June 19th, at the
close of our sixteenth week from Plymouth, we found our-
selves in


PORT PHILLIP,
Which is about forty-five miles in length, and of a varying
width. The bush, with its curiously shaped trees, and its
patches of green lawn, was very near us, and had a pleasing
appearance. After reaching the head of the harbour, the
vessel was anchored in Hobson’s bay, and next day the gov-
ernment emigrants were passed on to Melbourne, where there
were persons waiting to engage them ; the passengers for
Sydney remaining on board until the vessel was again ready
to sail. I took the opportunity of seeing Melbourne, then in
its infancy, its streets unpaved and unlighted. Mr. Richard
Howitt, brother of the well-known writer, William Howitt,
arrived about this time at Port Phillip, and writes of the
Yarra (the native name of the river on which Melbourne is
situated, signifying £ Bending ’), as follows :
‘ Flow on, sweet Yarra ! time shall be,
Shall happy votaries crowd to thee ;
And smiles of cultured beauty bless
With theirs thy natural loveliness.
Oh Yarra ! worthy highest place 1
Flo more wilt thou reflect a race
Squalid in form, in aspect base :
Fair girls from England’s lovely land,
Bright as thy bloom, will by thee stand,
And stooping low thy waves shall kiss, —-
And in return shalt thou disclose
Fair brows, clear seen in thy repose,
Our England’s lily and her Rose.’ •
The population of Melbourne was at this time under 10,000.
In 1871 it had increased to 206,000; the colony of Victoria
then containing 731,528 persons. Of the’ latter number
17,935 were Chinese, only 36 of whom were females, it being
the practice of these people to return to their native land as
soon as they have saved a sum of money. Those who die
before they accomplish this having their bones taken back to
China by a shipload at a time.
FROM PORT PHILLIP TO SYDNEY,
After a few weeks’ stay, having taken on board a good many
gentlemen passengers, we left our anchorage in Hobson’s
Bay for Sydney, and with a fair wind soon passed over the
forty miles or so to the entrance of the harbour. Our course


lay through Bass’s Straits, an interesting but rather danger-
ous passage, especially for sailing vessels. Often did we pass
a large boulder-like mass of stone, its smooth, rounded head
rising out of the deep, not many yards from us ; the sea
constantly dashing over, and again retiring from it—a picture
of perpetual but unavailing warfare, —for it ‘ was founded
upon a rock.’ When we had passed Gape Howe, at the
easterly entrance of the Straits, we again found ourselves in
the open ocean, on our second day from leaving Port Phillip.
Pursuing our course northwards, in the afternoon we spoke
the brig” Louisa,’ bound from Sydney to Adelaide. One of
her crew had fallen from her yard-arm to the deck, through
the breaking of the rope on which he was standing, and had
fractured his skull. Our captain offered to take him back to
Sydney, and he was brought alongside in their boat, ihe
poor man afterwards died in the Sydney hospital.
A little to the north of Sydney, and stretching northwards
along the eastern coast of Australia, is the commencement of
one of the most remarkable objects in the world. This is
THE GREAT BARRIER REEF,
A vast submarine wall or buttress, which rises almost per-
pendicularly, in many parts from nearly unknown ocean
depths, on its outer side, to the surface of the water. It forms
a natural breakwater to the shore, which it guards for more
than 1,100 miles, rendering the water within it smooth,
however rough it may be outside. The breadth of the reef
is from a few hundreds of yards to several miles; and that of
the inside passage from twenty to seventy miles. It has
many openings across it, by which vessels may enter the
inside channel, and sail the whole distance from Sydney to
Torres’ Straits. The swell of the mighty Pacific strikes the outer
edge of the reef, producing a long curling line of white foam,
—with a booming sound heard far and wide. And yet this
stupendous undertaking is the sole work of myriads of the
■[ 'my white-coral insect, hundreds of thousands of successive
generations of which must have been born, lived, toiled, and
died, before their work was finished. £ Grain by grain, and
particle by particle, they have built up these vast masses of
rock, the depth of which is, in some parts, at least 2,000 feet,
and their area contains thousands of square miles.’ Compared
with this, how trivial appear the greatest effects of human
labour, —the great wall of China, the pyramids of Egypt, the


•earthworks of British railways, or the Plymouth break-
water !
Two more days’ sailing brought us opposite the open bay
of Botany, and when seven miles further to the north we
were at the entrance of Port Jackson. In reply to a signal,
a pilot came alongside in a whale-boat manned by six stout
New Zealanders, and took command. He did not leave us
until the anchor was dropped close to the city of Sydney,
four miles up the harbour, which with its shores skirted
with rocks of various hues, the singular vegetation that
■clothed the sloping sides, —amongst which were many gen-
tlemen’s seats, —together with its islands, and the deep blue
sky reflected from its waters, made it appear to me as a view
in fairy-land. Mr. Gibson, our chief officer, was appointed
a pilot of the port, and in 1872 was still performing his
duties, as Superintendent of Lighthouses.
During the writer’s residence in Sydney, Robert Lowe,
Esq., late Chancellor of the Exchequer, was practising there
as a barrister, and was a member of the Legislative Council.
I remained in the Colony till March, 1845, a period of four
years and seven months ; the first and greater part of which
was passed in Sydney ; the latter in the country at Mangrove
Creek, on the Lower Hawkesbury, about fifty miles north of
Sydney, where I had bought thirty acres of land. This was
a quiet but picturesque and healthy locality. In returning
to England, having made the circuit of the globe from west
to east, —the direction of its daily revolution, —we had made a
day that was not a natural one. So that on passing the
180th degree of east, and entering into west longitude, we
had to put two Thursdays into one week, to make our date
correspond with that of England.
In concluding the narrative of my first voyage, I would
draw attention to what appears to me a very remarkable
fulfilment of prophecy, which has for some time past been
taking place, in connection with the emigration movement.
To each of the three sons of Noah different portions of the
earth were assigned. To Shem, the central and eastern
parts of Asia, including that which is now the Chinese em-
pire ; to Ham, Arabia and Africa; and to Japheth, Europe,
including the British Isles. The descendants of Shem, it is
generally agreed, also peopled the islands of the Pacific, New
Zealand, and North and South America; in most of which
parts the aboriginal natives are becoming fewer in number,


and by their extinction in time it may yet be seen, that those
countries were to them only as ‘ tents ’ or temporary dwell-
ings. Three hundred years since, the offspring of Japheth
began to make settlements in the West Indies; since which
time they have spread themselves over North and South
America; taken possession of India, —and are fast peopling
Australia, New Zealand, and other lands. How true, there-
fore, was the prophecy spoken more than 4,000 years since by
the patriarch, after he and his little band had come forth from
the ark, shut in wdiich by the hand of the Almighty they
had safely ridden for a twelve-month upon the billows of a
shoreless sea, —‘ God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall
dwell in the tents of Shem,’ Gen. ix. 27.
SECOND VOYAGE.
THE HAWKESBURY IN THE LONDON DOCK.
On Thursday, October 26, 1871, myself and wife went on
board the Hawkesbnry (advertised to sail that day), a vessel
of 1,017 tons, —Captain Philip Sayers, commander, —then
lying in the S.W. India dock, London, hound for Sydney,
N.S.W. The previous day I counted fourteen men aloft, —
‘ riggers,’—bending the sails and putting the ropes in their
places. The loading of the ship was being proceeded with
when we went on board, the stevedore, who had undertaken
the work saying it should be finished before his men left;
and this was done by about ten o’clock, lighted lamps being
placed in the hold.
The vessel was nearly new, and long in proportion to her
breadth. The three lower masts were of iron, and being
hollow served to ventilate the hold. Each of the two anchors
weighed about thirty-two hundred-weight. The cabins were
upon the upper deck, and consisted of two rows of deck-houses,
placed back to back between the fore and mainmast, the
double row having a passage all round. The doors of all
faced the sides of the ship, excepting the two amidships,
which opened towards the poop. We had one of the latter;
it was well lighted by a small window on one side, and a
skylight above. The sides and ceiling inside were painted
white; it had convenient fittings, and was every way com-
fortable. The poop was a raised part at the stern of the ship,


and formed the usual place of exercise for the first-class
passengers,—the saloon and their cabins being below it.
The forecastle was another raised part of the deck, at the
head of the vessel, and under it were the sailors’ berths. The
bulwarks, about six feet high, extended from the poop to the
forecastle ; the poop had wire netting on its sides; the fore-
castle a single iron rail, supported by stanchions.
When a vessel returns to port, it is the duty of her ‘ship’s
husband,’ as he is called, —generally the owner, or some one
appointed by him, —to see that all needful repairs are made,
and stores supplied, before another voyage is commenced.
The provisions put on board are often sufficient for both the
outward and homeward voyage. Most of the vessels carry-
ing passengers now go out under the Emigration Act; and
it is required of these ships that a list of the daily allowance
of provisions, and the quantity of fresh water to be supplied,
printed on a contract ticket, on which is also a receipt for
the passage money, shall be given to every passenger before
the ship sails. Before the ship left the dock, a Government
officer came on board and asked every passenger if he had
received his contract ticket, cautioning him to be careful of
it, as by it damages might easily be obtained from the ship
owners, if they did not fulfil their agreement. A copy of
the Emigration Act may be easily obtained, and should be
taken.
FROM LONDON TO GRAVESEND.
It was the afternoon of Friday, October 27th, when the
Dock Company’s tug, the Defiance, towed the Hawkesbury
out of dock. Just before passing through the gates, the
sailors came on board, a pilot being in command. A clergy-
man standing on the quay bade his son, a young midshipman
near me, a happy voyage. The sailors stood on the forecastle
hurrahing, and waiving their caps hr farewell to their friends,
some distance off, by the side of the river, —who, with others
to the number of a hundred or more, replied by the waiving
of handkerchiefs. The Fiery Cross steam-tug then took us
down the river to Gravesend, a distance of about thirty
miles, where the anchor was dropped the same evening.
The following day a young man came on board, and offered
me a couple of packets of numbers of the ‘ Leisure Hour,’
upon the outside of each packet being printed— ‘ A Farewell
Present to Emigrants. Presented by the Religious Tract


Society, London.’ I accepted them with pleasure; and on
his further offering me a ‘ Form of Prayers,’ &c. r I told hhim
I thought the spirit of prayer was better than the form;; to
which he assented, saying he thought we should not meed
what he had offered. There were on board eighteen salcoon.
passengers, most of them young gentlemen returning to
Sydney after completing their education in England; six
second cabin passengers ; captain, three mates, eight midship-
men, steward and assistants, sailmaker, carpenter, and crew
of about thirty men. After breakfast the tug proceeded with
us as far as the North Foreland lighthouse, where the anchor
was dropped; the wind being unfavourable for going down
the Channel.
GOING DOWN THE CHANNEL. —LAND BIRDS.
It was not until Monday morning that the anchor was
weighed, the wind still being unfavourable. The vessel was
put upon different tacks during the day, and oxdy a dozen
miles or so of progress were made. But between twelve and
one o’clock next morning, when lying in my berth, I heard
the pilot give the word, ‘ Square the yards.’ ‘Aye, aye, sir,’
was the reply, which told me the wind had become favourable.
In passing through the Straits of Dover, which in the nar-
rowest part are only twenty-one miles wide, the French and
English coasts may often be seen at the same time. The
day was dull, with rain falling at times ; and before evening
we had lost sight of the land. About four o’clock next
morning, November Ist, we were near Portsmouth, and the
pilot wishing to be put ashore, a rocket was sent up from
the ship and blue-lights burned. Two pilot cutters came off
in answer, on board one of which he was put, wishing us a
good passage. By noon we were ninety miles clear of the
English Channel.
The early part of the following night was very tempestuous,
and I was kept awake by the noise of the sailors shouting
and running about the deck, and of the winds and waves;
to which was added the constant rolling of the vessel. At
such a time one feels that none but an Almighty power can
give protection. Next morning the wind and sea had in a
good measure subsided ; the sea being of a dark blue colour.
Four or five sparrows were flying about the deck, chirping
and quite merry. They came on board the day before, it


was supposed from the French coast. During the day a
couple ot chaffinches also visited us, and were flying about
and picking up what they could find in the way of food. 1
also saw a young starling and a thrush. In the afternoon
of the 4th I was surprised to see a true ‘ robin redbreast ’
come within a yard of our cabin door ; it looked in and then
hopped away. I had not seen it before, nor did I see it
again. Next day all the land-birds had left us. The doctor
and some of the saloon passengers playing at throwing quoits
- with rings made of rope—on the poop. With a good wind
the Hawkesbury runs 14-|- knots in an hour, —her highest
speed.
THE ‘TWEED.’—DIVINE SERVICE ON BOARD.
Nov. 4 th. A fine vessel of 2,500 tons, named the ‘ Tweed,’
which left London the day after the Hawkesbury, came up
with us at noon. She was also bound for Sydney; her
captain had not been there before. On Sunday, the sth,
both ships were becalmed; in the morning the Tweed being
about a mile from us. In the afternoon, a slight breeze
having sprung up, she was only about two cable-lengths
distant. Amongst the passengers walking about upon her
poop, I noticed a lady—l believe she was the only one on
board—wearing a small red shawl. Although the Tweed
arrived safely in port, and before us, it was the sad lot of
this lady not to be amongst those who stepped ashore, as
will be afterwards shown. There was divine service in the
saloon; in the morning for the passengers and midshipmen ;
in the evening for the sailors. The captain, who is tall, and
between fifty and sixty years of age, read the service from
the prayer-book in a very proper manner, a lady passenger
playing the piano, to accompany the singing. One of the
two ship’s bells, struck by a midshipman with a piece of
iron, was made to serve, before each service, for the ‘ church-
going bell.’
HOW WE OBTAINED OUR FRESH WATER.
The end of the deck-houses nearest to the forecastle was
used as the cook’s galley ; and next to it was the workshop
of the carpenter, who had charge of the condenser, by which


our supply of fresh water was obtained from sea water. This
was a cylindrical boiler, about five feet long, placed upright,
and having a small steam-engine attached to it, which vas
generally heard going all the day, except on Sundays. Salt
water was pumped up by the engine from one side of die
vessel, and brought to the condenser by a pipe; pure frtsh
water being distilled from it by evaporation. This vas
carried by a pipe to a tank at the bottom of the hold. Fmn
two to three hundred gallons of good water could be obtaired
in this way in a day, the salt being passed into the sea at
the other side of the ship, by a pipe, along with the refise
water. The fresh water thus made is free from all bad taae,
but is said not to keep so long as the common sort. Thtre
is thus a great amount of space saved in the ship’s hod,
over the plan of taking water from the port.
The ship was generally pumped twice a day, eight or tn
of the crew working at the two pumps, which were just
behind the mainmast, usually lightening their labour by n
impromptu song. The carpenter, or £ chips ’ashe is always
called, took the depth of the water in the ‘ well ’ sevenl
times a day, by letting down a line with an iron rod at tie
end, from the upper deck, and observing the depth of is
immei’sion. Iron vessels sometimes do not make a bucketfil
of leakage-water during a long voyage.
Nov. Qth. During the whole of this day a strong wcstery
wind drove us on at the rate of from twelve to thirteen knos
an hour; the head of the vessel dashing into one wave affir
another, and throwing up a cloud of spray on the windwaxi
bow. The waves are not white broken heaps, as at Southpo-t
or Blackpool, but huge rolling masses, with very little foan ;
the force of the wind beating their heads down, aid
preventing them from turning over in curls. In tie
morning two seas came one after the other, over the bulwark?,
and flooded the deck. As our cabin door did not face the sice
of the ship we received none of it, but our neighbours had
more than they wished for. Five sail were in sight at one?,
including a homeward-bound steamer. We were taking out
‘ Tommy,’ a two-year old bull, to Sydney. He was roaring
during the day, perhaps from sea-sickness; however, he sooa
learned to be fond of sea biscuits, besides the provender
supplied to him by the butcher. There was also a milci
cow, for the saloon passengers. Milk thickened and preserve!
in small tins is an excellent article for use on shipboard.


Nov. B th. This was the first really warm day we had
experienced; the pitch between the planks of the deck
rising and sticking to the soles of one’s shoes. The carpenter
was making his 18th voyage to Sydney. We were becalmed
during the whole day, at the distance of 160 miles north of
Madeira.
MADEIRA.—DEPTH OF THE SEA.—THE TRADE WINDS.
Between one and two o’clock in the morning of November
10th, while there was only alight breeze, orders were given
to take in some of the sails. At five we passed Porto Santo,
one of the Madeira Islands; and when I went on deck the
island of Deserta was visible. It was one o’clock before we
came up to it, when we were near enough to distinguish the
fields and vineyards, with a town and village. Madeira could
be seen several miles ahead. Although near the middle of
November, the day was warm, but not unpleasantly so, with
a gentle sea-breeze, and an almost unclouded sky. A dozen
or so of large sea-gulls were soaring high over the ship, as we
slowly proceeded. At least half-a-dozen rainbows were seen
throughout the day. We got up to the southern coast of
Madeira a little before sunset, and passed at a distance of
three or four miles. The land rose to a considerable height,
clouds hanging around the upper part. A town, —possibly
Funchal, the capital,—and a lighthouse were seen, with a large
convent on the side of a hill. Captain Sayers said that in a
day or two he hoped we should see the peak of Teneriffe ; as
last year when bound for Sydney, he and others had a mag-
nificent view of the mountain, on the morning of Christmas
day. But in this we were disappointed, as the wind was not
favourable for that course. Thermometer at noon, in cabin,
70 deg.
Many ocean islands are supposed to be the tops of mountains
rising from vast depths. The general depth of the ocean has
been found to be not more than 2,000 fathoms, or under two
miles; it being only here and there that hollows of much
greater depth are found, some of the deepest being about
five-and-a-quarter miles. The deep-sea lead for taking
soundings is about two feet long, and weighs from 80 to
1201b5., a piece of tallow being placed in the cup-shaped
lower end for bringing up a sample of the bottom. But for


depths beyond 1,000 fathoms, the Hydra apparatus is useed,
so called from its being the invention of the blacksmithi of
H.M.S. ‘Hydra.’ The line is nearly an inch in circumforemce,
and strong enough to support 14 cwt.; a stout iron rod beiing
fastened to the bottom, and to, the end of the rod a tube) is
screwed, five feet long, through which the water passes in its
descent. The weights are round discs of iron, half-a-hundreed-
weight each, with a hole in the centre through which the tuibe
and rod are passed ; the whole of the weights amounting to
from two to three hundred-weight. These are suspended Iby
a wire from a peg passing through the upper part of the rod,
carried under the bottom weight, and upwards again, at the
other side to the peg. The tube is divided into two compart-
ments, and has a ‘ butterfly-valve ’ near the bottom, and other
valves above. The weights become detichei on its striking
the bottom, which Captain Calver of the ‘ Porcupine,’ when
taking a sounding,—the line passing through his hand, —
distinctly felt with a depth of three miles. Upon the tube
being drawn up, the valves close upon the soil which has
been forced into the lower chamber, and the sea-water in the
upper. The time occupied in the descent of the tube and
weights, was in this instance 33| minutes, and in heaving up
by a donkey-engine of 12-horse power, 2 hours, 2 minutes.
Before the plan of leaving the weights at the bottom was
adopted, it has taken twelve hours to raise the tube. In the
greatest depths an abundance of animal life has been found;
the bottom consisting of a fine white sediment, in some parts
several feet deep, consisting of the remains of minute shells.
There is a stillness there as of the grave; and in all parts of
the globe the temperature, at these depths, is near the
freezing point of fresh water.
Soon after passing Madeira we took the north-east trade-
winds. These winds blow regularly all the year round, and
are of great service to navigators j those on the north of the
equator blowing from the north-east, those on the south from
the south-east. When there is an intermission for a few days
there is usually a storm before they resume their course.
They are supposed to be caused by the daily rotation of the
earth, the air rushing towards the parts which have been most
heated by the sun’s rays. The captain told me that the
distance from London to Sydney, by the course we should
take, —to the south of Tasmania, —was 15,900 miles. In
the morning of the 15 th a flying fish was picked up from the


deck, on which it had fallen during the night, and was given
by the sailors to their cat, of which there are three on board.
CROSS THE LINE.—FALL OF DEW.—THE GULF STREAM
AND ITS ORIGIN.
On Sunday, Nov. 23rd, divine service was held on the
poop, under an awning. As I looked upon the deep blue
sky from where I was sitting,—then upon the sparkling blue
water, bright sunshine, clean decks, and bleached sails of
the vessel, and thought of the service we were met to engage
in, it appeared to me that such a day might be put down as
part of the bright side of a sailor’s life. If a good sermon,
or a part of one were also read, it would be an improvement
to such services. In the afternoon, by hoisting various flags,
spoke a French vessel, the Ariadne, homeward bound. She
then hoisted the French ensign, and dipped it three times as
a farewell. We did the same with the English flag.
Crossed the line on the Friday following, which was our
twenty-fourth day from Plymouth. Thermometer at noon,
in cabin, 81 deg. ; but as there was a pretty strong breeze
no inconvenience was felt from the heat; indeed when
on deck in the morning I felt the wind quite cool. Sailors
do not like quick passages at all times, and ours said they
would rather have a week of calms than the wind we then
had. They appear to be an underpaid class of men, no able
seaman on board receiving more than £2 10s. a month, with
rations. I think the days of sailing vessels for passengers
are numbered, believing that a passage by steamer is generally
made in half the time, with equal safety, and the advantage
of a more abundant supply of fresh water. It is very
remarkable, that the dew 7 begins to fall soon after noon in
these parts, while the night dews are very heavy.
A shower-bath had been fitted up on deck, for the use of the
saloon passengers early in the morning; some of the other
passengers getting over the side of the vessel at the head,
and after undressing having a few bucketfuls of sea-water
thrown upon them. After a heavy shower the ducks and
geese were taken out of their pens, and allowed to wash
themselves in the rain-water on deck, what they had long
appeared to be in need of.


It is a common opinion that the ocean is at rest, except
when affected by the winds or tides ; but this is an error, as
many powerful currents exist in it, one of which is known to-
have a very beneficial influence on the climate of Cheat
Britain and the surrounding waters. Near the eqmator,
but far to the eastward of our present position, are the
islands of St. Thomas and Anna Bon; a little to the scouth
of which the constant force of the trade winds, assisted it is
supposed by the diurnal motion of the earth, 4 begins to dlrive
before it an immense surface current of hot water, 4,000*
miles long by 450 miles broad.’ Proceeding in a westerly
direction, a great part of this vast stream enters the Caribbean
Sea and the Gulf of Mexico, and issues from the latter under
the name of the Gulf Stream, being then a mighty current
thirty miles broad and 2,200 feet deep, having a temperature
of 86 deg. and a rate of progress of four miles an hour.
It is said by Professor Wyville Thomson to be, in this part of’
its course, 4 probably the most glorious natural phenomenon
on the face of the earth. The water is of a clear crystalline
transparency and an intense blue: and the stream is so
sharply defined, that a ship may have her stem in the clear
blue stream while her stern is still in the common water of
the ocean.’ It then spreads itself out considerably, and being
acted upon by the prevailing westerly winds, gradually leaves
the coast of North America, and proceeds in a north-easterly
direction. Approaching to and passing the coasts of the
British Isles, it is the softener of their prevalent winds, the
promoter of a plentiful supply of rain, and the cause of the*
singular mildness of their winter climate, when compared
with that of the east coast of America, Avhere Labrador, —in
the same latitude as the Western Isles of Scotland, —with its
ice-bound coast and dreary frozen solitudes, has winters little
less severe than those within the Arctic Circle ; the ther-
mometer falling to 30 deg. below freezing-point. 4 When the
Most High divided to the nations their inheritance,’ Dent..
xxxii. 8, he allotted these mercies to the British people.
THE SUN VERTICAL.—THE RAINY SEASON IN INDIA.
Dec. 2nd. This day the sun was vertical, so that we had
no shadows when standing on deck. The morning was cool,
and at noon the thermometer stood only at 74| deg, in the
shade. The breeze we had kept the heat from being


■excessive. In India, from June to October,—and in some
other hot countries during the summer season, —the sun is
in a great measure obscured by dense masses of clouds, from
which the rain is poured in torrents. This, through the
consequent evaporation, renders the ‘ rainy season,’ as it is
called, comparatively cool. The year is there divided into two
seasons, —not into four, as in England,—known as the rainy
and the dry, portions of the latter being the hottest in the
year, though really belonging to the winter.
The cook having made a demand upon the passengers for
a quart of fresh water from the daily allowance to each, for
cooking purposes, I borrowed the 1 Emigration Act ’ from
the captain ; and seeing from it that the owners of the ship
were bound to supply certain provisions in a cooked state,
they finding the water, I declined to accede to his invitation,
giving him my reason. Some had complied, and it appeared
that in other ships he had practised the extortion, but it
ended with his having to make a virtue of necessity,—to be
content with what he received from the ship, and so the
passengers saved their fresh water. Perhaps he had had an
eye to a partnership Avith one of the sailors avlio washed
Avhite pocket-handkerchiefs for the ladies in the saloon, at
the moderate charge of two-and-sixpence per dozen.
Such of the crew as were on duty in the daytime were
employed in taking to pieces old ropes, and making spun-yarn
of the strands, A wheel was fitted up on one side of the
deck, and was being turned all day, in fine weather, as in a
rope-walk. In other parts lengths of rope, after being
covered with tar, were having spun-yarn passed round them,
to be used for various purposes. The standing-rigging is noAV
chiefly made of wire-rope.
There was no grog, that is, rum, allowed the sailors of the
HaAvkesbury, but there was coffee instead, at fi\ r e in the
morning, for those who happened to be in the morning Avatch.
At about the same hour the butcher began to feed the cattle,
pigs, sheep, and poultry; while three or four cocks were
usually saluting the approaching dawn by crowing ; the decks
being regularly washed down before' breakfast. In the
evening work ceased at half-past five, when the sailors had
their tea; some then lying down in their berths to sleep
previous to being called for the night watch • others hoav and
then playing at leap-frog, without shoes, or spending their
time in other ways.


ASCERTAINING A SHIP’S POSITION AT SEA.—AN UNUSUAL
SIGHT.
The position of a ship at sea is found by determining (1)
the latitude, or distance north or south of the equator; and
(2) the longitude or distance east or west of the meridian of
Greenwich, which is a line supposed to run from the north
to the south pole, through Greenwich Observatory. The first,
or the latitude, is ascertained by the captain and first mate
each taking the height of the sun a little before noon, by
means of a sextant. The second, or the longitude, is found
by comparing the time of the day where the ship is—which
is easily found—-with the Greenwich time noted by the
chronometer, a large watch made to keep time very accurately.
As the sun is twenty-four hours in going round the earth, a
distance of 360 degrees, a difference of one hour between the
two is equal to fifteen degrees, or four minutes to one degree;
if the ship’s time is before that of Greenwich, it is to the east;
if later than, it is to the west. To make sure of the
chronometer being correct, observations are also taken of the
moon and stars, by measuring the distance—which is always
changing—of the moon from one of the principal stars.
Then finding from the Nautical Almanac the time for the
same distance at Greenwich, and knowing the hour where the
ship is, the difference gives the longitude ; the distances in
the almanac being given for every three hours, and for two or
three years in advance. No ship will be insured unless it
has a chronometer on board. We have four, —one belonging
to the captain, one to the first mate, and two to the ship-
owners. They formerly cost £SO each, but not so much
now. As Dr. Livingstone often used the sextant when
travelling in Africa, the natives spoke of him as ‘ the white
man who could bring down the sun and moon, and carry
them under his arm.’ The natives of the Society Islands
often asked Capt. Bligh, of the Bounty , if he had been as far
as the sun and moon; ‘ for they think,’ he says, ‘we are
such great travellers, that scarce any undertaking is beyond
our ability.’
Dec. 7th. At noon we were half a degree to the south,
but much to the westward, of the Cape of Good Hope.
About tea-time an unusual sight presented itself to all on
board. A large yellowish-coloured mass was seen floating
ahead. When the ship came up to it, it proved to be the


dead body of a whale, which had been left by its captors
after being stripped of its blubber. Some hundreds of sea-
birds, small and large, were upon the water around it, many
•of them engaged in feasting upon the body. For some
distance from it the water showed oil floating upon the
surface, and there was a perceptible smell.
WHALES IN SIGHT.—AN AMERICAN WHALER.
We saw several whales, two or three at a time, at a
considerable distance from one another. They were of
the spermaceti species, which is most abundant in warm
latitudes; is larger than the Greenland whale, and of
a more vicious disposition, having been known to run head
first against a ship and sink it; but is more valuable when
captured. The nostril of the whale, called the ‘ blow-hole/
is placed nearly at the top of the head, and from it a column
of air and water is thrown up a considerable height during
the operation of breathing or blowing. A valve, or stopper,
closes the hole when the fish again descends. The throat of
a sperm-whale is wide enough to admit the body of a man,
but that of the Greenland whale is only an inch and a half
in diameter. Both species live upon animal food. A whaler
has from six to eight boats, each 25 feet long, pointed at each
end, and painted white ; the crew of the ship comprising
from 40 to 60 men. When a whale is sighted each boat is
hastily manned with its appointed crew, and a strife takes
place as to which shall first come up with the fish. When
the boat strikes its side, the man standing at the head with
the harpoon in his hand thrusts it into the body, and at the
cry of ‘ Stern all ! ’ the boat is backed as quickly as possible,
to avoid a stroke from the tail, which has been known to cut
a boat in two as clean as if divided by a saw, sending the
men sprawling into the water. By the diving of the whale
the line is run out so quickly that a bucket with -water is
kept ready, to prevent the sides of the boat taking fire. The
boats then spread themselves about, to be ready to strike it
again on its reappearance. The head of the sperm-whale is
very large, and has a cavity which frequently contains ten
large barrels of spermaceti ; while a large fish will furnish 80
barrels of sperm-oil.


In the afternoon of Jan. 16th I was observing the spout-
ing of a whale about a mile off, or less; it disappeared, and
shortly afterwards a huge brown mass rose to the surface,
alongside the ship, at a distance of from forty to fifty yards,
its head being in a line with that of the ship. It was a
whale, and it must have seen the vessel, and perhaps myself,
for its back was not more than a minute or two above the
water, when it sunk noiselessly, and I saw it no more. How
plainly did its hasty departure prove the truth of the divine
words spoken to Noah, —‘And the fear of you, and the
dread of you, shall be upon every beast of the earth, and
upon all the fishes of the sea.’ On my return voyage, one
fine afternoon, when there was a gentle breeze, we fell in
with a three-masted American whaler, cruising about under
easy sail. Three boats hanging above the bulwarks, at each
side, and three sailors in blue clothes, on the look-out,
standing nearly at the highest point of the masts—one on the
fore, and two on the mainmast, —told what she was. The
swell on the water made her roll from side to side, making
the position of the men far from j>leasant, had they not been
sailors.
A SOUTHERLY COURSE.—AN ICEBERG.—THE MAGNETIC
POLES.
After passing the Cape our course was more to the south
than that taken by vessels bound for Melbourne, which have
in consequence finer weather and less danger. This was to
obtain a strong westerly breeze, and to pass to the south of
Tasmania. Several vessels have been lost, as is supposed by
taking this course. We found fogs to be of frequent occur-
rence, and often did not know but that an iceberg might be
immediately ahead of the ship. One forenoon, the weather
having cleared up, a large iceberg was in sight, at the distance
of a few miles, appearing very white, and in shape resembling
u, church, with a square steeple at one end. While I was
looking at it, a sailor remarked to me, that I had now seen
what many of his class had passed their lives without seeino-.
In the year 1840 Sir J. Parry met with many icebergs in the
high latitudes of the southern hemisphere, which were 180
feet high and two miles in circumference. They have all a
much greater depth below, than height above the surface of
the water.


The cold of the southern is more severe than that of the
northern parts of the world ; icebergs being met with in 10
deg. (about 700 miles) lower latitude, that is, nearer to the
equator, than in the northern. The island of Georgia, lying
to the east of Cape Horn, in the same south as Westmoreland
in England is in north latitude, has not upon it ‘ a shrub
big enough to make a toothpick,’ and in the height of summer
Captain Cook found it covered many fathoms deep with frozen
snow. A great ice barrier of perpendicular cliffs, from 150
to 200 feet high, flat and level at the top, is found to surround
the south pole, at a distance from it of 700 or 800 miles.
Victoria Land, to the south of New Zealand, is within this
region of perpetual ice and snow. Mount Erebus, an active
volcano, is one of its most remarkable objects, rising 12,400
feet above the level of the sea, and continually sending up
flame and smoke to a great height, illuminating the terrible
darkness of the long winter nights of those frozen regions.
What the land wants in vegetable and animal life, is made
up by the abundant life of the ocean, which swarms with
whales, sea-elephants, and other forms of life, the larger
preying upon the smaller; while inconceivable myriads of
penguins were found by Sir J. Ross covering the surface of
one island, ‘pecking with their sharp beaks at those who
waded through their ranks.’
The magnetic pole of the northern, has its counterpart in
that of the southern hemisphere, both being at a distance
from the terrestrial poles. The nearer an approach is made
to either of the magnetic poles, the more does the needle dip,
until, when over the pole, it becomes vertical, and points
downwards. The north magnetic pole has been stood over,
and that was then found to be the effect upon the needle;
ice prevented Sir J. Ross, in 1841, approaching nearer than
160 miles to the south magnetic pole, the dip oftheneedle show-
ing that he was that distance from it. The mysterious con-
nection between these two points under, but near to, the sur-
face of the globe, and the mariner’s compass, shows in a
•wonderful manner a wise and beneficent provision made by
the Creator for the wants of man, for without the compass it
appears impossible that great tracts of the ocean could be
traversed with safety, as they now are, and in the most
beclouded nights. The north and south points of the needle
point to their respective poles; and if removed, each turns
again to its own. Well may we say, ‘ O Lord, how manifold
are thy works ! in wisdom hast thou made them all.’


Jan. Bth, 1872. The previous week we sailed 1,700 miles,
and should have done more had the ship not been so heavily
laden. English vessels have their sails made of course flax ;
those of the United States of cotton; the latter costing more
but lasting longer. A ship sails the fastest with new sails.
The compass circle is divided into 32 points, and a ship will
sail within six points of the direction the wind comes from;
being then said to be ‘ close hauled.’ A dozen or so of alba-
trosses were keeping us company, continually soaring round
the ship, and in all directions. 18th. The anchors were got
over the bows, ready for dropping, and the placing of the
side-lights near to them resumed, they not having been used
since we left the Atlantic, —a red light on the port, or left
side of the ship, and a green one on the starboard, or right
side. The sailors had been busy, for several days previous,
scraping, cleaning, and painting, so as to make all look clean
on arrival in port. It was expected we should make the land
during the following night.
TASMANIA.—BECALMED. —PORT JACKSON.
I rose at four o’clock the next morning, and saw rocks
on our left, a few miles ahead, with land at some miles
distance, a part of the south coast of Tasmania. In an hour,
the wind being strong and favourable, we came up to the
rocks, large brown masses, the sea breaking wildly over them,
and dashed past them at about half a mile’s distance. Early
in the forenoon the breeze died away, and left us becalmed
for the remainder of the day opposite, and at a few miles
distance from, Storm Bay, into which flows the river Dciwcnt.
Hobart Town, the capital of the island, is situated ibout
twelve miles up the river, at the foot of Mount Wellirgton,
whith is 4,320 feet in height, and has a road to its summit
of ten miles in length. Tasmania is about the size of Scotland,
and has a climate resembling that of England ; cur rank and
gooseberries being sent to Sydney, which is 600 miles b the
north of Hobart Town. The mouth of Storm Bay is see era!
miles in width, and is formed by two arms, as it vere,
projecting towards the sea, —Bruni Island forming the outh
arm and Tasman’s Peninstda the northern one. The lad on
each side and before us rose majestically to a great hight,
the sloping sides being covered with lofty trees, and altogther


formed the finest panorama of sea and land I had ever beheld.
As we were becalmed, with not a breath of air stirring, and
it was midsummer in that part of the world, the sun’s rays
felt very powerful throughout the day.
After leaving Storm Bay we encountered a very severe gale,
the water being thrown over the bulwarks to the top of the
deck-houses, and the decks frequently flooded. In the after-
noon the wind abated. Jan. 2bth. Passed a steamer bound
from Sydney to Melbourne; and next morning, before daylight,
passed the lighthouse at Wollongong. Late on Saturday
evening we saw the flash of the revolving light of the Sydney
lighthouse, from its lofty position on the high cliff of the
‘ South Head,’ at the entrance of Port Jackson. On our
getting near it, one of the two guns on deck was fired as a
signal for a pilot, who soon came alongside in a steamtug,
and then on board. The vessel was towed up the harbour,
passing the dangerous rocks called the ‘ Sow and Pigs,’ and
the various forts and islands. We were at anchor a little
before midnight, with the city of Sydney before us, less than
half a mile off.
The ‘ Tweed ’ had arrived eight days before us, with all
her passengers except one,- —the lady I had seen on her poop,
as previously stated. She had been lost on the passage, but
in what manner I could not hear. She was going out to be
married to a young gentleman who went on board as soon as
the ship arrived, and was much affected when informed of
her loss.
THE RETURN VOYAGE
from Australia is nearly always made by way of Cape Horn,
on account of the prevailing westerly winds. Leaving Sydney
in March, 1845, in the brig Caroline, we first sighted the
islands named the ‘ Three Kings,’ a little to the north of New
Zealand; and as there was found to be a leakage in the
vessel, the captain decided to put into the Bay of Islands,
on the north-east coast, to endeavour to have it stopped.
NEW ZEALAND,
which is 1,200 miles to the east of Australia, was discovered
by the Dutch in 1642, and named after their own province


of Zeeland, or Sea-land—land recovered from the sa. It
consists principally of two islands, extending a distnce of
1,100 miles, —long in proportion to their width—searated
from each other by Cook’s Straits, and with a total urea of
only a little less than that of Great Britain and Irelad ; to
which they are also nearly the antipodes, it being ndnight
with them when it is noon in England, and their mi winter
being the season of our midsummer. The climate i ranch
more like that of England than is that of Australia, j chain
of mountains runs through the length of both islands, kose in
the south island being the loftiest, some of the peaks rising
to the height of 14,000 feet, being within the reion of
perpetual snow, and in winter the whole of the sathern
range, white with their snowy covering, is a remarkablcobj ect
from a distance at sea.
As we entered the Bay the houses of the Missionary tation
were on the shore to our right, while the town of Korcarika,
on our left, was hidden from view by a point of land which
projected into the Bay. After passing this the ancbr was
let go, and the sails furled. Before us lay the town, >r the
remains of what had been the town, for it had, shortlybefore
our arrival, been attacked by the natives when they assmbled
to cut down a flag-staff on a neighbouring emincnc*—the
British inhabitants forced to take refuge on board the essels
then in the bay; and the houses, which were of woo, had
then been burned by the natives, leaving only the brick
chimneys standing. On our arrival we saw only two essels
besides our own; one the Hazard, British sloop of wr, the
other a whaler. The Hazard had taken part in the cbfence
of the town, and a wooden block-house—the sides piered for
musketry—had been occupied by a number of her mrines
and sailors, but their ammunition failing, they had to eturn
to the ship. The crew slept at their quarters on deck sveral
nights, the captain expecting to be attacked by the ntives.
On one occasion a canoe containing a number of thei was
making for the shore when a ball from one of the ship’; guns
passed over their heads, at only a slight distance abovuhem.
A boat from the Hazard soon put off to us, under cormand
of the second lieutenant, who came on board and tol our
captain he must be off directly, as the natives had hrned
the town, and the commander of the Hazard would not aswer
for our safety. However, our skipper had a different ojnion,
so we remained at anchor. Next morning we proceedd two


or three miles farther up the harbour, passing the sloop of
war, its rigging fall of flannel shirts, &c., strung upon lines
from one mast to another, it being the men’s appointed
washing-day. In our new position we were near the shore
and a number of neatly-built wooden houses, with gardens
and a good wharf, the place bearing the name of Whapoo.
Not a living being,—man, woman, or child, was to be seen.
It had been a pretty spot, though now so desolate. Next
day we were visited by some natives, who came down the
river from their village, or pah. They belonged to a tribe
who professed to be friendly to the English, and who denied
that they had taken part in the burning of the town. The
women wore loose cotton print gowns, all of a small neat
pattern, and each had a shark’s tooth, —like a piece of white
bone tipped with red—suspended from the ear by a piece of
narrow black ribbon. Every man bad a large blanket thrown
over his shoulders, and coming down to his knees, as his only
clothing, with a little axe or tomahawk stuck in his waist;
the boys, of whom there were a few, wore long knives. All
were anxious to get tobacco, as both men and women smoked.
The women were modest and well-behaved. I did not feel
particularly fond of our visitors, especially of the men, knowing
that we were unarmed, and entirely at their mercy; remem-
bering too that the Bay had witnessed various treacherous
massacres of ship’s crews in former years.
The Maories (Mow-ries), though a fine race of savages, have
been much given to revenge and bloodshed. Mr. G. F. Angus,
in his book entitled ‘ Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and
New Zealand,’ says that in 1844 (the year before my visit)
he visited the battle-field where the Bay of Islands tribe, under
the celebrated chief Shungie, had fought with another tribe.
He states that ‘ The hones of two thousand men still lie
whitening on the plain; and the ovens remain in which the
flesh of the slain was cooked for the horrible repast of the
victorious party ’-—the tribe from the Bay of Islands. I
believe it was in this battle that Shungie, possessing a number
of firearms, his opponents having only the native weapons,
shot his opponent, the chief Inacki, and then sprang forward,
scooped out an eye of the dying man, and swallowed it. He
then plunged his knife into his throat, and drunk as much
of his blood as his two hands would hold. Shungie was
himself killed in a subsequent battle.


The natives usually cook their potatoes, meat, &c., in holes
which they scoop in the ground. After heating a number
of stones the food to be cooked is put in, some water poured
upon it, and it is then covered with leaves and sand or soil.
In a short time it is found to be well cooked. The gardens
around their villages, or pahs, are said to be kept in very
good order, the digging and all the woik of cultivation being
done by the women.
The introduction of Christianity and civilization into the
islands has in general greatly altered the condition of the
natives for the better. The whole of the Bible has been
translated into the Maori language, their internal wars have
ceased, and with them the horrible practice of cannibalism,
or the eating of human flesh. There are now good markets
for their garden produce and fishing, while many of the chiefs
receive handsome incomes from the rents of their lands. One
of the kinds of fern common in the country has an edible
root, and this formerly supplied a chief portion of the food
of the natives. But ‘ the lordly Maories have now abandoned
to the wild hog this humble provis'on.’ Only a few years
since, two of the chiefs wearing top-boots were proceeding
along one of the rivers when it was flooded, to witness horse-
races which had been introduced by the English, when their
canoe was upset and both were drowned, not being able to
swim in top-boots.
In the early parts of the morning we sometimes saw a
dozen canoes, in different parts of the harbour, in each of
which was a native engaged in fishing, his line having the
figure of a small fish made of mother-of-pearl, and a hook at
the end, which he was continually throwing into the water,
as he followed the shoals of fish, paddling his canoe wilh the
other hand. Throughout the day many pretty white birds,
called ‘Wide-awakes,’about half the size of a pigeon, wer< to be
seen in flocks, hovering over the water, and picking up thei 1 food.
Some of the passengers and myself had a ramble anong
the deserted houses and gardens of Whapoo, and thei into
the country, winch appeared to have a very fertile soil. After
staying a few more days, and finding that no assistane was
to be obtained in the place for the repair of the vesst, the
anchor was weighed, and it was with very satisfactory felings
that I saw we were going, with a fair breeze, out c the
harbour. I considered we had been mercifully presrved
from great dangers by a watchful Providence.


Our course was then directed to Auckland, at that time
the seat of Government (since transferred to Wellington, in
the southern part of the North Island), 100 miles to the
south of the Bay of Islands. On the second day of the pas-
sage, in the afternoon, we were becalmed about a mile from
the rocky shore, towards which wc were being gradually
drifted. To our relief a land-breeze sprang up after sunset,
which took us out of danger.
After arriving at Auckland we were favoured in getting
the vessel repaired. One Sunday evening we saw the de-
parture for the Bay of Islands, or the neighbourhood, of a
considerable number of English soldiers, who went on board
the ships with their band playing, and cheered by their
fellow soldiers in the barracks. Ten days after a boat-load
of the poor fellows, wounded in an engagement they had had
with the natives, was landed from the ‘North Star’ ship of
war, a number of soldiers’ wives running to meet the boat at
the landing place, anxious to know if any of their husbands
were amongst the number. It was a distressing scene.
Some of the men died afterwards in the hospital.
One pleasing sight I observed at Auckland. From one to
two hundred Maories were assembled on the shore one evening,
all joining in singing a hymn to one of our old English
tunes. Electric telegraphs, railways, good roads, and the
discovery of gold fields—the latter bringing into the country
a great increase of settlers—have with other causes so altered
New Zealand, that it has become one of the most promising
countries for the British settler.
CAPE HORN.
There is a distance of 4,600 miles between New Zealand
and Cape Horn, the southernmost point of South America;
and it is 22| deg. of latitude, or more than 1,500 miles
further south than the city of Sydney. As we approached it,
though out of sight, in the winter, we had snow storms, the
rigging of the vessel covered with ice, and the figure of the
woman at the head of the vessel spread over with ice and
icicles. The days were shorter than those in England at
Christmas; while at noon the sun was very low down in the
north. The Dutch navigator who first rounded the Cape
named it after the peaceful little village of Horn in Holland,


from which, most likely, Early Horn carrots had also their
name. After passing the Falkland Islands the weather began
to get gradually warmer. It was in this part we came in
sight of a barque, like ourselves steering northwards. She
appeared to be deeply laden, for every time she rolled the
water rushed upon her deck, first on one side then upon the
other. A feeling of anxiety took possession of one’s breast,
to know of what nation the stranger was. This was relieved
when we |aw the English Union Jack run up to her peak,
telling us that shetoowasbound forthefar-off isle. She proved
to be the ‘ Royal Exchange,’ from Valparaiso to Plymouth,
laden with copper ore. We approached so near that our jib-
boom projected over her stern; our captain saying that he
intended calling at Rio Janeiro for provisions, and asking
them to report us in England.
We sighted the Island of St. Sebastian, on which appeared
the dim outline of a lofty mountain, off the Brazilian coast,
but had again to stand off from the land. At length we
came up to the magnificent harbour of
RIO DE JANEIRO,
on one side of the entrance of which is the famous Sugar
Loaf Rock —so called from its shape—rising to a great height,
the upper part being often encircled with light vapours or
clouds. A number of cocoanut trees growing by the shore
imparted a foreign aspect to the scene. They are said never
to grow far from the salt water. In entering the harbour
upon a tack, the wind not being favourable, we got much
too near some rocks near a fort, from which our captain was
hailed and warned of the danger. We lay at anchor near
the city of Rio several days, waiting for a supply of provisions
and water. Upon going ashore I found the city not remark-
able for the cleanliness of its streets. In the business parts
these were narrow, the shops open at the front, without glass,
and ladies were walking in the streets without bonnets or
covering to their heads. Roman Catholic churches were
numerous, and appeared to be open for daily service. Slaves
seemed to far outnumber the whites, and to be generally en-
gaged in carrying water to their masters’ houses.
After leaving Rio in our homeward progress, we lay at
anchor one night in Pernambuco Roads, and next day passed
many catamarans, small rafts composed of lengths of young


trees bound together, and having a mast and sail. They are
used by fishermen in the place of boats. The water was
continually coming upon them, as they skimmed over and
through the waves.
Before coming in sight of the English shores we encountered
some very severe storms, the vessel having to be hove-to for
days together. At length there was a termination to our
long and dangerous passage; and arriving at the mouth of
the Thames we were towed up the river by the ‘ Tom Bowline ’
steam-tug.
If the reader is not weary of the narrative, the writer has
yet a little more to add, showing that ‘ They that go down
to the sea in ships, to do business in great waters; these see
the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep,’ Ps. cvii.
23, 24. .
On the 12th March, 1872, I left Sydney for London in the
ship ‘ Highflyer,’ 800 tons, Captain W. Harrison commander.
There were on board twenty-five saloon and thirty-four
second cabin passengers, including children, making a total,
with the crew, of 103 persons. The cargo consisted of
2,332 bales of wool, 963 bags of wheat, 44 tons of candlenuts,
1,000 boxes of tinned meat, besides cotton, copper, tin-ore,
tallow, &c.
Our course lay to the south of New Zealand ; after passing
which the captain kept the vessel a good deal to the north
of the usual track, to avoid icebergs. On the 12th of April
we had a snow-storm, and the same night the doctor, an
elderly gentleman who was returning to England after residing
in the Colonies several years, was thrown out of his berth
through the motion of the vessel and had a rib broken.
We passed the Cape on the thirty-fifth day from Sydney,
and nine days afterwards were overtaken by a violent storm.
A little after six in the morning I heard the Captain on deck
giving orders ; he was taken ill some time after, went into
his cabin, and died at half-past eight. He was only about
forty years of age, and it was thought he had been subject to
heart disease. He was buried next day, the first mate taking
command of the ship. The rolling, pitching, and labouring
of the vessel, as we lay awake in our berths, told us the gale


was an awful one. In the forenoon, the wind havimg abated
a little, I went on deck and found that several of tlhe panels
of the bulwarks had been broken in by the waves, rmore than
thirty feet of the taffrail wrenched from its iron bcolts; and
the large long-boat, lashed at the top of the deck-houses, had
been carried by a wave over the lee bulwarks and was seen
no more.
On the 6th of June w T e spoke ‘ The American shijp Endea-
vour, from New York .to Hong Kong. Out nineteen days ;
no news.’ This was chalked upon a large board. Alt starting
it was said the good ship had before her a passage of 21,500
miles to Hong Kong. We had spoken several other vessels
before this one. When only the masts and sails of a ship
can be seen, she is- said to be ‘ hull-down,’ and is not less
than twelve miles distant.
1 When 800 miles from the Lands End the colour of the sea
had changed from a deep blue to green. Soundings were taken
and the depth found to be thirty fathoms. We were approach-
ing the English Channel.
A lovely Sabbath-day morning, June 23rd, saw' us sailing
along and very near to the English coast, passing Beechy
Head, Eastbourne, and Hastings. After leaving Dungeness
two powerful steamtugs took us in tow; one lashed to the
side of the vessel, the other at the head in the usual way.
A Thames pilot came on board, and we continued our course,
passing Folkstone and several Martello towers, Dover, Walmer
Castle, and many other places of interest. The coast of
France was plainly visible. On arriving in the London dock
we found the passage had taken 105 days, or fifteen weeks.
Printed at the ‘Observer’ Steam Printing Works, Drake-street, Rochdale.




