

Bal. Office
AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE
Notes on Supply
in War
BY A UTHORITY:
ALBERT J. MULLETT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.




NOTES ON SUPPLY IN WAR.
CHAPTER I.
SUPPLY DUTIES IN WAR.
1. For the purposes of these Regulations, the term “ Sup-
plies ” will be taken to mean those articles of food, forage,
fuel, light, and disinfectants which are required by an army
in the field, and are provided, collected, distributed, and
accounted for by the Army Service Corps.
The officers of the Army Service Corps, therefore, are
responsible for both administrative and executive duties in
connexion with these services, and are charged with all supply
arrangements necessary for rendering movements possible
which have been ordered.
2. When war is imminent, orders are issued by the Army
Council as regards the number of men and animals of the
field army to be provided for in the first instance, and the
number of days’ supply which is to be immediately, maintained
as a reserve in the country where operations are impending,
exclusive of all supplies that may be available from local
sources.
These preliminary dispositions are subject to modification
according to the subsequent requirements of the Commander-
in-Chief in the field.
3. The Q.M.G. to the Forces is responsible to the Army
Council for the provision of these supplies, and for their main-
tenance at the seat of war.
The Director of Supplies, Army Head-Quarters, is imme-
diately responsible to the Q.M.G. for the efficient administra-
tion of all matters connected with supnlies for troops, and for
the expenditure relating thereto.
The C.-in-C. in the field keeps the Army Council informed
as to his requirements from time to time.
4. Mobilized units will, on embarkation for service abroad,
have their regimental supplies with them; these supplies will
be packed on board, either in or close to the vehicles of regi-
mental transport.
A ship conveying troops proceeding on active service will,
unless orders are issued to the contrary, carry, in addition to
the regimental supplies, 15 days’ reserve rations for men
C. 16766.


and horses embarked. This reserve is intended to furnish the
initial issues to the supply columns and reserve parks of the
force embarked, and to augment, or to form the nucleus of
supplies at the base, or other depots on the lines of communica-
tion. It will be shipped as cargo, and placed in charge of the
master of the vessel. The officer commanding the troops on
board will be informed by the officer in charge of the Supply
Reserve Depot at Woolwich of the number of reserve rations
placed on board, and to whom they are consigned.
Owing to the conditions of modern warfare, it may be anti-
cipated that only a proportion of the supplies subsequently
required by an army in the field will be obtainable in the
theatre of war, and therefore that the bulk of the food and
forage will have to be forwarded to the oversea base.
Under these circumstances, and in order to facilitate their
subsequent handling, arrangements for the packing of the
various classes of supplies are included in the specifications
issued to the various trades at the time of order.
This necessitates previous and close consideration of the
gross weight of the cases as compared with the net weight
and distribution of their contents.
5. Outside the theatre of war itself, the supplies needed
will, in the main, be provided under contracts made be-
tween the War Office and the trade. In the theatre of war
itself, however, questions of policy, population, carrying capa-
city of transport, &c., regulate the means of obtaining sup-
plies locally, and while it may be possible and expedient to
make use of the contract system on the lines of communica-
tion, it will not generally be advisable to extend the use of
this method beyond the advanced base, or to mobile columns
based on the different posts on the lines of communication.
6. Outside the theatre of war, the question of collection of
supplies is dependent on the general commercial conditions
which obtain at the time, and the facilities that may exist
for forwarding them from all parts of the world to the sea
base of operations.
In the theatre of w ar, the duty of collection devolves on the
Army Service Corps,
7. In countries where railways exist, the primary or bulk
distribution of supplies from the landing point or base of
operations will necessarily be effected by this means of trans-
port, supplemented possibly by the use of mechanical transport.
From the railway, the final distribution of supplies to the
troops will normally be made by the following methods: —
(o) Field Depots selected by I.G.L. of C.
(6) Supply Columns, which are provided witli mechanical
transport.
(c) Supply Sections of Divisional Train.
(d) Cooks’ vehicles or travelling kitchens with Ist line
Transport of Units (Sec. 36 F.S. Pocket Book and
Sec. 46 F.S. Regs., P. 11., p. 82),


8. The question of accounting for supplies in war depends
entirely on the demands of the audit of those accounts; the
stricter the audit, the more elaborate must bo accounts for
the protection of those officers and others responsible for the
same. No accounts subject to aiidit will be kept beyond the
depots, bulk issues from which will be treated as final issues
to the troops. In order, however, to safeguard the public
interests, supply officers with field units will be required to
keep a careful administrative record of all supplies received
and issued by them.
Full instructions regarding field service supply accounts are
laid down in the Regulations for Supply, Transport, and
Barrack Services.
9. Officers charged with the details of supplying an army
in the field with food, forage, fuel, and light, have a dual
responsibility as follows:
(а) Administrative and executive responsibility.
(б) Responsibility to their immediate local superior, as
well as to their immediate administrative or execu-
tive superior on technical matters.
The chain of supply from the War Office to units in the
field is shown in Appendix I.
10. The following are the duties of the various branches
connected with the supply of an Army in the field:—
(o) Q.M.G.’s Department at the War Office.
Orders as to number of days’ reserve of rations and forage
to be kept up in theatre of war; maintaining that reserve;
preparation of specifications for contracts for various articles
of food, forage, disinfectants, fuel and light; arranging with
the Contracts Directorate for making the necessary contracts
for same, either at home, abroad, or in the Colonies; arranging
for the inspection of supplies manufactured abroad; informing
C.-in-C. in the field of exact description and destination of
each consignment of supplies; watching the state of reserves
at the seat of war, and seeing that no undue accumulation
takes place. Arrangements for the disposal of surplus supplies
on conclusion of hostilities.
(6) Assistant Director of Supplies, Supply Reserves Depdt,
Woolwich Dockyard.
Immediate preparation and despatch,' through Director of
Military Transport, Woolwich Arsenal, of the first require-
ments of the field army; arrangements for providing for
troop transports, if necessary, the 15 days’, or other authorized
number of days’ shore rations for use by units immediately
on landing, and voyage forage for animals; keeping an
accurate record and trace of all supplies sent to the theatre
of war and ordered by the War Office from abroad; arrange-
ments for the payment for the same; inspection of supplies
manufactured under contract at home,
A 2


(c) Director of Supplies in the Field.
Under the orders of the Commander-in-Chief in the field
alterations in the standard scales of field service rations;
watching exact state of supplies in the country, on sea and
on order; instructions regarding the distribution and quan-
tities of supplies to be maintained in various depots on lines
of communication; deciding what supplies are to be purchased
locallv, and arranging for contracts or special purchase of the
same; preparation of demands for supplies from the War Office,
instructions regarding tne forwarding of various classes of
supplies to the front; transmission of orders of a technical
nature to Assistant Directors of Supplies and Transport o
divisions and detached forces. , „ !•__ j.i 1£ , qo
ffote —Tn the absence of the Director of Supplies these
duties,'so far as they concern the lines of communication are
performed by the Deputy Director of Supplies, Lines of Com-
munication.
(d) The D.A.A. and Q.M.G. of a Division.
The O.M.G.’s branch, i.e., the D.A.A. and Q.M.G. at divi-
sional H.Q, is normally responsible for the selection of Ren-
dezvous and for sending timely information to the I.G.L. ot C.
as to requirements of the Division operating.
( e ) Senior Supply Officer with a Division.
Keeping in touch with the D.A.A. and Q.M.Q.; execu-
tive control and supervision of the supply duties of:
sion; supervision of all subordinate supply officers in the
division; communicating supply requirements £ D.A.A. and
OM.G. (F.S. Pocket Book, p. 24, F.S. Regs., Part 11., Secs.
10-13 and 26); obtaining early information as regards local
resources; executive duties as regards collection distribution
land recording) of supplies obtained by requisitioning, and
of requisitioned or captured stock; allotment of supply officers
to brigades and divisional troops, &c.
(/) Supply Officers attached to Divisional Troops,
Brigades, &c.
The issue in detail to all units of their formation; the
refilling of supplv waggons from the supply columns or other
sources; ‘collection of fuel and forage during the march;
keeping an administrative record of all transactions in con-
nexion with the receipt and issue of supplies; the comparison
of ration indents with field states as laid down in the regu-
lations.
( g ) Officer in Charge of Base Supply Depot.
Arranging with the military landing officer for landing of
supplies; preparing for reception of shipments of supplies;
arrangement of depot so as to facilitate rapid intake, despatch
and stocktaking; checking bulk weights of supplies landed
• Duty of Requisitioning Officer.


with bills of lading, and general inspection of their condition;
arrangements with railway control or other transport officer
for despatch of supplies to the-front; arrangement for constant
flow( as ordered) of the various classes of supplies to the front;
complying with the demands of the supply depots on lines of
communication; making claims for deficiencies or damages
on c.i.f. shipments to masters or ships’ agents; proper storage
and preservation of supplies; keeping bulk account of sup-
plies; payment of supplies obtained by local contract or special
purchase at the base.
(h) Depot Supply Officers on Lines of Communication.
Upkeep of sufficient stock to provide for troops of the gar-
rison and troops passing through; arranging for local field
bakeries and butcheries; storage of supplies in the open;
arranging for purchase of supplies locally either by contract
or special purchase; arranging for detail issues being kept
separate from bulk supplies; accounting for supplies on their
charge.
(i) Officer in Charge Advanced Supply Depdt.
Maintenance of sufficient stock to meet the daily require-
ments of troops of the garrison and field army; anticipating
wants of field army as regards classes of supplies; keeping in
touch with the supply column; having as little surplus stock
as possible so as to permit of rapid moves forward of the
advanced depot; arranging for issues to supply columns; bulk
accountant; arranging for detail issues to troops at the ad-
vanced depot being kept separate from bulk supplies; the
sending forward of supplies by mechanical transport of supply
columns to fill the suprdy waggons of the divisional train;
the establishment of field'depots, to facilitate the feeding of
the army, in connexion with the advanced depot, when con-
sidered necessary by the I.G.L. of C.
CHAPTER II.
METHOD OF OBTAINING SUPPLIES OUTSIDE THE THEATER OF
OPERATIONS.
11. Supplies sent from home for use' of an army in the
field are obtained as follows:
(a) By contract.
(5) By direct purchase.
12. A fixed reserve of consumable supplies for the purpose
of meeting first requirements on the outbreak of hostilities is
maintained at the supply reserve depot, Woolwich Dockyard;
this reserve is turned over in peace time by issue to troops at
home and abroad’.


W On°the%utbreak of
are * (or
Sa T 3 G Provisions supplied under contract are either delivered
inSpeCting
contracts deUvfry TSe
the SKw TeWacS
stipulates that the contractor sh^? h en goods ate® received in
re-paCKcd according to serv.ee
requirements, at the supply reserve depot.
17 ' b vesSlThartered purposely for
the'cohvevance of supplies and nothing else.
(ii) In transports, i.e., in military ships conveym 0
(iiil As 1 parcels in ordinary freight vessels, i.e., ships
partially loaded with Government stores.
18. Freight transport of adl kinds « obtained
from the Assistant Director of Military iransporr guch
£S.4 :irhe a pJeparer whenever possible, a' fortnight
to 19 dV Sr documents necessary for fte conveyance of Go-
vernment stores by sea are as follows.
m Shivvinq Notes.— For each quantity of supplies fo -
warded for shipment by barge, boat, or lighter,
made out in duplicate,-one copy retained by the
S 5? the other, after being signed ,by the offleer
responsible for stowing the cargo, is returned to
the P lighterman or other person who conveyed t e
stores to the ship.


(ii) Carriers’ Notes. —For each consignment of goods
forwarded to the ship by road or rail.
(iii) Bills of Lading made out in triplicate:—
(а) For consignee by post (stamped).
(б) For consignor (stamped).
(c) For master of vessel (stamped).
On arrival at destination, the master of vessel’s copy of
B/L is receipted by consignee, who indorses on it
any deficiencies or damage. This copy is the
voucher to the owners’ account for claim for freight.
20. In the event of there being a net deficiency on a con-
signment from the Supply Reserve Depot, Woolwich Dock-
yard, claims are made out in the War Office against the
owners from the indorsements on the bill of lading. If,
however, there are both surpluses and deficiencies, and the
number of surplus packages exceeds or equals that of the
deficiency, no claim can be made. The ship is only respon-
sible for the actual number of packages shipped, not for the
weight, except in the case of bulk cargoes. The value of the
supplies for which claims are put forward is computed by
taking the cost of the supplies, plus 12£ per cent.
Deficiencies or damages of consignments under c.i.f. con-
tracts will be adjusted in accordance with the instructions
contained in the Regulations for Supply, Transport, and Bar-
rack Services.
21. When contracts or purchases are made for provisions to
be shipped direct by contractor, it is stated whether the price
is f.o.b. (free on board) or c.i.f. (cost, insurance, freight).
22. Purchases, or contracts for provisions obtained in Great
Britain are usually f.0.b., when all expenses connected with
the delivery on board a specified ship at a specified port are
paid by the seller. Provisions and forage purchased abroad
are generally c.i.f. In this case they are shipped on a War
Office bill of lading.
CHAPTER III.
THE SUPPLY OF AN ARMY IN FRONT OF THE L. OF C.
23. A field army* is subsisted from the advance supply
depot by three lines of supply, except on those occasions
when the operations take place under conditions which make
it possible to billet troops with subsistence on the inhabit-
ants, reference to which is made in paragraphs 51 to 54, or to
live otherwise entirely on the country by a system of re-
quisitioning.
* The fighting troops.


24. The lines of supply referred to in the previous para-
graph are as follows: — .
(a) The first line of supply, “The Divisional Tram, the
link between units in the field and supply columns.^
(b) The second line of supply, “The Supply Columns,’
the link between the supply wagons of the tram
and the Advanced Depot or Railhead.
There is also a Reserve Park, containing two days’ (iron)
ration and two days’ grain, to be used when ordered by
C.-in-C.
A Reserve Park consists of horse-drawn vehicles and ad-
vances parallel, if possible, to the Supply Columns (M.T.),
always keeping in touch with the Field Army, for use when
required. These reserve rations may be required for either ot
the following reasons: —
(i) When the iron ration on the man has been used
and has to be replaced.
(ii) When a sudden movement forward in pursuit is to
be carried out and extra preserved rations are
necessary.
(iii) When a sudden movement to a flank is ordered in-
volving a change in the L. of C. The issue of
Reserve Supplies then gives L. of C. Staff time to
arrange for the change of the Advanced Base or
Regulating Station.
The details governing the working of each of the above
Knes are dependent on whether the force is fed entirely from
the advanced base, or is to exist partially or entirely on the
country in which the operations are taking place.
Supply Columns, Second Line of Supply.
36. The supply column is the first link in the chain of the
svstem of supply between the advanced depot, or railhead,
and the divisional train.
Normally, each column carries one full field ration for every
man and one grain ration for every horse, composing the
force to which it belongs, but these amounts may be altered
at the discretion of the commander of the force, having re-
gard to: —
(i) The nature and latitude of the operations.
(ii) The resources of the country.
(iii) The transport available.
(iv) Railway communication.
38 When a supply column is emptied by issues to supply
wagons of divisional train, it is replenished as soon as pos-
sible from the railhead or advanced depot, returning for this
purpose the same day.


Local resources should be used to the utmost extent by
being sent to the nearest depot, even when supplies at ad-
vanced depots are plentiful and services regular.
The principle underlying all loading is twofold —to econo-
mize lime, labour, and transport, by loading the maximum
number of vehicles simultaneously, and to provide the troops
and horses with as varied a diet as the scale of rations and
available resources will allow.
All stock captured or requisitioned will be handed over on
the first opportunity to the nearest dep6t on the lines of com-
munication.
40. The issues of supolies from a supply column are made
in detail to supply wagons of the divisional train for de-
tail issues to the units of the force to which it belongs.
At the commencement of a campaign the C.-in-C. will issue
standing orders in which the general principles governing
detail issues are distinctlv laid down. Such orders should
include the following points:—
(а) Scale of rations.
(б) Names of supply officers.
(c) Period in advance at which indents are to be sent in.
(d) Hour of issue when halted or on march.
Supply officers will bring to notice any circumstance neces-
sitating either permanent or temporary alteration of standing
orders, or the publication of special supplementary orders.
When local resources are not entirely utilized, arrange-
ments should be made immediatelv on arrival in quarters to
prepare for the dailv issue. Eouipment and supplies should
be unloaded, the distinguishing flag or lanterns hoisted, tents
pitched, or shelters erected, and sites for slaughtering chosen
as close to the main supply camp as practicable.
Units should be informed of any special orders or circum-
stances affecting the issue, and the time at which each will
draw rations. If necessary, police or orderlies will be posted
over entrances and exits.
Should the issue be made from local resources, it must be
considered whether it could be made more efficiently by col-
lecting supplies at a central point, or by issuing the various
articles direct at the places where they are obtained. Tn
either case, but especially the latter, carefully arranged de-
tails as regards times and places must be communicated to
all units, and, if necessary, guides furnished.
Fuel wood is not carried by a supply column except for
mechanically propelled vehicles, but the supply officer will be
responsible for its issue to the trooos when obtainable from
local resources. A requisitioning officer is appointed for the
purpose of collecting wood and hav.
Kivdlivq wood is usually obtained locallv in the same
manner as fuel wood. This is supplemented bv the
packing cases containing the articles forming the provision
and grocery ration of the force.


No bakery equipment accompanies the supply column, which
will obtain its supplies of fresh bread from the bakery sec-
tions attached to the advanced depot or railhead.
41. The strength of the subordinate establishments varies
slightly with the nature of the organization which the column
serves, but in all cases it is divided and organized with refer-
ence to the following duties: —
(i) Clerical duties.
(ii) Issuing duties.
The efficient performance of supply duties, and the expedi-
tious issue of rations, largely depends upon the organization
of the subordinate personnel with a judicious distribution of
duties and a fixed chain of responsibility.
42. No accounts subject to audit are rendered by the supply
officers of columns, but the administrative record of all trans-
actions in connexion with receipt and issue of supplies as laid
down in para. 152 of the Regulations for Supply, Transport,
and Barrack Services will be kept.
43. Stationery boxes, ready filled, form part of the supply
officer’s technical equipment, and any subsequent supply re-
quired is obtained by means of demands on stationery offices
established at the base or on the lines of communication.
Supply Wagons of Divisional Train.
44. The supply wagons of divisional train form the last
link "in the chain of the supply system connecting advanced
depots with the field army.
Its functions are to afford each individual soldier indepen-
dent means of subsistence for a certain time, to allow a cer-
tain amount of individual independence of action to each unit
of the field army, and to insure a speedier issue of rations
after arrival in quarters than would be possible if troops
were solely dependent upon supnly columns.
45. Supply wagons of divisional train form part of the
organization of every unit, and may be considered under the
following headings:—
(i) One day’s rations and one day’s grain carried in
supply vehicles of divisional train.
(ii) Supplies carried in cooks’ vehicles, one day’s
rations, less any portion consumed.
(iii) Supplies carried on man and horse —(man), one iron
ration, plus bread and cheese ration issued pre-
vious evening, less any portion consumed; (horse),
one grain ration, less anv nortion consumed. (See
F.S. Pocket-book, pp. 154-156.)
A second iron ration may be carried when ordered by
C.-in-C. . . n


The iron ration is only consumed in extremity, when all
other sources of supply fail, and, if possible, after
reference to the commander.
46. When local resources are not utilized, the daily ration
will usually be issued to the troops from the supplies carried
by the supply wagons of divisional train, which, as it ac-
companies or follows each unit into bivouac or camp, is easily
and speedily accessible. Issues are usually made each even-
ing for the following day’s consumption.
Supplies so issued will at once be replenished from the
supply column.
47. It is the duty of officers commanding units to use every
endeavour to facilitate the smooth and rapid issue of rations
by the supply officer, and to assist him in every way to carry
out his duties.
With this object they are responsible:—
(i) That all standing and special orders referring to
supplies are strictly carried out.
(ii) That ration indents are made out correctly accord-
ing to the actual strength of each unit in the
field, and that they are sent in at the proper time.
(iii) That parties are detailed to draw rations.
(iv) That the officer from each unit specially responsible
for supplies is present at every issue—that he
makes himself acquainted with the position of the
place of issue immediately on arrival in camp or
bivouac, and that he is in close touch with the
column supply officer.
When a unit is temporarily detached or cut off from the
supply column, a supply section of an A.S.C. Coy. will accom y
pany it and the requisitioning and supply officer will be respond
sible for their subsistence. /
Subsistence of Troops in Billets.
51. From the point of view of the Supply Servicpf are
three descriptions of billets, which are as follows^*
(a) Billets with full subsistence. — system
complete rations, forage, fuel arflq~ light are P ro '
vided by the proprietor of wllet, who also
arranges for the rations cooked, and
ready for consumption i#r complete meals, which
will usually consist of dinner, and supper.
The component vip rations and forage pro-
vided will of according to the cir-
cumstances, huL ( Hnu& v tVtal amount must in all cases
conform in quantity, and substance as
closely as posfflMe with the standard ration in
force in the fiem army at the time. (See sec. 34,
F.S. Regs., Pt. II.)


(b) Billets with partial subsistence. —Under this system
only a portion of the rations, forage, &c., are pro-
vided by the proprietor.
Whenever possible, arrangements should be made
for this portion to be served in one or two com-
plete meals, according to the capabilities of the
billet, such meals, subject to the limitations set
forth under (a) above, to approximate as closely
as possible to similar meals usually arranged from
the standard ration in force at the time.
The balance of the ration not available in the
billet will be issued under arrangements made by
the supply officer of the formation, from requisi-
tioned, regimental, column, or park supplies.
Whenever possible, all cooking for both portions
of the ration, and also the necessary fuel and light,
should be proviued by the billet.
(c) Billets without subsistence. —under this system, com-
plete rations, forage, &c., are issued under arrange-
ments made by the supply officer of the formation
from requisitioned, regimental, column, or park
supplies.
Even in this case, actual cooking may often, and
should whenever possible, be arranged for by the
proprietor.
It will often happen that two or more of the systems de-
scribed above must of necessity be combined.
In many instances the resources in supply of the various
classes of houses, and the social and economic position of their
occupants will vary to a considerable extent, and the time
available to discriminate between classes and the circum-
stances of the situation will not always be sufficient to enable
billets to be allotted with a definite idea as regards subsist-
ence. Also, in allotting billets with a view to full or partial
subsistence, it will rarely be desirable or possible to disregard
public buildings, such as churches, town halls, warehouses,
theatres, &c., in the majority of which, as a rule, only billet-
ing without subsistence will be possible.
52. The systems described under para. 51 {a) and (b) will
usually only be employed during an advance, or for the initial
day or days of a halt, and even under these circumstances
favorable conditions are necessary to insure success and
smooth and efficient operation.
Some of the most important of these conditions are as
follows:
(a) The inhabitants must be distinctly friendly.
(b) The district in which troops are to be billeted with
subsistence must be thickly or fairly thickly popu-
lated, and fertile in resources.
(c) The country must not have been previously occupied
by troops, or otherwise denuded of supplies.


( d ) It must be possible to make ample provision for the
billeting by sending forward, a considerable time
in advance of the troops, billeting parties composed
of staff and administrative officers and regimental
representatives conversant with the language of the
country. The force, therefore, must not be in
immediate touch with the enemy.
53. The system of billeting, therefore, usually employed will
be that described under para. 51 (c), i.e., billeting without
subsistence.
This system does not require the elaborate arrangements
and close preliminary supply reconnaissance necessitated by
the other two, and is therefore most suited to meet the adverse
conditions which may be reasonably expected to prevail at the
time, the principal of which are as follows:
(а) Hostility of the inhabitants.
(б) Presence of the enemy.
(c) Inability, owing to any or all of the above reasons,
want of time, or tactical considerations to make
the necessary preliminary arrangements, or to
ascertain the local resources.
(d) Scarcity of supplies, owing to natural causes, or to
their having been previously consumed, removed, or
destroyed.
(e) Necessity of subsisting the civilian population itself.
54. Scales of rations and forage, &c., for subsistence, either
full or partial, in billets, the price for the same, and the
method of payment or acknowledgment, will be fixed by the
C.-in-C. and promulgated in orders from time to time as may
be necessary. Separate scales and prices will be in force for
officers and for other ranks. The scale of rations and forage,
&c., will, by the liberal employment of equivalents, be made as
elastic as possible to suit local conditions and resources, but
the main principle, that its food value should conform as
closely as possible to tnat of the authorized standard ration,
must not be departed from. When immediate payment for
billets is authorized, as in a friendly country, or where con-
siderations of policy necessitate such a course, the settlement
should be in cash if possible. Such payments should be made,
in the case of small parties, by means of the Billeting Book,
Army Book 262, and, where time is available, this method may
also be used for a large force. In the latter instance, i.e., that
of a large force, bulk payments will usually be made by
supply officers to municipal or other authorities, requisition
receipt notes on Army Book 361 being furnished by units to
the proprietors of the billets for presentation to the authori-
ties in question, who will be responsible for the nroper dis-
tribution of the money. When payment is withheld, the total
number of billets, together with the amount of subsistence re-
quired with them, will be demanded from the local authorities
on Array Form F. 780, and requisition receipt notes (Army


Book 361) given to tnc proprietors of billets as detailed in the
“ Instruction for the Requisitioning of Supplies.”
Field Butcheries and Field Bakeries.
56. When cattle are available, and are to be issued to troops,
field butcheries will be established immediately on arrival in
camp or bivouac; the site should be chosen whenever possible
with reference to the following corlsiderations: —
(а) Sanitary Conditions. —It must not be too near to
the main camp, and, having regard to the prevail-
ing wind, should be to leeward of it, and so situated
that the water supply of the camp cannot be con-
taminated by drainage, &c. It should be sheltered
from view as far as possible.
(б) Convenience. —Subject to the conditions in {a), it
should be as close as possible to the supply camp
and to a plentiful supply of water.
(c) Local Resources. —Whenever possible, compatible with
the foregoing conditions, suitable barns, sheds, &c.,
for slaughtering and hanging meat; and pens, small
fields and enclosures, &c., for herding cattle, should
be taken advantage of.
57. With a force marching rapidly and continuously, time
will usually be of the utmost importance, and elaborate
arrangements for field abattoirs will not be possible.
Cattle must usually be rounded up and slaughtered against
a wagon, or secured by a ring lashed to the foot of a small
tree. They can be dressed against a wagon, or on a gallows
formed by means of a pole slung between two wagons or trees.
When timber is plentiful, a small tree may be felled, and
fixed horizontally in the forks of two adjacent trees.
58. In a camp when a force is halted for a few days, more
elaborate arrangements can be made.
Local conveniences may be improved upon, and if these are
not available, a single or double “ gyn ” should be erected as
a gallows for dressing meat, a meat store put up for hanging
the meat previous to issue, and pens or laagers constructed
for the cattle.
A pit should be dug for blood, and all offal removed clear
of the camp.
In all cases when a paved yard is not available, a tarpaulin
should be made use of to keep the meat clean whilst being
dressed. If a tarpaulin is not available, the animal’s own
skin must be used as a substitute.
59. Butchers in the field should, in addition to the more
technical duties of the trade, have a good knowledge of the
following:—
(а) Erecting and striking bell tents and marquees.
(б) Erecting and striking single gyn and double gyn
with cross-bar.


(o) Erecting cattle laager.
(d) Erecting field meat stores.
(e) Knowledge of knots and lashings.
60. Animals should be deprived of food for twelve hours
before slaughter, and those to be slaughtered should therefore
be selected in good time and not allowed to feed; they should
not be slaughtered immediately after having been driven into
camp, but should be allowed to rest, otherwise their flesh will
present an unpleasant and fiery red appearance, will be very
tough, and will soon decompose.
After slaughter, meat should be quartered and hung up
until issue, as it soon deteriorates if left lying on the ground.
If there are no local conveniences, or if time and circum-
stances do not admit of the construction of a field meat store,
the meat should be laid out on the ground on sail cloths, in
the shade, or under some cover, for which another sail cloth
may be used if no other means are available.
Tarpaulins should not be used for this purpose as they
impart a “ tarry ” taste to the meat.
61. Whenever possible, fresh bread will be issued to the
troops. It will be obtained either by direct purchase or re-
quisition from the country, or by utilizing existing bakeries
with civilian or military labour at villages or towns where
the force halts, or it will be drawn by the transport and supply
columns from the bakery detachment attached to the park.
62. When it has been decided to establish a field bakery,
the site should be chosen, whenever possible, with reference to
the following considerations:—
(а ) Prevailing Wind. —The ovens and kitchens should be
erected to leeward of the main camp, with their
mouths facing the prevailing wind.
(б) Ground should slope slightly downwards from the
mouths of the ovens; the firmer the soil is the
* better.
(c) Convenience. —lt should be as close as possible to the
main camp and to the water supply.
63. The following arrangements must be made immediately
on arrival at the site selected.
(a) Fill water carts.
(ft) Pitch marquee for making dough, &c., and bell tent
for brewing yeast.
(c) Set up the sections of field ovens.
(d) Construct field kitchen for preparing yeast, and start
brewing the yeast.
(e) Arrange for supply of wood or other fuel.
64. Bakers in the field should, in addition to the more
technical duties of their trade, have a good knowledge of the
following:—
(a) Field engineering, in so far as it applies to the use
of the pickaxe, spade, and shovel, and to the con-
struction of field ovens and field kitchens.


(6) Pitching and striking marquees and bell tents.
- (c) Erecting shelters for flour.
65. The best form of yeast for use in the field has by
experience been found to be “ Parisian ”; it is made with hops
and flour.
“ Sour dough ” yeast may be employed with success in warm
climates.
Baking powder may also be used in place of yeast when
bread is required in a hurry, or yeast unobtainable.
66. Should fermentation be checked by a sudden fall of tem-
perature, or by cold draughts, it may be assisted by placing
sacks on and round the sponge or dough. If necessary, coke
fires may be lighted in old buckets perforated with holes, and
placed round the troughs or near them.
Excessive fermentation may be checked by taking the sponge
or dough at once. If sufficient labour is not available for this,
salt may be added, and all coverings, such as sacks, &c.,
removed.
During the whole process of brewing, setting sponges, and
making doughs, every effort must be made to guard against
the effect of weather, especially cold and draughts, upon the
yeast plant.
Tent curtains should be banked up with earth or sacks,
cracks or holes in windows and doors or walls should be
plugged, and troughs carefully covered over with sacks or
blankets, and the temperature of water regulated. Flour may
be conveniently stored round the curtains of marquees to keep
out draught. ” The bottoms of troughs should never be on the
ground, but should rest on cases, wood, or stones.
67. If no suitable building is available, bread should be stored
in marquees.
Sail covers should first be laid on the floor of the marquee
to protect the bread from damp and dirt.
Tarpaulins should not be used for this purpose, because they
impart a “ tarry ” taste to the bread. The piling up of loaves
one on the top of another should be avoided, as this makes
the bread sodden and heavy and apt to turn sour.
Three layers is the limit for satisfactory storage, and should
not be exceeded. In the first two layers the loaves are packed
on edge, thus affording extra strength and economy of space,
while in the top layer the loaves are laid flat. Wood should
be stored round the inside of the curtain of the marquee, to
protect the bread from damp, and a trench should invariably
be dug round the outside.
68. The present pattern of travelling oven employed in the
service is the Perkins steam travelling oven (double or single
decked), a full description of which appears in A.S.C. Train-
ing. Part 11., Supplies.
These ovens will normally be used on the lines of communi-
cation only.


CHAPTER IV.
SUPPLY DEPÔTS IN WAR.
69. Supply depots may be divided into three main classes —
(i) Base depots.
(ii) Depots on the lines of communication.
(iii) Advanced depots.
(i) A base depot is that formed at the base of operations.
Its function is to receive supplies from oversea, or from the
country lying outside the theatre of war, and to distribute
them to the various depots on the lines of communication.
(ii) As an army advances, certain posts are established on
the lines of communication at which supply depots may be
formed. These depots are termed “ Supply depots on the lines
of communication,” and are charged with the supply of the
troops guarding the lines of communication, and of those pro-
ceeding to the front or passing through, and with holding re-
serves for the field army.
{iii) The advanced supply depot is the depot at the extreme
end of the lines of communication; from this depot the field
army draws its supplies, and to it the transport and supply
parks return to refill.
A supply depot on the lines of communication may become
the advanced supply depot for a body of troops operating to a
flank.
There are certain broad principles which are applicable to
supply depots of all kinds, but which vary slightly according
to the size, position, and class of each particular depot. The
following instructions regarding the formation, organization,
and maintenance of supply depots in war refer mainly to the
larger depots, but, in a modified form, are applicable to all.
70. In selecting a site for a supply depot the following points
are important: —
(i) The ground must be dry and well drained, or capable
d¥ being easily drained.
(ii) The site must be large enough to hold the maximum
reserve of supplies it is intended to provide, and it
should be capable of considerable expansion in addi-
tion, in case of emergency.
(iii) The depot must be as near as possible to the wharfs,
roads, or railways, from which the greater part of
its supplies are to come, and by which its supplies
have to be despatched.
(iv) Facilities should exist for the laying of roads or rails
to the outlying parts of the depot. If regular lines
cannot easily be laid, light tramways may advan-
tageously be employed.
(v) A good supply of water should be available.
C. 16766.—8


(vi) Office accommodation should be obtainable near the
depot, and also, in the case of a large and perma-
nent depot, quarters for the personnel employed
there.
(vii) Facilities should exist for providing electric light, or
flare lights, for night work.
71. The laying out of a depot will greatly depend on the
{•osition of the ground available for the purpose, but the fol-
owing general principles should be adhered to as far as
possible:—
(i) The direction of the prevailing wind having been
ascertained, the bakery must be placed to leeward of
the depdt, in order to minimize the risk of fire to
the stores; the abattoir should also be placed to
leeward of the depot.
(ii) The cattle laager should also be well clear of the
depot, and as near to grazing and water as possible,
(iii) Forage and inflammable supplies must be stacked away
from the rest, and out of reach of sparks from
chimneys, engines, &c.
(iv) Locked stores should be provided for medical comforts,
wines, spirits, &c. It is advisable to place all
articles which are apt to be a temptation to the
troops (jam, tobacco, &c.) under lock and key.
(v) Perishable sunplies, such as bacon, potatoes, sugar,
flour, &c., should be placed under cover. In per-
manent depots, if no stores are available for this
purpose, they should be built.
(vi) A “transit shed” should be provided at the place
where supplies are to be received, in which mixed
cargoes or trainloads can be sorted, and from which
they are distributed to the various sections of the
depot.
(vii) A roadway 15 feet wide should be left between stacks
to enable two wagons to pass. If it is contem-
plated to lay rails, which should always be done, if
possible, in large depftts, the space between stacks
will vary according to the gauge it is intended to
employ.
(viii) Drains should be dug round the stack platforms and
beside the roads, and sufficient dunnage must be
provided for the stacks.
(ix) Ramps and platforms should be erected where neces-
sary to facilitate loading and unloading.
(x) The sections of the depot containing different articles
should be kept separate.
(xi) Sufficient tarpaulins must be provided to cover all
supplies stacked in the open.
(xii) Signboards should be put up showing the way to the
different parts of the depfit.


72. In considering the organization of supply depdts, it is
not possible to lay down any precise rules, as the local con-
ditions prevailing at each depot must influence to a great
extent its organization, and the officer in charge should have
an entirely free hand in detailing the work of the personnel
allotted to him.
It will be sufficient to describe the organization of a base
depot, all other classes of depots being capable of organiza-
tion on more or less the same lines, according to their size
and importance.
73. The officer in charge of the base depot will be generally
responsible for the receipt, custody, accounts, condition, and
despatch of all supplies passing through his depot. He will
pay particular attention to economy in carrying on the work
of the depot, especially with regard to labour, storage, facili-
ties, demurrage charges, and transport.
He makes the necessary arrangements with the transport
authorities for forwarding his supplies up the lines of com-
munication.
He arranges for local purchases and for sales of damaged
or unserviceable supplies, as may be from time to time autho-
rized.
74. In large base depots, an officer will be specially placed
in charge of the office, and will be responsible for the correct-
ness and punctual rendering of all states, returns, and accounts
kept at the base depot; for the correctness of all bills pre-
sented to the officer in charge for signature, and for the proper
conduct of correspondence with the depot; there should also
be an officer as outside assistant, who will superintend the
work of the storeholders in charge of the sections of the
depot, the despatch of supplies, and the engagement, payment,
and work of the labour gangs.
The storeholders in charge of the sections of depot stores
are responsible for the receipt, custody, and despatch of the
stores in their respective sections, and for bringing to notice
any deteriorating stores, losses, &c.
They will be responsible for the correct preparation of sup-
plies for despatch to the front.
75. The officer in charge of the landing establishment
arranges with the military landing officer (at a sea base),
or with the railway cbntrol or other transport officer (at an
inland base), for the receipt of all stores arriving by sea, rail,
or other route. He is in charge of the “ transit shed,” and
is responsible for distributing the stores to the various sec-
tions of the depot. He is responsible for all stores, from their
arrival on the wharf until they are handed over to the charge
of the storeholders in charge of sections of dep6t stores.
77. Detail issue stores, either at the base or other depfits,
will be kept entirely distinct from bulk depots.
The officer responsible for detail issue will draw in bulk
from the depdt and issue in detail to the troops either
B 2


stationed on the line of communication or passing through
the Station.
78. Although the following paragraphs deal more especially
with the working of a sea base, they will be foumi to be
equally applicable to other classes of depots on the lines of
communication.
79. When a ship arrives at the base port with supplies on
board, the officer in charge notifies the Deputy Director of
Supplies, lines of communication.
The officer in charge of the landing establishment arranges
with the military landing officer for the berthing of the vessel
as near as possible to the shed into which she is to discharge
her cargo, and the ship should begin to discharge forthwith.
It is important that there should be no undue delay in com-
mencing to discharge. In case of delay, not only are charges
for demurrage incurred, but the consignee can seldom sub-
stantiate any claim for damaged cargo, as the responsibility
of the master or insurance agent usually ends on the com-
pletion of the voyage, i.e., when the vessel drops anchor at her
destination.
In case of a mixed cargo, the vessel will discharge into the
transit shed. The supplies are checked into the shed by the
tally clerks, and distributed, as soon as possible, to the various
sections of the depot.
If the vessel cannot come alongside, a tally clerk is sent
out to check the supplies from the hold into the lighters.
He gives the man in charge of each lighter a “boat note,”
detailing the supplies in his charge, keeping a duplicate him-
self, which is checked with the supplies actually received,
according to the tally clerk’s records, at the end of each day.^
80. On arrival of the supplies at their proper sections in
the depot, whether direct from the ship, from the transit
shed, or by lighter, the supplies are checked in by the tally
clerks, and stacked under the supervision of the storeholder.
When each stack is completed, or at the end of the day, the
storeholder makes out a “tally-board” showing the actual
contents of the stack. On this board is entered every receipt
and issue, and the remains are entered up after each trans-
action.
The storeholder keeps a manuscript book, called the “ store-
holders book,” in which he enters up all supplies as they are
received, noting the source from which they come, and the
stack where they are to found. Any damaged supplies
are to be placed in a separate stack.
As soon as the vessel has completed discharging, the tally
clerk checks his figures with those of the representative of
the shipping company, and the storeholder checks them with
the actual quantities in store according to his book and tally
boards. Any discrepancy between the quantitv received and
that shown on the bill of lading must be immediately reported
to the officer in charge of the depot, who indorses the bill of


lading accordingly and takes up the matter with the shipping
company, in accordance with the Regulations for Supply,
Transport, and Barrack Services.
81. The officer in charge of the depot issues reauisitions to
the storeholders in charge of the sections concerned for the
supplies required, stating to whom they are to be consigned,
and arranges with the transport authorities to provide the
necessary transport. The counterfoils of these requisitions are
kept in the depot office.
If the stores are to be despatched by rail, the tally clerks
check the supplies into the trucks in conjunction with the
railway authorities’ checkers, and the storeholder enters in
his book the quantities issued and the stack from which they
emanated, attaching the original requisition to the book, and
entering the issue on the tally board. He obtains receipts
for each truckload from the railway authorities’ checkers.
Similar procedure will be adopted when other forms of trans-
port are employed.
The storeholder of each section reports daily the amount
he has issued, giving the truck numbers, and a wavbill for
this amount is sent to the consignee from the depot office.
82. The naval authorities are responsible for the arrange-
ments for conveying from the ship’s hold to the wharf
or landing place, and for the care of such supplies in transit.
But the naval authorities are not accountable for the actual
quantities of the stores placed in the boats, and, consequently,
the responsibility of the officer in charge of the depot com-
mences as soon as the vessel begins to discharge, and ends
when the stores have been handed over to the railway or other
land transport authorities for conveyance to the consignee.
83. The officer in charge of the depot, or his
should personally inspect each cargo on arrival, and
its general condition. If the cargo has become damped »n
the voyage, the matter must be immediately takeiKuli .with
the master, who applies to Lloyd’s agent at AJrrt to
assemble a Survey Board. The Board consists/d'f $$ Lloyd’s
agent assisted by a representative of the company,
and a representative of the consignee. decides on
the condition of the cargo, and as to the shipping
company, master, or insurance agent is/fuilye' for the loss.
84. The officer in charge of a deptft 'responsible that the
oldest supplies are issued first, see that this rule
is strictly complied with by thn/vaiTpns storeholders.
It may be necessary, und«r circumstances, to
forward supplies direct shins, up country, but this
should not be done if any danger of the older stock
deteriorating in in cases of extreme urgency,
when a special be made to the administrative staff
officer for supplies oAWie lines of communication.
85. It is the dutyxff the officer in charge to see that stock
is frequently taken of the various stacks, and that the actual
amount of supplies contained in each stack agrees with the


quantity as shown on the tally board. The entries on the tally
board must then be compared with the entries in the store-
holder’s book, and the latter initialled by the officer taking
stock as a record of his inspection. Stock must be taken of
each stack, and the entries compared at least once a month,
and, if possible, oftener.
BG. The storeholders’ books are sent in weekly to the depot
office, accompanied by the railway company’s or carriers’ re-
ceipts. These receipts are compared with the counterfoils of
the issue requisitions, which have been retained in the office,
and the entries in the account checked as follows:
Issues, by the railway company’s or carriers’ receipts
attached.
Receipts, by the record of bills of lading, or by other
receipt vouchers in the depot office.
The books are then initialled by the officer in charge of the
office, and returned to the storeholders.
87. It will be frequently necessary to employ civilian clerks,
storeholders, &c. If these are authorized by the Inspector-
General of Communications, they should be engaged by the
officer in charge of the depot personally.
Gangs of labourers are necessary for work in the stores and
yards,°and for loading and unloading supplies. These may
be obtained —
(а) By engaging the men direct, and forming them into
gangs with duly appointed foremen. They may
be paid either by time or by piece-work, the latter
system being preferable if it can be arranged.
(б) By dealing with the local labour contractors, plenty
of whom will be found at every considerable port.
The contractors will be paid according to the num-
ber of men provided, and their bills will be passed
monthly in the ordinary manner.
(c) By arrangements with the local railway or landing
companies. These comnanies usually command a
considerable amount of labour, and arrangements
t can often be made with them to supply occasional
labour on similar terms to the labour contractors.
They will be paid in a similar manner.
88. (a) The Base Depot.— The number of days’ sunnly to
be maintained at the base is determined by the C.-in-C. in
the field, and depends on many considerations, e.g., the dis-
tance of the base from its main sources of supply, the length
of the lines of communication, the probable duration of hostili-
ties, command of the sea, nature of operations, supplies obtain-
able in theatre of operations, &c.
One of the chief difficulties at the base depot is a conges-
tion of it, caused by—
(i) The arrival of supplies at the base faster than they
can be dealt with.


(ii) The inability of the railway or other foffn of trans-
port to cope with the work of getting the supplies
away from the depot in the quantities and time
desired, with the extra work entailed by military
operations.
It is therefore important that the depot should have plenty
of room to expand on an emergency,
(5) The supply depots on the lines of communication should
not, as a rule, hold more than one month’s supply for their
garrison, in addition to the average amount required daily
for feeding the troops passing through them. This amount
may, however, be greatly increased to relieve congestion at the
base by creating a supplementary reserve for the field army,
to assist the advanced supply depot in preparing for an exten-
sive Hank movement, or for any other reason which, in the
opinion of the 1.G.C., necessitates an increase.
(c) A railhead supply depot is a forwarding station between
the farthest point of the railway leading from the base and
the advanced supply depot. It only exists as a separate
organization when tlie advanced depot has left the railway.
The amount of supplies held at the railhead supply depot is
constantly varying, and depends on—
(i) The quantity coming forward from the base or else-
where.
(ii) The quantity which the officer in charge of the
advanced supply depot is able or willing to take.
(iii) The number of days’ supply ordered by the I.G.C. to
be held for the troops at the railhead post.
(d) The Advanced Supply Depot. —The number of days’
supply to be held at the advanced supply depot varies greatly
according to—
(i) The distance from the troops in front.
(ii) The nature of the roads between the advanced depdt
and railhead, and between the troops and the
advanced depot.
(iii) The activity or otherwise of the enemy.
(iv) Movements in contemplation.
(v) The amount of supplies available in the theatre of
operations.
The position of the officer in charge of the advanced dep6t
is one of great difficulty, and only an officer of foresight and
resource should be selected for the post.
The main principles which have to be kept in view as regards
the advanced depot, are —
(i) That the depfit must be as near as possible to the
troops, having due regard to safety.
(ii) That it must be able to maintain sufficient food and
forage for the troops to provide for any probable
movement.
fiii) That it must not be so large, or so near the troops,
as to become an embarrassment to the commander.


CHAPTER V.
MEASURES TO BE TAKEN FOR THE PREDERVATION OF SUPPLIES
STORED IN DEPÔTS.
89. When, owing to the absence of storage accommodation,
supplies have to be stacked in the open adequate protection
from weather is a matter of the first importance.
This will mainly involve the provision of —
(a) Cover for the tops and sides of the stacks.
(b) Dry foundations.
(c) Ventilation, in cases where the supplies are liable to
overheat.
90. Tarpaulins or sail covers provide the readiest method of
protecting the tops and sides of the stacks. They should be
lashed, or otherwise firmly secured.
91. Foundations may be constructed of almost any available
material, such as railway sleepers, rails, logs, hurdles, or large
stones. On no account are full packages of supplies to be used
for this purpose. Foundations need not, as a rule, be made
higher than is necessary to raise the stack just above the
ground level, except in localities where heavy accumulations
of surface water may be expected, when the height should be
increased, and additional protction afforded by a system of
surface drainage.
If circumstances demand that stacks be built up while rain
is falling, they should be prilled down again, so soon as an
opportunity offers, for the issue of their contents. But in
any case, such stacks should not be allowed to stand untouched
for any length of time.
92. Ventilation is secured by leaving air spaces through the
stacks. Supplies liable to heat in the stack must be subjected
to frequent examination. Issues snould be made from the
stacks longest on hand, to minimize loss by deterioration.
93. Space is, as a rule, the determining factor when the
question of stacking comes to be considered.
Given ample space, it is, as a general rule, preferable to
build a number of small stacks rather than a few large ones.
94. The advantages pertaining to small stacks are—
(i) They are quickly built and covered over, so that the
risk of damage from sun or rain is minimized.
(ii) Stocktaking, and consequently accounting, is facili-
tated. It is often almost impossible to make even
an approximate estimate of a large stack that has
been broken into for issue.
(iii) Issue is facilitated. It will often happen that a small
stack can be handed over to a fatigue party en bloc.
and thus the labour of checking it down package
by package is saved. It is unsatisfactory to issue
to several units at a time from the same stack;
this is avoided by having several small stacks
instead of a large one.
(iv) A more regular turnover is insured.


The most suitable height for small stacks in field depots
is 7to 8 feet. Ten feet may be regarded as the maximum,
as for every additional foot above this height the labour of
erecting is enormously increased.
95. On the other hand, large stacks will often be the most
suitable to build at base depots where large reserves of sup-
plies are maintained and issues in detail are not made. Issues
will he on such a big scale that such stacks are quickly dis-
posed of, once issue from them commences. They occupy less
ground space, which in enclosed surroundings, such as usually
characterize base depots, is a manifest advantage. Moreover,
when once built, their contents are better protected from the
elements than are the components of small stacks.
96. The following are general rules to be observed for build-
ing stacks of supplies; —
(i) A stack should be composed of packages of uniform
dimensions only, and on no account are packages
of more than one article to be mixed.
(ii) Each stack will be built on a well-defined plan, and
in such a manner that its contents can be easily
counted.
(iii) A sloping roof will in all cases be added to stacks
which are built up rectangular in section.
(iv) Ample space will be left betweeen stacks for the free
passage of vehicles.
(v) Foundations will be laid before the building of a stack
is commenced.
(vi) If possible, numerous air passages should be left when
building stacks which will in all probability remain
untouched for a length of time. When this is done,
a careful record of the contents of a stack will be
prepared contemporaneously with its erection, since,
particularly if irregular in shape, the usual methods
for rapid computation when stocktaking would not
give accurate results.
97. The majority of service packages are rectangular in
shape, having a greater length than breadth. Those placed
with the longer side parallel to the front of the stack are
known as “stretchers,” those with the shorter side to the
front as “headers.”
98. The simplest form of stack is built as follows:
The foundation having been laid, a layer of packages, all
either stretchers or headers, is first laid. On top, of it a layer
of headers or stretchers (according as the lay underneath
was composed of stretchers or headers) will be placed, and
so on, alternately, stretchers covering headers, and vice versA.
By this means joint is broken uniformly, and the stack acquires
a solidity which will cause it to stand firm despite any rough
handling to which it may be subjected. The width of such a
stack will be determined by the ratio between the length and
0.16766.-0


width of the packages since it is essential that the overall
width of a layer of stretchers should exactly equal that of a
layer of headers. This generally results in a stack some 9to
12 feet wide. The length need only be restricted by the space
available and general conditions of convenience. It should
be remembered, however, that the stack will be automatically
divided lengthwise into a number of sections each equal in
length to the breadth of the stack. This is a great conveni-
ence when pulling down the stack for issue, since sections can
readily be cut away complete.
The roof of such a stack is formed by reducing the width
of the layers by one stretcher or two headers alternately until
a layer one header wide only is reached. Such a roof will
have a slope of about 45 degrees, which is quite steep enough
to throw off rain water as fast as it falls.
Another very convenient form is that known as the tri-
angular stack. It has the great merit of falling naturally
into small sections, one package wide, which can be removed
one by one without detriment to the remaining sections. This
stack is, however, wasteful of space.
All packages are laid one way, as headers. They do not
break joint longitudinally, but transversely. The number in
each layer is uniformly reduced by one as the stack is built
up, so that a section of it assumes a triangular shape, as
shown below.
The contents of this stack can be readily ascertained by~
the use of the following formula:—
Height* + 1
Length* X Breadth* X = No. of packages.
2
• In No. of packages.


99. The following ground spaces, occupied respectively by
a million rations of biscuits, meat, groceries, and oats, are
given as a guide:—
Economy of space can be effected by increasing the height
of the stacks.


CHAPTER VI.
GENERAL RULES TO BE OBSERVED IN CONNEXION WITH THE
SAFE CUSTODY, RECEIPT, AND ISSUE OF SUPPLIES STORED
IN DEPÔTS.
100. While the officer in charge of a dep6t assumes full
responsibility for all supplies in his charge, the successful
working of the depot can alone be insured by a proper decen-
tralization of duties.
101. The personnel, under the orders of the officer in charge,
falls naturally into two main divisions, viz., “ inside ” and
u outside,” the former being composed of the clerical estab-
lishment, and the latter of butchers, bakers, storeholders,
issuers, and labourers. In large base depots officers, and in
smaller depots warrant or senior non-commissioned officers,
should be placed in immediate charge of “ inside,” or office,
and “ outside,” or yard, personnel and duties respectively.
They should be made directly responsible to the officer in
charge, and to him only, and their duties should, as a rule,
comprise tlie discipline of the personnel of their charge, general
supervision over their work, and such executive duties as the
officer in charge may from time to time assign to them.
102. The inside assistant, under the orders of the officer in
charge, distributes the clerical work of the office amongst the
clerical staff, as may be most convenient but the existing
regulations for the conduct of offices must be strictly adhered
to.
103. The outside assistant will similarly assign specified
duties to the “ outside ” personnel. Bakers and butchers re-
quired for that purpose will work at their trade, but the
remainder may be detailed for general yard duties, e.g., store-
keeping, issuing, and checking. Receipt and issue are facili-
tated by placing individuals in charge of single storehouses,
or grotips of them, or of the whole stock of one or more articles
of supply, according to circumstances. The adoption of such
a system of decentralization is, moreover, rendered imperative
by the fact that, as a general rule, only in this way can serious
loss from one cause or another (peculation particularly) be
avoided.
104. A storeholder will be held responsible for all supplies
placed under his charge. He will be present at all intakes
or issues. He will keep an account in manuscript of all
incomings and outgoings, and will not receive stores without
instructions from the outside assistant, nor issue them without
written authority from the officer in charge, or the inside or
outside assistant.
105. The duties of tally clerks are confined to the counting
of packages of supplies as they are unloaded in the yard on
arrival. At small depots the duties of tally clerks may con-
veniently be doubled up with those of issuers, but at large
depots such an arrangement is to be avoided.


10(5. All packages of supplies, and particularly those con-
taining wines and spirits, should be examined frequently to
prevent the substitution of dummies.
107. Night watchmen are necessary, except when a depot
is located in substantial buildings which can be locked up,
and even then it will generally be desirable to employ one or
more. They should come on duty at the hour when work
normally ceases for the day. Storeholders should be strictly
forbidden to leave their charge at any other time.
108. Smoking is strictly prohibited within the precincts of
all supply depots. Notices to this effect should be posted up
in prominent positions within the precincts of depots.
109. Officers in charge of depots will formulate rules to be
observed within their depots by both employees and strangers,
with a view to the prevention of fire, and regulations for the
conduct of employees in case of fire will likewise be issued for
the information of all concerned.
110. Special attention will be given to the question of water
supply, and in standing depots, where water from pipes is
not available, tanks will be provided and kept full. Im-
provised tanks for depots in the field may be constructed by
digging large trenches in the ground, and lining them with
tarpaulins or waterproof sailcloths.
111. Supplies of an inflammable nature must be kept entirely
separate from other stores, and not be located close to articles
which burn freely when ignited.
112. Steps will be taken to prevent unauthorized persons
gaining access to, and loitering about, the precincts of the
depot. This order applies also to soldiers and persons in mili-
tary employ. Fatigue parties will be kept together under the
charge of their own N.C.O.’s.
113. The procedure to be followed on the re'ceipt of supplies
involves action on the following lines: —
(i) Inspection of the supplies as to their condition.
(ii) Inspection of the supplies as to their quality. (Ap-
plicable only in the case of supplies delivered by
contractors and not to those emanating from other
military depots.)
(iii) Inspection to ascertain that the description and
weight of the packages correspond with those given
on the truck, or carrier’s note, or waybill letter of
advice.
(iv) Checking the packages received with the waybills, or
other letters of advice.
(v) Co-operation between the outside and the inside
personnel , in order that all paper transactions in
respect of the supplies, and the subsequent account-
ing for the same, may be facilitated.
(vi) The distribution and stacking of the supplies.


114. The inspection of consignments of supplies with a view
to determining their condition is a duty which officers in charge
should perform themselves, and which should be deputed to
subordinates only under unavoidable circumstances.
As a general rule, it will be sufficient to observe the exterior
appearance of the packages composing the consignment as a
whole, and to open and examine the contents of a few, selected
at random. The latter, for preference, should include any that
might appear to have been roughly handled.
In the case, however, of a consignment of supplies which
are known to have come under circumstances which would
point to the probability of their condition having deteriorated,
the inspection should be carried out very thoroughly, even to
the extent of opening every package if necessary. Supplies
returned to store by units of the field army, or from reserve
stocks held for considerable periods of time by posts and
detachments, would, as a rule, come under the latter category.
115. Officers in charge will test the weights of consignments
received, by selecting a few packages haphazard and weighing
them. Tally clerks and labourers will be given instructions to
set aside any packages that, on being handled, feel light.
Discrepancies between actual and supposed weights or de-
scriptions will be pointed out to carriers or their agents, and
the facts will be recorded on truck or carrier’s note,
11G. The tally clerks will keep tally sheets, upon which
should be clearly indicated the nature of the packages received,
the total quantity, the name or official designation of the con-
signor, the number of the railway wagons, or description of
other transport in which they reached the depfit, the date and
hour of their arrival, and similar information as to the time
of their unloading.
If duplicate truck notes are found with consignments of
supplies, they should be attached to these tally-sheets, which
will be handed by the tally clerks to the outside assistant,
who will initial and pass them to the inside assistant.
117. Unloading will invariably be performed in the presence
of the carrier or his agent, and discrepancies pointed out to
him immediately they are detected. The fact that this has
been done, and a note of the discrepancy, will be recorded on
the truck or carrier’s notes (carrier’s portion), before they
are receipted and returned to the carrier.
118. Storeholders and tally clerks will be forbidden to issue
receipts; these should be invariably signed by the officer in
charge, or his representative.
119. At all the larger depots, the normal subordinate estab-
lishment of which will be sufficient for the purpose, a system
of double tally will be automatically brought into operation,
as described below, and should be taken full advantage of.
This system is in operation whenever separate staffs of
storeholders and tally clerks are employed. The former will
1m required to keep a tally of all stores that are placed under


their charge, in order that their responsibility may at all
times be clearly defined. The tally ordered to be taken by the
tally clerks is not to be omitted on that account. The store-
holders’ tallies should be forwarded to the inside assistant
in the same manner as has been laid down for the tally clerks
tallies, and the two will be compared in the office, and any
discrepancies will be inquired into without delay.
120. All communications, written or verbal, between the
office and the yard on routine matters connected with the
work in hand, will be passed through the inside and outside
assistants. Any interference by the one with the subordinates
of the other is strictly forbidden.
It is essential, on the other hand, that each shall inform
the other, from time to time, of the progress of the work
in hand, and of the arrangements made to comply with the
demands on the depot generally. The outside assistant will
be held specially responsible that tally clerks’ and storeholders’
tally-sheets are correctly compiled, and are forwarded to the
office as they are completed.
The inside assistant will see that the outside assistant is
provided with copies of advice notes at the earliest possible
moment after they are received in the office.
The distribution and stacking of supplies received is
governed largely by the principle that receipts and issues
should never be made concurrently from the same stack.
121. Issues in bulk to other depots, or to supply officers
of the field army, will be made direct from the stacks or store-
houses, but detail issues will invariably be made by one or
more responsible subordinates who will be detailed specially
for that duty. Detail issue stores will always be kept entirely
separate from the main depot. They should be located with
due regard to the facilities for the approach and withdrawal
of vehicles, and to non-interference with the work of the main
depot. Supplies of all kinds, in quantities sufficient for the
purpose, will be handed over to detail issuers from time to
time. These issuers will be held responsible for such stores,
and will keep an account in manuscript of their disposal.
This account will not go beyond the office, but it will be care-
fully checked there with the storeholders’ statements of receipt
and issue, and with the ration indents, A.B. 55.
Detail issuers will make no issues whatever without autho-
rity in writing. This authority will emanate from the office,
and will, as a rule, be represented by A.B. 66. Ration indents
on A.B. 55, and requisitions generally, will not be passed out
from the office to the yard or detail issue store.
Issuers will obtain receipts for all stores issued by them.
Since original requisitions and ration indents (A.B. 55),
which are retained in the office, also require receipting, it will
be sufficient if the initials of the person receiving the supplies
are affixed to the A.B. 66, or other order, under which the
issue is made.


122. No issue will be made except in the presence of the
authorized representative of the unit to which the issue is
to be made, or, in the case of supplies forwarded by road or
rail, in the presence of the carrier or his agent. The latter
will be required to give a receipt on the proper form for
supplies handed over to him. Such receipt should contain full
particulars of the quantity and description of the stores to
which it refers, and the inclusion of any damaged packages
should (provided they must be sent forward) be specially
noted. The absence of such note will be held to imply that
the carrier accepts the consignment as in good order and
condition.
123. Different hours for drawing supplies should, whenever
possible, be allotted to the various units dependent on the
depot. Steps should be taken to prevent more ration parties
than can be accommodated gaining access to the depot at one
time. Notice to this effect should be posted at the entrance
of the depot, and a common waiting ground should be fixed,
and indicated by direction-boards.




THE SERVICES OF MAINTENANCE IN THE
FIELD: SOME OBJECT LESSONS FROM THE
ARMY EXERCISE, 1913.
By COLONEL E. E. CARTER, C.M.G., M.V.O.
(Reprinted, by permission, from the “Army Review,”
April, 1914.)
The Scheme of the Army Exercise.—Preparatory Measures. —•
Preliminary Decisions. —Supply Situation at Commence-
ment of Exercise. —'Lines of Communication. —Some Deduc-
tions: (a) The Staff at Regulating Stations. — (b) The
Position of the Inspector-General of Communications. —
(c) Allotment and Position of Directors. —Services of
Maintenance in the Cavalry Division and Armies. — (a)
Selection of Rendezvous —(6) Selection of Refilling
Points. —Conclusion. —Appendix I: Arrangements for
Supply and for Supply Accounting on Manoeuvres.
Appendix ll:—March Table for Supply Columns. — Map
of Rendezvous and Refilling Points Is# and 2nd Armies.
For the first time in the history of our array the scheme
arranged for the Arxpy Exercise, 1913, rendered possible a
test of some of the services of maintenance; and the organi-
zation and administration laid down in our “ War Establish-
ments ” and “Field Service Regulations” were more under
review than was possible at previous manoeuvres or staff rides.
So far as the supply and transport services were concerned,
the test was almost entirely complete, and the so-called “new
system ” received a practical trial, which no similar system
had ever had in the past. So much has been'written and
spoken about our now established system of food supply in
the field that even a resume of the same would be out of
place in this article; but there is one point of vital import-
ance which it is necessary to keep constantly in mind in
connexion therewith, namely, that while the principles govern-
ing the system remain the same, its elasticity and adapta-
bility are such that numberless modifications of detail are
not only possible, but desirable, in order to obtain the full
value of our establishments and organization. It may be
argued that this very elasticity is a danger; but any such
danger disappears, if those who are responsible for the direc-
tion and use of the system are sufficiently conversant with
the principles, on which it is based, to vary daily (or even
oftener, if absolutely necessary) the details of its applica-
tion to suit the ever-changing conditions of time and locality.


In this article the object will be to give as precise an
account as possible of the arrangements for the organization
of the supply and transport services, and to quote a few
instances from which useful lessons may be drawn with a
view to greater efficiency in the future.
In doing so the writer desires to disclaim any attempt
at criticism, which naturally is entirely outside his province,
and where an alternative suggestion is made, the object of
the article will be attained if such suggestion is taken at its
face value and in the spirit of wisdom after the event.
The Scheme of the Army Exercise.
It is unnecessary to recapitulate at length the general and
special ideas on which the Army Exercise was carried out,
seeing that they are already widely known throughout the
Army.* It is principally with the designs of the Exercise
that we are most concerned, and for this purpose the summary
given by the Chief of the Imperial General Staff at the
Conference at Weedon on 26th September last is quoted.
Field-Marshal Sir John French said —
“ This year’s Army Exercise has been designed to afford
practice in, and trial of, the working of General Head-
quarters and Army Headquarters at War Establishments;
an approach march of one cavalry division and two
armies, each army consisting of two divisions and march-
ing on one road, the supply of the above force, the supply
services being confined to the same roads as those on
wnich the troops march; cavalry covering the advance of a
big force (Brown) against a slightly superior White
cavalry, reinforced by cyclists, necessitating the support
of the Brown cavalry by the advanced guard of the main
columns; the driving in of the enemy’s advanced troops,
the deployment of the above force (Brown) for attack;
an attack on an enemy in an entrenched position; organ-
ization of a pursuit; and breaking off the pursuit and a
sudden change of direction.”
The foregoing quotation has been given at length, because,
including as it does all the main movements of the force, it
emphasizes the fact that the services of maintenance had to
conform to them as an integral part of the force itself. This
point is important in view of the regrettable fact that there
is still a tendency to think that the executive work of these
services is so distinct from the duties of the arms comprising
the fighting troops as to need more or less independent direc-
tion —a tendency which necessarily hampers co-operative sub-
ordination on the part of those responsible for executive
action.
1 See " The British Army Exercise of 1913,” by Commandant de Thomasson,
The Army Review, January, 1914, page 143.


Preparatory Measures.
As in the case of all army training periods, the elaboration
of the preparations for the exercise had to be taken in hand
some time previously. The War Office decided that, as Aider-
shot was to represent the Main Supply Depot of the Brown
Force —-fixed under the scheme at Ashford in Kent —all the
food and forage required should be arranged for by the exist-
ing machinery at that station, although certain grocery sup-
plies were sent from the Supply Reserve Depot at Woolwich.
In carrying through the preparatory measures and in devising
their scheme, the Aldershot Command were able, with the
approval of the War Office, to make a very marked advance
on previous years by adopting a system of supply which
approximated to service conditions more closely than before.
The instructions issued are given in full in Appendix I. to
this article, but the main features may be summarized as
follows: —
(i) The fact \vas established that the provision of all
supplies (except hay and wood) would be from rear
to the front, based on the strengths of units
twenty-four hours before leaving their various
commands, and that no units were to “ purchase
any articles of supply without the consent of the
supply officer or requisitioning officer of their for-
mation.”
(ii) The quantity of supplies sent up each day from the
Advanced Base Supply Depot would be calculated
on the strengths given at the commencement of the
Exercise. Any alteration in strengths would be
made from General or Army Headquarters by the
representative of the Inspector-General of Com-
munications. Any supplies that were not taken by
the troops were ordered to be returned to the Supply
Depot by rail.
(iii) No supply accounts were kept beyond the Supply
Depot, but supply officers in the field kept dairies
showing exactly their transactions with the troops;
and the daily receipts on A.B. 55 were forwarded
by supply officers to the Manoeuvre Accounting
Office, which was established at Aldershot in close
touch with the Supply Depot itself.
(iv) For the supply of hay and wood, a reconnaissance of
the area, through which it was known the troops
were to pass, was made and published in book form,
showing the exact addresses where these articles
could be obtained. The requisitioning areas were
carefully allotted in orders to each formation, and
it was arranged that the requisitioning officers
should obtain the quantities required by the troops
of their formation.


Formation.
Officers.
Other Banks.
Horses.
General Head-quarters
61
601
309
Army Troops
51
841
284
Cavalry Division
264
4,705
4,633
1st Army:—
171
Army Head-quarters
55
320
1st Division
459
7,983
1,953
2nd Division
461
8,535
1,977
2nd Army:—
171
Army Head-quarters
55
320
3rd Division
450
8,739
1,951
4th Division
Lines of Communication —
469
8,242
2,349
Head-quarters of Inspector-General of
11
46
21
Communications.
13
Head-quarters of Administrative Services
15
31
Lines of Communication Units
21
757
—
Grand Total of Brown Force
2,372
41,120
13,832
The estimated feeding strength of Brown Force at the com-
mencement of the Exercise was as follows;
The completion of the force as regards transport animals
was, as usual, carried out by resorting to contractors. Each
Command, however, made its own arrangements, although
by mutual agreement the choice of contractors was such that
Commands did not necessarily compete with each other. The
scale of transport (additional to technical vehicles) was drawn
up by the War Office, and while it was based on the general
principles land down for service in the field, there were the
customary modifications for manoeuvre purposes, namely, that
a change of clothing at 4 lbs. per man was allowed, and scale
of officers’ personal luggage and equipment was authorized
at 100 lbs. per mounted officer, and 70 lbs. per dismounted
officer. Officers’ messes were also allowed on the scale of
one hired wagon per regiment of cavalry, brigade of artillery,
and battalion of infantry, and one cart for smaller units con-
sisting of four or more officers. The train transport was cal-
culated to carry “ one day’s complete supplies for men, and
one day’s grain for horses, at the rate of 6 lbs. weight per
man, 16 lbs. weight per hired horse, and 14 lbs. weight per
troop horee.”
A distinction as regards the horsing of four-wheeled vehicles
was also made, namely, cavalry and horse artillery units had
teams of four horses, while in other units only pairs were pro-
vided. Canteens for beer or other liquor were not permitted
to accompany the troops on the march, but local arrangements
could be made for these articles to meet the troops on arrival
in camp or bivouac.
In the case of mechanical transport units the several supply
columns were made up to their required strengths by the hire
of suitable lorries, but only one general contract was arranged
through the Aldershot Command, and the distribution to all


the mechanical transport companies was made by that com-
mand. The numbers of lorries were allotted according to the
strengths of the formations which they were to supply, due
regard being made for the vehicles to be loaded by brigade
and divisional troops.
Preliminary Decisions.
As the date for the commencement of the Exercise drew
near, it was found necessary to hold certain conferences of
the A.G.’s and Q.M.G.’s branches of the staff at General,
Army, and 1.-G.C.’s head-quarters, and also to decide on
various details of procedure with reference to the allotment
of duties and distribution of the personnel of the administra-
tive services and departments between General Head-quarters
and 1.-G.C.’s head-quarters, as well as the distribution of
personnel of the latter head-quarters. As a result of the
conferences it was decided to classify orders issued by General
Head-quarters under the headings of “ Operation Orders,”
“ Routine Orders,” and “ Standing Orders.” It is with the
two latter that the maintenance services were principally
concerned, although it was in Operation Orders that was
found the guiding principle, which governed all movements of
supply and transport services, both with the two armies
and cavalry division, as well as the lines of communication
transport units. The operation order containing this prin-
ciple read as follows:
Operation Order, No. 3. Dated September 21s£, 1913.
The supply column of the cavalry division will use the road
allotted to the Ist Army.
Supply columns and the trains of the Ist and 2nd Armies
will use the same roads as those allotted for the march of
their respective Armies.
Routine orders contained amplifications of the original
“War Office Instructions, Army Exercise, 1913,” and included
specific instructions regarding medical and veterinary arrange-
ments.
The most important orders were, however, contained in
Standing Orders under the heading of “ Supplies,” and these
are given in extenso owing to the effect they had on the move-
ments of transport both with the troops and on lines of com-
munication. They were as follow:
4. Supply of Current Requirements. —General Officers
Commanding Ist and 2nd Armies will communicate direct
with the Inspector-General of Communications regarding
the supply of their current requirements. Telegrams
fixing time and place of rendezvous for supply columns
for the following day will be addressed to “ Communica-
tions,” Regulating Station (Addison Road), and should
be despatched by 5 p.m. daily. ••


5. Refilling Supply Sections of Train. —Supply sections
of the train will march empty and will be refilled from
the Supply Column close to the rear of the billeting and
bivouacking areas occupied by their respective formations
on the completion of the march. Officers commanding
trains will be responsible for organization of the trans-
port at refilling points.
6. Cavalry Supply Columns. —General Head-quarters
will fix the rendezvous for the cavalry and will communi-
cate it and the route to be followed by the Cavalry Sup-
ply Column to Inspector-General of Communications.
General Head-quarters will notifv tne rendezvous to
General Officer Commanding Cavalry Division, who will be
responsible for the movements of the. Supply Column in
front of that point.
General Officers Commanding will be informed when the
Cavalry Supply Column will use a road occupied by
troops under their command, and will take all necessary
steps to facilitate its passage.
It was also decided that the personnel of administrative ser-
vices or departments (wmch were represented by the Ist and
2nd echelons only, as laid down in “War Establishments”)
should be located on the lines of communication, and only
one deputy assistant director of supplies was ordered to be
attached to General Head-quarters.
Following on the foregoing, the Inspector-General of Com-
munications established his own head-quarters at Aldershot
(the Advanced Base), and with him were the following staff
officers and directors:—
General Staff (L. of C.).
Adjutant-General’s Staff (L. of C.).
A representative of the Quartermaster-General’s Staff
(L. of C.).
Director of Transport.
Director of Railway Transport.
Director of Supplies.
As a portion of the head-quarters of the Inspector-General
of Communications, but detached therefrom, was the personnel
at the Regulating Station (Addison Road Station, Kensing-
ton), which included the following:—
Quartermaster-General’s Staff (L. of C.).
A representative of Adjutant-General’s Staff (L. of C.).
Assistant Director of Transport.
A representative of the Director of Railway Transport.
Assistant Director of Supplies,
A deputy assistant director of transport was placed in gene-
ral charge of the first railheads, viz., Rickmansworth and
Watford, but, as the railheads advanced, the Assistant Director
of Transport from the Regulating Station was sent forward
to the western line to superintend the work thereon.


Practically, all the staff work on the lines of communica-
tion for the purpose of the Exercise centred at the Regulating
Station, Addison Road; and as all orders from General Head-
quarters as to the actual daily requirements of the troops
were sent to that office, it must be regarded as a sub-office
of the Inspector-General of Communications’ head-quarters.
At the Inspector-General of Communications’ office at Aider-
shot the duties of the staff were mainly of a theoretical
nature involving the movements, on paper only, of the lines
of communication, defence troops, and the consideration of
the allotment of the bulk of the lines of communication
administrative units which were not represented by any cadres
of actual troops.
It is obvious that the limits of an article make it impos-
sible to detail day by day the actual movements of railway
supply trains, supply columns, and the various trains belong-
ing to the cavalry division and the two armies; therefore, it
is proposed to give only in general terms the normal working
of the lines of communication and to consider one or two
points connected with the executive supply and transport work
with the divisions.
lw-' m:
Supply Situation at Commencement of Exercise.
The Army Exercise began officially at 7 a.m. on 22nd Sep-
tember, when the initial movements of troops (from the posi-
tions which they would have occupied on the night before)
were permitted to commence, and thus the supply situation
generally at that moment was as follows: —
(i) With the troops—
(а) The current day’s food (less breakfast) in
the regimental cookers or cook’s wagons.
(б) Supply sections of -trains, empty.
(ii) Supply Columns at railheads, Watford and Rickmans-
worth, full; with food, forage, and petrol, for con-
sumption 23rd September.
(iii) Railway Supply Trains. —Two trains at the sidings
at Aldershot, loaded ready for immediate dispatch
to the Regulating Station, and containing food, &e.,
for consumption by the armies on 24th September.
(iv) Supply Depot of Advanced Base at Aldershot, pre-
paring to load the railway supply trains which
would eventually contain supplies for consumption
on 25th September.
Lines of Communication.
In accordance with the Standing Orders quoted, the Quarter-
master-General’s staff, lines of communication, at Addison
Road Station received the times and places of rendezvous daily
from General Head-quarters for the Cavalry Division, and from
Army Head-quarters for each of the two armies. In point


of fact it was generally not until about 7 p.m. that some of
the telegrams were received, and until they were in it was
impossible to be certain of the times for starting the several
supply columns on the following day. This information formed
the basis of a march table, a specimen of which is given as an
appendix.
When fully prepared the contents of the table were tele-
phoned to the head-quarters office of the Inspector-General of
Communications at Aldershot, and copies were sent by motor
cyclist to the assistant directors of transport at the railheads
in confirmation and expansion of the wires which had already
been dispatched giving general directions for the various
columns concerned.
The intention regarding the march tables was originally that
they should be published with the Inspector-General of Com-
munications’ daily orders, and forwarded to General and Army
Head-quarters, but it was considered that, in actual warfare,
this would be too dangerous a practice to adopt. On the
other hand, the advantages of General and Army Head-quarters
knowing the movements of lines of communication units be-
hind the rendezvous were lost, and on many occasions on
service this might, no doubt, be important. On service it
would be essential that the commander of the lines of com-
munication defence troops should have a copy of this table.
So far as the Army Exercise was concerned, it may be claimed
that the procedure adopted enabled the work of tae supply
columns up to the rendezvous and on their homeward journeys,
to be performed without any serious hitch or difficulty.
Some Deductions.
It is, however, not so much from the actual work done by
the 1.-G.C.’s head-quarters and lines of communication units
during the Exercise, that the most important lessons may be
learned, as from the consideration of the position and allot-
ment of the staff of the Inspector-General of Communications
in relation to the work during the Exercise, and it is sug-
gested that the following items are worthy of notice, with a
view to developing the details for active service conditions: —
(a) The Staff of Regulating Stations.
It was considered essential that the number of staff and ad-
ministrative officers at Addison Road should be reduced to a
minimum, and there can be little doubt that in principle this
view is sound, but it seems open to question whether this staff
should be a detached portion of the Inspector-General of Com-
munications’ immediate staff; in other words, should the
A.Q.M.G., Lines of Communication, be the officer performing
really executive duties in the name of the Inspector-General of
Communications ? Practical experience of the Army Exercise


rather leads to the conclusion that the area between and in-
cluding the Regulating Station and the various rendezvous
(i.e., approximately the rear of the divisions) is one which
cannot well be subdivided and must be under the control of one
officer, whose administrative duties with regard to that area
would be such as to necessitate his being, not a staff officer to
the Inspector-General of Communications, but really his de-
puty for that particular sphere of the operations. If this view
be adopted it follows, then, that this deputy needs a small staff
independent of the Inspector-General’s staff, although it may
be formed from the existing establishment of the latter’s head-
quarters. Thus it would be necessary for him to have one at
least of the General Staff officers and one of the Quarter-
master-General’s staff as his immediate assistants, while there
would (as in the case of the Army Exercise) be representatives
of the directors of railway transport and supplies permanently
allotted to the Regulating Station in addition to representa-
tives or other directorates ( e.g., medical and ordnance
services) when special circumstances required their presence.
The consideration of this particular area of Lines of Com-
munication also involves another, namely, the relationship of
the lines of communication defence commander to the Inspector-
General of Communications, for the very obvious reason that
the protection of fast moving mechanical transport through
hostile country is of a different nature to the old-fashioned
measures for the defence of convoys. It is suggested that the
commander of the lines of communication defence troops must
be in the closest touch with the officer in charge at the Regu-
lating Station, so that roads traversed by administrative units
(whether mechanical transport or otherwise) have the full
measure of protection to which they are entitled.
(6) The Position of the Inspector-General of Communications.
During the Army Exercise, the Inspector-General of Com-
munications’ office was established, as already stated, at Aider-
shot, the Advanced Base, with what was practically a sub-
office 30 miles away at Addison Road Station in London. The
conditions of the Exercise require to be carefully remembered
in arriving at definite conclusions, namely, that the actual
duties to be performed were solely those of supply of food and
forage, and are practically not comparable to the conditions of
active service, where movements forward will include men,
horses, ammunition, and materiel of all sorts, apart from the
backward movements of sick, wounded, and prisoners of war.
All these items will demand the close attention of the
Inspector-General of Communications and his staff, and it,
therefore, seems easier to arrive at a conclusion where the
Inspector-General of Communications’ head quarters should not
be, than where they should be. The two localities that demand
the most concentrated attention on the Lines of Communication
are the Advanced Base and the Regulating Station, and the
details of working these will entirely absorb the attention of


the responsible officer at each.* Hence it seems fair to argue
that these two places at any rate should be avoided as head-
quarters of the Inspector-General of Communications; for, xx
he were established at either, he would soon find himself and
his staff involved in local matters which would prevent them
from being able to keep a wider and more alert supervision
over the communications as a whole. This last desideratum,
therefore, seems to be a guiding factor, while the fact that the
Inspector-General of Communications is frequently required to
visit General Head-quarters to discuss questions of policy in-
volved in the maintenance of the communications points to a
forward position of his head-quarters being essential.?
(c) Allotment and Position of Directors.
It must be admitted that so far as the Exercise was con-
cerned, the duties of the officers, who occupied the appoint-
ments of directors, were reduced to a minimum, for the very
simple reason that their roles had to be performed beforehand
bv the Aldershot Command, to which all details were neces-
sarily referred by the War Office in connexion with the pre-
paratory measures for the Exercise. However much it may be
desired to organize the duties of heads of administrative
services on manoeuvres as in war, if the individuals only
assume their respective offices at the stroke of midnight two
days before the operations begin, it is impossible for them to
do' anything but accept the arrangements which they had in
existence —arrangements which are, and must invariably be,
worked out to last the whole of the five or six days of con-
tinuous operations of the armies with whom they are dealing.
It is suggested as an alternative that if directors are appointed,
they should be entrusted with the duties of organization of
their respective departments from the initial stages of the
preparations.
As regards their location no less than their actual duties
“Field Service Pegulations, Part IT.” (Chapter 111., Section
22, para. 3), definitely imposes on directors —
«the responsibility for tne methods employed in provid-
ing the requirements of the forces in the field . . .
subject, according to circumstances, to the general super-
vision and control of the three principal staff officers,
through whom the instructions of the Commander-in-Chief
are issued, or of the Inspector-General of Communica-
tions.”
* The Advanced Base is the area within which are sitnated advanced depots
of ammunition, stores, and supplies of all kinds. There is no reason why the
Beenlatine Station should not be a place within that area. The Advanced Base
and Bevulatlns Station [need not, therefore, be two separate localities.—
General Staff.
r » The T -G.O.’s'head-quarters'must obviously be where he can best exercise
control and whence he can quickly reach General Head-quarters tf required.—
General Staff.


It seems clear, therefore, that the directors should have
direct access to the “ three principal staff officers ” of the
Comniander-in-Chief, and not be placed under the Inspector-
General of Communications (except so far as lines of com-
munication duties per se are concerned) who himself receives
his instructions through the same principal staff officers {vide
ibid., Section 11, para. 1). This being the case, while the
locality of the permanent office of a director may, for the sake
of convenience, be even as far back as the Overseas Base, he
himself should be free to go to General Head-quarters when-
ever necessary, or to move over the Lines of Communication
whenever circumstances demand.- 1 Further, so long as it is
expected that directors must assume financial responsibility for
their particular services, it is only reasonable to permit them
direct access to the “ principal staff officer ” concerned when
discussing questions of policy involving large or special ex-
penditure of public money, in connexion with their particular
departments or services.
Services of Maintenance in the Cavalry Division and
Armies.
For all practical purposes during the Exercise the services of
maintenance with the troops resolved themselves solely into
matters of supplies and transport. Questions of ammunition
were not involved, and the procedure as regards medical ser-
vices was necessarily improvised. No other department was
really concerned in the daily duties of maintenance.
From a purely regimental point of view the experience
gained by the units of the Army Service Corns that composed
the various trains during the manoeuvres of 1912 in the neigh-
bourhood of Cambridge produced results during 1913 which, on
the whole, must be regarded as satisfactory. There was cer-
tainly more realization of the necessity of co-operation between
the staffs of the various formations and the executive officers of
the trains, and, even if mistakes and omissions did occur, the
experience gained bv such will be valuable in the future. The
employment of civilian horse transport with the trains must
always give valuable lessons to the Army Service Corps, which
will have a similar, though greater, task to contend with on
mobilization when horses, unused to conditions of active
service, and reservists, whose capabilities are unknown, are
brought into the companies to expand them to their respective
war establishments.
There is, however, one point that still requires something
more than even careful consideration, and that is. the overload-
ing of transport vehicles. There is Only one remedy for this,
i Two paragraphs in “ Field Service ‘Regulations, Part IT.” which have no
been referred to bv the author, have a direct bearing on this question, viz.
Section 6 [1 1. in which it is stated that the supreme authority is vested in the
Commander-in-Chief of the Forces in the field ; and Section 22 [7l. in which It is
provided that offices of directors and heads of administrative services will be
located as directed by'the Commander-In-Chief.—General Staff.


namely, that units other than the Army Service Corps must
realize that their personal comfort, if nothing else, depends on
the assistance which they give the transport in the matter of
loading, or rather of not overloading, the vehicles of the bag-
gage section of the train. Technically, of course, the Army
Service Corps are responsible; practically, it is impossible for
that corps (when wagons are already loaded and have to
move off to take their proper place in the long line of march
of two divisions on one road) to make any really suitable
alteration. Drastic measures of dealing with this question
are to be deprecated, but there may be occasions in the future
when units will have to put up with such methods if the lesson
cannot be taught in any other way.
The fact that in 1913 there were two divisions marching on
one road, supplied the material for valuable lessons from a
staff point of view, and the following are suggested as being
the most worthy of notice: —
(a) Selection of Rendezvous.
The procedure decided on before the Exercise began was that
General Head-quarters made themselves responsible for the
cavalry, and each Army Head-quarters for its own divisions.
It must be borne in mind that the routes of the supply columns
were limited to the same roads as those on which the troops
themselves were marching, and that the Cavalry bupply
Column had invariably to pass through the Ist Army. Un
one occasion when the information as to the rendezvous jyas
collated at the Regulating Station, it was found that, in
to reach its rendezvous at the appointed time, the
Supply Column would have had to be running abreast oVtlie
two divisional supply columns of the Ist Army for £
able distance. Naturally, an adjustment was poj*ihte> but it
was at the expense of the Cavalry Supply Colytnftph avin g
start one hour earlier than necessary to cover thedWfance which
it had to go. On the other hand, in the caso'ofArbP 2naKrmj,
which had only its own two divisions to wtnsiljfer no difficulty
was experienced. It seems reasonable, tjjfcrdfpYe, to ar^ e that
all formations that are being supplied' bit vne road should be
dealt with by one authority so fa f'Mi times and places of
rendezvous are concerned, and it Xvaum appear that Gcneial
Head-quarters will have to be tljrft'l horit y-
One minor, but important, j*6k*'in connexion with this sub-
iect of rendezvous is its dearfuMm with refetence to the map.
The nlace selected a point, that is some
clearly defined as cross roads, bridge, church,
&c., and not an say, 1 mile south of . . .
The reason for this is it is a meeting place for the repre-
sentative of the formation and the officer commanding the
supply column, and it must he regarded as the point at which
the head of that unit will halt.


(6) Selection of Refilling Points.
There are two conditions that require to be borne in mind
in this connexion: the one during the period of the advance
before the divisions come into action with the enemy, and the
other during the period when the deployment of divisions is
taking place. In the former case, in the Exercise the refilling
points were generally at the rear of the divisions when halted,
although there was an instance, on 22nd September, when the
refilling point of the 4th Division was properly altered and
placed back at the rendezvous (Traveller’s Rest) owing to the
block in front caused by the 3rd Divisional Train being delayed
at Billington Hill. In the latter case—that is, when the
divisions began to deploy on 24th September—it would seem,
from the positions of the various trains, that some limitation
as to the march of this transport would have prevented the
“ packing ” of the several sections of the Ist and 2nd Divi-
sional Trains; in other words, the refilling points for these
divisions were too far forward. Probably their selection was
due to the desire to keep the supply sections of trains empty
as long as possible, but this seems to furnish an important
instance of the necessity of interpreting the Standing Order
on the subject with due regard to the circumstances of the
moment rather than of rigidly obeying its letter, and so open-
ing the door to difficulties and delay.
24th September also supplied an instance of the need of a.
central authority controlling the general movements of
transport where more than one formation was concerned, when
the 2nd Division was diverted from the route, laid down in
Operation Orders of the previous evening, and passed through
the refilling point selected for the Cavalry Division at Cul-
worth. The question, therefore, arises as to whether there
may not be occasions when, owing to the armies closing up on
the cavalry, refilling “ areas ” may have to be allotted to
formations. The object of such an arrangement would be that
all formations suddenly diverted through such areas would be
aware of possible congestion, and by prevision could minimize
the same.
Conclusion.
There seems little doubt that, as far as the organization for
the Army Exercise permitted, great value was obtained in the
practice of moving large masses of transport in more congested
areas than ever before, and the instruction gained by the Staff
was invaluable, but it is perhaps chiefly in connexion with the
Lines of Communication that greater experience is needed,
although it is recognised that the difficulties in the way are
perhaps insurmountable.
There is possibly no part of our military system in which the
personal element has so important a place as in that of the
administration of the services of maintenance—services which
are largely dependent on the conditions of locality and of the
moment, when quick decisions have to be made. It seems,


therefore, not out of place to conclude with a quotation from
an address to the Senior Division of the Staff College by the
late Commandant.* who said that —
“ Human nature will undoubtedly assert itself in war,
and with it you must reckon; and the recognition of this
elemental fact will, I believe, do more than anything else
to prevent you from straying into unpractical paths.
APPENDIX I.
ARRANGEMENTS FOR SUPPLY AND FOR SUPPLY ACCOUNTING ON
MANŒUVRES.
With a view to adopting on manoeuvres a system of accounts
as near as possible to that which will obtain on service, the
following instructions have been approved (W.U. letter
51/3256—Q.M.G.6 —dated 18th June, 1913) : .
The ordinary depot account will be kept the Main
Supply Depot. A manoeuvre accounting office will also be
formed at the Main Supply Depot, where all accounts of sup-
lies issued from the Main Supply Depot and all accounts for
supplies purchased in the manoeuvre area will be kept in detail,
in lieu of the usual formation supply accounts.
2 The A.A. and Q.M.G.’s of divisions, or brigade-majors of
cavalry brigades, will supply 1.-G.C.’s representative at the
Main Supply Denot with a complete roll of strength of units
composing the various formations 24 hours before the troops
leave the command. Complete rations for the total strength
of formations will be loaded daily at the Mam Supply Depot
until such time as instructions are received from General or
Army Head-quarters by the representative of the i.-G.U tnat
any alteration is required. . . , ..
isr.B. With regard to the distribution to formations,
General or Army Head-quarters will notify to the representa-
tive of the 1.-G.C. at the regulating station any change that
may have been made in the distribution of the force, so that
the representative of the 1.-G.C. may be able to arrange the
desired distribution of supplies with the supply columns.
3. The commander, Main Supply Depot, will load railway
trains in bulk by formations, making out way-bills for the
trucks of each formation. ,
4 After seeing his train loaded and checked, the commander
of the railway supply detachment detailed to proceed from the
advanced base will sign the counterfoil in the way-bill book at
the Depot Supplv Office, and will take the consignor s and con-
signee’s copies of the way-bill. He will hand over consignor s
copy to the manoeuvre accounting office before leaving. this
■ Major-Gen. Sir W. R. Robertson, K.C.V.0., C. 8., D. 5.0., in The Army
Review, April, 1913, p. 333.


will be retained by the manoeuvre accounting office until the
consignee’s copy is returned indorsed and duly receipted. The
consignor s copy will then be signed and similarly indorsed by
the manoeuvre accounting officer and returned 'to the head-
quarters of the Main Supply Depot, where it will form a voucher
to the Main Supply Depot account. On arrival at the regu-
ladmg station he will pass to the railway supply detachment
officers of the trains for each formation the consignee’s portion
of the way-bills for the formation to be supplied by each
commander of railway supply detachments taking a receipt in
his diary for the way-bills handed over.
5. At railhead the commander of the railway supply detach-
ments will issue to the supply column supply officer, who will
load his lorries in detail for brigades and divisional troops.
6. After issue, the supply column supply officer will sign the
way-bills in possession of the commander of the railway supply
detachment for the supplies taken from the railway, and the
commander of the railway supply detachment will ’take from
the supply column supply officer any sacks or supplies to be
returned to the base, indorsing details thereof on consignee’s
way-bill, which will be forwarded to the manoeuvre accounting
office through Main Supply Depot.
7. If the trucks containing empty sacks convey supplies of
any sort not required by the supply column (and this should
be most exceptional), the commander of the railway supply
detachment will notify the Main Supply Dep6t by wire of the
number of the truck and the contents.
8. The supply officer of supply column will enter in his diary
the quantities he has signed for, and get a receipt in his diary
from supply officers of formations which he supplies.
9. Army Book 55 for supplies coming in supply columns
Wlll be handed in by units to the supply officers of formations
tit refilling points daily for the supplies to be drawn from
supply columns on the following day. A receipt will be taken
on A.B. 55 for each unit at the time of issue. No special de-
mand will be required for hay and wood obtained in the
manoeuvre area, but a separate receipt will be given by units
to supply officers of formations at the time of issue on a
separate form from A.B. 65. At the end of the day supply
officers should send, by registered letter, the receipted forms
from Army Book 55, and those for hay and wood locally pur-
chased to the manoeuvre accounting office, Main Supply DepSt.
10. As regards the supply of hay and wood, it is proposed
to obtain these, as far aa possible, from farmers and others
living in the immediate vicinity of the areas through which the
troops are marching. It is proposed to attach requisitioning
officers to each formation. It will be the duty of the requisi-
tioning officer to arrange the dailv supply of hay and wood.
In order to carry out this proposal a register will be compiled
before the commencement of manoeuvres, of all individuals, in
that part of the manoeuvre area which will be traversed’ by


troops, willing to sell such supplies. This register will show
the names and addresses of the sellers, together with the quan-
tities which each has available, and also the selling price
agreed upon; the cost of cartage, in each case, within a radius
of 7 miles will be quoted separately. Copies of these registers
will be given to all supply officers, requisitioning officers, and
staffs of formations.
In war the A.A. and Q.M.G. of a division must be responsible
for the subdivision of requisitioning areas allotted to his
division and for the general co-ordinating of requisitioning
duties. It would, therefore, appear that the samp _ system
should be adopted on manoeuvres, and that requisitioning
officers should work, directly under his instructions as regards
the local purchase of hay and wood. Before marching out
each day the A.A. and Q.M.G. of a formation will allot to each
requisitioning officer his purchasing area for that day. In
allotting these areas the A.A. and Q.M.G. will consider the
situation of probable bivouacs for that night. The requisition-
ing officer should purchase such hay and wood as may be neces-
sary within the area allotted to him, and he will be responsible
for purchasing only at such places as are most conveniently
situated to the bivouacs for his formation. He will also
arrange for the delivery of the hay and wood purchased.
Supply officers of formations will be responsible that the
requisitioning officer of their formation is informed daily of
the quantities of hay and wood which he will have to purchase.
11. At the end of manoeuvres all supply officers’ diaries will
be sent to the accounting office, and the manoeuvre accounting
officer will send out Army Forms F. 743 and F. 719. Officers
commanding units will then forward Army Form F. 727 to
the manoeuvre accounting office. .
12. All supplies, with the exception of hay, wood, and coal,
will he supplied from the Main Supply Depot. The supplies
purchased in the manoeuvre area will not be paid for in cash,
but supply officers will give the seller a receipt note in tripli-
cate on Army Book 361, stating the date, the nature of the
article, price, amount, to what unit supplied, and to what
formation that unit belongs. The seller will sign in proof of
the correctness of these details. The seller retains one copy.
The supply officer sends the second copy to the manoeuvre ac-
counting office, where bills will at once be passed for
supported by the copy of the receipt note. The third copy of
the receipt note will be retained by the supply officer who will
obtain the seller’s signature to it._ A supply of these Army
Books 361 for issue to requisitioning officers will be required
s6me time before the commencement of manoeuvres in order
that officers may be instructed in their use. On no account
man units purchase any , article of supply without the consent
of the supply officer or requisitioning officer of their formation.
13 Supplies damaged or unfit for issue will be dealt with in
accordance with King’s Regulations, Appendix XXII., and


supply officers must report in writing to the base accounting
office the amount condemned, the unit to which the rations
belonged, what happened to the condemned supplies, and how
the condemned supplies were replaced.
14. All action taken under 12 and 13 must be entered in
the supply officer’s diary.
15. If a detached force is sent out, the officer commanding
train of division, under the orders of the General Officer Com-
manding, must arrange to send an Army Service Corps Officer
with it, who, if necessary, must act as supply officer as well as
do the transport work.
16. It must be borne in mind that supply officers are allotted
one wagon, in which they should always be able to keep in
reserve some preserved meat, biscuit, and groceries, in order
to meet any unforeseen occurrence. These articles, particularly
groceries, should be issued before the end of manoeuvres.
17. Any supplies loaded at the railway and not required by
supply columns must be returned to the Main Supply Depot,
and any supplies loaded in supply columns not required by
supply officers of formations must'be returned by the supph’
column to the railway.
18. The difficulty of cutting up meat should be got over as
follows:
(а) The contractor shall deliver all frozen quarters labelled
with the weight, and all fresh quarters shall be labelled before
being placed on rail.
(б) Meat shall be loaded in quarters, except a proportion
in which the quarters will be cut up, at the Main Supplv
Depot before loading, into three pieces approximating 20, 50,
and 80 lbs., each piece being clearly marked with its weight.
Thus small units with a number of approximately 20, 50, 70,
80, 100, 130, or 150, can be supplied, the balance required
being made up with preserved meat. In no case will the full
ration of fresh or frozen meat be issued, but issues will be
made on the scale of—7s per cent, fresh or frozen; 25 per
cent, preserved meat.
Petrol. —All petrol required in the manoeuvre area will be
supplied from the Main Supply Depot at Aldershot on requisi-
tion by the supply officers of the various formations.


Depart.
Rendezvous.
Return from
Telegraph Call Offices.
Food for
Outward Route.
Refilling
Supply Column.
consump-
Point to
tion on.
Railhead.
Time.
Place.
Time.
Railhead at.
Outward.
Return.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Cavalry Division:
'i
i Winslow —
* Buckingham —
) Syresham —
1
1st Brigade
2nd Brigade
4th Brigade
| Aylesbury
10 a.m.
/ Provisionally
\Helmdon (J5)
|2 p.m.
l Aylesbury
r Whitchurch —
■j Buckingham —
1- Helmdon
i <
Divisional troops
* Crowfield
Amersham
9.30 a.m.
f Buffler’s Holt
12 p.m.
i Aylesbury —
)
rWendover —
No. 2 Divisional ..
Thurs-
I (K 7)
! Winslow —
> Amersham
-! Whitchurch —
As for
►“Out-
ward.”
dav,
y Sept.
25th.
72.15
1 Buckingham —
, Dagnall —
I
vPadbury
TLeighton
No. 3 Divisional ..
j Boxmoor |
10 a.m.
10.15
1 Galley Hill
I p.m
1 2.30
I Leighton
1 Buzzard —
J. Boxmoor..
J Buzzard —
i Stony Strat-
No. 4 Divisional .
a.m.
j (J 9)
1p.m.
V Fenny Stratford
j
I ford
Army Troops :
, Buckingham*
i Buckingham —
j- Aylesbury
( Buckingham —
( Whittlebury
General Head-
quarters
Amersham .,
9 15 a.m.
< for Tow-
' Chester.
jp.m.
J Akeley —
f Whittle bury
No. 1 Army
Amersham ..
As for Nos. 1 and 2 Divisional Supply Columns.
No. 2 Army
)
Boxmoor
9.45 a.m.
palley Hill (J9)
2 p.m.
j As for Nos 3 and
4 Divisional
Supply Columns.
J
* To await orders at Buckingham for time of arrival at Towchester.
APPENDIX II.
MARCH TABLE FOR SEPTEMBER 24TH, 1913 —SUPPLY.


Ry Authority: Albert J. Muliett, Government Printer. Melbourne.
