

ROYAL
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF AUSTRALASIA.
QUEENSLAND.
Outridge Print, Brisbane
Notes on Some Tribes of
Western Australia.
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(r V* V


tFlic Ifogiil sit<jj)ra|)(|i(iil Soiiidß of .\itslfalasia.
QUEENSLAND
Founded 1885.
A\Hl S Society has been established in Brisbane for the last twenty-five years. It
was instituted with the view of promoting the interests of Geographical science
in its widest sense, of encouraging exploration and pioneering enterprise in
Australasia, and of furthering the study of Physical and Commercial Geography.
While these objects cannot fail to commend themselves to the scientific, com-
mercial, agricultural, and other industrial classes of the community, and to many
persons engaged in extending pastoral and mining enterprise into distant parts of the
Continent, the great educational advantages to be derived from the establishment of
this Society will be no less apparent to all intelligent citizens of the Commonwealth.
Any lady or gentleman may become an Ordinary Member, subject to election.
Subscription, £1 Is. per annum, due on the Ist July in each year.
Life Membership! £lO 10s.
The usual Entrance Fee is not charged at present.
Members’ Privileges
To receive the Society’s Diploma.
The right to be present at, and to introduce two friends to, all meetings of the
Society.
The privileges of admission (without additional fee) to the meetings of the Royal
Geographical Society, London, and of the use, for the purpose of reference, of the Map
Boom and Library.
To be allowed to purchase copies of all the publications of the Royal Geographical
Society, London, on special terms.
Membership of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society when in North Britain
without payment of additional fee, and the privilege of purchasing The Scottish Geo-
graphical Magazine on special terms.
To have access to the Library and other public rooms of the Society.
To receive a copy of the Society’s official publications.
Diplomas ok Fixlowship.
Section IV, Ctame 3, Constitution and Roles :
The Council may confer the Diploma of Fellowship upon, such eminent persons
as have rendered valuable services to geographical science ; on persons of distinguished
scientific attainments ; on those who have proiiioted the objects of the Society ; and
on Honorary and Honorary Corresponding Members of the Society, without the pay-
ment of diploma fees. Qn Ordinary Members, on payment of a nominal diploma fee,
subject to the following conditions, namely:— (a)'" Upon written application: Those
who have compounded for life membership and are deemed worthy of the distinction
by the Council, (b) Upon written application : Those who are not in arrears with
their annual subscriptions, and are, upon the recommendation of the Council, approved
by the Society at an ordinary monthly meeting. Of the honorary class the number
of Fellows shall not exceed ten. Each Diploma, after being approved by the Council,
shall be signed by the President and by the Hon. Secretary of the Society. Members
who receive the diplomas shall have the privilege of designating themselves “ Fellows
of the Society and may use the initials F.R.G.S.A.Q. after their names as long as
they continue to be members ot the Society.
Ladies or gentlemen who wish to become Members of this Society may do so by
handing in or posting their names to the Hon. Secretary, at the Rooms, Public
1 ji braky Building, Brisbane, or to any Member of the Society, who will arrange foil
their nomination.


NOTES ON SOME TRIBES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.*
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
Western Australia contains an estimated area of 978,299 square
miles, or, inclusive of the contiguous islands, about 1,057,250 square
miles, being about eight times the size of Great Britain. It is the
largest of all the States of Australia, containing more than a third of
the entire area of that continent. In the south-west coastal district,
there is much land suitable for farming operations, and farther north
there are extensive grassy downs, capable of depasturing immense
numbers of sheep and cattle. Considerable areas are gold-producing,
chief among which may be mentioned Kalgoorlie, Cue, Marble
Bar and Kimberley—comparable in extent to some prominent
European kingdoms. By far the greater portion of the State, however,
consists of vast arid tracts of sand and scrub, which is practically a
desert.
In this monograph, I shall endeavour to give the reader a short
account of the customs of some of the aboriginal tribes of Western
Australia, supplied to me by trustworthy correspondents throughout
the State. The article is divided under the following sub-headings:
Language, Sociology, Folklore, Customs and Superstitions, Boy
Companions for men. The accompanying map will enable the reader
to trace out at a glance, the geographic region to which every one of
these parts of the subject belongs.
* Note.— The appendix to this paper deals with certain customs of the
tribe therein referred to and is not printed but will be held as a record
of the Society, the information being available to scientific bodies and
scientists on application.—Ed.
Reprinted from the Proceedings ami Transactions o<f the' Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia, Queensland/ Vol/ XXV.


LANGUAGE.
In 1907 I published an elementary grammar and vocabulary
of the language spoken by the Loritya 1 and adjoining tribes, located
on both sides of the boundary between South Australia and Western
Australia, from Blyth and Tomkinson Ranges to Lake Macdonald,
reaching also into South Australia a considerable distance. The only
other grammar of any of the dialects of Western Australia, is that
prepared by Mr. Charles Symmons, which was published as an appendix
to the Western Australian Almanac for 1842. It dealt with the
tribes of the Perth district, but I have ascertained that the language
was practically the same as far south as King George’s Sound, and
feat it also extended north from Perth about 150 miles or farther.
I have very much condensed and re-arranged, Mr. Symmons’s
text, with some additional information gained from my correspondents.
It is gratifying to me to revive interest in a subject which has lain
in abeyance for nearly 70 years.
If we compare the present vocabulary with the one I published
of the Erlistoun language 2 , we find that eleven of the words are the
same, and six closely similar. In 1903 I published a vocabulary
of the Roebourne dialect 3 ; in comparing that vocabulary with the
the present, it is seen that thirteen words are the same. Comparing
Roebourne vocabulary with that of Erlistoun, we find that seven of
the words are identical and two similar. Then, if we examine my
Erlistoun and Loritya vocabularies, it is found that thirty of the words
are the same, or practically the same, whilst eight others are very
similar. That is, more than a third of the Erlistoun are the same
as the corresponding words in the Loritya.
In order to realise the geographic range of these dialects, let us
start at Esperance Bay, and follow the coast northerly to Roeboume ;
thence an arbitrary line to Lake Macdonald on the South Australian
boundary; thence to Blyth Ranges, and thence via Menzies back
to Esperance Bay. The area included in this description represents
more than half the territory of Western Australia. In comparing
the above-mentioned vocabularies, it has been observed that several
of the words are the same throughout this vast region. Moreover,
the fundamental elements of the grammar of the Loritya and Perth
dialects are substantially the same—a distance of more than 80
miles in a direct line.
(1) Proc. Ajner. Philos. Soc., vol. xlvi, pp. 362-368.
(2) Proc. Ajner. Philos. Soc., vol. xlvi, pp. 365-368.
(3) Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xix, pp. 69-70.


ARTICLES.
The place of the English Article is supplied by the various forms
of the demonstratives representing “ this ” and “ that.” The
English adverb, “ here,” in its several native forms is frequently
treated as a demonstrative.
NOUNS.
Nouns have number, gender and case.
Number. —There are three numbers, the singular, dual and
plural. Yago, a woman ; Yago-gurdar, a pair of women ; Yagoman,
several women. The suffix man is a contraction of manda, all.
Words ending in a consonant are said to take arru or garra, meaning
“ again ” or “ others ” ; as, gulang, a child ; Gulungarra, several
children.
Gender. —Different words are used to distinguish the sex of
the human subject, as Yago, a woman ; Mamarap, a man ; Gulang,
a child of either sex. For animals, words meaning “ male ” and
“ female ” are employed.
Case. —The cases are indicated by inflexions. The principal
cases are the nominative, causative, genitive, instrumental, dative
§
and ablative.
The nominative merely names the subject at rest. As durda
a dog ; yangor, a kangaroo.
Causative. This represents the subject in action, and is connected
with a transitive verb, as Yago-al budyor bianaga, a woman the ground
dug.
Instrumental. This case takes the same affix as the causative.
Ngadjo boat-al Perth-ak bardaga, I in-a-boat Perth-to went. Durda
gun-al bumaga, a dog the gun-by was killed or a dog was killed by
the gun.
Genitive. The genitive takes the affix ak, as yago-ak wanna,
a woman’s yam-stick. Mamarap-ak giddyi, a man’s spear.
Kumal-ak garrab, an opossum’s hole or nest.
There are inflexions denoting the dative and ablative cases,
but the samples to hand are not sufficiently definite.
ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives follow the qualified nouns, and are similarly declined.
Comparison is generally effected by a reduplication, and the super-
lative is formed by the addition of the intensive particle dyil. Gwabba,
good; gwabba-gwabba, very good; gwabba-dyil, best.


PRONOUNS.
Pronouns are inflected by number and case, but are without
gender. There are two distinctive forms of the first person of the
dual and plural, depending upon whether the individual addressed
is included or excluded 1 . Again, there is a set of nominative pronouns
for use with transitive verbs, and another set for use with intransitive
verbs. These sets are, however, confined to the first and second
persons of the singular number, and are not found in the dual and
plural.
Transitive. Intransitive.
( I Ngadjo Nganya
Singular j Thou Nyundo Nginni
l He Bal
I have omitted the pronouns in the dual and plural, because
the information yet to hand is not sufficiently explicit. They are,
however, the same in principal as those of the Loritya language,
the pronouns of which are as follows :
i 1st Person
I
Ngaiulu
Singular
2nd Person
Thou
N untu
, 3rd Person
He
Paluru
1st Person
We, inclusive
Nuntungali
We, exclusive
Ngali
Dual
2nd Person
You
N umbali
3rd Person
They
Palumkutara
1st Person
We, inclusive
Nguntunganana
"Pl/urnl
We, exclusive
Nganana
X 1/ l/vr Vll' "
2nd Person
You
Ngurangari
3rd Person
They
Tana
There are also forms of the pronouns signifying “ with me,”
” for me,” “ towards me,” and other modifications to meet different
shades of meaning. The pronouns of the third person frequently
take the place of demonstratives in all the numbers; a fact which
accounts for the great diversity of these pronouns, which have little
or no etymological connection with the others.
Demonstratives. —The demonstratives in this language, by the
combination of simple root words, can be made to indicate position,
distance, number, etc. That, nyagga. This, niddya. That (is it),
1. I was the first author to report the " inclusive ” and “ exclusive ” forms
of the first personal pronouns in the dual and plural in the languages of Western
Australia. Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xix, p. 67. Proc. Amer.
Philos. Soc., vol. xlvi., p. 363.


alii. Belonging to that, alluk. This way, wunno. Here, yual.
Just there, alganya nyering. Here, in-yene. There, inyanyellung.
That very one, nyagabal.
Interrogates.— Who, nganni ? Who (did it), ngando ? Who
(will do it), ngandyal. Whose, ngannong ? What (did it), yanman ?
What for, yannung ? Where, winjee or winjal ? Is it so, kanna ?
Which way, injal ngwarroo ? Why, na-it-jak ?
VERBS.
Verbs have the singular, dual and plural numbers.
There is a form for each tense of the verb, as bumawin, beats ’>
bumaga, did beat ; bumadyul, will beat. Any person and number
can be expressed by using the proper pronoun from the table given
in an earlier page.
The following is a short conjugation of the verb, buma, to beat
or kill. An example in the first person of each tense in the indicative
mood will be sufficient.
Present Ngadyo bumawin, I beat now, or am beating.
’ Ngadyo bumaga, I did beat.
Ngadyo gori bumaga, I beat just now.
Ngadyo karamb bumaga, I beat a short time ago
Ngadyul bumadyul, I shall beat.
- Ngadyul burda bumadyul, I shall beat presently.
Ngadyul mila bumadyul, I shall beat by and by.
Past
Future
There are conditional reflexive and reciprocal moods, similar
to those* shown in my grammar of the Wiraidyuri language 1 .
ADVERBS.
The following are a few of the most commonly used adverbs: —
Of Time. —Now or to-day, yai-i. Tomorrow, binang. Yesterday,
mar-rok. Day before yesterday, maira-jain. Immediately, ilak or
gwai-titch. Formerly, karamb. Soon, burda. Lately, gori. Long
ago, gorah.
Of Place.—Here, inyone, yual and nyal. There, yellinya. There
farther, boko. Yonder, bokoja. Where, winyi. Before or first,
gorijat. Behind, ngolanga. Last, yuttok. Near or close, bardak
That way, wunno. Here (in this place), nidjak.
Of Quantity.—How many, ngamman. More, ngatti ngatti.
Enough, belak. So many, winnir.
(1) Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xxxiv., pp. 284.


Of Affirmation and negation.—Yes, Kwa or Kai-a. No, yuada.
Never, yuatjil. Not, bart or bru. Nothing, arda.
Perhaps, gabbain. Then, garro. Indeed, bundojil. Always,
do-wir. Between, kardagor. Together, dan jo. Apart of separate,
wallak-wallak. Below, ngardagan. Above, viragan.
PREPOSITIONS.
These are always placed after the noun or pronoun. Without,,
bru. With, gambarn. Among, manda, Within or in, bura. On or
upon, ngadja. After, ngolang.
CONJUNCTIONS AND INTERJECTIONS
And or also, gudyir or wen. If, minning. Or, ka. Alas ! nyon.
NUMERALS.
One gain. Two, gudyal. Five, marjinbangga, meaning a hand.
Ten, belli-belli marjinbangga, the hand on either side, or both hands.
VOCABULARY.
The following list of 220 words has been selected and re-arranged
from the vocabularies prepared by Charles Symmons, Captain George
Grey, G. F. Moore and Rev. J. Brady, all published between the years
1840 and 1845. I have thought that placing groups of words of
the same character, together under distinctive headings, will prove
more acceptable for reference than the common method of arranging
the vocabulary alphabetically.
The Family.
A man
mammarap
Mother-in-law
mangat
Old man
windo
A woman
yago
Sorcerer
boylyagadak
A widow
yenang
Medicine-man
mulgar
Old woman
windo
Youth
gulambiddi
Girl
bun-garn
Elder brother
nguban
Child
gulang
Young brother
guloain
Elder sister
j indam
Father
mamman
Younger sister
guloain
Mother
ngangan
Infant
gudja
ThE Human Body.
Head
katta
Beard
nganga
Forehead
bigaitch
Eye
mel
Hair of Head
kattamangara
Eyebrow
mimbat


Nose
Ear
mulya
twank
dta
Mouth
Teeth
nalgo
bibi
Mammae
Umbilicus
Abdomen
Tongue
nanna
kobbalo
dtallang
nganga
bogal
Chin
Back
F orearm
Hand
marga
marra
nogait
Elbow
Moon
Stars
Thunder
Lightning
Rain
Rainbow
Fog
Frost
Water
Dew
Cloud
Sky
Planet Venus
Ground
Dust
Sand
Stone
Light (of day)
ngan-ga
miki
mil yarn
malgar
babbangwin
moko
waigen
dulya
kurbon
gabbi
minyi
margabbi
gud-j ait
jula-goling
budjor
dalba
goyarra
buy’
buait
durda
kumal
walyo
Opossum
Kangaroo-rat
Native-cat
barrajit
kwogga
muritya
Bandicoot
Water-rat
Inanimate Nature.
Leaves of trees,
Mammals.
Shoulder munga
Thigh dtowal
Knee bonnit
Foot jinna
Heel ngardo
Fat bo-ain
Flesh il-ain
Bone kotye
Penis merda
Sorotum yadjo
Vulva babalya
Urine gumbu
Darkness maiart
Fire kalla
Smoke buyu
Food * dad.) a.maraia
Day birait
Night ' kumbardang
Dawn waulu
Hill katta
Sandhill ngobar
dilbi
Bird’s nest jidamya
Egg nurdo
Pathway bidi
Shadow mall
malliji
Summer birok
Winter maggora
River bilo
Bat bambi
Wallaby banggap
Kangaroo yangor
Ringtail
Opossum ngora
Grey squirrel bellogar


Crow wardang
Plain Turkey bibilyer
Pelican budtalia
budtaliang
Swan mele
Wood duck maranganna
Quail murit
Eagle-hawk walja
Emu widji
widji
Common magpie gurbat
Bronze-wing
pigeon wodta
King-fisher kanyinnak
Guard Fish
Porpoise
yellin
warranang
Snake
Lizard
waugal
jina-arra
Louse
Centipede
House-fly
Spider
kambarra
murdo
kara
nido
Mosquito
Native pear
Ti-tree
]anpn
galyang
gardan
wando
Red gum tree
White gum tree
Y amstick
Spear, jagged
Spear, hunting
Spear, fishing
Spear shield
Spear lever
Fighting club
Boomerang
wanna
borail
gidji
garbel
wunda
miro
dauak
kaili
Birds
Plover
Wh. Cockatoo
Mount. Parrot
Musk duck
W’hite Owl
Brown Owl
Bittern
Grey Thrush
Blue Crane
Sparrow Hawk
Fish Hawk
Fishes.
Mullet
Frog
Reptiles.
Carpet-snake
Scorpion
Invertebrates.
Mussel
Cray fish
WiM bee
Leech
Trees and Plants.
Honeysuckle
Grass tree
Bull rushes
Mushroom
Weapons, &c.
Girdle, human
Nose-peg
janjarrak
manait
waukanga
gatdarra
binar
gurgurda
bardanitch
gudilang
waian
kurringar
molar
kalkada
wurgail
majinda
karraima
konak
blura
ninin
biara
balga
batta
yalle
Hammer kadgo
Stone, knife tabba
Girdle, opossum
nulbarn
niggara
mulyet


Adjectives.
Alive
Dead
Large
Small
Long
Short
Good
Bad
wongin
Afraid
Tired
mult-chin
bidibaba
kallang
wonnaga
ngomon
nyumap
walaiadi
gorad
Cold
nagga
Angry
ngarrang
mendaik
bidjak
gwabba
djul
Stinking
Pregnant
kobbolak
urri
Thirsty
Hungry
Red
gabbi-gurdak
bailyar
Narrow
nulu
wilgilang
wilban
balyan
ilar
White
Black
Quick
Slow
moan
ngunyak
mulyit
yabbra
dabbak
murdoen
Sweet
Thin
kotyelarra
yurar
Strong
Far away
Verbs.
To die
Eat
Sleep
Stand
Sit
Talk
Tell
Walk
Bring *
Take
Break
Strike
Arise
See
Hear
Give
Sing
Weep
Steal
gwar-do
ngannow
bidjar
yugau
nginnau
wangau
warrangan
yannau
barrang
gangau
takkan
buma
djinnang
katittch
yonga
yeddigarrau
walle
kwippal
Climb
Conceal
Jump
Laugh
Scratch
Swim
Throw
Whistle
Vomit
Dance
Burn
Bite
Fly
Copulate
wanga-jinnang
dendang
ballarijau
tandaban
goa
dyirrang
kauanyang
narrija-gwart
wunnang or
gwardo
wardail
yallorgannau
bardo
narrau
bakkan
bardang
muyang
SOCIOLOGY.
If we take the tribes inhabiting the north-west coast of Western
Australia from Roebourne, via Condon and Broome, to Derby,
extending inland to the boundary line marked upon the accompanying


map, we find that they are divided into four intermarrying sections
or classes, as in the following table. The women are put in the first
column, because they represent the cycles, and descent is always
reckoned through them.
TABLE A.
Cycle. Wife Husband. Child.
A Kaimara Palchari Banaka
Banaka Booronga Kaimara
B. Palchari Kaimara Booronga
Booronga Banaka Palchari
The materials from which the above synopsis has been constructed
were supplied to me by Mr. J. C. Rose, Fraser River Station ; Mr.
J. Wilson, Derby; Mr. J. G. Withnell, Hillside, A. E. Clifton, Yee.da
Station. Mr. Clifton, in addition, supplied me with 125 words spoken
on the Lower Fitroy River 1 . One of my correspondents reports a
case which came under his own observation, where a Palchari woman
was married to a Palchari husband, and the children were Booronga.
This would be a No. 4 marriage.
When Sir John Forrest visited Nicol Bay, near Roebourne in
1878, he found that the natives were divided into four sections,
whose names, intermarriage and descent were identical with Table
A 2.
If we proceed back south-easterly into the hinterland from
Broome and Derby, some distance beyond J oanna Spring, we encoun-
ter tribes possessing the same organisation, but having the names
of the four divisions somewhat different.. These tribes are scattered
over the country all the way to Lake McDonald, Petermann Ranges,
and onwards into South Australia for a great distance. See No. 2
on the map. The following table shows the mother, father and
child, in each of the four sections.
TABLE B
Cycle. Wife.
A. Kamara
Husband.
Child.
Paltara
Pananka
Kamara
Pananka
Purula
B. Paltara Kamara Purula
Purula Pananka Paltara
Three of the section names in this table are almost identical
1. Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xix., pp. 71-72.
2. Journ. Anthrop. Inst., vol. ix., pp. 356-357. Aust. Assoc. Adv. Sci., vol. ii.,
pp. 653-654. Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S.W., vol. xxxii., p. 86.


with those in Table A-, whilst one of them, Purula (or Pooroola) is
substituted for Booronga (or Pooronga), the first syllables of which
are virtually the same, because p and b are interchangeable in most
native words.
Adjoining the last described organisation on part of the south-
west is what I have called the Erlistoun community, whose boundaries
are approximately indicated by No. 3 on the map. This tract of
country includes Malcolm, Erlistoun, Lake Wells, Laverton, and other
places in the Mount Margaret gold-field. The intermarriage and
descent of the sections are as under.
TABLE C.
Cycle. Wife. Husband. Child.
A. j Boolgooloo Palchari Booronga
| Booronga Kaimara Boolgoolo
Kaimara Boolgooloo
B. j Kaimara Booronga Palchari
j Palchari Boolgooloo Kaimara
Boolgooloo Kaimara
The above table illustrates cycles composed of the same pair
of women, as in Table D., infra, but the husbands are “ alternative.”
That is, a man of any given section at Erlistoun would have a mother
of the same section name, as if he were a native'of, say, Milly Milly
on the Murchison ; but his father would have the name of the other
section in the cycle ; in other words, the cycles consist of the same
pairs of sections.
In portions of the above area, the name Boolgooloo is inter-
changeable with Banaka, as in some of the tribes represented in Table
D., infra. Again, some of my correspondents observed that Turraroo
was sometimes substituted for Palchari. Milunga and Ibalgu were
also mentioned, but whether as names of cycles or sections, I was
unable to determine. Perhaps Turraru, Milunga, Ibalgu, and
Boolgooloo are the names of the sections till puberty is reached,
similarly to the names of the sections in the Chingalee and other
tribes reported by me 1 . My correspondents in dealing with the
Erlistoun community were Mr. K. Young and Mr. D. Connors.
The space numbered 4 on the map comprises the region drained
by the Fortescue and Ashburton, and the upper portions of the
Gascoyne, Murchison, Sanford and other rivers. The organisation
of the tribes therein is represented in the following table. My
correspondents were Mr. D. Stewart, Balmoral; Mr. W. G. Learmonth,
Nanutura; Mr. Edward Smith, Milly Milly; Mr. H. J. T. Hodgson,
Braeside, and others.
1. American Anthropologist, vol. x., N.S., pp. 282-283


TABLE D.
Cycle. Wife.
A. j Booronga
( Banaka
Husband.
Palchari
Kaimara
Child.
Banaka
Booronga
B. | Palchari
I Kaimara
Booronga
Banaka
Kaimara
Palchari
On the Upper Murchison and surrounding country, Boogaloo--
(or Boolgooloo), is substituted for Banaka, as reported by me in 1900 1 .
It may be stated here that Mr. Learmonth reported that he knew
a case where a Booroonga man had a Kaimara wife, and the family
were Palchari, which is my “ alternative,” or No. 2 spouse.
In a narrow strip of country along the coast, from about Dongarra
to Exmouth Gulf, marriages were arranged by the tu-ar system,
described by me in 1900 2 , with descent counted through the mother’s
lineage. The tu-ar region is practically overlapped by the four-
section organisation illustrated in Table D.
The tables A. to D., inclusive, represent the normal marriages,
which I have elsewhere called “No. 1,” where a man or a woman obtains
a spouse from the other section in the opposite or normal cycle, it is
what I have called an alternative or “ No. 2 ” marriage, an example
of which is reported among the tribes represented in Table D. Again,
the case reported under Table A., where a man or woman takes a
mate from his or her own section, has been called by me a “ No. 4 ”
marriage. In the present treatise there is not an example of a
person taking a spouse from the other section of his or her own cycle,
called a “No. 3 ” marriage, but I am told by correspondents
that the natives say they are lawful in certain cases.
The foregoing tables A. to D. not only prove the same organisation,
but the names of the divisions are substantially the same, and in all
of them descent is counted through the women. Inspection of the
map will show that this organisation obtains over more than half
the State of Western Australia.
The line from A. to B. on the map closely approximates the
western boundary of the tribes who practise splitting the urethra
and circumcision, neither of these customs being found between
that line and the sea coast. It should be stated, however, that
from the point A., along the coast to about Roebourne, the rites
1. I’roc. Amer. Philos. Soc., vol. xxxix, p. 124.
2. Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xix., p. 51.
Proe. Amer. Philos. Soc., vol. xxxix., pp. 560-562, with map.


referred to are not now insisted upon. As far as my correspondents
can yet discover, these rites are in vogue over all the rest of Western
Australia.
Within the tract numbered 5 on the map, I have not yet been
able to obtain definite particulars of the social organisation of the
people ; some of my correspondents state that descent is through
the mothers, whilst others affirm that it is counted through the
fathers; but I intend, during the next year or two, to visit Western
Australia and make personal inquiries.
In 1831, Dr. Scott Nind reported that the natives of Albany
were divided into two sections, with female descent 1 . This line of
descent was confirmed by Sir George Grey in 1841, regarding the
tribes about Perth, but he mentioned more than two sections in their
organisation 2 . In 1904, on the authority of Mr. Thomas Muir, of
Deeside, I reported two sections with descent regulated by the
fathers 3 . In 1907, I stated that “ from the information then to hand
it was impossible to arrive at any definite conclusion regarding the
descent 4 .” From information received since then, I am now of
opinion that the people are divided into four sections, similar in struc-
ture to their neighbours on the north, but with different section names.
I understand, however, that Mrs, D. M. Bates is 'preparing a general
account of the aborigines of Western Australia, and therefore, I
shall wait the publication of her work.
In the south-east corner of Western Australia, from Eucla to
Eyre’s Sand Patch, or perhaps Israelite Bay, or Esperance Bay
(see No. 6 on the map), the tribes have a similar organisation to those
at Port Lincoln and intervening country 6 , with only two principal
sections or cycles, with maternal descent. This information was
obtained from the Manager of Yalata Station, about 200 miles east
of Eucla.
In the north-east corner of Western Australia, marked 7 on
the map, the social organisation comprises eight sect ons, the names
of which were first reported by me nine years ago 6 . This eight
section system obtains on Sturt Creek, the numerous tributary streams
of the Ord River, the Upper Fitzroy, Durack River, etc. I have not
1. Journ. Roy. Geo. Soc., London, vol. iii., pp. 37-44.
2. Two Expeds. N.W. and W. Australia, vol ii., pp. 225 and 228.
3. Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xix., p. 51.
4. Op. cit., vol. xxii., p. 80.
5. Proc. Amer. Philos, Soc., vol. xxxix., pp. 79-82, with map. Dr. A. W.
Howitt copied extensively from that map, without the slightest
acknowledgment.
6. American Anthropologist, vol. iu, N.S., p. 186.


yet succeeded in determining whether the blacks on the coast, from
Calder River northwards to Drysdale River, have four or eight
sections ; I have accordingly marked that area on my map as doubtful ?
Among my correspondents were Mr. J. Wilson, Hall’s Creek ;
Mr. Stretch, Denison Downs, Sturt Creek ; Mr. J. C. Booty, Koojoobrin,
and others. Mr. Wilson, likewise, sent me a vocabulary of 120
words of the language spoken around Hall’s Creek 1 .
Following is the synopsis published by me in 1900 2 .
TABLE E.
Cycle. Wife. Husband. Child.
Changura Chungala Chambin
Chanima Chulima Chagara
J Chambin Chungardin Chanima
( Chagara Chabaldyi Changura
Chungala Changura Chabaldyi
g I Chulima Chanima Chungardin
Chungardin Chambin Chungala
k Chabaldyi Chagara Chulima
Marriages of the Nos. 1,2, 3 and 4 types have been explained
elsewhere, and need not be repeated 3 .
Where the two types of organisation meet on the Fitzroy River
Mr. Wilson ascertained that the equivalence of the eight sections
at Hall’s Creek to the four sections at Derby (Table A.), is as follows :
Changura and Chanima are the equivalent of Kaimara ; Chagara
and Chambin are equal to Banaka ; Chungala and Chulima equal
Palchari ; and Chungardin and Chabaldyi correspond to Booronga.
These natives are ignorant of the natural facts of procreation,
and their beliefs regarding conception are similar to those of other
tribes described by me. The totem of a child is determined by the
locality of its birth instead of by its parentage 4 , but the child’s section
name depends absolutely upon the mother only.
Folklore.
Some legendary tales current among the natives occupying the
country between Albany and Busseltown, related to me by an old
resident of the district, who had personally gathered them from the
1. Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, vol. xxxv., pp. 220-222.
2. American Anthropologist, vol. ii., N.S., pp. 185 187.
3. Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., vol. xliv. pp. 32-35.
4. Queensland Geographical Journal, vol. xxii., pp. 75-76 and 79.
Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, vol. xl., pp. 107-111.


blacks, will be useful for comparison with tales from other parts of
Australia.
How Fresh Water was Obtained. —In ancient times all the coast
tribes drank salt water. The eagle-hawk, wallitch, never drank
with the rest, but always went back into the hinterland. One day
the fish-hawk, molar, watched him going to a forked tree, from which
he removed a piece of bark and had a drink. After the eagle-hawk
went away back to his camp, the fish-hawk approached the tree for
the purpose of making investigations. As soon as molar lifted up
the piece of bark, the water flowed out in torrents, and filled all
the hollow places, making creeks, rivers and lakes as they now appear.
The White-topped Rocks, near Cape Chatham. —In those olden
days there was a large plain extending from the main land out to the
White-topped Rocks, about nine miles out from Cape Chatham.
On one occasion two women went far out on the plain digging roots.
One of the women was heavy with child, and the other woman had
a dog with her. After a while they looked up and saw the sea rushing
towards them over the great plain. They both started running
towards the high land about Cape Chatham, but the sea soon overtook
them, and was up to their knees. The woman who had the dog picked
it up out of the water and carried it on her shoulders. The woman
who was far advanced in pregnancy could not make much headway,
and the other one was heavily handicapped with the weight of the dog.
The sea getting deeper and deeper soon overwhelmed them both,
and they were transformed into the white-topped rocks, where the
stout woman, and the woman carrying the dog can still be seen.
The Making of Mt. Johnston and other Hills.— J On another occasion
there was a party of natives cooking a big heap of roots, which they
had gathered. A dispute arose about the partition of the food,
and one of the men who was a mulgar, or wizard, drew his foot and
kicked the heap of roots in all directions. Some of them became Mt.
Johnston, whilst some more were turned into other rocky hills in
that locality, upon which large root-shaped rocks can still be
distinguished.
The Origin of Fire. —In olden times the bandicoot had the monopoly
of the fire. It was shut up in a nut, which he always carried about
with him, secreted in his anus. The other people noticed that his
meat was always tender and different from theirs, and they asked
him the reason of it. He told them he laid it on a rock
and let it cook by the heat of the mid-day sun. They also observed
that the barbs were neatly fastened on to his spears with gum, and
that all his weapons were better finished than those of other people.


Repeated inquiries as to how he managed all these things elicited
nothing definite, and consequently the pigeon, watta, and the sparrow-
hawk, kurringar, were appointed to watch him when out hunting.
About the middle of the day they saw smoke rising from where he
was camping, and as they could not make out what it was, they
stole upon him unawares. As soon as the bandicoot saw them he
commenced putting the fire into the usual receptacle; but the
sparrow-hawk, who was always very quick in his movements, made
a sudden rush and secured some of it, with which he set fire to the
surrounding bush. Every tree, from the hardest to the softest,
got a share of the fire, from which the blacks have obtained it ever
since. ,
Why Lakes are Salt. —The Kimberley natives believe that a
supernatural monster, in serpent form, made all the rivers as he
travelled in from the sea. The big waterholes are places where he
rested at night. Once he camped for a long time at the lake into
which Sturt Creek empties, and it is owing to his wine that the water
there is saline. The saltness of other lakes in that part of the country
is ascribed to the same cause. This creature is known as Ranbul
in some districts, and as Wonnaira in others.
Some Customs and Superstitions 1 .
The following customs and beliefs were current among the blacks
in the vicinity of Albany, Bridgetown, Mount Barker, and adjacent
country. The information was obtained for me by Mr. Thos. Muir,
J.P., of Deeside Station.
An old blackfellow, who lived on Mr. Muir’s estate years ago,
used to sit down and relate stories about the stellar constellations.
He would point out certain conspicuous stars and stellar groups,
and tell how they fought, avenging the death of friends and warring
with enemies, when they were men living on the earth.
It was a custom for certain men to let their hair grow for two
or three years. Then a boy about fifteen years of age, wearing a
mulyet, or nose-peg, made from a small bone out of a kangaroo’s
leg, was sent as a messenger to different families or triblets throughout
a large district, to invite them to meet at a specified place, where there
was a good food supply. He might be about a year away on this
business, and all the people he visited treated him kindly. He was
accompanied by a middle-aged man to the first camp of people, and
they in turn found another convoy to take the lad to the next mob, and
1. For some other beliefs of the aborigines in Western Australia, see Queens-
land Geographical Journal, vol. xix., pp. 61-63.


so on ; the men who acted as convoys returning to their own tribes
respectively.
When the time of meeting came round, the various mobs travelled
to the appointed locality from all parts of the district, and a big
corroboree was held. A lock was cut by each of a number of persons
from the head of the men with the long hair, and names were exchanged.
With the hair they manufactured brow bands and waist girdles,
the latter being several yards in length. Each of the contingents
who assembled at the general meeting place would have some men with
long hair, which was cut in the same manner and exchanged.
When a man died, his eldest brother took his widow; if he did
not want her, the next eldest brother had the right.
Mr. Muir, who has known the country between Perth and Israelite
Bay since 1844, states that he never knew or heard of canoes being
used by the natives. The rivers are small, and the people could
generally find a tree which had fallen across the stream, or which
had been washed down by floods, which served the purpose of a bridge.
A medicine man or sorcerer was called mulgar, and was supposed
to be able to draw pieces of spears and other things out of a man’s
body, and so cure him of any real or imaginary illness. He could
cut open the body of an enemy, and take out his fat, and close up
the wound without leaving so much as a scratch upon the skin. A
mulgar could go up to the moon, make thunder, cause storms of rain
or wind, and do many other wonderful things.
The natives believed that it was evil spirits which struck trees
and split them during a thunderstorm. When they saw a small tree
which had been struck by lightning, they would laugh and say to each
other that the spirit who had done that was only a slender fellow,
because a powerful spirit would have practised his skill on a larger
tree. If an evil spirit, or wein, came to a man in the bush, and he
attempted to strike at it, he would only hit himself on whatever part
of the body he tried to hit the spirit upon. His only means of escape
from the attack of such a spirit was to run and get on top of the nearest
white-ant hill; then he was just as safe as Tom O’Shanter, when he
had passed the keystone of the bridge.
The Fly-catcher, a little fan-tail bird, was formerly a wicked
man with a bushy beard, always going about doing mischief and
carrying tales. When the blacks see one of these birds, they kill it if
they can. It still has whiskers as in times of yore, which are
represented by a little bunch of greyish feathers on each jaw.






YEtfiG j .


THU THOMSON FOUNDATION GOLD MODAL
(f lie floyal s>eogc[a|il|ital Society of jListrulasia,
QUEENSLAND.
Founded 1885.
Established in honour of J. IThomson , LL.D., :Hon.F.R.S.d.S., etc.,
Founder. See pages 132-135 of .Journal, Vol. XVI.)
CONDITIONS.
This Medal shall be awarded annually, or at such other times as the
Council may approve, to the author of the best original contribution to
Geographical Literature, provided it be of sufficient merit, approved and
accepted by the Council. Special awards of the Medal may also be made
from time to time to such persons as have gratuitously rendered eminent
services to the Society.
The Council may award a silver or a bronze impression of the Medal
to the Author of a contribution deemed to further the interests of the
Society and add to the value of Geographical Literature.
The Council may name from time to time the subject of such con-
tribution for which the Medal is to be awarded, preferential consideration
being given to the Geography,of Australasia.
All contributions must be written in the English language, and every
contribution for which the Medal, or a silver or bronze impression of it,
may be awarded will become the property of the Society absolutely.
It shall not be competent fur any Officer of the Society or Member
of the Council for the time being to compete for the Medal.
The administration of the Medal shall he entirely in the hands of
the Council of the Society, who will make such additional rules and
regulations for awarding the Medal as from time to time may seem
necessary.


Hjoual Untidy of Australasia,
QUEENSLAND.
Founded 1885.
Conditions of Competition for The Thomson Foundation
Gold Medal.
The Thomson Foundation Gold .Medal of this Society will be
awarded to the Author of the Best Original Paper (provided it be of
sufficient merit) on the following subject :
To be Kent in not later than lKt July , 1911.
I.—The Economic Utility and Distribution of the Sub-Marine Eauna of
Queensland.
The competition is open to Members and Non-members of the
Society alike, whether residing in Australasia or elsewhere, but not to
any Officer of the Society or Member of the Council for the time
being. No award of the Medal will be made for a mere compilation,
no matter how meritorious.
A.ll competitive communications for the Medal should be written on
one side of the paper only, with marginal space on the left hand side
thereof, and limited to, say, about 32 pages of the “ Queensland Geo-
graphical Journal,” Royal Bvo. Instead of the writer’s name each paper
must be identified by a motto. A sealed envelope with such motto
written outside, and the writer’s name and address inside, should ac-
company each paper.
The successful papers will be printed and published in the Journal
of the Society, fifty reprint copies of each being supplied to the author,
free.
All communications, with illustrations, must be written in the English
language, and every communication for which the Medal, or a silver or
bronze impression of it may be awarded, will become the property of the
Society absolutely.
Papers may be illustrated by such maps, diagrams and pictures as
are considered by the authors thereof to be necessary and useful.
Additional subjects for future papers will be announced from time
to time.
AD communications should be addressed to the Hon. Secretary of
the Society, Brisbane
J. P- Thomson, Ron. Secretary.
