

NOTES
ON THE
VALUE OF LABOR
In relation to the Production of Wealth: —Regarded
from the Standpoint of a Physicist.
Read before the Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Hobart, January, 1892,
BY
ALFRED J. TAYLOR, F.L.S., F.R.G.S.,E.
I^fl




the only way in which labor can aid in the
production of wealth is by taking advantage
■of the natural energies that surround us ; 2.
That all labor means a consumption of
energy; 3. That labor may be wraproduc-
tive.
That labor may be unproductive needs
little argument to prove ; and yet, strange
to say, we continue to find some economists
who do not hesitate to assert that labor is the
only source of wealth, and men like Henry
■George declaring that “Nature gives wealth
to labor, and nothing but labor,” and
supporting their contention by illustrations
that clearly indicate the little attention they
have given to an understanding of those
fundamental physical truths essential to a
proper and scientific view of the question
they profess to grapple with.
Were it not so, there would be very little
reason for my argument.
Even Mill, who knew nothing, at the time
he wrote of the doctrine of energy
recognised and maintained the truth that all
labor is limited by capital, and . that there
can be no labor unless in proportion as there
is a pre-existing fund of capital to support
it, which it consumes; and Professor Huxley,
•one of the most eloquent expositors of that
doctrine, has found it once more necessary to
emphasise, through the medium of the
Nineteenth Centura, the truth that ‘ when we
find set forth as an absolute truth the state-
ment that the essential factors in economic
production are land, capital, and labor
when this is offered as an axiom whence all
sorts of other important truths may be
deduced—it is needful to remember that the
assertion is true only with a qualification :
and he also emphasises the fact that “ with
respect to human labor in regard to produc-
tion, the importance of human labor may be
so small as to be almost a vanishing
quantity.”
“The value and magnitude of the
produce,” says Philip, very correctly, I
think, “depends not on the productive power
of labor, but on the definite and measurable
quantities of the potential energy of Nature
which the product contains, and which are in
no sense created or called into existence by
anything that man can do.
In order to be in any sense a factor in the
accumulation of wealth, the laborer must in
every instance start with an amount of
available vital energy that he cannot originate
in himself. He is dependent, for example,
upon food —and the energy potential in food:
and for the production of foodstuffs that will
supply the potential energy necessary to his
power to accomplish work he is dependent
upon the delicate laboratory of plant-life—
the activities of which may again in turn be
traced to the influence of the sun upon the
gases that supply plant-life with energy in a
form suitable for transmutation and
adaptation to the requirements of man.
Now, labor can never be “ productive ” in
the same sense that foodstuffs, for example,
are “ produced ” by plant-life.
Labor may be a factor in the accumulation
of wealth, but most certainly cannot
correctly be regarded as its source or creator.
Labor must be thought in action to be
profitable to man; for the admission that
labor may be unproductive is. an admission
that the mere exertion of labor is not
essentially a productive process. A larger
amount of labor may be expended in
cultivating a poor piece of land than in
tilling a rich piece of soil; but the results
in wealth will not be proportionate to the
labor expended, but to the favorable con-
ditions under which the labor is applied.
What position, then, does labor really
occupy in relation to the production of
wealth ?
I have already pointed out that, to be
profitable to mankind, labor must be thought
in action ; and the truth yet remains to be
fully realised that physical exertion, to be
profitable, need not necessarily be any more
thought in action than the working of a
steam-engine or the beat of paddle-wheels
overcoming the resistance of opposing
waters.
The streams that have their source in the
watersheds of Mount Wellington only
become wealth to man when he has learned
how to turn their potentialities into channels
of usefulness to himself. To accomplish
this something more than muscular labor is
required. The mere act of removing the
obstacles that stand in the way of . the
accomplishment of the end aimed at might
be effected by other means than the exertion
of human hand labor. And this brings me to
the all-important point of my paper, that
back of muscular effort (which in itself is.
merely an expenditure and consumption of
the potentialities of fuel supplied in the
form of food i —intelligence which can alone
grasp the meaning of Nature’s riddles—must
map out the one course to be taken if the
end aimed at is to be attained.
Labor, then, must be conducted intelli-
gently, and not at haphazard, if the forces of
Nature are to be turned to profitable account.
Thought must work out the problem, and
muscular effort, by depositing certain mate-
rials in one place rather than in another, may


may be as well, at the outset, if I define
j|[ the senses in which the terms wealth and
labor will be used in this paper. The term
wealth will be used to mean that which is
profitable to man in satisfying Ins desires.
In using the term labor, while not exclud-
ing mental effort, I shall refer principally
to what is popularly spoken of as the labor
of the hands (the class of effort put forth by
those who are said to earn their living by
the sweat of their brow).
Now, there are two classes of desires.
There are desires the gratification of which
is necessary in order that animal life itself
may be sustained ; and, secondly, there are
desires that can only be satisfied by the
pleasures arising from contemplation or the
idea of possession.
The difference in the relative value of the
two classes of wealth that satisfy human
desire is very great, and ft needs no argument
to demonstrate tlie fact that the wealth that
is necessary to the sustenance of life must
be of infinitely larger importance than the
wealth that merely affords satisfaction on
contemplation—or in the idea of possession.
Wealth, in the shape of food for example,
would be of far more value to a man on a
raft in mid-ocean that the possession of kegs
filled with diamonds or gems of literature
and art.
The one form of wealth has its value in
use • the second its value in the pleasure it
affords in other ways. Wealth, essential to
the sustenance of life, may be broadly classed
under the term Necessaries—the other form of
wealth, referred to, under the term Luxuries,
What produces wealth ?
If this question is answered fairly it seems
to me that only one conclusion can be arrived
at.
It lias been truly said that ‘‘No theory of
labor or work, no philosophy of the pro-
duction of those things which sustain and
gratify human life, can rest upon any accurate
and scientific basis unless it be founded upon
the clear and accurate comprehension of
certain fundamental physical truths.
The fundamental physical truths referred
to are these 1. That the only real things
in the physical universe are matter and
energy. 2. That matter is indestructible and
invariable in quantity. 3. That matter can-
not be transmuted from one kind to another.
4. That the sum total of energy being always
constant, no portion of energy can be put out
of existence or created by any power at the
command of man. 5. That energy may
be readily transformed although the
quantity present will remain the same. 6.
That all the physical changes that take place,
including those that are inseparable from
thought,are merely transformations of energy.
7. That energy may be--l. Potential (in
position). 2. Kinetic (or in motion.)
Now, the Universe is a vast storehouse of
energy,’ and the great problem set for human
ingenuity to solve is how to transmute energy
so that .it may become most useful and
serviceable to man.
It is to this great storehouse of energy
that we must look for the real source of
wealth.
All labor implies thepre-existence of capital
that can be drawn upon to satisfy _ every
desire of human life,and this capital is only
to be found in the vast stores of energy
in N ature that are ever ready for transmuta-
tion and adaptation to the requirements of
man.
If so much has been admitted, the following
conclusions will also be accepted :!• That




become a factor in the augmentation of the
potential energy that it is the object and in-
tention of thought to conserve for the sus-
tenance of life and the purposes of civilisa-
tion.
To this extent, and only so far, may labor
(the class of labor I have referred to as the
labor of the hands) lay claim to a share in
the production of wealth.
The problem of the future is how to ren-
der larger supplies of potential energy avail-
able for the sustenance of life and the pro-
gress of the human race.
This problem cannot be solved by endea-
vors to persuade the ignorant and credulous
that by the exertion and application of mere
“Tasmanian News” Print, Hobart.
brute force tbey are tbe creators of wealth,
and that they above all others possess the
creative power that belongs alone to the all-
sustaining influence of which all forms of
energy are but the expression and manifest-
ation.
It is because I have a very clear convic-
tion of this that 1 have penned these fugitive
thoughts, in the hope that they may prove
suggestive, and be of service to some of
those who are endeavoring to gain a clear
conception of the function of labor in rela-
tion to wealth and the part which labor (as 1
have defined it) really fulfils in the produc-
tion and accumulation of wealth.
