

NOTES
ON THE
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
OF THE SENATE
IN RELATION TO
APPROPRIATION, TAXATION, AND
OTHER MONEY BILLS ;
TOGETHER WITH
STANDING ORDERS AND PRESIDENTS’
RULINGS;
ALSO A
SUMMARY OF CASES REFERRED TO.
(1901-1910.)
BY
CHARLES BROUGHTON BOYDELL,
CLERK SENATE.
Ordered by the Senate to be printed, 6 th September, 1911.
Printed and Published for the GOVERNMENT of the COMMONWEALTH of AUSTRALIA
by J. KEMP, Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
F. 10026.


CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTORY. Pia ®
Amenmient not to Widen Area of Proposed Expbndi-
TTXRE— , , # t
Appropriation (Works and Buildings) Bill 1910-11 ™ I?
Bounties Bill 1907-8 .. .. "
Manufactures Encouragement Bill 1908 ' ’ ’ ‘ go
Appropriation and Supply Bills— . ” m
Consolidated Revenue (Supply) Bill 1901-2, No/l ‘ ’ m
Consolidated Revenue (Supply) Bill 1901-2, No 2 in
Inclusion of items of expenditure .. .. '' Ja
Items other than ordinary annual services . " i<
Right of Senate to join in grant of Supply .. |{g
Debate on First Reading • • ~ 7
Powers op thb Senate— .. __ ’'
Constitution, the, Section 53 .. ‘ *
Origin of practice .. .. *' ' ’ ‘' *
Right op Senate to press Requests— 70 .
Appropriation Bills 1903-4, Nos. 1 and 2 " ‘ ’ 7?
Customs Tariff Bids 1901-2 and 1907-8 " " ,
Excise Tariff (Spirits) Bill 1906 . ‘‘ ?
Standing Order 251 .. .. " ‘ ‘
EIG IsnBDEN- ATE T ° ReQXJEST in Charge or
Bounties Bill 1907-8 ]" ’'
Customs Tariff 1907-8 . ’ ’' ’' ‘
Sugar Bounty Bill 1903 .! ” ” --
Senate may not Request Insertion op New Items— ' 91
Excise Tariff Bill 1907-8 .. .. ’ ‘ [
Taxation Bills to deal only with Imposition op
Taxation— .. ..
Customs Tariff (Agricultural Machinery) Bill 1906 "" ia
Excise Tariff (Harvesters) Bill 1906 .. .. ’'
Appendices—
I. Standing Orders— Proceedings on Bills which the
Senate may not amend .. 23
rr D ■, Procedure on other Money Bills 25
il. president s Rulings in reference to Money Bills
(Sir Richard Baker) .. .. _ _
(Lieut.-Col. Sir Albert Gould) ~ _ 07
111. Summary of Senate’s Requests and Amendments in
Appropriation, Taxation, and other Money Bills ~ 29
A 2


PREFACE.
The following notes are published with the approval
of the President of the Senate (The Hon. H. Turley).
They are compiled from the official record of cases that
have arisen in the Senate during the period from 9th
May, 1901, to the end of 1910, and are given, as far as
possible, without any comment as to the procedure which,
has been adopted.
In any references that are quoted S.J. stands for “ Senate-
Journals,” Y.P. for “Votes and Proceedings of the House
of Representatives,” and P.D. for “Parliamentary De-
bates ” of the Commonwealth of Australia.
C. B. BOYDELL.
The Senate,
Commonwealth of Australia,
9th May, 1911.


INTRODUCTORY.
The Parliament of the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia having been in existence for ten years, a brief
outline of the practice and procedure between the
Senate and the House of Representatives, and the
practice of the Senate generally, in regard to Appro-
priation, Taxation, and other Money Bills, during the
first decade, may prove useful; whilst a reference to
the cases in which the Senate has exercised its right
of requesting amendments, as provided for in the
Constitution (Sec. 53), and to any Rulings on the
subject, will, it is hoped, be of service as a guide in
the future.
The notes which follow chiefly refer to cases in
which the relations between the Senate and the House
of Representatives were concerned; but there are
also instances cited of the procedure of the Senate in
matters which did not come before the House of
Representatives for consideration, as well as rules
which govern the proceedings of the Senate alone.
DEBATE ON FIRST READING.
The Senate, being a body elected on a franchise
-similar to that for the House of Representatives,
■and in that respect differing fundamentally from the
Legislative Councils of the various States of the Com-
monwealth, it was claimed that Senators should have
an opportunity of discussing the finances of the Com-
monwealth, similar to that permitted in the Budget
debate in the House of Representatives. Accordingly,


R'n n /?) o^ tll Tr fi . rS x debates m connexion with a Money
ill (P.D., Vol. 1., p 1034) it was suggested that the
Senate should be enabled to have a general discussion
on the annual Estimates, which only come before the
Senate m the form of Bills to authorize the expendi-
ture covered thereby The Standing Orders were,
therefore, so framed that, contrary to the practice in
regard to ordinary Bills, the motion for the first read-
ng of any Bill which the Senate mav not amend
should be open to discussion, and that the debate
RiU ™ b !, relevant t 0 tJle subject-matter of the
BUI. -thus the opportunity is afforded for a general
debate on the financial and other proposals of the
Government. (See Appendix L, S.O. No. 185.)
POWERS OF THE SENATE.
Section 53 of the Constitution reads :
“ Proposed laws appropriating revenue or moneys
taxation, shall not originate in
the Senate. But a proposed law shall not be
taken to appropriate revenue or moneys or
to impose taxation, by reason only of’its
containing provisions for the imposition or
appropriation of fines or other pecuniary
penalties, or for the demand or payment
or appropriation of fees for licences, or fees,
for services under the proposed law.
The Senate may not amend proposed laws
imposing taxation, or proposed laws appro-
priating revenue or moneys for the ordinary
annual services of the Government.
The Senate may not amend any proposed law
so as to increase any proposed charge or
burden on the people.


“ Tiie Senate may at any stage return to the-
House of Representatives any proposed law
wiucn tiie Senate may not amend, requesting,
by message, tie omission or amendment of
any items or provisions therein. And the
House of Representatives may, if it thinks
ht, make any of such omissions or amend-
<t u, ments > or without modifications.
Except as provided in this section, the Senate
shall have equal power with the House of
laX” SentatlVe3 k rBSpeCt of all P ro Pose<i
, provisions contained in the foregoing section of <
the Constitution were the outcome of a practice which 1
originated in the Province of South Australia, where
•it had been in operation for many years, governed
by a series of resolutions mutually agreed upon bv
the two Houses. 1
The State of Western Australia also followed the
same practice with reference to Money Bills, having
embodied in its Constitution* a provision for request-
ing amendments; and the procedure had been found
to work smoothly in each of those Parliaments.
When the Constitution for the Commonwealth of
Australia was being framed such a method was
strongly advocated by many of the Representatives
in the Convention, and particularly by Sir Richard
Baker, the then President of the Legislative Council
of South Australia. As its advocates predicted, the’
procedure has so far worked satisfactorily between
the two Houses.
The section of the Constitution defining the powers
of the Senate in regard to Money Bills leaves little
room for difference between the two Houses, except
as to the method of carrying out the provision, and
the extent to which the Senate may proceed within
Origin off
practice.
WertS^AmteSto. 23 ° ( TAe Cmatituthm Acl Amendment Act, 1893, of


its rights under the Constitution—that is to say
where the right of the Senate to effect an alteration
by way of amendment ceases, and the procedure by
request for amendment should be followed. A case
in point, the Sugar Bounty Bill of 1903, is referred to
later on.
APPROPRIATION AND SUPPLY BILLS.
Consolidated
Revenue
(Supply) Bill
1901-2,
Ko. 1.
cl The Consolidated Revenue (Supply) Bill 1901-2
u No 1, was the first Money Bill introduced into the
Federal Parliament, and, when it came before the
Senate, the amount to be authorized therein was
stated in one sum, without details of items being
given. On a motion for the suspension of the
Standing Orders (P.D., Vol. L, p. 1023) it was
contended that, in order to carry out the provisions
of the Constitution, there should be embodied in all
Appropriation and Supply Bills sent up to the Senate
for its consideration, the fullest details of the ex-
penditure proposed, to enable the Senate to
request the omission or amendment of any “ items ”
or “ provisions therein.” The practice in some of
the State Parliaments had been for the details of
expenditure, as submitted in the Estimates, to be
considered and dealt with in the Lower House in the
Committee of Supply, and for the Appropriation or
Supply Bill covering such expenditure to be sent to
the Upper House with only aggregate votes appearing
m the Bill. The Senate was not slow to insist that
this form of procedure would preclude the due con-
sideration of the “ items ” of the proposed expendi-
ture- A Message was, therefore, sent to the House
of Representatives, requesting it to amend the Bill
so as to show the items of expenditure comprised in
the sum which the Bill purported to grant to His
Majesty. (V.P., 1901-2, p. 61.) The request of the
Senate was complied with, and a second Bill received
from the House of Representatives included the items
Inclusion of
items of
Expendi-
ture.
'Consolidated
Revenue
(Supply) Bill
1901-2,
Ko. 2.


in detail as passed by the Committee of Supply i n
the latter House. (S.J., 1901-2, p. 37.) 1 *
The Senate may not amend proposed laws imposing
taxation, or proposed laws appropriating revenue or
moneys lor the ordinary annual services of the
overnment. In order that proposed laws which
come under the latter of these restrictions shall
deal exclusively with appropriations for such services,
tPe Constitution provides, in Section 54, that—
The proposed law which appropriates revenue
or moneys for the ordinary annual services
of the Government shall deal only with such
appropriation.”
The question arose, in considering the second Con-
solidated Revenue (Supply) Bill (P.D., Vol. 1., p. H 99)
whether the inclusion of certain sums for extraordinary
expenditure, such as “ Military and Naval Demon-
strations in connexion with the Opening of Parliament
in Melbourne, and the Royal Reception in Melbourne
Sydney, and Brisbane,” was not in contravention of
the provision that “proposed laws appropriating
revenue or moneys for the ordinary annual services of
the Government shall deal only with such appropria-
tion; and a motion was submitted as a matter of
privilege—
“ That the Senate is of opinion that the inclusion
of such items as the first item of Division 22
of the Schedule to the Appropriation Bill
is contrary to the provisions of the Common-
wealth Constitution Act.” (S J 1901-9
p. 41; P.D., V01.1.,p. 1310.) ’
In consequence of the divergence of opinions as
to what might properly constitute “ ordinary annual
services, the motion was withdrawn. There has
however, always been a strict line drawn between
Items other
than
ordinary
Annual
Services.


expenditure for “ ordinary annual services ” and that
for Public Works and Buildings, &c., which is
non-recurring; and separate Bills covering the
respective classes of expenditure are invariably sub-
mitted to the Senate, which Chamber has exercised
its power of requests for amendments in regard to
the former, and made amendments in the latter class
of BUI.
Prom an early perirfd the fundamental rule in the
Imperial Parliament, in regard to Aids to the Crown,
has been —The Commons grant, the Lords assent.
Followmg this practice, the first Consolidated Revenue
(Supply) Bill forwarded to the Senate contained the
“free gift” preamble, viz., “that the House of Repre-
sentatives in Parliament assembled had granted to His
Majesty ” the sum named in the Bill. In the debates
in the Senate on the Bill objection was taken to this
form of preamble, and, in consonance with the views
of the latter Chamber, the second Bill omitted it, but
used the words “ For the purpose of appropriating
the grant made by the House of Representatives.”
The Senate took exception to the terms of this pre-
amble also, and returned the Bill with requests for
amendments which would give recognition to its
right —which the Senate contended was a constitu-
tional one —to join in the granting of Supplies. The
House of Representatives accepted the suggestion of
the Senate by substituting for the words “ For the
purpose of appropriating the grant made hj the House
of Representatives ” the words “ For the purpose of
appropriating the grant originated in the House of
Representatives.” (S.J., 1901-2, p. 46.)
RIGHT OF SENATE TO PRESS REQUESTS.
The Senate may at, any stage return to the House
of Representatives any proposed law which the Senate
may not amend, requesting, by Message, the omission


or amendment of any items or provisions therein.
(Section 53 of the Constitution.) To this end
the Senate has provided, in Standing Order 251 (see
Appendix I.), that any request for an amendment,
which has not been acquiesced in by the House of
Representatives, may be “pressed,” and, in accordance
therewith, requests for amendments have been
“ pressed ” by the Senate in regard to numerous
Bills, as will be seen later on.
In considering the question as to the right of the
Senate to press its requests for amendments, it is
interesting to note that, when the Convention was
framing the Draft Constitution, it was moved to omit
from the clause the words “at any stage,” and
substitute “ once.” This amendment was, however,
negatived (Federal Convention Debates, Melbourne,
Vol. 11., p. 1997), and the section was passed as it now
stands.
On consideration of the requests pressed by the (
Senate in regard to the Customs Tariffs of 1901-2 and '
1907-8, the House of Representatives contended that ■
the Constitution did not contemplate or authorize
the pressing of requests by the Senate, but that, as
the requests had been once made, and dealt with by
the House of Representatives, the right of the Senate to
make requests in respect of such Bills was exhausted.
And on both occasions the House of Representatives
passed a resolution to the following effect;—
“ That, having regard to the fact that the public
welfare demands the early enactment of a
Federal Tariff, and pending the adoption of
Joint Standing Orders, the House of
Representatives refrains from the deter-
mination of its constitutional rights or
obligations in respect to this Message, and
resolves to receive and consider it
forthwith”—
Standing
Order 251.
Customs
Tariff Bills
1901-2 and
1907-8.


and embodied it in the Message returning the Bill to
he Senate (S.J., 1901-2, p. 545; and 1907-8,
P- 096) The Senate, however, while not accepting
the interpretation placed on the Constitution by the
House of Representatives, was content, seeing that
the requests had been entertained, and, in many
cases, given effect to, by that House, to leave the
position as it stood, but recorded the declaration—
That the action of the House of Represen-
tatives in receiving and dealing with the
reiterated requests of the Senate is in com-
pliance with the undoubted constitutional
position and rights of the Senate.”
—(S. J., 1901-2, p. 552 ; and 1907-8, p. 611.)
In Session 1903 the House of Representatives, ia
Committee of Supply reduced the proposed salaries-
of certain officials of the Senate. When the Appro-
priation Bill covering such salaries was considered in
the Senate, requests were made for the restoration of
the salaries to their former amounts, and, on the
Rouse of Representatives declining to make such
amendments, the Senate pressed its requests. The
House of Representatives then introduced and passed
a second Appropriation Bill, in which the requests,
of the Senate were agreed to; and the Senate
accepted this as equivalent to a compliance with the
requests which had been pressed in connexion with
the former Bill.
Notwithstanding the protests by the House of
Representatives in the cases referred to, the action
ot the Senate in twice “ pressing ” (S.J. 1906 nn 195
»d 207, certain re , u L, A.ndm.nK S
Excise Tariff (Spirits) Bill in 1906 was allowed to-
pass without demur by the House of Representatives,
(V.P 1906, pp. 169 and 173), and the Bill was-
amended as requested by the Senate.


RIGHT OF SENATE TO REQUEST INCREASES IN CHARGE
OR BURDEN.
The Senate may not amend any proposed law so as to
increase any proposed charge or burden on the people
In Session 1903, in a Bill for granting a bounty
to growers of sugar who employed white labour-
only, which was not an Appropriation Bill for
ordinary annual services, the Senate made an amend-
ment which the House of Representatives considered
would have the effect of increasing a proposed charge
or burden on the people. In the first instance the
Senate, in dealing with the Bill in Committee, shaped
its desired alteration in Clause 2 in the form of a
request ” to the House of Representatives to make
the amendment (S.J., 1903, pp. 40-41) ; but on
reconsideration (S.J., 1903, p. 60) such resolution
was rescinded, and the alteration was made in
the form of an ordinary amendment. However,
when the matter came before the House of Repre-
sentatives the Speaker pointed out “that the amend-
ment of such a nature that it would, if passed,
increase ’ a ‘ proposed charge or burden on the
people, and that it was in direct contravention of
sub-section (3) of Section 53 of the Constitution that
such an amendment should be made by the Senate;
but the alteration, if sought, should have been by
request and not by amendment.” (V.P., 1903, p. 55.)
The Message returning the Bill to the Senate contained
the following, viz.:—
The House of Representatives has disagreed to-
amendment No. 3 made by the Senate, for
the following reason .-—Because the Bill is a
proposed law appropriating revenue or
moneys, and amendment No. 3 is an infrac-
tion of the provisions of Section 53 of the
Constitution, which prohibits the Senate
from originating a proposed law appropriat-
ing revenue or moneys or from amending
Sugar
Bounty
BUI 190&


any proposed law so as to increase any pro-
posed charge or burden on the people ; and
the House of Representatives does not deem
it necessary to offer any further reason,
hoping the above may be sufficient.”
—(S.J., 1903, p. 67.)
The Senate adopted the suggestion of the Speaker
ot the House of Representatives, and made the desired
alteration the subject of a “request,” which was
agreed to by the House of Representatives with a
modification. Thus was established the practice that
the Senate might both amend and request amend-
ments in the same Bill; and Standing Orders Nos.
227 and 228 (Appendix I.) have since been agreed to,
with, the view of meeting such cases.
In accordance with such practice, the President,
on appeal, allowed a request to be moved by the Senate
(S.J., 1907-8, p. 112) for an increase in "the amount
of a bounty to growers of rice, provided for in the
Bounties Bill of 1907-8, which was a Bill open to
amendment by the Senate.
Whilst the Senate is expressly forbidden, in sub-
section (3) of the section of the Constitution dealing
with Money Bills, to amend any proposed law so as
to increase the charge or burden on the people, there
is no such restriction in sub-section (4) in regard to
requests for amendments; and the Senate has in
the latter case made requests for amendments directly
increasing the amount of duty proposed in Custom's
Tariffs, and such “ requests ” have been agreed to by
the House of Representatives, cases in point being
(1) Item 122. —Parasols, sunshades, and um-
brellas—proposed duty, 20 per cent. Duty
increased at request of Senate to 25 per
cent.


(2) Item 178. —Electrical and gas appliances,—
(D) n.e.i.—proposed duty, 15 per cent.
Duty increased at request of Senate to
174 per cent.
which occurred in the Customs Tariff of 1907-8.
The question as to the right of the Senate to
request amendments which would increase the duties
of customs was raised and debated in the House of
Representatives on the 6th August, 1902 (P.D., Vol.
XI., pp. 14885-11918), on the 3rd September, 1902
(P.D., Vol. XII., p. 15676), and again on the 22nd
April, 1908 (P.D., Vol. XLV., pp. 10484-87). On
the latter occasion the Speaker pointed out the
difference in the wording of the section in relation to
“requests” and “amendments” respectively, and
instanced the case noted in connexion with the Sugar
Bounty Bill of 1903, wherein an alteration, which
could not be effected by way of direct amendment
by the Senate, was made by the House of Repre-
sentatives at the request of the Senate.
The practice, therefore, has been established, that
while the Senate cannot amend a proposed law so as
to increase a proposed charge or burden on the people,
it may yet request the House of Representatives to
.make amendments having that effect.
TAXATION BILLS TO DEAL ONLY WITH IMPOSITION
OF TAXATION.
In Section 55 of tlie Constitution it is enacted
that —
“ Laws imposing taxation shall deal only with
the imposition of taxation, and any provi-
sion therein dealing with any other matter
shall be of no effect.
. F, 10026.— b


Laws imposing taxation, except laws imposing:
duties of customs or of excise, stall deal
with one subject of taxation only ; but laws
imposing duties of customs shall deal with
duties of customs only, and laws imposing
duties of excise shall deal with duties of
excise only.”
In Session 1906 a Bill which came before the Senate-
for imposing duties of customs on agricultural
machinery contained, in addition, a clause for regu-
lating the prices at which manufacturers of such
machinery should sell their goods, and the point was
taken 11 that the Bill was not in order, and could not
be proceeded with in the Senate, as it dealt with a
matter other than the imposition of Duties of Cus-
toms, and to that extent violated the provisions of
the Constitution that ‘ laws imposing Duties of;
Customs shall deal with Duties of Customs only.’ ”
(P.D., Yol. XXXV., p. 5949.) After a lengthy debate
on the question the President declined to rule the Bill
out of order, basing his decision on the following
ruling laid down by himself in the early days of the
Senate, which had been accepted ever since by"
the Senate, viz.
t: It does not seem to me that I should, from the-
Chair, undertake the responsibility of inter-
preting all the provisions of the Constitution.
The Constitution itself has provided for a
tribunal, the High Court, which, after argu-
ment and consideration such as would be
impossible and undesirable in this Senate, is
empowered to finally determine its meaning
in most of the cases which will arise. It is
my duty to interpret and determine the-
Standing Orders, and to regulate the proce-
dure of the Senate; and, perhaps, to interpret
lafcotua
vriff
gricuifcural
auhinory)
U 1006.


the Constitution so far as the conduct of the
business of the Senate is concerned.”
—(P.D., Vol. XXXV., p. 5967.)
The President further stated that he did not think
he should undertake the responsibility of ruling the
Bill out of order, but that, if the clause to which
exception was taken ought not to be in the Bill, it
was for the Senate in Committee to vote it out. In
Committee (P.D., Vol. XXXV., p. 5968) it was moved
to amend Clause 4 ; whereupon the Chairman ruled
that, as the Bill was a “ taxation ” measure, the
method of procedure should be by way of “ request .”
From this course the Committee dissented, and, on
the matter being referred to the President, he ruled
that the clause was not one to which the provisions
of the Constitution in respect to requests applied, and
that it was open to amendment in the ordinary way.
(S.J., 1906, p. 175.) The proposed amendment, how-
ever, was negatived, and the Bill was agreed to
without alteration.
In the same Session the House of Representatives
forwarded to the Senate a Bill for imposing duties of (
Excise in respect of agricultural machinery, Clause 2
of which had for its object the regulating of wages
paid to employes engaged in the manufacture of such
machinery. In this case the Senate accepted the
principle that this was a Bill dealing with taxation
only, and made “ requests ” (S.J., 1906, p. 182) to the
House of Representatives to amend the Bill; the
latter House made the amendments as requested (S. J.,
1906, p. 191), and the Bill received the Royal Assent!
It may, however, be mentioned that the Act
(Excise Tariff—Harvesters) was subsequently declared
by the High Court to be invalid.*
Exciaa
Tariff
(Harvesters)
BUI 1906.
♦ See judgments in the cases of the King v. Barger, and the Common-
wealth o. McKay {Harvester cases), 6 C.L.R. 41.
B 2


AMENDMENT NOT TO WIDEN AREA OF PROPOSED
EXPENDITURE.
The rule that no amendment can be made in. a Bill
by the Senate which would have the effect of widening
tne area of proposed expenditure, and thus increasing
a charge or burden on the people, was upheld by the
President in connexion with the Bounties Bill of
1907-8, in the following ruling: —
“ The Bill, as received from the other House,
represented the requirements of the Crown,
and must be so accepted without reference
to the form in which it might have originally
been presented to that House, and there was
no power to make alterations that would
have the effect of altering the destination of
the grant sought, or of creating another
bounty. The Senate, with certain excep-
tions under Section 53 of the Constitution,
had powers similar to those, of the House of
Representatives, and as this was such an
amendment as that House could not make
in the Bill, he ruled that the Senate was
restricted in the same manner, and the
amendment was not in order.” (S J
1907-8, p. 134.)
The Senate, in dealing with the Manufactures
Encouragement Bill, in 1908, made small amend-
ments, which, it was held by the Speaker of the House
of Representatives, would have the effect of extending
the area of the bounty, and thus increasing the
“ charge or burden on the people.” The House of
Representatives, however, accepted the amendment
in view of its insignificance, but added to the Message
Bounties
Bill 1907-8.
Manufac-
tures
Encourage-
ment Bill
3908.


signifying its agreement a declaration that the matter
was not to be drawn into a precedent. (S J 1908
p. 126.) ' ’ ’
In Session 1910, m the Appropriation (Works and
Buddings) Bill there appeared the following item, 1
viz., Tasmania New Quarantine Stations, includ-i
mg acquisition of land at Triffitt’s Point—Towards ]
cost, £1,300.” The Senate made an amendment to
kave out the words “at Triffitt’s Point,” to which the
Rouse of Representatives disagreed, on the ground
that such amendment altered the “ destination of the
vote. The Senate insisted upon the amendment,
and the House of Representatives again disagreed to
it, but as a consequence, amended the Bill by omitting
the whole item. The Senate no longer insisted upon
its original amendment, and agreed to the conse-
quential amendment of the House of Representatives
and the Bill was passed as so amended. (S.J., 19K)’
p. 110).
Appropria-
tioa
{Works and
Buildings)
Bill
1910-11.
THE SENATE MAY NOT REQUEST INSERTION OF
NEW ITEMS.
Although the Senate has always exercised its right to
request alterations in respect of Money Bills, whether
such alterations may involve an increase of an item
or amount named in a Bill or not, it has been held
that such requests, in accordance with the wording
of the Constitution, can only deal with “ items or
provisions ” already therein—that is, in the Bill when
received from the House of Representatives—and,
therefore, when m connexion with the Excise Tariff
Bill of 1907-8 a proposal was submitted in Committee
to request the House of Representatives to insert a
newitem (P.D., Yol. XLV.. p. 10020), the Chairman
ruled the motion out of order on the above ground *
the President was appealed to, and gave a ruling
Excise
Tariff
Bill 1907-9.


upholding the decision of the Chairman, for the
following reason, viz. :
“ That the Senate could not ignore the provisions
of the Constitution which limited the powers
of this House to requesting amendments to,
or the omission of, items already in the Bill.
The proposal to which exception had been
taken was not an amendment of any item
in the Bill, but rather a request for the
insertion of a new item.” (S.J., 1907-8,
p. 508 ; P.D., Vol. XLV., p. 10024).
As to any incidents which have arisen between the
two Houses in connexion with Money Bills, it may be
said that nothing has occurred in the nature of a
disagreement which has gone so far as to reach the
acute stage of a “ dead-lock,” or even of a “ Confer-
ence ” ; much less, therefore, has there been any
suggestion of a resort to Section 57 of the Constitu-
tion, which provides for a dissolution of the two Houses
in case of the failure by the Senate to agree to a
proposed law. All differences have been settled in a
manner agreeable to each Chamber, and, in this con-
nexion, the Senate may be said to have justified the
words of an eminent authority on the Constitution
that —“Astrong Senate will compel attention to its
suggestions; a weak one will not insist on its
amendments.”


APPENDICES.
The Standing Orders of the Senate, dealing
Tvith procedure on Money Bills, also a reference
to the Rulings of the Presidents in reference
thereto, together with a summary giving the
cases in which amendments and requests for
amendments were made, and the manner in
which they were disposed of, are appended.
APPENDIX I.
STANDING ORDERS.
.[Note. —The following numbers refer to the print of
the Standing Orders of September, 1909.]
Proceedings on Biles which the Senate may not
Amend.
185. In Bills which the Senate may not amend, the i
•Question “That this Bill be now read a first time”, 1
may be debated, and the debate need not be relevant !
to the subject-matter of such Bill. S
i
246. Bills which the Senate may not amend shall ]
(unless otherwise ordered) after the second reading r
has been passed, be referred to a Committee of the *
Whole. I
i
247. Requests to the House of Representatives may £
be made at all or any of the following stages of a Bill'
which the Senate may not amend : ,
(1) Upon the motion for the first reading of any 1
such Bill; or
(2) In Committee after the second reading has
been agreed to ; or
Debate on
first reading
‘of Bills
which
Senate
may not
amend.
Bills to be ~.
referred to
Committee
of the Whole
after second
reading.
Stages at
which
Requests
may be
made.


(3) On consideration of any Message from the
House of Representa tires in reference to
such Bill; or
(i) On the third reading of the Bill.
248. The Committee shall be empowered to recom-
mend the Senate to make, press, modify, and generally
to deal with requests on the Bill.
The proceedings in Committee shall be as follow ;
The Chairman shall (unless otherwise ordered) call
on each clause or item, and ask if any Senator
has any request to more thereon.
If no motion for a request is moved, or moved
and negatived, the Chairman shall declare the
clause or item passed.
If motions for requests are moved and passed, the-
Chairman shall declare the clause or item
passed, subject to the requests being complied
with. 1
At the request of any Senator any clause or item
shall be divided.
1 ,L 24 ?r Upon any amenclmea t containing a request to-
the House of Representatives being made upon the
motion for the first reading of any such Bill, or the
motion for the third reading thereof, and upon the
adoption of any report from the Committee, or of any
report as amended by the Senate recommending re-
quests for amendments, a Message shall be sent to the
House of Representatives requesting that House to
make amendments in the Bill in accordance there-
with, and returning the Bill.
250. All Messages from the House of Representatives
in reference to such Bills ivhich do not completely
comply with the requests of the Senate (as originally-
made or as modified) shall (unless otherwise ordered)
be referred to the Committee.
251. If the Bill is returned to the Senate by the
House of Representatives with any request not agreed
to, or agreed to with modifications, any of the following
motions may be moved
That the request be pressed.
That the request be not pressed.
Powers of
Committee
as to
Requests.
On adoption
of Report
Message to
be sent to
House of
Represen-
tatives.
Messages
from
House of
Represen-
tatives in
reference to.
If BUI /.
returned
with :
requests
not agreed ,
to. itc.


That the modification be agreed to.
That the modification be not agreed to.
That some other modification of the original
request be made. °
That the request be not pressed, or agreed to as
modued, subject to a request as to some
other clause or item which the Committee may
order to be reconsidered being complied with.
232. All resolutions of the Committee shall be
reported to the Senate.
Procedure on other Money Bills.
-27. If (whether in addition to amendments or not)
requests for amendments in the BiU shall have been
made, such requests, together with the amendments (if
any), shall, upon the conclusion of the Committee’s
proceedings, be reported to the Senate, and upon the
adoption of the Report, a message shall be sent to the
nouse of Representatives, informing that House of the
amendments (if any) made by the Senate, and request-
mg the House to make amendments in the Bill in
accordance with the requests, and returning the Bill,
upon the disposal of such requested amendments, as
provKied m Standing Orders 246 to 253 inclusive, the
Rill shall be read a third time, and thereafter the
lowed" 16 m re3pect to amendments shall be fol-
228. It any Bill received from the House of Repre-
sentatives, in which the Senate has made amendments
be returned by the House of Representatives with a :
suggestion that any of such amendments should be
made the subject of a request by the Senate in accord- I
ance with Section 53 of the Constitution, the Senate 1
may forthwith, or on a future day, take such message '
into consideration in Committee : and it any requests i
for amendments are made, the BiU shall be returned to >
. e House of Representatives with a message request- ■
mg that House to make such requested amendments
shnPK f i7 lth , au y suo , h requests the same procedure
1 ? W ? d - aS 13 l ald dovTn in Standing Orders
246 to 2o3 inclusive. After such requests have been
disposed of, if the amendments of the Senate have not
shall KiWd 1 ! 6 Pr00edUre “ reSpeCt t0 amendmente
Resolutions-
of Com-
mittee to b«?
reported to
Senate.
Procedure
when Bill
reported
with
Amend-
ments and
Requests.
Procedure
when Bill
rsturned by
House of
Represen-
tatives with*
suggestion
that
Amend-
ment be
made
subject of:
Request.


APPENDIX II.
PRESIDENTS RULINGS IN REFERENCE TO MONEY
BILLS.
(Sir Richard Baker.)
First Reading.
On the Rest reading o£ a Bill which the Senate may not amend,
■subject to the Standing Orders and rules of the Senate, matters not
relevant to the subject-matter of the Bill can be discussed, but other
questions which by other rules of the Senate cannot be discussed are
not open to debate. It would be an inadvisable precedent to permit
Bills which have not come up to the Senate to be discussed; they
might be alluded to in general terms, but Standing Order 411 pre-
cludes reference to any debate of the current session in the House
■of Representatives, or any measure pending therein. P.D., p. 5264
•of 1905. S.O. 185, 411.
Firsl Reading ; Latitude of Debate.
On the first reading of a Bill which the Senate may not amend,
reference may be made to almost any matter, but matters which by
other Standing Orders may not be debated cannot be discussed
P.D., pp. 5223 of 1903; 2801 of 1905. S.O. 185.
Second Reading Debate : Limitation.
On the second reading of an Appropriation Bill, whose sole
object is the appropriation of the consolidated revenue, discussions
on such questions as land tax, protection and free-trade, a new scheme
of taxation, are not in order. P.D., pp. 5534-5550 of 1905.
Supply Bills : Second Reading : Latitude of Debate.
On the second reading it is not competent to discuss any ques-
tion unless there is an item in the schedule relating to such question;
it would not be proper, for instance, to discuss the whole policy of
the Government in reference to one of the principal heads of the
-Public Service. P.D., pp. 1411-1416 of 1905.
Requests : Reasons for Pressing.
Reasons for pressing requests cannot be sent to the other House
■except by the express desire of the Senate. P.D., p. 6243 of 1903.


Third Reading after Request.
Where tbe request of the Senate to amend a BiU has been com-
plied with, the motion for third reading can be negatived, but the
Senate cannot deal further with the Bill. There is, however, an
implied understanding with the House of Representatives that if
•the Senate suggests amendments, and the House of Representatives
makes them, the Bill, as amended, will be passed by the Senate.
P.D., p. 6449 of 1906.
Bills Imposing Taxation.
A clausa which, under the guise of being a condition as to the
imposition of a tax, really regulates maximum prices to be charred
“ c . a ?-A l . r .t lole ’ 18 not a P r °P sr Provision to be in the Bill (Customs
Tariff Bill). P.D., pp. 5971, 6072, 6073, 6086, 6089 of 1906.
Date of Collection ; Alteration.
Where a clause of an Excise Tariff Bill fixes the date on which
•the imposition of the duties shall commence, an alteration of the
date of collection should be by request. P.D., p. 6086 of 1906.
Excise Tariff Bill.
A request to limit imposition of Excise duties unless certain
conditions exist is relevant to the subject-matter of the Bill. The
President declined to express any opinion as to whether or not the
inclusion of conditions in a Bill of this nature was or was not contrary
to the provisions of the Constitution. P.D., p. 4738 of 1906.
( Lt.-Gol. Sir Albert Gould.)
Requests : Procedure.
A request to increase the amount of a bounty is in order
(P.D., pp. 3481-3 of 1907-8), but a proposition to alter the destina-
tion of a bounty or to include a new tax cannot be received, either as
an amendment or as a request. P.D., pp. 4165-7 of 1907-8.
A request to add words to a request already agreed to is in
■order, although it may restrict or modify the request originally made
P.D., pp. 8651-2, 9252 of 1907-8. s y ue.
After the body of a paragraph of an item has been agreed to, a
Senator should be allowed to move a request for the insertion of a
paragraph to admit free, “ as prescribed by departmental by-laws,”
certain articles mentioned in the paragraph. P.D. pp 8716-8
3251 of 1907-8. S P ’ PP 0/10


When a request to make an article in an item the subject of a
new paragraph and dutiable at a lower rate has been carded' «d th£
tafnVreo 6 ' f 6 ltsm S be . en dealt with ’ the Committee cannot enter-
n a request concerning the new paragraph (P.D., p. 9251 of 1907-81
S,*?™ t 0 dealm S with tlle duty under the item it was open to any
Senator to move a request for the grant of a preference to British
imports under the new paragraph. P.D., p. 9233 of 1907-8.
Where the schedule to an Excise Tariff Bill includes ffiucose
but not paraffine wax and plaster of Paris, a Senator may submit a
request for the insertion of an item dealing with confectionery con-
mnlaftfrTp’ b ' l ‘ o°n f ° r confecti °uery containing paraffine wax
oi plaster of Pans. P.D., p. 10024 of 1907-8. 1
p. W 023 ofIOOT-S. 13111 C£Vnnot bB amenc W in any respect. P.D...
First Reading Debate.
1907-S. b ° discuss3d - PD - PP- 1026 <>. 10273-6 o£
JIZSSt as%Ugs£Ur “~" 1 - “ ol “"
Second Reading Debate.
J" tlle aecond reading of a Bill to appropriate public money a-
Se insnffW P ° m j t the obll ? aticns upon the Government and
the insufficiency of the revenue, but he cannot debate any method
of raising the money (P.D., p P . 1840-1 of 1909). He may make a
passing allusion to the method (P.D., p. 1842 of 1909). He may
meats* but ‘lf ro T enue . or the administration of the
ments, blit not the alteration of the Tariff, or the raising of revenue,
or a mandate by the people. P.D., pp. 4311-2 of 1909.
Adoption of Report,
fnr A^ Pt !r ° f Pe P° rt , cannot moved it objected to, if requests
foramendment have been made. P.D., p. 10040 of 1907-8. S.O.
Third Reading Debate.
Rule of relevancy applies. P.D., pp. 10396-7 of 1907-8.


Summary showing “ Requests ” and Amendments made by the Sen
were disposed of.
itc, and the manner in which they
Sonata Journals.
Date.
Title of BUI aud Nature of Jlequcst
or Amendment.
How disposed of.
No. 13, p. 35-6
14 June, 1901
Consolidated Revenue (Supply; Bill
1301-2 (No. 1).
Request that the House of Represen-
tatives will so amend the Rill tint
it may show the items of expendi-
ture comprised in the sums which
the Bill purports to grant to His
Majesty.
Bill not returned by House of Repre-
sentatives, but a second Bill
forwarded, showing items as re-
quested.
No. 15, p. 42-3
No. 16, p. 40..
No. 17, p. 47..
No. 160, p. 495
No. 161, p. 498
20 June, 1901
21 June, 1901
25 June, 1901
24 July, 1902
20 Ang., 1902
Consolidated Revenue (Supply) Bill
1901-2 (No. 2).
Request to alter Bill so that Supplies
should be joint grant of two
Houses
Customs Tariff Bill 1901-2.
Requests for alterations of duties,
additions to free list, &c.
Requests complied with by House
of Representatives, with a modi-
fication, winch was accepted by
the Senate. J
Certain requested amendments made
by House of Representatives,
otuers made with modifications’
remainder not made.
APPENDIX III.
APPROPRIATION, TAXATION, AND OTHER MONEY BILLS.


Senate Journals.
Bate.
Title of Bill and Nature of Request
or Amendment.
How disposed of.
Customs Tariff Bill 1901-2— could.
No. 107, p. 537
29 Aug., 1902
Certain requests pressed and others
Certain requested amendments made
No. 107, p. 545
No. 171, p. 552
4 Kept., 1902
9 Sept., 1902
modified.
Customs Tariff Bill 1907 8.
by House of Representatives,
others not made, others made with
modifications, &e.
Bill as amended by House of Re-
presentatives at Kenate’s request
then agreed to.
No. 102, p. 508-9
2 Apl., 190S
Requests for alterations of duties,
Some requested amendments made
No. 105, p. 521
No. 107, p. 555
6 May, 1908
20 May, 1908
and for additions to free list, &«.
by tire House of Representatives,
others not made, others made
with modifications, and conse-
quential amendments made in
Bill.
No. 108, p. 588
21 May, 1908
Certain requests pressed, others
Some requested amendments now
No. Ill, p. 596
28 May, 1908
pressed in part, or modified
made, and modifications agreed to,
some not made, others made with
modifications.
Bill as amended by House of Repre-
seutives at Senate’s request, then
agreed to, '
Appendix lll.— Appropriation, Taxation, and other Money Bills—continued.
Summary showing “ Requests ” and Amendments made by the Senate, &c.—continued.


Appropriation Bill 1903-4 (No. 1).
No. 55, p. 204
8 Oct., 1903
Requests for restoration of salaries
One requested amendment made,
No. 59, j). 221
15 Oct., 1903
of Senate Officers which had been
others not made.
reduced by House of Representa-
No. 60, p. 230
No. 61, p. 237
tives, &c.
16 Oct., 1903
21 Oct., 1903
Requests pressed
House of Representatives laid aside
Rill, but gave effect to Senate’s re-
quests in a new Bill, which was agreed
Excise Tariff (Spirits) Bill 1906.
to by Senate without requests.
No. 41, pp.141-2
No. 43, p. 151
No. 51, p. 180
20 Sept., 1900
24 Sept., 1900
4 Oct., 1906
Requests for amendments
Some requested amendments made
by House of Representatives,
others not made, and one made
No. 53, p. 195
8 Oct., 1906
Requests pressed
with modifications.
One requested amendment made.
No. 55, pp. 207,
211
10 Oct., 1906
Requests further pressed
others made with modifications.
Requested amendments made as
originally requested.
No. 17, pp. 60-1
No. 19, p. (17
8 July, 1903
Sugar Bounty Bill 1903.
Returned to House of Representa-
One amendment disagreed to by
House of Representatives on Con-
stitutional grounds, viz., that it
would increase the proposed
charge or burden on the people ;
15 July, 1903
tives with amendments as to
bounty to be paid
No. 23, pp. 83-4
23 July, 1903
Amendment disagreed to by House
of Representatives altered into the
form of a request for amendment
others agreed to.
Requested amendment made by
House of Representatives with a
modification, which was agreed to
by thq Senate.


. Appendix III.-Appropriation, Taxation, and other Money Bills r i
Summary showing “Eeouests” i , honey Hills — Loahnued.
~ Requests and Amendments made by the Senate,
Senate Journals.
Bate.
Title of Bill and Nature of Bequest
or Amendment,
How disposed of.
1
Manufactures Encouragement Bill
No. 27, pp. 100,
101
No. 32, p. 120
3 Dec., 1908
11 Dec., 1908
„ 1908.
Returned with amendments, in-
cluding alterations in the
Schedule
Amendments two of which were
considered by the House of Repre-
sentatives' to be in excess of
powers ot Senate, as extending
the aiea ot the bounty proposed
to be granted-agreed to, on eon-
d it ion that the matter be not
No. 27, p. 98..
16 Sept., 1910
Appropriation (Works and Buildinrs)
. Bill 1910-11.
Amendment to leave out words from
item in Schedule
'.uuaUtuted a precedent.
Amendment disagreed to by House
ot Representatives as alterim-
No. 29, p. 104
No. 30, pp.
109-10
21 Sept., 1910
22 Sept., 1910
Amendment insisted on
destination of the vote. °
House of Representatives insisted
on disagreement, and made con-
sequential amendment; and the
Senate then no longer insisted and
agreed to consequential amend-
