

NOTES ON DEEP SEA SOUNDINGS.
(SUPPLEMENTARY TO THE ANNIVERSARY ADDRESS
OF 12th MAY.)
BY HEV. W. B. CLARKE, M.A., E.G.8., Y.P.




NOTES ON DEEP SEA SOUNDINGS.
(SUPPLEMENTARY TO THE ANNIVERSARY ADDRESS OF 12th MAY.)
By Rev. W. B. Clarke, M.A., F.G.S., Y.P.
[ Read before the Royal Society, 1.?/ December, 1875.]
P 13355
Although I endeavoured, in the first part of the Anniversary
Address of the present year, to bring together a number of
instructive data respecting the condition of the bottom of the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, as shown by the observations and
researches of the Officers and Scientific Staff of H.M.S. “ Chal-
lenger,” that account was necessarily incomplete. It was merely
a detail of work in progress, requiring the addition of fresh
material.
In the design of such continuation, I have thought it advisable
to lay before this Society some fresh statements and conclusions,
collected from various sources, not doubting that they may prove
interesting to such as gave willing audience to my preceding
remarks.
(I.) By the kindness of my friend Captain F. J. O. Evans, R.N.,
C. 8., F.R.S., Ilydrographer to the Admiralty, I have been put
in possession of two reports from the “ Challenger”—the former
dated from Hongkong, by Captain Hares, on 19th November, 1874,
to which are appended “ Extracts from the Remark Book of Staff-
Commander T. H. Tizard on the temperature of the seas partially
enclosed by the Indian Archipelago”; the latter entitled “ Hydro-
graphic Proceedings,” being a communication from Captain
Frank T. Thomson, successor to Captain Nares, in command of
the “ Challenger,” bearing date Yokohama, 11th April, 1875, also
supplemented by Commander Tizard. These Reports are illus-
trated by sections of the ocean between New Zealand and Fiji;
Raine Island in the Barrier Reef, Appi, and Kandavu, the
Banda, Celebes, Sulu, and China Seas, together with the Isother-
mal lines at different depths.
By these Reports I am enabled to fill in the “ gap” betAveen
New Zealand and Cape York, mentioned in my “ Address,” and
to add something in relation to the coasts and ocean further
north. The last previous Report of Captain Nares bears date
17th March, 1874; the present one, therefore, is to us a new
official document,


On 14th and 15th Jujy, 1874, the “Challenger” was in 600
fathoms water, in the neighbourhood of the Kermadec Group, the
bottom composed of lava pebbles and pumice, and dangerous to
the trawl.
The weather prevented any determination of deep or shallow
water between that group and New Zealand. On the 17th July,
in latitude 25° 5' S., and longitude 172° 56' W., the depth was
2,900 fathoms, and bottom temperature 32°.9, proving a deep
continuous channel from the southward to those seas. She was
at Tonga-tabu on 19th and 22nd July, reaching Kandavu on the
25th, after dredging in shallow water near Matuku. The anchor-
age at Ovalu was surveyed in the beginning of August, on the
12th of which month 1,350 fathoms were reached, 30 miles from
Kandavu, the bottom being red ooze. There was little in the
dredge but pumice and a branch of a tree.
Between Fiji and the New Hebrides the bottom, on the 15th,
in 1,450 fathoms, was red clay. Two days afterwards the same
bottom was found in 2,650 fathoms, the temperature being 35°
that of 1,300 fathoms. There is proof that below that depth the
sea is cut off by a ridge extending towards Raine Island, and
from Sandy Cape in Queensland to New Caledonia, New Hebri-
des, the Solomon Islands, and New Guinea, the depth of which
does not exceed 1,300 fathoms. Below this depth, between the
New Hebrides and Torres Strait, the water, as in the Mediter-
ranean and other cut off seas, is stagnant.
In a run of 1,000 miles four soundings over 2,200 fathoms
were obtained, the temperature constant. At 170 miles from
Raine’s Island, the depth was 1,700 ; at 74 miles off, 1,400
fathoms, showing the gentle slope up to the Barrier Reef*
A continuous line of shallow soundings extends all the way
from Torres Strait to the Arrou Islands; some points there are
incorrectly laid down on the charts. The sea is shoal—varying
from 5| to more than 150 fathoms on the south-west of Wokan
Isle.f
Soundings at 800 fathoms occurred between the Islands, with
green mud and rich hauls. The Little Ki group are wrongly
placed on the charts. Bird Island is also much out in Hors-
burgh’s Directory ; it is a volcano, with a truncated cone 980 feet
high, with the slope of 30°.
we are informed by Captain Nares, that the squatters on the
Gulf of Carpentaria are said to be abandoning their stations because cattle
did not thrive well, and sheep not at alt. He recommends the retention of
Somerset as the best spot for a settlement.
f The town of Dobbo is a dirty place, with population varying, from March
to August, from 400 to 1,500, and in November there are only a few Chinese
merchants and slaves. In Wamma Island the Dutch have established school-
masters. Supplies being scanty —poor fowls cost 25., and eggs 2d. each ; fish
rare. Three hundred tons of Borneo coal (Tertiary, I believe) were met
with.


In 2,800 fathoms the bottom was green mud ; it is an enclosed
basin, with border only 800 fathoms deep, temperature 37°5, the
same as at 900 fathoms. There was found water GOO fathoms
deep over the spot marked as Bird Island on the chart.
Leaving Banda, search was made for a reported 4,000 fathoms’
sounding ; bottom was struck at 1,450 fathoms, ooze, five miles
beyond the site, which would give 1 in 2 for a five miles’ incline.
Ihe conclusion is that the announcement was incorrect.*
The deepest sounding in the Malacca Sea was 1,200 fathoms,
with temperature of 35° - 2. At 200 fathoms the temperature
was nearly the same as on the Equator in the Atlantic, but the
surface was warmer.
Between Banka, off the coast of Celebes, and Bejaren, 2,150
fathoms were reached, red clay bottom, 23 miles west of Maqui-
Here. The Celebes Sea is cut off below 700 fathoms, with a temper-
ature of 38° G, in agreement with Captain Chimmo’s observations.
Forty miles from Point Pola, Mindanao, on 22nd October, bottom
at 2,600 fathoms, temperature the same as the last, was reached.
At 110 110 the depth was 2,550 fathoms, temperature 50°—
same as that reported by Chimmo, and deduced from his observa-
tions by Dr. Carpenter. Thirty miles west of Fiedra Point,
Manila, ooze at 1,050 fathoms, temperature 3G 0- 3, was reached.
A deep channel exists between Formosa and Luzon ; the tem-
perature agreed with “ that obtained by Captain Chimmo ; but
at the lesser depth of 550 fathoms jnust have been incorrect.” At
Manila the air temperature was between 75° and 85°, and
oppressive, surface water constant at 82°.
From Commander Tizard’s notes, we learn, in addition to the
data given in my Address, that the temperatures of the Celebes
and the China Seas (the mean distance of which is 8 degrees of
latitude) agree well, both receiving their waters from the Pacific
(the points of connection with that ocean being, however,
respectively 4° N. and 20|° N.) the temperature of both being
45° at 300 fathoms, and 40° at GOO fathoms of depth.
The China Sea is somewhat colder than that of Celebes below
•>OO fathoms, showing a great circulation from the Pacific Ocean.
The Celebes ridge is stated by Commander Tlzard to be 700
fathoms or less (quoted by me from a former document as 400),
the China ridge at 900 fathoms, and the ridge between the Celebes
and the Sulu Sea at not more than 200 fathoms, and that between
the Sulu and China Seas at 170 fathoms. The Banda Sea is con-
siderably higher in temperature than the Celebes; and as the mean
latitude of the latter is about 5° N. of the Equator, and of the
former 5° S., the temperature of the Banda Sea is governed by
# Whilst at Amboina the Dutch mail steamer, which travels from Sourabaya
to Ternate and Banda came well freighted. Coal sold there at £3 4s. lid.
per ton.


that of Arafura rather than by that of the Pacific, the communica-
tion being through a series of comparatively narrow channels.
Captain Thomson’s Report states that, between the 6th and
11th January, of the present year, on the run from Hongkong to
Manila, 2,100 fathoms were reached.
Leaving Zebu a call was made at the volcanic island of Cami-
guin. Off the south end of Bohol the depth was 370 fathoms.
On 26th January the depth, a mile from the volcano, was 190
fathoms, sand and brown mud, with the usual bottom tempera-
ture ; the height of the volcano being 1,950 feet from a growth
of only four years. On 27th, a patch of six fathoms was found
between the Islands of Aliguay and Mindanao, and on 28th
the sounding reached 2,225 fathoms. Leaving Samboanga, 2,050
fathoms were sounded on Bth February ; between Meangis and
Tulur group, 500 on the 9th; and on 10th and 12th, 2,550
fathoms. On 16th, on the supposed position of the Carteret
group (nothing visible at noon at 8 miles clear distance) a depth
was reached of 2,000 fathoms.
The following quotation will be interesting to many at the
present time : —“ Finding we were gradually being set towards
the coast of New Guinea, I resolved to call in at Humboldt Bay,
and if possible let Staff-Commander Tizard survey it, and also
give Professor Thomson and his staff an opportunity of making
some researches. AYe anchored inside Point Caillie on the
evening of 23rd February, and shifted further into the Bay on
the following morning, anchoring in 35 fathoms, mud. Boats
were hoisted out and armed, to begin work, but the menacing
attitude of the natives on two occasions determined mo to leave
the same evening. A stay of a week or ten days would, perhaps,
have brought about a good understanding, but with such uncer-
tainty, time, I feared, could not be spared; nor did I consider
that the service on which we were engaged would justify an
embroilment, and perhaps bloodshed. There were about 100
canoes alongside during the whole day, with from three to six
natives in each, but none of them could be induced to put a foot
on board, and although trade was carried on briskly the whole
time, and in the fairest spirit on both sides, for bows and arrows
and other native productions, nevertheless up went their bows on
the most groundless alarm, even on the back turn of the screw.
Staff-Commander Tizard succeeded in obtaining observations,
and in making a partial sketch of the “ Challenger” anchorage,
which, although deep, is well protected from all quarters.”
Captain Nares did not visit New Guinea. He says : —“ It was
with extreme regret that I found myself unable to afford time to
visit any part of New Guinea; even had I been able to do so,
very little good could have resulted from a flying visit on only
two or three days to a single port.”


Captain Thomson was prevented by north-east winds and
westerly currents from reaching either the Caroline or Ladrone
Islands ; but he reached Nares Harbour in Admiralty Island on
the 3rd March, got Soundings on the way, and staid there six
days finding the natives friendly : a good deal of work was done,
and Commander Maclear obtained magnetic observations. On
the 10th March they were carried westward, out of sight of both
the groups mentioned above. On the 23rd March, the Sounding
of 4,475 fathoms was reached, in 11° 24' N., and in longitude
143° 16' (not as quoted before by me from a private acount in
145° 16'.) The distance from New Guinea was about 850 miles.
In the same spot, and on the same day, as appears by the
Abstract of Soundings, appended to Captain Thomson’s Peport,
a Sounding of 4,575 fathoms was obtained, on red clay. On this
occasion one thermometer was broken, and on the second two;
the bottom temperature being recordedat 33°’9, and not 35° - 5 as
in the communication I quoted in my Address.
The difference of the Specific gravities at the surface and at the
greatest depth is recorded as between 1 02585 and T025G2, the
pressure increasing, therefore, under a column of water 27,450
feet thick 0 00007, just one-third of what the proportionate
increase was two days before, under a depth of 1,850 fathoms, on
Globigerina ooze, about 228 miles, a little Westward of North of
the position on the 23rd. This is merely a rough deduction of
my own, made from the Table of Abstracts.
In the Sulu Sea the Specific gravity was found, on the contrary,
to be higher at the surface than at the bottom, increasing up-
wards 0 - 00025 in 2,225 fathoms water. Commander Tizard
says : —“ The Specific gravity of the water in the Celebes, Sulu,
and Banda Seas was found to be less than in the Pacific Ocean
on the surface; this may be accounted for by the excess of rain-
fall over the evaporation in the area occupied by them.” The
temperatures of the seas just mentioned appear to be nearly con-
stant. In the China Sea it is different; the temperatures vary
greatly. This is owing to the fact that nearly one-half of the
China Sea is under 100 fathoms in depth. Moreover, the China
Sea has in winter a range from 64 degrees at Hongkong to 84
degrees at Singapore, whilst the other areas have only slight
variations.
“An examination of the chart of the. regions mentioned will
show,” says Captain Tizard, “ that the deep basins of the China
and Celebes Seas are alone in communication with the Pacific
Ocean, and that consequently their temperature must be greatly
dependent on the temperature of that part of the Pacific imme-
diately adjacent to their opening into that ocean; for although
both seas are in communication indirectly with the Indian Ocean,
they are cut off from the deep basin of that ocean by a large tract


of shallow water, which in the China Sea exceeds a breadth of
(500 miles, and in the Celebes Sea is apparently about half the
length of the Macassar Strait.”
These and other collateral facts belonging to the arrangement
of the ocean bottom in basins of different depths, and separated
by ridges of various widths and extent may, I think, be con-
sidered to be in accordance with certain features of the present
surface of the earth. On a much smaller scale we have in
the Gold Fields of the Lachlan and Currajong a similar conforma-
tion,—hollows separated by ridges, in which drift has accumulated,
sometimes richly, sometimes poorly auriferous. Since the water
that occupies these basins in the Indian Ocean cannot get out to
mingle with the neighbouring waters at great depths, we have
only to consider that if instead ofAvater the contents of the basins
Avere to be drift matter of various periods, and from various
sources, the very features of the gold field alluded to would be
explained, inasmuch as some of the deepest drifts have been found
of the least commercial importance. This observation will apply
to many other gold fields.
There are some interesting data afforded by Commander
Tizard, relating to the changes of seasons affecting temperatures
of the ocean. At Manila, for instance, in 1870, the total evapo-
ration was 237 inches greater than the rainfall, but during the
first four months it Avas 28 inches greater than the rainfall, so
that there must have been an excess of 4 inches of rain over
evaporation during the remaining eight months. “In 1871 the
total evaporation was 325 inches greater than the rainfall, and
in the first four months 45 inches greater, leaving 125 inches in
excess of evaporation for the remainder of the year. The mean
rainfall at Manila is 95'36 inches.” The average rainfall at
Labuan is 115 inches per annum, and only an average of 22
inches falls during the first four months of the year; whilst at
Hongkong, Avhere the total annual fall is 80T4 inches, 7’77
inches only fall at the same period.
Moreover, the Avinds affect the changes of temperature, for
during the N.E. monsoon the surface water is forced by the Avind
into the China Sea from a higher and colder latitude, and in the
S.W. monsoon the surface Avater is forced out.
In consequence of these changes and effects, and of the excess
of evaporation over the rainfall, “ the surface water in the south-
Avest part of the sea becomes heavier and has a tendency to sink,
and in sinking carries with it its high temperature, which is
gradually imported to the deeper water of the sea.
“ The consequence of this is, that in the N.E. monsoon the
Avater in the China Sea has a tendency to sink and flow out at the
bottom into the Pacific Ocean, Avhilst in the N.W. monsoon it


will flow in and rise to the surface, so that the minimum tempera-
ture of the sea during the S.W. monsoon will be nearer the sur-
face than it is in the N.E. monsoon.
“ It appears then to he evident that as the China Sea is cut oft
from the general circulation of the Pacific (the minimum tempera-
ture of 36°T, being at a depth of about 900 fathoms in that ocean),
the ridge which separates it from the Pacific is probably between
700 and 1,000 fathoms.”
(II.) These observations on temperature and evaporation are
most valuable, as will be seen in consideration of another paper
to which attention ought to be directed, viz.:—“ Summary ot
Eecent Observations on Ocean Temperatures, made in H.M.S.
‘Challenger,’ and U.S.S. ‘ Tuscarora,’ with their Bearings on
the Doctrine of a General Oceanic Circulation, sustained by
Difference of Temperature,” read in June last, and published in
the August number of the Proceedings of the Eoyal Geographi-
cal Society, by William B. Carpenter, M.D., LL.D., Corre-
sponding Member of the Institute of Prance. Notwithstandingthe
different conclusions of Professor Wyville Thomson (see “Depths
of the Sea”), Dr. Carpenter has long been an advocate of the doctrine
stated in this summary, and he sees in the facts mentioned in the
Eeports from Sydney and Hongkong, an abstract of Ayhich has
now been laid before this Society, a strong confirmation of his
views. It will be impossible now to enter fully into his argu-
ments ; but those who are desirous of studying them may find
their exposition in the memoir named and in his previous papers.
But, a few examples of the areas nearest to ourselves may be
properly cited here.
In relation to the Antarctic Ocean which the “Challenger”
visited, we have these facts. Leaving Kerguelen’s Land, and
passing some icebergs, she entered the pack-ice in 65 ° 0 30
latitude, and on 18th February obtained a Sounding in 65 u 42 S.
and 79° 49' E. Here, says Dr. Carpenter, the superficial stratum
was cooled down by the melting of ice several degrees below the
substratum on which it is floated. The temperature at the edge
of the pack was always between 28° and 29°, just sufficiently
warm to melt the salt-water ice very slowly, whilst at a short
distance the surface water was found to be at 32°, coming down to
29° at a depth of 40 fathoms, and so continuing to 300 fathoms, the
depth at which the icebergs float. Below this there is a tem-
perature of 33° or 34°, and again a deep stratum below of glacial
water. Captain Nares thought the bottom temperature would
be 31° • but Dr. Carpenter had met with a bottom temperature
of 29°'5 in the Faroe Channel, in the Atlantic, and therefore
thinks 29° nearer the mark. “The notion ” (he says) “ that m


Polar seas the temperature goes on increasing in depth till it
reaches 39° may now be disposed of.” He attributes that notion
to the effect of pressure on the thermometers used by D’Urville
and Sir James Boss. He argues that the warmth of the sub-
surface stratum can have no local source. Captain Hares found,
between 13th and 25th February, a slightly colder climate in 64°
S. latitude than is found in August in the Arctic seas in 74° H. ;
and Dr. Carpenter argues from this that, as the atmosphere in the
winter tends to keep down the surface warmth, the temperature
ot from 30° to 34° must have come from a lower latitude, and
Hares regards it as “ evidently the continuation towards the cold
regions ot the main oceanic flow of water.” Dr. Carpenter sees
that, as there is no “ Gulf Stream ” in the Antarctic area, the
■warm w r ater of the underlying stratum shows the tendency of
the upper stratum to the Pole, which is the result of indraught
produced by the downward movement in the Polar area by the
effect of surface cold. Any interruption of this descent is
purely local and temporary, being limited to the margin of the
ice-region in a brief summer season.
Dr. Carpenter considers the passage of the “ Challenger” from
the Antarctic ice to Melbourne peculiarly instructive, especially
between 58° 55' S. and 108° 35' E. and Cape Otway, in 38° 50' S.
and 143 J 37' E. On the 3rd March, at the former position, the
surface temperature of 37°'2 was gradually reduced to 36°6 at 60
fathoms ; then to 33° at 70 fathoms ; the temperature from that
to the bottom, in 1,950 fathoms, being 31°, only 2° lower. In the
next sounding,on 7th March, in 50° 1' S., and 123° 4' E., the surface
being at 45°, the Isotherm of 40° was found to be at 250 fathoms,
and that of 35° at about 1,000 fathoms; the bottom at 1,800
fathoms, being 32°5. On 10th March, in 47° 25' S., the
isotherm of 45° had sunk to about 450 fathoms, that of 40° to
about 600, and that of 35° to 1,350; the bottom bein", in 2 150
fathoms, at 33°'3.
As the Australian coast was neared, the temperature of the
surface gradually increased. Comparing this with the sections
in the Southern Indian Ocean and the South Atlantic under
nearly the same parallels, the thickness above the isotherm of
40 is noticeable, but especially so in the stratum between 45°
and 50°, which thus corresponds with the stratum between 55°
and 60° in the western portion of the Horth Atlantic under cor-
responding parallels. This Dr. Carpenter considers to be due to
“ an extension of the East Australian current , which is the
south-ward prolongation of the southern portion of the Pacific
Equatorial.”
\\ e are thus brought face to face with the effects of the
current which sets southwards along our coast, frequently with
rapidity, between Moreton Bay and Cape Howe, and by which,


on 21st May, 1839, the ship in which I arrived here was carried
46 miles to the south in twenty-four hours, about 25 miles from
the laud, the depth at noon being 70 fathoms.
On the“ Challenger’s” passage from Melbourne to Sydney,-while
the surface temperature rose to above 70° the cold understratum
rose nearer to the surface, the isotherm of 40° lying at about 400
fathoms, and the descent nearly uniform. But from Sydney to
Cook’s Strait, in New Zealand, while the surface temperature fell
with increase of the distance from the Equator, the isotherm of
40° again deepened to more than 700 fathoms, the stratification
above being nearly tiniform. On the way to Fiji, as the surface
temperature increased, the isotherm of 40° again rose to within
450 fathoms from the surface. Comparing these observations
with those recorded of the Equatorial Atlantic, to which Dr.
Carpenter had already drawn notice last year, in his paper headed
“ Further Inquiries,” he thinks “it may now he stated, with some
confidence, that the lightening of the upper stratum by elevation of
its temperature tends to favour the ascent of cold water from the
bottom, which is precisely what theory would lead us to anticipate I'
He further states that the soundings taken by the “ Challenger”
in different parts of the Eastern Archipelago confirm this view,
and in illustration he quotes a passage which I have to-night
already referred to, from Captain IS 7 ares, relating to the shallow
bank of 1,300 fathoms, between Sandy Cape (Queensland), New
Caledonia, and New Guinea. He deals with the other cases I
have also quoted, and comes to the same general conclusion, con-
firmatory, as he believes, of his opinion that currents are due to
the interchange of temperatures.
He argues, in dealing with the results of the observations made
on board the “Tuscarora,” that if the action of the Gulf Stream in
the cul de sac of the northern Atlantic (that stream being a mere
rivulet ) is capable of producing the downward displacement of
colder water (which Professor Wyville Thomson suggests as a vera
causa*), “much more ought that effect to be produced intheNorth
Pacific by the Japan current, which has no outlet at all save the
narrow' and shallow strait of Behring.” But it may be mentioned
that the depth of Behring’s Strait is only 32 fathoms; and it
may be asked how could an Arctic current only 192 feet deep
affect the water in the enormous depression of the North Pacific,
* It is well to mention that Professor Wyville Thomson, who was with Dr.
Carpenter in the first explorations of the Atlantic, holds views not in exact
agreement with those of his companion. These are deserving of full con-
sideration, and are freely stated in his work on the “ Depths of the Sea, in
chapter viii of which work the Gulf Stream is freely discussed. See pp.
397-398,


which the “ Tuscarora” sounded to nearly 28,000 feet, or how
otherwise are we to account for the deep stratum of Glacial water
in the North Pacific (seeing there can be no fresh connection with
the Arctic Ocean), except by the fact that the Antarctic cold
water finds its passage northwards all the way past Kamschatka
over the deep sea bottom of the Pacific.
Some very striking facts are related of the depths and bottom-
contour of the North Pacific. By sections, on eight lines of
soundings, between San Francisco, Cape Flattery, and San Diego,
it seems that there is a great similarity in the contour of the
bottom and that determined along the western shores of Europe,
falling gently and then steeply, as on the west coast of Ireland,
with terraces between deep depressions. In the more southern
area at 150 miles from San Diego, the depth was 2,117 fathoms,
and for nearly 1,000 miles westwards it varied between 2,049 and
3,604. About half way to the Sandwich Islands, where it is 2,159
fathoms deep, the bottom sinks rapidly to 2,650, and then to 3,000
fathoms ; and about 150 miles from Honolulu it rises to 2,488,
falling near the Sandwich Islands to 3,023, where they spring
from that enormous depth, which exceeds that at the base of the
Atlantic Volcanic Islands very considerably.
Within 50 miles of Hawaii, the water deepens from 206 to
1,580 fathoms, and within 100 miles, to 2,418 fathoms. The
American half of the North Pacific is, however, more regular than
the Asiatic.
Westward of Honolulu, the bottom varies from 1,874 falling to
3,045 fathoms, and for more than 300 miles continues at about
3,000 fathoms ; then at about 1,400 miles west of Honolulu it
comes to 1,108 fathoms from the surface. To the eastward the
depth increases to 3,262, and keeps nearly the same till 2,275
miles from Honolulu, where it rises abruptly from 3,009 to 1,400,
then falls to 3,023 ; and so, by alternate abrupt elevations and
falls, from 3,000 to 1,500 and 2,173 fathoms.
The bottom betAveen San Diego and Honolulu consisted of
yellowish brown ooze, with fine sand ; but in the shallow portions
near the Hawiian Islands, of “ whitish-grey sand,” apparently
disintegrated coral. To the westward, also, the yellowish-brown
ooze was uniformly found, but at certain points white coral with
lumps of lava, whitish-cream coloured ooze at 1,964 fathoms ; at
1,108 and 1,817, white coral; at 1,613, white coral and sand, and
at 2,813, the yellowish-brown ooze. At 2,092 and 2,173 fathoms
coral limestone and sand appeared ; at another point, at 1,499
fathoms, coral limestone with specks of lava ; at another, at 1,712
fathoms, coral limestone and sand ; at a third, at 1,700 fathoms,
coral limestone and lava; and on both slopes of Peel Island in
the Bonin Group, coral limestone and lumps of lava.


From these data Dr. Carpenter infers that between the Sand-
wich Islands and Japan there must have been “ a great and rapid
subsidence within a very recent epoch.” This, is, no doubt, a
just conclusion, for, as he states, the limit of coral growth being
about 20 fathoms, the seven elevations in the area named show
that the sinking was too rapid to allow of the corals being formed
up to the surface in the period of depression. The corals must
have been killed at the submersion of each elevation, as on the
slopes of the Bonin Islands. It is a fair illustration of Darwin’s and
Dana’s doctrines of the coral reef formations ; and the data also
show that there was once a chain of submarine volcanoes in that
part of the Pacific. The absence, moreover, of such coral islands,
as in the Central and Southern Pacific, shows also the rapidity
and perhaps recentness of the subsidence in the Northern por-
tion. I would remark, however, that this must have taken place
very recently indeed, if the view taken is correct, that the volcanic
islands lie along a line of elevation.*
The great depth of the bottom in parts of the Pacific will, as
Dr. Carpenter deduces from the Tuscarora observations, render
the laying of a cable across that section unsuitable. The irregu-
larity of the bottom is also very great near the shores of Niphon,
Yesso, and the Kurile Islands, though a terrace exists at from
1,100 to 1,425, and 653 fathoms of depth ; for at the outside of
the ridge the fall was rapid to 3,587, 4,356, and 4,655 fathoms.
Even 100 miles south of Cape Lopatka, the extreme point ol
Kamschatka, the depth was 3,759 fathoms ; and though it rose at
about 300 miles south of Behring’s Island, to 1,777 fathoms, it
sank again rapidly to 4,037. Similar facts are stated ol the
vicinity of the Aleutian group. South of the Alaskan Peninsula,
great and sudden changes of depth occurred ; but between
53° 35' N., and 60° AV, and Vancouver’s Island, for 1,000
miles, the bottom sloped upwards with little variation from 2,500
to 1,500 fathoms, and after another series of ups and downs from
1,007 to 1,300, it rose to within 100 fathoms along the North
American coast. Yellowish and clay-coloured mud and ooze
with grey and black sand, formed the specimens brought up, but
in one spot, at 3,439 fathoms, the bottom was tormed ol “ hard
yellow sand with black specks.” Dr. Carpenter ends his review
of the “ Tuscarora’s” researches in these words : —“ Along the
whole of this route, except between the Peninsula of Alaska and
Cape Flattery, there was laud at no great distance ; and there is
therefore no great difficulty in supposing that both the mud and
sand were derived from its disintegration. No indication is given
of organic constituents ; but I have reason to believe that a
microscopic examination of these Soundings would yield abund-
ance of siliceous exuviae.”
♦See on this head some interesting remarks by Darwin ( Structure and Bis -
tribution of Coral Beefs, 2nd. Edn., 1874, p. 184),


I trust it is not necessary for me to explain that, in again
bringing this subject before the Society, my chief object has been
to lay before its members the interesting details of the great
experiment now going on as to the ocean bottom, so far as it
is within our reach ; and if I have drawn largely from Dr.
Carpenter’s paper, I owe no further apology for so doing than
the quotation from the words of the President of the Royal
Geographical Society, at the close of the reading, with which I
will conclude this part of my remarks.
“ The President said that, upon such papers as that which Dr.
Carpenter had prepared, the scientific reputation of the Royal
Geographical Society amongst continental nations depended. If it
was merely a Society to register personal adventures or the
ordinary run of travellers, it might be a Geographical Society,
but it would not be a Scientific Geographical Society. When,
however, serious problems of physical geography, such as Dr.
Carpenter had solved, were considered, the Society fulfilled those
tunctions for which it was really constituted.”
If I may apply this to ourselves, I would say that, in making
known to all our members, and to outsiders in the Colony at
large, information of the kind condensed in this paper (though
in one sense not strictly original), I have considered that I have
been carrying out part of the work for which we have been
united ; for if the researches as to the formation of Australasian
lands, or of the starry worlds above us, be of use in the educa-
tion of a people, so the wonders of the ocean, and what we can
learn of its depths, are equally part of the aim we have in view ;
and surely we ought not to exclude the sea that washes our
shores with its currents, offering as it does prospects of inter-
communication by means of its bottom, from what belongs to the
development of “ The resources of Australia.”
111, One other brief portion remains in connection with the
subject before me. Many facts were cited in my Anniversary
Address relating to the occurrence of Globigerina ooze and the
tiny creatures from which that designation is taken. There are
many notices also of the Red clay. These were principally from
the observations of Professor Wyville Thomson. That distin-
guish naturalist has recently thrown fresh light on these subjects.
In a letter, dated Yeddo, 9th June, 1875, he addressed to'Pro-
fessor Huxley some very interesting information respecting
living Globigerina; and the latter gentleman has communicated
it to the readers of Nature in the Number of that journal for
19th August (vol. xii. p. 318).
Professor Thomson, in a note recently published in the “ Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society,” had stated that up to that time
he had never seen any trace of the pseudopodia of Globigerina.


He says —“ I have now to tell a different tale, for we have seen
them very many times, and their condition, and the entire
appearance and behaviour of the sarcode are, in a high degree,
characteristic and peculiar.” He then states that when at once
transferred from the tow-net to a tolerably high-power micro-
scope, in fresh, still sea water, “ the sarcodic contents of the
chambers made be seen to exude gradually through the pores of
the shell and spread out until they form a gelatinous fringe or
border round the shell, filling up the spaces among the roots of
the spines, and rising up a little way along their length.”
“This external coating of sarcode is rendered visible by
the oil globules, which are oval and of considerable size, and
filled with intensely coloured secondary globules; they are
drawn along by the sarcode, and may be observed with a little
care following its spreading or contracting movements. At the
same time, an infinitely delicate sheath of sarcode containing
minute transparent granules, but no oil globules, rises on each
side of the spines to its extremity, and may be seen creeping up
one side and down the other of the spine, with the peculiar
flowing movement with which we are familiar in the pseudopodia
of Giromia and of the Eadiolarians.”
“ If the cell in which the Globigerina is floating receive a
sudden shock, or if a drop of some irritating liquid be added to
the water, the whole mass of protoplasm retreats into the shell
with great rapidity, drawing the oil globules along with it, and
the outline of the surface of the shell and of the hair-like spines
is left as sharp as before the exodus of the sarcode.”
Dr. Thomson then states that in the Atlantic, the siliceous
bodies, such as spicules of sponges and of Eadiolarians or the
pustules of Diatoms found in the Q-lobigerina ooze appeared to
diminish in the transition to the red clay. His recent observa-
tions have served to correct that opinion, and singularly enough
the fresh data were obtained from the greatest depth reached in
the Pacific, that of 4,575 fathoms, on the 23rd March (already
referred to), between the Caroline and Ladrone groups, when
one of the thermometers resisted the pressure, as Dr. Carpenter
remarks, “of six tons to the square inch.” Professor Wyville
Thomson says the bottom was rather different from the ordinary
red clay, being more gritty —“ the lower part of the Sounding-
tube seemed to have been compacted into a somewhat coherent
cake, as if already a stage towards hardening into stone.” It
appears also that, at such a depth, the deposit assumes ‘ the
character of an almost purely organic formation, the shells in this
case being siliceous,” whilst at about 3,000 xathoms the calcareous
element was prominent. Another fact is inferred that “ Eadio-
larians exist at all depths in the water of the ocean, while
Eoramiuifera are confined to a comparatively narrow belt.


Further it is suggested that fresh species are found as the depth
increases, and in increasing numbers, and of larger size ; and that
if the depth be enormously increased the red clay must be
swamped, and masked by the Radiolarian shells.
These references are necessarily limited; but enough has been
quoted to excite surprise at these revelations respecting the in-
habitants of the ocean, and at the marvellous fact that creatures
so minute can exist and carry on the functions of life under such
pressure as they must be subjected to.
Professor Huxley, in his communication to Nature , admits
that Professor Wyville Thomson and his Staff have not been able
to discover what he calls Bathyhius, and that it is “ seriously sus-
pected” that the said Bathyhius “is little more than sulphate of
lime precipitated in a flocculent state from the sea water by the
strong alcohol in which the specimens of the deep sea soundings
which he examined were preserved.”
Much to his credit, Hr. Huxley adds: —“Since I am mainly
responsible for the mistake, if it be one, of introducing this sin-
gular substance into the list of living things, I think I shall err
on the right side in attaching even greater weight than he (Pro-
fessor Thomson) does to the view which he suggests.”
As many persons do not know what was meant by the term
Bathyhius, it may be instructive to quote a passage or two from
Professor Wyville Thomson, who thus describes it in “ The
Depths of the Sea;” p.p. 409-415.
“ The dredging at 2,435 fathoms at the mouth of the Bay of
Biscay gave a very fair idea of the bottom of the sea over an
enormous area, as we know from many observations which have
now been made, with the various sounding instruments contrived
to bring up a sample of the bottom. On that occasion the
dredge brought up about 11 cwt. of calcareous mud.”
*******
“ In this dredging, as in most others in the bed of the Atlantic,
there was evidence of a considerable quantity of soft gelatinous
organic matter, enough to give a slight viscosity to the mud of
the surface layer. If the mud be shaken with weak spirit of
wine, fine flakes separate like coagulated mucus, and if a little
of the mud in which this viscid condition is most marked be
placed in a drop of sea water under the microscope, we can
usually see, after a time, an irregular network of matter resem-
bling white of egg, distinguishable by its maintaining its outline
and not mixing with the water. This net work may be seen
gradually altering in form, and entangled granules and foreign
bodies change their relative positions. The gelatinous matter is
therefore capable of a certain amount of movement, and there
can be no doubt that it manifests the phenomena of a very
simple form of life.


“ To this organism, if a being be so called, which shows no
trace of differentiation of organs, consisting apparently of an
amorphous sheet of a protein compound, irritable to a low
degree and capable of assimilating food, Professor Huxley has
given the name of Bathybius Haeckelii .”
If this have a claim to be recognised as a distinct living
entity, exhibiting its mature and final form, it must be referred
to the simplest division of the shell-less Rhizopoda, or if we
adopt the class proposed by Professor Haeckel, to the Monera.
“ The circumstance which gives it special interest to Bathy-
bius is its enormous extent; whether it be continuous in one
vast sheet or broken up into circumscribed individual particles,
it appears to extend over a large part of the bed of the ocean;
and as no living thing, however slowly it may live, is ever
perfectly at rest, but is continually acting and re-acting with its
surroundings, the bottom of the sea becomes like the surface of
the sea and the land —a theatre of change, performing its part
in maintaining the ‘ balance of organic nature.’
“ Entangled and borne along in the viscid stream of Bathybius,
we so continually find a multitude of minute calcareous bodies of
a peculiar shape, that the two were long supposed to have some
mutual relation to one another.
“ These small bodies which have been carefully studied by
Huxley, Sorby, Haeckel, Carter, Humbel and others, are in
shape like oval shirt-studs. There is first a little oval
disk about 0.01 m.m. in length with an oblong rudely facetted
elevation in the centre, and round that, in fresh specimens, what
seems to be a kind of frill of organic matter, then a short neck,
and lastly a second smaller flat disk, like the disk at the back of
a stud. To these bodies which are met with in all stages of
development, Professor Huxley has given the name of ‘coccoliths.
Sometimes they are found aggregated on the surface of small
transparent membranous balls, and these which seemed at first
to have something to do with the production of the ‘ coccoliths,
Dr. Wallich has termed ‘ coccospheres.’ ”
“ I think that now the balance of opinion is in favour of the
view that the coccoliths are joints of a minute unicellular alga
living on the sea surface and sinking down and mixing with the
sarcode of Bathybius, very probably broken into it with a pur-
pose, for the sake of the vegetable matter they may contain, and
which may afford food for the animal jelly. What the cocco-
spheres are, and what relation, if any, they have to the coccoliths,
1 -. , i >) * * * * * **
we do not know. *
“ I feel by no means satisfied that Bathybius is the
nent form of any distinct living being. *


1 think it not impossible that a great deal of the ‘ Bathybius,'
that is to say the diffused formless protoplasm which we find at
great depths, may be a kind of mycelium—a formless condition
connected either with the growth and multiplication or with the
decay —of many different things.”
[The term “Monera” in the above extract means a class formed
by Prof. Haeckel (Biologische Studien, Leipzig, 1870) for “ a vast
assemblage ot almost formless beings, apparently absolutely
devoid of internal structure, and consisting simply of living and
moving expansions of jelly-like protoplasm.” (Vide “ Depths of the
Bear p. 408.) J J
The Monera are the first-class in the first and simplest of the
invertebrate sub-kingdoms,—the Protozoa; the other two classes
being the Rhizopoda and the Sponges. Of these, says Professor
W. Thomson (op. cit. p. 409), “The Monera pass into the Rhizo-
poda, which give a slight indication of advance, in the definite
form of the graceful calcareous shell-like structures which most
of them secrete, and the two groups may be taken together.”]
Sydney: Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lB76.


THE ECHOMETER.
New Depth-finding Device.
An interesting development in nautical
apparatus is the echometer, a machine which
has recently been installed on the trawler
Alfie Cam by Amalgamated Wireless (A’sia),
Ltd. This machine takes the form of a
machine which, when put into operation by
the pressing of a switch, enables the observer
to see on a visual recording dial the depth
of water beneath a ship.
On the New South Wales coast the depth of
water is about 100 fathoms for approximately
60 miles out from the coast. Beyond that
distance it shelves quickly to a depth of 2000
fathoms. The echometer will take readings
to a depth of 720 fathoms, but as trawlers
do not generally work in any greater depths,
the echometer should prove of great value to
them in ascertaining their height from the sea
floor. As different types of fish are sought at
different depths, the device should prove use-
ful to those engaged in the fishing industry.
The echometer is said to have undergone suc-
cessful tests.
i fcL tffSif


St-A Oo&rrxts - V VloTSfoNi,
'VWo) 4 Ho
I
‘l3 EYING ” FIRST CHINESE JUNU TO VISIT
ENGLAND. LEFT CANTON OCT. 1846. VIA
CAPE AND NEW YORK, 4APJHAMES.ENGLAND,
477 DAYS LATER. CREW. 12 ENG. **■ 30 CHINESE
f tX' Ifl \y.


WIRELESS.
Ocean Sounding.
REFLECTION OF WAVES.
(BY N. M. GODDARD. 8.E.)
A few days ago it was announced that 0
a Sydney trawler, the Alfie Cam, had been ii
fitted with apparatus whereby the depth oi d
water is shown upon a dial whenever the q
information is required by those in command j £
of the ship. The particular device fitted
in this instance is known as the “echometer.” j
Forty or fifty years ago the idea of echo I
sounding was first suggested, but in common vj
with many other highly useful scientific n
principles it has not been usefully applied j]
until recently. The experience gained in the A
development of apparatus for the trans- rj
mission and reception of wireless signals has a
been of material benefit in its application. n
. all
that
In its essentials, echo sounding is a simple
process. A disturbance is made in the water
below the ship and the time that is taken p
for the echo to return from the bottom of x
the sea is measured, and when this is known j
the depth can be determined, because the |
speed of the impulse through the water is
also known. This seems a simple proceeding.
but the development of reliable apparatus t
whereby the depth may be accurately shown v
on a dial whenever it is required has been a
a matter of no little difficulty. The problem g
has been successfully solved, however, and J
many surveys have been made by this method w
and hundreds of trawlers on the othei side ii
of the world have been fitted with such
devices, with certain types of which it also
is possible to determine the nature of the J
bottom, which is valuable information for n
trawlers. ... n
For sounding purposes neither ordinary Q .
light waves nor what are referred to as
wireless or Hertzian waves are of any use.
Both kinds are too rapidly absorbed. There-
fore, sound waves or ultra-sonic waves, that
is, disturbances of the same kind, but of
ultra-audible frequency, are used. In the case o.
of the first, some kind of hammer is arranged
oi me mst, suxuc muu ~ r?
to strike the hull of the ship or a water- B
filled tank fitted within the hull. Hydro- i
phones, a special type of microphone, are jH
used for receiving the reflected signal. It ,
is essential that the transmitted signal shall J
be of short duration so that it has died away re j
before the echo returns, while means for N J
distinguishing the echo from all kinds of (j
unwanted noises must also be provided. J
The supersonic type of wave has many d
advantages. It causes no noise or vibiation.
while the effects of resonance can be used,
and it can be made directional, thus enabling |
unwanted impulses to be avoided. In the s j
supersonic method high-frequency oscillations -j
are generated by means, of a valve oscillator d
or the like and fed to a piezo-electric sub-
stance, such as a slab of quartz. This, as was r l
explained in this column recently, vibrates 1
mechanically at the same rate, generally of f|
the order of 37,500 cycles per second. A cone 8|
of waves of about 4 cms. wave-length is thus d l
transmitted through the water. The reflected
waves are picked up by the same unit, and
they set up across the crystal an oscillating 2F
voltage which is amplified and detected by Mf
ordinary wireless methods. sin
The problem of indieating the depth in a I
manner which can be directly and easily ob- Ml
served is. of course, of primary importance. » e l
In the echometer the indicating dial has a
graduated opaque sector, and a spot of light hil
is reflected upon this scale by a revolving 2F_
IS ICUCUICW UF/w** ■' , f
mirror, and through a mirror that can be -
oscillated. The revolving mirror is driven by na
an accurate motor or like device, so that it po<
travels across the full length of the scale in Ew
exactly the same time as is occupied by an '
impulse travelling to the maximum indicated .
depth and back again. The other mirror is bu
caused to move by a coil connected to t.ne *Pi
wave transmitting or receiving circuit, so that
when an impulse is sent or received the spot J
of light is caused to jump fr m its normal I
path. When the revolving mirror commences j
to sweep the light across the dial, a contact n |
is closed which allows a trajn of waves tq be
sent from the projecting device at the bottom I
of the ship. The soot of light at the same JJI
time gives a jump. When an impulse is given t |
by the returned echo, the oscillating mirror is il
again caused to move and make another peak b|
in the oath of the travelling spot of light.
The point at which this peak occurs on the 1
graduated scale corresponds to the depth of t|
water and provided that the maximum depth
to be indicated is not too great, the soundings
can be given as frequently as once per second.
Thus bv the simple process qf closing a ini
f switch, the commander of a modern ship has
i at his disposal a continuous supply of accurate
information which no amount of heaving the
lead could possibly give.
