

NOTES
ON
VINEYARDS
IN
AMERICA
AND EUROPE.
BY
THOMAS HARDY.








NOTES
ON
VINEYARDS
IN
AMERICA
AND EUROPE.
BY THOMAS HARDY.
,’Urt:m')r:
PR'NTED BY L. H6NN & CO.. GENERA |. RRI N iTR.S* 7t5 CUPRIC ‘■rpgET.
|S«;.




PREFACE.
fJplIE following letters were written. at the request of the proprietors of
the llegister and Observer newspajiers, and hare appeared at
intervals In those papers during the past eighteen month*.
During this publication many who read them hare expressed n wish to
hare them collected in u pamphlet, and I naturally wish myself to see them
preserved.
I hare throughout endeavoured to express as clearly as possible what T
saw, that was in anyway likely to interest or benefit my fellow-rignerons,
and did not consider any matter of detail as too trivial to note down, haring
often in reading books of travel in wine countries found the want of mart
explicit and close observation. As an instance, I found a paj/er in the Jirst
report of the Californian. Viticultaral Commission on llaisin-muking at
Malaga, in which the writer stated that the grapes were laid on earth. I
went to the trouble to try this plan, and proved, it a failure, as the grape*
became rotten on the uniter side while drying. J found on my visit to Alalaga
that the floors were of gran I, and not earth, and on trying if at Dankside on
my return, 1 found that the gravel floor was a complete success.
I trust that these letters may suggest to many the advisability of trying
di/l'erent modes of cultivation and manufacture of the fruit of the vine into
Wine, Brandy, and, Jtaisins, and the study of the ej/ect of climate, and soil
on the produce which 1 believe to be edl important.
Having been, engaged, in the cultivation of the vine for the last thirty
years in this colony, I believe we have much yet to learn, and which, with
extended experience and observation, will enable Australia to become equal to
the best wine-piroduciny countries of the world.
BANKSIDE VINEYARDS,
Adelaide.
MaVch 2'drd, ItSSo.




CONTENTS.
I'AOK
CHAPTER 1.
Climate of California.—St. Helena.—Krug’s Vineyard.—lmple-
ments Used.—Extensive Cellars.—Distilling Apparatus ... 7
CHAPTER 11.
Beringa Brothers’ Vineyard and Cellars. —Price of Crapes.—
Fermentation of the Wines.—Thomann’s Cellars.—Arrange-
ments for Wine-making and Distilling.—Pomace Brandy... I I
CHAPTER lIL
Mr. W. Sehetller’s Vineyard and Distillery.— Immense Crops of
Crapes. Favourite kinds Grown. Sonoma Valley.—
llarazthy’s Vineyard.—Phylloxera.—Winkler's A Drcssel’s
Cellars ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... II
CHAPTER IV.
Sonoma. —Adobe Houses.—Mr. Cady’s Cellars.—Glen Ellen. -
Favourite Resort for City People.—Fish-Breeding Establish-
ment.—Chauvel’s Cellars.—Good Wine, from the Mills ... is
CHAPTER V.
Harazlhy’s Champagne Cellars.—Processes Used in Champagne
Manufacture. Lachman Cellars. Laehmau A Jacobi’s
Cellars. Sherry Making. Dreyfus & Co.’s Cellars.—
Gundlach & Co.’s Cellars.—Kohler &■ Frohling's Cellars
Oldest in the City.—Redwood Vats T 1
CHAPTER AM.
Raisin .Making.—Mr. C. G. Briggs’s “Ranch."—-Chinese Labour,—
Drying Kilns.—Novel Mode of Irrigation o(j
CHAPTER AMI.
San Jose.—General H. At. Naglee’s Brandy Manufactory.—Hue
Brandy from the Rcisling Grape.—Large Vats Used ... 30
CHAPTER VIII.
Fresno.—Eiscu’s Vineyard.—lrrigation, System of and AVonderful
Effects.—AVater-power Utilised.—Fresno Company’s Vine-
yard.—Cellars Built of “ Adobes ” 33
CHAPTER IX.
Railway Travelling.—Dust and Heat.—Los Angeles.—Kohler and
Frohling’s Wine Cellars.—St Gabriel AVine Company.—
Superior Arrangement of Buildings and Machinery.—
Orange and Lemon Trees.—lrrigation 37


I'AGK
CHAPTER X.
The Future of Wine-growing in California and Australia ... -11
CHAPTER XI.
Vineyards on Lake Erie.—Kelly Island.—High Price of Grapes.
Catawba Wines.—Gallizcd Wines.—Sham and Humbug in
the Wine Trade ... ... 43
PART 2_
LETTER I.
Voj'age to Lisbon.—Street Trees.—Cintra.—Collares, Wines of ... 47
LETTER 11.
Village of Collares.—lrrigation of Fruit-Trees.—Sandy Soil of
Vineyard. Rrcakwinds of Bamboo. Ancient-looking
Vehicles ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 49
_ LETTER HI.
Oporto.—Messrs. Forrester's Lodges.—lBls Port.—Aged Cellar-
man.—Markets in Oporto ... ... ...
LETTER IV.
The Upper Houro, the Port Wine Country.—Lovely Scenery.—
Boa Vista. —Phylloxera, Ravages of.—Treading the Grapes.
Fortifying Port Wine ... ... ... ... ... ... 51
LETTER V.
Lodges of Martinez Gaziot & Co.—Wine-Making on the Douro.—
Australian Trees in Oporto.—Wines Drank by the Lower
Orders ... ... ... ... ... ... 58
LETTER VI.
Wine Spirit.—Bathing at the Mouth of the Douro.—Olive-Trees.
Seville, Interesting Sights there.—Houses Built to Suit the
Climate ... ... ... ... ... ... 61
LETTER VII.
Xcres.—Bodegas of Forrester & Co.—Cool Roofs.—Sherry, How
Kept—Mr. W. G. Suter.—-Interesting Reminiscences of
Vines Sent to Australia.—Walk Among the Vineyards.—
.Mackenzie & Co.’s Bodegas.—Fining the Wines (I;l
LETTER VIII.
Sherry Vineyard.—Kinds of Grapes Grown.—Mode of Pruning'.—
Presshouse.— Old Chapel.—Treading the Grapes 66
UTTER IX.
Fermentation of Sherry.—Density of the Must.—Hospitality of
the Proprietor.—Duff, Gordon, & Co.’s Bodegas.—Fine
Old Wines (jy
LETTER X.
Ivison’s “Bodegas.”—Strength of Sherry.—Distillation of Wine.
Falling off in the Sherry Trade.—lnfluence of Soil on the
Produce ... ... ... ... ... ... 71
LETTER XI.
Malaga.—Sunday Traffic.—Raisin-Packing.—Schultz, Hennanos,
and Co.’s Cellars. —Wine from Raisins 75
CONTEXTS.


LETTER XII.
Raisin-Making .at Malaga.—Muscat Gordo Blanco the Grape
Grown.—Drying Grounds.—Packing the Raisins in Layers.
Rate of Wages 7G
LETTER XIII.
Valley of the Gaudaljorce.—Pomegranates.—Romantic Scenery.
Alcanzar; Wine-Making there.—Vineyards near the Town.
Kindsof Grapes Grown ... ... ... ... ... 7!)
LETTER XIV.
AVine-Making at Alcanzar.—Dirty in the Extreme.—lrrigation by
“ Xorias.”—Valencia, Raisin-Making there.—Manufacture
of “ Mustella or Sweet Wines ... ... ... ... S'J
LETTER XA r .
Port of A'alenoia.—Mode of Carting AVine.—llcnicarlo.—Tarra-
gona; Fine Bodega there.—-Wines of Tarragona.—Carob-
Trees.—Best AVay to the A'iuoyards of Europe ... ... 8d
LETTER XAT.
Tarragona to Barcelona.—Large AA'ino Stores.—lmmense Akits.—
Grain Distillery.—Perpignan ... ... ... ... ... S.S
LETTER XVII.
St. Xazarre.—.AL. Escarra’s AJneyard and AVine-Making Cellars at
Perpignan 01
LETTER XVIII.
Cette. Collars there. Chanvain’s Cellars. Manufacture of
A'ermonth.—Florensac.—M. Ricard’s A'ineyards ... ... 05
LETTER XIX.
Florensac, Distilleries there.—Grape-skins from Spain.-—Return
to Cette.—AVines Exposed to the Sun there... ... ... <lB
LETTER XX.
Bordeaux.—Cellars of X. Johnston & Co.—AVine-Making in the
Mcdoo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 101
LETTER XXL
Vineyards of the Mcdoo.—Chateau Lafitte.—Chateau Margeaux.
St. Pierre.—Cultivation of the Vineyards ... ... ... 105
LETTER XXII.
Chateau Yquoin.—Sauterne A'ineyards and the Vintage.—Sweet
Sauternes 108
LETTER XXIII.
Barbezioux.—M. Boutilleau & Son's Brandy Distillery.—Ravages
of the Phylloxera.—Kind of Stills Used.—A’ineyards Turned
to Dairy Farm,—Brie Cheese.—Cognac.—Otard, Dupuy,
and Co.’s.—Martell’s Cellars.—Distillery of M. Moulen ... 110
LETTER XXIV.
Bordeaux.—James A'iolot & Co.’s Establishment.—Packing of
Plums.—Cette.—M. A'achteFs Cellars.—Mcursault, in the
Burgundy Country ... ... ... ... ... ... Il l
LETTER XXV.
A'isit to the Champagne Country.—Vcrtus.—Prieur A Co.’s Cellars.
Small Proprietors’ A'ineyards, Yield of.—Moot & Chandon’s
Cellars.—Mcrcier & Co.’s Establishment ... ... ... 117
LETTER XXVI.
Dannstadt.-Mayencc.-llenkcl & Co.’s Cellars.-Coblenz.-Dcinhard
and Co.’s.—Manufacture of Sparkling AVines.—Conclusion lk’l
CONTEXTS.




THE VINEYARDS & WINE CELLARS
OF CALIFORNIA.
CHAPTER I.
CLIMATE OF CALIFORNIA.—ST. HELENA.—KRUG’S VINEYARD. —
IMPLEMENTS USED.—EXTENSIVE CELLARS.—DISTILLING APPARATUS.
AVING determined to take a few weeks here among the
_ ’ vineyards and cellars in this country, I believe it will be
of considerable interest to wine growers and all who take
an interest in production to know what is being done here, and
what are the prospects in the future for the wine industry in this
country and in Australia.
This is a very large State, extending from 31° to 49’ of north
latitude, and embracing all or nearly all the same range of climate
as Australia, and modified in many particulars by the formation
of the country, the high mountain ranges giving abundance of
water for irrigation in some parts, and the cool winds and fogs
of the coast having a great influence on vegetation in other parts,
especially north of this city ; and as vineyards and orchards are
widely scattered over the State I endeavoured to find out the
localities where I could see most in the least time, and I was
fortunate enough to light upon the right man to give me such in-
formation.
Mr. Charles Wetmore, the energetic Secretary of the State
Viticultural Commission, received me most cordially, as is the
general habit of all genuine vinegrowers, for Mr. Wetmore is one,
and from him I got to know the principal growers and merchants.
1 am also indebted to our old friend Dr. Bleasdale (who I found
hale and hearty, but not so stout as when in Australia) for some
valuable information.
The first vineyards we visited (I being accompanied by my wife
and youngest son) were those situated in the Napa Valley,
heaving the city by one of the immense ferry-boats which take in


thousands of passengers, wagons loaded, with two and four horses
attached to them, trucks loaded with goods of all kinds, itc., wo
cross over to Oakland in about thirteen minutes, and take train
to a narrow point of the bay. Here we take ferry again, and in
a. few minutes are landed at Vallejo Junction, near the town of
Vallejo (pronounced Velay-o, the “ j ” being left out in all the
Spanish names). From here to Napa City, 41 miles from San
Francisco, and containing less than 4,000 people (why they call it
a City I do not know), through fine agricultural and dairy land.
Here vineyards commence; and from here on to St. Helena town-
ship, 18 miles, fully one half of the valley, which varies from two
to five miles in width, is in vines. St. Helena is a thriving town
of 1,300 inhabitants, and is beautifully situated among vineyards
and fruit gardens in the centre of one of the richest valleys in
California. The main street is planted with trees, many of them
the Tasmanian bluegum, and, better still, several fine old spread-
ing oak-trees have been spared, and stand in the street or on the
footpaths, and give a cool and pleasant appearance to the place.
This we made our quarters for a couple of days, and visited
some of the principal vineyards in the neighbourhood.
First we went to one of the largest, that of Mr. Charles -Krug
(no relation to the champagne Krug), about a mile up the vaTTeyT
We found the proprietor at home, but as he had to attend the
funeral of an old neighbour ho turned us over to Mr. F.
Fflhndorfl) who is a great man among wines, and has a good
knowledge from personal observation of Spain and Portugal and
other wine countries of Europe,
Mr. Krug’s vineyard contains 225 acres, and is cut in two by
the railway, which, however, is amply compensated for by the
facilities it gives him for dispatching his produce. A small station
siding and platform called “ Krug’s,” close to the cellar enables
him to put his wine into the trucks, and it goes “ right away,”
as they say here, to New York, if required, without once being
shifted out of the truck.
The vineyards are in splendid cultivation, and the size of the
stocks show the goodness of the land, some near the house being
larger for their age (20 years) than any I ever saw. The vines
are mostly in bloom, and men were busy topping and sulphuring.
Sulphuring is done by putting the sulphur into coarse bags made
of material like our bran bags. These bags hold abcut 2or 3 lbs.
each when tied loosely. Others have a tin vessel like a funnel,
with the mouth covered with wire gauze, and are lilled through
the handle, and answer very well. The bellows is everywhere
hung up like poor old Joe’s fiddle, as done with and superseded.
The old vines are planted at G x G, and are now grown without
stakes, and most of them had been topped before the blooming, no
disbudding or “suckering,” as they call it, had been done. I did


not ascertain what kinds are principally grown, but Mr. Krug has
a newly planted vineyard of 75 acres over the hills, at an elevation
of 1,700 feet, planted mostly to reisling, which is here, as every-
where else, considered the best white wine grape.
The implements used to work the vineyard are single-furrow
Yankee ploughs; no others would do among the old vines.
Scarifiers made to expand, mostly of wood, but some of iron. The
tines for a two horse implement are from five to seven, and are
made of a diamond-shaped piece of steel, about eight inches long
by four broad, slightly bent, and riveted or fastened with a bolt
and nut to the standards, so that the plate is almost vertical,
only lying backward very little. This horse-hoe is very effective
in ripping up the ground if caked on the surface, as much of the
land is liable to, but it is pretty hard on the cattle, and a hoe
four feet wide is quite enough for two good light horses. A very
good revolving circular iron harrow, five feet diameter, and made
of one and a quarter or one and a half inch gaspipe, and with
small square tines driven through the piping, fitted with handles
and a pole for two horses, is a very effective implement, and is in
use pretty generally.
The cellars are very extensive, two stories, all above ground,
and cover a space 150 x 130 feet. About one-fourth of the top
story is an open balcony over a fermenting cellar, the floor being
inclined about two feet to the front and covered with asphalt,
so as to be water-tight. Into this balcony the grapes arc deli-
vered from the wagons that bring them by elevators made with a
stout canvas apron about two feet wide, and the length required
from thirty to forty feet, and return. This is fastened to a rubber
bolt of four inches wide on each margin, and at every two feet
is a cross bar of wood two inches square, fastened also at each
end, and the whole working over a drum at each end and through
a trough, which receives any juice that may fall through. The
grapes are brought in boxes holding forty to fifty pounds and
are emptied from the wagons on to the apron, and are carried up
the incline and delivered into a mill fitted with fluted iron rollers,
from which, if for rod wine, they fall into the “ stemmer,” as it is
called. This is a shaft studded thickly with spikes about twelve
inches long, and sot spirally, so as to work the stems towards the
opposite end to which the grapes enter. This shaft revolves at
a great speed, from 300 to 400 revolutions per minute, in a con-
cave made of stout copper and punched thickly with one-inch
holes, and about five feet long. From sixty to seventy tons of
grapes can bo put through in a day with this apparatus, and if
the stemming is not required the concave can be removed, and
the grapes, with the stalk, fall into a sieve, through which a large
portion of the juice passes, and the remainder is passed on
(always on the incline downwards) into a hydraulic press of


peculiar construction, which is capable of taking three tons of
grapes, after some of the juice is gone, at a charge, and two
charges an hour can he put through if required. I shall on a
future occasion describe more fully this press, which is being
adopted by all the foremost men in the winemaking business.
Mr. Krug made upwards of 300,000 gallons last vintage from his
own and purchased grapes. He pays from 820 to 830 a ton of
2,000 lbs.
If for red wine the grapes as they pass from the stemmer are
received into small iron dobbins on four wheels and made to turn
on a pivot so as to empty in any direction. These when filled are
wheeled away and the contents shot through holes in the floor
into immense vats below, where the fermentation is carried on,
They are fitted with false heads to keep the skins below the
surface. When the fermentation is completed the wine is drawn
off and pumped with steam pumps into vats set nearly up to the
roof, and from them run with hose to any part of the cellars.
The skins are then shovelled out into the dobbins and run off to
the press, and from the press, after all the wine is got, they are
loaded again, and this time run out of the cellar on a high-level
bridge to the distillery, about fifty or sixty feet distant where
they are shot on to a close boarded platform over the distilling
vats. The distillery contains the engine and boiler which works
all the machinery and the distilling. The engine is of 20-horse
power, and ample for all requirements. The distillery is fitted up
with two stills, one of which is used for the skins and the other
for wine. There are to each still two redwood vats of 1,000
gallons each, fitted with a manhole on top for filling, and another
of iron near the bottom for emptying. They are heated with a
steam coil full of holes at the bottom of each, and one is always
being emptied and filled again whilst the other is distilling. They
get through from two to four vats a day with each still. The
spirit made is reduced to proof, and put into new oak casks of
twenty to forty gallons capacity, and bonded or duty paid of 90
cents per gallon proof.
Mr. Krug does his business direct with the Eastern States,
keeping five travellers employed all over the country, and the
orders are dispatched direct from the cellars, which are well
arranged and capable of containing 700,000 gallons, the casks
varying from 100 to 3,090 gallons, most of them oval oak casks
of 1,200 gallons, and redwood vats from 1,000 to 3,000 gallons.
The whole concern is well arranged for getting through a large
quantity of grapes in the least possible time, and as the aim of
Mr. Krug is to make a dry wine, the quicker the vintage! is over
the better in every way for him.
Some further notes on the wdnes tasted and other matters will
be for another paper.


CHAPTER. II.
BERINGA BROTHERS' VINEYARD AND CELLARS.—PRICE OF GRAPES.—
FERMENTATION OF THE WINES.—THOMANN'S CELLARS.—ARRANGE—
MENTS FOR WINEMAKING AND DISTILLING.—POMACE BRANDY.
a: FTKII leaving Mr. Charles Krug’s St. Helena vineyards wo
j visited that of Messrs. Boringa Brothers, across the road from
Mr. Krug’s. They have a beautiful place at the foot of the
hills, and from the cellar a fine view of the upper part of the valley
is obtained, Mount St. Helena, over 1,000 feet high, towering up
and apparently shutting up the valley in that direction ; but it
extends for several miles further, and there arc vineyards nearly
all the way, and many in the smaller valleys among the hills.
Mr. Beringa, one of the proprietors, was busily engaged directing
the excavating of a cellar under his two-story dwelling-house,
which had been only a few days removed from a distance of 100
yards or so to a more convenient site. They think very little of
moving a big house here.
The cellars are very extensive and three stories high, built
against the side of a very steep hill, so that the roadway at the
back is nearly level with the top-story floor. The cellars an;
substantially built of stone as far as the top floor, after that of
wood, which was added after the cellar was built, the flat wooden
roof of the old cellar forming the floor of the top story. At the
back of the bottom collars are others excavated into the hill,
which is of a soft granite-looking stone, easily picked, but getting
harder after exposure. These cellars are wide and lofty, and for
champagne making would be perfection. The floor of the lower
collar is formed of a patent cement flooring, made in slabs of
about two feet square and three inches thick, and makes a
splendid floor with watertight joints, and costs laid down 25 cents
per square foot. It wears as well or better than granite, and is
greatly in use in San Francisco for sidewalks.
At the entrance to the lower cellar, which is one of the neatest
kept that we have yet seen, is a fine oak vat of 1,500 gallons,
with the monogram of the firm surrounded with a wreath of vine
and oak leaves and fruit, beautifully carved in bold relief. This
cellar is almost wholly stocked with oval oak casks of from 1,000
to 1,500 gallons each, and are used for fermenting or storing, as
may be required. The top story is where the grapes are received
and crushed. They are drawn up by an elevator and delivered
into the crusher, which is set high enough for the four-wheeled
dobbins to receive the crushed grapes, if for red wine, and the
contents put through the floor into the vats below, a large wooden


funnel of four to five feet in diameter and one foot deep receiving
the load from the dobbins. If for white wine the crushed grapes
are passed down direct into the presses which are on the second
floor.
At the end of the second floor are the distilling vats in a shed
lean-to from the end of the main building, and in which also is
the engine and boiler of 20-horse power, which drives all the
machinery and generates the steam for the distilling. Then! is
also a copper still for rectifying or distilling of wine. The dis-
tilling vats arc conveniently set to receive from the dobbins the
skins for distillation. The pipes from the distilling vats are of
copper and about four inches in diameter, and the rectifying
column and beckets above are on the same plan as Nitschkc's
stills. The skin or “ pomace” brandy fetches as much as that
made from wine from 80 to 100 cents per gallon proof without
the duty. Winemakers are not allowed to use their spirit for
fortifying their wines without paying duty. As all the wines here-
abouts are made dry, and therefore require no added spirit, this
is not regarded as any groat hardship ; but I am curious to know
what the southern winemakers think of it, and how they manage
to get what spirit they require for making their angelica and
other sweet wines.
Beringa Brothers’ vineyard is 88 acres in bearing, and 75
newly planted in addition. They purchased last vintage 1,000
tons of grapes from $25 to $33 per ton of 2,000 lbs., but they
expect in a year or two to be able to purchase at a much lower
rate. They do their business principally with the eastern cities,
and employ their own salesmen and forward direct to their
customers. They aim to make a perfectly dry and well-fermented
wine, and to do this are careful to begin as soon as the grapes
show from 20 to 22 per cent, of sugar, and then to hurry through
as quickly as possible. They found when they allowed their
grapes to get riper that the wine was never reliable, and they
often got into trouble about it fermenting after it got to their
customers.
From here we went to the wine factory of Mr. Thomann, about
a mile dqwn the valley. The railway for a considerable distance
runs alongside the public road without any fence. There arc
plenty of stray cows about the road, and they do not get killed.
Perhaps they read the notices, “ Look out for the Locomotive
when the Bell Rings.”
Nearly all the winegrowers about here are of German descent,
Mr. Thomann being one. He has extensive cellars and distillery,
is not a vinogrower to any extent, but is a large buyer from his
neighbours, and even gets grapes from Sacramento or anywhere,
he can. For the last two years the growers demand cash on
delivery. That is owing to the great demand and increased prices


oll'ered by the buyers. The price paid last vintage was from S2B
to $33 per ton.
Mr. Thomann’s cellars are all of wood and all above ground.
The portion of them where the wine is made is of two stories, and
the grapes are carried up an elevator in the boxes in which they
are brought in, and which for convenience are all of one size, being
about the size and shape of a brandy case. From the elevator a
man takes the cases as they arrive at the top and empties them
into the crusher, and sends the empty boxes down a slide through
another window. Thomann says his is a much cleaner way
than sending up the grapes by the endless apron as Krug and
others do.
The lloor is so well put together as to lie like the deck of a
ship, and if grapes come in too fast, rather than keep his patrons
waiting the grapes are emptied into heaps on the lloor until they
can be crushed.
The mill and separator is the same as Krug and Beringa’s, and
the grapes are taken along a platform about two and a half feet
below the edges of a double row of vats just right for tilting the
dobbins into the vats. The vats are all of redwood, and can be
headed up if required for storing the wine after it is fermented.
The fermentation of red wine is all begun in the vats without the
false heads, and when the violent fermentation is over the false
heads are put in and blocked down from the groove. The vats
are wide and shallow, not over four feet in depth. Mr. Thomann
is of opinion that the fermentation is bettor than in deeper vats ;
the head is also easier put down when required than in deeper
vessels. The juice for white wine is put at once into vats headed
up or casks, and fermented, but not allowed to work over. As
the contents recede they are kept filled up and racked olf in
December and January, and the red wines are served in the same
way.
Mr. Thomann’s distillery, which is only a short distance from
the cellar, is fitted with stills for distilling the pomace, and the
motive power is got from a good-sized boiler; and from the cellar
to the distillery is a double row of vats, which arc used when a
rush of grapes comes in more than can be accommodated in the
building. The vats which were not filled with wine at the last
vintage are now filled with limowatcr, which is changed once or
twice during the season. About a bushel of lime to a vat is
found to bo enough to keep the water from going bad.
At all the vineyards I have visited here they have water laid
on from reservoirs in the hills, some public and some private
property, and this is so great a convenience that they go to very
considerable expense to get it laid on.
Air. Thomann’s place is well arranged for getting over work
quickly, with plenty of room about for wagons. A Weighbridge


stands at the bottom of the elevator, so that every load is weighed
as it comes in to be unloaded, and the taro taken before it leaves
the place. The wines are all sold to merchants in San Francisco,
and there is no wine over a year old in the cellars. Brandy is all
put into new kegs of twenty gallons and casks of thirty and forty
gallons of our measure. The American gallon is about five bottles,
as far as I can learn; therefore in all cases a fifth must be
deducted when gallons are spoken of in my reports.
Brandy fetches from 70 cents to 'JO cents per gallon proof, and
it is all reduced to proof. The pomace brandy is preferred in the
East by the. liquor concoctors, who find they can flavour nineteen
gallons of corn spirit with one of pomace brandy. I think it
would be difficult to find a market for such an article in
Australia.
I have not yet said anything about the wines tasted at the
vineyards, and shall reserve my remarks on them until I have seen
them in all parts of the State that wo visit
CHAPTER III.
MR. W. SCHEFFLER'S VINEYARD AND DISTILLERY. —IMMENSE
CHOPS OF GRAPES.—FAVOURITE KINDS GROWN.—SONOMA VALLEY.
—HARAZTHY'S VINEYARD.—PHYLLONERA.—WINKLER’S AND
DRESSEL'S CELLARS.
SE next visited the vineyard of Mr. W. .Scheffer, about a
_____ mile west from Mr. Thomann’s. The road lay through
an almond grove, kept in splendid order and bearing
abundantly. Mr. Scheffler’s place is beautifully situated at the
foot of hills, and a splendid view is obtained from his residence.
Ilis vines arc planted on the, slopes of the hills on reddish soil,
and consist of about 100 acres in bearing and another 100 rented
from other people; he is also a buyer of grapes for wine-
making. The wine-house is large and lofty and of one story,
and furnished with six rows of vats of 1,000 gallons each, with
three broad roadways between them, and doors at each end of the
roadways, so that loads of grapes can pass right through the
building.
Mr. Schefiler has a different system of making rod wine from
any others I have seen. The grapes are put into the vats with-
out crushing, and fermented about ten days, when the wine is
drawn off,, and water put on the skins instead of pressing them,


and then when drawn off is distilled, and the skins also put
through the still. The white wines an; crushed by hand mills
placed over vats ; a powerful Boomer press is used to press oil’
the white skins. The skins arc all carted from the wine-house to
the distillery, which is some distance away, and emptied into a
large shallow tank, and from thence carried up by an elevator-
band into the distilling vats, and water put with them to facilitate
the boiling, which is done here as at the other places, with a coil
full of holes near the bottom of the vats.
When the distillation is completed the door at the bottom is
opened, and the force of the steam in the vat is sullicient to drive
out all the contents of the vats into a shallow 7 tank, the liijuid
part is allowed to drain away, and the skins are carted out for
manure. The rectifying still is of a peculiar construction, and
made to distill in vacuo. It is claimed that a better spirit can be
got in this way, as it can be run otf at a lower temperature. I
do not quite understand the principle, but I tasted some very
excellent brandy made with it. 1 think Mr. Schefiler said it was
the only one of the kind in the State. Mr. Schefiler’s cellars are
rather small compared to some others, but cool, being under-
ground or partially so ; they are well filled with the usual oval
oak casks of about 1,500 gallons each, besides casks of 150
gallons and smaller for the transportation of wine, and are neatly
and cleanly kept.
I noticed in the warehouse some rope made on purpose for
tying vines, apparently a coarse manilla, and done up in bales
of 100 lbs. ; also sulphur matches for cellar use, which are bought
by weight ready made. They are much thicker than those wc
use and make ourselves.
These were all the vineyards we had time to visit in Napa,
which is undoubtedly a favorable spot, and nowhere have 1 seen
vines look better. There are now between eleven and twelve
thousand acres planted with vines in the valley, over four
thousand acres of which were planted last season. The yield on
the rich bottom land from young and healthy vines is almost
fabulous. Mr. Krug’s distiller told me that out! of the farmers
who brought in grapes last vintage had close on fourteen tons to
the acre from six acres, and from five to six tons is not thought
at all extraordinary, but I do not think they are getting quantity
and quality both there, any more than elsewhere. I find a very
marked difference in the wines made from grapes grown on the
hill-sides and those of the plains, and the principal men also
recognise it, and are now planting largely the hill sides, which are
admirably adapted for vines where not too step, as the soil is a
reddish loam, full of stone, but no lime that 1 could see in any
part of the valley.


Tlio flats arc very liable to frost, and the last year’s crop was
very materially reduced from that cause. The hill sides are
almost exempt from it. The annual rainfall is good, and averages
twenty-six indies, and in addition they have cool and damp nights
from the fogs drifting over from the sea during the summer
months, the same as they get in San Francisco, so that even if
they have very little rain, anything like a failure of the crops is
a thing unknown. Land in the valley suitable for vineyards is
very high in price at present, and some has been sold near the
town at 8200 (or £10) per acre, and vineyards in bearing as
much as ?800 per acre.
There seems to be, a great difference of opinion among the
growers as to the best kinds to plant. The Zinfandel, a
Hungarian grape, seems to bo the favorite for red wine, and
makes a light clarety wine, and would bo an acquisition to us
in Australia if we could get it without the risk of the phyl-
loxera. A great many of the older vineyards are planted with the
Mission grape, which was introduced here by the Jesuit Fathers
over 100 years ago. It is an excellent bearer, and very hardy,
and they do not seem in any hurry to get rid of it, although
some are grafting them to other kinds. lam told that the bunch
and berry arc like our Grand Turk, and the leaf and growth of
the vine is much like it, but the skin is very thin, and it is
considered an excellent table grape. It is said to have been
brought from Spain. Among the white grapes the Reisling, of
which there are several kinds, arc considered the best. Next to
them is tlie Gutedel, or Chasselas, and several others. I have no
doubt this is the country to grow the finest clarets and rcislings ;
also a large quantity of cheap white and red wine can be produced
here to great ad vantage, when a market is well opened up for it.
The great facilities for sending it away at a little cost by rail and
steamer, the easy working nature of the land, and the enormous
crops ensure that, if phylloxera does not come in the way. lam
told that it is found in several places in the valley, but is not
thought to be spreading fast, and very few seem to care much
about it in this valley, and go on planting in spite of it.
Some are grafting the Lenoir, an American vine from Missouri,
which is said to give a good wine of very high colour, and to bo
proof against the phylloxera. The reason given for grafting this
kind on the Mission vine is to be able to get a largo number of
cuttings in a short time, as there is a great demand for them from
all parts. The cultivation generally is very thorough, and costs
from £5 to £8 an acre. They are all planted so that they can be
worked with the plough and scarifier both ways. The labour in
the vineyards is mostly done by Chinamen, whose wages are a
dollar a day. They are also employed in some of the cellars on
account of their not drinking and general steadiness and adapta


tion for the work. Pruning is mostly done with tho shears instead
of the knife, and generally by daywork. Many are still planting
at close distances—o feet by 0 feet, and a row of maize is often
grown the first year between the rows of vines.
The next place visited was the Sonoma Valley, which runs
nearly parallel with Napa to the westward, a moderately high
range of hills separating the two valleys. Wo called on Mr. E.
Harazthy, son of tho late Mr. A. Ilarazthy, who did a great deal
to foster vinegrowing in California. He at one time owned the
Beuna Vista vineyards at the foot of hills on the western side of
tho valley, a view of which is given in his book on tho vines of
Europe. They wore 600 acres in extent, with splendid cellars and
residence, but now are nearly all gone to ruin, the phylloxera
having made great ravages among the vines eight or ten years
ago. I believe this was the first place where it was observed.
Mr. E. Harazthy’s residence is on the flat, his vineyards are not
extensive, but he has a large cellar, and is a purchaser of grapes.
He says that himself and others are planting again in the old
ground, where tho vines have been destroyed by the phylloxera,
and they believe that by tho use of a compost made with stable
manure, mixed with lime and gypsum in tho proportion of 300
each of the two to 1,400 parts of horse manure, that tho vines
will withstand the phylloxera. Ho has tried it now for three
years, and found it succeed, and has great faith in it; but lam
inclined to doubt it, and think it a great piece of folly to attempt
to plant again in the way they are doing.
He says that fully one-fifth of the old vines in the valley arc
already destroyed, and that there is hardly a vineyard free from
it, but it takes from five to ten years to destroy a vineyard, and
they calculate on getting enough to pay them in spite of it, and,
strangely enough to me, that land is worth as much as it is in
Napa. Some of the valley land is of too strong a clay for vine-
yards, as it is difiicult to work, and bakes into hard lumps in the
summer. Fruit-trees of all kinds are grown to supply the city
demand. Peaches are very much troubled with the bladder, and
apricots and pears are blighted as bad or worse than ours.
Passing the old vineyards of Beuna Vista, which have a sad
and disheartening appearance after seeing the luxuriant Napa
Valley, wo come to the vineyard of Mr. Winkler, one of the
oldest vignerons in the district. His vines arc partly on the hill
sides, and consequently the wines are of a better quality. He is
planting tho Lenoir grape where tho old vines have been
destroyed. He showed us some very good young Zinfandel
wine ; his cellars are pretty old, and apparatus not quite so
modern as some we have seen. He uses a hydraulic jack to press
with, but does not recommend it.
Adjoining Mr. Winkler’s is the cellars and vineyard of Mr.


Dressel. Mr. Dressel, jun., was getting off a largo parcel of
wine for the Eastern States, where they sell their wines, but say
that they have a hard fight in competition with the merchants of
San Francisco. They are sending away wine of the last vintage,
and filtering it as it is filled into the casks. The white wines are
fermented in 150 gallon casks, and kept filled up. They rack-ofl
in December and then sulphur, but are careful not to use any
during the fermentation, as it retards that process, and their
object is to got as thorough a fermentation as possible. At the
first racking the casks are piled one on the other three deep.
They are now (18th June) racking the second time, what is not
going away, and blending it in a 4,000 open vat set high up, so
that it can be run from it to any part of the collar. lied wines
are kept in casks of 1,500 gallons.
Mr. Dressel kindly showed us various wines, especially some
from the new wine and up to six years old, made from the
Mission grape. The oldest resembled a good Verdeilho, with a
sherry flavour, and shows that from some land the Mission grape
is a better one than some would have it to be. Reisling very
good, Gutedel fair, also a white wine from the juice of the
Zinfaudol, rather full of acid, reminding one of the wine made
at Gawler Park from the Pineau. Mr. Drossel’s cellars arc
pretty extensive, and a large quantity of wine and brandy is
made from their own and purchased grapes.
Immediately adjoining is the vineyards and cellars of Messrs.
Gundlach it Co., who have a large business in San Francisco.
The foreman was away looking after some hay work, and two
old Chinamen in the cellar, in answer to some questions, replied,
“No savee,” so we did not got much information. AVo saw that
they are putting down a large hydraulic press and steam-pump
in a shed outside the cellar. Some Chinamen were engaged in
“ suckering” in the vineyard, and sulphuring after, The old
vines here are trained very high, some of them two and a half to
three fe.ct in the stem, but they are not doing it now with the
young vines, but growing them low.
CHAPTER IV.
SONOMA.—ADOBE HOUSES. —MR. CADY’S CELLARS. —GLEN ELLEN. —
FAVOURITE RESORT FOR CITY PEOPLE. —FISH-BREEDING ESTABLISH—
MENT. —CHAUVEL'S CELLARS. —GOOD MINE FROM THE HILLS.
SROM Gundiach’s we returned through the town of Sonoma,
which has an old and dilapidated appearance, as though it had
seen better days. Most of the old buildings are of “adobes,” or
sun-dried bricks, made about 1) x IS and U inches deep. They


appear to stand the weather well, and if the walls are well footed
with stone and the roofs kept good will last for any length of
time. In the centre, of the town is a large covered pavilion in the
middle of a square planted with trees. This is used for various
purposes—on Sundays excursion trains from the city bring
hundreds of people, and they use it for a picnic ground, dancing,
music, and public meetings, Fourth of July orations, itc. Fol-
lowing up the valley, which becomes narrower and more stony as
wo proceed up the winding roads, crossing creeks full of the wild
vine of California, climbing up the highest trees, we first called at
the new cellars and distillery of Mr. Cady, who very courteously
showed us all we wanted to see. His cellars, &c., are small
compared to some we have seen, but are very substantially built
of stone and exceedingly well arranged, the cellars being built
against the hill. The grapes are taken in on the top floor, and
crushed with a hand-mill and separator worked by two men, and
capable; of putting through two tons in an hour,
Mr. Cady having a name for his wines, and which he undoubt-
edly d eservos, has a family trade which takes most of his growth,
and a portion of the cellars is devoted to office and bottling
departments. AVe tasted the finest Reisling here of the last
vintage yet seen ; also Zinfandel claret very good. An attempt
to make sweet Muscat was not a success, being too thin and
spirituous. Mr. Cady’s vineyards are all among the hillsides,
and none in the valley. He uses one of the hydraulic jack
presses, and finds it sufficient for his purpose. The distillery is
on the same plan as the others I have described for distilling the
pomace, and when there is too much of it to get through he has it
put into sonic; old vats, and well trod in and covered with earth
to prevent acidity until it can be operated upon. The wines are
all bottled in Californian-made bottles of a shape designed by Air.
Cady, and with his brand on each, and of a light-rod colour.
They cost about $Bl per gross ; clean French clarets cost $9 per
gross, but mixed bottles can be -bought for very much less.
Holding, capsuling, labelling, and casing up is done as neatly as
any I have seen. Called next at Sevcnoaks Vineyards, belonging
to Airs. Warfield, who conducts a large business herself. Her
vineyards are all on the hillsides ; the collars and apparatus much
as we found elsewhere, including the new steam crusher and
separator, itc. The proprietress being away we could not get
much information from the old Chinaman, who was the only man
about the cellars.
This is close; on the station named Glen Ellen, and the terminus
of this railway, and is a favourite resort for the San Francisco
people on Sundays and holidays, and they could not have a more
beautiful place to go to for outdoor worship. The clear sparkling
brook rippling over the pebbles, and shaded with trees as thick as


they can grow and festooned with wild vines, deep pools full of
fish, and smiling vineyards and orchards in all directions, and all
this—including a ride of one and a half hours across the beau-
tiful bay of San Francisco—forsli, including return. 3Tost of
the people, especially family parties, take their lunch baskets with
them and make a day of it. Across the creek and up a pretty
rugged road for one and a half miles is a large fish-breeding
establishment, owned now by a company, and managed by the
former owner, Mr. Lament. Saw salmon, trout, and carp here
in all stages ; one pond of trout would average .3 lb. each fish.
The ponds are puddled and lined with boards and asphalted, and
all covered at about six feet high with loose boards during the
summer, and which are removed in the winter. The hatching-
room is fitted up with troughs covered with wire-gauze lids. As
the young fish got largo enough they are transferred to other
troughs. In one trough were thousands of lively little trout
about an inch in length, and in others larger and larger. They
are fed several times a day with chopped liver, which is prepared
by a machine driven by the water.
The fish are caught with nets as required, and sent to San
Francisco, and fetch 50 cents per pound. They are taken by the
large hotels and restaurants. They have also a frog-breeding
pond or ponds, but wo had not time to see them. The water for
the whole concern is taken from the creek and brought round in
wooden “Jlumos,”and falls into the ponds from a considerable
height, and so keeping the water in constant motion. I could not
ascertain whether it is a paying concern or not, as the manager
was away, but it is certainly a very interesting one. On our
return visited the cellar of Mr. J. Chauvel, a Frenchman from
the Champagne country, but who has been in California for over
thirty years. He has a splendid new stone-built cellar, which
cost 625,000, and has it built against the hill at the back, and
facing the creek in the front. From the front cellar door a
bridge of 200 feet or more in length, and from forty to fifty feet
above the bed of tin- creek, carries a line of rails fitted with a
truck, which takes two pipes of wine at a time across to a siding
of the railway on the opposite side. A fall of six inches in this
distance enables the truck to lie run with the least possible
trouble, and sixty pipes of wine a day can lie loaded and
dispatched if required. The cellar is of three stories, and the
grapes are taken in at the back from the first flat, and passed up
into the top storey by one of the endless band elevators, and
delivered right into the crusher, which is driven by a 10-horse
power vertical engine set on this floor on a bottom of bricks.
Under the crusher is a wire sieve, which lets the, juice drain
oil and delivers the skins into trucks, which arc run along the
floor and “ dumped” through holes in thp floor into vats below or


into the presses, which are at present the hydraulic jack ones, but
it is intended to have a proper hydraulic press in time for the
vintage. There is a Fairbanks weighbridge handy to the
unloading place for weighing grapes as they come in. Mr.
Chauvel is a large buyer of the grapes grown in this upper part
of the valley, and paid last year from §2O to §33 per ton for
them.
The second story, or fermenting-room, is well filled with vats
for storing or fermenting in, but the bulk of the white wine is
fermented in 100-gallon casks, and kept well filled up, and so
continued every fortnight after the fermentation is over.
The red wine is all fermented with false heads to keep down
the skins, and where there is no groove in the vat a couple of
clamps are fixed under the last hoop, and project three or four
inches above the chine ; a bar of 3 or 4 by 4 wood is put
through them, and the head propped down from this cross-
piece. M. Chauvel, who is a jolly old Frenchman, gave us all the
information we asked, and volunteered a good deal more. He
says that he can always get his wine thoroughly fermented, even
when as high as 13 of lieaume; but attaches great importance to
beginning soon enough and getting over the vintage quickly, so
as not to let the grapes get too ripe;. In former times they were
often troubled with their over-ripe grapes making a badly-
fermented wine, but now that seldom happens. I did not see a
single white wine but what was in excellent condition. Mr.
Chauvel very kindly took samples from any cask I liked to ask him
to. Now casks are scalded with boiling water first, and then
filled if possible with cold water, and left for a few days with it in
them. A little soda in the boiling water is considered to bo an
improvement.
I tasted some very excellent wines here, and Mr. Chauvel has no
difficulty in selling to one firm in this city all he can make at a
paying price, and all of it delivered before the next vintage. The
distillery is old and some distance away from the new cellar, and
there was nothing about it worth while describing.
The now cellars and all about them are the best designed of
any yet seen, and everything kept in capital order. The situation
of the place is very unique, the banks of the creek hen; narrowing
in together, and are very steep and deep, so that a good deal of
excavating and filling has had to be done to make room for such
an extensive building and to give access to it both back and front.
The hills in this upper part "of Sonoma Valley are being exten-
sively planted. Some of the large wine merchants in the city


have gone in for planting on a large scale. Ido not think that
the phylloxera has yet reached these parts; at any rate, the vines
showed no signs of it, and are here all well cultivated.
CHAPTER V.
HARAZTHY'S CHAMPAGNE CELLARS.—PROCESSES USED IN CHAMPAGNE
MANUFACTURE.—LACHMAN CELLARS.—LACHMAN AND JACOBI'S
CELLARS.—SHERRY MAKING.—DREYFUS AND CO.’s CELLARS.—
GUNDLACH AND CO.’s CELLARS.—KOHLER AND FROHLING'S CELLARS
OLDEST IN THE CITY.—REDWOOD VATS.
JN previous letters I have described what we saw of the
JL vineyards north of San Francisco, and before giving our
experiences of tire southern vineyards of Fresno and Los
Angelos and the raisin vineyards of the Sacramento Valley a
short account of some of the principal wine-cellars in the city of
San Francisco will, I trust, bo of interest to many, as seeing
them has been to us.
The first visited was the cellars of A. Harazthy it Co., in
■Washington, and to give some idea of their extent I got the area
of them from Mr. Harazthy himself. Below ground the principal
cellars cover 250 x 137, and across a right-of-way, and got at by
a tunnel under the street are two others—one 125 x 197, and a
smaller one of 20 x 137. Above ground are three stories, each
125 x 137, and ollices, ,tc., facing Washington-street, 85 x 35.
There is also a yard across the street or right-of-way, where
several coopers and bottle-washers are employed. The principal
part of the cellars below ground and the second-door above arc
devoted to champagne making, which is carried on on a large
scale, there being always 500,000 bottles in stock and in process
of manufacture, and in one cellar on the ground-floor are twenty-
eight oval casks of from 2,500 to 3,500 gallons each, all of oak,
containing mostly dry wines. In the cellar is an immense
blending tank made of three-inch redwood and strongly bolted
together, and containing 15,000 gallons, and the wine is operated
on by three sets of beaters revolving at from forty to eighty
revolutions per minute, and driven by steam. The joints of this
tank are perfectly wine-tight, and this is effected by using a
cement or luting consisting of twelve pounds clean mutton tallow,
two pounds of white lead, and half a gallon of glycerine well
mixed together.


It is intended to put up some very large vats on the top-floor,
and to pump up the wine, after blending, into them, and from
them to run it off to any part of the cellars required. The wine
for champagne is bottled at about six months old, and put in
stacks in the second story above, and stoves keep this room at a
required temperature to bring on the wine. AVhen the breakage
becomes considerable it is lowered down into the cellars, and after
remaining some time in piles is treated to get the sediment down
into the neck of the bottles, by placing the bottles in racks of a
peculiar construction neck downwards. The rack is an invention
of Mr. Harazthy’s, and he has it patented in the States. It takes
six months to get the deposit down, and each bottle has to be
handled many times before this result is obtained. The next
process is the most difficult of all, and must be done by well-
trained hands, and that is the disgorging, which is done by
removing the cork and allowing the wine to drive out the
sediment, and it is then dosed with the, required amount of syrup,
and refilled and corked, and is now ready for sale as soon as
capsuled, labelled, and cased. Messrs. Harazthy it Co. make
several qualities of champagne, the “ Eclipse,” selling for $1 2 to
815 per dozen, to inferior quality at 88.
Air. Harazthy was taken to France by his father when a young
man, and remained in the champagne cellars for some years to
learn the business. He claims that his champagne is an almost
pure article ; that nothing is used but the small quantity of sugar
for sweetening, and that is reduced lately to a minimum by
blending , sweeter wines. The strength of the “Eclipse” is 11"
of alcohol, or 19 per cent, proof. I tasted some of this brand,
and found it clean and good, but too sweet for my palate ; but
no doubt they know the taste of their customers, and, if one may
judge from the number of candy shops and the way sweets are
used in the city, nothing can be too sweet for the majority of the
people. The bottles used are mostly secondhand ones, imported
in crates from Liverpool, and are all washed on the promises.
Most of the work is done by Chinamen, who get a dollar a day,
but arc overlooked generally by white men. About seventy are
employed altogether.
Harazthy & Co. also do a large trade in dry and sweet wines,
and have a stock of 500,000 gallons in the cellars, besides that
under treatment for champagne.
The cellars of S. Lachman, in Alarket-street, in the heart of
the city, are some of the oldest and most extensive, and every
kind of wine and brandy is to be had here. The stock of wines
here and in other cellars is said to be a million gallons. (The
gallon hero is eight pounds, ora fifth less than ours.) There is a
blending vat of 2,000 gallons, but not operated on by steam. A
large trade is done in shipping to the Eastern States, and I was
1!


shown new red wines sold to go there at 42 cents per gallon,
including the wood, which costs at least 6 cents per gallon. It
is mostly sent in 100-gallon butts. This wine was being sent
away at the time of my visit. I was also shown samples of
various wines from bottles, but none from bulk. Some of the
sweet wines were very good for their age.
We next saw the cellars of Lachman & Jacobi, in Bryant-
street It is a large two-story building, covering 140 by IGO
feet, with cellars under the greater portion, and engine-house and
cooperage at the back. The first floor is furnished with rows of
splendid oak casks of 3,000 gallons each, and capable of containing
750,000 gallons. In the top story are piles of casks two and three
deep, of 100 gallons each. A shipment of 17,000 gallons was being
got ready to go by steamer for New York, via Panama, and the
footpath in front was almost blocked up with casks and coopers
working at shiving-up and making ready. In the cooperage six
men were at work putting together puncheons, the staves and
heads of which are imported, already prepared, from the State of
Indiana. Upstairs, in a close room, are four vats of 7,000
gallons, all heated by a steam coil in each vat. This is the
cooking-room, where sherry is made. The heat is kept up to 140 J
Fahrenheit for three or four months, and in this way they claim
to be able to get sherry fit to send out at a little over a year old.
I tasted some samples of it, also of port, but neither would hold a
candle to our Angaston ports and sherries. They have a sweet,
strong, light-coloured wine, made from almost any grape by
stopping the fermentation with a heavy dose of spirit. This is
called “Angelica,” and is a great favourite with the Yankees,
and I am told also with the niggers down South, who are many
of them now able to indulge in wine and other luxuries. I
sampled some very fair young Reisling and Zinfandel, but I
begin to suspect that a great deal of wine is sold as Zinfandel
which has very little of that grape in it. The strength of it was
said to be 12° alcohol, or 21° proof. Common white wine, dry,
and of the last vintage, is now being sent away to the East at
421, cents per gallon in the wood. Freights are now from 12
cents to 14 cents right through to New York by either steam or
rail. It takes about sixteen days going by rail, and more than
half of the wine and brandy goes that way now.
We next visited the cellars of Dreyfus A Co., in Fifth-street, a
very large two-story building, without any cellars below. The
first floor all filled with ovals, all of oak, and mostly 2,500 gallons
each. One cask on the left as we enter the door is the largest
oval cask in the city, and is over twenty feet high and fifteen feet
in the staves, and contains 12,000 gallons. It is made of four-
inch oak, and is decorated in the front with a carving of grapes
and vine-leaves. On the top floor are piles and piles of 150-gallon


casks, all filled with white wines of the last vintage. It seems to
he the general practice to put the white wines in small hulk
where possible, and the red in large casks ; these 150-gallon casks
are used for shipping away the wines. All new casks are
steamed before being used. Dreyfus it Co. have also a sherry
baking-house, but it was not in action at the time of our visit.
They have large vineyards at Anaheim, near Los Angeles, 500
miles south of San Francisco, and from it they get the sweet and
strong wines. They have also extensive vineyards planted, but
not yet in bearing, at Glen Ellen, in the Sonoma Volley, and
always hold a stock of wine of over a million gallons. They have
oilices in the heart of the city. Each man A: Jacobi have cellars
there also, where they do the small business and office work. In
both cellars steam-power is used for all purposes to which it can
be applied. All the wine is pumped by steam from either fixed
or movable pumps, agitators for blending wine, etc.; and where
such large quantities of wine are handled it becomes a necessity
to have all these appliances. After a trip into the country wo
visited the cellars of J. tiundlach & Co., in Second-street, and
well in the heart of the city. Their cellars are not so extensive
as some, but are well arranged and well kept. They have from
500,000 to 000,000 gallons, and were able to show wines of
considerable age; but I suspect or “guess” only in small
quantities. A lleisling of 1870 was very fine, and by far the
best I have yet seen ; also, a Gutedel of 1877, equal in every
way to a first-class hock. All their wines are got up in splendid
condition, and well capsuled and labelled. They have here, as in
several other cellars in the city, a wine-bar, where people come in
and pop down their five cents and help themselves to a glass of
wine from bottles on the counter ; this is called in some places
the “sample-room,” and I suspect that there is a good deal of
sampling done in some of them.
Gundlach & Co. employ a number of coopers making up casks
for export from prepared staves, and pay sll for setting-up
100-gallon casks. They are prepared by steaming before being
used, and filled with water for a few days, if possible.
The last collars we visited were those of Messas. Kohler and
Frohling, at the foot of Montgomery-street. This is about the
oldest wine-cellar in the city, and we were introduced to them by
our old friend Dr. Lleasdale, whose otlice is in the immediate
neighbourhood. Mr. Kohler, the senior partner, began the wine
business here on a small scale in 1850, and from it has grown a
very large trade, the firm having vineyards and cellars at Sonoma
and Los Angeles, the latter of whichjl hope to visit. They deal
principally in wines and brandies of their own manufacture, and,
having vineyards both north and south, can supply every kind of
wine wanted.. This cellar is itself evidence of the way in which


the business has grown, as room after room has been added until
after a time another and more extensive cellar had to be found,
and now it is far larger than the old one, which, however,
appears to be aflectionately retained, and most of the bottling is
(lone in it.
. The firm have all their export casks made at the vineyards,
and sent up to the city filled with wines or brandies, and when
emptied the wine casks are drained and sulphured, but not
washed. In these cellars they have a number of redwood vats
of 2,000 gallons, costing only SOS set-up in the cellar. They are
only two-inch staves, and rather lightly hooped for their size. In
the ollice are some beautifully executed coloured pictures of some
of the best known grapes cultivated in California. They were
published in the city, but are now out of print, and none to be
had. The new cellar of the firm is at the corner of Sutter and
Dupont streets, more in the centre of the city, and is all below
ground, it covers about 100 x 150 feet, and is filled very closely
with rows of oval oak casks of 1,500 gallons each, (except one or
two rows of very old 500 or COO gallon ones, imported from
Cermany by Mr. lx older, and arc ornamented with carving in the
old style, and named after large cities, as Rome, Florence, Venice,
Ac. There is room in this cellar for from 300,000 to 100,000 gals.
We tasted her(( some of the best light-red wines we met with
in any cellar in the city. The Zinfandel gave us more satis-
faction than any, being very similar to our own clarets, and not
so thin and wiry as many of the red wines we have sampled.
We took a few bottles with us for use on the overland journey,
and in crossing the Colorado Desert, with the thermometer at
110 in the shade, we found that, mixed with the ice-water,
always to bo had in the cars, it gave us the best drink we could
get, and we shall always think of Kohler's claret, and hope he
may rest in heaven for making such-good wine to help us through
this fiery ordeal. In the absence of Mr. Kohler, sen., who was
a way to a Vino Congress at Los Angeles, we were very courteously
shown everything by his two sons, who, T should say, will be
worthy successors of the old pioneer, their father.
CHAPTER VI.
RAISIN MAKING.—MR. C. G. BRIGGS'S "RANCH."—CHINESE LABOUR.—
DRVING KILNS.—NOVEL MODE OF IRRIGaTION.
HAA IXG heard that the place to see grapes grown for raisins,
and how the manufacture of them is carried on, was in
the Scramento Valley, we took train for Davisville,
seventy-six miles from San Francisco. After taking the train at


Oakland, we skirt along tin: bay for many miles, winding round
and round the points of land until we come to the steam ferry-
boat, which takes the whole train, engine and all, across the bay.
This ferry-boat is a wonder for us ; it has four lines of rail, each
capable of taking six of their long saloon cars. Our train of
four and the engine, standing on one side of the boat, did not
seem to list her over a bit. After crossing, the country is mostly
in wheat and hay crops, except the lowlands near the river, which
carry large numbers of cattle. Harvest and haywork were going
on in full swing, the; one being close on the heels of the other, and
in some cases both going on at the same time. Hay is being
drawn into small stacks by large rakes worked by two horses, and
is afterwards pressed in bales with a portable press worked by
two horses or mules, and the hay either sold or stacked in barns.
In the wheat-fields the header is busy in all directions. They
take off much more of the straw than I expected, very nearly a
half of the length in a moderately high crop; three wagons
at tend each header to receive the crop and take; it away to heaps
ready for the threshing machine. 1 did not site any crops that
would go over twenty bushels to the acre. Nearing Davisville
the country to the right and left is all vineyards, and all planted
at wide distances apart, and carefully cultivated.
Visited the “ ranch ” of Mr. 0. G. Briggs, who is the largest
maker of raisins in California. The railway passes through his
vines, and the homestead is only a mile from the station. The
vineyard is 450 acres, and Mr. Briggs has another of 180 acres
at Woodlands, twelve miles distant. Mr. Briggs was away from
home, but his son-in-law (Mr. Gould) kindly showed us round.
The vines are principally the Muscat Gordo Blanco; and the
oldest are only eight years. They are planted 10 xB, but the
younger planting is 10 x 10 ; they bear from 40 to 50 lb. to the
vine, when not injured by any pest; they are neither staked,
disbudded, or topped, and no objection is raised to the. fruit lying
on the ground, as the climate is usually dry all through the time
of the grapes ripening. Cuttings are generally planted ; the
latest idea being to plant cuttings feet long, 2 feet laid
horizontally in a trench, and 1 foot brought up, and they are said
to do well. Mr. Gould has 158 acres of his own planted in this
way, and looking well. Pruning is done with strong shears,
having handles about thirty inches long, and the. cuttings are
bundled up for use by a simple contrivance; they use them for
the steam boiler and for other purposes, as wood is scarce in this
part.
When the grapes are thoroughly ripe they are gathered and
laid on trays about 3 feet by 2 feet 6 inches, made, very light,
and each holding the crop of one vine as a rule. They remain


out between the rows, and are turned in about seven or eight
days by placing an empty tray on a lull one and turning both
over. 1 believe I gave them this idea some ten or twelve years
ago, as I know that my process of drying was copied from the
Adelaide papers into the “ Rural Press ”of California. In about
twelve or fourteen days, according to the weather, the raisins are
sulliciently dried, and are shot off the trays into boxes about the
same size or a little larger, and deep enough to hold sixteen trays.
Paper is put between every four layers, and they are allowed to
remain in these “sweating” boxes, as they are called, in the
packing-house until wanted. The packing-house is a large and
lofty wooden building 230 feet by 90 feet, and the centre was
fitted up as drying-kilns last season to try and save some of the
crop, as it turned out an unusually wet season. A table 4 feet
wide runs the whole length of the building on one side, and the
fruit is sorted and packed here into boxes of 5, 10, and 20 lb.;
those of 20 lb. are in four layers, those of 10 lb. in two. The
boxes are neatly made, and cleaned off' with a revolving disc
covered with emery paper, and are all of one size, the only
difference being in the depth of the box. There are three
different grades of raisins boxed besides the loose ones, which are
packed in 50 lb. boxes, and sold at 6 cents per lb. The boxes
are all made on the place, and another building nearly equal in
size to the packing-room contains them and the fruit when
packed ; and another large shed is full of trays packed away.
Thu quantity turned out in 1881 was 550 tons, but the 1882 crop
was reduced to less than half by the grape hopper or thrip and
the wet weather. The price got was slf for 20 lb. boxes, and §1
for 10 lb,, and s2| for four 5 lb. boxes. Prunes are dried in
three “ Plummer ” driers, heated by lire. They take five or six
days in the sun and two days in the kilns, and sell for 15 cents
per lb. in small boxes. These and raisins an; the only fruits
dried. About 250 Chinamen are employed at the raisin-making
during October and November. They are overlooked by white
men, one to about tw r enty-five of the yellow-skins ; they get from
80 cents to a dollar a day, and Mr. Briggs is afraid now that they
are stopped from coming to the country that he will have great
difficulty in carrying on the business.
The soil is a deep sandy alluvium, easily worked. A large
portion is irrigated by cement pipes laid between every second
row of vines at 20 inches in depth, with a hole for the water to
come up through between every four vines. The pipes are made
of sixteen parts gravel from the bod of a river to one part of
cement, and the machine lays the pipe continuously in the trench
as it travels along. Mr. Briggs is not quite satisfied with this
system, and thinks that surface irrigation is the best after all.
The water is raised with a thirty-six-horsopower portable engine.


The.land is all deeply ploughed once in the winter with single-
furrow ploughs, and kept well worked with two-horse scarifiers
and a pulverizer made with steel knives crossing each other. It
is called the “ Aclinic ” cultivator, and is found very useful if
used at the right time. The cultivation is very thorough, and
scarcely a weed is to he seen. There are seven acres of soft-shell
almonds, which are expected this year to yield from twenty-five
to thirty tons. They got 14 J cents per lb. for the last crop to go
to Chicago. There are also several acres of apricot, plum, and
pear trees, the produce of which is all sent to the canning factories
in San Francisco. The whole establishment is a model of good
management. Mr. Briggs travelled tlirough Spain in the autumn
of 1878 during the raisin-making season, and saw nothing there
to copy, their processes being found by him to be quite unsuitable
to a new country, where land is cheap and labour dear, and he
came back fully persuaded that he could turn out in California
raisins better and cheaper than any country in the world. I had
the pleasure of meeting Mr. Briggs in the same train that brought
us back to the city, and got many of these particulars from him.
lie also told me that he had not tried the system of dipping the
grapes in boiling lye, the object being to make as many dessert
raisins as possible, as they fetch a higher price than pudding
raisins. lie also said that the kilns he had to put up last year to
save a portion of his crop answered very well, and that he could
get in twenty tons at a time, and by means of a steam coil in the
bottom of each compartment could get up a heat of 130° F.,
quite sufficient to dry them thoroughly. I saw here a very
ingenious contrivance for taking the outer husks from almonds,
and which is said to work very well, but I should like to see it at
work, as I doubt whether it would not injure the soft-shell kinds.
There is no doubt but this part of the country is admirably
adapted for raisin-making, the soil being, with the aid of irriga-
tion, capable of producing the finest grapes, and the climate
during the ripening nearly dry and free from the fogs and damp
of the country nearer the sea. The land requires nothing more
than deep ploughing to prepare for planting, and no stakes are
used, as the grapes arc allowed to lie on the ground, and are
considered to ripen earlier than if kept trained higher. Oidium
is very seldom seen to do any damage, the only trouble they have
is the little vine hopper, which cats away the under side of the
first leaves, and causes them to drop and leave bare the fruit,
which consequently gets burnt with the sun.
Several kinds of Muscat grapes have been tried. One, under
the name of the Cannon Hill Muscat, was found to set badly,
but where a few Tokay vines were among them they set better.
Mr. Blowers, at Woodlands, is also a largo grower of raisins, but


I had not time to visit him, as I should like to have done. A very
interesting article hy him on raisin-making in the first report of
the Viticultural Commission can be found in the library of
the Royal Agricultural and Horticultural Society, Adelaide.
CHAPTER VII.
SAN JOSE. —GENERAL H. M. NAGLEE'S BRANDY MANUFACTORY.
FINE BRANDY FROM THE REISLING GRAPE. —LARGE VATS USED.
HA VIXG heard that a gentleman at San Jose had devoted
. much of Ids time and money to the manufacture of brandy,
s we determined to pay him a visit. San Jose is about fifty
miles soutli of San Francisco, and is situated in the midst of a
very fertile plain, and surrounded with orchards and vineyards.
It is not far from the southern end of the Cay of San Francisco.
The town is well laid out, the streets being of good width, and
nearly all planted with trees on both sides, the Tasmanian gum
here having made a wonderful growth. The town is lighted with
the electric light. At the intersection of the two principal streets
a structure of tubular iron springing from the four corners of the
footpaths rises tapering to a point over 100 feet in height, and
bearing the light at the top. There are also four or five high
masts bearing lights of great power, and the light is considered
very satisfactory by the townspeople.
The vineyard, distillery, and cellars of General H. M. Naglee
are close to the town. The vineyard is an old one of about fifty
acres, and was formerly nearly all Mission grapes ; but they have
been grafted from time to time, and are now principally brought
down to wo kinds—Reisling and Burgundy. They are grown
particularly high on account of spring frosts. Being old and
strong, they do not require much support. Those that do arc
staked with sawn stakes. The land being apparently a rich
black alluvial soil, full of waterworn stones, has given immense
yields ; as much as nineteen tons to the acre is said to have been
gathered from the Mission grape.
The cellars are well-built of stone, and principally of one story,
except the part used for crushing and fermenting the grapes and
distilling. The grapes are brought in from the vineyard in boxes,
and delivered from the wagons through a wide doorway at the
end, the ground outside being raised some feet to allow the
wagons to rise to the level of the floor. Hero they are crushed


by a powerful iron-fluted roller-mill, worked by two men, and
fall, stems and all, into vats of 0,000 gallons below, through
openings in the floor. There are nine of these vats, all made of
redwood, and open at the top.
All the, juice that will run oil' is allowed to do so, and is
pumped off into other vats to ferment, and warm water, heated
by steam, is then put on the skins, and they are again fermented
and the liquor run off, and sometimes a second lot put on ; this
liquor is made into a second-class brandy. There is no press now
used, as it is found that after the second watering and drawing, the
skins do not pay for the labour of pressing. A very good and
large single-screw French press if therefore lying unused.
As soon as possible after fermentation is over distilling com-
mences. The still, which is apparently a rather complicated
arrangement, is a continuous one, and made on a plan given by
the General himself. The still is worked by steam, and turns out
about 170 gallons a day at about 7)0 o.p, which is the strength
found to answer hest. Much more could be run off at a lower
strength, but the quality would be injured by the quantity of
fusel oil driven over with the spirit.
In a cellar adjoining are two immense vats of 10,000 gallons
each, into which the fermented wash is pumped until wanted for
distillation.
The spirit after distillation is put into oak casks of 1,500
gallons each in an adjoining cellar, where there arc; twenty or
more of them in two rows, all very strongly made, and the heads
prevented from coming outwards hy longitudinal timber crossing
every three casks both back and front, and kept together with
strong iron bolts. As all the heads are put in concave I should
say this is quite an unnecessary precaution, hut it gives
an idea of security. The brandy is left in these casks to age
after being reduced to proof with distilled water. No flavouring
or colouring is used, the General priding himself on the absolute
purity of the article he produces. The price obtained is $7.1 per
ease, and, considering that nearly 62 or 61'SO is paid as duty to
tile State, and that no brandy is sold under three years, the price
seems to be very low indeed.
Brandy is allowed to be kept for throe years in bond, after that
the duty of 90c. per gallon proof has to bo paid.
The thing here of the most interest to us was the different
kinds of brandy made from various kinds of grapes, and of
different ages up to twelve years.
The finest and most delicate flavoured was a brandy made
from the Reisling grape, and twelve years old. This, when
compared with other kinds, showed that there is as much diffe-
rence in the brandy as in the wine it is made from. Next to the
Reisling the Burgundy gave the best; after that the Gouais.


Muscat gave a very full-flavoured and heavy spirit, without the
delicate bouquet and flavour of the Rcisling. Brandy from the
Mission grape, from one to twelve years, very good, but not so
fine as the Rcisling and Burgundy. General Naglee is undecided
which is the best grape to plant for brandy. He says if he could
get double the price for his Rcisling brandy he would plant that
kind only ; but, as that is not the case, and not likely to be, ho
would as a paying business go in for the heavy bearing kinds and
those easiest to cultivate. I have no doubt that his Muscat
brandy would be preferred by most persons, and that giving that
made from the Rcisling grape would be like throwing pearls
before swine to nine-tenths of the people.
Only the best Indiana oak is used for storage casks. A 1,500-
vat of brandy made from the Mission grape in 1870, and put into
a new redwood cask, had got a slight pine flavour, but was
otherwise very good.
There was only one thing which I wished to see here, but did
not, and that is the brandy made from the same grapes grown in
different soils. Much as General Naglee has already done, his
work will not be complete until ho can show the influence that
soil and situation has upon the product, and I have no doubt, if
he is spared a few years more, he will do that also.
It is a good thing for any country to have a few men who
make a hobby of special industries. Even if they make mistakes
they greatly benefit the country by the experience gained. There
are but few who have the pluck to go into ventures like this, and
who can, like General Naglee, afford to stand the outlay and wait
for years for the return ; and if no adequate return does come
they have the satisfaction of feeling that they have done more
for their country than all the stockjobbers and land schemers ever
did or ever will do.
General Naglee’s residence is in the old stylo, but is surrounded
by a magnificent park, which he generously throws open to the
public on Sundays.
I was sorry not to have had more time to spend in his company,
as there were many points I wished to ask his opinion about,
and which escaped me at the time ; but ho very kindly offered to
answer any enquiries 1 might make as far as he could.
The brandy is all sold in bottles made of a special shape for
him, and is neatly labelled, capsuled, and cased. It can be got
at most of the leading hotels in the country, and is recommended
by many of the leading medical men to their patients. We hope
to be able to take a sample he kindly gave us back to Australia
to show what pure brandy is like.


CHAPTER VIII.
FRESNO.—EISEN'S VINEYARD.—IRRICATION SYSTEM OF AND
WONDERFUL EFFECTS.—WATER-POWER UTILISED. FRESNO COM-
PANY’S VINEYARD.—CELLARS BUILT OF “ADOBES.”
’fjff.llE vineyards of Los Angeles being nearly 500 miles south
of San Francisco, we determined to take what is called the
* southern route on our way to the east, taking us through
Arizona and New Mexico, and then northward to Chicago, instead
of the northern route via Salt Lake and Omaha. On the way we
stopped a day at Fresno, which is about 200 miles on the route,
and is situated in the midst of the immense plain between the
Sierra Nevada and the coast ranges, both of which arc seen
nearly the whole way, the snow-topped peaks of the Sierra
Nevada showing up occasionally through the dull vapour-laden
air. Nearly the whole of this plain is in wheat and other cereals,
and makes one feel small in talking of our wheat-fields in South
Australia. The whole of this valley is drained hy the San
Joaquin River and its tributaries. The principal one crossed
before reaching Fresno is the King’s River, from which water is
obtained for irrigating the plains about Fresno. Fresno is quite
a new place, but has already 4,000 inhabitants. The streets are
laid out wide and regular, and when well planted with trees it
will be a very fine city.
We drove out to the vineyard of Mr. Eisen, about four miles
towards the Sierra, This is the oldest vineyard in the district,
having been started eight years ago. The estate is GlO acres,
000 of which arc planted with vines. The proprietor was away
to Sau Francisco, but his superintendent, Mr. Baber, a young
Englishman, showed us all we wished to sec, and gave us all the
information possible about irrigation, which is the life of the
district, for without it it is only a sandy waste, destitute of trees
or grass, and barren-looking in the extreme compared to the
portions irrigated. The great feature of this estate—or “ ranch”
as they are all called, from the Chinaman’s five acres to the
squatter's 50,000 —is the system of irrigation, which was here
brought first into use in the district. On the estate was the bed
of one of the many creeks which bring the waters of the


mountains across the plain in times of flood. A company took
it in hand to huild a dam across the King's River, about sixteen
miles up the stream, and divert a portion of the water into this
channel, which hy this means soon became larger and more
delined in its course. .Mr, Eisen has the advantage of this
stream through the middle of his property, and it has so
thoroughly saturated the land that water can now bo obtained
anywhere at a few feet, whereas before they had to sink lifty feet
for it. A raised channel, or ditch as it is called, 3 feet deep,
9 feet across at the top, and 3 feet at the bottom, is taken
from this main channel at about a mile up the stream, and
brought round to the cellars nearly on a level, and is there used
to turn a turbine wheel, bavins; a fall of about 4 feet. This
power is used for all purposes, such as pumping wine, crushing
grapes, grinding corn, pressing cotton, sawing wood, <fcc. From
this channel are smaller ones, following generally the highest
ground all over the estate, and the water is turned into them by
a very simple arrangement of doors from the main channel. In
this way every inch of the land can be irrigated at pleasure. Mr.
Eiscn’.s greatest trouble is too much water, as the company occa-
sionally let down too much water in the creek, flooding the vines
at the wrong time and destroying the crop of grapes.
The growth of everything here is simply astonishing, and no
one can believe it without actually seeing it. Vines planted as
cuttings two years ago from February or March have now a good
crop of grapes on them, and poplars and other trees in four years
arc from twenty to thirty feet in height; lucerne, or alfafa as it
is called here, is as good as at the Reed beds, and is cut five or six
times during tiro season. Some kinds of trees, however, do not
get on—the mulberry, olive, and orange—l suppose from too
much water at the root. The collars are large and of two stories,
built of “ adobes,” or sundried bricks ; the top story, which is in
the roof, is used only for crushing the grapes, and for all sorts of
lumber. The grapes are crushed with iron rollers, and fall on to
a large wire riddle, which is shaken by the same power that
drives the mill. The grapes and juice fall into a dobbin, which
holds aboutS cwt., and is of wood, with a sloping point end. It is
tilted by blocking the front wheels and raising the handles
behind. These dobbins are run along the floor, and the contents
shot down through traps into 1,500-gallon redwood vats below,
where it is fermented, and after the wine is drawn off water is
put on to both the red and white skins for distillation. We saw
no press on the place, and so conclude that they do not use any,
but forgot to ask the question.
There are over 100 vats, mostly 1,500 gallons each, and a few
of 3,000. We saw a pump at work taking the wine from five
vats at one time through an inch hose to each vat, and pumping


it into a blending vat of 3,000 gallons. Here it is stirred with
a vertical shaft-stirrer, also worked by the waterpower from the
main shaft running right through the cellars. Various kinds of
grapes are grown here, and all kinds of wine are attempted to be
made—from fairly light wine from the Zinfandel to heavy
Muscats and Ports. The most of the Zinfandel runs from thirty
to thirty-five by Bel ling's sacchrometer (the one used here) to
forty-five for the Muscat.
Wine has only been made here in any quantity for five years,
and as the vines are all young one can hardly say yet what the
quality may be in time to come as the vines get older, but at
present the wines are not much to boast of. We were shown a
red wine of last vintage, made to order with all stalk in it, and
fortified up to 40 per cent proof. It is to be used in making
Port, and has plenty of tire and roughness, and no doubt they
into whose hands it will soon come will be able to add all else
that may be required, and turn it out as port by the time it is a
year old. We were shown a white wine called sherry, from the
Paher Zagos grape, but without any sherry flavour. Scarcely
any wines but of the last vintage are in the cellars, and these are
being sent away as fast as possible. I am strongly of opinion
that the produce of this and similar vineyards will nearly all be
made into brandy in a very few years, and will pay better for
that than for wine, except it may be sweet wines. Mr. Eisen is
a large buyer of grapes, and up to the last year or two had it all
his own way, but the presence of other buyers last year raised the
price from 820 to S3O per ton.
The best wine tasted was a Muscat made from very ripe grapes
and duly fortified, and I think by regulating the supply of water
that grapes may be ripened here to any extent, and good sweet
and heavy wines made. But to try to make clarets and hocks in
this hot and dry climate is quite a mistake, and will never be
able to compete in quality with the hill wines of the northern
counties of California. Fortunately for them they have no
phylloxera here yet. Their only trouble is the vino-hopper and
thrip, but the growth is so strong as to bid defiance to almost
any pest of this kind. From here wo drove over the main creek
again, and soon came to the property of the Fresno Vineyard
Company, managed by Mr. Hudson, a thoroughly practical man,
and who, 1 should judge, is a first-rate manager. He took some
pride in astonishing us with a piece of Zinfandel grapes of forty
acres, planted two years ago last January as cuttings, and which
have now a crop of grapes on them which he estimates at 400
gallons to the acre. No doubt there is 300, and there may be
more. Some of the stocks are already as big round as my wrist.


There are 430 acres of vines planted, and all laid out for
irrigation; also about 1,000 fruit-trees of various kinds, and
which have made extraordinary growth. There are about seven
kinds of grapes planted, consisting of Zinfandel, Berger, Charbono,
Faher Zagos, Malvoise, Muscat Gordo Blanco, and a few Eeisling.
They are planted at good distances apart, about 10x10 and 10x8,
and staked for two or three years with a short stake about a foot
above the ground, just to keep the stein upright; the only ones
staked with long stakes are the Eeisling. The vines are not
topped, and already nearly cover all the ground, so that it is not
possible to work them with horses. Mr. Hudson, who has had
considerable experience in the older vineyards of Los Angeles,
prunes the Muscat long so as to prevent colure or bad setting.
Large new cellars are being built and casks getting ready for
the vintage, which begins in August in this part of the country.
The cellar is all above ground, and built of adobes, in two bays,
each about 50 x 120 feet, and each will take four rows of vats of
15,000 gallons, which are being made of redwood, and leave room
for two roadways of eight or nine feet each, with doorways at
each end of them. The floor is of brick, grouted in with cement,
and with gutters on each side of the paths, and the floors under
where the vats are to stand have a slight incline towards the
gutters. There is no machinery yet on the ground, but the best
out is to be put down. A large distillery and boiler-house is
built at one end of the cellar at about 40 feet distance. The roofs
are all of sawn shingles, which make a much better roof than our
split palings. They project about three feet, and so protect the
walls to some extent, but the adobes made here seem to stand the
weather well; some at Eison’s, eight years up, show very little
signs of the action of the weather.
The irrigation scheme on which the prosperity of this part of
the country wholly depends, is yet in its infancy, and troubles
are already being experienced. Schemes of this kind are started
by companies, and after a time get into the hands of one or two
persons, who do pretty much as they please with the people who
are depending on them for water. The people some miles lower
down the rivers are up in arms because the supply of water for
their cattle is taken away, and take the law into their own hands,
and send bodies of men, 100 or more in number, to destroy the
head weirs. In some places too much water is put on the land,
and the soakage Irom it forms marshy spots ; other places get too
little, and the whole thing wants carefully regulating by law or
custom. But there is no doubt about the ellect of it, as it can
be seen on all sides that it has already caused a howling desert to
rejoice and blossom as the rose ; but the rose in this case is tho


oleander, which is everywhere planted among the poplars around
the ditches, and is now in the most luxuriant bloom. We are
glad to hear that Mr. Eiscn, who may be considered the pioneer
here, has done well, knowing as we do that the first men in new
undertakings are often spending their energies for the benefit of
others who follow after them.
CHAPTER IX.
RAILWAY TRAVELLING.—DUST AND HEAT. —LOS ANGELES. —KOHLER
AND FROHLING'S WINE CELLARS. —ST. GABRIEL WINE COMPANY.—
SUPERIOR ARRANGEMENT OF BUILDINGS AND MACHINERY.—ORANGE
AND LEMON TREES.—IRRIGATION.
SROM Fresno for some miles the plain extends, and the line
1 for miles is a straight one. The ballast is only the earth
G '' out of the trenches, and the train in passing along raises
clouds of fine dust, nearly smothering the occupants of the hinder
cars. Americans both men and women- provide themselves
with linen garments called “ dusters,” reaching from the, chin to
the feet, and every one travelling here during the summer should
take the same precaution. During the night the train passes
over a very steep incline, and rises 7,000 feet above the level of
the sea in crossing the tail end of the Sierra Nevada chain of
mountains. It was here where a fearful accident happened lately
to a train which got away from the summit station whilst the
engine-driver was off his engine, and after being capsized over an
embankment caught fire and killed and burnt nearly fifty people,
so we were glad to be over this part of the line in safety. From
daybreak in the morning until nearly reaching Los Angeles the
country is a desert, compared with which the country about
Farina is a paradise. After a good rest, which we required, for
we got very little rest in the train, as it was a hot night and
quite stifling in the berths, we visited the cellars of Kohler and
Frohling, in the outskirts of the town. As the manager was not
in we took a drive round for a few miles—all the way through
orchards, orange groves, and vineyards. The, whole; of the laud
is laid out for irrigation, and there is water, water everywhere—
in earthen ditches and wooden flumes, crossing the roads and
running alongside them, and in some cases driving wheels of
twenty feet diameter to raise water into wooden vats for domestic


purposes. The orange and all fruit-trees are trained with a high
stein, and generally the land is well cultivated and kept free from
weeds. The orange trees generally look very healthy, and of a
much darker green in the foliage than they do in New South
Wales. We saw some forty-seven years old, and still strong and
healthy. The crop is now nearly all gathered and sent all over
the country, many of them going eastward even to New York
and Philadelphia. The lemons grown here are very fine. Peach-
trees looked rather scrubby and the fruit small. Pear-trees gene-
rally well loaded, but apples a failure. Returned and found the
manager, Mr. Whilhelm Schillgins. who kindly showed us round.
The vineyard is the oldest in the district, and was planted by Mr.
Kohler in 1854. It is only of small extent, and almost wholly of
the Mission grape, but large quantities of grapes are bought and
made into wine and brandy.
The vineyard is carefully cultivated, and the vines are dis-
budded, but not topped. They are trained with very high stems,
and the stakes done away with, as is the case in all old vineyards.
The cellars are extensive, but detached from one another, having
evidently been built as the business increased ; the oldest cellar
is still standing, and used as a fermenting cellar.
The newest cellar is a fine building of two stories, the lower
one being 20 feet high, and the top one 10 or 11. Here are two
crushing and separating machines similar to those described at
Krug’s and other places. These machines are supplied with
grapes by an elevator to each, and the crushed grapes and juice
fall into a tank 10 x 12 and 2 feet deep, fitted with a strainer in
the bottom to allow the juice to flow away. The skins are.
then passed through a hole in the floor and fall into wooden
shoots about 11 inches wide and 9 or 10 deep, so arranged as to
deliver into any vat in the lower story by means of stops and
outlets. The crushed grapes are also taken overhead across the
yard into the old cellars through earthenware pipes 9 inches in
diameter, and then on to the vats in open wooden shoots with
very little fall, but, they say, quite enough to prevent choking.
In 1880 200,000 gallons of wine and 20,000 gallons of brandy
were made ; the vintage of 1881 was much less in quantity.
Wine of all descriptions is made here. Drank some very fair
light-red wine ; also tasted sweet wines Port and Angelica, both
good, but wanting more age. The manager said that many of the
small growers use too much water while the grapes are ripening
to increase the weight, and when there is less competition for
grapes they will try to buy them according to the weight of the
must. Having had late rains this year they have not irrigated
their vines at ail, and they do not appear to want it, having made
good growth. The distillery is adjoining the new cellar, and is
fitted with a still of wood 20 feet or over in height and about


4 feet in diameter; this is divided into three chambers in the
inside, and there is also a rectifier or “ doubler” alongside. They
do not distil the skins, but do it all by washing them with water.
We did not see a press on the place. They are just now fixing
a 20-horsepower boiler, the old one proving too small to do all
the work required in the vintage. The fireplace is arranged to
burn oil instead of coal or wood, and if anything happens the fire
can be put out in a moment by turning a tap. The cooperage is
away at some distance, and three men are busy at setting up
40-gallon casks from staves and heads brought from Indiana.
They get 55 cents each for this work. They are filled with wine
and brandy here, and sent on to the San Francisco cellars of the
firm, which have been already described, and they are then
used again for sending out the wines to customers all over the
country.
Next day took a coach and driver to the large vineyard of Rose
and .Stern, at St. Gabriel, eight or nine miles from St. Angeles.
The country between is rather hilly, but on getting near St.
Gabriel the land improves, and many orchards and gardens are
passed, nearly all of them open to the road. Some of these are
irrigated from artesian wells, but the. supply from them is limited
compared to that got from the hills. We passed several of them.
The water is delivered through a six-inch pipe some eight or nine
feet above the ground, and falls over into a reservoir. It looks
as if it was as clear as crystal and as cold as ice as it flows over
the bell-mouth of the pipe. Noticed one that had failed from
some cause or another. I noticed that they were watering the
orange-tress, all done by Chinamen. They raise a bank between
each tree and fill the same with water, which comes from the
Sierra Madre Mountains, about four or five miles distant to the
foot of them. They profess to water the trees every month
during the summer. On our return passed through the village
of St. Gabriel and by the old Mission House built by the Jesuits
140 years ago. It is still used, a new roof having been put on a
few years ago. About here are a few old adobe buildings,
occupied by the remnant of the Mexican people, who are to be
seen lying round or propping up the few trees growing about
their dwellings. No cultivation or anything but a few old horses
• —high in bone but low in flesh—tethered or hobbled about. In
strange contrast is the flash-looking Yankee beer-saloons and
drug stores near them. Returning by another route we came
upon the splendid cellars of the San Gabriel Wine Company—a
new concern. The wine-house is an immense building of two
stories, built of brick made on the place, and is 2G6 feet long by
18G feet wide. The lower story is 13 feet high, and the top 11,
as near as could be judged. This is built on the top of a chalk
hill, which was levelled off, and the material used to make a
c


roadway to ascend to the hack of the building for the delivery of
the grapes. The crushers are two in number, and placed at a
distance of one-fourth from each end in transverse roofs made
for them above the level of the ceiling joists. The grapes are put
into one end of a cylinder, on which are revolving beaters, set
specially to carry the grapes forward to the other end, where they
fall into a wire cylinder, also revolving, but at a low speed, which
separates the stalk, and delivers them out at the end. The skins
and juice then pass into wooden shoots arranged with a fall of
4 feet in 30 to all parts of the building, and to every vat in
it. About half of the bottom door is already furnished with
fermenting vats, of 3,000 gallons each ; from them the wine,
after fermentation, is run oil’ to the cellar through a four-inch
galvanized iron pipe. This cellar is about 400 or 500 yards
distant, and the top of it is below the level of the bottom of the
winehouse. The pipe is carried across on trestles 40 or 50 feet
high, and delivers the wine into a tank raised on a platform on
the top door, and from that with hose to any part of the cellar,
which is 215 feet long by 18G wide. Already the cellar has, on
the bottom door, 50 oval casks of 1,500 gallons each, all full, and
a lot of smaller casks stacked about. A branch from the Great
Southern Railway is brought in past the cellar, and another to
the distillery, which is also built at the foot of the hill, on which
the winehouse stands, and is dtted with four stills of the best
kind, so arranged that one man can attend to the lot. This
building also contains the boilers which supply steam for the
stills, and also through a pipe several hundred feet up the hill,
and to a crushing apparatus in the winehouse. The skins of the
grapes, after the wine is drawn od‘, are treated with water, and
that after fermented is drawn od'intoa tank in the middle of the,
winehouse, from which iron pipes convey it to the top of the
distillery. I dnd that no officer is set by the Government to
watch the distillery, but every distiller is required to declare on
oath how much he has distilled. The skins, after the water is
drawn off, are thrown out of the vats into iron trucks, which run
on rails laid all through the building, and through a tunnel cut
in the rock at the back, and are shot out over a stage and down
the hill. The grapes are all brought up to the top of the hill,
which is levelled off to make room for thirty or forty wagons,
and high enough, so that the boxes of grapes can be handed out of
the wagons into the crushers. In this arrangement no elevators
are required. From this platform a splendid view of the estate
and the San Gabriel Valley is obtained, and when the whole
estate of I,GOO acres is planted, as is intended, it will be a pretty
panorama. Already they have 200 acres planted and doing well
without irrigation. They do not intend to resort to that if they
can avoid it. They have planted cuttings of Mataro, Carignan,


and Grenache, and other good French kinds 14 or 15 inches in
the ground in holes dug with the post-hole digger, and well
rammed at the bottom. The land before planting looks very
barren, and full of hills and hollows, like our Bay of Biscay land.
This is levelled with earthscoops before planting. The land is
trench-ploughed 15 inches deep, which I consider quite useless, as
the soil seems to be a gravelly sand with no clay, as far as I
could see in the water washes about the place. The planting is
rather close, I think—6 feet x G feet—but I am not quite sure
about the distance. The secretary and manager were away at
the time of my visit, but an old soldier attached to the Customs
or Distillery Department took us round, and I afterwards saw
the secretary, Mr. Fred. Wood, in Los Angeles, and he kindly
gave me much information. Mr. Wood was the architect of the
whole concern, and the arrangement of it all is at the top of
everything we have yet seen, and reflects infinite credit on that
gentleman. Mr. Walker is manager, and Dr. de Barth Short
president of the company, who only commenced operations in
May, 1882, and in September had the place ready to receive
grapes and make wine. The whole of the bricks and lime were
burnt on the place, and everything appears to be done to stand,
and no cracks or faults are to bo found in any ol the buildings.
No fencing is done, as the law allows damages to be claimed for
trespass on other lands. Wo shall be glad to hear of this spirited
undertaking succeeding well, both for the shareholders and the
country at large.
CHAPTER X.
THE FUTURE OF WINE-GROWING IN CALIFORNIA AND AUSTRALIA
‘WW'Y last letter completed the description of all I have seen
of the vineyards and cellars of California during a stay
l ’ ’ of twenty days. Of course it would take months to visit
all, but I think I have seen the principal old vineyards in the
country. There may he a few errors in my letters in respect of
numbers and quantities—-I took no notes at the time of my visit
—but as 1 had two pairs of eyes and ears with me beside my
own, and we generally compared notes when in the evening I
jotted down the events of the day, I trust there is not much
wrong in what I have written. I have come to the conclusion


that there is a great future before the vine-growers and wine-
makers of California. They can produce every class of wine
required by the world in some part or another of the country.
They'can make good brandy, and as cheaply as any country, from
the immense yields of grapes and the use of labour-saving
machinery in cultivation and manufacture. The tine land of the
interior valley of the Sacramento and the .San Joaquin, with the
aid of irrigation judiciously applied, and the tine dry climate, will
enable them to supply all the world with raisins, and perhaps
currants, which, strangely enough, have hardly been tried as yet.
They have a population of over fifty millions of people in the
United States alone to supply, and railway rates are now at a
rate that will enable them to flood the eastern markets with wine
and brandy. There are already ten million gallons of wine made
in California from the best accounts I could gather, and from the
large increase in planting during the jsast few years, and still
going on, the production will be doubled in three years, and it is
quite possible that production will for a time be in excess of the
demand ; and, for the credit of the wines of California, tne
sooner that is brought about the better, as the wines now are
placed on the market much too young, especially for the sweet
and strong wines. We, shall very likely hear of a great depression
and low prices in consequence of this rush in vine-planting, but
it will be only for a time, and those who have good vineyards
and can make fairly good wine need not fear, for it will soon
pass away. The market for the wines in the country itself is not
yet half developed; there are hardly any places open to the
public in any of the cities for the sale of wines only ; it is gene-
rally mixed up with lager-beer and spirits, and very little attention
paid to serving it out in a proper manner. A great deal of it is
no doubt sold as French and German wines, the labels, brands,
and cases being imitated to a T.
Tin-, wholesale business in wines and brandies in San Francisco
is principally in the hands of Jews, and no doubt when the prices
gets low enough for them they will buy in largely and hold for
age and better prices. Now one scarcely finds any quantity of
wine over a year old in any grower’s cellar, and I do not think
there is much in those of merchants.
For us in Australia wo have nothing to fear from the compe-
tition of Californian wines with ours in Europe. They have too
large a market of their own to supply for many years to come ;
and our wines are of a quality to suit the London market much
better than any I have seen of theirs. The youth of most of
their vines is a cause of much inferior wine being made ; add to
this the very general habit of planting vines in land too rich to
give anything but poor wine, even from the best kinds of grapes.
That the country is capable of producing fine wines I have no


doubt, having tasted excellent old wines, and very promising new
wines made from old hillside vineyards.
I have obtained during my visit greatly enlarged views of what
we should he able to do in Australia in the production of wine
and in the economical working of vineyards and cellars ; many
hints which will, I trust, bo of some service to the country of
1113'' adoption, and to myself and family. As I purpose to visit
some of the vineyards on the islands in Lake Erie, where the
famed Catawba wine is made, I may be able to give an account
of them at a future period.
CHAPTER XI.
VINEYARDS ON LAKE ERIE.—KELLY ISLAND.—HIGH PRICE OF
GRAPES. —CATAWBA WINES. GALLIZED WINES. —SHAM AND HUMBUG
IN THE WINE TRADE.
leaving California we passed through the State of
IjTjL Arizona, and on the Rio Grande River saw the Mexican
villages and their mode of cultivation, lire Mexicans are
early birds, for we saw many of them out turning the water into
the crops at day-break. The only cultivation is alongside the
river. The vast treeless plains, covered here and there with the
gigantic cactus and the yucca, now in bloom, are almost destitute
of life of any kind, and we were glad to get into a better country,
which wo did in Kansas, and better still as we neared the great
rivers the Missouri and the Mississippi. After a stay of a few
days at Chicago to see the wonders there, we went on to Sandusky,
on the shores of Lake Erie, as we had heard of large vineyards
and champagne-making being carried on there. Sandusky is a
very nice town, well laid out, and with many good public
buildings, and has many wood and other factories, and does a
great trade in ice, which is got from the lake and stored in ice-
houses during the winter ; but it is a quiet place compared to
San Francisco and Chicago, and puts one in mind of Geelong, in
Victoria. From here we visited Kelly’s Island, about twelve
miles out in the lake; it is about 2,400 acres in extent, and
nearly all of it is planted with vines. The island is flat, and is
nothing but a limestone rock, in many places with very little
soil, in others a good depth. Large quantities of the stone are
quarried and sent away for building and for burning into lime j


the vines arc all pretty closely plant,;;!, and arc all trellisecl with
posts and three or four wires, being the first we have seen trained
this way in America. None are grown here but the American
grapes, the Catawba being the principal grape grown. Some
grow the Concord for quantity and for sale as a table grape, and
the Delaware to make sweet wine from. Of course we had no
chance of seeing the fruit, as it is yet early in the season (July 9),
and the vines only just off the blossom. They arc very carefully
pruned and tied to the wires and the ground kept well worked,
which is easily done, the soil being of a sandy nature. Some of
the vines are pretty old—up to twenty-five years—and do not
make the rampant growth seen in California.
The largest wine concern on the island is the Kelly Island
Wine Company, managed by Mr. Kelly. We called on his
brother, who is president of the company, and he very kindly
drove us in his carriage to the cellars, which are on the highest
ground on the island, and well b lilt from the stone taken out of
the cellars. They do not grow grapes, but purchase all they can
at prices ranging from §2O to nearly §IOO per ton, the best prices
being for Delaware and Catawba. They have a capacity for
making 200,000 gallons a year if the grapes come in, but there
are several other buyers and the competition pretty keen. Home,
of the Cincinnati winemakers buy here and make the wine, and
then have it sent there to be finished into champagne. A new
feature to us in wine-making presents itself here—that is, wine
made from the skins of grapes, glucose, and corn spirit. The
grape-skins, after being pressed, arc put into casks tightly rammed
and headed up until wanted, and they are busy here now making
up this fabricated wine. Mr. Kelly defends the practice by
saying that the acids in the wine, and especially in the skins, are
in excess, and by this means they can make, a wine which pleases
the people better than the genuine article. The fermenting
cellar is heated by steam-pipes running round and in front of the
vats and near the floor, and many vats were fermenting and
pressing was going on. The smell of the fermenting cellar and
and press-room was enough to condemn the whole thing to us,
for it smelt more like a vinegar factory than anything else. In
the cellars below ground, and which are very damp and unwhole-
some-looking, is made the far-famed Catawba champagne. The
skins and juice of the grape, which is a coloured one, is fermented
for from sixteen to twenty-four hours to get a little of the colour,
and then drawn off and fermented in largo vats. The wine is
bottled at six months old, and is worked much in the same way
as described in the account of Harazthy’s cellars in a former
letter. The presses used are powerful single-screw ones, worked
by steam-power. The grapes are crushed in a wooden-fluted
roller-mill, driven by steam in a detached building from the main


cellar, and the juice pumped l>v steam pumps into tlic fermenting
cellars. Wo tasted some of the wines made here ; a dry claret, a
better llurgundy, and the now' dry Catawba of the last vintage.
It is generally sold under a year old, as it does not improve with
age. Also tasted the champagne, which is very fair, but leaving
a very peculiar flavour behind, as also does the dry Catawba.
None of these wines were so good as those we got at the hotel.
Wo stopped at the Sloane House, in Sandusky; we got there a
very nice dry Catawba at 75 cents the bottle, clean and soft, and
in splendid condition.
These cellars were burned down a few years ago, and have not
been reinstated in their original plan, and are not nearly so well
arranged as they might be for getting through the work of the
vintage. The strength of the Catawba is said to bo 11° of
alcohol or 19-5° of proof spirit, but it hardly seemed so strong as
that to us. On board the steamer we went to the island in,
wore some thirty or forty barrels of spirit, going out to
strengthen the gallized wines. This spirit costs, I was told, from
sl'2o to sl - 40 per gallon proof, and of that 90 cents is paid as
duty. The phylloxera is said to be all over the island, but Mr.
Kelly tried to find it to show me, but failed to do so. They do
not fear anything from it, as the vines seem to resist it, and gene-
rally look healthy enough. There arc several other islands in the
lake where grapes are largely grown, but we had not time to visit
them. On the shores of the lake for a mile or two back they are
able to grow grapes, but farther away the frosts are too severe.
No doubt the water tempers the climate to a great extent. Next
day we visited the cellars of Mills & Co., on the mainland near
the town. Mr. At ills kindly took us through. There is a vine-
yard here of fifty acres, mostly Catawba, but the growth is very
feeble compared to some we have seen. They were being carefully
trained to the wires by women, who get 70c. per day. They have
no Chinese here working in the vineyards as in California. This
underground cellars here are well drained, and kept cool when
necessary by. hosing with iced water. Ice can bo got delivered
here for 15 cents per 100 lb. Very little wine except champagne
is made here, and the quality stands as high as any in the market.
We sampled some, and found it very good, and with a decided
Catawba after-taste, which, I have no doubt, would be liked after
a person got used to it. The wine is worked in the usual way.
Saw the disgorging and corking done. Very good corks are used,
as much as §6 per gross being paid for them. The wine sells
wholesale from $lO to sl2 per two-dozen case, and is very well
got up, labelled, capsuled, and packed to resemble the French
article as near as possible.
There is a fearful lot of sham and humbug in this country.
We were very curious to know why at every little town we passed


of only a few houses the largest and most prominent store was
always lettered up “Drug Store.” Wo thought that the people
must he very much in need of pills and plasters, but we have been
enlightened since. One of the largest wine merchants dealing in
American wines assured us that fully 75 per cent, of the wine
sold by him and others and a large quantity of the spirits are
sold in these drug stores, and that the people take it “ medicinally”
and require it very often.
Wo visited a few of the dealers in Californian wines in New
York, but saw very little in them worth noting. It appears to
us that a very large proportion of the wine is sold as imported,
and the brandy worked off with corn spirit and sold as pure
cognac. We tried brandy once on the way through New Mexico,
but did not venture on it again.


PART 2.
NOTES ON VINEYARDS
IN EUROPE.
LETTER I.
VOYAGE TO LISBON.—STREET TREES.—CINTRA.—COLLARES,
WINES OF.
a’Y former letters, describing what I saw in the wine-cellars
[ and vineyards in America, having been so well received,
especially by the class to whom I have the honour to
belong, and by the public generally, who always take a lively
interest in the natural productions of a country, I am encouraged
thereby to give the results of my extended trip through Portugal,
Spain, Franco, and Germany during the vintage of 1883.
After spending about five weeks among our friends in England
my son Robert and myself went on board the s.s. Tagus, one of
the South American traders bound for Lisbon, on September 10,
1883. We have plenty of introductions from our friends
Messrs. Hopkins, Forrester, P. B. Burgoyne, and others in the
wine trade in London, and as we have left Mrs. Hardy in England
we expect to get over the ground rapidly and follow up the
vintage into France, and be back to England in a month or five
weeks.
We "ot stuck on a mudbank in the Southampton Docks and
did not "et away until the next tide, early on the 11th; and
after a very tine passage across the Bay of Biscay got to Lisbon
at 10 a.m. on the 14th, and had to wait at the Custom-house
until 2 p.m. to got our luggage examined. The Portuguese
officials cannot bo hurried. Lisbon is beautifully situated on the


broad Tagus. The buildings rising above one another and look-
ing white and clean give the city a very pretty appearance from
the river. Many of the streets arc wide and straight, and there
an; many squares, very prettily paved with black and white
stones, and planted with trees, but they arc generally small and
rather scant of foliage. The acacia, like we have in the Botanic
Gardens in Adelaide, is the best shade tree. We had a walk
through the principal streets in the evening. The shops are all
small, but well stocked, especially the jewellers’ and the ivory and
fancy-goods shops. Got up early and saw from our window
crowds of people, mostly women and children, going off in
steamers and boats to bathe down the river. At G a.m. we
started by coach for Cintra, .seventeen miles from Lisbon ; fan;,
3s. Saw many well-kept gardens outside the town and many
trees planted, mostly the elm, acacia, and the Tasmanian bluegum,
also a good many pepper trees and the alianthus. Saw many
arbours overlooking the road, covered with vines, but the foliage
rather scanty. The common bamboo, or Spanish reed, is largely
grown, and is used for various purposes, among others for sticking
peas and tomatoes, the latter looking very luxuriant. All the
gardens arc watered from wells or from reservoirs. The water-
wheels, with earthenware pots and worked by a mule or donkey,
are numerous, and there are a few Yankee wind-pumps. Saw
many orange ami lemon trees, but nearly all of them looking very
poor and full of black blight and dead wood, the fruit very small
and inferior, and the old trees covered to the tops with moss,
none of them so hcalthy-looking as our own. Stopped twice on
the road to rest the mules, As soon as we alighted we were
surrounded by beggars. On the coach we found two Englishmen
who both spoke the language of the country, and we got on very
well, At the first stopping-place we all went into a small wine-
shop and got some of the red wine of the country, for which we
only had to pay twenty reis, or one penny, for a small glass drawn
from the cask ; it was as light as a common Medoc, hut not so
rough. At the next place we stopped we tried a white wine
called Bucellas, taken from bottles, and wore charged twopence
per glass for it ; it was very good and light and had a slight
sherry flavour. Soon after leaving the suburbs we came in sight
of the Penha, a line palace built on the crest of a rocky mountain
nearly as high as Mount Lofty.
We got to Uintra about 10, and had breakfast at Lawrence’s
Hotel, and then hired two donkeys and driver to take us to
Collares, a village about five or six miles down the valley towards
the sea. The driver, who did not know many words of English,
was directed by Mrs. Lawrence to take us to some of the wine-
cellars and vineyards. They were all small places. The first
cellar we came to was a pretty lofty one, with wide doorways at


each end and all aboveground, with very thick walls, the root of
tiles laid on boards. There were no windows, and the only light
was from the doorways. There were about twenty casks of
about 300 gallons each, and all fitted with manholes and brass
screws and caps in front. Two men were here getting ready for
the vintage, and the only plant we saw was three or four tubs of
150 gallons each and one deep one of 250. One of the tubs was
half-filled with black grapes just gathered. They were sweet, but
with very thick skins and small stalks. There was no mill or
press, and we understood that they trod the grapes in the tubs.
The men were doing a little bottling and had a Gcrvais corking
machine, which was the only machinery wo saw. The wine they
were bottling was of the previous vintage; it was very fair wine,
of good colour, and in fine condition, and reminded us of our
Tintara Mataro, only lighter in strength. Noticed here a handy
funnel made of boards, about nine inches deep, and long enough
to come quite to the front of a 300-gallon cask. The men seemed
quite ready to show us everything and to give us wine to taste,
and a present of a few reis to some small boys belonging to them
made all pass oil' pleasantly, and we then mounted our steeds
again and proceeded further down the valley to the next cellars,
situated in the village of Oollares.
LETTER II.
VILLAGE OF COLLARES.—IRRIGATION OF FRUIT-TREES.—SANDY SOIL
OF VINEYARD.—BREAKWINDS OF BAMBOO.—ANCIENT LOOKING
VEHICLES.
'yrj'llE village of Oollares consists of a few houses scattered
©ls among the gardens on both sides of the creek running
®l® through the valley. It is hero crossed by a bridge of many
arches, built of stone, and about six feet high from the bed of the
creek. Against the arches are placed moveable boards, which
dam back the water of the creek, and nearly all of it is now
diverted into channels on both sides to irrigate the gardens below.
Near the bridge is a small square fenced in with stone posts, and
shaded with plane-trees, which grow very luxuriantly here.
There are stone seats beneath the trees.
We wont into another collar here and tasted the wines. Ihore
were ten 300-gallon casks, but only one or two full. The wines


were nearly all red, and similar in character to those wc had
sampled before, and all of the last vintage. At the back of the
cellar was a nice garden, full of fruit-trees, flowers, and vege-
tables, all irrigated.
We then crossed over the bridge and entered another cellar,
which was merely a low lean-to shed, and very hot. A woman
here gave us a glassful each of fair red wine drawn from a cask.
We were rather surprised to find these thin wines stand so well
on draught from the cask.
About a mile below the village we came upon the vineyards.
They are on both sides of the creek, and extend nearly to the
sea—perhaps three miles. The soil on which the vines are
grown is as pure a sand as our sandhills on the seaside. In
many places the sand has been removed to a depth of five feet,
and thrown up on each side, leaving a trench wide enough to
take three or four rows of vines at five feet apart. On the top of
the bank is a breakwind made of bamboo set on end in two rows
and filled in with brushwood and fastened together with longi-
tudinal bundles of bamboo on both sides, and fastened with
willow tics. These breaks are breast high, and from fifty to
sixty feet apart, and at right angles with the run of the valley.
-.Many of the bamboos take root, and form a living fence. The
purpose for which they are erected is to prevent the vines from
being buried with drifting sand. The hills beyond the vineyards
are thinly covered with stone pines, and they furnish the only
firewood wc saw from the prunings and a few trees cut down.
The banks arc generally planted with pumpkins of the ironbark
variety, and some very large ones are grown. Near the creek,
and as far as the water can be led from it, the land is planted
with fruit-trees, mostly apples, peaches, and pears. The margin
of the creek is planted with the basket willow, and dammed at
short intervals with earth dams, and trenches cut from them a
distance of two or three chains. Into the gardens at the end of
each trench is a waterhole, from which the water is raised with a
whip and bucket to a stone-built channel, about six feet high,
and so carried still farther into the garden, and then distributed
to the trees in earth gutters. The trees are all small in size and
very closely planted, and very little cultivated ; but the fruit
is very fine. We found a man and his son in one of these
gardens gathering apples, and they very readily volunteered to
show us round and explain to us the culture of the vines and
trees. We noticed that the peach-trees are not pruned. We
tried to find'out from them how often they irrigate the trees, hut
did not succeed. The vines are very closely planted in the rows,
and are pruned to leave one rod from two to four feet long.
Sometimes two arc left if the vino is very strong. These rods are
laid about in all directions, and kept off the ground about a foot


with props of bamboo, and the growth covers nearly all the
ground; the foliage is rather scanty and many of the bunches
fully exposed, but we did not find any of them scorched with the
sun, as we do in this country. The grape generally grown is a
small round black grape, very similar to the Spanish grape we
have under the name of Ferastes Colora. I think the long rod-
pruning and taking the'grapes early before they begin to shrivel
is the reason for the light and sound character of the wine made
here. The crop is very light— not more than 100 gallons to the
acre, if so much as that. We met many of the labouring people ;
they all appeared well clad, and many of the children wore boots,
and all looked happy. On our return we overtook our friends the
man and boy taking in their loads of apples. They are put in
deep baskets, holding about a hundred pounds, and two of them
is a load for a donkey. We saw a few carts, drawn by pairs of
bullocks, taking lemons and other fruits to Lisbon, the wheels
solid and axles of wood, and turning with the wheels. The
squeaking and croaking of them can be heard a mile away, and
created a good deal of amusement for us, as did also the cries of
the drivers to their cattle. Our donkeys took us well over the
sandy country. They are small, but very strong, and are much
used by tourists. We paid 1,800 reis—about Bs.—for the two
and driver for the day, but suspect that we were made to pay far
more than a native of the country would have to.
We missed the coach in the evening, and had to stop next day
(Sunday). This enabled us to go to the Penha and enjoy the
splendid view from the towers of the palace. We also visited
the beautiful grounds of Viscount Cooke, a London merchant,
and in the morning saw a small procession of priests and children
with llowing robes and silvered helmets ; but side spring boots
rather spoiled the ell'ect. It was headed by a band, and often
stopped and lot off rockets, a novelty to us in the daytime. We
found Lawrence’s Hotel very comfortable, and did not regret
having been delayed here, except that it prevented us seeing a
a bull-fight at Lisbon in the afternoon.


LETTER III.
OPORTO. —MESSRS. FORRESTER’S LODGES. — 1815 PORT.— AGED
CELLAR-MAN.—MARKETS IN OPORTO.
September 17.
§TARTED at 8 a.m. for Oporto, distance 206 miles. Break-
fast at Entrocamento, for which we were charged 500 re is,
or 2s. Id. Dinner at Aviero, GOO reis. At both places
wine is put on the table free of extra charge, but it is generally
very poor stuff, being so green and astringent. The second-class
carriages are not equal to the third in England, and smoking is
general in all. Women with bare feet come to the trains with
water in earthenware jars, very clear and cool, and expect
10 reis (equal to a halfpenny) for a drink. Small clingstone
peaches and a very nice small green fig are cheap enough.
18th,— Called at Messrs. Forrester Jb Co.’s office, in the llua
Inglese. The manager, Mr. Atkinson, being away, Mr. F.
Standrin took us across the Douro to their “ lodges” or wine-
cellars. They have them in three places, but near each other.
The largest consists of three adjoining cellars, each about 400 x 50
feet and from 20 to 25 feet high, and all above ground. The
roofs are boarded over the rafters, and red tiles laid on the
boards. They are lighted from the roof and at both ends, and
are kept moderately light. The wine is all in pipes of 111
gallons, and set in four tiers in each cellar, with ample roadways
between. Each tier is three pipes in height, the bottom one
very close to the floor. The two top rows are set leaning a little
forward for convenience of drawing off. The racking is all done
with the tap and bucket, and no pumps are used. There are
three vats for blending wines, all fitted with stirrers, worked by
hand, the largest holding 80 pipes. They are said to be only
used for blending inferior wines. Hero are the offices and
sampling-rooms, and a sample of every shipment is kept and
numbered, and all particulars of the blend entered in a book.
The samples are kept for three years, and from them they can
blend a wine to follow up any particular shipment that may have
been sent out. We tasted some ports of the last vintage and
older, and at prices from i'2o to £52 per pipe. The wine of a
good year is kept by itself and sold as a vintage wine; the


inferior vintages go into blending and come out as one, two, or
three diamond ports. We tasted a very tine wine of ’Bl vintage,
which they said would bo kept as a vintage wine, being very full,
and of a deep rich colour and fine flavour. We also sampled
several white ports, very sweet and strong; it is nearly all sent
to Russia ; also a very fine Muscat wine, very sweet, but clean
and of fine flavour. The cap piece of all was a port of 1815,
called the Waterloo port. We had tasted it before in Messrs,
Forrester’s office in London. It is the colour of brown sherry,
of exquisite flavour and bouquet, and is kept as a curiosity. It
has been kept filled up from time to time with newer wines, to
“ refresh” it as they say, so that how much of the 1815 wine
there is in it would be difficult to find out. At this cellar is the
principal cooperage, where a dozen or more men are employed
making hogsheads and quarter-casks (pipes are bought ready
made.) The only noticeable tiling among the coopers’ tools is the
horse, in which the cask is laid to be grooved for the head. The
staves are boiled for two hours, and afterwards soaked in a tank
of cold water to extract some of the tannin from the wood. The
casks are all said to be all seasoned with new wine before being
used for shipment. Previous to use they are all measured by
filling them with water from a tank with a glass gauge at the
side, and, if over or under measure, are returned to the cooper
and made to the proper size. We saw very few people at work
in the collars, and no racking going on. The utensils used are
wooden buckets, holding about six gallons, and tub-shaped funnels
of largo size; Rotary pumps are used, but only for the new wines.
The head cellar-man is 77 years old, and a fine, hale, hearty old
man. He pointed to his teeth, which are still good ; and when
Robert said that port had been very slow poison for him he said
he know another cellar-man ten years older than himself, and
still able to work. He has been nearly all his lifetime in the
cellars of the company.
The cellar contains about 250,000 gallons, the next one below
and nearer the river 200,000, and the lower one, where the new
and inferior wines are kept, 150,000 ; and, with the exception of
a few tonnals, the wine is all in pipes. The casks after racking
are not filled up again for nine or twelve months, and the ullage
caused by evaporation is not considered at all objectionable.
Cork bungs are used. Both red and white wines are considered
to be benefited by a certain amount of light. There is no par-
ticular arrangement for ventilation, and the walls are all black
and the floors mouldy. In one of the cellars a man was employed
cutting hoop-iron into lengths, and punching these with two holes
in each end ; he did it by the eye, and so true that the rivets
dropped into their places quite easily. We saw men carrying
empty wine pipes on their heads, and all seem to prefer that way


of carrying burdens, Women do most of the carrying. We met
, a man, looking like a working blacksmith, in the street, and a
woman trudging alongside of him with a hundred-weight bundle
' of rod iron on her head, which we supposed he had purchased and
employed her to carry for him.
In the early morning during our stay in Oporto we visited the
various markets, and saw in them many novel and interesting
sights. The busiest time is from 6to 7, and then one may see
the middle-class women doing their marketing. Some ladies have
a servant with them to carry their purchases; others hire carrier
women, who stand in the market ready to be hired. All cover
their heads with gaily-coloured shawls or kerchiefs, and we only
saw one in the market with a French hat on. The carrier women
wear no shoes or stockings, and wear a band or roll of stuff
around them below the waist. The largest market was near our
hotel, and was open every morning (Sundays included), and
nearly everything is sold in it—heaps of sweet and water melons,
some very large. The stone fruit is generally very inferior, and
the grapes mostly are the common wine grapes of the country.
We saw a few fine white grapes, which ire found to be the Belas
Blanco, also a red grape like the Malaga Muscat. Apples very
small ; pears good, but not so tine as ours ; peaches large, but
nearly all clingstones ; tomatoes and capsicums very fine. There
are no good fruit-shops in the city ; people all seem to go to the
market for their supplies. Maize bread is brought in from the
country in large loaves, and is out up in pieces and sold by weight;
meat of all kinds; sausages of queer appearance ; olives, both
green and black ; earthenware, baskets, and mats of all kinds,
wooden spoons, and many articles of wearing apparel, boots and
shoes, &c. Wo noticed that housewives purchased a very small
quantity of meat to a large basket of vegetables and fruit.
We arranged to start early next morning to visit the port wine
vineyards on the Douro, Mr. Standrin having kindly offered to
accompany us.
LETTER IV.
THE UPPER DOURO, THE PORT WINE COUNTRY. —LOVELY SCENERY.
—BOA VISTA.—PHYLLOXERA, RAVAGES OF.—TREADING THE
GRAPES. —FORTIFYING PORT WINE.
September 19.
STANDRIN meet us at the station, and 7.30 a.m. we
ATT started for the Upper Douro, the port-wine country ;at
j 0.30 we struck the Douro, and from this point we
followed the river to Finhao. The scenery as wo wound round


the bends of the river was exceedingly beautiful. Many of the
stations are so situated that glorious views both up and down the
river is obtained from them. The hills on both sides are close to
the river. The port wine vineyards begin about Regoa, which is
a pretty largo but scattered town. No one can imagine without
seeing how pretty the terraced the hills look, covered with vines
to the very tops, and dotted here and there with the white houses
of the peasants, and near the river, the fine houses and wine
lodges of the; wealthy proprietors. A few miles above Regoa we
reached the country devastated with the phylloxera, and
it is a sad sight to see nearly all these vineyards abandoned.
The hills are all terraced with walls of dry stone from three to five
feet high, which keep up the soil. This is composed of the
decomposed rock with a very little earth. The terraces are generally
ten feet in width, and two rows of vines arc planted on each.
A few olive-trees are scattered here and there, and near the river
bamboo, and orange and lemon trees near the lodges. We reached
Pinhao at 1.30, when it began to rain heavily, and we had to wait
an hour at the station before we could start to go down the river,
which we did in one of the boats, which had a high peak and
stern, and was steered with an oar twenty feet long, and worked
by three men. The only passengers wore ourselves and the bailiff
of the Roa Yista Vineyard, who met us at the station. The
distance we had to go was about three miles, and we enjoyed the
trip very much. We had to shoot three or four of the rapids,
with which the river abounds. On going over the first wo
thought the boat was grinding on the rocky bottom, but it was
only the bottom striking on the water. The boatmen shout to
one another, and seem all excitement at the rapids. Roa Vista,
which is well named, is situated on a projecting hill, and from
the house a splendid view is obtained both up and down the river,
the hills on hoth sides terraced to the tops. This place was
bought by tin; Forresters in 18GG, and kept as a country seat.
Before it was devastated by the phylloxera it produced about
forty pipes of wine. The extent of it is only about fifty acres.
Nearly all the old s ines have been dug up and the ground treated
with sulphide of carbon and replanted with the old kinds again.
Roth here and in Oporto they have beds of American vine
rooting, which they intend to plant here. The Mustang, or
native vine of Arizona, has made most growth. After dinner,
served by the old bailiff and his wife, we went over the sdneyard
and cellars. The vineyard is terraced in the usual way, and
after the heavy rain very little earth is seen among the stones.
The kind of grape mostly grown is called the Touriga, a black
grape, very like the Malhcc, but without the red-loafed stalk of
that vine. The young vines two and three years planted look
weak and sickly ; a few American vines planted look healthy,
D


Imt have not made much growth. Many of the strongest of
the old vinos an; loft, and I should say have kept the phyl-
loxera alive. On each side of the hill are gullies with small
pal flies of rich soil, and in one is a small garden with orange and
lemon (roes, watered from a small spring, and the water stored in
roek-luiilt cisterns'; in the other gully is a lino hit of soil watered
from a small spring ; here are hods of cuttings rooting. Among
them we saw the Shiraz and Carhinot, obtained from Australia,
and several of the American vines. Here also is a large space
covered with old vines on a rough trellis ; they are of tine table
varieties, and one, called the Formosa, was a splendid large white
grape. Beneath this trellis are grown pumpkins, cucumbers, and
other vegetables. Several large clumps of bamboo are grown
here, and this is the only support used for the vines about here.
Near this gully are a good many of the old vines, which appear
to have escaped the phylloxera and are bearing pretty well.
There is a great length of wood on them, but they are carefully
pruned with the shears and afterwards trimmed with the knife.
In planting a new vineyard with cuttings they are used about
three feet long, buried in a trench about a foot in depth, and the
top brought up just above the surface ; and very few fail to grow.
Layering is frequently done, but grafting is not practised. The
old bailiff believes that the failure of the vines is sent as a punish-
ment for sins committed by the people, and hopes lie is not one
of them ; and that when Clod has chastised them enough the vines
will grow again. He does not believe that the small insect on
the roots has anything to do with the death of the vines. The
lagar or presshouso is a low building, and contains three large
tanks or lagars, and one smaller one ; the larger ones arc about
11 feet square, and 2 feet G inches in depth, and all built of cut
granite ; the sides (5 inches thick, and well clamped together with
iron ; in the centre of eacli is a socket, firmly fixed, to receive tin*
screw. These tanks or lagars are raised about 4 feet from the
roadway in front, and a granite cistern, holding about a pipe, in
front and partly under each lagar, receives the must when it, is
run oil', and from these cisterns it is conveyed in granite gutters
through a wall to the cellars lower down the hill. The grapes an*
gathered and brought in in baskets and emptied into the lagar
until it is full enough. Sometimes two days’ gathering is done
before treading commences. About a dozen men then set in with
hare feet and short trousers, and the grapes, stalks and all, are
trod for thirty-six hours with scarcely any interval, and if that
is not found enough for three or four hours more ; the juice is not
drawn off until the treading is completed. It is then run olf
into the cisterns below, and from them into the tonnels or large*
casks in the cellar. For every pipe of wine they reckon to get
from the lagar, fifteen gallons of spirit are lirst put into the vats,


and when drawn off in the spring to send down to Oporto two
and a half gallons more are added, and a further quantity before
it is shipped to England—in fact, the wine is fortified up to 3S J
proof. Each lagar is said to contain grapes enough for sixteen
pipes of wine. After the Juice is drawn off the skins are heaped
around the screw and pressed, but the pressed juice is kept
separate, and only mixed as appears to be required afterwards.
In the cellars are six tonnels of 2,400 gallons each, all cask-
shaped with manholes in front; there are also a few smaller casks,
all now empty. The tonnels when emptied are washed out with
cold water and bunged up, and sulphur is very rarely used ; we
saw none about the cellars. Wo suppose that with these strong
wines it is not required. We were very careful to ask about, this,
as so much depends upon the management of casks, when empty,
in a cellar. The house is beautifully situated high up above the
river and railway It consists of one large room and several
small bedrooms, with spacious balcony in front, and is just suited
for the purpose it is used for. Everything about it is very clean
and neat. Several Australian blackwood trees are growing about
the house, but some have died from the long drought of three
months which they have had. The road leading from the river
up to the cellars is almost, at an angle of 45 J ; but a pair »f
bullocks will take down a pipe of wine in tin; ancient-looking
carts used. The wine is all shipped on board the boats from bits
of sandy beach, and sometimes from the rocks, by laying down a
staging of planks. The boats have to be towed up the rapids
with bullocks, and often the tow-rope has to be several hundred
feet long to reach the places where the cattle can get footing.
"We were right royally entertained here, and the old bailiff
thought we did not eat enough. The dishes wo liked best were
curried fowl and rice and delicious pork sausages : for dessert the
small green fig and magnificent grapes ; and for drink a good dry
red wine, but no port ; indeed, wo never saw port drank any-
where, except by English visitors, in this country. We went
into the kitchen, which is detached from the house, to see the
cooking arrangements. A tire on the floor in an immense chimney
was surrounded by a dozen or more pots of brass and earthenware,
and of various size's. After breakfast next morning we returned
to Oporto. After leaving the Douro we saw a great many vines
grown over oak trees, which are planted round the small holds—
and sometimes the vine entirely covers the tree. From these
high vines the thin red wines used by the peasants is made. We
saw some maize, olives, very little wheat or barley, no fences of
aiiv kind, and very few cattle grazing.


LETTER V.
LODGES OF MARTINEZ GAZIOT AND CO. —WINE-MAKING ON THE
DOURO. —AUSTRALIAN TREES IN OPORTO. —WINKS DRANK BY THE
LOWER ORDERS.
September 21.
WlSl'm, th(! cellars, or “lodges,” as tliey are called, of
ctl/a Martinez Gaziot. *t Co., at Villa Nova do Gaia, across tin*
Homo from Oporto, where all the principal ones arc
situated. The main entrance is through a lofty doorway into a
large courtyard with high walls against the street. The words
“ Inglese Propriotaio ” may he seen over the entrance to this
and many other lodges, which are wholly or partly' owned hy
Knglish firms, and is intended to protect them in troublesome
times. The courtyard is nicely planted with shrubs and flowers,
and vines are trained to shade a portion of it. Noticed that the
oidiuni was very bad on them. Here are the ofiices of the firm,
in what was once evidently a private residence, and in them
samples of all wines sent out for the last three years are kept
neatly stowed away in cupboards. Mr. Ramsay, the general
manager of the firm, being away, Mr. A. G. Nugent, the lodge
manager showed us over the cellars, and gave us all the informa-
tion we asked for. The cellars are exceedingly well kept, and
the largest is about 150 feet long, and contains 1,900 pipes of
wine in six rows, with plenty of room in the alleys. On each
side are two narrow cellars, separated only from the main one by
lofty arches, and from these others branch dff toward the river.
They are all roofed with tiles laid on hoards. The principals of
the older lodges are of chesnut wood, and very massive; but that
1 wood is now scarce, and in the newer places deal and iron is used.
They have also the cellars of an old convent, the walls of which
are fully .'lO feet high. They'are all lighted either from the roof
or high up the walls. In the principal lodges is an office for the
manager, raised ten or twelve feet from the floor, to enable him
to see all that is going on in the lodge. We were surprised to see
so few men at work in these cellars. Racking is all done with
the bucket, and two men generally work together, and when
finishing a cask one man raises it steadily’ whilst the other chocks
if up. All the coopering is done on the place, and the men feed
and sleep about the cooperage during the week, and go their


homes on .Saturday and return on Sunday. They were scattered
about having their midday meal, which appeared to consist of
soup with cabbage in it, and eaten with wooden spoons out of
coarse earthenware howls; that and maize bread ana onions is all
we saw them having. They get only Is. 6d. for making pipes,
and twelve pier week is considered good work for a man. Riga
oak is used, and the staves are lirst boiled and then soaked in cold
water. The new casks are always sent up the country for the
new wine to season them. Casks that have to remain empty some
time are sulphured, and all new casks are here measured, by
placing them on a raised stage and tilling them with water. They
are then turned over on to an open vat with a glass tube and
gauge at the side of it. .Mr. Nugent has been with the firm
many years, and has often had to go up the Douro during the
vintinge to superintend the wine-making. The firm purchase
fifteen or sixteen “ quintas ” or vineyards yearly, and send up
their own spirit, and have the wine made under their own super-
vision. The wine is generally delivered by May, and paid for at
three payments at four months apart, and the quantity of spirit
used deducted off the account. We saw a large quantity of
spirit going up) in boats and at the railway stations. Many of
the wealthy proprietors hold their wines and mature them. Mr.
Nugent gave us rather a different account of the treading of the
grapes. He says that as soon as the lagar is full of grapes as
many men are put in as can stand in it almost, three men for
every pipe is considered the right thing, and they commence at 6
in the evening and continue till 12, and then let it rest till 0 the
next morning, then a smaller number of men tread it all day
until 0 in the evening, and again the next morning as long as
may be required, and here comes in the greatest art in the making
—to know the exact time to draw otf, and can only ho attained by
long experience. The men are helped on with their monotonous
work by a fiddle or guitar, and have short rests at intervals. The
lager houses are all shut up at night while the treading is going
on, and in a low budding like that at Iloa Vista they must get
pretty warm with such a number of men in them. This prolonged
treading of the grapes is the only way found to answer, and no
doubt they get a more perfect fermentation and more colour than
could he got by any other method. The pray of the men is only
Is. 3d. pier day, and women (id., and they have to find their own
bread, but soup and other food is given to them, and a drink
made by pjutting water on the grape skins after' they leave the
piress is given ad libitum. We tasted some very fine wines at
these cellars. Wo specially noted a port of 1858, almost the
colour of brown sherry, hut full of body and flavour ; also white
ports, and many other line old wines, and left well pleased with
all we saw, and with (he attention paid Lo us by our kind friend.


Among the many noticeable tilings in Oporto is the immense
width of tlie bullocks’ horns. We were shown a pair measuring
7 ft. 1 in. from tip to tip. I measured the horns of one in the
f.uvet, and found that they reached to the palms of nij hands ;
the bullock boy looking on wondering at what J was doing, but
was made quite happy with a present of 20 rcis, or a penny. The
bullocks arc always worked in pairs, and led with a leather thong
by a boy in front, and a man following behind. The yokes are a
(lal piece of board 10 inches wide, and quite elaborately carved
and ornamented with tufts of hair, and are handed down as
heirlooms in the family. On the Donro they are yoked just
behind the horns with a large- pad of leather in front, and hang-
ing over the eyes. The carts have solid wheels of wood, and
axles of the same, turning with the wheels, and are, no doubt,
well suited to the steep roads they have to travel over. iVlany of
the houses are faced on the weather side and front with glazed
tiles of various patterns set in cement, and always look clean
after rain. Water fountains abound. One just below our window
is thronged with young and old of both sexes from daybreak till
late at night. They carry away the water in earthenware jars on
their heads, and men carry long kegs on their shoulders and
supply the houses ; and they give one a very small jug of it to
wash with. W e went into the line old cathedral while mass was
being performed. There was only one woman and three beggars
inside besides ourselves, and lots of beggars on the steps outside.
We got a splendid view of the town from the tower. Tramways
go up very steep hills, generally drawn by six mules, and through
streets not more than twelve feet wide between the kerbs. There
are many tine squares, planted with plane tree, and we were
pleased to find that the Jiuest street tree was our Australian
black-wood. It is kept pruned in the shape of an umbrella, and
a good deal of wine business in the Hue Inglese is done under
their shade. The Rue, Flores is full of jewellers’ shops, and the
beautiful fillagree work in gold and silver is largely made here.
The carrier women wear large gold earrings often worth .£lO the
pair, and three or four inches long. The wine most used at the
hotels is Collates, and charged 250 reis, or Is., per bottle ; a, lighter
arid rougher wine called Talahete is also much used, and is
charged about lid. We never saw port at table, except in front
of an Englishman or American ; very little white wine is drank.
We called at many of the small wine shops in the city and tasted
the wines used by the people; they are all dry, thin wines, and
many of them so green as to he hardly drinkable. They are all,
or nearly all, drawn from the cask. Food is generally supplied
at these wine shops, and a strong smell of garlic is generally
found in them.


LETTER VI.
WINE SPIRIT.—BATHING AT THE MOUTH OF THE DOURO.—OLIVE—
TREES.—SEVILLE, INTERESTING SIGHTS THERE.—HOUSES BUILT TO
SUIT THE CLIMATE.
Septemrf.r 22.
on Mr. C. W. Tait, in tlie Hue Inglcse, or English-
Sw* street. He is a great enthusiast about Australian trees,
‘^ a * and has a large plantation of them on the Tagus. He took
us to his brother, Mr. A. W. Tait, a wine and spirit broker.
We were shown by him a wine spirit six months old 30 3 over-
proof. He said it was preferred at that strength to that run oil'
stronger, as it gave more of the wine flavour in fortifying port
wines, and also that it is much superior to corn or potato spirit
for the purpose. This spirit was distilled at Lcira, and the grapes
are grown there on the flats of the Tagus ; and the kind grown is
the (Jarascambo —a white grape with a thin skin, and a heavy
bearer. Spirit is always tasted with two-thirds water, in dock
glasses with a mouth not more than an inch across.
Sunday, 23rd. —Went before breakfast to the Foz, three miles
from the city, by steam tram, to see the people bathe at the
mouth of the Homo. Hundreds of people, both old and young,
were bathing among the rocks. They are usually carried in by
two women, with the bather’s back towards the water, and dipped
head first, and then let go, unless they are timid. At the mouth
of the river lay a fine steamer, which was wrecked a few
days before. We were recommended by an old traveller to
furnish ourselves with some provisions for our long journey to
Xeres to obviate the danger of being left behind at the stations
where the trains stopped, so we purchased a pigskin holding three
or four litres, and had it filled with a light red wine at fid. per
litre, some quince marmalade in solid blocks, and very nice, also
some, fairly good cheese and bread, very light but as the
bread is always here. The hotel charges here are very moderate,
and at the Grand Hotel only a dollar a day ; but the wines were
always charged for. Wo started after a late, breakfast at 2.30
for Xeres in Spain, and passed over a great many miles of poor
sandy country, mostly planted with pine forests. The irrigated
flats an; a groat contrast to these, and are luxuriant with the
green maize. l!oth men and women wen; carrying away huge
bundles of it to feed their cattle. Towards evening the train was


swarmed with agricultural labourers going harvesting, and appa-
rently carrying a week's provisions with thorn. They invaded
all the cars—first, second, and third class. We saw many of the
houses of the peasants or small farmers, with the cattle housed
below them. Travelled all night, and at daybreak were passing
through miles upon miles of olive-trees, the country, barring
them, just like Canowie. Many of the trees are growing out of
beds of rock, and looked healthy ; they appear to be of great
age, and the top is very small compared to the bottom, and all
are pruned to leave the middle open. In the rocky land they are
not cultivated, but in better soil a crop of grain is taken from
among the trees. A\ T e reached Badajos at 8 a.ra., but could not
see the town ; the country is open and destitute of timber. Near
the town are a few vineyards in sandy land, the vines very small
and grown without any support. A few tig-trees are scattered
among the vines. Here an; seen the ruins of a tine old Roman
aqueduct of great height. From here to Cordova we continue to
pass through miles of olive-trees, with not a fence to bo seen of
any kind, and very few cattle or sheep ; now and then a Hock of
goats with a hoy or girl tending them. Reached Cordova at
10 pm. tired and sleepy, and had to wait there until 4 a.m., and
no place to lie down except the floor. We were glad to get into
a tirst-class car without any occupants but ourselves, and slept all
the way to Seville, which we reached early in the morning. After
a good wash at the Hotel Londres, which we needed, we got
breakfast. We longed for raw tomatoes, and a vegetable and
fruit merchant with his donkey happening to pass the door out-
wants were, promptly supplied. The poor little animal was so
loaded that only his nose and tail and a bit of his legs were
v isible. After enjoying our breakfast sallied out and got shaved
liy a barber of Seville, and then to the celebrated Cathedral,
which the Spaniards consider the eighth wonder of the world ;
the interior is magnificent in its proportions and height. We
here picked up a guide who agreed for half a dollar to show us
round the sights during the three or four hours w-e had to spans,
and he did his level best to trot us round sharp. We first
ascended the old Moorish tower of the Cathedral. It is square,
and ten paces inside measure each way, and has an incline all the
way up instead of steps ; it is very high, and from the top a
splendid view of the city is got, also the orange-trees on the hanks
nf the Cuadulquiver and the distant hills covered with rows of
olives, the ancient potteries, and the old Roman aqueduct, which
still supplies the town with water. We were afterwards taken
through streets so narrow that, we had to step into a floorway to
let a loaded donkey' pass, to the old Ah-asar or Moorish Palace,
and through the beautiful gardens and the swimming baths
beneath the Palace, then to the Museum and Picture Gallery,.


where Murillo’s masterpieces are, and to Pontius Pdutes hoime,
and back through the market to our hotel. The day was as hot
as a January dav in Adelaide, and we fully appreciated the simile
of the narrow streets, and halted many times to admire the inner
courts of the good houses. One can got a glimpse of them
through the burred gates. They are cool and shady, with shrubs
and llowcrs and fountains in them. If of any size they draw a
light canvas blind across high up, as also they do in some of the
streets. The iron gates can only he opened from the inside, I lie
lower windows against the street arc strongly barred, and every
man’s house is literally his castle.
The people, sit and lounge about in these courts during the day,
and arc up early and late to their work, lasted wine at several
wineshops. The red wine is generally the Val de Penas, grown
near Madrid ; it is strong and flat, and does not mix with water
like the Collates of Portugal. We got a very nice light wine
made in the neighbourhood, with a slight sherry Havour ; we
always put down a penny, and are never asked for more, for a
glass. They do not seem to use any ice here, hut keep all drinks
cool without it in earthern jars and bottles and casks covered
with damp cloths. We were only charged 9s. for breakfast and
lunch, boots, and use of room. Our landlord is ah Englishman,
married to a Spanish lady. Wh are sorry our stay is so short in
this interesting city, hut we fear to lose the vintage and raisin-
drying if vve stay any longer here. Wh saw' a drunken man here,
the only one since we landed in this country. There is no doubt
about the milk being genuine here, for they bring the cow with
the calf muzzled to the customer’s door, and milk her there and
then, as vve saw several times in our rounds.
LETTER VII.
NERES. —BODEGAS OF FORRESTER AND CO.—COOL BOOKS.—SHERRY,
HOW KEPT. MR. W. G. SUTER.—INTERESTING REMINISCENCES OF
VINES SENT TO AUSTRALIA.—WALK AMONG THE VINEYARDS. —
MACKENZIE AND CO.’S BODEGAS.—FINING THE WINES.
»’E left Seville in the afternoon for Xeres. Much of the
_ : land we passed is a strong black clay, full of large cracks.
stubble left is very strong In some parts we came
on limestone country very similar to the hills about Xoarlunga,
and generally planted with olive-trees ; the country very open


and no fences, and the people all living in villages, which arc
generally on the tops of hills. We arrived at Xeres at T p.m.,
and a porter at the station, who spoke a little French, seized our
portmanteaus, and wo had to follow him to the Xorcs Hotel,
which we, found a good distance from the station. Our landlord
spoke French, and .some of the guests were English, and we met
here Mr. Ferguson, manager for .Mackenzie ifc Co., who invited us
to their “ bodega,” as the wine-cellars are called here. The wine
put on the table here is the Val de Penas, and is not charged for.
We found the table well supplied, and the curried chicken and
rice and the tortillas, or omelettes, good. A very largo prawn is
considered a delicacy, but we did not like them. We got very'
line grapes and pears for dessert. In the evening we had a walk
about the town. A largo square in the centre of the town, with
fountains and tall palms, was full of people, and the cafes round
about were tilled. Orange and lemon trees are planted in the
streets as ornamental trees, but do not answer well for a street
tree. On (September 25, after breakfast, we went to the oflice of
Forrester A: Co., in the outskirts of the town. At 11 a.m. the
manager (.Senor Cayetauo Oastellon) came and received us very'
kindly, and showed us over the extensive bodega of the firm. It
is a line building, the roof supported by three rows of lofty arches.
The walls- are nearly thirty feet high, and both them and the
arches arc. kept whitewashed, and the whole place looks clean and
wholesome—very different to the old black walls of the wine
lodges at Oporto. This bodega contains when full 1,800 butts of
wine, each butt 108 gallons. The roof is of red tiles laid on
battens. A flat tile with turned-up edges is laid first, then a half
round tile covers the joint, and over that again a flat tile is laid
in mortar, covering the half-round ones, and forming a complete
double roof with good air space between, and must be a very cool
roof, A broad cross alley leads to largo doors, outside of which
is tiu- railway, which runs quite round the town, and accom-
modates nearly all the large bodegas. At the opposite end is the
walled-in courtyard, entered from the street by massive doors,
and planted with shade trees and shrubs ; also vines trained over
skeleton verandahs for shade, Here is an entranee-lodge and the
offices of the bodega. The bodega is well ventilated and lighted
from windows high up the walls. They are latticed on the outside
and have a wooden shutter on the inside, which is closed when a
hot wind blows from the east. The heat in the sun was 74'
Fahrenheit, but the bodega was delightfully cool. The butts are
generally three tiers in height, and all loosely bunged with cork
bungs, and all on ullage one-ninth of the contents. The bung is
merely laid on to keep out the dust, and not to exclude the air.
The Hour is of earth 'veil trodden, and kept very (dean. Many of
the new wines are covered with a thick white scum, and this is


looked upon us a sure sign that the wine is improving, ft lias a
very different appearance to the “flowers” on a wine which is
turning sour. We tasted a good many wines which were given
to us to show the ditierent typ.es of sherry. We were also shown
many of the old solera wines, which are kept to flavour wines for
sale or shipment ; also a sherry said to ho unfortified, but we
found it very strong in alcohol ; then Pedro Ximenes, made from
partially dried grapes, very dark in colour, sweet and highly
flavoured ; also Muscat wine, made iu the same way, very clean,
and good of flavour.
The samples are all taken from the bung iu a small silver cup,
lashed to a whalebone handle about two feet long. The cellar-
man lets the wine fall into the glass from a considerable height
without spilling a drop. Samples of every wine sent out are kept
tins same 1 as at Oporto, and a complete record of the blends made
for reference. Senior C'astello then took us to the bodega of Mr.
W. O. Suter, who is the British Consul here. Ho is a line hale
old man of 75 years. He was glad to see a vinegrower from
Australia, and told us that he helped to pack and dispatch the
l ines that Busby collected fifty years ago, and was greatly pleased
to hear from us of what great value they had been to Australia.
His bodega is a fine building, in the same style as those already
described. The floors are all paved with the ends of pipe stales.
They are, not troubled here with white, ants, or they would not
have lasted long. We drank a glass of flue old Amontillado with
him, and he promised to send me a map of the sherry district
made by him many years ago, and which promise he fulfilled the,
same day.
Sei’Tkmueu 2(i. —Cot up early, and found several of the cafes
already open, (lot coffee and milk and sponge cakes. They
always put a tumbler of cold water on the table with it. Then
took a walk .southwards out of the town, crossed several vegetable
gardens with rich black soil, and watered with the waste water
from the fountains in the town. The principal things now
growing are a loose-growing cabbage, beets, capsicums, and both
yellow and red tomatoes. The capsicums are very large and
handsome. Then over a plain of light-coloured clayey soil, very
full of large and deep cracks, to the nearest vineyard we could
see. It was fenced with a tall hedge of the prickly pear, and we
found a woman gathering the fruit for sale with a long bamboo
split at the end. We got some from her, and found them very
cool and juicy, and much larger than any wo have in Australia.
Whilst we were eating them a woman came out from the vineyard
and invited us to enter, which we did, and wont into the press-
house. There were a few men about. They had just finished
paring down the “ cheese” and getting it under press again, and
were about to have their breakfast. They offered us bread and


grapes ; we took the grapes, !mt declined the bread. A very
ugh - old woman was cooking something in an earthenware pot
over a lew eoals on the lloor of the presshouse. A quantity of
grapes were spread on mats in front, and some butts of juice Just
pressed olf and not yet begun to ferment. There were only two
I,agars, or trcacliiig-box.es of wood, with wooden screws in the
centre. The empty one was left dirty, and the whole place was
dirty in the extreme. They gave us permission to go over the
vineyard. It was on a hillside and closely planted, the soil a
white clay and looking like old mortar, and where holes had been
dug to layer vines we saw that the subsoil was nearly the same
as the surface. We afterwards found that this was one of the,
second class vineyards, and they are called “ harms.” Our walk
back to the town was a hot and dusty one. The country looks
as if thero had been no rain for months, and the roads ankle-deep
in dust. After breakfast visited the bodegas of Messrs. Mackenzie,
near the railway station. Sir. Eerguson kindly showed us round,
and gave us a great v ariety of wines to taste, among them Pedro
Ximenes and Muscat wines, both very old and highly flavoured ;
Kola Tent, made from the Tinto grape, very luscious ; also boiled
must, used for blending, and all the different types of sherry.
They ship some sherries as low as .£lO a butt, and some linns do
it as low as .£l2. The bodega is very clean and well kept, the
roof lofty, and supported by brick arches, which cover over an
acre of ground. A light is constantly kept burning in a dark
lantern on a stand to examine the condition of the wines by.
Tall, straight-sided glasses are used to compare wines for colour
and condition. Gelatine is much used for fining, and is prepared
for the wine merchants as they want it, and supplied to them
ready for use in a semi-liquid state, and looks like starch. Clay
and whites of eggs are also used for fining the wines.
LETTER VIII.
SHERRY VINEYARD. —KINDS OF GRAPES DROWN. —MODE OF
PRUNING,—PRESSHOUSE. —OLD CHAPEL. —TREADING THE CHAPES.
EdJNGTUALLY at 1 p.m., as arranged, Senor Oastillon called
_ i for us witli a covered coach drawn by three mules. We
e ' s ' i " were driven out of town past the beautiful garden, and
bodegas of Gonzalez, Byass. it Co., and for some distance along
the road we travelled over in the morning. We then turned oil)


and at about two miles from the town came upon vineyards on
both sides of the road ; no trees except a few pines near the
cellars. At four and a half miles we come to the La Contessa
Vineyard, owned by Senor Don Antonio de Beerio, who is an old
bachelor and a great friend of the Forresters. The vintage was
in full swing here, and the place very well arranged and kept,
and the proprietor very hearty and willing to answer the numeros
questions we put to him. The vineyard is eighty acres, and is
situated on a hill; the soil a calcareous loam, and has nearly the
appearance of old mortar, ft is one of the “alfura” or chalk
vineyaids, and of the first-class for fine sherries.
The vines are pretty regular and about five feet apart, and
appear very old. Many of them are a mere shell, the stock being
quite hollow, and yet they bear good wood and fine fruit. There
is a tank in front of the cellars with the date 1726 on it, and the
vineyard is said to be older than that, but all the vineyards are
being constantly renewed by laying down old vines and making
layers to fill up where vines have died out or become
unproductive.
The kind grown are, first, the Palomino Blanco, which we have
in Australia. It is the vine most like the Sweetwater of all the
Spanish kinds, both in the wood and loaf. The next in importance
is the Manuo Castellano Blanco. It is very much like the Palo-
mino. We also found the Doradilla under the name of the
Montua de Pila, and we were also glad to find the grape grown so
extensively about Angaston and called the sherry grape. It is
the Albillo, and is considered to be one of the best of the sherry
grapes, and is grown more or less in all the vineyards. We saw
very few of the Pedro Ximines in this vineyard.
All the kinds named are grown without any attempt to keep
them separate, and the crop is gathered altogether.
The vines are all grown to a stern about fourteen or fifteen
inches high, and carefully trained to one rod of from live to eight
eyes, and this rod is often bent and twisted round and made to
lie across the stump, and sometimes propped with a short piece of
bamboo to keep them oil' the ground ; another shoot is allowed to
grow at full length without fruit to give the rod for next year- ;
we sometimes saw a third branch, but not frequently. The crop
is said to be good this year, and appeared to us like 200 gallons
to the acre. Wo passed a piece of ground that was being trenched
to about eighteen inches in depth. We saw that the subsoil was
all chalk, easily broken up. We asked what they trenched for-,
and all the answer was to bury the seeds and weeds. The culti-
tion is all by hand labour, and is very thorough, and is said to
cost .£lO per acre. The tool used both here and in Portugal is
a heavy hoe with a long blade, and set at a very small angle in
the handle. The labourer has to stoop very low to use it, but


they will not use any other, and do all sorts of work with it.
The presshouse is a large building with a broad verandah in
front, and situated on a hill, from whence a fine view of the
country, which is nearly all in vineyards, is obtained. At one
end of the verandah are the rooms used by the proprietor when
here, and between them and the presshouse are the kitchen, office,
and other rooms. There is also a small chapel, which the pro-
prietor said was rarely used since the peasants had taken to read
the cheap newspapers. In front of the presshouse is a yard of
fully half an acre in extent, level and gravelled. Here the grapes
are brought from the vineyard and laid out on round mats made
of esparto grass to get the sun for at least twenty four hours.
The men who were gathering were coming in in Indian file, with
a square box, broad at the top, on the head of each. A boxful is
spread on each mat, which is about thirty inches in diameter.
For Pedro Ximenes and other sweet wines the grapes are
allowed to lie from eight to twenty days. They were also bringing
in grapes from a distant part of the property with bullock-drays,
in deep tubs holding about 100 lbs. each. They had been already
laid out on mats near where they were grown.
They were from a vineyard of eighteen years old, and which is
not considered to have arrived at its best yet. De lleerio said
that the wino from a vineyard up to ten years old is only fit, to
distil, but I doubt if it is so used. These grapes were being
mixed with those from the old vineyard in a proportion ol one-
third. Tlie presshouse is very lofty and large, and contains
twelve lagors or treading-boxes, nine on one side and three on the
other. They are about eight feet square and eighteen indies
deep, with sloping sides, and are made of 11,-inch pine well put
together. In the centre of each is a wooden screw ; tin* cap
containing the nut is .‘I. 1 , feet long and tapered to a handle at each
end. I)e Heerio kindly had a lagar of grapes brought in and
trod to let us see the process. Each lagar is said to take grapes
enough to give a butt of juice, and as they are emptied into the
lagar from four to six pounds of powdered gypsum is strewed
over them, and this practice is universal and has been done for
ages. ' Three men then got into the lagar with short-legged duck
trousers and heavy nailed shoos, and, after spreading grapes all
over the spare space, commence treading, moving quickly in line
backwards and forwards, and with a motion as regular as stop
dmcing.
They are very active fellows, and perspire freely, hut smoke,
their cigarettes nearly all the while. When trod enough they
shovel them up into a corner and let the juice draw away,
and then spread out more, and so on till all are done. They then
spread the whole lot and tread them over again, the juice running
oil’ all the time through the spout, on which is hung a basket to


keep back the seeds and skins; after this final treading they are
heaped up round the screw, and gradually brought up as the juice
leaves them to four feet high and two and a half feet in diameter.
Then a band of esparto glass three inches broad is cleverly
wound round and round from the bottom upwards, and the
pressure is then applied. The whole thing up to this took one
and a half hours to do. It is usually done at night, and the
pressmen get extra wages. After pressure they are put through
a sieve; on legs with one and a half inch mesh to separate the
stalk. Water is then put on the skins, and they are pressed again
to make an inferior wine ; and finally they go into mats of esparto,
and art; pressed with a handy hydraulic press, and the juice used
for distillation.
FERMENTATION OF SHERRY. —DENSITY OF THE MUST.—HOSPITALITY
OF THE PROPRIETOR.—DUFF, GORDON, AND CO.'S BODEGAS.—FINE
OLD MINES.
LETTER IX.
g'SWS soon as possible after pressing the juice is sent to the
jtgL, proprietors’ bodega in Xeres. We met many drayloads
‘ going in as we came out, generally three butts in each load,
and drawn by scratch teams, sometimes a big horse in the shafts
and a couple of mules leading, and sometimes a donkey or two
Viet,ween. A tube of bamboo or tin is lixed in the biingbole to
allow the gas to escape. The shaking up of the lees in the partly
fermented juice is said to be beneficial. It is allowed to complete
the fermentation in the bodega at Xeres ; a vacancy of two
arrobes is left in each butt (a butt contains thirty-six arrobes),
and a large iron or earthenware funnel, bolding two or three
gallons, is lixed in the bungbole and causes the yeast to return
into the cask, as described by Busby in his notes published fifty
years since. Do Berrio says that no spirit is used until the
fermentation is finished for sherry, but to make Pedro Ximenes
three arrobes of spirit are used, and for very sweet wines six
arrobes, and it is always put into the cask before the juice from
the press. We were fortunate enough to see the density of the
juice as it ran from the press. It stood at 1-' by Baume’s
saccbaromotor, equal to 34" by Brower’s or 1.090 sp. gr. De
Beerio said the pressings would The grapes we saw


gathered were not at all shrivelled. We noticed that none of the
lagars which had been used had been washed. The vintagers
were all men, and paid about 2s. a day, which is a great advance
on what used to be paid. After seing the pressing we were
invited to lunch, and were waited on by a very active brown-
skinned black-eyed girl. Among other dishes was a splendid
foreham of pork, said to be over two years cured. We got
excellent bread here, better than any we have seen before, and
good light red wine; the large Spanish olives and Bologna
sausages, and very fine grapes and pears for dessert. The grapes
were the Belas Blanco, here called the “ Beva also the delicious
green fig and two kinds of fine old sherry. We preferred the
lightest, and De Eeerio drank- the same, and said he was old
enough to know what was good for him. lie also kindly had a
dish of “GaSpachio” made for us to taste. It is a cohl soup,
made of tomatoes, garlic chopped line, oil, and vinegar. It is very
nice and refreshing, and is used as a drink at all times of the dav,
especially in hot weather, and would bo liked in Australia. After
a few more glasses of the old Amontillado, not forgeting to drink
the health of the Messrs. Forrester, we parted on the best of
terms with our genial host, and returned to Xeres at dusk, well
satisfied with our day’s work.
September 27. —Got up early and walked out of town,
intending to see some of the “ arenas,” or sandy vineyards, hut
took the wrong direction and came upon more of the “ barros," or
clay vineyards. Went through several of them, and found the
same admixture of grapes as before ; in one of them the pre-
dominant grape was the same as is grown at Rosefield, near
Adelaide, in the north-east corner of the vineyard there. In
passing through a deep railway cutting, noticed that the subsoil
was full of small scallop and other shells.
After breakfast took rail to Port St. Mary’s, which is reached
in half an hour. Called first on Dull, Gordon, & Co., to whom
we had an introduction from Air. John Hopkins, of London.
The manager not having arrived, we were shown over the splendid
bodegas of the firm by one of the head clerks, a German gentle-
man, who very kindly gave us all the information we asked for.
The bodegas are on three sides of a spacious courtyard, which, as
usual, is entered through massive doors. The courtyard is planted
with tine shade trees, and vines are trained overhead to give the
shade so .much needed in this warm climate. The shipping bodega
is a splendid building of six bays, divided by lofty arches, and
kept in first-class order, and as clean and bright as whitewash
can make it. At the end at right angles is another nearly as
large, in which are, kept the choice light sherries; it, is kept
pretty dark with mat blinds over the windows. The windows
were all open ; they have lattice outside and wooden shutters


inside. They send out sherries up to £2OO per butt, and some of
the old “ solera’’ wines are not to be bought at any price. When
a portion of them is drawn off to make up a blend it Is tilled up
again with the next best wine by putting a herd tin tube in the
bunghole, and which reaches to about half the depth of the cask,
and the funnel fits into this tube, thus preventing the lees being
disturbed. The funnel is made long and narrow, so as to pass in
between the butts ; the casks are all loosely bunged with cork
bungs tied to the cask with a string. The ullage is the same as
we found before, about one-ninth of the contents of each cask.
The evaporation is said to bo not more than 2 per cent ; we
saw no pumps in use here, but were told that they use them in
some of the bodegas.
Wo were shown the cooperage and place for steaming casks.
The new casks ai’e first filled with limewator for some time, then
emptied and steamed, and then unheaded and well scrubbed out,
and if intended lor fine wines are first used for new wines, but
for ordinary sherries this is not done. We afterwards visited the
bodegas of Sancho, Hermanns, it Co., but saw nothing special
there, and returned to Xeres. There is a grand bullfight on at
Seville to-day, and a very long train, nearly all third-class
passengers, left Xeres just before us in the morning. There is no
regularity about the starring of trains, and the people wait very
patiently, the busses always get to the station from twenty
minutes to half an hour before the time for starting the trains;
no one believes in being hurried in this country. 1 begin to
think that we drive much too fast in Australia to live the years
we ought to.
LETTER X.
IVISON'S "BODEGAS."—STRENGTH OF SHERRY. —DISTILLATION OF
WINE. —FALLING OFF IN THE SHERRY TRADE. —INFLUENCE OF SOIL
ON THE PRODUCE.
SOFTER our return from Port St. Mary's we went to see the
t, bodega and distillery of Mr. Ivison, in Xeres. lie is an
«-ers’ Englishman, and we were well received and shown over
the establishment by him. lie is a large buyer of grapes, both
for wine and distillation ; his bodega is large and well kept and
very full of wines. He showed us a great many, both old and
ii


now ; one was a sherry eight years old, still far from bright
and. full of send, and not at all nice to the taste, yet he considered
it a promising wine. A wine of JSI vintage from one of the
“ arenas, - ’ or sandy vineyards, was quite bright and lit for use,
but had very little of the sherry flavour, and he said it would not
improve.
We went into the cellar where the new wines were still fer-
menting, all in butts. Many of them bad still the funnels before
described in them. Some butts from a vineyard of his own and
fourteen days pressed were still fermenting a little, and <]uite
milky in appearance. He thought a good deal of this, and said
it was about 2o degrees of strength, and that nearly all the good
wines this year would reach that, but that they were fermenting
too quickly for good wine. If 20' is the strength of the natural
wines, when is the extra 10 or 12 per cent of spirit added '!■ We
cannot get at this ; they all say it is added as the wine appears to
want it. I think that must bo pretty soon and often. In the
yard was a large number of hogsheads and quarter-casks Idled
with water to season them. Some of them smelled very bad.
He said that steaming casks was not so good for them as boiling
water. He has a good way of filling casks from the steam-boilers
with a hent copper nozzle made, to drop into and fit any bung-
hole. In the yard were several drayloads of grapes brought iu
loose, and were being tilled into mat baskets and weighed, each
mat holding about 100 lbs., and then carried to the lagars by two
men. They were a mixed lot and some black ones among them ;
the price paid about £5 per ton ; lie said they were for distil-
lation. There were several lagars round two sides of the yard
under open sheds, and in some of them men were busy treading
the grapes. The lagars hero wore all fitted with cast-iron screws,
and there were two of the hydraulic presses at work to get all the
juice possible from the skins after being pressed in the lagars.
After the first pressing in the lagars the stalk is separated from
the skins, and the latter are then put into round mats made of
esparto grass and about three feet in diameter, and piled one over
another in the press. These mats cost Is, 2d. each, and stand
any amount of pressure without bursting.
The butts are filled at the lagars and rolled into the fermenting
cellar some distance away. None of the lagars had been washed
after being used ; it could not have been from a scarcity of water
here, for there are largo tanks full of it.
The distillery occupies the centre of the yard, and is fitted with
two of Coffey’s patent stills. They are principally of wood, and
the largest of them will turn nut about 100 butts of strong spirit
per day, and the condensing is nearly all done with the wine to
be distilled. A rectifying still by the same maker is not much
used, as it takes 140 butts of water to condense one of spirit.


He said tliat for fortifying new wines wine spirit was not required
to be very pun; and strong, lint for old wines for shipment the
purest and strongest article is always preferred. in the yard
were two large square coppers, in which must was being boiled
down. They are fitted with steam coil in the bottom of each.
The must is boiled down to one-fifth, and then mixed with
unboiled must in proportion of one to live, and then fermented,
and is used for colouring brown sherries. Saw some of it Wore
it was mixed ; it was about the consistence! of treacle, and not
haying at all a burnt flavour. He said it was dangerous stulf to
use, and very apt to “turn up” wines and make them ferment
again. We saw no other material about the place to distil from
except wine.
M. Tvison and all the other wine people complain sadly of the
trade in sherry falling oil’ of late years, and certainly one sees no
new vineyards being planted, and some old ones on the sandy
lands going out of cultivation. We noticed that many of these
sandy vineyards had a limestone subsoil, as seen in the! ditches
along the railway lines. Some of them were a red sandy loam,
and when trenched turned up in large lumps. We are sorry not
to have seen more of these, as they looked so much like some of
our Maclaren Vale land. Wo would also have liked to have
studied the wines from the different soils around Xeres more
than we had opportunities of doing ; but we saw enough to show
us that it is the soil that makes the great difference in the value
of these wines. I have taken samples of the soil and subsoil of
those vineyards, and which 1 hope to take back with me. W e
saw a troop of Spanish soldiers at drill in the evening, and they
did not impress us very favourably, for a more slouchy dirty lot
of undersized men I never saw before as sWdiers.
LETTER XI.
MALAGA.—SUNDAY TRAFFIC.—RAISIN-PACKING. —SCHULTZ,
HERMANOS, AND CO.’s CELLARS.—WINE FROM RAISINS.
Skfthmhkh '-'ll.
ti from Xm« via La lloda and Utreria to .Malaga. Tho
\ . jirst part of tin; Journey to I.a lloda was through grain-
growing country, where we saw steam threshing machines
at work, and all the people in the train crowded to the windows
to look at it. Much of the country passed, especially about


Aquadulcc and Pedrera, is like the lulls between Xoarlunga and
the sea, having the same i-url soil and hard limestone beneath, and
generally planted with olives. The olives look healthy, but not
quite so vigorous as those on the granite lands near Badajos, We
saw many new plantations and single trees to fill up vacancies,
all planted as truncheons, standing live or six feet out of the
ground, with a mound of earth neatly built up around each. This
mound appears to be gradually taken away as the tree gets
established. One old olive plantation had been cut down to the
ground, and three or four new shoots allowed to grow from each
stump. We saw men pruning and removing suckers from old
trees; they are generally planted from thirty to forty feet apart,
and in good land cultivated, and a crop of grain grows between.
In rocky land the trees do not appear to be cultivated at all, but-
grazed with sheep and goats. Wo got to .Malaga in the evening,
and after dinner took a turn through the principal streets, which
we easily found by following the people. The two principal
retail streets are very narrow, with no vehicle tratiic through
them. Xoxt day (Sunday) we got up early and strolled round
the wharfs. Pound all the shops open as usual, and trains of
donkeys coming in from the country laden with raisins, grapes,
and skins of wine. Pach driver has generally seven donkeys ;
the one that takes the lead has an enormous bell, and the driver
rides on the rear animal, which is also made to carry a load
besides tbe driver. We attended the English Church at the
British Consulate ; very few people were in attendance. In the
evening saw a grand religious procession, nearly a mile in length.
It was to have started at 6, hut it was past S before, it got oil',
and we lost our dinner by waiting for it. The cafes and many
shops wen; open. At one of the cafes there were quite 200
people inside, and on the sidewalk outside, all seated at small
tables, drinking, and smoking their cigarettes.
October I.— As we had no introductions to any one here, we
(-•ailed on tin? British Consul, who advised us to call on any of
the large fruit merchants and make ourselves known. We first
called on Messrs. Bevan it Co., large exporters of raisins. M.
Bevan kindly sent a clerk who spoke English round the establish-
ment with us, and would have gone himself but for an engagement.
Wo were shown the whole process of repacking the raisins into
clean paper, laying on the fancy papers on the top, nailing down,
stencilling, &c. Most of the work is done by women, and they
are very quick and clever at it. In a large room a number of
women were preparing .lordan almond kernels for packing by
tilling up all cracks and (laws in the skins with a paste, made of
the dust from the almonds and gum-water. They are sorted into
three grades ; the lightest in colour are the best. The nut is a
hardshell, and they are cracked by women with small hammers.


AVe also saw a (juantity of very small and inferior iigs in mats.
We next called on Campanzuno Brothers, another large concern.
They were very busy packing, and had a great number of women
employed. They showed us a sample box of all the different
qualities of raisins, seven or eight in all. Quantities of raisins
were coining in, all brought on the backs of donkeys. One of
the partners kindly sent a clerk with his card to accompany us
to the largest manufacturers of wine in Malaga, Messrs. Schultz,
llermanos, & Co. Here also we were very kindly treated, and
shown over their fine cellars and allowed to taste all their
different wines—red and white Malaga, Pedro Ximenes, Rota
Tent, Port, Sherry, Muscatel, and others—from one to 100 years
old. The wines are all in butts, and are kept full and not on
ullage as in Xeres, and bunged moderately tight with cork bungs.
The cellars are of three stories and all above ground; the floors
are very strong and supported by cast-iron pillars. Butts of
wine are pulled up an incline on a truck to the top stories.
Rotary pumps of Vienna make are used and copper syphons for
drawing off the wines. The windows are all closed with wooden
shutters, and a small door in them is opened as we go along to
give sufficient light, and closed again afterwards ; this is the first
cellar we have seen kept very dark. Crossed a street and into a
large paved yard ; on one side was another large cellar of three
stories, containing all new wines. Men were pumping wine
across the street into the cellars we came from. Noticed that
the hose was carefully covered with canvas. A small steam-
boiler is used for steaming kegs and casks ; a deal of the Malaga
wine is sent away in kegs holding an arroha, or three gallons.
On the opposite side of the yard is the lagar or trcading-floor,
under an open shed. It is about .‘lO feet long by 20 wide, and
floored with brick set in cement, and sloping to several outlets,
where brick and cement tanks of about 200 gallons each receive
the juice as it runs from the floor. A number of men were
treading raisins to make sweet wine ; they wear shoes made of
esparto grass, and tread the raisins into a paste, using a little
water as they go on. They are pressed with two powerful screw-
presses similar to one in use at Auldana, and which are set up in
the middle of the lagar. After pressing the skins and stalks are
put into three large cemented tanks at one end of the lagar, and
water put to them to make vinegar. At the other end of the
lagar is the store for raisins, and here the baskets of raisins were
being emptied from a raised bridge as they were brought in from
the country. The grape was said to be the Pedro Ximenes, and
they are dried sufficiently so as not to heat by lying in heaps.
The price paid is equal to 4s. for 25 lbs., about double the price
paid for the best undried grapes for wine-making. “Arrope,” or
boiled must, is made by boiling the unfermentod juice in deep


iron coppers to one-third ; the coppers arc small at tho bottom,
and iiied with coal or coke. One of the partners showed us
round this part of the place, and seemed pleased to find us take
so much interest in this part of the work. He showed us a
sample of grape spirit, taken out of a butt with a silver instru-
ment like a spoon with a hollow handle, and which answers as a
dipper and glass both. This spirit was made by the firm at a
distillery seventy miles from Malaga. It was very clean and of
good flavour, and he said they consider it very much superior to
grain or any other spirit for fortifying wines. He said it was 58'
by Guy Luysac, and worth £2O per butt, while grain spirit could
be had for £lB to £2O. We were very much pleased with the
attention shown us, and consider this one of the most complete
and well arranged places we have yet seen.
LETTER XII.
RAISIN-MAKING AT MALAGA.—MUSCAT GORDO BLANCO THE GRAPE
GROWN. — DRYING GROUNDS. — PACKING THE RAISINS IN LAYERS. —
RATE OF WARES.
OCTOMKK 1.
;tWE were recommended by Mr. JJcvan to visit tin; ‘‘ hacienda/’
or farms of Honor Orosco, who is the Mexican Consul in
Malaga, as the host place to see the drying and packing
of the celebrated Malaga bloom raisins, so we took a cab to San
Uosalio, which is the name of the farm, or rather country house;
and grounds. It was only a mile or two out of the city, and we
could easily have walked, but the cabmen and waiters repre-
sented that it was eight or nine miles, just to plunder us in (he
fare asked. The road is partially metalled with a very soft stone,
and fearfully cut up, and several inches deep in dust. The trees
and shrubs alongside the road are covered with white dust, as bad
as ever we saw in Australia. Fortunately there was no wind,
or we should have been pretty well .smothered. The only bright
things seen are the patches of sugarcane, which are irrigated and
look beautifully green and luxuriant. We took an interpreter
with us from the hotel. He was a Swiss, and professed to know
all the European languages, but did not know any, and we could
have done better without him, as he was constantly giving us
his own opinions instead of putting the questions we wanted


answered. Wo found the work of sorting and packing the
raisins going on here, and fifty or sixty men employed (no women
or children). The grapes were all gathered by the 18th Sep-
tember, or thirteen days since, and are nearly all dried into
raisins. The vineyard is of considerable extent, the land quite
Hat, and the soil apparently a dull reddish alluvial loam, with
abundance of waterworn stones. We asked if it had been
trenched, and were told that it had to the depth of the knees.
We, saw traces of a red marly clay here and there, as though it
had been brought to the surface by trenching. The vines in the
oldest part of the vineyard are planted six feet apart each way,
and the new vineyard, which, however, is eighteen years old, is
planted fifteen feet apart between the rows, and oidy three feet
between each vine in the rows. The vines are grown very low,
and the lower branches touch the ground ; a hollow is scooped
out round each vine for the hunches of grapes to hang in. They
are pruned very close, oidy one or two buds on each shoot, and
not generally more than five or six shoots on a vine, and none are
staked. We found a few grapes that had been missed in the
gathering ; they were not larger than we grow at Bankside, but
more solid; they are all the Muscat Gordo Blanco, the same as
we have, and no other grape is used for raisins as far as we could
learn. Jn planting a vineyard cuttings from two or three feet
long are used, and laid horizontally in a trench about nine inches
deep, and the top brought up and a mound of earth drawn up
around it to keep it upright instead of a stake, for two or three
years, saw many layers made to fiM up vacant spaces. Wo could
not find that the vines are disbudded during the growing season,
and they did not look as if it had been done to any extent. The
vineyard is all worked by hand labour, and was very clean and
free from weeds. The drying grounds are of two kinds. The
first are built up with brick walls, and filled in with earth ; they
are generally from ’2O to 25 feet long and 14 or 15 feet wide, and
and divided into spaces 0 or 7 feet wide with bricks set on end
and standing 4 inches above the floor ; they slope from close to
the ground at the, bottom at an angle of nearly 45", and face the
south. The floor is covered with several inches of clean small
gravel, on which the grapes are laid in small bunches, and very
regular. We saw one which was covered with grapes on the 18th
September; the grapes were nearly dried, and had not been
turned, as we could perceive by the stalks of the bunches; they
were nearly as dry on the under side as on the top from the heat
of the gravel. When they are sufficiently dried, covers made of
two !1 x 1 inch deal boards fastened together, and overlapping
like weatherboards, are laid over them until they can be gathered
up. These covers are put on at night during the time of the
drying. When they arc gathered up the men kneel on these


hoards, and, beginning at the bottom, sort them into three grades
beside the loose berries, and lay them on boards three or four
inches broad. They are then carried into the house (which was
not occupied), and every room and the staircase, on and under
tho bedsteads, and every available place was full of these boards
with raisins, piled one on the other. We were given to under-
stand that they remained in this way a month before, being
packed, but as they were busy packing we think they oidy remain
until they are ready to pack them. The other kind of drying-floor
is Hat, or only slightly raised in the centre. They are provided
with a ridge-pole and cloths to cover them at night, or when
required. We were told that the grapes do not dry so soon by
eight days as on the sloping floors opposite the sun. Packing and
sorting was going on under sheds of bamboo, and in a large room
adjoining the house the men all sat at their work, and most of
them were smoking their cigarettes. Each man has a small pair
of scissors, with which he cuts out all defective berries, pieces of
stalk, &c. Some pack the layers for the bottom, and others for
the top of the boxes. Each layer is laid on paper spread on a
box cover, and made to a certain weight. The men that prepare
tho top layer are very clever at it ; they turn and twist the
raisins, to make them come in rows, and fill up with single raisins
pulled out to flatten and make them look large. After they are 1
laid on the boxes they are sot one on another in tho same way as
we do in packing grapes for export, and that is all tho pressing
they get so far as we could see. We did not see any kina of
press about. Tho boxes are only lightly nailed, as they have all
to be repacked in clean paper in Malaga before they arc shipped.
Tho men are paid at different rates, according to the work ; the
lowest at six reales, or Is. fid. per day, and the highest at nine
reales and a dinner consisting of soup and brown bread. They
arc fearfully slow at their work, and it would not pay in Australia
to go to the trouble they do in sorting and packing. We were
glad to have so good an opportunity of seeing the whole process,
and also that wc got in time to see grapes still on tho drying-
floors. I have no doubt that the gravel floors are the best
possible thing to have, as they retain the heat and allow a current
of air to pass beneath the grapes. We shall have to find out the
best localities for growing fine fleshy fruit, so as to produce large
raisins, and also where tfiey will ripen early, so as to get the full
benefit-of the sun in drying. On the wharfs we saw men and
women under rough sheds of bamboo packing lemons for shipment.
They are quite green when packed, and each lemon is wrapped
in a piece of coloured paper. All sorts of cooking is to be seen
going on in the streets, and swarms of beggars at every step—
some of them loathsome-looking from disease, loss of limbs, Ac.


LETTER XIII.
VALLEY OF THE GAUDALIORCE.—POMEGRANATES. —ROMANTIC!
SCENERY.—ALCANZAR; WINK-MAKING THERE.—VINEYARDS NEAR
THE TOWN.—KINDS OF GRAPES GROWN.
October i l.
.Malaga early and travelled up the Valley of tin;
< laudaljorce. For nearly thirty miles the rail passes
through a strip of country apparently from one to three
nules in width, the whole of which is irrigated from the waters
taken from the river and carried round at the foot of the barren-
looking mountains on either side of the valley in channels, often
substantially built of stone. This valley is a perfect marvel of
fertility, orange and lemon-trees, datepalms, now fruiting, pome-
granates, and other fruit-trees, with every foot of ground between
them and close up to and even under the trees, planted with small
crops, such iis dwarf beans, tomatoes, capsicums, and various
kinds of vegetables. The clean-looking whitewashed houses of
the cultivators peeping out among the lovely green foliage and
the numerous population show an Australian the possibilities of
irrigation on a large scale to sustain a dense population. On the
lower slopes of the mountains many vineyards are seen, and
several drying-grounds for raisins on the steep hillsides facing the
south. Wo also saw a few almond groves on the hillsides, but
looking very poor and stunted and scant of foliage. Near Malaga
are many large patches of sugarcanes. The orange and lemon
trees in several places had a deal of dead wood in them, and wo
were told it was caused by a drought last year- when the river
failed to supply the necessary water for irrigation, but they had
since recovered and had made strong growth again. At the
stations, which are very frequent, women brought to the
train pomegranates which have cracked and are not tit to
send to Malaga, but are deliciously cool and juicy, and sold at
from two to three a penny, and were readily bought by the
passengers. At the head of the valley the railway passes through
a gorge in the mountains, and the momentary glimpses we get of
the scenery as wo emerge from the numerous tunnels is exceed-
ingly grand. In one place the river has cut its way through a
narrow channel in a perendicular rock, and one can look down a


depth of a hundred foot or more, to tlie river and upwards to a
greater height still. W'c tried to get a photograph of it, hut no
one had been enterprising enough to take it.
We reached Cordova at midday, and remained there until the
evening. We spent most of the time in rambling about the
wonderful old cathedral there, which dates from the time of the
Roman Empire, and is a mixture of Roman, Moorish, and Gothic
architecture. From the. top of the, tower we got a good view of
the town and the broad River Guadalquiver, and the ancient flour-
mills built in the midst of it. We got a very fair white wine at
a wineshop, but we found it rather strong and heady as compared
to the ordinary red wines. After travelling all night wc arrived
early at Alcanzar St. Juan, about ninety miles from Madrid, in a
high-lying part of the country. As we had heard that there are
many vines grown about here we determined to stop the day
before proceeding eastward to Valencia ; so after coffee and cakes
at the railway bullet wo took a walk about the town. Jt is quite
a different sort of place from the seaport towns, and is a collection
of poor houses, ill-paved and crooked streets, very few footpaths,
and no good shops or hotels, and not a Rank in the place. The
Church seemed to be the only building above the others. We had
not provided ourselves with sufficient Spanish money on leaving
Malaga, and here the ticket clerk at the station wanted to give us
only twenty pesetas for a sovereign instead of twenty-five. The
railway officials are said to be miserably paid and cheat and rob
to make, up for it.
We had not gone far before we saw loads of grapes coming in
from the country, and following them up, wesoon came to a large
winemaking establishment. We entered and were lucky in find-
ing a French gentleman superintending the winemaking for a firm
in Bordeaux, who take all the wine as soon as made at a fixed
price, sending their own casks from Bordeaux, and having it
shipped from Valencia. The proprietor, a Spanish gentleman,
and the Frenchman very kindly showed ns round, and wc. .were,
glad to find some one to whom we could speak. There were here
two I agars paved with bricks, tin* largest about twenty feet by
forty, the other about half that size. A passage of seven or eight
feet wide between had a paved gutter of brick to take, tin; juice
from either lagar, through a wall to an adjoining cellar,
which was partly under ground. A man was pumping it with a
rotary •pump as it came through into butts placed three tiers high.
The butts are filled so that they do not work over during the
fermentation, and are kept filled up as it slackens. On one side
was a row of earthenware jars holding nearly 500 gallons each,
with wide mouths covered with a lid of hoards coated with
plaster of paris. Wo, were told that the wine would be racked
into them from the butts as soon as the fermentation was over,


ami again into tin* butts when sent away. Two powerful presses
of French make stood in the lagars. Drayloads of grapes wen;
coining in, all in mat baskets holding about I.', cwt., which were
weighed as they were emptied into the lagars. Most of them
were white ; a few black ones were kep separate and put into a
smaller lagar in the yard. The must was said to be 13”, we
understood by Jlaunie. They very kindly offered to send a man
to show us the vineyards near the town, and we gladly accepted
the oiler. In going out of the gates of the town wo passed the
funeral procession of a woman. The priests followed thus far,
and then, after a halt and some prayers, they went into the town.
We followed it to a walled-in cemetery a mile from the town, on
our way to the. vineyards. At about a mile and a half wo came
to the vineyards. The country is undulating, and quite destitute
of trees of any kind, and the hills are covered with windmills.
We counted twenty-eight from one spot. The soil is a deep sandy
loam of a red colour, full of limestone in lumps ; but no crust as
with us. We found in some cuttings that the subsoil was also
full of this and other kinds of loose stones mixed with the clay.
The vines are all planted seven feet apart each way, and all
worked by the plough. None of the ground had been trenched
as far as we could see. Our conductor being a Spaniard we could
not converse much with him. None of the vines are staked.
The principal white grape he called “ Dosuno.” It has a berry
like the Doradillo, with a thick skin ; but not the same growth,
being more straggly. The next most grown is the Pardilio,
bearing a thick clustery bunch. The red grapes lit! called
“ Tiuto ” and “Tinto Gordo,” the latter very much like the
Ulliade, both in the berry and growth of the vine. The vines are
kept low, and pruned very short, and rarely more than five or six
spurs left on the vine. There arc no fences, and as wo were about
to cross one of the vineyards a man with an old flintlock musket
called on us to stop, but a peace-ollering of a cigarette made all
straight, and wo went on.' We came across several parties, mostly
women, gathering the grapes. Two of them take a row and put
their grapes into one mat and clear all as they go, except a few
second crop, which are still green. The grapes are perfectly ripe,
but not at all shrivelled. The people seemed very happy and
fairly well clad. They were all very civil and offered us grapes
to eat. We. left them evidently amused, and were sorry wo could
not talk to them. We returned to the town about noon, quite
ready for breakfast, our guide having taken us a good long round,
and the clear bright air of the (derated country giving us a good
appetite.


LETTER XIV.
WINE-MAKING AT ALCANZAR.—DIRTY IN THE EXTREME.—IRRIGATION
BY “NORIAS.”—VALENCIA.—RAISIN-MAKING THERE.—MANUFACTURE
OF “MUSTELLA” OR SWEET WINES.
SFTER breakfast at the Railway Bullet, tlie only decent
place, we could Hud in Alcanzar, we visited the bodegas
and wine, manufactory of the Marquis do Mudella, which
are .situated near the station. We found no difficulty in gaining
admittance, but could not find any one who could speak English
or French. The place covers several acres, but is not very well
arranged. Wine-making was going on and grapes coming in fast ;
from thirty to forty loads were waiting in the yard to bo unloaded.
There are several lagars, the largest about forty feet square, and
paved with brick sloping to a point on the side nearest the cellars,
and from there the juice flows through a low wall into a large
cistern partly below the floor From this it is pumped with a
rotary pump, worked by two men, into the fermenting cellar
adjoining. This cellar is about six feet below the surface, and is
furnished with a long row of earthenware vessels holding about
500 gallons each ; they have wide mouths, and are covered with
boards plastered over with plaster of paris. In the lagar were
four presses of French make. The crushed grapes are put into
deep narrow circular cages made of wood and handed with iron,
and after a very moderate pressure are pitched out through
windows into an immense cemented tank, and trodden and
rammed in tightly, and we supposed kept there until required
for distillation. At one, side of tin; lagar are two large windows
or doors, at which the grapes are taken in and weighed with
steelyards. The driver takes his weigh-note to the office and
receives payment. Our friend in the morning told us that the
price paid was 108 francs the ton. In the lagar were two mills
with separators attached of Bordeaux manufacture, but they did
not seem to get through many grapes with them, and about thirty
men and boys were treading in the lagar at the same time; they
all wore shoes made of esparto grass. At another part of the
establishment was a smaller lagar made of wood, and here several
men were treading red grapes, and raking out the stalks and
picking them out by hand after treading. There was also another


brick-paved lagar being filled with white grapes. The cellars
appeared to be pretty full of wine of previous vintages, contained
in several large; vats. There was a distillery, but the apparatus
was very old and dirty, and did not appear to have been used
lately. We found that the demand for the wines of this part of
the country for the French market has opened up during the past
few years, and many new vineyards are planted. Previous to
this the wine w r as of little value here, and it is said that they
sometimes used it to mix up mortar for building instead of water.
Their method of making appears to us dirty and careless in the
extreme.
After leaving here we interviewed the miller at one of the
numerous windmills, and after the usual compliment of otiering
him a cigar he showed us all over the mill and the, wheat In* was
grinding (a very poor sample), also the ground meal, and all with
plenty of talk on both sides—none of which was understood by
any of us.
We then went into a walled garden to examine one of the
ancient “ norias,” or water-wheels, worked with a horse blind-
folded. The water is raised from a depth of twenty feet in
earthenware jars of peculiar shape fixed on an endless band of
esparto grass. The man in charge showed us round ami tried to
explain everything to us, and gave ns some fine tomatoes. A few
grapes grown here had to be tied up in bags to preserve them
from the sparrows. The whole garden (about an acre and a half)
is irrigated from the one well, but was not very well attended to.
We tried some of the red wine at a wineshop. It was not so flat
and strong as the Val do Penas, and we were charged a peseta,
or 9d. per bottle for it. We also tried the pancakes, made in
rings and fried in oil, and both cooked and sold in the streets,
and found them very light and good. We left here again in the
evening. At the first station saw another wine-making place of
the Marquis de Mudella, and plenty of grapes still coming in
from neighbouring vineyards.
OcTOntcu d.—We arrived at Jativa by daylight, and here we
saw hundreds of butts of new wine at the station waiting to be
sent on to Valencia. All were on the side, with a small hole in
the shiveto let the gas escape. Noticed that many of them were
German spirit casks. We arrived at Valencia at !)..‘sl), and after
breakfast called on Mr. Gard, the British Consul. He told us
that we ought to have gone to Donia to see the raisin-making, as
most of the pudding raisins arc made and shipped from there.
However, as we could not go back to Denia, he told us where
we could see some little of the process a few miles out. So we
hired a trap and pair and took a man who spoke French. We
paid two and a half dollars for the trap. As soon as we got into
the country the roads were dreadfully cut up and dusty. After


crossing a plain all under irrigation, and growing among other
tilings flax seven or eight feet high, and which was being retted
and worked (dose to the road, we reached a village on rising
limestone land. Here we saw people living in hovels dug out
of the limestone rock. At about five miles wo came to some
vineyards, and turned off the road to visit the “ hacienda” of a
wealthy merchant of Valencia.. It is situated among low lime-
stone hills ; in many places the stone is quite bare of soil, and
nothing growing there but a few scattered carob-troes. The
house is a fine building, with terraces in front, and overlooks the
garden and vineyards, which are all in the hollows between the
hills. The land is all trenched and levelled, with the large stones
taken out to build walls to keep the soil from washing away.
The vines are all planted at a distance of ten feet each way, and
are all of the Gordo lllanco Muscat. There were a few of both
first and second crop left on the vines, and wo remarked how
flesh}' and solid they were. The vines arc grown very low, the
same as at .Malaga, and a hollow made round each vine allows the
fruit to hang, but much of it lies on the ground. No supports
arc used, and not more than five, or six spurs, very short pruned,
are left on each vine. The grapes are dipped in a boiling lye
before they are laid out to dry. An Iron boiler was set on a
sloping piece of ground, and at the back and sides was a floor
levelled and cemented, where the grapes are spread on frames
made of small bamboos, about 7 feet x b feet, in size and fastened
with crossbars of split bamboo on both sides, and tied
through with esparto cord. There was a large shod full of them
packed away. The raisin-making was finished and the crop
under lock, so that we (amid not see any of them. The proprietor
is having orange-trees planted among the vines in the best of the
land, and they are watered every week from two wells about
thirty feet deep. The water is raised with norias of English
make, having iron links working over an eight-sided wheel, and
carrying buckets of cast-iron bolding about two gallons each.
Several men were at work levelling a piece of land. They fill the
earth into mats with the boo, and carry it to where it is wanted.
There is a paved and walled channel to take the flood wafers
through the main valley; at intervals places are left in the walls
to receive boards to dam back the water and flood the vineyard.
A man who was building a raised channel for water said that
tin? raisins were sometimes dried in three days. From hero wo
went to a wine making place of another Valencia merchant ; his
son very kindly showed ns round. The vines grown here are
nearly all the Mataro, and arc called the “ llerema. ’ They
seem to suit, the limestone country well. We saw no second crop
on them like we otlen gel. The winchousc and cellars are very
substantially built of stone. The grapes are trod over largo tanks


coveriid with loose boards fitting close together* When trod, and
the stalks raked and picked out, they remove some of tlic boards
and let them drop into the tank below. Spirit is then added in
large quantities to make “Mustella," or wine used for sweetening
dry wines. In one tank we examined the grapes were all sunk to
tlie bottom, and on trying with a stick we could not find that they
were kept down with anything; a few seeds were, floating on the
top, and the liquor tasted very sweet and strong. German spirit
had been used, as we, saw' by the empty casks lying about. The
pressroom, situated below the level of the fermenting tanks, had
in it several French-made single screw-presses with east-iron
beds set nearly on the level of the floor; in front is a gutter in
the floor which takes the juice from each press into another cell,•li-
on a lower level, where it. is put into casks. The must from the
presses is very sweet and strong, but has not much colour. They
had made 000 hectolitres of sweet Muscat wine and sent, it, away to
their bodegas in Valencia. We saw hero several expensive
mills, pumps, &c., all thrown aside after being tried and found
not to answer so well as the simpler methods common in the
country. Whilst the labourer is willing to work for fifteen pence
a day machinery is not likely to be much used in this country.
LETTER XV.
PORT OF VALENCIA. —MODE OF CARTING WINE.—DENICARLO.—
TARRAGONA; FINE BODEGA THERE.—WINES OF TARRAGONA.—CAROB-
TREES.—BEST WAY TO THE VINEYARDS OF EUROPE.
@X our wav back to Valencia we called at a small farmhouse
j on a hill overlooking the city. Here we found the family
jiacking their raisins in mats, holding about 51) lbs. each.
The stalk was not taken from them. They were very tine raisins,
larger than any we make in Australia, very well cured, and
bright in colour. It is a wonder to ns how they can grow grapes
tii make such line raisins on this poor limestone land ; but it is
onlv the hollows between the hills that arc planted with vines,
and thev get .all the water from the hills above them. On the
hills are a few carob-trees growing among the bare rocks. We
saw no burnt-up grapes on any of the vines. 1 lie toliage is very
sc.antv, and we inferred from this that the sun is not so scorching


as it sometimes is in Australia. We made enquiries if fruits such
as apples ever get roasted on the trees, but could not hear that
they do. Wo wore shown by the good wife the implement used
for dipping the grapes in the boiling lye previous to drying. It
is a round basket made of strong wire, and fixed on a long
handle, It would hold about 20 lbs. of grapes. The people here
seemed very much interested to find we came from Australia, and
offered us refreshments.
Next morning we took tramcar to the port, about three miles,
the road all the way shaded with rows of fine plane-trees. A
large quantity of wine is sent from hero in small steamers to
French ports, especially to Cette and Bordeaux. It is all lifted
into barges with block and tackle. The wharfs are blocked up
with empty wine butts, many of them without bungs. Some were
quite sour, others smelled strongly of spirit. The wine is carted
from the stores and railway to the wharfs with two-horse drays
made for the purpose. The load, of two butts, are slung below
the bed with chains, and are raised about a foot from the ground
with a windlass fixed at the back and another at the front of the
dray ; one man can thus handle them easily. Saw several loads
of wine just in from the country, the teams and men covered with
dust. They have usually four mules in the team, and the load
consists of two butts slung below the bed with chains, and three
on the top ; the wheels are very high and light, and lean over
very much.
Close to the city is the broad channel of the Guadalaviar ; a
very small stream of dirty-looking water meanders along the bed,
and the smell from it is most abominable. I low ever the people
can walk and sit on the rambla alongside we cannot think.
Across a fine bridge is an Exhibition now on; we visited it on
the evening of our arrival, but as wo had been two nights on the
railway we wen; very tired and did not remain long. There were
a good many exhibits of wines and liquors, ea;ks, and coopers’
ware and tools. Around one of the wine exhibits were several
vines with the fruit on them, to show the kinds, but the foliage
was too much withered for us to recognise the kinds.
October 4.—Left Valencia at 12.40, and travelled all the
afternoon .along the coast through country planted with orange
and lemon trees in the irrigated lands, vines and mulberries on the
higher land, end the olive and carob tree on the poor and stony
rises. The grapes were all gathered except a large heavy-bearing
black grape. At Benicarlo wo lose sight of the sea and get
among limestone hills ; here t'>e land, except the bare rocky hills,
is all terraced to keep what little soil there is from washing away,
and planted with vines. They appeared to be nearly all the
lUataro, and are grown without support and look fairly healthy,
but with rather scant foliage. We saw a few patches with a


dark-red leaf, which we took to be the Carignan. We saw many
patches of newly-planted vines, and ground being made ready
for planting ; long holes arc dug to receive cuttings laid in
horizontally. Every station we came to was blocked up with
butts of wine and empty casks. It was nearly dark when we
reached Tortosa. The Ebro, which we crossed here, is a find
river, and looked as broad as the Murray. From here to
Tarragona w r e saw nothing.
October s.—After an early breakfast we visited the bodega
of Messrs. Ransome, Vluller, & Bagot, one of the largest in
Tarragona, and one of the largest that we have seen yet. It is
divided into six bays by lofty brick pillars, and covers over an
acre of ground, and is of one story and all above ground. In
one bay was a row of 1,000-gallon casks, and on the other side
vats of 10,000 gallons each, with a roadway over the tops of them.
There are several large tanks below ground, and between every
two of them and close to the wall is a small one about six feet
square, with a pump to each fixed to the wall and worked by
hand. The large tanks are run off into the smaller ones, and
pumped away as required. AVe looked into one of the small
tanks ; it was lined with white tiles, and a man was in it cleaning
up a little wine left below the suction-pipe. There was a largo
stock of wine in pipes and butts, also several large iron tanks full
of spirit. The spirit used here now is all from Germany. The
price of the common wine that used to be distilled has risen from
lb pesetas the hectolitre (about fid. per gallon) to 30 and 40 since
the demand for these wines for France has set in. We were
shown many wines here. Ordinary dry Tarragona red, under
2fi°, unfortified, deep in colour, and rough on the palate as if all
the stalk had been fermented—this is shipped at £ll per pipe of
12b gallons ; sweet Tarragona or Spanish Port, .at £l2 ; sherry,
much inferior to our new Angaston wines—this is shipped at £l2
per butt of 1(H gallons. We also saw a dry full-bodied white
wine, like a dry Verdeilho; it was said to be under 20°. AN e
were not shown any over a year old. AA r e were told that they
hold a large stock in the growers’ cellars, and have it down as
required. The bulk of the red wine is made dry and sweetened
afterwards with “ mustella. ’ They send their own spirit up to
the vineyards and have this article made for them. The bulk of
the wine shipped at Tarragona is made at Lerida, some thirty or
forty miles inland from here, and the vintage is already over, and
we fear if we go there we shall lose the vintage in France. AA T e
had no introduction to these people, hut they very kindly gave us
all the information we asked for. AA r e afterwards took a walk of
a few miles into the country ; as far as we went it was a thin
light soil on limestone, and if the sheaoaks at Edithburgh would
be changed into olive anil carob trees it would be almost like this
r


country in appearance. Fnrther on we could see a fine in igalod
valley ; we saw three men gathering carol) beans near the road,
one man was in the tree knocking down the beans with a bamboo.
We understood from them that the crop was a poor one, we
judged there was not more than .'!() lb. to a tree. The beans were
quite dry, but hung very tightly, and took a deal of hammering
to detach them. The trees seem to grow on the hare limestone
rocks where scarcely .any soil is to be seen.
Just outside the town a new hull-ring is building of brick. It
has twenty rows of seats all round next the ring uncovered, .and
ten or twelve above, covered with an iron roof. There is a line
breakwater and a pretty good harbour for small steamers, but
all the wine is taken off to them iu barges or lighters. The town
is old and the shops very poor, and the streets dirty ami the
people also. We visited the early market near a line old
cathedral, and saw many curious things exposed for sale—dried
mushrooms in large quantities, vegetable marrows just formed,
ami kids taken out of slaughtered goats, clothing of all kinds
spread out on the flags, and fish, sausages, and pancakes cooking
in the open air. We were sorry vve did not get here a fortnight
earlier so as to have seen the vintage. The wines here have a
great similarity to many of our Adelaide wines in colour, body,
anil flavour. Any one travelling to see the vintages in Europe
ought to land here, as this appears to be earlier than any other
part of Spain, They could then visit the raisin-making districts
of Denia and Malaga, see the vintage at Val de Penas and
Aleanzar and get to Xeres in good time, and he on the Douro in
ample time for the port wine vintage, and then on by the railway
into France via Biarritz to Bordeaux. Then on to the Burgundy
country, and from there to the champagne districts, and into
(Germany in time for the late vintages on the Rhine, which is as
late as the end of October. The only important part left out in
this programme is that of the lieranlt in the south of France,
which is worth visiting, although no first-class wines are now
made there since the phylloxera has made such ravages.
LETTER XVI.
TARRAGONA TO BABCELONA.—LARGE WINE STORES.—IMMENSE VATS.
GRAIN DISTILLERY.—PERPIGNAN.
OcTOIIEIi 6.
S?,T ARTEL) early for Barcelona. .lust as we wore leaving the
) station, and before the train got into full speed, a prisoner,
' who was working witli a gang close to the rail, jumped on
to the step of the next carriage and close to the compartment we


wert! ill. A soldier guard posted on the bank above fired two
shots at him; the first wont through the step of our carriage,
and the second brought him down, and we saw several men
carrying him away as if dead.
From Tarragona for many miles the soil is still the same as
before described, but at Villafranca the solid limestone gives
place to a soft kind, often at great depth, as we could see in the
railway cuttings, and terracing is not practised. The soil appears
richer and the vines much stronger ; they still seem to be
principally the Mataro. In some vineyards pruning has already
begun, and in others goats are turned in to browse on the foliage.
We only saw two ploughs at work in vineyards during the
day, but men were already digging over the vineyards with hoes.
Towards Barcelona the land is very hilly, but every available
spot, even the steep cuttings of the railway, are planted with
vines. The population of the country all the way from Valencia
appears very dense as compared to the corn-growing districts,
and shows what the vino, olive, and such like plants do for a
country.
The mountains, which are in sight nearly all the way, look
very barren, only a few carob-trees growing on the lower spurs.
We cross many dry watercourses, but wherever water can be
obtained there is plenty of everything growing.
We got to Barcelona in the evening, and next day (Sunday)
attended service of the English Church in an underground room
at the American Consulate. Afterwards went up the mountains
until we got a splendid view of the town and harbour and the
irrigated plain below us. . Tim lower lulls arc all planted with
vines. The soil still contains much decomposed lime. Wc went
through several vineyards without any hindrance, but the crop
was all gathered. Went to a circus in the afternoon, and found
it crowded with people. A line rambla in the centre of the town,
shaded with four rows of plane trees, is the favourite resort in
the evening, and the people an* said to pass much of their time
here.
Next morning wo visited several of the large wine stores on
the outskirts of ,1m city. They arc mostly near tin* railway, and
some have branch lines running into them. One of the best we
saw was a building not. quite finished, the; (loot's being laid with
concrete. There were three very large tanks below the floor, with
suction-pipes running from a steam-pump to each of them; over
each tank Is a small cistern about six feet long anil eighteen
inches wide, and the bottom sloping from a few inches at one end
In a foot or more at the other, and lined with glazed tiles. The
butts of wine are rolled on to these to be emptied. Above
•vmlind is a row of very large vats, all of one size and mounted on
walls three feet high. A e pper pipe of three incites diameter


from the steam-pump is taken along the walls, and a branch from
it to every two vats. By simply turning over the bent end of
this branch the wine is delivered into either vat as required.
The largest cellar we saw was 31 paces wide by 42 long,
the roof of iron of one span without any intermediate supports.
In it were two vats of 50,000 gallons each—by far the largest we
have yet seen—two of 30,000, and eight or nine of 15,000 ; also
several underground tanks with copper pipes leading to all of
them from a steam-pump. In all the cellars wo saw filters with
double calico bags, the inside one larger than the outside. We
also saw a man blending wine in a large vat by plunging a long
pole with a perforated board at the end of it. Very little is
doing in the cellars except sending away empty butt. up the
country for the new wine, very little of which has come in as
yet. Wo afterwards visited a very large grain distillery, said to
bo the only one in Spain. They operate almost entirely on maize
imported from America. It is ground and steamed, and after-
wards mashed in large oval vats of wood ; the mash is cooled in
them with a moveable coil of flat copper pipe before the yeast is
added. After about seventy-two hours it is pumped away to the
stills, of which there are four, two of French and two of German
make. The largest will turn out 600 litres per hour of strong
spirit, and when in full work they can turn out 4,000 gallons in
the twenty-four hours. The price of first-class spirit was said to
be about 2s. lOd. per gallon. The refuse of the spirit is given to
about 400 pigs, about half of which were Berkshires, and the rest
Catalans with long legs and snouts. There was a hospital for
sick pigs, and a few were quarantined for biting the others’ tails
otT. About forty dry cows were fed with the refuse; in a well-
arranged stable ; they get a little lucerne hay with it, and are
said to fatten very rapidly. We were obligingly shown over this
interesting establishment by Mr. B. Naas, a young German, who
called himself the technical director of the distillery. We after-
wards saw the cemetery, where, the dead are all buried above
ground in ovens seven tiers high. In the centre of the spaces
enclosed by these singular tombs are many magnificent ones of
the wealthy, often with a small chapel in them.
The old part of the town is very interesting, the streets very
narrow, but the shops well filled and plenty of business doing.
This is the busiest place by far that wo have seen on the
Peninsula, and we wished to see more of it, but we have to hurry
on into France.
October 9.—Started at 5 a.m., and got to the frontier at 11.
The land after leaving Barcelona is mostly sand and gravel, and
no more lime is seen. As soon as we got into France we began
to see what ravages the phylloxera has made. At Banyuls-ser-mer
and Port A r endres the steep hills are terraced to the very tops,


but the vines are nearly all killed : here and there are a few
sickly-looking stragglers. As we got near Perpignan they got
better, and on the plains near the town they appeared very
healthy, and with a heavy crop on them. We got to Perpignan
at 1.30, and went to the office of the Messrs. Durand, who are
bankers and vineyard proprietors. They were not in, and the
clerk did not seem inclined to help us much. We were debating
whether to go on to Cette at once or not, when a gentleman, who
was in the office and heard what we wanted, spoke to us and
kindly offered to send his clerk with us to see some places whore
wine-making was going on. We found out that he is the Spanish
Consul, and his clerk, Mr. A. Calonge, had been some years in
Canada, and spoke good English. He took us to a small place in
the town, but they had finished wine-making, and we ascertained
from him where to go next day. We afterwards spent an hour
or two with him seeing the sights of this interesting old town.
A noble rambla a mile long, shaded with four rows of enormous
plane-trees ninety years old, is quite close to the town ; a small
river runs through the town, and over a hundred women were
washing linen in it, and the smell from it was anything but
agreeable. After dining together our kind guide gave us his
experiences of life in Canada and the States, but, like all
Frenchmen, fully believes that there is no country equal to his
own. He thought that a few practical men from the parts
devastated with the phylloxera might bo got to emigrate to
Australia, but generally they are very much against leaving their
country.
LETTER XVII.
ST. NAZARRE.—M. ESCARRA’S VINEYARD AND WINE-MAKING CELLARS
AT PERPIGNAN.
October 10.
us to St. Nazarre, through vineyards nearly all the way,
about nine miles, to the farm and cellars of M. Escarra.
Ho is one of the largest proprietors in this neighbourhood, and
has 150 acres of vines, and large cellars, house, and otlices. He
was away from home, but one of his sons received us very kindly,
and took us all over the collars and vineyards, and gave us all


Uu’ information «■(' asked for most r<■:!.<lily. Wr had no inlro-
duction, but Uio fact of our bring winegrowers from another |mi t
of the world seemed i|uitr enough.
Wo first, visited the collars, and found the last, of the grapes
coming in. They are brought in in deep tubs with two handles,
and containing about a hundred-weight each. The drays are
backed up to a platform at one end of the cellar, which is on
falling ground, and (here put on a low truck running on rails,
and through a doorway to a kind of gallerv built over I lie
fermenting casks.
There arc here twenty-seven casks holding 10,000 gallons each,
thirteen on each side and one at (lie upper end. There is a
trap-door in the lloor over each cask, ami the mill (an ordinary
fluted-roller one, worked by hand) is placed over it, and the
grapes are crushed and fall into the casks below with all the
stalks ; with every tubful of grapes a handful of plaster is
strewn over them as they are emptied into the mill. Although
the last of the grapes are coming in they are not at all shrivelled.
There are a good many rotten ones among them, but we could not
find any burnt-up grapes. There is no means used to keep down
the skins, &c.. in the vat, but a large iron funnel with a spout to
it is fixed in the manhole on the top of the cask after it is Idled,
and a shute conveys the yeast as it wmrks over down into a large
tub on the lloor: the juice that works over with the yeast is
pumped back into the vat as soon as it van be done. Tim grapes
are usually allowed to ferment fourteen or fifteen days before I lie
vats are drawn off, but this year, owing to a good crop, they had
to draw off a little sooner. The vat they are tilling to-day was
filled the lirst time on the iird September and drawn oil on (be
15th, and filled again the second time a day or two after
In an adjoining cellar are three large. screw’-prcsses, each with a,
single screw in the centre. On the 1 top of the screw is a wheel of
live or six feet diameter carrying the nut. A groove round the
edge carries a rope several times round the wheel, one end of
which is taken to a crab-winch, which serves for all three presses.
After the marc is pressed the press is raised, the cheese is
pared down wdth long knives and piled on the top and pressed
again, and the pressings mixed with the wine drawn off. The
contents of the first vat drawn off was in a yard adjoining the
cellar--in butts, with a flat stone over the bmighole of each. M.
Escarra said it would be rolled into the cellar and pumped into a
vat as soon as they could find room, and that it would settle down
again without any injury to the wine. \Ve tasted several of
these butts and found the wine very rough and deep in colour
but light in body, and very inferior to fair Mat am wine we make
at Tintara. They have sent away a good deal of the new wine
already to make room, and the w hole crop is already sold for


28 fruncs per hectolitre, or about a shilling per gallon. The
vineyards are slightly undulating, and the soil a deep free-working
sandy loan), with more or less gravel, and the subsoil a light-
coloured red clay, with traces of lime in it. The vines grow very
strong except in the very gravelly land, and are planted at five
feet apart each way, and all worked by hand labour. The crop
varies from MbO to 700 gallon:-, to the acre.
The kinds mostly grown are first the (Jarignan, next iMataro.
and then (irenache. (irenache wine is said to lose colour in
keeping, but ,M. E.scarva said that did not matter, as all their
wine is sold and used within the year. The vines are all spur-
pruned and grown as bushes without any stakes, and they are not
topped during the summer, ill. Kscarra said it would do no good
to do so. We looked among the vines for burnt grapes, but
could not find any, and infer from this that their climate is not
so severe as ours, and that we must still continue to top our vines
to give shade to prevent the fruit from burning up.
The phylloxera is here in spots, and M. Kscarra is treating it
with sulpho-carbonate of potassium, and washing it in with water
pumped on to the vineyard with a portable steam-engine through
iron pipes. They have been able by this means to check the
spread of the pest, but are afraid to lay out any more money in
cellars and casks.
The country all the way from Perpignan is undulating and
very pretty. Some of the vignerons are already digging the
vineyards ; they first roughly top oil" the shoots with billhooks to
get between and about the vines. Others are manuring the vines
by opening a trench between the rows about a yard long and six
inches deep ; in this they place a little fresh cow manure, all the
small cuttings and weeds about, and then draw buck the earth
again with the hoe to cover it. On returning we made a detour
to see some of the irrigated land near IVrignan. it is very fully
cultivated with all kinds of fruit and vegetables. Wc saw noold
peach-trees, and were told by our driver that they renew them
every ten or twelve years. They do not prune them much. The
land is very valuable, and M. (Jalonge said T2OO per acre, and
very seldom any of it for sale.
After a late breakfast we went to the cellars of M. Kscarra, in
the town and near the railway station. The son, who attends to
this part of the business, was out, but the cellar-man showed us
round. There are sixteen casks in one cellar, ranging from !J,OO(J
to 10,000 gallons each. In answer to our enquiries, he said that
the}- never use water to wash put these casks, hut take wine for
that purpose, and that the casks would go mouldy if they used
water. They sulphur them well every two months when empty.
We noticed the bag-filters here like we saw in Spain. Wc next
visited the collars of Keynes A: Andossan. They have in one


ceHar thirteen vats of 14,000 gallons each, and in another
detached cellar ten of 5,000 gallons each. These arc filled or
emptied through a copper pipe running beneath the vats from a
pump worked by a gas-engine at one end of the cellar. The pipes
arc laid at a regular incline so as to drain thoroughly, and taps
are placed so that any one vat can be filled or emptied as required.
This is the first time we have seen this arrangement for filling
from below, and it is said to answer perfectly well. The new
wine is coming in here, and 12,000 hectolitres have been already
received. The foreman here got the keys and took us to a small
cellar, where there are ten or twelve butts and a few small casks
of old wines. Among them two wines of the best Eousillion type
from Banyuls-sur-mer, and thirty years old ; they were like a very
old Port. Also a very old Grenache, quite yellow, and a Muscat
of Rivesaltes ten years old, both very luscious and high-llavoured.
He also showed us the ordinary red wine of the country a year
old, such as they are sending away. It is very thin, and not at
all equal to our Tintara wines. He said that all the fine hill
vineyards that used to produce the fine Rousillion wines are
destroyed by the phylloxera.
We next visited the cellars of M. Savary Villar. They are
much in the same style as the others, and the vines much the
same. We were shown here a vat of wine made at the proprietor's
own vineyard. It was deeper in colour, and better than the
ordinary red wines. We enquired if they kept these large, vats
always full. They said they did as far as they could, but if on
ullage they arc frequently sulphured.
The last cellar that we saw was that of A. Fric it Co., close to
the railway station, and they have made the most of their position.
The offices and cellars are entered through a grand archway, with
the name of the firm in gold letters, then through a yard planted
with shrubs and flowers, and in front of the offices a broad
skeleton verandah of iron, covered with vines and creepers. The
cellars are beautifully clean and well kept. They very kindly
showed us many of their wines, among them some hill wines,
which would very well take the place of Port, being very full-
bodied, but not sweet. In all these collars they use rotary pumps
and hose for racking. We were not sorry that we stopped here,
as we should have missed seeing so much if we had gone on
yesterday.


LETTER XVIII.
CETTE, CELLARS THERE. —CHAUVAIN'S CELLARS, MANUFACTURE OF
VERMOUTH. FLORENSAC.—M. RICARD'S VINEYARDS.
OcTOBEK 11.
/t^ETTE. —Arrived here late last evening, and took up our
V»j| quarters at the Hotel Grand Gall ions. Early this morning
\vc took a turn round the town and docks. We saw men
building large blocks of stone and cement for harbour works.
After breakfast called on Peredier Feres, ifc Co., to whom we had
an introduction from P. I>. Burgoyne & Co., of London. None
of the partners were in ; but the head cellarman showed us
round. The collars are large, and of two stories, the upper one
quite in the roof, and is only used for old wines. The new wines
are stored in twenty casks containing from nine to 10,000 gallons
each, set up on walls about four feet from the floor ; the space
underneath is used for stowing empty butts. A gas-engine works
a treble-action pump, and the wine is pumped up into an iron
reservoir near the roof, and from this it is conveyed in tinned
copper pipes along the walls to each cask. There is very little
wine now in the cellar, and the new crop has not yet begun to
come in, and they do not expect it for another month.
Next called on H. Benezch, who has a fine and well-kept cellar
with twenty-seven large casks. He also uses a pump worked by
gas-engine and india-rubber hose of three inches in diameter to
convey the wine from a reservoir set on the second floor to the
casks. The hose are kept from getting sour by washing them
with water after use. Empty casks are kept sweet by sulphuring
them every fourteen! days ; from fifteen to twenty matches are
used each time for a cask of 10,000 gallons. These matches are
purchased ready made, and are seven to eight inches long by an
inch broad, and very thick with sulphur. The wines are fined
with dried blood, got from Austria; it is very effective, but takes
a good deal of colour out of red wines. We saw hero a little old
wine evidently kept as a curio; it was said to be thirty years old
and like an old Madeira. A large trade is done here with the
interior, and steamers are arriving daily with wine from Spain
and Italy, and they are blended with the thin wines of the
neighbourhood. From the pumps a suction-pipe is carried across
the street to the canal in front for the purpose of seasoning new


casks with salt water. Everywhere one secs rows of butts ranged
alongside the canals (which intersect the town in various places),
being filled with salt water by men who bale it up with a bucket
fixed on a long pole. It is allowed to remain in them about four
days, and they are, then rinsed with boiling water. is ext called
on Mr. G. Espitallier, the Mritish Consul, respecting getting a
few men to emigrate from this part. JJc thought there would lie
great difficulty in getting good men, as they earn b francs a day,
and foremen in cellars much more than that, and they are very
loth to leave their country. He very kindly took us to a cellar
near his office to taste some Algerian wine. ft was poor, thin
stuff, and 'cry astringent, and we did not think much of it. lie
then took us to the cellars of M. Chauvain—the largest manu-
facturer of Vermouth in France, and who has hy far the finest
cellars in Cette. They are situated near the railway station, and
arc nearly new. They are entered through massive doors, past
offices on both sides, into a large yard floored with cement, and
rooted with glass. This yard is now empty, hut in the summer
is filled with wines in butts to get the heat. There are six lofty
cellars all opening into one, another and into this covered yard,
and in them are no less than R3O casks of 11,000 gallons each.
They arc all of -f inch oak and well hooped, and set up on dwarf
walls a good height from the floor, and have galleries running
along over the tops of them all. They cost set up 7 francs per
hectolitre, or a little over .'id. per gallon. There are copper pipes
from a steam-pump, like the Tangye pump, to every cask, and
the pipes, taps, and brass fittings are said to have cost over
£4,000. The stock of wine on hand is not less than one and
a half million gallons, and is all white wine, and made into
Vermouth ; and M. Chauvain is said to have made an immense
fortune out of it in ten years. The whole place is nicely kept,
and one man does nothing else hut keep the brass taps clean.
Octoukk I — Went by rail to Floreusae, a small village near
Cette. We found here a small proprietor, M. C. Celly, who has
a brother in Adelaide. Ho received us very' heartily, and took
ns round to various places in the neighbourhood. We first visited
the vineyard of M. Louis Ricard, who is one of the largest
proprietors here, and owns llbO acres of vines here and another
vineyard near. Marseilles. They were here still gathering grapes
and making wine. 'The vineyard is all on the Hat country near
ttu; River Jlcrault, and the soil is a rich alluvial loam, and the
vinos are planted about five feet apart each way and grow very-
strong, and are appaivntly all worked by hand labour. A pretty-
large party of vintagers—mostly women and girls—were .at
breakfast when we got to them, but they soon started to work
again and begun to sing. 'The women were mostly old, and very-
few good-looking ones among them. They all wore broad-brimmed


straw )ih(.». The graphs aw carried by men to tins carts, which
are like those used at Cette for moving wine, with temporary
hottoni and sides put to them for the vintage, and a tarpaulin
laid to receive the grapes. The kind they were Leathering was the
Hound, a whitish grape with a brown tinge, and a very heavy
hearer. There is also the hlaek Hornet ami the Ammon, a large
black grape with a (hick skin, and very late : it also is a heavy
bearer. The Carignan and the Tintnrier are considered the best
crapes. The leaves of the latter are turning oh" very red. and
it. is rather a straggly grower. At. the cellars we found M.
Ricard sitting talking to the men. who were at breakfast. He
excused himself from going round with us, as he is paralyzed, but
sent a man with us. In an inner cellar we found twenty casks
in two rows of from 9,000 to 11,000 gallons each cask, and a
similar lot in another and larger cellar, and preparations making
for setting up more. About the centre of the cellar are three
large stone-built tanks, all above ground, and used for fermenting
the red wines. The drayloads of grapes go up an incline and
over a, strong board Hour on the (op of tin* tanks, 'Hie grapes
are crushed in an iron roller mill, with teeth like those of a
handsaw, and fall through trapdoors into the tanks below. They
were unloading a drayload of white grapes into a shallow cistern
of wood, and men were shovelling them into the mill, which took
two men to work it. From the mill the crushed grapes passed
down into another cistern on the ground-floor, and around it are
several old-fashioned presses. The heds of the presses are of very
heavy timber, and from seven to eight'feet square. The presses
are worked with a jerk when well down. The skins, after
pressing, are sent to a distillery in the village. There is an old
still in the place, hut it is not now used. The wine is already all
sold 25 francs the hectolitre, or about Is. per gallon. The red
wines are fermented with all the stalks, and remain in the tanks
for eight or ten days, and are then drawn oil' into small tanks
lined with white tiles below the floor, and pumped from them
through copper tubes, which are fixed to the walls, and lead to
the casks in the several cellars. Very little can,' seemed to he
taken, and dirt and disorder and a strong smell of lactic acid
pervaded the whole place. The Terret Jlourct, said to give
sometimes as much as 1,500 gallons to the acre, and 1 should
think there would be from SOO to 900 on what we saw gathering ;
and at the price got for the wine it must he a very profitable
business.
After thanking the proprietor, we went to the banks of the
river to see the way the water is raised to inundate this and some
other vineyards. The river has a substantial darn or weir thrown
across, and a fall of seven or eight feet is obtained, and a turbine
raises it to the surface through an 18-inch pipe, and it is then


conveyed away in raised ditches to the vineyards. They are
flooded for thirty or forty days during the winter, arid this has
been done now for four years and proved a certain cure for the
phylloxera. We noticed in the middle of the vineyard a small
hillock which cannot be flooded, and on it the vines are nearly
all dead.
In some places steam pumps are used for raising water for
inundating' the vines, and everywhere it is possible to inundate
fresh vineyards are being planted, and on the hills American
vines grafted to French sorts. The)' evidently do not intend to
lose the vine hereabouts.
LETTER XIX.
FLORENSAC, DISTILLERIES THERE. —CRAPE-SKINS FROM SPAIN. —
RETURN TO CETTE.—WINES EXPOSED TO THE SUN THERE.
Florensac there art; to tie found several small distilleries,
jAjIL, and we were taken to some of them. At the first one we
s ~®" 3 visited they were operating on a material called '“Clausette,”
It is a fruit like a small date, and is imported in mats from
Bombay. The still was a continuous one, and the spirit was
running off at 85° by Cartier. It was far from a pure spirit, and
the place was ill-arranged and dirty. In the next they were
distilling from the marc of grapes. There wore two large vessels
of copper in which the marc is heated with a steam coil at the
bottom, similar to the wood vats we saw used in California for
the same purpose. One of them is distilling whilst the other is
being emptied and tilled again. The spirit running off was the
most horrible stuff I ever saw, and the smell of it hung about our
hands all the rest of the day, and to our handkerchiefs for a day
longer. The marc is brought in from the wine-making places and
stacked up in largo heaps under cover and well trod. After it
leaves the still it is carted away and stacked up again out of
doors, and fed to sheep and cattle during the winter. We then
visited the distilleries and cellars of the Mayor, M. Dental ;
nearly all his casks were empty, as very little wine is now
distilled. The still is on the same principle as those made by
Linde, of Adelaide, and will turn out a hectolitre of spirit per
hour of a strength of 85" Cartier. They had Just finished
distilling from wine, and the still was yet warm. The spirit was


fairly clean and very different from the marc spirit. We then
visited the cellars of M. Yilliotte, who has a fine chateau in the
town. The cellars are lofty and well built of stone, and well
furnished with casks of a large size, but all empty, the phylloxera
having destroyed nearly all his vineyards. We saw several large
cisterns built of stone for fermenting, and several old-fashioned
looking presses ; but, being near dark, we could not examine them
very minutely. We were shown a piece of vines near the railway
of five and a half hectares which was sold last year for 25,000
francs, or £7O per acre. It was on flat country, and capable of
being put under water. The vineyards hereabouts do not succumb
to the phylloxera so quickly as in poorer land, and a vineyard was
pointed out which had been attacked ten years ago and was still
in partial bearing. The pruning is all done here witli two-handed
sicateurs, one blade having a cutting edge at the back, which is
used to chop off the small shoots and suckers growing from the
base of the stock. The wines grown on these plains are very
thin, and contain only 7 or 8 per cent, of alcohol, or from 12 to
14 of proof spirit.
We had for breakfast Aramon wine of the previous vintage,
very thin and hard, but sound, and it quite amused us to see the
quantity of it drunk by both the young and old during the meal,
and the way they seem to enjoy it. At the railway station we
saw quantities of puncheons, quite blocking up the place. On
enquiring what they contained, we found that they are filled with
grape-skins in Spain and which are sent here to be worked over
again; and at Adge, another town on our way back to Cette, we saw
large vats of them fermenting out of doors near the station.
The skins of the Spanish grapes are found to contain more
colour and other qualities than those grown here, and are said to
be fermented over and over again with glucose, and and after-
wards strengthened with German spirit, and sent away to Cette
and Bordeaux to be made into cheap clarets.
Octoueu 30.—We got back to Cette by an early train, and
walked up to the top of the hill above the town, from whence a
„rnnd view is got of the town and the lake and country round for
many miles. The town is one of the most prosperous in France,
and since the phylloxera the trade has increased immensely.
Steamers are arriving from Spain, Italy, and Greece daily laden
with the wines of those countries, which are here blended with
the wines of the neighbourhood, and then sent all over France,
and a small proportion shipped to America and other countries.
Property has greatly increased in value, anil the Consul pointed
out several stores irear his office on one of the wharfs which are
let at 5 francs the square metre, and four years’ r ent paid in
advance to enable the proprietors to build.
During the day we visited several more cellars. At one of


them that of Estovo it Sinot, wo found an apparatus for heatin'!
wines, ft is a vat containing 100 hectolitres, or about 2,200
gallons, heated with a .steam coll at the bottom. It is fixed on a
stagi! high up, and above it is another of the same size, into
which the wine to be heated is pumped up with a steam pump,
and from it run down into the heater as required. They said
they only heated itick wines, and never those that were sound.
At the cellars of M. de Jaen, who very kindly showed us round
himself, we. saw a large yard full of butts of wine marked
Madeira stacked up two or three; tiers high. lie said it is put
out here in the sun to get age at two years old, and remains from
two to three years;-also that the evaporation is at the rate of 8
per cent, per annum.
We noticed in the cellar on the crossbar in front of many of
the large casks a small wide-mouthed clear glass bottle filled with
white wine, and covered with a piece of card. He said it was
done to try how the wines stood the air.
The large linn of Momq-, Pratt, it do. have several acres of
land near their cellars covered with butts of wine, all stacked in
single tiers, with narrow gangways between. There are also a
row of large casks painted black to attract more heat, but the
butts are not painted, and looked very old and weather-beaten.
They are all slaved up, but on sounding them we found a con-
siderable ullage. Several men were at work racking off and
pumping the wine into the large casks. They run olf four butts
at a time into the pump tub with tin syphons.. The wine is
strong am! high-coloured for white wine, and it has to be of a
strength of 2(i proof to stand this treatment, and is fortified up
to that if required. It is used in the manufacture of Vermouth
and in making up imitation wines, a trade for which Cette is
notorious. The wines arc all carted about here with vehicles,
which are merely a long pair of skids on high wheels. A couple
of good horses take seven butts, which are held in their place
with a strong rope, which is tightened up with a roller lixed to
the shafts just behind the horse.
We called again on .M. Espitallier. the Consul for England.
Ile is quite willing to act as emigration agent, if required; but
does not give much hopes of inducing people to go to Australia.
He said that he had a great, difficulty to get a man to go to Italy
to manage a vineyard for an English gentleman, and as soon as
his two years’ engagement was up he threw up the place of .£2OO
a year and returned to work as a labourer in his native village.
OcTonnn I t.—Started early for llordeaiix. between Cette
and Adge the land is low and sandy, and not much above the sea,
yet every available spot is in vines ; further on the land is better,
but here the phylloxera has made sad havoc, and large heaps of
vine-stumps, piled up near the houses, are all that remain (.<*» show


whore once had heen tliriving vineyards. And yet they are
planting again in all directions, especially where water can lie
raised to inundate the vines. At Xarbonne we missed our train
through a mistake, and had to wait several hours for the next,
but found our luggage all right at Carcassone when we got there.
There is a marked difference in the railway accommodation and
in the civility of the officials in France as compared to Spain and
Portugal. From Carcassone onward the cultivation is more
mixed, and continued so as far as Agon, when it became dark,
and we saw no more of the country that day, and got to Bordeaux
late in the evening.
LETTER XX.
BORDEAUN. —CELLARS OF N. JOHNSTON AND CO. —WINE MAKING
IN THE MEDOC.
OcTOUEK 15.
thereat wino centre of France. (Jailed on
J£| Nathaniel Johnston it Co,, and saw Mr. (Jlos-% the senior
'* sr * partner, and Mr. .Johnston, Jim., who took us to their
cellars, at. some, distance from their olliees. The cellars are very
old, some part of them 150 years, and are all helow ground. In
these are kept the old wines in hogsheads and large stocks of
claret in bottle. The temperature was 15 centigrade, and never
varies much. In one cellar was 10,000 bottles of Chateau Latour
of 187 S, and in another .10,000 of Lalitlee of the same year.
The cellar walls and roof are covered with a thick coat of mould,
and it may be seen running oxer the bottles in stack, and the
casks are also covered with it. All the casks containing old
wines are turned with the bung on one side. The old head cellar-
man brought us in the tasting-room samples of some of the finest
wines, both claret and sauternes. They do not keep samples
of the wnies sent out here as they do at Oporto and Xeres. .Mr.
Close told us that the trade with Australia had greatly fallen oft’
during the last few years, and wanted to know the leason He
said he had tasted many of the Australian wines sent to the late
Exhibition in llordeaux and found many of them very good, but
remarked that the older wines were not so good as the younger,
ami concluded from this that they had not been well kept ami
managed. Ile said that all the line llordeaux wines are rucked
every three months the Jirst yw, twice the second, and once a


year afterwards.; also that five kinds of grapes are grown in all
the best claret vineyards, that they are gathered separately
beginning with the Malbec, then the Merlot, Carbenet, Sauvignon,
Carmenet, and Yerdot, and fermented in separate vats, and when
drawn off a proportion of each is put into each hogshead, and
that it often takes a week or more to complete the filling, and
that the wine takes no harm from being kept on ullage during the
time of filling. Mr. Close kindly gave us a letter to a relative,
M. Viellard, who has a vineyard in the Medoc and is still gather-
ing grapes there. He has a large pottery establishment in
Bordeaux, and we found him there, and he kindly arranged for us
to see the vineyard next day. We afterwards called on Messrs.
Junot Freres it Kapelhott', to whom we had an introduction
from our good friend, Mr. John Hopkins, of London. M.
Kapelhoff and two nephews received us very kindly, and showed
us round their cellars, which are near the wharf, and their offices
overlook the broad river Garonne in front of them. Their cellars
are nearly all above ground, but are mostly arched over, and are
very cool and damp, and the walls, casks, and bottles all covered
with greenish mould. Communication from one cellar to another
is through sliding iron doors as a precaution against fire. Here
are the old wines in cask, and large stacks of the finest wines of
the country in bottle, many of them in bins made of iron. One
cellar was stacked quite full to the arched roof with Chateaux
Margaux of one vintage, in bottle, and there is said to be 300,000
bottles of wine in stock. We had the pleasure of tasting some
very fine wines—Chateau Yquem fifteen years old, and Sauternes
of 187 G and 1878, both in splendid condition and of a beautiful
green golden colour and exquisite bouquet and flavour. Our
Sauvignon. grown at Tintara, from the vines brought out by Dr.
Kelly, comes nearer to these wines than any I have tasted in
Australia, but it wants a certain dryness under the sweet. J
believe we shall be able yet to make Sauternes.
In one cellar we noticed two vats, of about 2,500 gallons each.
They are used for blending. They reach quite to the ceiling, anil
are filled through a trapdoor from the floor above. It is drawn
off into hogsheads by a tap, having two branches, with hose
attached, so that two casks are filled at the same time.
We noticed that all the casks of old wine were on their side,
but that a tap-hole is bored ready for drawing off without having
to move the casks. The new wines are all kept in cellars above
ground, and are kept bung upwards, and frequently filled up.
They have a tasting office about the centre of the cellars, and
rails laid to roll casks on to the dispatching-room near the front,
and here the coopering and marking is done before the wines are
shipped.


At 12 next day we took train for Macau Station, in the Medoc,
and found the carriage of M. Viellard in waiting to take us to
Chateau Larrieu Terrefort, about a mile from the station. On
our arrival at the chais, or winehouse, wo were taken in hand by
the foreman—a very intelligent man—and shown through the
chais and cellars adjoining. Wine-making is still going on and
grapes are coming in in drays, each drawn by two good stout
horses. The grapes are brought in in largo tubs holding about
5 cwt. each, and two of them is a load. The drays are backed
up to the chais, and the tubs hoisted up to the second story by a
travelling crane. The tubs are very strong, and fitted with pivots
about halfway down, and are easily emptied into lagars or treading-
boxos on low iron wheels. These lagars arc made of 4-inch deal,
and are 12 feet long by 8 wide and 16 inches deep, and well bolted
together. There are three of them, and they overlap the tops of
the fermenting vats about a foot. There are two rows of these,
from 8,000 to 16,000 gallons each, and they come up about four
inches above the floor, and on the head is a door about three fee*
square, with hinges, through which the vat is filled.
The grapes are trod first in the lagar in which they are emptied,
then shovelled into a square sieve standing on legs in the next
lagar, where three men soon rub them from the stalks. The
sieves arc of wood, and the meshes a little over an inch square.
They are again trod, and then a plug is withdrawn from the side
and the juice allowed to flow into the vat below. After another
treading the skins arc shovelled over the side into the vat, which
is usually filled in one day, but not always, and when full enough
the door is closed and about an inch of plaster of paris is spread
all over the head, rendering it quite air-tight. A bent tube of
tin of one and a half inches diameter is inserted in tho head and
turns over into a small tub of water, which allows the gas to
escaper and prevents the ingress of air. The head is never pushed
down or kept down in any way below the juice, and they say it
is not required, and that they get plenty of colour without doing
so. Tho vats are left to ferment from twenty to twenty-five days,
and are only used once during tho vintage. After the wine is
drawn off sugar and cold water is added to make a second wine,
and after that the skins are given to the men, who make another
brewing from them for their own drinking. The foreman said
that in. a late season like the present one all tho stalk is taken
out as we saw them doing, sometimes half is taken out, and in
some seasons it is all left in and fermented together. The density
of the must to-day was 10" by Costi’s saccharometnr. It had
rained a little in the morning, which would have made it a little
weaker. The grapes coming in are tho verdot, from the “ palus,”
or low-lying vineyards ; they are not at all shrivelled, and not
very sweet to tho taste. Wo asked our guide what they did to
a


preserve the fermenting vats when not in use. He said that they
were well washed after the vintage and sponged with alcohol, and
left till the next vintage, when they are again sponged with spirit
before being used. No sulphur is used. Wo saw two or three
empty ones with the tap-holes open ; they smelled rather old, but
not acid or mouldy. From here we walked across to the adjoining
vineyard of Chateuu Dausac, which belongs to Nathaniel Johnston
and Co. The chais here is of one story only. The gathering was
all completed, and the wines all fermenting in seventeen large
vats all plastered down. The gas escaping through the water
makes a strange noise. They were busy here getting the new
casks ready to receive the wine; first scalding them with boiling
water, then rinsing with cold water. After being drained they
are rinsed out with strong spirit. No sulphur is used. At the
entrance to the chais at Vi el lard’s we noticed a large open cask
tilled with common red grapes crushed, and having a tap in the
lower part. Half a cocoanut shell lay on the grapes. On enquiry
we found that it was for the use of the men, and that as they
draw off from below more water is added, until it gets too weak.
I wonder what our labourers would say to such “ tipple” as this.
We tasted it, but would need to lie very thirsty to drink much of
it. We then went round the vineyards and noticed many large
heaps of manure ready to be put on to the vines. The soil of all
the best vineyards is mostly composed of white quartz gravel, and
very little loam among it. The lowlands are a stiff clayey soil,
and with the rain in the morning was very sticky and bad to
travel over. The vines are all planted at about four feet apart
between the rows, and are trained on low trellisses of bamboo,
and in some places wire is used. The strong vines are pruned
with one long rod, and the weak ones short. On the gravel the
vines are very weak and small compared to what we have seen in
the South of France, and the stems are covered with moss. They
are carefully trained, hut not topped. On the flats, or “ palus,”
the vinos are much stronger and planted wider apart and trained
on higher trellisses. Some part of the vineyard is said to be l')0
years old, but it is being constantly renewed by layering to fill
up the place of vines that die or become sickly. We came on
the vintagers. There were thirty-six gatherers, mostly women
and children. To every four or five gatherers is a man to carry
the grapes to the drays in an iron bucket strapped on his back.
We noticed that they left a few unripe grapes on the vines ; but
on looking into their buckets we saw plenty of rotten grapes, and
shall never more believe the stories about the careful sorting, &c.,
that one reads of. The women look after the children to see that
they work properly, but they do not seem at all lively. Perhaps
the damp weather and the sticky soil weighed on their spirits, as
it certainly did on ours, and we were pleased on returning to the


chateau to have a cup of tea presented to us, and the only good
one wo have yet hoen able to obtain in France. After a visit to
the kitchen, where preparations were making to feed the vintagers,
we left, well pleased with the attention shown to us by all we
came in contact with and the information obtained.
LETTER XXI
VINEYARDS OF THE MEDOC.—CHATEAU LAFITTE. —CHATEAU
MARGEAUX. —ST. PIERRE. —CULTIVATION OF THE VINEYARDS.
October 17. .
S'OOK train this morning to St. Jullien .Station, on the Medoc
1 Railway. Here we found M. Kapelhoff waiting for us,
* and we went on with him to the next station, where his
carriage was in waiting to take us round to see some of the best,
of the world-renowned vineyards of the Medoc. We were accom-
panied by M. Tastot, a wine-broker, and whose father is a largo
vineyard proprietor. We drove first to Chateau Lalitte. It is a
beautiful place, but as we proposed to visit several places we did
not stay long here. We tasted several of the 1882 wines, which
seemed to us very light both in body and colour. We next called
at Chateau Mouton. The chais here, is nearly new and of two
stories, and in the form of the letter L. There is a row of vats
on each side of the lower story, all raised on walls about four feet
high, and the tops of them come a little above the second door.
The grapes an; lifted from the drays at the angle of the building
with a crane and emptied on to the lagars on rails, the same as
described in my last letter. Everything here is in first-class style
—the vats all varnished, the hoops japanned, and the floors
scrupulously clean. The grapes were all gathered and fermenting
in the vats, which were plastered down in the usual way.
Next called at Chateau Latour and tasted the wines of 1881
and 1882 vintages. They wore very good, but rougher and fuller
t han those of Lafitte.
Wo then drove to Chateau St. Pierre, the property of M.
KapelhotU The chais here is of one story, in the old style. We
noticed the way the vats are tilled here and at Chateau I )au/ac is
by carrying the crushed grapes up an ineline on wheels, so that it
can he easily moved about from one, vat to another as required.
Wo tasted hero some very line wines of vintages 1881 and 1882.


i. The older wines had all been removed to the cellars of the firm
in Bordeaux. Wo lunched with our kind host and his amiable
family, and had the pleasure of drinking some of the finest
clarets and Sauternes of the world. I especially refnember a
Sauterne of 1869, like liquid gold, and Chateau Latour of 1875,
and St. Pierre, of the same year ; also Chateau Margeaux, which
we liked the best. After lunch we drove to Chateau Margeaux,
through vineyards all the way. Here we tasted the wines of
1881 and 1882, and found that of 1881 the best new wine we
had seen The chais and cellars hero are magnificent, and the
latter for the new wines is 200 feet long and very lofty, and the
roof supported by a row’of massive pillars in the centre. There
is room on each side for six rows of casks, which are all placed
ready to receive the new wine as soon as it is ready to draw off
from the vats.
The cellars here, where the old wines are kept, art’ at some
distance away, and entered through the cooperage, and there are
no less than three doors to get to them. Here we tasted several
of the old wines, but having gone through so much tasting in so
Abort a time the mind got mixed about the several vintages. We
noticed here that the vines were trellised on two wires about three
feet high, and most carefully pruned and tied to the wires.
■Lastly we called at Chateau Margeaux Palmer, and found them
•here getting ready the hogsheads for the new wines in the same
way as described before. They never' sulphur a cask until the
first racking, as they say it interferes with the fermentation.
AVe noticed that the bungs in the one-year-old wine wen; not
driven, and could easily be removed by the hand. The tapholos
are all closed with neat plugs wrapped the long way with clean
-rush, and the casks arc kept filled up. The broker', M. Tastet,
carried his own silver valinche and saucer, and took the samples
himself front the casks, the cellar-man removing the bung for
him. The wine is everywhere carried from the vats to the casks
in buckets holding about ten gallons with a polo through the
centre and the top hoop forming a lip, and they are carried by
two men. Where the chais is of one story the entshed grapes
are carried in wood or iron buckets strapped on the shoulders of
the men The many villages we passed through have all an air
of neatness and prosperity about them, and there are no old or
■ tumble down houses to be seen, and every appearance of the
people doing well. Generally the vines are planted about four
and a half feet apart, and trained to low trellises—they say to get
• the heat of the ground, which iseverywhere gravelly. Near Chateau
Margeaux wo saw a place where they had excavated. It was
■ almost pure white quartz for nine feet in depth. At. Tastet said
. that many of the Australian wines had the taste of the Eucalyptus
.with them, and At. Kapelhoff and ho agreed that the wine made


from French vines grafted on stocks of American vines had the
foxy flavour, and that wines grown near pine-trees could always
ho distinguished by the flavour of the piue in them. These men,
who are daily tasting wines from their childhood upwards, are
ready to find the most trifling differences in flavour, such as would
not bo noticed by ordinary mortals. We returned to Margeaux
Station in time to catch the evening train, and parted with our
kind host, who had enabled us in one day to visit the most
renowned vineyards in Europe.
OcTOUEU 18.—We called on A. de Luz & Co., to whom we had
sent some samples of wine a few years before. They informed us
that a son of Mr. Hubert de Castella, of Victoria, was at Latour
for the vintage, and we were sorry we did not see him, After
looking at some cellar tools, &c., we required we took a run to
Langon by rail in the afternoon, and took a walk into the
country. Wo went into a small vineyard where a man was
ploughing his vines with one cow. He took pains to show us
the different kinds of vines. The kinds grown here are the
Sauvignon and the Semillion, both for white wines. They are
trained to long poles like hops, and the Semillion is pruned to
short spurs, but the Sauvignon is pruned with one long rod,
which is bent round like a bow and tied to the vinestock. We
called at a wineshop in the; village, the sign being a bush hanging
over the door, and were served with two glasses of red wine, very
thin and new, but quite strong enough, and were charged 6 sous,
or 3d., for it. The vines about here are being ploughed with a
plough which has the beam prolonged to the yoke of the cattle
drawing it, and having a very long turn-furrow. They turn the
earth up to the vines at this ploughing. The soil here is a friable
sandy loam, and is easily cultivated. We saw about here many
plantations of acacia, grown for stakes. This is considered the
best wood for the purpose.
The cultivation throughout the Medoc is very thorough, and
M. Kapelhoff said that it cost 1,500 francs per hectare, or nearly
£2O per acre. I think I must have misunderstood him.
The phylloxera is kept in check in the best vineyards by the
use of sulpho-carbon of potassium, at a cost of from £5 to £8
per acre. The lowlands are inundated whenever it can be done,
and new vineyards are being planted in such situations.
The charges at hotels here are very high. At the Hotel
Nantes, where we stopped, they charged 6 francs for dinner, and
we got better served at Oporto at less than one-half, and got
better wines there at a shilling per bottle than here at 3 francs.
On the 19th I started for England via Paris to fetch Mrs. Hardy,
and left my son Robert at I iordeaux. About Libourne saw signs
of the phylloxera and men at work pulling the vines up with
windlass and chains. There' are vinos more or less all the way


to Orleans, and the journey was a very interesting one. I noticed
the varied crops grown and small patches of ground under culti-
vation, and the number of women at work cutting clover and
lucerne for stall-fed cattle. Very few cattle are to he seen on
the- land anywhere in France.
Ploughing is nearly all done with light ploughs drawn by one
horse. 1 saw one team of a horse and a small ass alongside of
him, and only saw one two-horse team at plough all the day. I
got to Paris in the evening, and made for the. Hotel d’Anglctcrre,
a small but very comfortable house near the Champs Elysee, and
next day on to England.
LETTER XXII.
CHATEAU VQUEM.—SAUTERNE VINEYARDS AND THE VINTAGE. —
SWEET SAUTERNES.
TVURING my absence from France my son Itobert, whom I
JpP left at Bordeaux, visited several vineyards, and was careful
to take notes of all he saw, and 1 extract the following
from his diary : —“ October io —Took train at 1.10 from Langon,
where M. Dupouy, a winebroker, to whom we were introduced
by A. de Luz & (Jo, was waiting for me. We took a carriage
and drove to Chateau Yquem, through Fargues. The country is
undulating and very pretty, with plenty of pine and acacia trees.
Chateau Yquem and all the first Crus are on gravelly and sandy
land, with argillaceous subsoil. The vines are planted at a
distance of one and a half metres apart. Some have a stake to
each vine, others are trained on wires. The kinds grown here
are principally the Sauvignon Blanc and the Semillion. The
latter has large berries, round, and a loose bunch ; the wood is
much darker in colour than the Sauvignon, with short joints.
They are both pruned to two or three spurs, and not more than
two or three buds to each spur. This is done to keep the crop
near the stock to make the gr apes ripen sooner. The grapes are
allowed to get to a state between a raisin and a rotten grape, and
they have to go over the vines from four to eight times to get
them in the proper state ; they are gathered with small sicateurs
and the lingers. The Chais at Chateau Yquem is a large one-
story building on one side of the yard, and the cellars are on the
other. . There are eleven largo presses, each one in a lagar, with
a window opposite to it, through which the grapes are emptied,-


The presses are much the same as in the Medoc ; tlie grapes are
trod and pressed, and the cheese pared down and piled up three
or tour times. The juice is put into hogsheads, which are filled
up so that you can touch the juice with the finger. During the
first fermentation the yeast runs over the side. They say that in
a good year, when the grapes are in a good condition, they let the
yeast go to the bottom, as it nourishes the wine, but in a bad
year it must be taken oil as much as possible. After the
fourteenth day the casks are filled up and kept filled up every eight
days. They are closed only with a bottle, turned upside down,
in the bunghole. After from six weeks to three months the wine
is racked, but is not then clear, and it takes from six to twelve
months to clear. It is only in bad years that the wines clear
quickly. I spoke to them about Mr. Hubert de Castella s idea
of not filling up the casks. They said the; wine would become
bright sooner, but it would spoil the flavour and would have a
taste given by the ullage. They are very careful here to wash
the bungrags very often, and not to have any bad smells about
the place. The vineyard is 110 hectares, and produces 6 hogs-
heads of IS gallons each to the hectare. It is situated on a nice
hill, and you can see from it nearly to Bordeaux, and have a view
of Chateaux Latour Blanch, Guirard, Lafore, Haut Peyraguey,
and several others. Chateau Yquem is owned by the Marquis
of Saluces, whose residence is at Chateau F llliot, through which
we passed ; he also owns Chateau Coutet in the Barsac, which we
also visited. We tasted some of the new wine here ;it had fer-
mented quite dry and had a nice bouquet already. Me also
tasted a wine of 1808 vintage; it had a splendid perfume and
was sweet, but not too sweet. They do nothing to keep the wine
sweet, and it is only in a good warm year that it is sweet. M.
Dupouy said that some of the vignerons at Berigac, in the
Graves, stopped the fermentation with sulphur, and that the wine
is sent to Paris to be drunk at once by the workpeople at two
sous the glass. On the road back passed Chateau Clemens and
Chateau Doisy, and took the train at Cerons for Bordeaux. 1
noticed that the cellars have very few windows and are kept
pretty dark, and the casks all placed in rows, and a portion of
the wine is put into each cask as it comes from the presses so as
to equalize it as much as possible. The skins after being pressed
are given to the workpeople to make piquette.
“ October 20—Went down to Paulliac by steamer, and walked
to Chateau Latour to find Francois de Castella, son of Castella,
St. Hubert’s, Victoria, but he had gone to Blaye, so I walked on
to Beaucaillou, where they were drawing-oil They have
a plan here for equalizing it in drawing-oil'. They connect
all the vats with hose to an oval cask holding 220 gallons, and
from that it is carried and put into the hogsheads. I hey were


tying up tlio vines here preparatory to ploughing the (irst time,
and I saw several men liaeking oil' the branches from a piece of
vines which was forty-four years old, and was to he rooted up
this winter. Called at St. Pierre and paid my respects to Madame
Ivapelhol!' and family, and hack to Latour and found Castella,
and stopped the night with him at Chateau Terrier, where he
was lodging. He is a jolly fellow, about 10, and I was glad to
meet him. I went with him next morning to Latour to see the
‘eeoulage’ or drawing oil' of a vat of red wine. ft was dry and
rough, but had a nice bouquet; but it was not bright, although
it had been twenty days in the vat. The presshouso here contains
twelve vats and two stone lagars, with presses for them ; there is
also another press on wheels. The presshouso and collars form a
square, with a large courtyard in the centre. The cellars are kept
very dark, and the casks have all glass bungs in them. On the
22nd I called again at Chateau Turrcfort and Chateau Dauzac
and saw’ them drawing oft at both places. The wines were not
clear, but the foreman at Terrefort said it would clear in a
month.”
LETTER XXIII.
BARBEZIEUX.—M. BOUTILLEAU AND SON’S BRANDY DISTILLERY.—
RAVAGES OF THE PHYLLOXERA.—KIND OF STILLS USED.—VINE-
YARDS TURNED TO DAIRY FARM.—BRIE CHEESE.—COGNAC. —
OTARD, DUPUY, AND CO.’s.— MARTELL'S CELLARS. —DISTILLERY OF
M. MOULEN.
NoVEMUER 2.
BELT Loudon with -Mrs. Hardy, and next day met my son
Robert at Angouleme, and went on to Rarbczieux, in the
‘Cognac country, the same evening. Next day called at the
office of Messrs. Rontilleau, to whom we had an itroduction from
my friend M. Frere, manager for Mi'. J. T. Fallon, at Alhury.
It being Sunday there was no business doing, and M. Roulilleau
and Sons kindly o tiered to drive us out to their farm and distillery,
about two miles from the town. This was about the centre of
the best brandy district in France, and was nearly all in vines
before the phylloxera destroyed them ; now only a few sickly -
looking stragglers are left. The country is slightly undulating,
and the soil a sticky black clay, almost like our Ray of iliseay
land, and all on a shaly limestone formation; in many places it


works up with the top soil. I uni sure their is plenty of similar
land in Australia to lie found. Wo noticed a few vines left
under a large chestnut-tree, and Mr. B. said the tree had preserved
them from the phylloxera. The distillery was at work. There
are four stills, ranging from 400 to 700 litres each in capacity;
three of them are the common still and worm and heated from
below with coal; the fourth had a copper vessel placed above the
still, which is tilled with wine to be distilled ; the vapour passes
through this heating it ready for the next charge, but it is not
considered much of an improvement and not very generally
adopted. I noticed that the spirit was running off' quite warm,
from one still ; the others were nearly spent. One man was
attending to all four of the stills, and M. Boutilleau, jun., who
was with us, said that they usually run off at 70 s and reduce the
spirit afterwards with distilled water to Go° of Celsius ; also that
they had tried all sorts of so-called improved stills in this part of
the country, but that they had not been found to answer as they
took too much flavour out of the brandy, and they all had to go
back to the old plan of still. If they wish to make a very fine
brandy they put by about ten litres of the first run, and take
care not to run it too low at the finish. He said he had received
a sample of brandy from M. Frere, of Albury, but found it too
dry and wanting flavour, but not otherwise a bad article, and was
quite of opinion that we ought to be able fo make good brandy
in Australia. They do not ship their finest brandies to Australia,
as they cannot get their price for them there. The wine they
were distilling was a white wine of the last vintage, grown about
twenty miles from here. It was a full-flavoured rough wine, not
a thin watery wine, although of very low strength ; it was not
clear, and the casks containing it are rolled about without any
care to keep the lees from mixing up with it. M. Boutilleau
said it did no harm to distil the lees with the wine, and some
were of opinion that it improved the flavour. It costs from 70
to 75 francs the hectolitre now, or about Is. -'ld, per gallon, and
before the phylloxera it was about one-half that price ; he also
said that the wine is ready to distil as soon as the fermentation is
over, and that no more is given for old than for new wine. The
principal grape grown is the Folle Blanche, or Couais, and it
yields from 15 to 40 hogsheads of 48 gallons each to the hectare,
its principal recommendation being that it is a heavy bearer.
Almost any other white grape would give good brandy from this
land, and it depends on the soil to give the different qualities and
flavours more than on the kind of grape grown. The black
grapes are considered to give a coarse brandy, and are not much
grown. When the phylloxera set in M. Boutilleau had all his
vines rooted up, and grow clover and started a dairy of fifty cows,
which are all kept tied up and fed in a long shed well paved, and


the cows well littered clown. The milk is all made into the
“ Brio” cheese, a small cheese about an inch thick, and, like
cream cheese, is not pressed, hut drained on straw mats, and when
a little mouldy on the outside is fit for sale and commands a high
price. The dairy and cheese-room arc; at one end of the cowshed,
and kept very clean ; the smell from the cows is considered to be
good for the cheese l . M. Boutilleau is evidently an advanced
agriculturist, and has chaff and pulping machines driven by steam,
and is building a new dairy. The pigstyes are well paved, and
the greatest care is taken of the manure, both solid and liquid ;
there is also a fine; hayshed, where; the; clover-hay is stowed away.
After tasting some brandy thirty years old we returned, after a
most pleasant time with our kind friends, one: of whom spoke
good English, and had a look through their well-ke;pt town cellars,
where thc;y have a large; stock of brandy, some; of their cats
holding 30,000 gallons ; but a good deal of the stock is kept in
hogsheads, as it improves much faster in them, but the loss from
evaporation is fully 5 per cent, per annum.
iS'ovivMUF.i! s.—Got to Cognac this morning .and put up at
Simon’s Hotel. The country all the way is very similar in
character, but near Cognac the soil is re;dek;r in colour, but the
same limestone subsoil is there;. There are; scarcely any vines to
be seen, and no new plantations making anywhere. After break-
fast wo visited Messrs. Otard, Dupuy, «fc Co.’s establishment, and
were kindly shown over it by M. Otard himself, who let us taste;
a branely fifty years olel, the flavour of which I shall not soon
forget. We also saw the new brandies just brought in from the;
farmers, and ho showed us a lot of fifty puncheons which he hael
just bought at Bs. per gallon ; it was quite white and very clean
and good flavoured. M. Otard was very hard on what he called
the new firms, who, he says, use up large quantities of German
spirit, which they distil over again with wine, and undersell the
old firms. We; saw plenty of German spirit casks at the railway
station.
Novembeu o. — Our obliging landlord, M. Simon, took us to see
Martell’s large establishment, which occupies a large; portion of
the town, covering many acres of ground. The buildings are
mostly one story and detached from each other, with plenty of
space between, and we were told it was elone; as a precaution
against fire. In one room we saw forty vats of about 3,000
gallons each, all fitted with agitators worked by steam. The
brandies are blended in them and then run into vats on a lower
level, and from these filled into casks for export or pumped away
through copper pipes to the bottling cellars. There arc several
double-action brass pumps, all worked by steam. There is a
distillery with four largo stills, and each still has two heads and
separate coolers, and is heated from below. They are only used


for clistilliiitr water, and no brandy is distilled in tin; place. A
hydraulic lift takes the casks of brandy as they come in to the
top lloor, and from there they are roiled on to long troughs and
run down into the blending vats below. On one of the top floors
we saw a number of hogsheads of brandy with the grower’s name
and the ago. 1 marked in chalk on the heads; some of it was
thirteen years old. We showed one of the foremen a sample of
brandy we brought from California. He said the smell was not
good, but that it arose from the soil and not from careless distil-
lation, and that it was too dry and wanting llavour. The whole
of the establishment is kept in splendid order, and it is a pleasure
to see how smoothly all the diflereut operations of bottling,
packing, &c., go on in such a well-regulated business. They told
us that owing to the destruction of the vines they were not going
to sell any more brandy in bulk after this year, and that in future
it would all be bottled.
In the afternoon M. Simon took us to the farm and distillery
of ,M. Moulen, a brandy merchant of Cognac ; it is two or three
miles out, and on a reddish soil, with limestone subsoil. There is
a vineyard here which has been preserved by the use of chemicals,
ami which has given this year 300 casks of wine. The vines are
nearly all the Folle Blanches, and are spur-pruned and grown
about live feet apart without supports, and not topped during the
growing season. Then; was one still at work here of a capacity
of GOO litres, and heated with a coal fire, but the distiller said
that wood was the best fuel. There was a heater’ attached to the
still having a coil of six rounds inside. It holds a full charge for-
tho still. The wine they were distilling was thin and hard hut
irot acid, although covered with “flowers.” The distiller said it
took ten hogsheads to make one of brand}'. The still is kept
going day and night, and the distiller has his bed alongside. He
said he got through five or six charges in twenty-four hours, but
of course he has some help during the night. Ho told us that he
kept hack a portion of the “ foreshot,” or first run, and returned
that and the “ faints” into the wine to be distilled. The chais
alongside the distillery was fitted with a large wooden lagar,
where the grapes are trod, and three single-screw presses are fixed
on three sides of it. The grapes are pressed in round cages of
wood, strongly hooped, and are 3 feet deep and from b feet to
G feet across. The juice runs into a tank, and is pumped away
into vats. The last charge was still in one of the presses, and
smelled very sour. We saw some red wine covered with flowers,
and which is drunk by the labourers. Ours in Australia would
not look at such poor stuff'. A windmill is used to raise water
into large tanks above ground, and conducted in iron tubes to the
vineyard and used to wash in the sulpho-earhon among the vines.


The cowsheds here are well kept, and the cattle all lied up and
fed with clover and roots.
It is fortunate for this district that the land is good, and
although the more profitable cultivation of the vine is at an end,
the land can be turned to other uses.
I feel very confident that we shall lie able to make good brandy
in Australia, and that it will be a profitable business, but will
require much capital to work it properly to give the age necessary
to turn out a good and wholesome article.
LETTER XX IV.
BORDEAUX.—JAMES VIOLET AND CO.'S ESTA ESTABLISHMENT.—PACKING
OF PLUMS. —CETTE.—M. VACHTER'S CELLARS. —MEURSAULT, IN
THE BURGUNDY COUNTRY.
November (>.
O,OT to Bordeaux iu the evening, and put up at the Hotel do
> Amcricanes, which we found very comfortable and the
i attendance, good, and the charges about one-half of what
we paid at the Hotel de Nantes. We remained here until
the 11th, during which time we visited several of the leading
’ O O
wine merchants. We also drove out to Leognan, about nine miles
from Bordeaux, to see M. Emilio Dubois, who represented South
Australia at the Bordeaux Exhibition, and received from him the
medals and diplomas awarded to the exhibitors. Wc obtained
from him much information about the management of the wines
of the country. He said that the Judges were surprised at the
quality of the; brandy from Adelaide, and could hardly believe it
was Australian.
We also called on James Violet ik Co., the large packers of
plums. They are also wine merchants. Wc were shown over
the premises by Mr. J. Violet, jun, It is of two stories, and the
upper floor is wholly devoted to the plum trade, whilst the wine
cellars are below. The crop of plums was coining in in barrels
holding about 3 cwt. each, and women were busy at tables sorting
thorn according to size, from 40 to SO to the pound. They are
then taken to the packing-tables, where women pack them very
carefully into the glass jars in which we get them. After they
are filled the jars are passed into a room, which is heated, and
which we were not allowed to enter. When they come out of
this room they have acquired the the glossy black appearance


From here they go into the labelling and packing room down-
stairs by a hydraulic lift. The plums are grown near Agen,
and are dried partly in the sun and finished in ovens. The firm
is an old one, and was founded by a prisoner of war in the time
of the First Napoleon.
On the 10th we took rail to Margaux Station to visit M.
Lebeque, to whom we had an introduction from Mr. P. B.
Burgoyne. He had gone to Bordeaux, but his father-in-law was
at the vineyard of St. Vincent, situated on the “ palus,” or low
lands, near the River Garonne, and we drove there and found
him busy getting the last vat of wine drawn off and pressing the
skins. The cellar, or warehouse, here is of two stories, on a
similar plan to others I have described. Two powerful screw
presses were being used; they are fixed on wooden lagars on
wheels. They were filling them with the skins brought up from
another detached cellar in buckets of iron strapped on men's
backs. After being pressed they are thrown into vats below, and
water heated to 2 3° and good white sugar, at the rate of Qd. per
lb. to the gallon of water, put to them and fermented over again;
and this is the way that most of the cheap clarets are made. We
noticed that the greater portion of the stalk was left in, and were
told that it is required in these wines to help to keep them. The
vines here grow much stronger than on the higher land and are
trained on wire trellises, and produce an inferior wine in large
quantities. After seeing pretty well all of any interest to us in
Bordeaux, which is a busy place, we started on the lltli for
Cette again. At Agen we saw a good many plum-trees, but no
large plantations of them as we expected from the large quantities
which must be grown hereabouts.
November 12.—Called on M. Schuydt de Vachter, on the Quay
Chartrons, to whom we had an introduction from his cousin, of
the firm of Eschancur it Co., of Bordeaux. He deals in all sorts
of imitation wines, and was kind enough to show us over his
large establishment and let us taste the various wines. First the
thin red whies made in the neighbourhood of Cette ; they are
poor and flat after the Medoc wines. He said they were worth
about 37 francs the hectolitre, or Is. sd. per gallon, at a year old.
We also sampled several older and better wines of Rousillion and
Narbonne; we also noticed a lot of new white wines of the
district stacked in an open yard two tiers high ; they were still
milky and fermenting, and would remain here until they are clear
before they are racked. They were very dry and thin, and not
not near so good as our Doradilla grown at the foot of our
Adelaide hills. Wo also saw some sweet white wines in which
the fermentation had been stopped by adding 00 litres of spirit
to the butt, or nearly one of spirit to four of wine. We were
next shown a Greek wine nearly as black as ink and fearfully


astringent, but was considered a very useful wine in making up
imitation ports. We also saw many Spanish wines, some dry and
full-bodied, others sweet like those we saw at Tarragona, and all
useful in a trade like this. We then went into a large yard
enclosed with high walls full of wine in butts three tiers high,
white ports for Russia, sherry and port for America, Madeira,
and Malaga, and all exposed to the sun and rain. We tasted the
ports; they are a fair imitation, but not so good as our Angaston
wines. A sweet Malaga was very good, as was a sweet Muscat,
but it had not the true Frontignac flavour. We noticed that
none of the wines were very tightly bunged up, and M. Vachter
removed the bungs easily with the hand as we went along. Many
of the red wines had the white scum, or “flowers,” on them, and
none are kept well filled up. The thin red wines of the country
are kept in large vats of 7,000 to 8,000 gallons, and are said to
do better than in smaller casks.
We showed some of our Australian wines to M. Vachter and
his son, who took great interest in them, and thought that our
red wines would all make port and the white sherry, and said
they were better made than the Spanish wines generally are.
Wo also showed them to INF. lispittalier. the British Consul, who
is also a winebroker. He thought them well made, but more
suitable for the English market than for here. He considered
that our red wines were all very “ yellow” for their age, and saiil
that would be an objection to them here.
1 had a desire to leave my son hero for a year or two ; but
after spending a few more days on this our second visit here I
came to the conclusion that ho would learn more by experience
in our vineyards and cellars than he could here. We left Cette
on the I,‘ith for Marseilles, staying a few hours at Montpellier,
and arrived at Marseilles the same evening. Our intention was
to. have gone, to Italy ; but, having taken a severe cold at Bor-
deaux, which prostrated me completely, we decided, after staying
a day at Marseilles, to make tracks for Paris, staying a night at
Macon, and on next day to Meursault, in the Burgundy country.
We had an introduction from Mr. Grainger of London, to M.
Tetard, manager of a large wine cellar, who received us very
kindly and showed us through the cellars, which are all below
ground and very wet, and the walls and roof covered with black
mould ; but we found here some magnificent wines, especially the
White Burgundy, or Chablis, which we consider the finest dry
white wine we have seen. The grapes are crushed in an upper
story over the fermenting-room with one of the Bordeaux made
mills and separator. We noticed that the rollers are of c’st-iron,
mid covered with knobs to draw in the grapes. Ft is said to
answer well where the. bunches are small and the grapes not over
ripe. The fermentation of the red wines is carried on in oval


vats of about 800 gallons capacity. They are not very deep, and
have no top head, or any means of keeping down the head that
we could see. M. Tctard said that the fermentation was con-
tinued for fourteen or fifteen days, and that men get into the vats
naked and tread down the head, and that the heat of their bodies
promoted the fermentation, but did not say how often it is done.
We walked a little way into the vineyards. The vines are planted
very close, only about two feet apart, and very irregular. They
are pruned to one shoot with only two eyes, and the old wood in
most of them was from two to three feet long. We asked why
they did not cut them back, but he said they would all be laid
this season below the ground, and the vineyard in this way
renewed. The vines hero are generally staked, and the stakes are
taken up after the vintage and stacked in piles until again
required. Wo saw one vineyard planted in rows five feet apart
and trelliscd with wire and the land ploughed. The soil is a
reddish loam very full of stones, and very similar in appearance
to the Auldana Vineyards, near Adelaide. We were afterwards
shown over the Chateau, which is a line well-situated residence,
and splendidly furnished. We afterwards visited a mustard mill
in the village, worked by both steam and waterpower. The
mustard is all ground with vinegar, and put up in stone jars
for sale.
We were sorry to have to leave this part of the country without
seeing more of it, but were anxious to got to Paris to rest and
recruit before visiting the champagne vineyards and collars at
Epernay.
LETTER XXV.
VISIT TO THE CHAMPAGNE COUNTRY.—VERTUS.—PRIEUR AND
CO.’S CELLARS. — SMALL PROPRIETORS’ VINEYARDS, YIELD OF. —MOET
AND CHANDON'S CELLARS.— MERCIER AND CO.’s ESTABLISHMENT.
®|E spent a week in Paris, and during that time saw as much
of that truly wonderful city as was possible. Among
other places visited by us was the Halle des Vins, near
the Paris and Lyons Railway Station. We were taken there by
M. Charles Prieur and his son, to whom we had an introduction
from Air. Wioksteed, of Port Adelaide.
This immense wine market covers many acres of ground, and
is full of cellars and offices of wine merchants, and thousands of


pipes and butts of wines stacked in the open ground, but we saw
nothing to note of any interest in cellar arrangements. M.
Prieur informed us that the daily consumption of wine in Paris
is 880,000 gallons. We lunched daily at one or other of Duval’s
restaurants, and got a very fair Macon wine at a shilling the
quart bottle—the best value for the money of any since leaving
Oporto, and always of the same quality.
Wines are charged very high at hotels generally, and at
Bordeaux we paid three francs for an inferior claret, and the
same for a very medium Chablis in pint bottles.
November 24. —Left Paris for Epernay, but went on a few
miles further to Vertus, to visit the cellars of Charles Prieur and
Co. there. We were met at the station by M. Sinigor, the
manager, who took us just outside tin; town to have a look at the
vineyards ; but it came on to rain, and wo could not see much
of them. We then visited the champagne cellars, which we found
very complete and well arranged. In a largo open shed in an
enclosed yard we found two very large and strong single screw
presses. The screws are set in a cemented bed nearly level with
the floor, and ten feet in diameter, with gutter round, leading to
a cemented cistern sunk below the level. The grapes are brought
to the press in deep baskets holding about li cvvt., and emptied
without crushing into a large shallow round cage and there
pressed.
After sufficient pressure the refuse is fermented with water to
make a common red wine for use in the district.
The cellars are over 200 feet long and 40 feet wide, and are
two stories above ground and two below. The ground-floor is
full of the new wine, all in hogsheads, and is all bunged down,
but not tightly yet. Those we examined are still milky in
appearance, but the first made arc beginning to clear. They have
a different taste from any of the now wines we have seen in other
places, being sharp and lively on the tongue. The grape mostly
grown is the Pineau Noir, and the gravity by Beaurae this year
was 114°. In some years it rises to 12°, and that is considered
too strong.
The next cellar below is filled with wines from one to six years
old, all iri butts. We tasted some of the oldest. It is quite lit
to lie, bottled, but has first to be vattod with a portion of newer
wine. The lower cellar, which is 15 metres below the surface, is
divided by a row of arches into two bays of 20 feet wide, and
here are solid stacks of champagne in bottle. Some of it is said
to be six years bottled, and before it is fit to send out has to go
through the process of disgorging, which takes from three to four
months to effect, and a largo quantity is always going through the
process. We tasted some of vintage 1870 not yet put through.
It was a line dry wine ; also one of 1875, which we liked, even


better. We were shown the disgorging, syruping, and tying down
with wire and string. The firm was established in 1840, and their
name stands well in Australia. After dining with the manager
and his family we returned late in the evening to Epernay, and
next day (Sunday) before breakfast had the pleasure of seeing
M. Foreur, whose son is now foreman in Messrs. Bickford’s
aerated water factory in Adelaide, and was in my employ on his
first arrival in Australia.
The old gentleman, who is a good specimen of the peasant
proprietors of this country, came in from the village of Haut-
villiers, four or five miles, to see us, and after breakfast, together
with his son-in-law, wo visited some of the vineyards near the
town, and spent most of the day, which happened to be fine
and clear, in admiring the palatial chateaus of the wealthy wine
merchants in the town and suburbs.
M. Foreur was able to give us much interesting information.
The vines were all very closely planted; many of them arc not
more than a foot from each other. They are laid down every
second year, and pruned to one or two spurs, and very few of the
stocks are larger than one’s thumb. They are all staked, and
carefully tied and topped after the blossoming is over, and the
ground worked by hand labour. Land intended for vines is hand-
trenched to the depth of half a metre and the large stones picked
out. A vineyard lasts about fifty years. They use all sorts of
manure, but that from horses and cows is preferred. M. Foreur
has a small vineyard of two acres, and has already sold and
delivered his wine. He had 32 hectolitres, and received 308
francs per hectolitre, and must therefore have got nearly £4OO
for it. No wonder this country looks prosperous and no tumble-
down houses to be seen; and yet there is poverty even here, for
I saw from my window early in the morning a man picking over
heaps of dirt put out for the scavenger, and eating something he
got out of it. Wages are high here. M. Foreur said 50 francs
per week and board and two bottles of wine a day, and 31.
Siniger said 7 francs is the ordinary rate per day for labour.
November 26.—M. Foreur and his wife .called early for us.
They had walked in from their home, and are a lino healthy-
looking old couple, and were both delighted to see us and hear of
their relatives. They took us first to the cellars of Moet and
Chandon, who always buy their wine. We were first shown into
the cellars on the ground-floor, and here all the processes of
disgorging, syruping, tying down, labelling, and packing is going
bn in regular order, and from these to the first cellar below, where
there are large stocks of wine in casks, not many of them over
200 gallons. The 1880 and younger wines have all a small hole
bored near the bung and three straws stuck into it to allow the
gas to escape and yet prevent the ingress of air; here also are
s


large stacks of thousands of bottles getting ready for disgorging.
We then descended to the lower cellars, at a great depth, and in
them are immense stocks of champagne in bottles all covered
with mould. It is taken from here on trucks in three-dozen
baskets, and sent up by lifts to the ground-floor. In one of the
cellars on the ground-floor are two immense vats, which are used
for blending, and the wine is sent up in hogsheads to the top of
them by a lift worked by steam. After breakfast, which is gene-
rally from 10 to 11, we visited the cellars of Mercier & Co. They
run from the railway in front back into a steep hill. A siding
from the railway runs into the outer cellar, and a broad flight of
steps from it leads to the offices, which are situated high up on
the hill, and from them a fine view is got of the River Marne and
the vine-covered hills across the valley and the numerous villages
among them. The cellars are all, with the exception of the outer
one, excavated out of the solid limestone rock. There are fifty of
them running back into the hill, and four transverse ones.
Altogether there are said to be fourteen kilometres of them
(about nine miles), and they are still excavating more. The
cellars at the far end are over 40 feet below the surface, and are
of a uniform width of 15 feet, and about 18 feet high to the top
of the arch. They are very damp and sloppy under foot in many
places ; the stone is soft and easily excavated, but is apparently
too soft for building or road making. The ends of some of the
transverse cellars are fine pieces of sculpture in the stone the full
size of the end, and representing subjects connected with the wine
and vines. In the outer cellar are two very large vats for
blending, fitted with agitators; also a splendid cask Of 33,000
gallons. The staves arc eight inches thick, and it is supported
on four walls of solid masonry. The head is beautifully carved
in bold relief. There is also in one of the inner cellars a cask of
22,000 gallons, which was at the Paris Exhibitiou of 1878 ; that
is also beautifully carved, as are several smaller ones. The
bottling, labelling, and packing is done in cellars next to the
outer one, and the capsuling is all done by women in different
styles to suit the trade of the different countries ; it is all done
very neat, but very slow, and very different to the way the same
work, is done in America.
M. Foreur says that the wine is racked from three to four
times the first year, and that in vatting a portion of new wine is
used to give the effervescence. The top of the hills is not planted
with vines, the soil being too thin. He showed us a large piece;
at the back of Mercier’s, which ho said was too poor and not
having a sufficient depth of soil over the limestone rock below.
Also that a little sulphur is used in racking the wines, more to
help to clear it than to arrest the fermentation; also that spirit
is often used to strengthen weak wines to the extent of four litres


to the barrique of forty-four gallons. Some marc brandy is made
in portable stills, and is mostly used in the country. Brandy from
the south is preferred for fortifying champagnes. There is a
beetroot sugar factory near Mcrcicr’s, but we had not time to
visit it; but we could see immense stacks of beetroot ready for
use. Altogether wo passed a very pleasant day, and hope the
time will soon come when Australia will produce fine champagne,
but do not think the right soil or situation is yet found for it.
LETTER XXVI.
DARMSTADT. —MAYENCE. —HENKEL AND CO.’S CELLARS. —COBLENZ
—DEINHARD AND CO.’S.—MANUFACTURE OF SPARKLING WINES. —
CONCLUSION.
November 27.
Epernay by the night train and got to Strasbourg early
next morning. The railway station here is very strongly
" w '* fortified. Spent the morning in visiting the fine old
cathedral and other objects of interest; in the afternoon we
crossed the Rhine and passed through the fertile and highly-
cultivated plain to Darmstadt, where we arrived in the evening.
The hills are in many places planted with vines, but always in
small patches, and the land generally divided into small allotments
the same as in France.
November 28—Called on Mr. Weber, whose brother is manager
of the Iceworks at Thebarton. We dined with him, and had
some fine Rhine salmon and several German dishes new to us,
and some very good champagne made at Wurzborg. A brother-
in-law of Mr. Weber was with us. He has a vineyard lower
down the river, below Mainz. He gave us some information
about the manufacture of wine in this part. He said that they
ferment the red wine with all the stalks for fifteen days, and put
down the head twice a day and cover the vats with a cloth, and
lay the head of the vat on the top; also that the pressings ar e
always mixed with the juice drawn off. Tire white wines are
fermented for four or five days with the skin and stalk, to give
the flavour of the grape which lies in the skin, the juice is then
drawn off and put into casks, but not allowed to work over, and
kept filled up until the usual time for racking off. We went out
a short distance to see a small vineyard. The vines are planted


about 2J to 3 feet apart, and are pruned to two bearing spurs
with three or four eyes to each, another shoot is allowed to grow,
from below about the level of the ground, one of the bearing
spurs is cut away every year and the vine kept low and the growth
tied up to a stake and topped.
It is interesting to us to review the different modes of pruning
we have seen in the countries we have visited. The long rod
propped off the ground at Collares, in Portugal; the single bear-
ing rod tied to the vinestock at Xeres, in Spain; the spur-
pruning in the south of Spain and France ; the, careful training
in the Medoc to laths and wire; the system of layering the vines
at Meursault and in the Champagne country—each no doubt has
been found by long experience best suited to the different
conditions of soil and climate.
November 20—Came on early to Mayence, and called on
Henkel & Co., to whom we had an introduction. They manu-
facture here sparkling wines, both white and red. They purchase
the must of the white wines as soon as pressed, and ferment it
here in casks of about 200 gallons. A good many of them were
still fermenting, and had the water-cups fixed in the bungholes
to prevent the air from entering and to allow the gas to escape.
When the fermentation is over the casks are filled up and remain
until the wine is clear in -March, when it is racked from the lees.
The after treatment is said to be precisely the same as in the
Champagne districts of France. The casks are very stout and
made of Hungarian oak. The manager showed us several of the
wines from the casks. A Hock of 1878 made from the Reisling
grape, which is the favourite kind grown, was very fine and soft;
also a red Assmanhauser, a very fine and light wine ; he also
showed us various white wines from 12s. to 245. per dozen case,
all in fine condition. He said we shall be able in time to got
over the difficulty of our white wines depositing in the bottle,
but that it must be begun by careful cultivation in the vineyard.
We also sampled some very good sparkling red wines at about
305., and a fine sparkling Hock at 445., quite equal to many of
the best Champagnes. After visiting the tine old Cathedral we
took train again for Coblenz, following the Rhine all the way.
The hills here close in on the river, and on the one side are
planted with vines terrace above terrace to a great height, much
the same as we saw on the Douro. The vines are very closely
planted and all staked, but the stakes are still in the ground and
not taken up and stacked as we saw them in the Rurgundy
country. The vineyards are kept very clear of weeds.
November 30—After breakfast at the Anchor, where we
stopped, we visited the cellars of Deinhard & Co., the largest
wine firm on the Rhine. One of the partners, JMr. Charles
Wegeler, very kindly showed us round their extensive and ..well


kept cellars, which extend from one street to another. The
cellars are of two stories below the ground—the lower one is 45
feet below the surface, and is liable to be filled with water from
the soakage from the Rhine when a high flood occurs. *lt
happened last year, and for a fortnight they could not go into the
lower cellar, and when they did it had to be in a boat ; the water
all soaks away again when the flood subsides. They take the
precaution to keep the casks all well bunged, and have props
ready to prop each cask from the roof to prevent their rising.
These lower cellars are splendidly built, and like the crypts of an
old cathedral. The wines are mostly in casks of about 250,
and a few 1,000 gallons each. A few casks of new wine in the
upper cellars was still fermenting, with the usual water-cups still
in them. They do not usually get in the new wine from the
growers until the second racking in February or March. They
are racked here the first time in January and again about six
weeks later. The white wines are usually made from the Reisling
grape and pressed off from the skins as early as possible. They
are fit to bottle for sparkling wines in June or July following,
arid remain in the bottle two years, when it is treated the same
as Champagne. There is always a certain portion of the juice of
the Pineau Noir mixed with the Reisling, it is said to help the
wine, to clear in the bottle, a certain proportion of syrup is also
put into each bottle to ensure the effervescence. The bottles are
all sent up a lift to the ground floor to be disgorged, and we saw
the process going on. It takes five or six men to keep it going
—the disgorger passes each bottle to the one who puts in the
syrup, he hands it on to the corker, and from him to the tyer
who fixes the cork with string and wire, it is then carried away
to others who capsule, label, and pack it in cases ready for export.
They do a large trade in the still wines, and he showed us some
which had been two years in bottle without the slightest deposit.
He said it is difficult to know when to bottle many of the white
wines, and showed us one ten years old which had moved every
year in the spring and was even not yet fit to bottle. If the
wines are bottled before this movement is finished it is sure to
deposit in the bottles. The bins for bottled wines hero are all in
brickwork, and they do not like iron bins. We were shown still
white wines from 18s. to Johannesberg at 70s. We liked a
Steinberg at 48s. best, it reminded us of the Pewsey Vale Reisling,
but was not nearly so strong. We also tasted some very fine
light rod wines. They are very light, and do not require water.
We, happened to have a small sample of Shiras made on the hills
near Gawler with us, and Mr. Weglcr and another member of the
firm tasted it, and were surprised at the good quality of it; it is
much deeper in colour than any of their red wines. The strength
of their white wines is seldom over 12° of alcohol or 21° of proof


spirit, and the rod less than the white, which was found to be
invariably the case in all the countries we have visited. They
have paid this year as high as ss. per gallon for the new wine
from choice vineyards. They have a vineyard of ten acres near
Rudesheim, and consider that a pretty large one for this country.
Mr. W. also said that he had known of a vineyard having been
sold for the extraordinary sum of £2,000 per acre, and that the
price ranged from that to £l5O per acre, according to the quality
of the wine made. After leaving Coblenz we went on to Colonge,
and near there we got away from the Mountains and left them
and the vines behind us, and so ends our pleasant, and, I trust,
profitable trip among the vineyards of Europe. We should have
liked to have been able to have made a longer stay at man}*
places, especially in the south of Spain, where the climate and
soil is so much like that of our own country, and the man who
can spare the time and money to remain there for a year or more,
and study and examine thoroughly all the different cultures
which at present we know so little about, might do a great
amount of good, not only to the colony, but to all Australia.
Among the many pleasant recollections of our trip is that of
our reception, in all countries we have visited, by our brother
vine-growers and wine merchants, and their readiness to afford us
all the information we could wish for, and our heartfelt thanks
are due and hereby recorded to all of them for their kindness
to us.


THE VINEYARDS
OF
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
NO. 1.—TINTARA.
[From the Federal Australian, September 20, 1884.]
TXTII K traveller in search of the wild beauties of nature in this
sunny land, cannot do better than vist the vineyards and
‘ orchards south of Adelaide. Tintara, the largest of them,
is situated duo south from the city, and can be reached by follow-
ing the main road to Clarendon, eighteen miles from Adelaide.
This is one of the prettiest drives, and Clarendon one of the
neatest of villages, and is much visited during the spring and
summer by pleasure parties from the city. The river Onka-
paringa is here crossed, and from the bridge a magnificent view
is obtained of the Clarendon vineyard—one of the oldest in the
colony—and which we shall describe farther on. About a mile
from here a bush road turns off to the right, and follows for
about seven miles the “ range road,” or water shed of the river,
through seven miles of scrubby country, now gay with wattles
and other plants in bloom. At this point the Tintara Estate is
reached. It was originally purchased from the Government by
a small company of wealthy colonists in conjunction with the
late Dr. A. C. Kelly, as managing partner. He is well known
to all Australian vignerons as the author of “ The Vine in
Australia,” and “ Wine aud Wine-making in Australia.” The
vineyard was planted by him in 1863, and continued under his
management until 1877, when it came into the possession of the
present owner, Mr. Thomas Hardy.
The original purchase was about 217 acres, but another 80-
acre section was added in 1872 or 1873, and Mr. Hardy has
since purchased two adjoining blocks of 387 and 482 acres,


making altogether 1,166 acres. The estate is now nearly three
miles in length, with a creek running through the centre of it.
The hills on both sides are admirably adapted to the growth of
the vine. The soil is generally of a light sandy loam, resting on
a red clay bottom, the crest of the hills being full of ironstone
in large boulders, and the slopes in most parts contain ironstone
gravel in the soil. The earliest planting was made with red
grapes, consisting of the Carbenet, Shiraz or Hermitage, Mataro,
Oarignan, and Grenache. They were planted in rows nine feet
apart and four and a-half feet in the rows, which follow the
contour of the hills, and give the vineyard a very pretty appear-
ance from all points of view. The vines are all, with the
exception of the Shiraz, grown on what is termed the gooseberry
bush system. The Shiraz are trained on low trellisses of two
wires. The average crop in the old vineyard is only 150 gallons
to the acre. Mr. Hardy has added about 60 acres more vines,
principally of the Doradilla a Spanish vine, very productive
and easily cultivated, and giving a good clean light white wine.
Dr. Kelly on a visit to France in 1872-3, introduced the
Sauvignon Blanc, one of the Sauterne grapes from the Bordeaux
vineyards, and a few acres were grafted to them, and have given
n very superior wine; but the yield is so miserably small that
only ten acres more have been planted of this kind. The land is
all cultivated with the plough and scarifier; a double-furrow
plough is used. The vineyard has been worked very satisfactorily
for the proprietor for the last six years by A. and H. Howard
(father and son), both practical men, at a given rate per gallon
on the quantity of wine made, the lessees finding horses and
labour up to the delivery of the grapes to the cellar. The wjnes
are fermented in slate tanks, each containing 800 gallons. The
wine is made under the care of Mr. J. G. Kelly, who is the
son of Dr. Kelly, and an ardent viticulturist, and worthy follower
in his father’s footsteps.
The wines from this vineyard are now nearly all shipped to the
order of a London firm, and are fast making a name in England.
They are sent forward at three years old, and the red wines are
deep in colour, and soft and pleasant in flavour. They have been
favourably noticed by the Lancet, and by Dr. Druitt in his
work on wines. They usually reach to nearly 26° in strength,
without any addition of spirit, and arc amongst the strongest
natural wines of Australia. Mr. Hardy has several other vine-
yards—in all over 300 acres—in the same locality, one of them,
a currant vineyard, of 35 acres, which wo hope to describe in a
future number.


No. 2—BANKSIDE, NEAR ADELAIDE.
BY BRUNI.
[From the Australasian, May 24, 1884.]
any one who takes an interest in the development of the
Sa9 industrial resources of Australia, there can be no more
® interesting a trip than a visit to Bankside, the property of
Mr. Thomas Hardy. Though of very small extent—the area is
only 60 acres—Bankside yields a more varied produce, and
furnishes a better illustration of the capabilities of the soil and
climate of the district in which it is situated than any other
estate within the widespread borders of Australia. To most of
the Australian-born a visit to the place will be found invaluable
from an educational point of view, and after witnessing the skill,
energy, and intelligence that has been brought to bear in develop*
ing the industries so successfully established, one cannot help
contrasting the supineness of the various governments in the
Australian colonies in providing agricultural education for our
youth, with the results achieved by individual enterprise.
Bankside is only three miles out of Adelaide, and the drive
through the lucerne fields is a very pleasant one. The road up
to the house is planted on each side with olive trees, which grow
with a luxuriance I have seen in no other part of the world.: I
found the olive trees on one side of the road put to a novel use.-
They have been trimmed four feet from the ground, and the
trees used as posts to run fencing wire through. Mr. Hardy has
for years past made experiments in the way of using live trees as
a substitute for posts, and finds that running the wire through
the tree in no way injures its growth. This is a question of
considerable importance in a country posessing such large treeless
areas as South Australia. These olives are now coming into
bearing, and besides being ornamental as an avenue, are useful
as a fence, and at the same time furnish a fine yield of fruit,
which is readily purchased by the oil makers. The variety grown
is Hardy’s Mammoth, which was raised at Bankside, and is
remarkable for the size of its fruit. Near the house is a still
handsomer avenue of olives, the trees in which are 25 years old.
These trees give excellent yields, but the difficulty here, as else


when; iu Australia, is the cost of gathering. The fruit clings
tenaciously to the tree, and cannot be shaken off' like most fruits
when fully ripe. It has been found the best plan to lay cloths
under the tree and strike the branches with the hand, winnowing
out the leaves afterwards. All the olive trees I saw at Bankside
are extremely healthy, and no sign of scale among them.
Olivo-growing is, however, the least important of the various
products of Bankside, and I readily turned from the olive walks to
follow the grapes through the various processes they undergo before
they are turned out as the raisins of commerce. When the
grapes are to bo made into pudding raisins—and this is by far the
larger product—the bunches of ripe fruit are placed in oblong
sieves, and plunged for 20 seconds into a tank of boiling lye.
These sieves contain about d 0 pounds of grapes, and are handled
by two men. The lye used is made from the ashes which are got
from the vine prunings. This dipping takes the bloom off the
fruit, but causes it to dry in one-third the time it would other-
wise take. The next stage is to spread the grapes evenly on
paling trays five feet by two and a-half feet, and expose them to
the sun. This is done in a small paddock of about an acre and
a-half. In the season this is quite covered with the trays, and
in case of rain are piled over one another to a height of four
feet, and securely covered. Mr. Hardy has designed a new kind
of tray made of Oregon laths, which are set at a small distance
apart to allow a free current of air. This, he believes, will
answer better than the close paling trees. When the grapes are
about three parts dried they arc removed to the kilns in the centre
of the paddock. They are built of “ cob,” as it is called in
Devonshire, the walls being eighteen inches thick, and with an
arched roof of the same material, and which is found to answer
admirably for the purpose. There are two large kilns alongside
each other about 50 feet long by 8 feet wide, and the trays are
placed on racks about nine inches apart on each side. The kilns
are heated with hot air pipes, and the drying is completed in from
twelve to twenty-four hours, when the raisins are taken out of
the kilns and while still crisp they are rubbed free of the stalks,
which is then easily done. The next process is to run them
through a winnowing machine, which separates a greater portion
of the stalks. They arc then packed in boxes by young girls,
and pressed with a handy screw press six at a time. The sizes
used contain 28 and 00 pounds each. In appearance and flavour
the Bankside raisins compare very favourably with the best
European ones, and by many are preferred to the imported fruit;
the only difference they exhibit is that they are not quite so large"
as the best European samples. Currants, of which a considerable
quantity, are made in a similar manner, but require no dipping^


They have a fresher appearance, aud arc certainly much freer
from foreign matter than European currants.
When it is intended to make table raisins the process is some-
what different from that employed in making the pudding raisins.
The grapes are not dipped, as that would spoil the appearance*!))'
removing the bloom. They are carefully spread on floors made
like a large melon frame about 14 feet square, and with a pretty
steep inclination toward the sun. This is covered with gravel in
which the grapes are laid. I was surprised to learn that it is not
found necessary to turn them, the under grapes drying as well as
the top ones from the heat of the gravel floor. When finished
they present a very handsome appearance, and arc quite as good
to taste as to look at. They are packed in neat flat boxes con-
taining 10 pounds each, in two layers in each box. The kind of
grape used for both kinds of raisins is the Muscat Gordo Blanco,
and Mr. Hardy has ascertained from personal observation made
during a recent visit to Spain and Portugal that this is the kind
used at Malaga and Valencia for the best raisins.
A considerable quantity of Sultana raisins are made from that
variety of grape. In appearance I could not see any difference
between them and the imported Sultana raisins.
From raisins we naturally turn to almonds, and after seeing
the process of raisin making I was taken to see the almonds.
The trees are mostly grown in single lines along the banks of
the river Torrens, and are like the olives, made to do duty as
fencing posts. The kinds grown are the Brandis, Paper Shell,
and a small round nut named the “ Picnic,” a very excellent nut
raised in the colony. The production of dried fruit is about
twenty tons each year. The price fluctuates owing to the market
being occasionally glutted with European fruit, and which is
often sold at a sacrifice. Once the demand for dried fruits is
equal to the demand the industry will be a more profitable one,
as the imported fruit being beaten out of the competition, the
market will not be liable to such disastrous fluctuations as have
lately occurred.
In the centre of the ground is a fine orangery in which the
trees are growing as well as any I have visited in Australia. By
means of a steam pump they are irrigated with water drawn
from the river Torrens. After watering the trees are mulched
with fresh horsed ung j from two to three waterings in the season
are generally sufficient. A few trees are outside the line of irri-
gation, and a marked difference is seen in the quality of the
fruit, that from the Unwatered trees being coarse in the skin and
not so well flavoured. Some fine varities of the Citron are
grown here, one of which, the Bengal Citron, is as large as a
rock melon. The tree is a handsome one, and with its immense
fruit presents a very striking appearance, A large number of)


Seville oranges are grown, and the fruit sold for marmalade
making, in which Adelaide is far before any other town in
Australia.
Handsome as is the orangery, it is fairly eclipsed by the lemon
orchard—indeed I never saw anything half so attractive. The
lemon-tree is generally a straggling tree, possessing little beauty
of form, but here, with regular pruning, they arc kept as
handsome and compact as the orange-tree, and are in constant
bearing; the blossom, green and ripe fruit being found on the
same tree nearly every month in the year. There is a ready sale
for the fruit during the long summer of South Australia, and in
the winter the fruit is sold for the manufacture of candid peel.
The vineyard occupies the greater portion of the property, the
area under vines being thirty-five acres. The first plantation
was made in 1853. Shiraz is grown for wine, but a considerable
area is taken up with raisin and currant grapes. The yield is
heavy, from four to six tons to the acre. In addition to his own
vineyards Mr. Hardy purchases large quantities of grapes from
neighbouring vineyards. The Shiraz vines are pruned long, two
rods of eight to ten eyes being left on each side of the vine.
They are trellissed with two wires on posts thirty to forty feet
apart. The Muscats are pruned very short, and trellissed' with
stout posts and one wire; the object in this case is to prevent the
fruit from being scorched by the sun, by supporting the young
growth and foliage.
The vines which produce the currants are of two kinds—
the Zante and the Corinth—and though the grapes are so small
the vines that grow them is remarkably robust,' and require to be
trellissed to give them as much room to spread as is: possible;
that being found to increase the yield materially, and various
kinds of trellis are being tried, the latest idea being - a leaning
trellis which allows the grapes to hang clear of the foliage ; this
is done to allow a free current of air through the vine. These 1
vines require a good deal of room, and a vineyard in another
district owned by Mr. Hardy he has planted them at twenty-four
feet apart in the rows, and twelve feet from row to row. Between
each .two Currant vines are planted three'vines for wine and
which it is intended to remove when the currants require all the
ground, which is not expected to be for at least ten years, as they
take about that time to come into full bearing.
The cellars at Bankside are very extensive, and consist of one’
floor below ground, with two stories above.. The grapes are.
brought into the cellars in waggons, and hoisted by a small steam-
engine to the second storey, where they are run through a crusher
and then stalked by a machine. Three or four small-sized presses 1
are used, which are shifted from : place. to place as required.
Sjlate vatsfrom 800,to 1,000 gallons are used for fermenting, 1 for*


which purpose they are well suited. The cellars throughout are
open inside, so as to give a thorough ventilation. ■ The appearance
of the place on looking up from the underground cellar through'
a forest of posts and beams is striking, and the possibility of one
of those great casks of wine coming down “by the run,” strikes
one rather forcibly. The timber is well looked after, so as to
prevent the white ants from effecting a lodgement. Some time ago
these pernicious insects built a covered way two inches long from
the wall to a cask, and they were not discovered till the contents
were taken out and the casks cleaned. The practice at Bankside
is to put the strong rich wines in the upper portion of the cellar,
and reserve the lower portion for the lighter wines. On the
underground floor there are some cellars arched over with stone,
while smaller branches are cut out of the solid earth. In a little
retreat of this description I tasted a splendid red wine, twelve
years old, that would be difficult to surpass in the best cellars of
Burgundy. A Reisling of about the same age was different to
any wine made from the grapes that I have met with. It was
very clean, delicate in flavour, and had a bouquet I have never
known equalled by an Australian wine. Red wines of exceptional
character are sent out from hero, which are blended in
Mr. Hardy’s town cellars. About fifteen men are constantly
employed at Bankside, while during the vintage about sixty boys
and girls from the neighbouring villages are engaged to assist in
the work. It is the custom of the place to have a merry-making
at the close of the vintage, in which about 200 persons usually
take part.
The Bankside property consists of about 60 acres of very deep
chocolate soil, resting on a strong clay. Trees of all kinds
appear to thrive admirably in this deep rich soil, and yield large
crops of fruit. Irrigation is easily practised over this small area.
Water is raised from the bed of the Torrens river to the top of
the bank, and that being higher than the surrounding country it
is very easy distributed. With its olives and almond groves,
orange and lemon orchards, fruit trees and vineyards, there is no
place in Australia gives such an interesting and varied product as
this little spot.
Mr. Hardy has purchased several vineyards in various districts
near Adelaide —the most important one being Tintara, situated
about 25 miles to the south of Adelaide, where he has 150 acres
under vinos. The produce of all these vineyards when matured
is brought into his stores in Currio-strcet, Adelaide, the last
year’s yield being 102,000 gallons of wine. A large quantity of
wine is shipped to the London market, where it is rapidly
"rowin" in favour. The Adelaide cellars are very well arranged
for carrying on the business effectively and rapidly. One
peculiarity of the local trade is the form in which the wine is


sent out. Stout glass flasks, containing half-a-gallon of wine are
much used, and are preferred to the ordinary earthenware jars.
These glass flasks are made by the Melbourne Glass Bottle
Company. Not the least important portion of the management
of the wine is performed by Signor P. Yillanes, who makes a
careful analysis of each sample of wine as a 'guide to the
proprietor to be used in making the various blends. The
industries carried on at Bankside are of the highest
importance to the country, and no visitor to Adelaide should
neglect to see this intresting little plot of land, on which so much
good work has been done.


THOMAS HARDY
Has TAKEN MORE PRIZES and AWARDS since
1870 ihan any grower in Australia, and
at the
Adelaide International Exhibition, 1881,
wjo * = S sa V^j»
CValue 100 guineas)
u dfor the exhibitor who shall by his exhibit show that
he has done most to •promote an industry or industries
of national and liheh/ to be a source of
wealth to the Sdustrahan colonieswas awarded
to him.
=3^&E=s=-
A LSO,
LONDON. BORDEAUX, CALCUTTA, ADELAIDE.
CHRISTCHURCH. AND PERTH.
mir
m
2S;


ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
i
ft
z!
C-
m
5
■TV
fjjf-**
m
Jtfc*
m
m
i
m
m
.x;
se.
©
&
&
PU
PU
fit
52J.
©
-u
sa
ta
tas.
~U
Ml
&Sl
ta
o
er
©
T
‘AdHVH SVROHX






