

(Reprinted from Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
N. S. Wales , Vol. xxxvii.)
NOTES on SOME NATIVE DIALECTS of VICTORIA.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5.,
Corres. Mernb. Antlirop. Soc., Washington, U.S.A.
[With one Illustration.]
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, October 7, 1903. ]




NOTES on SOME NATIVE DIALECTS of VICTORIA.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5.,
Gorres. Memb. Anthrop. Soc., Washington, U.S.A.
[With one Illustration.]
[Read before the Royal Society of N. 8. Wales, October 7, 1903.]
Having collected some additional details respecting tbe
grammatical structure of the Woiwurru, Bunwurru,
Lewurru, Buibatyalli, Nundatyalli, and Yabula-yabula
dialects, spoken by the aboriginal inhabitants of central
and western Victoria, I beg to submit the result of my
labours for publication in your Journal. The information
now supplied is of considerable importance, as extending
and confirming my previous researches among the remnants
of the native tribes of Victoria. 1 Now is the time, while
the opportunity still exists, to endeavour to preserve some
record of the speech of the Australian I have
abbreviated my notes as much as possible, in order to bring
the subject within the space at the disposal of this Journal,
but it is hoped that the present article will be found
sufficient for the purpose intended, if it be read in connec-
tion with my former memoirs on the speech of the aboriginal
tribes of Victoria.
The system of orthoepy adopted herein is the same as
that used in my “Language of the Bungandity Tribe of
South Australia,” already published in this volume, to
which the reader is referred, pages 59 to 74.
1 “ Tbe Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” with Vocabularies, Journ.
Eoy. Soc. N.S.W., Vol. xxxvi.. pp. 71 - 106, in which I dealt with six of
the native tongues. See also my “Yotayota Language” and “ Bureba
Language,” spoken within the Victorian frontier on the Murray River,
Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S.W., Vol. xxxvi., pp. 167-175, with Vocabulary at
pp. 179 - 190.


The WorwuitßU and Bunwuriic Dialects.
In a former article I defined the boundaries of the territory
within which these dialects were spoken, together with a
short conjugation of one of their verbs. I now wish to
make a few remarks on their nouns. These dialects are
named after their equivalents for the English word “no,”
to which is affixed the native word “ wurru,” signifying
“lip,” and hence speech. The names of the dialects there-
fore mean, “Wo-i speech” and “Bun speech,” respectively.
This peculiarity of naming a language after its negative
adverb obtains among several tribes in Victoria, as well as
in New South Wales, already reported by me.
The following information respecting nouns in the Wo-i-
-wurru are supplied for the purpose of comparison with other
Victorian languages described by me in former papers.
Number and gender are so nearly the same as in the Thagu-
wurru and Wuddyawurru, that they will not be introduced
here. Only a few of the cases of nouns need be illustrated:
The nominative merely names the object under attention,
and then the noun remains unchanged, as guli, a man;
wangim, a boomerang ; guang, an eel.
Causative —Gulia guang bakunirra, a man an eel caught.
Genitive —The possessor and the chattel are both declined
guliagu wangimnuk, a man’s boomerang.
Everything over which ownership can be exercised is
subject to inflection, by possessive affixes to the noun, for
number and person, as, Wangimek, my boomerang, and so on.
The remaining parts of speech follow substantially the
same grammatical rules which have been reported by me
among the adjoining tribes on the north and west.
The records which I have preserved of the Wo-i-wurru
grammar were gathered by me from “ Billy Berak,” a
member of the Yurundyeri sub-tribe, which formerly roamed


over the country watered by the Yarra and Plenty rivers,
including the site on which Melbourne and its suburbs now
stand. This man died on the 15th August last at Coranderrk
Aboriginal Station, near Healesville, Victoria, and was
buried in the cemetery there the following day. When I
was at Coranderrk in 1898, Mr. J. Shaw, the manager,
told me he thought “Billy Berak” was then about 75 years
old, which would make his age at the time of his death 80
years. He was the last pure-blood survivor of his tribe,
and spoke the Woiwurru tongue, but he also understood the
Bunwurru. He belonged to the wa (or crow) totemic
division, for particulars respecting which, and the laws of
intermarriage and descent, the reader is referred to an
article 1 contributed to the Anthropological Society at
Washington in 1898. 1
I have been several times at the Aboriginal Station at
Coranderrk, and on each occasion visited “Billy Berak ” at
his hut there, and obtained from him all available informa-
tion respecting the language and initiation ceremonies of
his people. He was a merry old fellow, and frequently
sang some of his native chants for my benefit. Incidentally
he told me that he had been several years in the Police
Force as a “tracker” —that he had been thrice married,
but had no children living. He remembered the visit of
Batman to Port Phillip Bay and the Yarra river, although
himself only a lad at the time. My last visit to Coranderrk 2
was in April of the present year. Poor old “ Berak” was
‘“The Victorian Aborigines: their Initiation Ceremonies and Divis-
ional Systems,” American Anthropologist, Vol. xi., pp. 325- 343, with map
of Victoria.
8 Coranderrk is a corruption of korranderrak, the aboriginal name of a
small tree or shrub usually found near watercourses. Numbers of these
trees grow along the banks of Badger Creek, on which Coranderrk
Aboriginal Station and grounds are situated. It is commonly known as
the “ mint bush,” and its botanical name is Prostanthera lasiander, of the
natural order Labiatoe.


not in good health, but I persuaded him to sit on a chair
in front of his hut while a photographic acquaintance took
a picture of him. As this is the last photograph of the last
man of the Yarra river tribe, I submit it for publication.
Billy Berak, the last of the Yarra River tribe, Victoria.
(From a photograph taken four months before his death).
In 1886, Rev. G. W. Torrance, contributed a short article
to the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain on
“Music of the Australian Aboriginals,” in which he supplied
the music of some songs which were sung to him by “Billy
Berak.” Mr. Torrance says the man’s voice was “a bari-
tone of average compass.” 1
i| For the music and words of several songs of the aborigines
of the south-east coast of New South Wales, see my
“Aboriginal Songs at Initiation Ceremonies.” 2
The Lewurru Dialect.
This tongue prevails about St. Arnaud and surrounding
country, and is somewhat similar in grammatical structure
to the “ Tyattyalli Language ” reported by me in 1902,
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, Yol. xvi., pp. 335-340.
2 Queensland Geographical Journal, Yol. xvn., pp. 61 - 63.


although differing more or less in vocabulary. It is thought
that a few examples in the different parts of speech will be
sufficient. Le means “no” and wurru “lip.”
Nouns.
Number and gender will be passed over.
Case. —Nominative —Kuli, a man. Duan, a squirrel.
Kuyun, a spear. Kulkurn, a boy.
Causative —Kulingu kulkurn tyilpin, a man beat a boy.
Instrumental —Kulingu duan band yin kuyunu, a man
killed a squirrel with a spear.
Possessive —The proprietor and the property are both
declined. Kulinga kuyunuk, a man’s spear.
Adjectives.
These are declined like the nouns for number and case.
Pronouns.
Pronouns have four numbers —singular, dual, trial, and
plural. There are two forms to express, respectively, “ we,”
“ours,” “us” —the one including both the speaker and the
person spoken to, and the other excluding the latter.
The persons of the singular number of the nominative
pronouns are as follow :
f Ist Person I, Wangek
Singular <J 2nd ~ Thou, Wangin
13rd ~ He, Wanyuk
The other numbers resemble the Tyattyalli. The trial
is formed by adding kullik to the plural, the same as in
that language. The demonstratives and interrogatives
are omitted.
Verbs.
In the following conjugation the present tense is given
in full; but in the past and future the singular only is
taken: —


Indicative Mood —Present Tense.
f Ist Per. I beat, Tyilpan
Singular <; 2nd ~ Thou beatest, Tyilpar
L3rd ~ He beats, Tyilpa
f Par i We incL ’ beat ’ Tyilpangul
p . J * | W T e excl., beat, Tyilpangulung
ua | 2nd ~ You beat, Tyilpawul
13rd ~ They beat, Tyilpabullang
. p> I We inch, beat, Tyilpangurkullik
T , I s er *l We excl., beat, Tyilpangandangkullik
lia j 2nd ~ You beat, Tyilpawatkullik
13rd ~ They beat, Tvilpanatykullik
f 1 Par I We incL > beat ’ Tyilpangur
P 1 . J *I We excl., beat, Tyilpangandang
I 2nd ~ You beat, Tyilpawat
L 3rd „ They beat, Tyilpanaty
Past Tense.
f Ist Per. I beat, Tyilpinan
Singular <J 2nd ~ Thou beatedst, Tyilpinar
l3nd ~ He beat, Tyilpin
Future Tense.
f Ist Per. I shall beat, Tyilpinyan
Singular <J 2nd ~ Thou shalt beat, Tyilpinyar
(3rd ~ He shall beat, Tyilpin
Imperative—Beat, Tyilpak
Reflexive —I am beating myself, Tyilpillangan
Reciprocal—
We, dual inch, are beating each other, Tyilptyerrangul.
The prepositions, adverbs and exclamations are omitted,
because they closely resemble the corresponding parts of
speech in the Wutyuballeak tribes to the westward. 1 The
Lewurru and Tyeddyuwurru are sister tongues.
1 See my “Native Languages of Victoria/’ American Anthropologist,
Vol. v., N.S. pp. 380-391.


The Buibatyalli Dialect.
The Buibatyalli is spoken about Hopetoun and Lake
Hindmarsh, in the north-west of Victoria. It is a dialect
of the Tyattyalli, and the leading elements only will be
touched upon.
Nouns.
Nouns have the singular, dual, trial and plural, which
are expressed by words meaning two, three, or several
placed after the noun.
Gender —Wutyu, a man. Laiuruk, a woman. The sex
of animals is shown by adding words signifying “male ” and
“female.”
Case is generally the same as in the Tyattyalli, but with
differences in the suffixes, as in the following few short
examples.
Causative —Wutyulu gal burdin, a man a dog beat.
Genitive —There is a double form in this case, one for
the possessor and another for the possessed : —Wutyugity
kirramuk, a man’s shield. '
The name of every object over which one can exercise
ownership may be inflected for person and number, as
Kirramik, my shield. Kirramanguruk, our (plural) shield,
and so on.
Adjectives are declined like the nouns.
The pronouns resemble those of the Tyattyalli and
Lewurru, and will be passed over. There is a double form
of the first person in all the numbers beyond the singular.
Verbs.
A few brief examples will suffice to show their similarity
in conjugation to neighbouring tongues.
Present I tell, Kenan
Past I told, Keinan
Future I will tell, Keinyan
Q -Djc. 2,1903.


With an objective pronominal affix we get:
(Someone) spoke to me, Keinnin.
The remaining parts of the verb are, with slight differ-
ences, the same as in the Tyeddyuwurru language, reported
by me elsewhere.
Some prepositions and adverbs can be inflected for person
and number as in my “Thoorga Language.” 1
The Nundatyalli Dialect.
The country in which this tongue is used is situated north
of the Bungandity-speaking people, and extends northerly
towards Horsham. The grammatical constitution resem-
bles partly the Bungandity and partly the Tyattyalli.
The nouns, prepositions, adverbs, etc., in addition to the
verbs and pronouns, take inflection for person and number,
as in my “Tharumba Language.” 2
Nouns.
Druah, a man. Druahaga bopop dakin, a man a child
beat. Druahagaty gattimgattimuk, a man’s boomerang.
The other parts of spqech are omitted for the present.
Some Victorian dialects are named after the word tyalli ,
meaning “tongue,” which the people have recognized as
the source of speech. Nundatyalli, Buibatyalli, Tyattyalli,
are examples of languages which have received their names
in this way. In Gippsland certain dialects are designated
by means of their word dhcincj, “talk,” or “speech,” with
a qualitative adjective, thus, —Dhang-mak, great or wide
speech; Dhang-gwai, rough speech, and so on. In the
south-western districts of Victoria, some of the dialects
are distinguished by the aboriginal equivalent of our second
personal pronoun. For example, the Dhahurtwurru is also
called Ngutuk , “thou,” by neighbouring tribes. Other
1 Queensland Geographical Journal, Yol. xvii., 49 61.
* Ibid., Yol. xviii., pp. 58-61.


languages are named after the negative adverb, as men-
tioned in an earlier paragraph of the present article.
The Yabula-yabula Dialect.
This language is spoken on both sides of the river Murray,
from Echuca downwards for some distance. It is a dialect
of the Yota-yota, a portion of the grammar of which I
briefly outlined last year. 1 Both these tribes are located
partly in Victoria and partly in New South Wales. Although
more or less different in vocabulary, the declensions of the
nouns and adjectives are substantially the same in the
Yabula-yabula as in the Yota-yota, and will therefore be
omitted in this paper. But I succeeded in obtaining much
fuller lists of pronouns of a varied and interesting character
which I should like to publish for comparison with primitive
languages in other parts of the world. Yabula means “no.”
Pronouns.
There is a set of nominative pronouns for use with tran-
sitive verbs, and another set for intransitive verbs, as in
the following table. There are “inclusive” and “exclusive”
forms for the dual and plural in the first person: —-
Transitive. Intransitive.
(lst Per. I, Nguttha Nga
Singular i 2nd ~ Thou, Nginnak Nginna
13rd ~ He, Daluk Da
f i«t 1 We ’ incl -» Ngalnginnak Ngalngin
Pnaiv r * ( We, excl., Ngullak Ngulla
JJUai j 2nd „ You, Bullak Bulla
13rd ~ Tiiey, Damulak Damulu
f. , „ f We, incl., Nyuandak Nyuanda
I lst Pen i We, exch, Nyanak Nyana
i inrai 2nd You, Nhurak Nliura
L3rd ~ They, Damnak Darnna
Again, there are emphatic forms of these pronouns,
equivalent to “myself,” or, “ I alone.” etc. They are made


by adding ngo to the pronouns in the foregoing table. Ex-
amples in the singular number will be sufficient:
( Ist Per. Myself, Ngutthango Ngango
Singular <! 2nd „ Thyself, Nginnakngo Nginnango
13rd „ Himself, Dalukngo Dango
The following table exhibits the pronouns of the possessive
and objective cases :
Singular. Possessive.
Ist Per. Mine, Nyini
2nd „ Thine, Nguni
3rd „ His, Danin
Dual.
Objective.
Me, Ngannin
Thee, Ngunun
Him, Bey a
1 p j Ours, inch, Ngalngun Us, inch, Ngalngunan
Ist Pei.-j Q urs , excl.,Ngullun Us, excl., Ngullunan
2nd „ Yours, Bullun You, Bullunan
3rd „ Theirs, Damalunya Them, Bulleya
Plural.
( Ours, incl., Nyuandun Us, inch, Nyuandunan
Ist l er. | Q e xcl.,Nyanun Us, excl., Nyanunan
2nd ~ Yours, Nhurun You, Nhurunan
3rd ~ Theirs, Ngamnyun Them, Dhamnan
The demonstratives in this language are numerous, and
can, by various combinations, be made to indicate position,
direction, distance, person, number, possession, etc.; but
these, and also the interrogatives, must be omitted.
Verbs.
Verbs have modifications for the tenses, but person and
number are shown by the pronouns, as in the following few
examples, including transitive and intransitive verbs: —
Present I speak,
Past I spoke,
Nga loatbaty
Nga loatbatybenga
Future I shall speak, Nga loatbatyak
and so on through all tbe persons and numbers.
Reciprocal.
We, dual, speak to each other, Ngalngin loatbadhan
We shall speak to each other, Ngalngin loatbaddherak
Transitive verbs take transitive pronouns:
Present I strike, Nguttha nyinnin


Past I struck Ngutthabenga nyiunin
Future I shall strike, Nguttha nyinniak
In the past and future tenses of the verbs in all the dia-
lects treated in this article, there are forms to indicate
that the act described was done in the immediate, recent,
or remote past; or that the act will be performed in the
proximate or more or less distant future; that there was,
or will be, a continuance of the action, and many other
modifications which will not now be touched upon.
The grammatical functions of the prepositions, adverbs
and exclamations of the Yabula-yabula are so similar to
those of other languages in that locality already reported
by me, that they will at present be passed over.
Conclusion.
Victoria is the only Australian State of which it can be
said that no grammar of the languages of its native inhabi-
tants had ever been published, until my “Aboriginal Lan-
guages of Victoria ” appeared last year. 1 Chiefly through
the medium of this Journal, and also by the kind support
of other societies, I have now recorded and published for
the first time, the elements of the grammar of sixteen of
the native dialects of Victoria, which have been selected
from different districts throughout that State, for the pur-
pose of being representative of the speech of every tribe.
It may therefore be said that, practically, I have dealt with
the constitution of all the aboriginal tongues of Victoria-
The whole of this work has been the result of my own
individual investigations, every word in the grammars and
in the vocabularies having been noted down by me person-
ally from the lips of the native speakers.
The social organization, illustrating the intermarrying
divisions of the community, and also several highly inter-
esting ceremonies of initiation among Victorian tribes,
as well as many native customs, have been fully described
by me in other publications.
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N.S.W., Vol. xxxvi., pp. 70-100.


Y€A,cliC)s 7




