

Reprinted from
Vol. XIII., “Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science."
[lssued 22nd May, 1912.]
Section F
NOTES ON SOME PUBLISHED STATEMENTS
WITH REGARD TO THE AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
VV. E. Smith Limited, Bridge Street, Sydney.




7.—NOTES ON SOME PUBLISHED STATEMENTS WITH REGARD
TO THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
[Plate XLII ]
At the meeting of this Association held at Brisbane in 1895 the late
Mr. T. Worsnop read a paper in which he described, inter alia,
certain aboriginal paintings in South Australia and Queensland,
which appeared to me to call for further inquiry. 2 In 1905 I wrote
'l Rep. A.A.A.S., Brisbane, vol. 6, pp. 141-2-4, plates 12 and 19.


to Mr. T. A. Bradshaw, the officer in charge of the telegraph station
at Alice Springs, sending him a copy of Mr. Worsnop’s report and
a reproduction of his plate xii., asking Mr. Bradshaw to send me a
photograph of the paintings at Ooraminna rock-hole. He ac-
knowledged my letter, and after a long interval he got a chance
to comply with my request. In August, 1907, he wrote to me from
Alice Springs as follows :
“ I availed myself of an opportunity occurring last week to visit the
Ooraminna (or Uraminna) range and waterhole, 30 miles southerly from
here, taking my camera with me. I had to exercise great patience to secure
a photograph of the drawings you refer to, as they are on the sloping roof
of the cave. I had to watch until the sun shone between two boulders on to
the floor of the cave, and then take the picture with reflected light. I forward
you a copy of the result, hoping it will be of interest ; anyhow it will dispose
of Mr. Worsnop’s elaborately uniform and fanciful design. (Plate 12).
" The cave is situated at the north-west end of the waterhole, and is
about 15 feet long, going back about 10 feet into the rock. The height of
the roof from the floor at the outside or front would be about 7 feet, rapidly
decreasing downwards, until at the back, some 10 or 12 feet distant, the
roof and floor join together. The roof, like the rest of the cave, consists of
desert sandstone, and has not been painted white, as stated by Mr. Worsnop,
but is in its natural state. The greater part of the roof or ceiling is covered
with sketches, of which my photograph represents about a fourth, and is a
fair sample. (See fig. 3). They are drawn in white, yellow, and red ochre,
and there is no trace of a regular design of any kind. There are a few similar
markings on some sheltered rocks outside the cave, but no human hands or
feet, either inside or outside, unless they are so faint as to be unrecognisable
as such.”
I also asked Mr. Bradshaw to try and obtain a photograph of
the “ sculptured rocks ” described by Mr. Worsnop at the junction
of Sullivan’s Creek with the Finke River (p. 144 and Plate 19). He
replies :
" I have not seen them, and am not likely to be in that neighbourhood
to inspect them. lam of opinion, however, that Mr. Worsnop’s Plate 19 is
too regular to be reliable, and would advise inspection by some capable
person.”
At p. 142, Vol. 6, Mr. Worsnop further states :
“ At Buckland’s tableland, in Central Queensland, on the banks of
Nardoo Creek, is a high cliff, and on its face is a magnificently executed
picture, representing a lake of fire, out of which are stretched dusky brown
arms in hundreds . . . The hands are efevated as in the agonies of
death, as though a host were engulfed in a seething lake of fire . . .
Every joint can be seen, and each looks alive . . . The whole picture is
about 70 feet across . . . The groundwork of this grand picture is
painted in pigments of red, white, blue and yellow, giving the general effect
of a mass of sulphurous fire.”
I sent a copy of the above to a resident of the district indi-
cated, and asked him to make inquiries. He reported that Nardoo
Creek is about 60 miles southerly from Springsure, in the county
of Denison, Queensland. On the smooth natural face of an over-
hanging rock, sheltered from the rain, a large number of hands
are stencilled in the way commonly adopted by the natives, as well
as a few other devices. He says there is nothing remarkable about
the work, and that to call it a “ magnificent picture,” or that it
represents “ a seething lake of fire,” is a ludicrous misdescription.


While I am endeavouring to correct some inaccuracies which
have appeared in our own Proceedings in the description of rock
pictures it may be well to also invite attention to erroneous
accounts of other doings of the aborigines published elsewhere.
It has truly been said that “no man has been more misrepresented
than the Australian blackfellow.”
The following is a detailed and very early account of hunting
a kangaroo in Western Australia, according to Captain (afterwards
Sir George) Grey :
" The mode of tracking a kangaroo until it is wearied but is the one
which beyond all others excites the admiration of the natives ; this calls
out every qualification prized by savages : skill in tracking, endurance of
hunger and thirst, unwearied bodily exertion, and lasting perseverance. To
perform this feat a native starts on the tracks of a kangaroo, which he
follows until he sights it, when it flies timidly before him ; again he pursues
the track, and again the ainmal bounds from him ; and this is repeated until
nightfall, when the native lights his fire and sleeps upon the track. With
the first light of day the hunt is resumed, and towards the close of the second
day, or in the course of the third, the kangaroo falls a victim to its pursuer.
None but a skilful huntsman, in the pride of youth and strength, can perform
this feat, and one who has frequently practised it always enjoys great renown
amongst his fellows.” 1
G. S. Lang, in describing the native fishing weir at Brewarrina,
says:—
" The great weir for catching fish on the upper Darling at Brewarrina is,
both for conception and execution, one of the most extraordinary works
recorded of any savage tribe. ... It forms an immense labyrinth of
stone walls about three to four feet high. . . . The lower parts of the
walls are so solidly and skilfully built with large heavy stones, which must
have been brought from a considerable distance and with great combined
labour, that they have stood every flood from time immemorial.” 2
If the reader refers to my article on the aboriginal fisheries at
Brewarrina 3 it will be seen that the walls of the fishing pens were
formed of boulders of various sizes washed out of the bar of desert
sandstone which crosses the bed of the Darling River immediately
above them, and were consequently lying on the spot ready for
the native builders, instead of having been “ brought a consider-
able distance with great combined labour.”
The ludicrous and impossible method of hunting a kangaroo
given by Sir George Grey would merely amuse a man accustomed
to Australian bush life, but the account has been accepted and
handed on by an English author, N. W. Thomas, in his “ Natives
of Australia,” pp. 103-104. G. S. Lang’s fabulous conclusion
respecting the building of the fishing weir at Brewarrina has also
been incorporated in the same work at p. 94.
1 “ Joums. Two Expeds. Discov. in N-West and W. Australia in 1837 to 1839 ” (London, 1841)
vol. 2, pp. 273-274.
2"The Aborigines of Australia ” (Melbourne, 1866), pp. 19-20.


Another marvellous account of the above fishing weir is given
by Mrs. K. L. Parker in her book on “ The Euahlayi Tribe.” At
pages 102 and 109 she says :
“ The greatest of local landmarks is at Brewarrina. It is said to have
been made by Byamee, the god and culture hero of this tribe, and his giant
sons—the stone fisheries made in the bed of the Barwon [Darling].”
In 1884 the late Dr. A. W. Howitt reported that in the Kaia-
bara tribe, Queensland, descent was in the male line. 1 In 1889 he
repeated that statement. 2 For the third time he repeated it, in
1904. 3 He arrived at this erroneous conclusion owing to a corre-
spondent having written him that the phratry Kubatine comprised
the sub-classes Balkoin and Bunda, and that the phratry Dilebi
was made up of the sub-classes Barang and Derwain. As I have
made several personal journeys among the remnants of the Kaia-
bara and neighbouring tribes during the past 15 years I am able
to report their law of descent with certainty. A table will be
useful for illustration :
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife.
Offspring.
Kubatine (
Balkoin
Derwain
Bunda
or • l
Kappaian l
Barang
Bunda
Derwain
Dilebi /
Bunda
Barang
Balkoin
or • 1
Diawai (
Derwairi
Balkoin
Barang
This table shows that the phratry Kubatine (my Kappaian) is
composed of Balkoin and Barang, instead of Balkoin and Bunda.
It also shows that Dilebi (my Diawai) consists of Bunda and
Derwain, instead of Barang and Derwain, as stated by Mr. Howitt.
If we take Balkoin, the first name in the “ husband ” column
of the table, his normal wife is Derwain, or it is quite lawful for
him to espouse a Bunda woman. If he marries Derwain his child
is Bunda ; but if he weds Bunda his child is Derwain. The
phratry, and the sub-class (or section), and the totem, of the man
Balkoin’s children would depend altogether upon their mother,
quite irrespective of their father.
Dr. Howitt’s statement that descent is counted through the
father in the tribe referred to has been accepted and repeated by
such able anthropologists as N. W. Thomas, 4 J. G. Fraser, 5 and
Andrew Lang. 6 On the other hand, Rev. J. Mathew 7 and myself,
who have both been among the blacks in question, have reported
that descent is reckoned through the mother in all cases.
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., 13, p. 336.
2 Op. cit., 18, p.
3 “ Native Tribes of S.E. Australia,” pp. 116 and 229.
4 “ Kinship and Marriage,” p. 43.
5 “ Totemism,” vol. I, p. 447.
6 Man, 1910, No. 80.
7 “ Eaglehawk and Crow,” p. 100.


C. Lumholz says : —“ On Herbert River, Queensland, expe-
ditions are sometimes undertaken for the special purpose of securing
talgora, that is, human flesh. The very thought of talgora makes
a man’s eyes sparkle.” 1
G. F. Angas states that the aborigines of the Tatiara district
of Western Victoria used to travel to Lake Alexandrina to catch
black children for the purpose of devouring them. 2
It is well known that the Australian blacks have cannibalistic
practices ; but that they go specially and deliberately hunting for
human flesh as an article of diet among their neighbours is alto-
gether improbable. No such custom has been reported to me by
any of the old blackfellows among whom I have made inquiries in
the different States of the Commonwealth.
EXPLANATION OF PLATE XLII.
Aboriginal Painting, Finke River
1 " Among Cannibals,” p. 27.
2 " Savage Life in Australia and N. Zealand,” vol. 1., p. 123.




Oh
W
>
Oh
W
US
z
£
in
O
Z
H
Z
5
&H
<
Z
3
5
o
m
C


