

' • U'-? 'for - -
Notes ON THE
eJls
Star Chart.
HOW TO USE IT
By H. C. RUSSELL, B.A.
Wkbsdale, Shoosmitii & Co., Printers, 117 Clarence-street, Sydney.




NOTES ON THE STAR CHART.
HOW TO USE IT.
By H. C. RUSSELL, B.A.
In article No. I. we endeavoured to explain what is meant
by the term south pole of the heavens, and how it is that the
motion of the earth in its daily rotation makes the stars
appear to go to the west. If these two facts have been made
clear, it will not be difficult to see that we who live in this
colony, in common with all the other members of the human
race, are every twenty-four hours, carried round under all the
stars visible from our point of view, and the only impediment
in the way of our seeing all the stars visible to us every
twenty-four hours is the sun, whose brilliance hides the
smaller lights of starland.
We are familiar with the motion of the stars every day
from east to west, but there is another motion of the stars
that we are apt to overlook ; and that is a gradual progression
of all the stars to the west. For instance, if we observe any
particular star or cluster of stars, it seems to be in the same
place every night at the same hour, as if it came there
regularly as the earth turned round ; but closer observation
for a few weeks would show us that the star comes earlier to
the point of observation every night, and in the course of about
fifteen days is an hour earlier, and this motion is not due to the
diurnal rotation of the earth on its axis but to some other cause.
Carrying on our observation we find that the same star or


cluster comes back to its place in a year, and, therefore, this
motion is in some way connected with the motion of the earth
round the sun. Now in this annual motion of the stars they
move slowly in the same direction that they move every day
owing to the earth’s rotation, i.e., to the west, at the rate of 15
degrees, or one hour in about fifteen days, and since the whole
revolution is 360°, or twenty-four hours, it follows that it will
take twenty-four times fifteen days, or 360 days about, to get
back to the starting. The actual time as you know is 365| days,
and you will find if you work it out that the daily motion is a
little less than four minutes.
The astronomer, in order to find the exact time, sets up his
great theodolite, or transit instrument, in order to observe the
sun each day as well as the stars, and it is clear that if he points
the telescope to the sun to-day, and waits six months that is,
until the earth in its orbit has gone half way round the sun
he will, when he now looks at the sun with the telescope, be
pointing it in exactly the opposite way with regard to the
stars, to that in which he pointed it before, and the earth must
therefore have made half a turn on its axis while going half
way round the sun ; and in the next six months, in going
back to the starting point, it will turn the other half or com-
plete the revolution.
If this mental picture does not make the matter quite
clear, but has left some fraction of doubt or uncertainty
behind it, conviction may be arrived at by a very simple
experiment. Let us take a piece of paper and draw upon it a
small circle say half-an-inch in diameter, and another larger
circle six or seven inches diameter from the same centre. The
smaller circle is to stand for the sun, the large for the earth’s
orbit. Now cut out of a piece of cardboard or cork a small
disc; put a pin into the edge of it, pointing to its centre ;
put this on the larger circle, with the head of the pin pointing


to the central circle or sun ; make a pencil-mark round the
disc and pin, then move it round the circle, keeping the pin
pointed towards the central circle ; when half-way round
make a pencil-mark round the disc and pin again, and it is
quite evident that the pin in the two positions is pointing in
opposite directions, that is 180°, or half a turn, has been
turned by the disc. Our pin, representing the telescope of
the astronomer, has therefore proved that the disc made half
a revolution in going half way round the circle or sun, and
makes the other half a turn by the time it gets back to the
starting point ; and in the same way the annual revolu-
tion of the earth on its axis takes a year to make, and is
something superadded to the diurnal one. It is obviously
the cause of the second motion of the stars which observation
shows us they have ; or, more accurately, the two apparent
motions of the stars are caused by the motion of the earth.
The diurnal revolution of the earth makes the stars appear to
turn once round every day, and the annual motion of the
earth causes another revolution on its axis, and therefore
another apparent revolution of the star-sphere, which takes a
year to complete.
The result of these two motions upon the novice when
studying the stars is confusing. The star positions with
reference to the horizon—which is the only fixed point we
have to start with—seem to be changing every night, and
bring up new stars month after month. When the motions
are explained we can begin to understand some of the diffi-
culties which beset our earlier attempts. The great majority
of star charts are very useful to one who understands them,
but to the novice they are often but little assistance, and it
was with the view to helping beginners that I designed the
modified stai chart which was published in the last number of
the Gazette. In it only the stars visible to unaided eyes have been


marked. The size of the spot representing each star bears some
relation to the size of the star, and all but the smallest visible
stars have rectangular projections indicating their magnitudes.
The main feature is, however, that it can be used so that we
are able to set it to show the positions of the stars at any
hour on any day of the year in their relation to the horizon
and the points of the compass, provided that the centre of the
chart, the south pole, is always set due south.
Now in order to use the chart conveniently, proceed as
follows Draw a circle round it, just outside the dates, so
that when you cut it round this circle the dates are near the
margin; now place it on a piece of cardboard, or small
drawing-board, and put a pin through the centre of the star
chart, so that you can turn the chart round ; turn it until
the date May 22 is on the side of the cardboard, or drawing-
board, which you intend to be the lower one or “ horizon ; ”
adjust the star chart until the line joining Xll.h and XXIV.h
is vertical, or at right angles to the base of the cardboard ; take a
ruler and pen and make a continuation of this vertical line
upwards on to the cardboard, and mark it “ meridian ; ” next
take a piece of paper long enough to go across the board ;
write on it the word “ horizon ; ” the edge must be straight,
and for the present we will take this when fixed in its place
as the horizon. On the star chart are a number of circles 5°
apart, at VII.h. 40m. and XIX.h. 40m. These are marked
to show the number of degrees distant from the equator, or
what is known as the “ declination ”of the stars, or D. The
hours and minutes marked round the chart, show the time,
or as it is technically called, the right ascension, or R.A. If
then we have the R.A. and D. of any object, it is as easy to
find it on a star chart as it is to find a place of which we know
the latitude and longitude on a terrestrial map.


But to return to the “ horizon.” Place the straight edge
of it at right angles to the vertical line, and just up to the
second circle, that is, the one marked 55* ; fix it in this
position. Then, approximately, when the chart is set for any
particular date, all the stars above the horizon would be
visible, and sincethedatesettothe “ meridian ” isNovember 20,
which we have taken at random, the stars on the chart are in the
positions they will occupy on thatdate. But we will assume that
what we want to see is not November 20th but June 6th. We
accordingly set the date June 6th to the “ meridian,” and we
have before us the stars as they stand in relation to each other
—the “ horizon ” and the “ meridian.” The meridian being a
vertical plane passing through the north and south poles of the
heavens to the right of XIII. hours, June 6th, we see the five
conspicuous stars of the Southern Cross between the declina-
tion circles 55° and 65°, and to the left of it, on circle 60° the
two first magnitude stars of Centaurus Alpha and Beta, and
the milky-way stretching completely across the chart. Now,
look out at the sky, if it is 8 p.m. on June 6th, and you will
readily recognise these bright stars and the milky-way.
Looking to south-west and some distance above the horizon
you will see a very brilliant star standing almost alone. This
is Canopus, the brightest star in the southern hemisphere
except Sirius. Its R.A. is Vl.h. 20m., and looking down a
little to the west of south you will see if you have a clear
horizon the bright star Achernar close to the actual horizon,
and on the chart it is close to the paper “ horizon.” Its
R.A. is I.h. 40m., but while this has been going on time has
slipped away and now it is probably 9 p.m., and the chart
therefore no longer shows the stars in their true relation to
meridian and horizon. You must move it on to the right
one hour or until June 21st is on the meridian, and again the
stars stand in the chart a 9 they are in the sky.


Beta Centauri is now on the meridian. Achernar has
passed the meridian below the pole, and is now slowly rising
in the east and the Cross is travelling to the west, while
Canopus is perceptibly lower down. We may thus go on
each hour, shifting the chart on one hour, and so find the
position of the stars at every hour in the night, and have
forced upon us very obviously the motion of the stars round
tho pole, due, as we have already seen, to the motion of the
earth in its daily revolution.
We are not obliged to make these motions of the star chart
at every hour. We can subdivide the hour into minutes if we
so desire, and move the chart on minute by minute, but
the divisions given to hours and subdivisions of 20m. are
sufficient for ordinary purposes. So much as to the method of
following the star motions on any night. It has already
been said that in the course of the year the stars appear to
make a revolution similar to the diurnal one ; and it is now
easy to see with the star chart, that if we adhere to a fixed
hour in the day, say 8 p.m., then we must put the chart on a
little every night—about four minutes, or an hour in fifteen
days—until, by the end of the year, we find that the stars
have made one complete revolution round the pole of the
heavens in the year.
There are several points here which we will go into again
at another time in elucidation of the matter before us. Now
we are only concerned about the apparent daily and annual
motions of the stars which the star chart enables us to follow.
We have already alluded to the smallness of the number of
stars which we can see in comparison with what we think we
can see. Later we will give a list of all the stars on this
chart which have any name or designation. I would only
now mention that the total number of stars visible on this
chart is 1363. Of these 1093 are of the sixth magnitude,


i.e., just on the limit of visibility, requiring a clear night and
f'tC'i j I v , _ r7rr
fairly good eyes to see them ; 143 of the fifth magnitude, 77
of the fourth, 33 of the third, 12 of the second, and only five
of the first. Of these only two have names apart from their
constellation names ; these are Canopus and Achetnar,
already mentioned. Alpha and Beta Centaun, and Alpha
Crucis in the Southern Cross, make up the five.
It would be good practice to find the twelve second
magnitude stars on the chart and see if you can pick them
out in the heavens.






