

rOTES ON SOME AUSTRALASIAN and OTHER STONE
IMPLEMENTS.
By A. Liversidge, m.a., f.r.s.,
Professor of Chemistry in the University of Sydney.
[With Plates XIII. - XXXYL]
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, December 5, 1892.~\
Price One Shilling.




AUSTRALASIAN AND OTHER STONE IMPLEMENTS.
M 3355 / r


NOTES ON SOME AUSTRALASIAN and OTHER STONE
IMPLEMENTS.
By A. Liversidge, m.a., f.r.s.,
Professor of Chemistry in the University of Sydney.
[With Plates XIII. - XXXVI.]
[Read before the Royal Society of N. 8. Wales, December 5, 1892.']
The implements, referred to in the following notes, form a com-
parative series from the Australasian Colonies, with the exception
of South and Western Australia.
All the specimens, with but one exception have been obtained
directly from the natives themselves, or from the localities formerly
occupied by them, many of them have been personally and expressly
procured for me by friends, to whom I have much pleasure in
tendering my thanks for their kind assistance. The exception
referred to is that from Niagara bought from a dealer at the Falls,
but I have no reason to doubt its authenticity.
Some of the specimens described are not figured, as they do not
differ sufficiently from others from the same locality, to warrant
the cost of extra plates. All of the figures are somewhat reduced
in size, and some of them considerably, the true dimensions how-
ever are given in the text.
For comparison, representative forms from New Britain, New
Guinea and other Oceanic localities are added; there is also one
from Java, which is of the New Zealand type, i.e ., with a chisel
edge or bevelled on one side only, and one from Niagara Falls
District, America, obtained by me there in 1887, which is included
because it bears a remarkable resemblance to some of the New
South Wales specimens, especially to No. 2 from Botany, New
South Wales.


I do not consider it necessary to describe the specimens minutely,
as I trust that the figures will give sufficiently correct idea of their
shapes and sizes.
Professor David kindly assisted me in identifying the rocks of
which they are composed, and I am particularly indebted to him
for his assistance in the case of Nos. 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13, from
Bondi, i.e., those composed of a spotted altered claystone, which
he recognised as being the same material as that of some imple-
ments from Vegetable Creek, described by him in the Journal of
the Linnean Society of N. S. Wales.
Wherever necessary, chips were taken from the implements
and converted into slides and examined under the microscope.
The pebbles of spotted altered claystone, from which many of
the weapons have been made, were probably brought from the old
river bed cut through by the road and railway at Lapstone Hill,
Emu Plains; the source of this rock is not known.
The minute pits in the surfaces of the older implements made
of the spotted altered claystone, are evidently caused by the
removal of the “ spots ” by weathering. The weathering and
pitting on some of the weapons indicate considerable antiquity,
and especially where such weathering exists on the cutting edge.
The effects of wear are quite different, and they cannot be mistaken
for those of weathering.
In some cases the implements, e.g No. 8, f Plate 13.) have
•evidently been etched or corroded by wind borne sand.
Nos. 24 and 25 (Plate 33.) serve to show the method of mount-
ing the weapons in vines, which is much the same as that used by
blacksmiths at the present day for mounting or holding chisels
and punches.
I do not give references to the literature of the subject, as the
recent publications by Mr. R. Etheridge, Jun., in the Memoirs of
the Geological Survey of New South Wales, the Linnean Society
•of New South Wales, and elsewhere, render it unnecessary for
me to do so here.


Most of the implements from Sans Souci and Bondi wero
obtained by me from the few blacks who, some twenty years ago,
used to camp at these places.
Native Implements.
I.—Tomahawk. The Blacks’ Camp, Sans Souci, Botany, N.S.W.
Of dolerite ; the cutting edge is fairly well ground, but the
haft or upper part is merely roughly chipped into shape.
Weight 1 lb. 12f ozs. Dimensions sf" x x If". {Plate 13.)
2.—Tomahawk. The Blacks’ Camp, Sans Souci, Botany, N.S.W.
Of diorite; the whole of this has been worked into shape,
except the top end ; in general make and appearance it i&
very like No. 68, from Niagara, America. Weight lib. If oz.
Dimensions 4-|" x 2f" x If". {Plate 14.)
3.— Tomahawk. The Blacks’ Camp, Sans Souci, Botany, N.S.W.
A flat pebble of spotted altered claystone, with ground
edge. Weight 12 J ozs. Dimensions 4 x 2f" xlf
{Plate 14.)
4. — Tomahawk. The Blacks’ Camp, Sans Souci, Botany, N.S.W,
Of spotted altered claystone; much worn. The cutting
edge of this is so blunted as to be practically non-existent.
Dimensions 4 x 3|" x 1".
s.—Tomahawk. The Blacks’ Camp, Sans Souci, Botany, N.S.W.
Of spotted altered claystone; an attempt has been made
to form thumb and finger pits. One side has been flattened,
as if it had been rubbed down on a rock or used as a rubber
or grinder ; from the appearance of the ground surface this
seems to be of much more recent origin than the implement
itself ; probably it was used as a grinder after it had become
useless as a tomahawk. This is not well shown in the plate.
Weight 13f ozs. Dimensions 4ff" x 3|" x If". {Plate 15.)
6. — Tomahawk. The Blacks’ Camp, Sans Souci, Botany, N.S.W.
Of spotted altered claystone; the shape is unusual, it is
apparently merely a flat pebble with a ground cutting edge


at one end. Weight 12 ozs. Dimensions 4" x x 1
{Plate 16.)
7.—Tomahawk. The Blacks’ Camp, Sans Souci, Botany, N.S.W.
Of spotted altered claystone ; edge much worn and blunted,
roughly formed finger pit on one side ; evidently old and
weathered. Weight 13 ozs. Dimensions 4- I V' x 2|" x 1-jV',
B.—Tomahawk. The Blacks’ Camp, Sans Souci, Botany, N.S.W.
Of spotted altered claystone ; much pitted, of smaller size
and thinner than usual ; the cutting edge is in fairly good
order, but, like the rest of the implement, is much pitted
from the action of wind blown sand or weathering. Weight
4f ozs. Dimensions 3 yV" x 2J" x {Plate 13.)
9.—Tomahawk. From the Sandhills, Bondi, near Sydney, N.S.W.
Of dark quartzite. The cutting edge is in fairly good
order; there is a finger pit on one side, this pit is just above
the figure 9 on the implement, but it does not show well in
the plate, and is apparently of comparatively recent date.
Weight ozs. Dimensions 3J x 2f" x 1 -fa". {Plate 17.)
10. —Tomahawk. From the Sandhills, Bondi, near Sydney, N.S.W.
Of spotted altered claystone. Evidently a flat pebble
ground to a cutting edge at one end. Weight 111). ozs.
Dimensions 4J" x 3tV' x 1 tV'- {Plate 18.)
11.—Tomahawk. From the Sandhills, Bondi, near Sydney, N.S.W.
Of spotted altered claystone ; old and much weathered or
corroded by wind borne sand, even on the cutting edge ; with
thumb and finger pits on both sides. Weight 7f ozs.
Dimensions 3 tV" X2H" X 1 tV- {Plate 16.)
12.—Tomahawk. From the Sandhills, Bondi, near Sydney, N.S.W.
Of spotted altered claystone, which is rather more schistose
than some of the preceding. Old and weathered or corroded
by wind borne sand. Outline of implement more rectangular
than usual, cutting edge in fairly good order but much pitted
from weathering. Weight 7£ ozs. Dimensions 3J" x 2H"
x f", {Plate 19.)


13.— Circular Stone Implement. Bondi, near Sydney, N.S.W.
Of quartzite ; with deep thumb pit on one side and shallow
one on the other ; this was originally a tomahawk which has
evidently been used as a hand hammer (i.e., without a handle)
until the original cutting edge has been entirely worn away.
Weight 7f ozs. Dimensions x 2£" x to If". (Plate 19.)
14.— Tomahawk. Uralla, New England District, N. S. Wales.
Indurated black claystone. Cutting edge in fairly good
order; the upper part is merely roughly chipped into shape.
Weight 12 ozs. Dimensions 4iV' x x 1|". {Plate 18.)
15.—Tomahawk. Uralla, New England District, N.S.W.
Basalt; weathered to a brown colour, even on cutting edge,
hence the implement is doubtless of considerable age. The
original dark colour of the basalt is shown by the freshly
fractured surfaces. This, together with the other Uralla
specimens, was obtained by Mr. Cleghorne, j.p., of Uralla,
and presented to me by him. Weight 8J ozs. Dimensions
3|"x2H"xl". {Plate 19.)
16.—Tomahawk. Victoria Park, near the University, Sydney,
N. S. Wales.
An elongated pebble of the spotted altered claystone; worn
and blunted at both ends; it is very much heavier and larger
than usual; it was turned up in trenching the ground of
Victoria Park, near the University, the soil of which is
derived from a patch of the Waianamatta shale. Weight
4 lbs. 7 ozs. Dimensions 9f" x x 2J".
17.— Tomahawk. Fairfield, Southern Railway Line, eighteen
miles from Sydney, N. S. Wales.
A large flattened pebble of spotted altered claystone; of
unusual size and weight; the cutting edge in very good order;
this in common with Nos. 16, 18, 19, and 20, was dug up
from a clay soil, free from stones or pebbles, derived from the
Waianamatta Shale. Weight 4 lbs. 9 ozs. Dimensions 9T§- ,/
x 4*" x 11" to 1 iV' {Plate 20.)


18. —Tomahawk. Fairfield, as above.
Of spotted altered claystone; this is a pebble ground down
at one end ; the cutting edge is almost obliterated. Weight
1 ft). 7 ozs. Dimensions 4tV' * 3f" x If".
19.— Tomahawk. Fairfield, as above.
Of spotted altered claystone. A flat pebble ground to an
edge, much weathered; the weathered skin is about f" deep.
Weight 1 lb. 4J ozs. Dimensions 5" x 3f" x If". (Plate 17.)
20. —Tomahawk. Fairfield, as above.
Of spotted altered claystone. This was evidently a rounded
pebble which has been split in half longitudinally. Much
weathered, the original structure of the rock is shown by the
chip from the upper left hand corner. Weight 11 ozs.
Dimensions 4f" x 3 - I V' x
21.— Tomahawk. Long Bay, near Sydney, N. S. Wales.
Of weathered spotted altered claystone ; with finger and
thumb pits ; the cutting edge in fairly good order but pitted
from weathering. Weight 14| ozs. Dimensions 4-jV / x
3-re" x 1".
22. —Tomahawk, Uralla, New England District, N. S. Wales.
Of black indurated claystone. An unusual form, being
elliptical in section and much more symmetrical and highly
finished than is usual with the New South Wales aboriginal
implements. Weight 1 B). 8f ozs. Dimensions x 2f"
x 2f". (Plate 15.)
23. —Tomahawk. Metung, Gippsland Lakes, Victoria.
Of mica schist; cutting edge much blunted and weathered.
Weight lib. If ozs. Dimensions 61V' x 2f" x iVe" (Plate 21.)
24.—Mounted Tomahawk. From Queensland near the borders
of N. S. Wales.
Of diorite; this is mounted in the original vine handle but
without gum or resin, the vine is cut away as usual, to a flat
surface inside, i.e., next to the stone head. This example is
very much like a modern steel tomahawk in form; the


groove for the vine handle, which passes completely round
it, is unusual. The vine handle is nearly new, but the toma-
hawk itself is an old one. Weight 1 ft. 4J ozs. Dimensions
SJ" x 3H" x 1 iV. (Plate 22.)
25.— Tomahawk. Tarampa, Queensland.
Basalt; mounted in vine handle with cement made of
native bee’s wax. This implement was actually in use
amongst the few remaining members of the Tarampa tribe
at the time of my visit in December, 1872; and was obtained
personally from the head-man or so called “King.” Weight
15 ozs. Dimensions 4|" x 3" x 1-nr". Handle about fourteen
inches long, also thinned flat inside where it comes in contact
with the stone head. (Plate 33.)
2G.— Chisel. Mount Bulloo, Queensland. (Mount Bulloo is
situated about 28° S. latitude and 143° E. longitude.)
The cutting edge consists of a chipped piece of flint or chert
mounted in a handle seventeen inches long, with what appears
to be a mixture of native bee’s wax and grass-tree gum
(Xanthorrhea). This chisel was in use by the blacks in
1874, and was obtained for me by Mr. Vincent Dowling ; I
had been informed that flint and chert were never used by
the Australian aborigines, but as I had seen flint or chert
gravels in Queensland, I felt sure that it must be used by
them, so at my request Mr. Dowling kindly made search
amongst the blacks in his district and was successful in
obtaining this interesting flint chisel. Diameter of stick
to IjV 7 , total length 17|". (Plates 22 and 23.)
■27.—Tomahawk. Mount Bulloo, Queensland.
Of green jasper ; polished, well formed. Obtained by Mr.
J, de V. Lamb from the Mount Bulloo blacks about 1870.
Weight 6| ozs. Dimensions 2|" x 2HT x 1£" (Plate 21.)
28.—Tomahawk. Mount Bulloo, Queensland.
Of diorite : small but well formed. Obtained about the
same date. Weight 3f ozs. Dimensions 2 T V' x2'x 1".
{Plate 22.)


29.—“80ra Stone.” Cape River Diggings, Oxley Creek
Queensland.
Of quartzite. Said to be used for knocking out the front
teeth at the “Bora” ceremony, This is an egg-shaped pebble
and probably selected by the blacks on account of its remark-
ably symmetrical form. Weight ozs. Dimensions 2iV'
x 1H" x 1J". {Plate 23.)
30. —Adze. New Zealand.
Of diorite ; this has a distinct haft or handle worked out
of the solid stone, it is symmetrical in form and highly
finished. Weight 2 lbs. 13 \ ozs. Dimensions 9|" x x 2i s ~ f ,
{Plate 24.)
31.—Adze. Otepepo, Hokianga River, New Zealand.
Of chloritic felstone. Polished ; the upper part is curved
out so as to form a handle; well formed and smooth with a
dull polished surface. Weight 2 lbs. 5 ozs. Dimensions
1W xW x lit". (Pto* 25.)
32.—Patu. New Zealand.
Of schistose rock. A Moriori war-implement; much
worn and weathered. The Morioris were the original inhabi-
tants of New Zealand, who preceded the Maoris. Weight
1 K). 11J ozs. Dimensions 8-/ x x 1J".
33. —Tomahawk. Ploughed up on Mr. J. Webster’s property at
Tammatawiwi, Hokianga River, New Zealand.
Of trachyte; cutting edge somewhat blunted. This,
although very ancient, has the narrow sides at right angles
to the faces or broad sides, a characteristic of the modern
New Zealand adzes. Weight 1 lb. 6f ozs. Dimensions s|"
34.—Tomahawk. Ploughed up on Mr. John Webster’s property
as above, at Tammatawiwi, together with Nos. 38, 39,
42, and 44.
Of diorite; old and much weathered. To ascertain the
depth of the weathering, I broke this implement across, and


found that the decomposition had penetrated almost to the
centre, as is shown by the lines of differently coloured material;
hence the implement is probably very old and may date back
to the Moriori times. The weathering contour lines (internal)
follow the outer external form, (See Plate 25, but very
imperfectly shown in the plate), which is artificial, i.e ., the
implement is not a pebble which has had an edge put to it
as in some of the New South Wales specimens, in which case
the internal weathering might not indicate so much, an old
weathered pebble would hardly however be selected to grind
into a tomahawk. Weight 1 lb. 2J ozs. Dimensions 5-j 5 -'
x x If". {Plates 25 and 26.)
35.— Tomahawk. Ploughed up at Tammatawiwi, as above.
Of basalt; weathered to a grey colour ; the cutting edge is
in very good order considering the weathering which the
weapon has undergone. Weight lib. 2| ozs. Dimensions
4l"x2i"x2i". {Plate 27.)
36.— Tomahawk. New Zealand.
Made of “greenstone,” jade or pounamu, well finished and
polished. Both faces about equally bevelled at the cutting
edge. Weight 13 ozs. Dimensions sf" x 2J" x {Plate 27.)
37. — Tomahawk. Kaiapoi, Gnahati Pa, New Zealand.
Made of jade or nephrite, polished; only one side is bevelled
off to form the cutting edge, which, therefore, resembles an
ordinary chisel for wood working. Weight 8| ozs. Dimen-
sions 4 x 21" x
38.—Tomahawk. Tammatawiwi, New Zealand.
Hornblende-granite. Well finished, and with good cutting
edge made with one bevel, like the edge of a wood chisel.
Weight 11J ozs. Dimensions 4J" x 2f" x |". {Plate 28.)
39.—Tomahawk. Ploughed up at Tammatawiwi, New Zealand.
Of fine grained andesite. Rather roughly formed; edge
with a single chisel-bevel. A piece has been broken out on
One side. Weight 10 ozs. Dimensions 4f" x 2 x 1".


Tomahawk. Wairoa, North Island, New Zealand.
Of gritty argillyte, with chisel edge. Dimensions 3f" x
IH'xH'. {Plate 28.)
Tomahawk. Chatham Island, New Zealand.
Of andesite; with chisel edge, of Moriori make. Dimensions
3f"xlH"xtV r - {Plate 26.)
Tomahawk. Tammatawiwi, New Zealand.
Of gritty argillyte. Of smaller size than usual, with sharp
chisel edge. Weight 2J ozs. Dimensions 3f" x 1|" x f".
{Plate 28.)
•Fragment of Tomahawk. Moa Hunter’s Camp, South
Rakaia, New Zealand.
Andesite. Weight 13 ozs. Dimensions 4-rg-" x 2f" x f".
Chisel for Carving. Hokianga, New Zealand.
Of jade, ‘-Greenstone” or pounamu. {Plate 25.)
Split Pebble Scraper. Moa Hunter’s Camp, South
Rakaia, New Zealand.
Dimensions 3yf" x 3-jV’ x
Obsidian or Tuhua. Pound by Mr. J. Webster on the
Sandhills opposite Tammatawiwi, Hokianga, New
Zealand. Brought from the south part of the Northern
Island for making knives.
Obsidian Chips (6). Moa Hunter’s Camp, South Rakaia,
New Zealand.
Tomahawk. Louisade Islands, New Guinea
Of diorite; well formed, originally this was apparently
smooth or polished from end to end. It is weathered and
pitted by the removal of felspar crystals, and is therefore of
some antiquity. Weight 1 ft). ozs. Dimensions 7" x 2|"
x If". {Plate 29.)
Tomahawk. Louisade Islands, New Guinea.
Nos. 46 to 50 are apparently composed of an indurated
diabase tuff, and were, together with Nos. 45, 52, and 53, col-


lected by Dr. McKinlay of H.M.S. “Swinger,” in 1885 and
presented to me by him. The upper part has not been worked
smooth but only chipped into shape. Weight 1 lb. 4| ozs.
Dimensions 7J''x 3iV'x If''. {Plate 30.)
The New Guinea and New Britain adzes have the sides
sloped or rounded off, and not squared off at right angles to
the faces like those from New Zealand.
47.— Tomahawk. Louisade Islands, New Guinea.
This has been shaped and smoothed from end to end, and
is a handsome well formed weapon, although the plate does
not convey that impression. Weight 1 R). Of ozs. Dimen-
sions 6|" x 31V' x 1 iV". {Plate 31.)
48. —Tomahawk. Louisade Islands, New Guinea.
The larger chip-pits have not been removed by grinding,
which has been done in the case of some of the others. Weight
1 R). 12 ozs. Dimensions 6f" x x If".
49.— Tomahawk. Louisade Islands, New Guinea.
This has been worked more or less smooth from end to end.
The same applies to Nos. 50 and 51. Weight 1 lb. 6 ozs.
Dimensions 6f" x x If".
50. — Tomahawk. Louisade Islands, New Guinea.
Weight 1 R). Of oz. Dimensions 5-|" x 3f" x 1
51.— Tomahawk. Louisade Islands, New Guinea.
Probably an indurated pyritous trachyte tuff. Weight
15J ozs. Dimensions sf" x S-fV" x 1".
52.—Tomahawk. Louisade Islands, New Guinea.
Of diorite. This is somewhat weathered or sand worn.
Weight 3f ozs. Dimensions 3f" x 2- I V / {Plate 29.)
53. —Tomahawk. Louisade Islands, New Guinea.
Probably an indurated diabase tuff. The edge of this is
very keen. Weight If ozs. Dimensions 2-fy" x Ipf" xtV"-
{Plate 30.)
54.—Omitted.


All of the following from New Britain were collected by
and presented to me by the Rev. G. Brown.
55,— Tomahawk. New Britain.
An indurated volcanic ash. The cutting edge is broken
or chipped. Weight 10 ozs. Dimensions 4|" x 2-fa" x 1".
The form of the New Britain adze is very similar to those
from New Zealand.
56. —Tomahawk. New Britain
Of lava. Weight 5 ozs. Dimensions 3f" x x If"
57. —Tomahawk. New Britain.
Of indurated ash ; apparently sand worn. Weight 5 \ ozs.
Dimensions 3|" x 2" x |". (Plate 32.)
58. —Tomahawk. New Britain.
Weight 4J ozs. Dimensions 3f" x 2fa" xff
59. —Tomahawk. New Britain.
Weight 3 ozs. Dimensions 3 fa" x I fa x f". (Plate 32.)
60.—Tomahawk. New Britain.
Of lava. Weight If oz. Dimensions 2|" x If" x fa"
61.—Tomahawk (unmounted). Fiji Islands.
Of andesite. Nos. 62, 63, and 64 are probably composed
of the same rock. The shaft or body of this adze (and Nos.
62, 63, 64) is almost cylindrical, with an elliptical section
near the cutting edge. Weight 1 lb. 4f ozs. Dimensions
8J" x If" x If". (Plate 34.)
62. —Tomahawk. Fiji Islands.
Mounted in a crook handle and secured by cocoa nut fibre
sinnett. Weight 1 K). 4f ozs. Wooden handle 17" long,
Ito 2" diameter. (Plate 33.)
63. —Tomahawk. Fiji Islands.
Mounted in handle. Weight 1 lb. 14f ozs. The wooden
handle is 13f" long, 1 to If" diameter, and is free from any
crook, the stone head meets the end of the handle and the
two are firmly bound in position by the sinnett, this mode of


mounting is far inferior to that of No. 62 on the same plate.
{Plate 33.)
64. —Tomahawk. Fiji Islands.
Mounted in handle. Weight 1 lb. 7J ozs. Wooden handle
14|" long, 1 to \y diameter.
65. — Tomahawk. New Britain.
Made of shell. Weight 12J ozs. Dimensions s|" x 2^-"
x\ to f". {Plate 36.)
66.—Chisel. Probably mounted and used as a chisel or gouge.
Guadalcanar Island, Eastern Solomons.
Worked smooth from end to end and tapered, the cutting
edge is a single bevel, sharp and extremely well formed.
Weight 10J ozs. Dimensions 7f" x 2H" x {Plate 32.)
67.— Tomahawk. South Seas.
Jade; of a roughly triangular outline, one edge, probably
the working one, is sharper than the others. Weight 6f ozs.
Dimensions x x f". {Plate 31.)
68. — Tomahawk. Niagara Falls District, U.S.A.
Of garnet schist. This, together with No. 69 from Java,
is placed with this collection for comparison; the American
one does not differ very materially in form from some of the
Australian adzes, and the Javanese one is closely ailed to the
New Zealand forms. Weight 7J ozs. Dimensions 3" x 2A"
x 11".
69.— Tomahawk. Java.
Of spotted flesh coloured jasper. The cutting edge is chisel
like but with two steps to the bevel —not shown in the plate —
and somewhat similar to that of the New Zealand adzes. The
sides are also finished off at approximately right angle to the
body, this is another characteristic of the New Zealand adzes,
both Maori and Moriori. Dimensions 3^ ' x liV x iV •
{Plate 30.)


70.— Hammer or Old Worn-Out Adze. Coalbaggie Creek,
New South Wales.
71. —Chipped Flint or Chert. Tasmania,
The Tasmanian examples are merely roughly chipped to
cutting edges and show no traces of grinding or smoothing.
72.— Chipped Implement resembling a spear head. Tasmania.
Chert. {Plate 35.)
73.— Chipped Implement. Tasmania.
Chert. (Plate 35.)
74. —Chipped Implement. Tasmania.
Nos. 70 to 75 were collected in 1892 by Mr. Alexander
Morton, f. 1.5., Curator of the Tasmanian Museum.




Australian and Other Slone Implements,
Plate XIII.
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S




Australian and Other Stone Implements .
' ■ M '\r, - s*"did yvivi dt *--' uk if Li fs f ,/ L ~ •
Platt
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S




Journal Roy. Soc. N.S.W., Vol. XX VIII., 1894 •
Australian and Other Stone Implements.
Plate XV.
A. LIYERSIDGE, M.A., F.H.S.




Plate XVI.
Australian and Other Stone Implements.
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S.




Journal Roy. Soc. X.S.W., Vol XXVIIIIB94.
Australian and Other Stone Implements.
\ ■ -u.
_ ■-
Plate
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S




Journal Roy. Soc. N.S.W. , Vol. XXVIIIIB9If.
* Australian and Other Stone Implements.
Hate XVIII.
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S.




Journal Hoy. Soc. X.S.W., Vol. XXVIII., 1894-
Australian and Other Stone Implements.
Plate XIX.
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.K.S.




Journal Roy . Soc. X.S. IT., Vol. XXVIIIIB9If..
Australian and Other Stone Implements.
Plate XX.
A. LIVERSIDGE M.A., F.R.S.




A ustralian and Other Stone Implements.
Plate XXL
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S.




Australian and Other Stone Implements,
Plate XXII.
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S.




Journal Roy. Soc. JV.S.WVoI. XXVIII., 1891
Australian and Other Stone Implements.
Plate XXIII.
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S.




.Australian and Other Stone Implements.
Plate XXIV.
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S.




Journal Roy. Soc. X.S. W., Vol. XXVIII ., 1894.
Section of No. 34, Plate 26.
Austral ion and Other Stone Implements.
Plate XX
44.—Jade Carving Chisel
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S,




' -9J/A mL?i< • H. jR .%
* Australian and Other Stone Implements.
Plate XXVI.
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S.




Australian and Other Stone Imjdements.
A. LIVERSIDGK, M.A., F.H.S,




Australian and Other Stone Implements.
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.




Australian and Other Stone Implements
A. Liversidkk, M.A.,
F.R.S




Journal Roy. Soc. N.S.W., Vol XXVIIIIB94.
Plate XXX.
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S.
Australian and Other Stone Implements.




Australian and Other Stone Implements.
J
/
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S.




Australian and Other Stone Implements.
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S








iustralian arid Other Stone Implements.
P
E:\vv
Plate X J
n
m.
|k>-•
K|V' v
tv. •
m;y
. .
A. LIVEKSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S,




Journal Roy. Soc. N.S.W., Vol. XXVIIIIB9J/..
Australian and Other Stone Implements.
Plate
A. Liverstdge, m




Australian and Other Stone Implements.
Plate XXXVI.
A. LIVERSIDGE, M.A., F.R.S.


