

f( X7oit>'i>
\J . Notified in Army O
Croii
57/General/8278.
NOTES ON CONCEALMENT
AND CAMOUFLAGE
1937
(This pamphlet supersedes the 1936 edition)
(Re-printed with the permission of the Controller, His Majesty's Stationery
Otlice, London.)
J
By Authority : 11. J. GREKN, Government Printer, Melbourne.
P. 1126


By Command of the Army Council,
The War Office,
31sf March, 1937.


Note. —Where the instructions in this pamphlet differ
from those in the Manual of Field Engineering, Volumes I
and 11. those in the pamphlet should be followed.
They are primarily intended for conditions in Great
Britain and Western Europe, and may require modification
in the Middle or Far East.
CONTENTS
PAGE
INTRODUCTION 5
PART I
SEC . GENERAL REMARKS
1. Necessity for concealment ... ... ... ... 5
2. Different aspects of concealment ... ... ... 6
INDIVIDUAL CONCEALMENT OR SCOUTCRAFT
3. Individual training ... ... ... ... ... 7
COLLECTIVE CONCEALMENT
4. Concealment of bodies of troops ... ... ... 8
5. Moving objects ... ... ... ... ... 8
6. Colour and disruptive painting of vehicles ... 9
7. Regularity ... ... ... ... ... ... JO
8. Shiny surfaces... ... ... ... ... ... 12
9. Miscellaneous points ... ... ... ... ... 12
CONCEALMENT AGAINST THE AIR CAMERA
10. Importance of air photography ... ... ... 12
11. How objects photograph ... ... ... ... 13
12. Concealment with natural materials ... ... 14
13. Covers ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
14. Painting ... ... ... •... ... ... 14
15. Concealment of trenches ... ... ... ... 16
PART II
16. General ... ... ... ... ... ... 16
17. Natural methods ... ... ... ... ... 16
(i) Unnecessary exposure ... ... ... ... 17
(ii) Use of ground ... ... ... ... ... 18
(iii) Use of vegetation ... ... ... ... 20
(iv) Conspicuous objects ... ... ... ... 22
(v) Use of backgrounds ... ... ... ... 24
(vi) Use of shadow ... ... ... ... ... 25
(vii) Concealment of parapets ... ... ... 26
(viii) Avoidance of straight lines ... ... ... 27
P. 112 6 -2.
3


SEC. PAGE
18. Artificial methods ... ... ... ... ... 28
(i) Weapon pits ... ... ... 28
(ii) Net and support for lighter weapons ... ... 28
(iii) Anti-tank gun ... ... ... ... ... 29
(iv) O.Ps. ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
(v) Loopholes ... ... ... ... ... 29
(vi) Artillery ... ... ... 31
(vii) Blast marks 31
(viii) Vehicles .., 33
(ix) Tracks ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
(x) Smoke and lights ... ... ... ... 34
19. Some “ do’s ” and " don’ts ” 34
Appendix I. Items for an elementary demonstration 36
„ 11. Details of materials 37
4


NOTES ON CONCEALMENT
AND CAMOUFLAGE
INTRODUCTION
This pamphlet is divided into two parts.
Part I is intended primarily for officers, and deals with the
principles of concealment and its wider aspects.
Part II is intended primarily for N.C.Os. and men, and
deals with the more elementary principles and details which
should be common knowledge to all ranks of the Army. .
" CONCEALMENT IS A MATTER OF COMMONSENSE
AND OF GOOD DISCIPLINE ”
PART I
GENERAL REMARKS
1. Necessity for concealment
Concealment is a primitive instinct. Among wild
creatures and uncivilised peoples it is an automatic habit,
because on its success depends the individual’s very existence.
But in the civilised world the need for concealment has dis-
appeared.
The modem town dweller has not only lost the habit;
he is to a great extent ignorant of the method. War revives
the need for concealment. The soldier must be able to hide
himself if he is to have any chance of surprising his enemy
and if he is to prevent the latter from making full use of his
weapons.
All ranks, from the day when they join, must, therefore,
be made to realise the importance of avoiding recognition, not
only by enemy ground and air observers, but also by detection
in enemy air photographs.
There need be no mystery about concealment. Any
mystery in the past is probably due to a too general use of
the term " camouflage,” which is really applicable only to a
particular form of concealment and, not being properly


understood, has tended to confusion. Certainly concealment
is an art, and like every other art reaches perfection only
through much practice.
Nevertheless its essentials are those which are learnt by
children playing hide and seek. They are what was later
included in the term scoutcraft, which really comprises what
the soldier as an individual must know and practice if he is
to escape detection by the enemy. He must of course keep
this scoutcraft up to date against modern methods of observa-
tion. Nowadays it is not only the human eye that has to be
guarded against, but also the longer ranging, more penetrating
field glasses and telescope, and to some extent observation
from above ground as well as on it.
Concealment does not end with the individual; it is equally
important to conceal bodies of troops, weapons, vehicles,
works of defence, depots, bivouacs and all other signs of mili-
tary activity that may give the enemy information of value.
These collective aspects of concealment have never been
instinctive like individual concealment. They are to a great
extent commitments resulting from the advent of the air
arm, and to the danger from the ground must now be added
the danger from the air observer and the air camera.
With its wide field and detailed accuracy the camera has
undoubtedly made concealment much more difficult, and
occasionally elaborate measures involving considerable
expenditure of time and material will be required for success.
None the less it will be found that the great majority of
cases call only for common sense and judgment. A little
thought, or better still forethought, will almost always
indicate a reasonable course to adopt. But there may not
be the time to think. In face of the fast-moving and wide-
ranging aeroplane collective concealment, to be effective,
must be made an ingrained and automatic habit. This can
only be done by a thorough knowledge of principles and
constant practice and rigid discipline in their application.
2. Different aspects of concealment
From the training point of view concealment is con-
veniently divided into: —
(1) Individual concealment or scoutcraft, and the con-
cealment of weapons and vehicles.
(2) Collective concealment, i.e. the concealment of bodies
of troops, and of units and formations.
(3) Concealment against the air camera.


Similarly the methods to be adopted may be grouped under
the three heads : (a) natural (adapting oneself to the ground
and local vegetation); ( b) artificial (camouflage); and
(c) deceptive (including dummy works, tracks and defences).
Further aids are the adoption of inconspicuous formations
and the dispersion of masses and of vehicles.
Where natural cover exists, it should always be used in
preference to artificial materials. Sometimes, of course,
such natural cover is not adequate and requires supplement-
ing with artificial materials. Or the use of such materials
may be necessary in order to save time.
Again, there will be cases where any means of direct con-
cealment are impracticable and where the desired results
can only be obtained by ruses to make the enemy misinter-
pret what he sees. In many cases, perhaps in most, a
combination of all three means, natural, artificial and
deceptive, will have to be employed.
It must be remembered that concealment does not end
with the erection or occupation of a cover. Carelessness in
the use of the hiding place or failure to maintain it properly
may easily disclose what it conceals. Unnecessary move-
ments, tracks, exposed lights, smoke and indiscriminate fire
at hostile aircraft are some of the faults which lead to dis-
covery. They must be avoided and concealment discipline
must be strictly enforced so that the careless acts of in-
dividuals do not give away the concealment of their com-
rades. Special care is necessary when men are tired.
INDIVIDUAL CONCEALMENT OR SCOUTCRAFT
3. Individual Training
Instruction in this stage should deal with the elements
of the art of concealment. It should aim at instilling into
the soldier the vital importance of hiding himself from the
enemy, and at teaching him how to do this. Except perhaps
for an introductory lecture illustrated with lantern slides or
by a film, the teaching must be practical. A simple demons-
tration to illustrate the possibilities of concealment, such
points as the use and abuse of backgrounds, of light and shade,
and of the usual materials available, etc., is very useful for a
start.*
* See Appendix I for some items which might be included in an
elementary demonstration.


After this troops can only learn concealment by practice,
and, whenever possible, by pitting themselves against
observers, who are absolutely essential if the training is to
be realistic. If men are really to use shadows, crawl, deck
their helmets with vegetation and darken their faces and
hands with soil and generally do their utmost to escape
notice, there must be observers for them to outwit.
Further details are given in Part 11.
COLLECTIVE CONCEALMENT
4. Concealment of bodies of troops
Concealment of the individual is primarily a matter of
hiding from the ground observer. Concealment of the
weapon is a matter of hiding from both the ground and the
air observer.
In the case of bodies of troops, units and formations,
although concealment against the ground remains just as
necessary in forward areas, the greater danger arises from
the air—chiefly the air observer but to some extent, and
increasingly so as conditions become static, the air camera.
The observer in an aeroplane has an enormous horizon and
cannot concentrate on his whole field of view. More often
than not he will have been given certain definite questions
to answer—are there troops in such and such an area, or signs
of new works, or movement along particular roads ? He flies
over the area in question and, if something catches his eye,
he looks again and more closely and he may, of course, take
a photograph.
Collective concealment therefore implies knowledge of
what is likely to attract an observer’s attention in this way
and of the steps to be taken to avoid so catching his eye.
Movement, colour variations, reflections from shiny surfaces,
regularity of formation, tracks and smoke are some of the
factors which contribute to discovery and which must
therefore be taken into account in planning collective con-
cealment. With a sound knowledge of principles and good
concealment discipline a great deal can be done to defeat the
enemy air observer.
5. Moving objects
Movement is of course one of the first signs to catch the
eye. In fact one of the first principles of concealment is


immobility. There is a chance that almost any stationary
object may remain unseen, but moving objects, whether
personnel or transport, cannot hope to escape notice for
long.
The remedy is to move when possible under cover of
darkness or by covered routes, e.g., through woodlands. It
may also be possible, although generally only to a limited
extent, to make use of shadows. Full advantage should be
taken of them.
Where there is no cover or where the cover is insufficient
to give concealment, all that can be done is to prevent the
enemy from identifying what he sees. This may be done by
moving in packets of irregular sizes and spacing, so that no
clue is given to the identity of the unit as a whole. Where
special vehicles (e.g., artillery, tanks, bridging) are liable to
identification and might thereby disclose something of our
intentions, steps should be taken to mask the identities of
these vehicles by altering their shadows and outlines. (See
Secs. 6 and 18 (viii).)
At night regular spacirig of head and side lights gives M.T.
away.
6. Colour
Against the ground observer and the low-flying aeroplane
colour is important, but it is dangerous to trust to paint
alone. A colouring or combination of colours which is suc-
cessful in the morning may become hopeless later on in the
day when the light has changed. Similarly every change
in landscape would call for a corresponding change in pro-
tective painting and there would be the same difficulties over
seasonal variations.
It is in fact difficult to find a protective colour scheme
which will meet all conditions. But it is quite feasible to
paint protectively for a particular set of conditions and, what
is perhaps equally important, to avoid glaring colours liable
to attract attention from aircraft at low altitudes.
The higher an air observer, the less pronounced becomes
any optical contrast in colours until, at a few thousand feet,
the landscape becomes a study in monochromes. Colour
then loses its value against detection by higher flying aircraft.
The chief use of colour, therefore, is to help, in conjunction
with other aids, in the concealment of large weapons and of
vehicles at rest against the ground and the low-flying air
observer.
9


For this purpose the weapon or vehicle should be " dis-
ruptively ” painted with a design to counteract its shape.
The colour scheme should be quiet, and the patterns should
be on a large scale and bold. The aim should be an effect
which will break up the outline against a variety of back-
grounds.
The most satisfactory colours have yet to be determined,
but experience shows that dirty green (foliage), dirty grey
(tarmac), and dirty yellow (earth) are probably the best for
Europe. Outlining the colours with an edging of black is
waste of effort, and of no value.
The darker colours must predominate above and the lighter
colours below. The design must be carried over the corners
of vehicles and the wheels. The space under the wings should
be painted white.
Oilbound paints reflect the light and should not be used.
The best medium is a matt cellulose, but distempers may also
be used.
Spraying helps to keep a dead matt surface.
It is probable that all army vehicles will be disruptively
painted in the near future.
“ Scenic " painting on screens may be of value against
ground observation, but needs skilled treatment.
The following points require attention for effective con-
cealment by this means :
(i) The outline of the object must be broken up.
(ii) Its edge must not stand in relief against the back-
ground.
(iii) Shadows on the object must be studied and toned to
those on the background.
7. Regularity
Regularity in a landscape is invariably a sign of man.
Regularity of spacing should be particularly avoided.
Battery positions are often given away by the regular spacing
of the guns. However careful their concealment*, it is not
as a rule possible to avoid some indications or mark on an
air photograph and a series of such marks evenly spaced will
invite attention.
Similarly aeroplanes on a landing ground have much more
chance of escaping notice if scattered round the perimeter
rather than neatly grouped.
Camps and bivouacs must not be laid out on straight


Disruptively-painted vehicles.
11


lines but with studied irregularity and, when possible, amongst
bushes or broken ground, which help to obscure the outline.
Parapets should not be “ smoothed down " but should be
rough and broken in outline.
8. Shiny surfaces
Reflections from shiny surfaces have always to be guarded
against. They may easily nullify the value of otherwise
excellent concealment. It is not only the obvious reflect-
ing surfaces such as lamps, mirrors and any other bright
parts that have to be dealt with but all other portions
that reflect light. The seats of touring cars, for instance,
reflect a great deal of light and hoods should therefore be
kept up. Windscreens should not be folded down.
9. Miscellaneous points
Use the shadows in woods and pay attention to the colour
and shape of the background.
Camouflage must not prevent the effective use of weapons.
In this connection, provided that an adequate field of fire
can be obtained, the field of fire should be subordinated to
concealment. It is useless to have a wonderful field of fire
if your weapons are discovered and put out of action.
Supports for camouflage coverings give greater freedom to
personnel, and more effective use of weapons.
Make use of natural depressions, ditches and other accidents
of ground, but avoid conspicuous landmarks.
CONCEALMENT AGAINST THE AIR CAMERA
10. Importance of air photography
In forward areas during mobile operations the human
observer, either on the ground or in the air, is a greater
danger than the camera. But in rear areas, and in forward
areas when static warfare sets in, concealment measures have
to be directed primarily against the air camera.
Under favourable photographic conditions the air camera
can obtain far more detailed and more accurate information
than any observer, provided that detailed examination of
the photographs by interpretation experts can be made. This
of course takes time.
Moreover the air photograph interpreter relies largely on
the comparison of photographs taken at intervals of days


or longer periods so as to detect new work, progress of works,
changes in position, etc. The chief value of such inter-
pretation work is naturally greatest against rear areas and in
static warfare.
11. How objects photograph
The form of any object is built up of varying planes of
light and shade. The camera records all and any contrast
in the tone of objects; it also records all shadows, which
then betray the objects casting them.
Therefore every endeavour must be made to avoid one’s
shadows being cast where they can be detected, or to
neutralize them by shadow sheets (see Sec. 18 (viii)), if they
cannot be avoided. *
Although there are no colours in a photograph, colours are
translated into tones of black, grey and white. The tone of
an object depends much more on its liability to reflect light
than on its colour. The texture of a surface must therefore
be considered, and for camouflage purposes the rougher
surfaces, either of material or paint, are infinitely preferable
to smooth ones, since they do not reflect light.
The various features in the countryside have different
tone values in air photographs, and they vary from very light
for concrete to very dark for growing gorse. The list below
shows the grading from light to dark.
(i) Smooth non-light absorbent surfaces :
(a) Concrete ; (6) roads ; (c) plough ; (d) fallow.
(ii) Textured light absorbent surfaces :
{e) Short grass : (/) long grass ; (g) crops ; (A) trees ;
(;) gorse and heather.
In estimating the tone, of any growth or vegetation, it will
be necessary to consider the shadows and amount of soil
to be seen from above. These various factors should be
borne in mind in selecting sites for the dispositions of one’s
unit and the approaches to them. They may help to avoid
siting a post or making tracks in fields where they will stand
out conspicuously, while more suitable cover exists close at
hand.
* Note: A good photograph taken in the early morning or late
afternoon will often reveal more than photographs taken at other
times.


12. Concealment with natural materials
More often than not intelligent siting and clever use of
natural features give far better concealment than is possible
with artificial material, Moreover transport for large
quantities of the latter may not always be forthcoming. It
is most important therefore that the soldier should be taught
to use his common sense and ingenuity and not to place too
much reliance on articles of store.
Hay and grass are useful for threading into netting and, so
used, make a very good texture ; knotted to a net they form
projections which catch light and can be used in this way to
eliminate shadows.
7ar used on smooth surfaces with hay added produces
depth of tone.
Branches and foliage are most useful for direct concealment
and in trenches to give a shadow effect and create an appear-
ance of greater depth than in fact exists.
Broken turf creates shadows in the sunlight, but the effect
varies with the light, not being very marked on a dull day or
when the light is very much overhead.
The fact that sub-soil is different in tone from surface soil
has to be remembered, and in all work of concealment the
top soil should be preserved and replaced at the end so as to
reproduce the original tone.
13. Covers
Wire and fish netting are the foundations of practically all
overhead covers. The latter is more portable but less
durable. Its use in small sizes is described in Sec. 18 (ii);
larger sizes may be garnished in the same fashion and used
similarly over larger objects.
Wire netting has the advantage for artillery purposes that
it can cover larger areas without intermediate supports. It
is, however, difficult to carry and handle (see Sec. 18 (vi)).
Fish netting is inflammable, but can be readily treated
with “ Kutch” and made fireproof.
14. Painting
Painting can be of great assistance, particularly in static
warfare or when there has been time for previous preparation.
It is chiefly an “ anti-eye " medium and only to a lesser
degree “ anti-camera." It is employed under the following
conditions:—


(o) Vertical and oblique from the air :
The general tone of the uncultivated landscape is
dark and any light tone attracts the eye. Therefore
paint the tone of things dark so that the airman’s
curiosity is not aroused to make him use his camera,
which will not be deceived.
(b) Horizontal:
It is easier to deceive ground observers by paint,
particularly by the use of painted backgrounds to
avoid silhouettes.
There are two methods of treatment: (a) scenic, when a
picture of the background is painted on the object; (b) dis-
ruptive, when masses of contrasting colours are painted to
contradict the shape of the object.
The character of the setting must be studied and imitated
closely.
To destroy the shape of an object, the edges must be
treated. Study the orientation of the object; if the enemy
is in the east, the object will appear in sunlight in the morning
and in the shadow in the afternoon—so a compromise in the
painting must be effected. Moving objects (M.T. trucks,
etc.) can only be treated with designs to contradict their
shape. (See Sec. 6.)
Patterns for disruptive painting for general purposes
should be on a large scale.
Three or four masses (green, brown, yellow, grey), are
generally sufficient.
Use distempers or matt cellulose rather than oil paints,
as the varnish in the latter destroys the tone value and
becomes most inflammable in dumps.
DISTEMPERS GENERALLY USED
(A) MOCHA, (One gallon of water, one pound of size,
half a pint of boiled oil, to be boiled together on the
day before and the pigments then added) for earth
and soil.
(B) BRUNSWICK GREEN
YELLOW OCHRE / For S rass and S reen foliage.
Note. —Brushes must not be left uncleaned after use. If
there is not time to clean them, stand them in a bucket of
water.


15. Concealment of trenches
Trench systems cannot be directly concealed and deception
must be resorted to instead. The most satisfactory method
is by presenting the enemy with a continuous system alike in
all its parts so that he cannot pinpoint centres of resistance or
discover the organisation of the defence. Such a system is
likely to take time to materialize and, if it has been developed
regularly, as for instance by expansion from section posts,
the enemy will have opportunities for discovering the organisa-
tion during the early stages of the work. It is most
important, therefore, that from the very start there should
be digging at places other than those to be actually occupied.
The crawl trench method of rapidly connecting up the
occupied and dummy weapon-pits throughout the system,
which is described in the new edition of Infantry Training
(shortly to be issued), has for its chief object the defeating
of the enemy air or ground observer in this way.
PART II
"AT ALL TIMES, THINK HOW YOU CAN
OUTWIT THE ENEMY ”
16. General
The succeeding sections outline some of the* elementary
principles of individual concealment and suggest methods
by which the man and his vehicle and his weapons may be
concealed.
Remember first to make use of natural cover and vegeta-
tion, and, if these do not suffice, to supplement them by
artificial ( i.e ., camouflage) methods.
Remember also that good concealment can be ruined by
carelessness and poor discipline—unnecessary movement,
tracks, smoke, lights, shining equipment, etc.
17. Natural methods
The diagrams in this section show ways of making the
best use of natural cover, and the effects of stupidity and
carelessness.


(i) Don’t expose yourself needlessly —where natural cover exists, use it.
17


(ii) Learn to make the best use of the ground and how to
improve matters by hiding conspicuous parts of
yourself, e.g., your helmet, with grass or other
vegetation.
On the edges of woods and in undergrowth, use
branches.
On heaths and in fields, use the growth of the
immediate surroundings.
On bare soil, rub soil on the face, shoulders and
hands.
Note. —For attachment of vegetation helmets should be
fitted with a wire or a rubber band.
3-inch safety pins are also useful for fixing vegetation to
clothing.




(iii) Don't make yourself conspicuous by moving vegetation, etc., to places where
none exists.




(iv) Conspicuous objects and features such as a solitary tree or bush, isolated building
or rick should be avoided even if they give concealment, as they usually invite fire.




(v) Study and make intelligent use of backgrounds.


(vi) Remember that the direction of the light alters the value of a background.
Make the most of shadows.


(vii) Always conceal the parapet of your weapon pit, and if possible cover the top. Turf,
roots ( e.g ., tu rnips), branches, netting garnished with foliage or with coloured raffia,
or even a garnished ground sheet, may be used effectively. Remember that vegeta-
tion changes its colour as it withers ; in hot weather frequent replacements are likely
to be necessary. The concealment must match the surrounding ground or vegetation.


(viii) Avoid straight lines where these do not exist naturally. Remember that walking
round your weapon pit will make a track, which will show as a white ring to the
air, and give you away.


18. Artificial methods
(Details of materials are given in Appendix II.)
This section gives details of methods by which weapons
and vehicles can be concealed.
Remember that " camouflage ” material is not enough by
itself. It must be used intelligently in combination with
natural vegetation, and must blend into its surroundings.
(i) Weapon pits and M.G. emplacements.
A weapon pit or emplacement is not a large object and,
in suitable country and given the time, a great deal can be
done to conceal it from both ground and air observation.
Siting will play the chief part in this, of course, and, com-
bined with a skilful use of local yegetation, etc., produces
results which can be very effective.
Amongst vegetation it is most important to conceal the
excavated earth, because its contrasting tone is very notice-
able.
The proper concealment of a weapon pit usually adds very
considerably to the time required for digging it. This
additional time may not always be available and it will
frequently happen too that, although there is material to hand
for covering the parapet, it is more difficult to find anything
to cover the pit itself. For these cases the use of covers
such as are described below may be necessary.
If digging at night, camouflage before daylight.
Remember to save turves in grassland, and the top soil
in ploughland, to put on your parapet.
Make your parapet bullet-proof, but make it irregular.
Do not smooth it down.
(ii) Individual camouflage net and support for the lighter
supporting weapons.
Small covers, for use over machine guns, mortars and single
weapon pits, are best made of fish or cricket practice netting.
The mesh should be square and 1£ to 2 inches across.
Suitable sizes for the nets are 8 feet by 5 feet for weapon
pits, L.As. and A/T rifles and 14 feet by 14 feet for M.Gs.,
mortars and Bren guns on tripods.
Experience shows that small arms fire does not ignite such
nets, particularly if they have been treated with ** Kutch.”
The nets will require garnishing, which can be done with
local vegetation or with coloured raffia. If the nets are
carried ready garnished with raffia, green*on one side and
brown on the other, they can be brought into use without


delay, additional local material being added later as re-
quired.
The garnishing, whether of vegetation, raffia or other
material, must be applied carefully, rather thinly towards the
edges and more thickly about the centre.
It will be found that the usual tendency will be to too much
garnishing. This should be guarded against, as it tends to
make the cover look like a dark blob, and so conspicuous
both to ground and air observers.
The smaller covers can be used without any support, being
pegged down across the hole or simply laid across the object
to be concealed. The edges of the cover should be ruffled
and not straight.
Some form of support is necessary for the larger
(14 feet xl4 feet) covers. This not only makes conditions
much less cramping for those underneath, but probably also
improves the concealment value. Sticks and branches, found
locally, can be used, or special made-up supports can be
carried.
As an example of the latter type the wire " spider " shown
on page 30 has many advantages, being quickly erected,
adaptable in shape and showing no straight lines, whilst at the
same time being reasonably light and compact for transport.
(iii) A/T gun.
For the A/T gun a somewhat larger cover and a support
which can revolve with the gun will be wanted. A net about
14 feet by 14 feet, supported by an umbrella-like frame of
J-inch wire carried in a socket on the gun shield, may prove
suitable.
Pending the production of a device of this kind, the net
and " spider ” should be used.
(iv) O.Ps.
Small O.Ps. should make use of natural methods, supple-
mented, if necessary, by a garnished net.
For artillery O.Ps., where elbow-room is ‘required, the
14 feet by 14 feet net and " spider ” will be necessary.
If using natural cover, be careful of your background. A
white face or a head against the skyline will give you away.
(v) Loopholes.
A loophole should not be rectangular, and must not show
the daylight behind. A piece of removable copper wire




gauze painted to match the surrounding ground or brickwork
will disguise a loophole at quite close range.
(vi) Artillery.
The concealment of guns is difficult. Some form of over-
head cover is essential in the open against air observation.
Ground observation can be avoided by siting batteries, if
possible, in places not overlooked by the enemy.
Guns must be irregularly spaced or they will attract the
attention of the air observer.
The best form of camouflage for guns has not yet been
determined.
Nets of light rope or strong cord (3-inch to 4-inch square
mesh) can be used, or wire netting of large mesh. In both
cases, a lighter net to 2-inch mesh) can be super-
imposed over the gun itself.
Garnishing is necessary, but not too much, and an artificial
material such as raffia is probably the best. (See Appendix
II.)
Netting should come down to the ground, to eliminate
shadow. Hence for one gun a net 36 to 40 feet square will be
required.
On the other hand wire netting is very difficult to transport
and to handle.
Supports for netting may be of local material, wooden
pickets or of gas or half-inch water piping. They should
not be too high, to reduce shadow effect. A form of light
umbrella, for use with a net is now being tried.
A form of cover, utilizing wire netting, is shown on
p. 32.
(vii) Blast marks.
Blast marks are not produced on operations in peace and
are therefore not thought of. They form fan-shaped white
patches and are very conspicuous from the air. No complete
concealment for blast marks has yet been found and investiga-
tion is continuing.
They can be partially hidden by sheets of J-inch mesh
expanded metal pegged down in an irregular patch in front
of each gun. One thickness resembles thin grass, two
thicknesses fairly long grass and three thicknesses long
grass.
A lighter form of concealment is a garnished net, but this
can only be used wheq the gun has ceased firing.




(viii) Vehicles.
Vehicles on the move cannot be concealed, unless they
move under cover of darkness or through wooded country.
At rest, however, it is quite possible to conceal vehicles,
except in very open country, when they must be scattered.
Concealment must be achieved by a combination of
methods. Neither disruptive painting nor the use of
garnished nets will by itself achieve the object.
Firstly, make full use of natural cover—trees, the edges of
woods (on the shadow side), hedges, etc., etc. Disruptive
painting will help to melt the outline of the vehicle into the
background.
Then apply nets to cover exposed parts of the vehicle, and
garnish with local vegetation. Nets as described in
Sec, 18 (ii), may be used.
Lastly, remember the shadow of the vehicle. This may
be neutralized by the use of “ shadow-sheets.” These are
sheets of canvas scrim or hessian (6 feet by 6 feet), painted
green one side, for use on grass, and brown the other side,
for use on other surfaces. They are laid " ruffled ”to break
up the edges of the shadow.
Small vehicles, such as two-seater cars, can carry garnished
nets,(or scrim covers in the desert) sufficiently large to cover
them completely, but the use of a cover of this type in the
open, without the assistance of natural cover, may not
deceive the air observer. '
Remember that a vehicle may be given away by its
shiny surfaces—windscreen, lamps, glass, etc.—and cover
them. Windscreens should not be lowered, if uncovered.
In movement the hoods of open cars should always be up,
to prevent reflection from the seats.
Light brooms are useful for wiping out wheelmarks in the
vicinity of concealed vehicles.
(ix) Tracks.
Tracks are the surest ihdications of activity and, in static
warfare especially, give more information regarding the
movement of troops and war material than any other photo-
graphic sign. In mobile warfare it is not so necessary to
maintain strict track discipline, but as a matter of training
all ranks should avoid the formation of tracks.
Tracks are very conspicuous and, where they must be made,
they should be foreseen. Use should then be made of dummy


tracks, which will lead past the real H.Q. or other position to
a dummy one, to confuse the enemy.
If possible, tracks should be led along the edges of fields,
hedges, etc.
No short cuts should ever be allowed, and no man should
walk alongside a track and thus make it broader.
Avoid also walking round an emplacement or weapon pit.
A track will form rapidly and give you away by showing a
white ring to the air.
(x) Smoke and lights.
By day, smoke, a*nd by night, lights, may reveal the fact
that an apparently unoccupied area is being used by troops.
Strict discipline is essential to avoid this tell-tale evidence,
and all buildings and structures where lights are used at
night must be carefully examined for windows and other
openings through which the lights might show to enemy
aircraft.
Such openings must be closed with opaque material.
The importance of adequate preventive measures from the
start cannot be over-emphasized, because, once the enemy’s
suspicions are aroused, concealment becomes more and more
difficult.
The possibility of night reconnaissance by aeroplanes with
flares must be remembered.
19. Some “do’s” and “ don’ts”
(i) DO use your commonsense to outwit the enemy.
DO avoid the skyline.
DO make use of natural cover, ditches, hedges, edges
of woods, folds in the ground, etc.
DO avoid conspicuous landmarks.
DO keep in the shadow, and remember that the shadow
moves.
DO scatter in the open.
DO approach an occupied position (M.G. post, etc.)
under cover.
DO avoid all straight lines or regular spacing. There
is no such thing in nature.
DO remember that anything unusual catches the eye
of the air or ground observer. Try to resemble your
background.
DO garnish carefully by using the vegetation in the
immediate neighbourhood and putting it in just as it
is growing round about.


DO remember to renew dead vegetation.
DO keep turves or topsoil, when digging, to use on the
parapet.
DO camouflage before daylight, if digging at night.
DO paint boldly, if you have to. Finicky patterns
are useless.
DO cover lighted windows or openings at night.
DO have a sandbag behind your head when looking
through a loophole.
DO take extra care when tired.
(ii) DON’T be careless and give away your comrades.
DON’T look up at an aeroplane.
DON’T expose yourself needlessly.
DON’T move unless you have to; then think first
how you can move under cover.
DON’T expose a white face or hands against a dark
background. Rub them with earth.
DON’T use artificial camouflage, if natural methods
of concealment are available.
DON’T use vegetation unnaturally, e.g., by moving a
bush to the middle of a ploughed field (but you
may leave it unoccupied to draw the enemy’s
attention).
DON T garnish nets too thickly ; thin out garnishing
towards the edges.
DON’T smooth down the parapet by patting it.
DON’T walk round your camouflage point and make a
track.
DON’T walk straight up to occupied positions, and
make a track, or give them away to a ground observer.
DON’T take short cuts over the open; keep to the
hedges.
DON’T expose lights or make a great deal of smoke.


APPENDIX I
SOME SUGGESTED ITEMS FOR AN ELEMENTARY
DEMONSTRATION
In every case an “ uncamouflaged ” exhibit should be
shown alongside for comparison.
A. The man in the open.
1. A rifleman, preferably on the skyline, with foliage
in his steel helmet and mud on the backs of his
hands.
2. A rifleman lying in plough, or against turned earth,
clothed with suitable " overalls ” — e.g., a canvas
suit or sandbags stained with mud.
3. A series of riflemen lying in the open clothed in " over-
alls” of fish netting garnished with raffia, canvas
strips, etc.
B. The weapon pit.
4. Three pits, all to the,dimensions of that in the Manual
of Field Engineering, Volume I, Plate 23. Ist pit,
no effort at concealment ; 2nd pit, sods carefully re-
moved when digging started and replaced on the
parapet on completion— i.e., concealed from ground
observation ; 3rd pit as 2nd and in addition the
excavation covered with vegetation, etc., i.e.,
concealed from the air.
C. The Machine gun.
5. A series of guns (with crew) under different types of
cover, supported in a variety of ways.
6. A L.M.G. on A.A. mounting disguised with natural
vegetation to look like a young tree.
By Authority; H. J. Green, Govt. Printer, Melbourne,


material
description
SOURCE OF
SUPPLY
USES
SUPPORTS —
In principle straight lines should be avoided. Local timber or branches can sometimes be used.
Plain wire.
Wire, galvanised, iron, S.W.G.
No. 14.
Ordnance.
All general purposes. Fixing garnishing to helmets.
Bullock wire.
do. S.W.G. No. 6.
do.
Construction of “ spider ” support.
Pipe.
Conduit, E.L.
Water pipe J in.
Gas piping.
do.
or
local purchase.
Supports over larger areas.
Struts generally.
COVERS.—As
Pa
s
a general rule it is a mistake to cover weapons, etc., too thoroughly.
tcbes of light should be allowed to get through; hence the advantage of garnished netting over canvas ground
heets, etc.
Fish or cricket
practice net-
ting.
14-in. or 2-in. square mesh
string netting.
(4-in. mesh cord netting for
artillery hnd large covers).
Local purchase.
Foundation for garnishing for all types of cover. Can be mounted
on supports, fixed on articles (e.g., vehicles) or worn as overalls.
Treatment with “ Kutch ” makes it non-inflammable and
increases resistance to wear.
Suitable sizes :—
Individuals, L.As. and A/T. rifles. S ft. X 5 ft.
M.Gs.; mortars, Bren guns on tripod. 14 ft. square.
A/T guns. 14 ft. square.
Field guns. 36—40 ft. square.
Small nets pack neatly in a sandbag.
Rabbit net-
ting.
Wire netting gauge 1-in. to
2-in. (larger gauge for artil-
lery).
Ordnance or local
purchase.
Similar to fish netting. Less adaptable and harder to handle, but
more durable.
Canvas.
Hessian canvas.
Ordnance.
Closely woven and therefore light reflecting. Shows up from the
air, if unpainted. Can be laid to imitate tracks, paths, etc., or
laid in cast shadows to reduce them. Can be cut into strips,
say, 12 in. by 2 in., dyed and used for garnishing.
Scrim.
Canvas scrim.
do.
Loosely woven and more light absorbent than canvas. Shows up
from the air, if unpainted. Painted or dyed in irregular patches
is effective as a cover, particularly in dull weather. Can be cut
into strips for garnishing as for Hessian.
Expanded
metal.
Expanded metal mesh J-in.
to 1-in.
do.
Covering blast marks. One layer for short grass, two for fairly
long grass and three for long grass. No painting required.
Wire gauze.
Copper wire gauze.
Local purchase.
To cover apertures or loopholes.
GARNISHING.—A basis of artificial material, completed with natural vegetation, is probably the best method.
Canvas and
scrim.
See above.
•
Raffia.
Raffia (gardeners’ bast)
coloured.
Local purchase
(inflammable).
Ordnance (non-
inflammable).
May be fixed in three main ways—
(i) Threaded through its foundation—a quick method.
(ii) Cut into 6-in. lengths and tied to its foundation with a
thurnbknot, giving a light tone and
(iii) Cut into 6-in. lengths and looped into the foundation, giving
a dark tone.
Paint.
Distemper or matt cellulose.
Ordnance or local
purchase.
For general purposes.
Oil bound paints reflect the light and are useless.
Netting, canvas, raffia, etc., can easily be rendered fireproof for service. For training the commercial (inflammable) type is adequate.
P H2$~3 Aurhorit - v: H Uovt. Primer, Melbourne.
APPENDIX II
SOME ARTIFICIAL MATERIALS SUITABLE FOR TRAINING PURPOSES
37


