

NOTES ON THE ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA.
JOHN F. MANN.




Notes on tlie Aborigines of Australia.
By John F. Mann.
[Read before the Geographical Society of Australasia, Sydney.']
My object in compiling these notes on the “ Aborigines of
Australia” is for the purpose of placing on record such of their
manners and customs as have from time to time come under my
personal observation. They include, amongst other things, a
detailed account of their mode of constructing and using their
implements of war and of chase.
The subject of their origin, as to whether they are descended
from Shem, Ham, or Japhet, has been so ably discussed in the
paper which obtained the premium of .£25 presented by the Royal
Society, Sydney, that I shall not touch upon that matter here.
My acquaintance with these natives commenced more than forty
years ago, at a time when they were comparatively numerous.
Since then I have had many opportunities of noticing their habits
in this as well as in the neighbouring Colonies.
The habits and general appearance of the aborigines who occupy
the whole of this vast country differ very little from each other,
and this difference may be attributed to the nature and position
of the particular tract of country they occupy. Thus, it may be
readily supposed that the inhabitants of the coast districts, which
consist principally of high, precipitous, heavily timbered ranges
intersected by deep ravines, and which include extensive salt-water
rivers, lakes, and inlets, abounding in all kinds of game and fish,
would be afforded greater opportunities for the exhibition of their
skill and ingenuity in obtaining supplies than their brethren who
occupy the vast level, arid, and often scantily timbered country of
the interior.
Though in many instances separated hundreds of miles from
each other, several of the customs of these tribes are almost
identical, and I therefore conclude that these aborigines sprang
from one common source or tribe, and have descended through a
course of many years to their present low standard.
I am inclined to believe that the original stock was much
superior to the present race, for I have noticed that, low as these
blacks are supposed to be in the social scale, there are instances
where a superior intelligence and good feeling occasionally crops out.
12 a 15—84


In tlieir native state their wants are few. Their shelter con-
sists of a few hastily constructed “ gunyahs ” or huts, and their
covering of rugs or cloaks made of the skins of the opossum or
native hear. Their usual state is perfectly nude. They readily
accept any old clothing, any single article of which they consider
as full dress. The first time I saw Queen Gooseberry, the widow
of King Bungaree, she had little on beyond an old straw bonnet.
Three men, who had been engaged on a farm, arrived to fulfil
their contract, having one boot, an old cravat, and a waistcoat
between them. This clothing, whatever it may be, is worn in
turn by each one of the tribe, and soon becomes, as may be sup-
posed, unwearable. The Government supply all those within the
police districts with blankets once a year.
Gunyalts or huts.
The huts are put together only on the approach of rain or during
cold, windy weather. They are readily constructed. A sapling
is cut half through at the height of 3 or 4 feet and the top bent
over so as to rest on the ground, or in a forked stick, or against a
tree, according to circumstances ; thus it forms a ridge pole along
which boughs or sheets of bark are ranged ; a shelter for the night
or protection from a storm is provided in a few minutes. When
shelter of a more permanent character is required greater care is
taken. The ridge pole is often supported on forked sticks, or the
gunyah partakes of a semicircular form. A fire always occupies
the lee side of the hut, which is never completely enclosed. When
lined with dried grass and the crevices stopped up to keep out the
cold wind they appear comfortable enough. They never keep up
very large fires, so it often happens on a cold night when a black
is too lazy to replenish it that he eventually coils himself up upon
the warm ground where the fire had been. A sudden change of
wind will destroy a whole encampment in a few minutes.
Obtaining fire.
My first desire on making their acquaintance was to be shown
the way to obtain fire by the friction of two sticks. Although
lucifer matches had greatly superseded this primitive method, the
art was not lost and was frequently practised by them. I was
particularly anxious on this point, as at a series of lectures de-
livered by the late Professor Paraday, I heard that great philoso-
pher say that he had never succeeded in the attempt, nor had he
ever heard of a white man being successful. My blackfellow pro-
cured two pieces of grass-tree ( Xanthorrhcea ) about 18 inches long ;
then cutting a notch about the size of a shilling in the side of one
piece, and laying it firmly on the ground, he inserted the end of
the other piece in this notch, and by giving it a drilling motion


between bis bands, bored a bole completely through it, the spark
being caught upon some dry inflammable bark previously placed
to receive it.
This operation requires much care. The friction must be con-
stant, as the slightest cessation causes the charcoal to become cold.
Pressure also is necessary whilst drilling, and in order to prevent
the hands from slipping and thus breaking the contact whilst
replacing them, they should be supported in the ends of a loop of
string passed over the top of the stick.
In those parts of the country where the grass-tree does not grow
other woods supply the place.
In removing from camp to camp a firestick is generally carried
by one or more of the women. Many woods, such as the ironbark,
apple-tree, and others, will, when dry, smoulder away, retaining
fire for a length of time. A large description of fungus which
grows on many of the large trees, has similar properties. I have
seen blacks use the old-fashioned tinder-box, as well as a burning
glass, to obtain a light; these of course were obtained from the
settlers.
Tree-climhmg.
The trees near the coast are gigantic in comparison with those
of the interior, and many of these have to be ascended for the pur-
pose of obtaining much of their supplies. I took an early oppor-
tunity of witnessing the ascent of one of these. I had little
difficulty by the offer of 6d. in obtaining a volunteer. He was a
very old man, his hair and beard white with age. He appeared
very unconcerned about the bargain, which was made by my com-
panion, an old settler, muttering a few words which, of course, I
could not understand. I noticed the movement of what I had
hitherto taken as a pile of filthy blankets, either thrown away as
useless or put aside for the washerwoman. This proved to be the
old man’s wife, who was lying with her head on a still more filthy
bundle about the size of a football. This bundle, or net, as it
really was, she opened and drew forth a still more dirty rag. This
rag when stretched out was supposed to represent a shirt, which
the old man, assisted by his wife, proceeded to put on. On stand-
ing up this old man presented a most extraordinary appearance.
His legs and arms were long, thin, and sinewy, his feet large and
well spread out, whilst his stomach, in consequence of abundance
of kangaroo meat in the camp, was round like a globe. His shirt
did not quite reach to his waist.
The tree which he was about to ascend was a very large one,
a blue gum, with a perfectly smooth barrel, and was estimated at
70 feet to the lowest limb, and measured 20 feet at about 4 feet
from the ground. This old man had been accustomed to the use
of a stone tomahawk, and even now seemed indifferent as to


whether he would use an iron one. He at once fixed upon the
proper side for ascending, then standing close to the tree he cut
two notches about 1 inch or 1| inch deep, one at about the height
of his waist and the other at about the height of his head, not
immediately in line with the first notch, but a little to the right or
left, according to circumstances. These notches were cut by a few
taps of the tomahawk given alternately in a horizontal direction,
and then at an angle of about 45°. This notch was sufficient
to place his great toe in. Standing with the ball of his right or
left foot according to circumstances in the lowest notch he had
cut, having previously cut a small piece out from the side of the
tree, so that he could place the tips of his fingers in to give him a
hold, he cut a third notch at the height of his head : then standing
with his other foot in the second notch he had cut before leaving
the ground he cut a fourth notch at the same height, and so on
until he arrived at the top.
It will be observed that two notches were cut before he left the
ground, and that he only ascended by one at a time. It is
absolutely necessary that the body be kept close to the tree, as
there is little or nothing to hold on by, and the notch affords but
little standing-room, admitting of no bending of the body. By
making the cut about the height of his head, and immediately
in front of him, the climber, by raising his eyes, can see whether
it is properly cut, and at the same time keep his body close to the
tree, for it is necessary that the bottom of the nick be horizontal
and evenly cut. It will be seen that these notches are in two
parallel lines at alternate distances. In descending, the foot is
slid down the side of the tree until the notch is found. The man
generally wears a ’possum-belt, into which he thrusts his tomahawk,
otherwise he holds it in his mouth ; this enables him to use both
hands whilst ascending.
I have witnessed this tree-climbing in many parts of the
country. Some blacks use a long rope of vine, which is obtained
in the dense brushes, passing it round the tree, and holding on by
it as they ascend. In other parts, where the timber is smaller,
slight indentions only of the bark are made.
I cannot call to mind that I ever noticed a black make use of
his knees whilst climbing; they invariably place the sole of the
foot at once on the landing-place, and use their feet like monkeys
in ascending an upright tree or limb. In ascending a tree a
second time fresh cuts are always made, and some trees show four
or five different marks.
On measuring the distance betAveen these cuts or notches on a
tree which bad been felled by sawyers, I found that they did
not vary the fourth part of an inch.


Canoes.
The management of a bark canoe is perhaps as remarkable a
feat as that of tree-climbing.
In constructing a canoe a suitable tree is selected, generally a
stringy-bark. Two horizontal rings are cut round the tree through
the bark, at a distance apart of 8, 10, or 13 feet, and a perpen-
dicular cut down one side enables the whole sheet to be carefully
removed. The rough exterior is pared off, leaving the thin, hard
inside shell. It is then placed over a fire ; this enables the ends
to be gathered up and folded. Sharp sticks like skewers are passed
through these folds, and secured by cords or bands of bark. The
opening of the canoe is preserved by stretchers or sticks placed
across.
Whilst stripping the bark from the tree, the black makes use of
a ladder, formed by cutting notches in a strong forked sapling,
which is leant against the tree.
These canoes support a very considerable load. With a black-
fellow alone they draw but a few inches of water. Being perfectly
round at bottom, having no keel, they overturn with the slightest
movement; yet in these frail canoes I have known blacks to
make wonderful journeys. A settler on the Clyde, many years
ago, engaged a black and his canoe to remove all his effects from
one side of the river to the other. I saw him with a heavy bullock
plough in his canoe. After removing farm implements and fur-
niture, he removed several tons of potatoes, his canoe being but an
inch or two above the water on each trip. One old man, white
with age when I knew him, seemed to have passed his life in one.
He would traverse Lake Macquarie and go out into the open sea;
from this lake he would carry his canoe across the neck of
land separating it from Tuggerah Beach Lake, thence to Brisbane
Water, and cross Broken Bay to Pittwater, and made periodical
visits up the Hawkesbury lliver. He was never without fish in
his canoe, which was often so laden as to be only a few inches
above the water. This old man, “ Jew-fish” by name, eventually
became so cramped that when on shore he could retain no other
position than that which sitting in a canoe compelled him to adopt.
I have also known the blacks at Bateman’s Bay to go out as far as
the Tollgate Islands. They are often pursued by sharks, when
they paddle away for the nearest shore, throwing over as they go
along any fish they may happen to have.
The blackfellow, whilst fishing from his canoe, which he does
by means of a spear, sits on his haunches, his right leg doubled
under him, his left knee drawn up to his shoulder. In his right
hand he carries his “ wammerah” or throwing-stick, formed to
serve as a paddle ; in his left a small piece of flat wood, also as a
paddle, whilst his fishing spear lies across in front of him, ready
for use. On spearing a fish he paddles up to his spear, and


instead of pulling it out at once gives it another thrust in, so as to
ensure its capture. As refraction causes a difference between the
true and apparent position of the fish, great practice is necessary.
They seldom miss their object.
Women also fish from canoes, but with a hook and line ; they
never use a spear. They fix the canoe in position along the edge
of a bank by driving the long pointed stick, which they invariably
carry, into the sand or mud. They then pass one of their arms
round the pole, or tie the canoe to it, so as to steady it. By
means of a flat stone and clay for a hearth, they can light a fire
and cook fish. They are often accompanied by one or more chil-
dren, who have to remain very quiet.
A fishing-spear consists of a grass-tree shaft with four long prongs
of hardwood inserted at one end of it. Sometimes the stem of
the gigantic lily is used, but this is not so strong or so durable as
the grass-tree. The test as to the fitness of the grass-tree for this
purpose is the manner in which it breaks off from the stem of the
tree. It is never cut with a tomahawk, and must not be either
too green or too dry.
In constructing a spear, two splits are made at one end of the
stick, at right angles, and the pith extracted to the depth of 3or
4 inches. This end is then bound round with ribbon-like strips
of bark, obtained from a small shrub or from the kurryjong tree.
The aperture is then filled with grass-tree gum, a resin having
much the appearance of gamboge in its pure state, but as generally
used it is not unlike pitch, in consequence of the effects of exposure
to the smoke of bush fires. Into this, whilst in a soft state, the
four prongs, slightly tapered at the end, are pressed. This has
the effect of forcing much of the gum through the splits and
through the band of bark, when, by holding it near the fire, the
gum is neatly spread over the joints. These prongs, which are
from 15 to 18 inches long, are scraped to a fine point, and barbed
by means of a small splinter of bone fastened to the end. The
four points of this spear form a square about 1 inch or more
apart, and are kept in position by small wedges of wood passed
between the prongs and fastened by bands of ribbon bark. The
pith from the other end of the spear is extracted to the depth of
about an inch, the end is bound with twine, and the whole stopped
with the fine scrapings of hardwood, which serves as a pad for the
hook of the “ wammerah,” or throwing-stick, to press against.
Other grass-tree spears are made in a similar manner, but with
only one prong. In those parts where the grass-tree does not
exist, the spear is made of one long straight piece of wood, which
is cut from the side of a standing tree.
The “ wammerah,” a stick by means of which the spear is
thrown, is about 3 feet long, in shape something like a long-
handled spoon ; the spoon, a rather flat part, being used as a paddle


when fishing from a canoe; at the opposite end a short piece of
stick is fastened so as to form a hook. In throwing a spear, the
broad end of the wammerah is held across the palm of the hand,
with the point of the hook pressing against the pad in the end of
the spear, the spear at the same time being held firmly between
the forefinger and thumb. By the use of this stick, great force
and impetus is given to it, and makes it a much more formidable
weapon than those spears which are made from one piece of wood
and are thrown by the hand as darts. Occasionally these spears
have sharp splinters of quartz or of glass fastened along one side.
Solid spears are frequently made with one or more barbs. In
those parts of the country where the wammerah is not required as
a paddle, they are formed from one stick, the hook being the natural
fork of the branch.
Boomerang.
The boomerang, in the throwing of which these blacks excel,
is a weapon which from its peculiar motion when thrown, has
excited and astonished every one who has witnessed the operation.
It consists of a flat curved piece of wood, and varies in size
from 18 inches to 3 feet or more. It is cut from the natural bend
of a tree, either from the root or branch. A curved block is first
cut from the tree, and then split and scraped down to the required
thickness, the edges being made sharp, and the ends or cusps
rounded. In the hands of a black they are thrown with great ease.
He holds it by one end, the other pointing outwards, then running
a few paces forward to gain impetus, he throws the boomerang as
though he aimed at an object a few degrees above his line of sight.
The boomerang at once assumes a rapid rotary motion and
ascends to a great height, occasionally suddenly taking opposite
directions, or forming a large circle in the air, at times appearing
stationary. After a time it returns rapidly towards the thrower,
who is now in a very dangerous position, and has to keep a sharp
look-out so that he is not struck by it, when assuredly, if not
killed, some of his limbs would be broken. The boomerang
gradually descends to the ground some 30 or 40 yards behind the
thrower, skimming along the surface for some distance. Some-
times the boomerang is made to ascend after having struck the
ground 20 or more feet ahead. All boomerangs do not possess
the quality of rising in the air—it is only the lighter ones of a
particular make and curve which do so. The others are larger
and heavier, and are used by being thrown so as to strike the
ground, when they roll along something like a wheel, with great
rapidity, and will knock over a kangaroo or emu. I once saw one of
these penetrate completely through a kangaroo. Should a boomer-
ang come in contact with an object, if not at once arrested in its
progress, it often flies off at a tangent with undiminished force,
and apparently with no loss of speed.


This remarkable implement has attracted the attention of
many mathematicians. The late Sir T. Mitchell adapted it as a
propeller for steam vessels, but unfortunately did not live to per-
fect his invention.
I have watched every movement most carefully of a blackfellow
whilst throwing one of these weapons, and have received every
explanation which a most intelligent man could afford, but was
never able to master the art of throwing it.
I • noticed that, before throwing, the thrower would give the
boomerang a slight bend. It is evident that if the two points or
cusps are not in the same plane, that the boomerang partakes of the
nature of part of a screw, and acts as such in ascending through
the air ; gradually these points return to the same plane, and
possibly pass it, when it becomes what may be termed a descending
screw. Every change in the position of these cusps must affect
its movements in the air, but this will not account for its rapid
motion, or even the movements, for I have seen a boomerang
thrown at random, on the spur of the moment, and act in a similar
manner.
The boomerang throws better from one end than from the other.
Every blackfellow knows the quality of his boomerang, and will
practise with a new one for a length of time so as to become
familiar with its peculiarities.
These weapons, as well as spears, are thrown with the greatest
ease and grace by a black, and I may here add that all their
movements are graceful and easy.
Tomahawk.
The manufacture of stone tomahawks is a work of considerable
labour, and a good implement is of great value. The beds of
rivers and creeks and other places are searched for suitable stones ;
these require the bestowal of much patience in grinding them
down to a proper shape. I have seen in many parts of the country
rocks scored in all directions by the deep grooves made by this
grinding process ; they work at it incessantly, men and women
taking turn about. These grinding places are invariably sand-
stone rocks with plenty of water close at hand.
Handle.
Fixing a handle to the stone is a work of much trouble. This
is done by bending around the stone a split stick of a particular
description of wood, or by perhaps a dozen small tough twigs twisted
together; this handle is secured by grass-tree gum and twine.
String and twine.
String or twine is beautifully and neatly made. This is gener-
ally the work of the women. It is made of the fine inner ribbon-


like bark of a small shrub, or that of the kurryjong tree. It
consists of two strands only. The twist is given by rolling the
strands with the palm of the hand on the side of the leg, and then
by a peculiar twist of the hand the two separate strands are
allowed to twist together. About a couple of inches of line is
made by each roll of the hand. This string is used for a variety of
purposes, especially for the making of nets, in which all the
worldly goods and chattels of the family are stowed away.
Nets.
The nets made of this string are of various descriptions and
patterns. Some are very closely netted, others have the mesh
much larger and knotted, whilst others are not knotted, and
consequently are very elastic. The size of the mesh is formed
solely by the finger, and are wonderfully regular. In many parts
of the interior very strong nets are made. These are used for the
purpose of securing game, kangaroos, &c. Stretched across a
creek or river, ducks are caught.
Opossum cloaks.
In making opossum rugs or cloaks the skins, after having been
stretched and dried, either before a fire or in the sun, are roughly
trimmed up and sewed together by means of kangaroo sinew. The
edges of the skins are pierced with a sharp-pointed bone for the
sinew to pass through. When a sufficient number of skins have
been sewed together, the next operation is to ornament the cloak.
This is done by doubling a part of the skin a few inches at a time,
and scraping the narrow edge so made with flint or the blade of a
blunt knife. The designs partake of a zigzag or diamond-shaped
pattern, according to the taste of the wearer, and when rubbed
with a little ochre and worn for a time become very distinct.
These cloaks, as well as the blankets, are worn by being passed
under one arm and fastened on the opposite shoulder. This
arrangement allows of freedom to both arms.
Independently of being used for cloaks, the fur, which at certain
seasons readily comes away from the skin, is collected in large
loose bundles and spun into cord or yarn. This is done principally
by the men. A long stout twig with a hook at one end catches
up a portion of the wool, and is then twisted between the thumb
and fingers of the operator’s right hand, whilst the thickness of
the yarn is regulated by his left. The yarn is wound round the
stick as fast as it is made until the stick has as much as it can
cany, when another hook is provided.
Illustrations of a similar process may be seen on paintings of
some 3,000 or more years old.
When a sufficient length of this yarn has been spun, it is
doubled continually until a long thick loop is formed. This is


worn by the men by passing it first round the waist, then alter-
nately oyer each shoulder, and round the neck. In this manner
it has the appearance of both a cross and a waist belt. They
seldom wear more than a roll or two around the waist, in which
they often hang a fringe made of the skins of the opossum, native
cat, or black or white squirrel, cut in strips.
The wool is often spun to a fine even thread, which the settlers
occasionally knit into socks or mittens. These last for a length
of time. It is also netted by the gins into narrow bands, and worn
by the men round their foreheads, coloured either white or red.
In these, as well as in all other manufactures, the blacks will
work incessantly, and when finished will stand or sit in front of
the camp, wearing them, as now described, for the purpose of
attracting attention and of being admired. They possess as much
conceit in regard to these adornments as do their European
brethren; but criticism is silent, though it possibly exists to a
great extent, but solely amongst the men—the women are not
allowed to express any opinion.
Kangaroo sinews.
In order to obtain the sinew from the tail of a kangaroo, the
skin around the second or third joint is cut through, and the
bones disjointed by the teeth ; these loosened joints are drawn
out with all the sinews attached to them. These sinews appear
much like a skein of white silk, and are of great strength.
JEL'air.
The blacks allow their hair to grow very long, and then tie
it in large knots on the top of the head, or otherwise fix it up
with long grass or feathers. One object in adopting this mode is
that during a fight a black is often enabled to receive his opponent’s
blow on this knot, and so protect his skull • though I believe it
to be a matter of impossibility to fracture a black man’s skull
with a waddy.
A strip of the skin of a native dog or other animal is some-
times worn around the head as a fillet, and serves to keep the
hair out of their eyes. The tail of a native dog is often used for
this purpose. It has much the appearance of a fur cap on the
man’s head. They seldom cut their hair, except, I believe, when
mourning for some departed friend. Their beard and whiskers
are often singed by a fire-stick, which is made to serve the purpose
of a razor. They occasionally rub their body with clay or bees-
wax, which tears out the hair by the roots. This custom has, I
imagine, greatly fallen into disuse on account of the pain it causes.
I have seen blacks without a particle of hair, but whether this
denudation was caused by the above operation or by disease I


cannot say. They are very fond of rubbing opossum fat on their
heads, and then comb their hair out by means of a sharp-pointed
bone formed like a skewer.
Tribal fights.
Before coming to blows two hostile tribes will encamp perhaps
for a day or two within talking or shouting distance, generally on
opposite sides of a watercourse. The women and children are
kept in the background, but are ready to join in so far as the
yelling and screaming is concerned. The men keep up an inces-
sant talk during this time; many of them taking it in turn to
walk up and down in an excited manner before their respective
friends, apparently boasting of what they intend to do, or endea-
vouring to inspire them with courage, every now and then spitting
and brandishing his spear towards their opponents. Occasionally
they fasten a small piece of grass-tree gum to the end of a
boomerang, and lighting it, throw it over the heads of their
opponents. This is considered a great insult. When sufficiently
excited, they rise simultaneously, and rush towards each other,
throwing their spears. These for the most part are warded off.
When the spears are exhausted they come to close quarters
with their waddies; but the fight generally winds up by a good
set-to between two warriors who, no doubt, were the originators
of the quarrel. These come to close quarters, and with their
waddies, deal each other fearful blows upon the head, occasionally
varying the performance with a dig in the ribs. They manage to
catch the blow upon the knot of hair, or ward it off with a stout
piece of wood about 15 inches long, narrowed at each end, and
pierced in the middle for a handle. The battle is considered over
when one of these warriors falls.
These fights, owing to their extraordinary dexterity in warding
off spears, are not so fatal as one would imagine ; many wounds
are given, some of them occasionally proving fatal. In some parts
the blacks use a small knife formed by inserting a sharp piece
of quartz or flint into a cleft stick. They use these in a back-
handed manner, and inflict horrible-looking wounds with them.
The shoulders of some of the men I saw looked like a scored leg
of roast pork, though the cuts were not so regularly made. They
seize each other by the left hand, mostly by the hair, and score
each other’s shoulders, the cuts often cutting deeply into the flesh
of the arm. Plies and mosquitoes are ever troublesome, and
these wounds attract the former in numbers, so that every black
carries a wisp of grass which they use incessantly to drive these
pests away.
Punishment.
It frequently happens that a blackfellow for transgressing some
of the laws of the tribe is sentenced by the old men, who pronounce


judgment upon him to undergo the “ ordeal of spears.” The
culprit, who is in a perfectly nude state, is allowed a “ heliman”
or shield, which he holds in his left hand, and either a boomerang
or a piece of wood in his right.
If grass-tree spears are used, he stands perhaps 50 yards away,
but much closer for other kind of spears. He may perhaps be
sentenced to receive twenty to fifty or more spears, according to
the magnitude of his crime. The spears should, I believe, be
thrown one at a time. There may possibly be a dozen men
throwing, but as these spears follow so quickly after each other,
little respite is given to the unfortunate man. The manner in
which he dodges these spears is something marvellous. Many he
receives on his shield, whilst, by jumping and contorting his body,
others pass by him harmlessly. Occasionally they are severely
wounded. On one occasion I saw where the spear had entered a
man’s breast and had come out under his right arm .These punish-
ments occupy but a short time ; but, short as it is, it is quite long-
enough to nearly exhaust the culprit, who appears at the end in
a state of profuse perspiration. A blackfellow who has safely
undergone one of these ordeals is greatly raised in the estimation
of his companions. From his crime, though it be murder, he is
considered absolved.
A “ nullah nullah” is a sort of club, and is made or cut from
the root of a tree ; they vary very much in shape. The handle is
the upright stem. A “ waddy” is cut from a standing tree, and
is a most formidable weapon. A blow by one is very severe.
They are often thrown at animals when hunting. The “ heliman,”
or shield, is an oval-shaped piece of wood about 3 feet long and
perhaps 18 inches broad ; but they vary greatly in size. They
are cut from the standing tree, and are when trimmed down
about three-quarters of an inch thick. They retain the natural
curve of the tree. Two holes are bored in them for the purpose of
inserting a handle. Should the shield split when struck by a
spear of course the man would be wounded, therefore a heliman
which has stood the test of spears is a very valuable acquisition.
A shield with five spears in it was presented to me after one of
these affairs, with a request that I would take great care of it, as
it might be wanted again. After keeping it for some time, and
as it was not called for, I presented it to the Sydney Museum ;
having foolishly cut the points of the spears off, these looked like
so many plugs, lam sorry to say that no trace of this shield can
now be found.
Betrothal.
From what I have been able to learn, verified by other evidence,
I am led to believe that every woman is betrothed at a very early


age, I could never understand the principle upon which this
delicate matter was arranged; it is according to some mysterious
law of their own. Anything approaching to incest is not for a
moment thought of or tolerated ; as every woman is supposed to
marry, a husband is chosen for her either from her own or from
some friendly tribe. I believe this is arranged by the old men,
the women having nothing whatever to say in the matter. The
age of the proposed husband is not taken into consideration, so
that it often happens that by the time a girl is of a marriageable
age her intended is an old man. In the meantime some other
younger men have set their hearts upon her ; this, as in all
similar cases, means fighting, so that in claiming a wife a black-
fellow has to encounter at least one rival. The unfortunate
woman, whilst being dragged away, is certain to come in for a
large share of the blows which the rival suitors deal out to each
other. On these occasions there is great excitement in the camp,
especially amongst the women, who join in with the bride in
uttering loud screeches and yells.
In the coast districts the betrothal of a young woman to a man
who follows the occupation of a fisherman compels her to lose the
first joint of the little finger of her left hand. This operation is
performed by winding around the joint several turns of the strong
cobweb or gossamer which is so frequently met with in the bush.
This is a slow and very painful operation.
On one occasion whilst travelling I saw a black carrying
a woman away on horseback. They turned off the road and
ascended a range when they perceived me. Some hours after-
wards I met another black, and was enabled to give him some
account of this couple so far as I had seen. He claimed the
woman as his wife, and at once continued the pursuit. It appears
that on coming up with the runaways the two men had a desperate
fight; but in consequence, it would seem, that as no members of
the tribe were present to decide the dispute, it was arranged by
them to bring the matter before a Magistrate. Whilst proceeding
to the Court-house a third black, who was encamped close by, saw
and claimed the woman as his lawful wife according to all the
laws of the tribe. In Court the woman acknowledged the truth
of this claim—that she had been given to this man when quite a
girl—but, now he was old and ugly, she could never like him ;
the only man she cared for was the man with whom she was
eloping. The dilemma in which the Magistrate was placed by
these admissions on the part of the woman was removed by a very
ingenious arrangement suggested by the woman herself, the details
of which I now forget, but papers were signed and duly witnessed
on both sides, binding each other over to preserve peace, &c,, for
six months.


Religion.
I could never detect the existence of any form of religion
amongst these tribes—that is to say, a belief in the existence of a
Supreme Being; and I am borne out in this by statements
obtained by many others who have had the opportunity of
earning their habits. They believe firmly in the existence of a
spirit or being whom they call “ devil-devil,” but each tribe has a
name of its own for it. This “devil-devil” is held in great dread
by all, and bears a very bad character among them. He is
thoroughly cruel and vindictive, sparing no one, young or old,
who happen to come within his reach. He is ever on the watch
to entrap any straggler, and whilst he haunts many lonely
places during the day, he is everywhere at night. This devil
has been variously described. He is supposed to have innumer-
able eyes and ears, so as to enable him to see and hear anything
without the trouble of turning his head, &c. ; he runs veiy fast,
and having long sharp claws, few escape his grasp.
One reason given by the blacks for changing their camp so
frequently is for the purpose of evading this amiable spirit. They
think that the “ devil-devil” is certain to discover their position
after a few days, so that by moving off suddenly and making a
rapid journey to a distant part of their domain he will be non-
plussed for a time.
Some very old men have the credit of having had personal
encounters with this fiend and of coming off victoriously. It is
needless to say that these men are held in great reverence by the
younger members of the tribe. Of course this belief is encouraged.
These old men claim the power of controlling the elements, and
will stamp, spit, and harangue some imaginary spirit during a
squall of wind or rain.
Many persons try to persuade themselves that they can detect
the existence amongst these natives of a true religion and a know-
ledge of a Supreme Being, but they forget that these blacks are
extremely shrewd, so that when they perceive the object of the
conversation they readily adapt all that they have been taught on
this subject to their replies.
I have always found that the rigmarole stories which many of
them have told me, and which are supposed to represent their
religious belief, were founded upon the teachings of missionaries
and others.
Mythology of the Aborigines.
A most interesting paper was read before the Royal Society by
Mr, James Manning on “ The Mythology of the Blacks.” The
particulars were obtained from a “ Koradgee” named Andy, of
the Binalong tribe, near Yass, whose confidence Mr. Manning
managed to secure. Mr. Manning’s paper is a verbatim account
as dictated by Andy, and is remarkable in every sense.


According to the statements made by this man, these blacks not
only believe in a God, a Supreme Being, but a Son of God, and a
spirit also. This God dispenses justice from an inaccessible throne,
situated in a sea of crystal, and grants pardons and rewards here-
after to all who believe in him and try not to offend, &c.
If this is a bona-fide account, it shows that these blackfellows
possess a religion which we cannot improve upon, and which it
would be a pity to interfere with. It completely upsets all the
assertions which missionaries and others have made to the con-
trary ; but it appears strange that no similar account of this creed,
almost that of a Christian, should never have been obtained from
any other aboriginal in any part of the country—especially in
those places where missionaries have dwelt for years.
If this statement of Andy prove to be an invention, compiled
from the scraps of religious teaching which either himself or mem-
bers of his tribe may from time to time have gathered together, it
shows a wonderful amount of ingenuity on his part, and a certain
amount of credit should be awarded him.
No argument will persuade them that their women can possibly
enjoy happiness hereafter. Women are, according to their idea,
certain game for the “ Devil-devil,” and the few men who escape
his grasp are supposed to return to this world either as a white
man or as some animal. White men who possess either a mark or
a wound on their bodies, or some peculiarity similar to that of a
deceased blackfellow, are credited with being that same black
“jump up white fellow.” Women are supposed to be wholly be-
yond redemption ; they are not allowed to interfere or to express
any opinion on any so-called religious subject. This is perhaps
fortunate for them, as they avoid many a good beating by keeping
aloof.
I heard a blackfellow, who had received a considerable amount
of religious instruction, but who unfortunately did not live on
very happy terms with his wife, declare that if he could only raise
half-a-crown, so that he could purchase a clean shirt, he would go
straight away to Heaven at once, where he would be out of reach
of all women, especially of his old wife, and so have peace
and quietness, &c. He made a most amusing address, anything
but complimentary to the women, his wife in particular, and kept
a large audience in roars of laughter. He raised the half-crown,
and passed the night in the lock-up.
Education.
These blacks, when taken away at an early age from the tribe,
are capable of receiving a good education, and in this respect
many compare favourably with the whites; but it is a question
whether educating them beyond a certain standard is advisable,
for when they grow up no white person likes to place them on an


equal footing, notwithstanding their learning. At the same time
they have been taught to look upon their parents and relatives as
a degraded lot. The tinge of wild blood which ever flows through
their veins, and which can never be eradicated, crops up at times
and leads their thoughts to their native forests, whilst their
education has tended to made them look with abhorrence upon
such a roving life. Under these circumstances the result has been
unsatisfactory.
The inherent love and natural desire for a life in the bush pre-
vents them from remaining any length of time in one employ-
ment, notwithstanding all the advantages of a civilized life. In
their written agreements as servants, they often stipulate for a
certain number of days in order to visit their tribe. The men are
very useful as shepherds, stockmen, &c., or at shearing-time. The
women are frequently employed in washing and scrubbing ; many
of them learn to do needlework very neatly. In the far interior,
many settlers are wholly dependent on these blacks as domestic
servants. When sent on messages they perform their duty faith-
fully. A letter secured in the end of a cleft stick enables a
man to pass safely through adjoining tribes—he feels proud of
his burden.
Gorrobloree.
The corrobboree or native dance is not, as some suppose, solely
a religious performance ; it really is a sort of play, though much
of their religious teaching has resulted in setting many prayers to
their so-called music. These performances embrace a variety of
subjects. The movements of many animals are imitated; those
dances which represent the movements of the emu and kangaroo
being particularly good and amusing. These blacks are most
observant, and being great mimics, many of the sayings and
doings of the white people are introduced. Thus, men travelling
with their bundles, otherwise “ swagmen,” settlers preparing
dinner, making a damper, police taking a drunken man, &c., are
represented; whilst in the midst of some songs English expressions
maybe detected, such as “Pussycat—mew”; “Bit bread, Jack
Donovan”; “One nobbier, please”; and others. Any peculiarity
in a person, either in manner or speech, is remarked and made a
note of.
These corrobborees take place on level ground, generally at
night-time. Large heaps of dried boughs and leaves are lit so as
to throw a bright light on the dancers, who are arranged in one or
more lines at a suitable distance, their bodies ornamented by
designs in pipelay. They are fond of tracing a line along each rib
and down the legs, rings round the knees and eyes, but the patterns
vary much, according to the dance and taste of the dancer. They
hold in their hands either a spear, boomerang, or waddy, according


to the dance. In front, and facing them stands a man called the
“fiddler, who acts as conductor or leader. He keeps the most
admirable time by beating his boomerang with a piece of stick.
In some of the dances the women are allowed to join, otherwise
they sit around, having opossum rugs rolled up into bundles, which
they beat; they also keep admirable time with the song. One
favourite way of dancing is this: They stand erect, holding in front
of them with both hands their spears or waddies, much in the
same manner as soldiers do when they present arms; they then
spring straight from the ground, extending their knees sideways,
drawing up their legs so that the soles of their feet nearly meet;
they all come to the ground together with a heavy thud; this has
a most remarkable effect. This dance is very severe and fatiguing,
but it is varied by brandishing their weapons and going through
other performances. They commence and cease dancing simul-
taneously—no one man likes to give in before any of his
companions.
Songs.
Their songs consist of a few words constantly repeated, and,
consequently, soon become monotonous. Their intonation is often
very harmonious and agreeable, especially in the song known as
“ Koorinda Bria. ” This song, and several others, were set and
arranged to music by the late eminent composer, Mr. Nathan. I
obtained the words of many of these songs from the blacks, but not
the translation, except for a few which had been composed to
illustrate the doings of some of the white residents.
As an evidence of the wide spread of these songs and dances,
whilst witnessing a corrobboree by a large number of blacks of the
Fitzroy Downs tribe, Queensland, the song was at once recognized
by a Newcastle black who was with me at the time.
Bora.
The ceremony known as “Bora” is universal. It is in operation
all over the country. This ceremony is for the purpose of initiating
young men into all the mysteries of art, war, and their so-called
religion. Before arriving at puberty the life of a young man is not a
happy one. Until initiated by undergoing this ordeal, he cannot
associate freely with those who have; that is to say, he is snubbed
by the older men, whilst he is old enough to look with contempt
upon the women, who are only considered as slaves, and are treated
accordingly. When the novice is considered old enough, he has
to prove his competency by throwing a boomerang or spear, climb
a tree, or in fact do anything he is required to do by the board of
examiners, which consists of the old men of the tribe. The eldest
young man of a family always follows the trade or occupation of
his father, for it must be known that, although every blackfellow


has a general knowledge of all the requirements for a life in the
hush, each man has a specialty of his own. Thus, a man who
spears fish from the hank of a river may he very awkward in a
canoe. Again, a fisherman seldom climbs any but very small trees,
whilst a tree-climber is an indifferent fisherman, consequently
stress is laid upon the particular line of life the young man is about
to follow. The novice has to abstain from food for some time;
in fact, I believe that until initiated he cannot touch certain
animal food, that is the male animal.
The place for holding this ceremony is selected so as to include
a level piece of ground, on which at least two concentric circles are
cut in the turf; but this is not always adhered to—various
designs are made use of. On the Upper Murrumbidgee a narrow
pathway was cut in the turf, which wound about in the most com-
plicated manner, and terminated at a small round space. I was
directed to this spot by a young man who, whilst looking for stray
cattle, came suddenly upon this remarkable meeting of the blacks.
He was in great terror at first, being under the apprehension that
some murder was about to be committed. In the centre of these
sinuosities, there stood the old man, ready to perform his part of
the ceremony. The young man was led by two others, his eyes
cast to the ground, along this pathway, up to the old man, who
delivered an oration of considerable length. This appeared to be
directed to some imaginary person, during which he exhibited
much excitement by stamping on the ground, hissing, shouting, as
though in a great rage with some one, brandishing his tomahawk
and goina; through a lot of antics and gesticulations j then suddenly
turning to the boy, he knocked out one of his front teeth with his
tomahawk. The young man was then led away and allowed to sit
with the other men, and could eat what he chose, or rather what
he could get. On another occasion a young man who followed the
occupation of a fisherman, told me that he was compelled to lie for
two nights on the grave of one of his ancestors, who had also been
a fisherman of some note ] by this means he was supposed to
inherit all the good qualities of his predecessor. Meanwhile others
of the tribe were making preparations by cutting these magic
circles and performing other mysterious acts, the canqo being dur-
ing this time protected from the intrusion of the “devil-devil” by
numerous small fires around it.
Ho translation of the oration given on these occasions has, so
far as I can learn, ever been obtained, nor can I say as to whether
the same words are used by each separate tribe.
The youth has still another ordeal to pass through before he can
be pronounced eligible or capable of taking a wife. Much mystery
is attached to this part of the ceremony, which no black will dis-
close.


Koradgee.
The Koradgee performs a prominent part in this, and has to
certify as to the young man’s competency. Europeans are allowed
to see certain parts only of these ceremonies, and no satisfactory
explanation can be obtained of the remainder. No two blacks
will give the same account; they give the most evasive replies, or
refuse at once to describe anything. I have often thought that
this mystery is really all sham, and that their silence in these
matters is because they have nothing whatever to explain. The
same reserve exists amongst the tribes in all parts of the country.
Possibly there may be some Masonic understanding amongst them.
The Koradgee is an important personage—a sort of medicine
man. He appears to share the authority exercised over the tribe
with the very old men, who are always looked up to with awe, if
not with veneration. He acts as a sort of referee or umpire in
cases of dispute. He professes to cure all diseases and to possess
great influence over the “ devil-devil.” The possession of a rock-
crystal, which he carries about with him, in some mysterious man-
ner acts as a charm and enables him to perform miracles. This
crystal is considered sacred—no woman must look upon it. It is
usually carried in his armpit, rolled up in dirty rags. I ascer-
tained that the stopper of a decanter had similar power. The author
of the paper on “The Mythology of the Aborigines” stated that in
his presence the Koradgee Andy ejected from his mouth a crystal
which he hadconcealed in his stomach, and had the powerof swallow-
ing and bringing up again at his pleasure. A similar process is
mentioned in the prize essay also referred to as being in practice by
the blacks of the Hunter Paver districts. I have remarked that
these men are usually more intelligent than the others—at least
they associate more readily with the white people. They are held
in great respect by the younger members of the tribe. Frequently,
after questioning and receiving replies on many subjects from
these blacks, I have been requested not to tell the Koradgee what
I had heard, or from whom I had received my information. This
led me to suppose that the information was genuine.
The names of children often partake of an abbreviation of that
of the parent, unless something occurs immediately at their birth
of sufficient importance to record by adopting it as a name. The
sight of a bird, insect, or animal supplies a name during minority.
Permanent names.
At the ceremony of the Bora permanent names are given
to the youths, and these are selected for various causes. Should a
young man during his minority distinguish himself either whilst
hunting or fighting, or meet with any accident either serious or
ludicrous, a name in allusion to that circumstance is given at this
time, probably at the moment of knocking out the tooth There


are few left-handed blacks to be found ; one man whom I met
possessing that peculiarity was expressively named in consequence.
The Bora ceremonies occupy some days, and are often attended
by blacks from friendly tribes. They invariably wind up with a
corrobboree. The surrounding trees are deeply marked by various
patterns, and the tribe move off to some distant spot. In the
Ulladulla district after one of these meetings the blacks left
hanging to the surrounding trees numerous small bundles of sticks,
tightly bound with vines.
Messengers.
At certain seasons messengers are sent forth, not only to gain
any information as to what is taking place beyond the limits of
their tribe, but also to convey to others such information as they
can afford. Their movements are guided by the blossoming of
certain trees and plants, especially the mimosa. This is their
only guide as to seasons; the moon affords them little data to
work on, except from new to full; they are unable to keep a
record of the number of moons. A messenger on this duty passes
safely from one tribe to another, even though an unfriendly one ;
he, on these occasions, is treated with marked civility. His
absence occupies a month or more, when he returns well laden
with songs and all the scandal and gossip of the districts he has
passed through. This messenger acts as fiddler to his companions
at the following corrobboree. The despatch of these messengers is
regulated by an arrangement understood only by the blacks them-
selves. A tribe who despatch a messenger one year receive one
the next. When a messenger is expected, the tribe assemble at
some previously arranged spot; here they wait during the day,
not at the camp, but two or three hundred yards away from it.
On the messenger’s approach they suddenly cease talking and sit
perfectly still. He approaches slowly and cautiously. When
about 40 or 50 yards off, he sits down, and perhaps for ten minutes
or more no movement takes place nor word is spoken. After this
pause one of the tribe takes a lighted stick and makes a small fire
in front of him. This act is always a sign of friendship and con-
fidence. The conversation commences by degrees; one by one the
blacks draw closer to their visitor, when it soon becomes general,
all talking at the same time. A day or two after the arrival of
one of these visitors, his chaperon brought him to the station
where I happened to be, and, introducing him to the owner, asked
permission to show his friend over the farm, which permission was
at once granted. Everything was pointed out and explained to
the visitor.
Disposal of the dead.
The mode of disposing of the dead varies considerably. Some
tribes possess regular burial-places, others dig a grave at


apparently any convenient spot, whilst others do not put the body
in the ground at all, but dry it, either in the sun or over a fire,
and make a sort of mummy of it, which they carry about with
them for a time, when perhaps it is placed on a framework of
sticks or in a hollow tree. In the western districts the body is
placed in a hollow tree, which is then filled up with clay.
Among some tribes, when the approach of death is imminent,
the invalid is carried by his friends to some particular spot where
he is to be buried. I have met these melancholy processions. On
one occasion it consisted of about half-a-dozen men with
their women; one man, a sturdy grey-headed old fellow, was
carrying on his shoulders his son, a young man about twenty years of
age, who was in the last stages of consumption. On this as upon
all other occasions, the blacks showed much kindness, relieving
the old man of his burden when he required rest, and handling
the poor young fellow with great care and tenderness. They had,
when I saw them, arrived nearly at the end of their journey,
having travelled about 50 miles.
This young man died a few days afterwards, and I was enabled
by the permission of the Koradgee and the old father to witness
the burial ceremony. The Koradgee, by reason of a bribe, and no
doubt also on account of my having supplied the invalid with
nourishing food, informed me at once of his death. They scarcely
wait for the last breath—they roll the body up instantly. When
I arrived at the blacks’ camp I found that the grave was nearly
completed ;it was circular, and about 5 feet deep. A man was
busily at work loosening the soil by means of a long pointed stick,
and throwing the earth out with a tin can. The body was already
rolled up in a blanket with a boomerang and a waddy, and was
placed close to the edge of the grave. The old father was crouching
down with his hands over the body, tears running down his
cheeks. The women had already covered their hair and faces with
pipe-clay, and blood was streaming down the faces of some of
them.
I found a number of blacks congregated here—men as well as
women. They sat on opposite sides of the grave. This was dug
by the men in turn, in all about 6 feet deep, the old father finish-
ing it, jumping down and smoothing the bottom and sides most
carefully. He then lined it with soft grass. The body was then
handed to the old man, and it was some time before he could
arrange it to his satisfaction. When at last that was done more
grass and light boughs were placed around it ; and as the poor old
man was assisted out of the grave and the others commenced
throwing in earth to fill it up, a most mournful screeching and
crying was set up by the women, who danced about, chopping their
heads with tomahawks until the blood flowed in profusion and
mixed with the pipeclay with which they had previously bedaubed


themselves. As darkness had set in some time, this latter part of
the ceremony was performed by the light of fires, which added
much to the effect of a scene which I cannot attempt to describe.
The light of these fires illuminating this ghastly collection of black
women, covered as they were with pipeclay mixed with the blood
which was now streaming plentifully from their heads, whilst they
—screeching, crying, and moaning—were writhing, dancing, and
contorting their bodies into all shapes and positions, conveyed an
admirable representation of Pandemonium—a picture which
Gustave I)ore alone could depict or Dante describe. The men as
yet had remained perfectly quiet. Suddenly a small light appeared
in the distance, and the shrill voice of a black woman was heard
commencing the funeral chant. This was taken up quickly by
other women, who in succession lit a fire in advance of each other
(nineteen in number) until they reached close up to the grave.
Each woman as she lit afirejoinedinthe chant. Whilst watching
this remarkable scene, I had not noticed that the men had retired
and were taking up similar positions in a line parallel with the
women. These men as they lit a fire also commenced to chant,
until the whole number were singing at once. The chant was of a
most plaintive description; it consisted, so far as I could make
out, of two lines of words only, which were continually repeated,
the singers rubbing the palms of their hands together and slightly
bending their bodies backwards and forwards, keeping admirable
time. By degrees they closed in around the grave, which was now
nearly completed. A mound was raised over it, and fresh boughs
and logs of wood placed on the top, and a trench dug all round, the
grass being cleared away for some distance. Larger fires were now
lit, and the singing became more vehement. I believe that this
singing was kept up during the whole night; but having witnessed
as much as I could expect to see, I gave the old man some
tobacco and returned to my own rest.
It is difficult to account for the various modes adopted by these
blacks as to the disposal of their dead. By what I could learn, it
is considered proper by many tribes that a black should be buried
at or near the spot where he or she was born, and for this reason,
when a black becomes seriously ill, the invalid is carried a long-
distance to these certain spots to die, as in this case. They
apparently object to place a body in strange ground.
On one occasion when at Bergalia, near Moruya, then the
property of a Mr. Campbell, now I believe belonging to Mr. H.
Clarke, a blackfellow commenced digging a grave close by the side
of the kitchen door • when remonstrated with by Mr. Campbell he
argued that he had no alternative, for the black who had just
died had been born there on that spot. Mr. Campbell had much
difficulty in inducing him to remove a short distance away.


I witnessed the burial of a black woman whose body was placed
in a coffin by her relatives. This woman was taken from the tribe
when quite a child and educated so as to be able to read and write.
I believe that she had been christened. After remaining for some
time with her white friends the tinge of wild blood got the better
of her, and she again joined her tribe. After roaming about with
her friends for a few years she caught cold and died of inflamma-
tion of the lungs, I saw her about an hour before her death, a
most pitiable-looking object. In consequence of her education the
blacks collected sufficient money to purchase a coffin, and took the
body in a cart and buried it near some native graves, marking the
surrounding trees deeply as usual.
Tattoo marks.
The custom of marking or ornamenting the body by means of
cuts or gashes prevails over the whole country. The skin is
drawn tight and is then cut either with a sharp splinter of glass
or with a knife, the scores being two or three inches or more long.
On the point of each shoulder they take a perpendicular direction ;
on the chest or back they are either horizontal or perpendicular.
The object is to make a raised scar; the wounds are therefore
kept open by blowing wood ashes into them. The bodies of some
of these blacks are marked in the most regular manner by parallel
scars from the shoulders to the heels. Some persons consider that
each tribe has its own particular form for making these cuts, but
I think that any irregularity or difference in the marking is due
either to the awkwardness of the operator or the fancy of the
black. Some men perforate the cartilage of the nose and thrust
a long bone through. This bone is sharp-pointed like a skewer,
and is used as a comb.
These blacks have great tenacity of life, and soon recover from
wounds which would prove fatal to other men.
Medical treatment.
The medical treatment received by them is of a very primitive
nature. It is out of the power of any of the old men, including
the Kooradgee, to reset a broken limb ; although they profess to
be able to do it. Other ailments are treated by rubbing the body
over with the sap extracted from the apple or the bloodwood tree,
which being of a most astringent nature may have some effect.
A counter irritation is often brought on by making the patient
stand on an ant-bed for a few minutes. Sometimes an old man or
the Kooradgee fills his mouth with water and spurts it over the
painful part. I have seen this done by an old woman to her
husband, who had a swelled eye. The mode of cure is supposed
to be a great secret; a great deal is done, or supposed to be done,
by the Kooradgee. Burying an arm or leg in the ground for a


time is occasionally practised. On one occasion I called attention
to tlie filthy state of a young child. The mother quietly scraped
two or three handfuls of earth together, and threw it over the
helpless brat.
Bed hands.
The existence of the remarkable marks on rocks in many places,
known as “ red hands,” has occasionally attracted much attention.
They are supposed to record some mysterious ceremony. They
are found on the face of sandstone rocks, mostly in sheltered
places. On the face of the cliff at Greenwich, Parramatta River,
seven fine impressions at one time existed ; they have long since
been quarried away. The most prolific places for them are at
Cox’s Creek, near the head of the Cudgegong Piver, about the
Hawkesbury and Hunter rivers, and other places. Many years
ngo, when at the Shoalhaven River, a black undertook to show me
•something “ very curious ”as he termed it. On proceeding some
■distance up the river with him in a boat, we landed, and he then
led me through a dense brush to a low cave or overhanging cliff,
and pointed out two of these impressions. He told me that he
found them accidentally, but could not account for their exist-
ence or how they were done.
These impressions are supposed to be made by dipping the
hand in blood and then stamping it on the rock. They arc
■often in relief, as the blood or pigment of which it is composed
preserves the rock from the action of the atmosphere. I have
never been able to obtain any account from the blacks as to their
origin. It may be possible that they are the record of some
religious or other ceremony, which the survivors were not allowed
to speak about, and that the custom, in consequence, like many
more in other parts of the world, has been gradually lost • but,
again, as these marks include the imprint of the hands of women
•and children, there remains some doubt on this point.
Bode carvings.
The so-called rock carvings are merely outline representations
of men, fish, animals, &c. They may be frequently seen on the
summit of flat-topped rocks. At Thornton’s Hill, Manly, the
remains of the representation of a man may be seen. A cart-
track has obliterated the body, but the feet and a boomerang,
which he held in his hand, are plainly visible. A few yards away
from this two fish are represented. A flat rock at Middle Head
was covered with the representations of whales, sharks, and other
fish. One of the former measured 30 feet or more in length. A
flat rock near the Association Ground, Sydney Common, was
covered with the representations of kangaroo, opossum, fish,
boomerangs, &c. At Berry’s Bay some figures also exist. Ho


mystery whatever may be attached to these marks, I have seen
a young man lying on rock whilst others traced his outline and
then picked out the line with a tomahawk.
Necklaces.
By way of outward adornment, the women make very pretty
necklaces of reed beads. A small kind of reed grows plentifully
in many swamps. These are cut into lengths of from 3 to 4 inches,
and, being hollow, are easily threaded with fine twine. These
lengths are then cut into small beads, by placing the reed on the
hard, thick skin of the heel of the foot, and by giving it a turn
under the edge of a thin knife. The reed is then easily broken into
small beads. Teeth, either of sheep, kangaroo, or human, are
often worn by the women as necklets, or around the head amongst
the hair. Occasionally a bangle of opossum-skin is worn round
the arm or below the knees ; but their decorations, besides pipe-
clay or red ochre, are of a very innocent description.
The men often smear themselves over with opossum fat, and
then rub their bodies and face with charcoal or red ochre. They
say this serves to keep away the mosquitoes, as well as being
ornamental. As a protection against mosquitoes they carry wisps
of long grass, which they keep in perpetual motion.
jFood.
Nothing comes amiss to them in the way of food. Every living
thing in the shape of animals, birds, fish, or reptiles, as well as the
roots of some plants and a sort of yam, serve to fill the game-bag.
Obtaining roots, &c., is generally the duty of the women, who dig
them up by means of long sharp-pointed sticks, hardened over the
fire, one of which every woman carries about with her.
When not too old, the heart of the palm-tree forms an article of
food. This is obtained by splitting each leaf up from the extreme
point, when it is readily detached from the stem. By this method
the head of a palm tree can be stripped and opened out in a much
shorter time than by means of a tomahawk.
Though they eat the flying fox, the bat is respected. The
difference in size may be one reason. On one occasion, on looking
behind a loose sheet of bark which was hanging from a dead tree,
I saw an immense number of bats closely packed together. On
calling the attention of a blackfellow to this, he seemed greatly
dismayed at my discovery, and requested that I would not disturb
them or mention the circumstance to any other blackfellow.
Grubs.
Amongst the delicacies the grub takes a prominent position.
This is like a large caterpillar; it is found both in living and
dead trees, principally the mimosa. Its location is not difficult to


discover, owing to the refuse which is always to he seen at the
outlet of the hole. A slice split off from a tree often discloses
three or four of them ; others out of sight are drawn from their
homes, no doubt much to their astonishment, by means of a long
barb-ended twig. These grubs are about the size of one’s finger,
and are often swallowed at once by the blacks. When roasted, the
skin, together with the head and numerous legs, come off. It then
looks like a roll of fresh butter, and is by no means bad eating.
The long transparent jelly-like-looking worm which penetrates
dead logs on the margin of salt-water rivers, and known as cobra,
is also much relished.
White ants.
White ants are occasionally eaten in quantities. They are pre-
pared by the women, by being put through a sort of winnowing
process in order to separate them from the dirt which surrounds
them. The food has, I believe, a medicinal effect. They require
no cooking.
Eggs of all descriptions are frequently obtained in quantities.
These include the eggs of the iguana, lizard, and turtle • they are
cooked by placing them in hot ashes, a small hole having been
in the first instance made in the upper end. They are by no
means particular as to the freshness of the eggs. “ Close up
piccaninny set down ” is the usual remark made when a young
chick or reptile is about coming forth.
I have been informed that the blacks at one time would collect
the heads of the long grass which grew on plains or open spaces,
and which when ripe are blown in heaps against bushes or other
obstruction, and after beating the seed out would grind it and
make cakes of the flour. I never saw this operation, but I have
seen flat stones which bore evidence of having been used as
grinding stones for this purpose.
A black walked at least 2 miles for the carcass of a native dog
I had shot. He and a few others enjoyed the meal.
Bees.
Before the introduction of the English bee the blacks sought
and obtained “ native honey” in great quantities. The native bee
is not much larger than a house-fly, and posseses no sting. They
construct their nests in the hollows of trees. On account of their
small size it is a difficult matter to discover this nest. Flies
innumerable hover around these trees, and the practised eye alone
of a blackfellow can detect the existence of the native bee. He
closely examines every fallen leaf and blade of grass beneath the
tree, so as to recognize, if possible, any spots or marks made by
them, when, if satisfied as to the existence of a nest, he ascends
the tree as already described, and either cuts off the limb or
extracts the honey through a hole.


The honey and comb differ much from those of the English bee.
The honey is a thin, watery syrup, very sweet, and possessing a
wild, peculiar taste. It is stowed away in irregularly made
pockets or cells, made of a dirty-looking sort of wax. They
squeeze this honey in a “ cooliman” or native bucket, and mix it
with water. A ball of soft ribbon bark is then sopped in it and
sucked by each blackfellow in turn.
Cooliman.
A cooliman is formed by cutting the knob or excrescence from
a tree and scooping out the decayed interior, so as to leave the
outside shell only. These are of any shape and size—from the
size of a teacup upwards.
Very neat water-tight baskets are made by the women from
the broad part of the palm leaf; some of these will hold two or
three gallons of water.
A very ingenious method of ascertaining the whereabouts of a
native bees’ nest was occasionally resorted to. A small piece of soft
down from a feather was attached to a bee, by means of either gum
from the mimosa or other tree, or wax from the ear. This would not
only compel the bee to fly very slowly, which it at once did in the
direction of its nest, but enabled the black to keep the insect in
sight. The operation was a delicate one and not always successful,
the insect being often crushed in the manipulation.
Native honey is now never sought for. The blacks say that the
English bee has quite destroyed the native bees and taken
possession of their nests.
Cooking.
They invariably cook their food by roasting or grilling on the
charcoal fire. Sometimes a kangaroo or emu is roasted whole. A
large fire is made in a hole or hollow in the ground, in which large
stones are heated. When sufficiently hot, some of these stones
are placed inside the animal, and whilst it is being turned on the
fire these stones are rolled about in its inside, the fore and hind
legs of a kangaroo being held by two blacks. This is a favourite
way of cooking; otherwise it is chopped into smaller pieces and
grilled on the ashes.
In cooking, the outside of the meat is roasted or almost burnt to
the depth of about a quarter of an inch. This outside is then
eaten or gnawed off, and the meat is again placed on the fire.
Green grass is often placed on the ashes before putting on the
food. This serves to keep it clean. The teeth of many of the
old people are worn quite loav to the gums in consequence of the
grinding nature of the ashes eaten with the food.
When food is plentiful, such as after a successful battu, they eat
to repletion, and will lie down in a helpless state, “ too busy to
move for three or four days, their stomachs being greatly distended.


Kangaroos and enrns are often “ stalked,” either "by one black
or by two or more acting in concert. When close enough a spear
or boomerang is thrown with usually deadly effect. In level
country, free from bush, the larger sort of boomerang is used, as
before described ■ it rolls along the ground with great speed and
force. Sometimes the women and a certain number of the men
form an extended line along the ranges, and gradually close in,
shouting the whole time. The kangaroos are driven to the valleys,
where they are speared in numbers by blacks who are lying in
wait for them.
The knowledge which these blackfellows possess of the habits
of the various kinds of game they hunt is of material assistance
to them. Kangaroos, when closely pursued, invariably make for
a waterhole. Emus will make a considerable circuit so as to
regain their starting point. The blacks are ready for these con-
tingencies. A waterhole is guarded, if necessary, and, instead of
following an emu, a black will take a cut across the bush and
intercept the bird in its flight.
Both kangaroos and emus will take to the water readily of their
own accord. I have seen kangaroos swimming across the Clyde
River, and I also saw two emus deliberately walk into the water
and swim across Keutral Bay.
Opossum.
The opossum generally makes its nest high up in the hollow of
a tree, and to obtain it is the duty of the tree-climber. The
existence of one of these animals in a tree is readily detected by
the practised eye of the black, who closely examines the marks
made on the bark by its claws. If the branch where the nest is
is not too large, it is cut off, otherwise a hole is made immediately
where the opossum is, when it is dragged out by the tail and at
once hit on the head and thrown to the ground, as its bite is very
severe and might endanger the man’s safety on the tree. Fre-
quently a fire is made in the hollow tree or limb, and so the
unfortunate animal is driven out.
In exposed positions, such as low points of land, projecting into
a lake or river, the blacks hide behind screens made of boughs for
hours together, waiting the arrival of waterfowl. Ducks and
other birds are usually knocked down by the boomerang or by a
stick. The ancient Egyptians used the same means, as depicted
by their paintings of 3,000 years ago.
Snakes they prefer to kill for themselves, as a snake when
wounded or cannot escape will bite, and no doubt poison itself.
Bandicoots, kangaroo rats, &c., are welcome.
Eish are not only caught by means of a spear, but are also
secured in weirs. These weirs are made in suitable places, by
means of a fence of the branches of trees being woven in with


mangrove bushes. Many fish are entrapped and speared as the
tide recedes. Fish are often speared at night-time. A black will
wade out in shallow water, and the fish, attracted by the light of
a fire-stick which he carries, are easily speared.
The root of the “ minmoi” or gigantic lily, as well as the nuts of
the zamia, are sometimes eaten. Both of these require preparation
before being used. According to the blacks, the “minmoi” causes
intense agony to the eater, if not properly prepared ; the stomach
swelling to an enormous extent, and eventually bursting, so that
the bowels escape. The zamia nut is crushed, and then soaked in
water for some days, by which means an essential oil is got rid of.
Arrowroot of a fine quality can be made from these nuts.
These blacks cannot always depend upon having a breakfast
before leaving their camp of a morning. When the dew is well
off the ground, they may be seen starting off in different directions
to seek whatever they can obtain in the way of food. The
married men are always accompanied by their wives and numerous
mangy dogs. Their breakfast consists of the first game obtained,
and may be anything. These separate parties often meet during
the day, when they cook much of the game, have a rest, a talk, a
smoke, and then start off again on their catering expeditions. As
evening approaches they return towards the camp, slackening
their pace and approaching it cautiously as though some “ devil-
devil” might possibly be in possession. When all have arrived, the
gins leisurely open their nets or bags and draw forth the result
of the day’s sport, for they are compelled to carry everything
obtained during the day, with the exception perhaps of a kangaroo
or emu. This they immediately proceed to divide, apparently in
the most liberal manner. Perhaps a whole opossum is thrown
across to some one, or it may be cut in halves or quarters and
then divided, whilst snakes, iguanas, birds, fish, in fact every-
thing is thrown from one to the other, no doubt in repayment for
similar loans on previous occasions. There is no grumbling; each
one seems perfectly satisfied with what he or she receives.* Most
* Mr. Edward Lamb stated in explanation of this apparently complicated
mode of dividing food, that independently of a child being named after the
first thing edible, either birds, animal, fish, &c., seen after its birth, that
this article of food is “ taboo” to the youngster, who cannot partake of it;
consequently an exchange of food is necessary. This statement, however,
only partly explains the arrangement, for the “ taboo” is removed at the
age of puberty, when the youngster receives another or rather a second
name. I have seen this division of food made amongst full-grown blacks
who were allowed to eat anything.
By the kindness of Commander Sadleir, I have been favoured with the
perusal of a paper entitled “Notes on the Australian Class Systems,” by
Mr. A. W. Howitt, being a reprint from the journal of the Anthropological
Institute, May, 1883. From this I have no doubt that the name given to
the infant at its birth is the “Totem” or distinguishing name, and enables
the elders or wise men to classify the young members of a tribe, and
make marital or betrothal arrangements.


o£ the game obtained throughout the clay is wholly or partially
cooked before it comes to camp; by this means it keeps better,
especially during hot weather.
Bathing.
In hot weather these people are very fond of bathing. They
are all, even the little children, able to swim. Although at times
they plunge into the water, they often walk in quietly and sink
below the surface so gently as to hardly leave a ripple. They
can remain under water for a length of time.
On one occasion a young man with whom I was out shooting-
vanished quietly below the surface of a deep waterhole. In reply
to my question as to his reason for so doing, he informed me that
he “ went below to obtain a drink of cold water, as it was too hot
on the surface.” This man also showed me how, by lying down
under water, with one end of a hollow reed in his mouth, the
other end above the surface, he was enabled to remain under for
a length of time, and so possibly evade any pursuers.
The fresh water creeks and ponds abound in mussels and cray-
fish, these also form an important item of food. Many of the
former are obtained by the blacks by standing in the water and
with their toes extracting the mussels from the mud. The crayfish
are easily caught by means of a piece of meat tied to a string; as
soon as their long antennae appear above the surface of the water
they are cautiously seized and thrown on shore.
In camp.
In camp these people, to all appearance, are most social. They
talk, laugh, sing, and tell stories. Nothing escapes their obser-
vation; every incident is recounted, and many a good joke is
enjoyed at the expense of some white person. In the day-time
many of the men, who are too lazy to go out, may be often seen
giving a lesson to the small boys in throwing the boomerang or
spear, &c. ; this is a very amusing sight to witness. Theft amongst
the members of a tribe is wholly unknown. A black can leave
his spear or boomerang, in fact his worldly goods, anywhere in
the bush—they remain untouched by his own or a friendly tribe;
of course they are prizes if found by an enemy. The women and
children keep much to themselves, a short distance from the men.
The children do much as they like, and exhibit the most violent
temper at times. I saw a little fellow, about four years of age, in
a fit of anger after throwing a fire-stick at his mother, run to
another fire and deliberately knock over three pots of tea which
were standing there; it is difficult to say what other mischief he
would have done had not a black hurled a stick at him, barely
missing him. The young savage ran back to his mother and hid
in her opossum cloak. She took no notice whatever of the
occux-rence.


Language.
Their language, abounding in vowels, enables it to be spoken
with fluency, and has by no means a harsh sound. Every tribe
has its own dialect; this is greatly caused by ill-feeling on the part
of many of the tribes towards each other, so that they will not
condescend to use the same words for many things. One tribe is
acquainted with the dialects of those tribes adjoining, and use the
same dialect when speaking to a friendly tribe, but they speak
most contemptuously of those with whom they are upon bad
terms, and ridicule the expressions used by them. This makes the
task of the philologist a difficult one, though I understand that
similar terms for many places and things remain intact, and can
be traced throughout the country. The late Rev. Mr. Threlkeld
compiled a very complete vocabulary of the language of the tribes
inhabiting the Wollombi, Lake Macquarie, Newcastle, Port
Stephens, and adjacent country. This energetic missionary was
known at lake Macquarie as Mr. “ Kowhow,” “ Kowhow” is
the negative, and is never used by the men, who only condescend
to give a sort of grunt. Women alone use it, consequently, for
that reason, it has a degrading meaning ; but as Mr. Threlkeld,
who wished to set a good example to the men, made a point of
using it, it was soon attached to him as a nickname, whilst his
influence among them was not increased thereby.
Names of places.
The names of places and things are very expressive, and in most
instances euphonious, though in many cases greatly distorted by
European pronunciation. Thus the proper name of Bodalla is
Eurobodella, known for many years as “Boat Alley.” Larella,
near Molong, is better known as “ Larry’s Lake,” and many others.
(“ Gabo” Island is altogether a misnomer ; it is a blackf ellow’s pro-
nunciation for “ Cape Howe.” Woolloomooloo, I was informed
by an old resident, is the result of a blackfellow trying to say
windmill), &c., &c., &c.
Every tree, plant, rock, animal, and insect has a name, and
localities are named accordingly. About Yass, for instance, or, I
believe, more properly Yarra, such names as Yarra-lumla, Yarra-
minya, Yarra-don. Yarra-laurila, &c., are to be found. Yarra I
believe to be the name of a species of gum tree. The termination
denotes the locality.
Cannibalism.
Although authentic instances of cannibalism have from time to
time been brought to light, these blacks cannot be placed in the
same category with the natives of the South Sea Islands. They
one and all indignantly deny such an accusation, but invariably
accuse the tribes to the far north-west of following this practice.


Notwithstanding this denial, during the continuance of cold wet
weather, when they cannot procure food, I do not think that they
would hesitate in adopting a fat piccanniny for a meal.
Daily movements.
Their daily movements are arranged by the old men each night,
and are strictly adhered to. This enables them when scattered
about during the day to know where to find each other if
necessary. Occasionally these arrangements are upset, and fresh
orders are suddenly issued. This may be caused by various
reasons. It may be in consequence of a dream which some of them
have had. Under these circumstances an immediate stampede is
considered necessary. No time is lost in packing up all their
worldly goods ; these consist of old dirty clothes and blankets, tin
pots, and all sorts of rubbish, which are crammed into their nets
with puppy dogs, occasionally cats and kittens, half-cooked food,
&c. These loads are carried by the women, who, surrounded
by numbers of half-starved, mangy dogs, of all sizes ages,
stagger along under their burden. On these occasions, to facilitate
their movements, young children are frequently destroyed by
being dashed against a tree and then thrown away. The men
carry a spear or tomahawk only. These women would rather
sacrifice a child than a dog. I have seen them suckling puppies
in turn with their infants.
Should any blackfellow be absent and consequently not aware
of this stampede, marks are made on a tree, or a branch is
broken, so as to attract attention, and the impression of a foot is
made in some soft part of the ground close by, the toes being
deeply impressed in the soil, and pointing in the direction the
others have taken. These blacks can identify the tracks of any
of their companions, and recognise a stranger’s footprint at once.
Gooey.
Their “ cooey,” or call is often required. It is extremely loud
and shrill, and can be heard at a long distance. It is uttered
entirely from the throat ; they press the sides of their face with
their hands and place a finger in each ear, which they say is a
great assistance. According as the last note either rises or falls,
they understand which one shall wait for the other. At closer
distances a low whistle is made with a similar understanding.
They often signalize to the adjoining tribes by means of fires or
smoke on the top of hills, and know by this means the approach
of a messenger or a visit from a friendly tribe, or other movements.
Shell mounds.
The existence at one time of large mounds on the banks of
many salt-water bays and inlets, which on being dug into, were


found to consist entirely of shells of various descriptions, princi-
pally oysters and mussels, plainly indicated that these spots were
favourite resorts of the blackfellow. These mounds were covered
with turf, and I imagine were of great age. They have now all
vanished, having been carted away for the purpose of using the
shells for lime.
Physique.
Opinions as to their physique and general appearance must not
be formed by the wretched-looking objects who may be occasion-
ally seen at the present day hanging about the old established
inland towns and public-houses. In their natural state the young
members are particularly well formed—lithe and active. Some
are perfect models, their limbs well shaped and muscular, hands
and feet small, especially those of the women. They have at this
time a pleasing expression of countenance, but as they get old
they soon lose even these charms, the old women being perfectly
hideous. J
The colour of their skin is a dark dusky brown, hair black and
curly, wavy, altogether unlike the negro. Their movements are
easy and natural. In searching for game they walk along with
body erect, slowly and cautiously, taking care to make as little
noise as possible. Their eyes and ears “ all about them,” occasion-
ally stopping to give a searching look at some tree which they
think may possibly shelter an opossum or native bear, or else to
listen for the movements of a kangaroo or wallaby. They watch
their game as a cat does a mouse, without even winking the eye,
and will remain motionless for a length of time, until an oppor-
tunity is given for them to strike a blow.
Savages as they are, they are not without some sense of good
feeling, as in the case of the death of Mr. Kennedy, the rescue of
King, the sole survivor of Burke and Wills’s expedition, and other
instances. I was a witness to the following :—A blackfellow who
had fallen from a tree and had dislocated his ankle, was lying on
the ground, under his blanket, when his brother accidentally stood
upon the injured limb; this caused the poor fellow to shriek with
pain. His brother at once threw himself beside the wounded
man, and hugged him, kissed him, caressed him, and did all in
his power to comfort him. It was genuine sorrow, and a most
touching scene between these two half-naked savages. They
never neglect the old and infirm. The blind and cripples are led
.about and carefully attended to.
They ai e particular in all points of etiquette, consequently many
a man has lost his life by unconsciously infringing their rules
such as walking into a camp without first obtaining leave. This
may be considered equivalent to a person walking into a stranger’s
c


house and sitting down without being asked. In the one case the
intruder gets a knock on the head which settles him at once, in the
other he is kicked out.
Whilst their thoughts are by no means retrospective, they
certainly do not look far ahead. So long as they have plenty to
eat and drink for the time being they are happy; the future
causes them no anxiety. They are thoroughly improvident. They
cannot carry their minds back beyond the oldest man they may
individually recollect, and whom they suppose to have been the
first man. The dislike or objection they entertain of ever
mentioning the name or of alluding in any way to a deceased
person naturally encourages the obliteration from their memories
of the existence of any great ancestors.
A koradgee told me that he had a perfect recollection of the
first man, who was a very old man when he was quite a boy.
Tin's first man, feeling lonely, paddled his canoe to the constellation
Pleiades, the seven stars, which are inhabited solely by women,
by their belief.* There he secured a wife, but refusing to pay a
fee to a large serpent who had charge of these stars the sei’pent
endeavoured to arrest him, but failing in that he hurled a large
rock after him and took away the canoe. The canoe is now
represented by Orion’s belt. The serpent can be traced in the
milky way, and the rock, which was similar to the Magellan
clouds, is to be seen in the middle of a swamp or open flat some-
where. The old black was credited with having got the best of
the squabble, for he retained his wife and built another canoe for
himself.
Astronomy.
All the principal stars are named, and many queer stories or
legends are told of them, as well as of the sun and moon.
Unfortunately I have lost all memoranda on this subject. The
Rev. Mr. M‘Donald read a most elaborate paper on the astronomy
of the blacks before the Royal Society, which is well worthy of
persusal.
I once had a man in my employment who had been three years
with the blacks at Moretonßay. He was a “ticket-of-leave man,”
and had at one time escaped from Moreton Island, in company
with two other men. These men, after wandering about for some
days, and being in a starving condition, came in sight of a black-
fellows’ camp. One of them, with the object of obtaining some-
thing to eat, walked straight into the camp, and was, knocked on
the head and killed immediately. The two other men, seeing the
fate of their companion, remained quite still, with the intention
of escaping during the night. But the blacks had seen them, and
* This is somewhat remarkable. The seven stars are, according to
mythology, seven women.


attributing their quietness to etiquette (that is, waiting for an
invitation), after some delay advanced towards them, lighted a fire,
and gave them something to eat. These two men remained some time
with the blacks, until one day one of them noticing a bundle of what
he at first supposed to be sticks hanging up, but were in reality
bones, took the bundle up to examine it, when he also was
immediately killed. These severe lessons taught the survivor not
to be too inquisitive. He managed to make his escape after a
residence of three years with them.
This man, who was a printer and compositor by trade, was most
intelligent and well informed. He told me that he could never
obtain an insight into their mysteries, and thought there was a
great deal more importance attached to them than necessary, that
there was really nothing in them, but that the old men purposely
mystified many of their doings so as to raise themselves in the
opinion of the younger men. They know nothing whatever of a
religion.
A similar accountwas given to me by aman who had been thirteen
years amongst them; and, of the many instances where white men
have resided for a lengthened period with these blacks, no
information or explanation of their supposed mysterious ceremonies
has ever been obtained from them; and the question again occurs
—is there any real mystery, or is it only a sham?
These savages are not sufficiently refined so as to torture their
prisoners as the New Zealanders and other savages are accustomed
to do: if they desire to kill a person it is done at once, and
effectually.
Barter.
A considerable trade or exchange of goods is carried on between
the various tribes. I have seen boomerangs, waddies, and other
implements in the hands of natives on the coast, made of the wood
of the sweet-scented myall localities, where this tree does not grow;
and again, I have seen the grass-tree spear in the hands of natives
of the interior. These are always much prized.
Other articles of barter are grass-tree gum, kurrajong, and ribbon
bark and other things.
Acute senses.
Their senses are wonderfully acute, especially that of sight, and
these qualities can only be appreciated or comprehended by actually
witnessing the exercise of them. On a shooting excursion one
need not be troubled with sporting dogs if accompanied by one of
these blacks. They either see, hear, or smell the presence of
game as quickly as a dog does. Their use as trackers in following-
up either men or animals is valuable, and when occasionally at
fault, they are, from their wonderful knowledge of bush lore, able
to exert great reasoning power.


Their “ locality,” in a phrenological point of view, is marvellous.
They can travel in a straight line from one point to another across
miles of country. In company with some friends, we tested many
of them very severely by blindfolding them, then turning them
round several times, and asking them to point in the direction of
certain places. Some of them were very exact, but they were not
each of them equally correct, though none of them were very wide
of the mark.
I am not aware whether any complete phrenological examina-
tion has ever been made. “ Veneration” is no doubt altogether
wanting, as well as “number” and “comparison.” They cannot enu-
merate beyond a very limited number. Two is the highest number
for which they have a name. When they wish to express a higher
number, the word is repeated two or more times, and the fingers of
one or both hands are held up at the same time. Thus on the
Lower Hunter and Coast “bolworra” means two ; this is short-
ened to “ bulla,” “ bulla-bulla,” means more than two, perhaps
half-a-dozen, &c. When this word is repeated often, and at the
same time, the fingers of both hands are opened and closed rapidly,
it means that the number is incalculable. They have another
word, “cowal,” which means plenty; “cowal cowal” great
abundance ; but this refers to quantity, and the fingers are not
brought into use whilst using it.
A man in describing a great crowd he had seen at some races,
expressed himself as follows :—“ Ka bon cowal cowal bulla karam-
bla (whitefellow) plenty too many tousand, close up a hundred.”
I do not suppose that “ destructiveness” is over large, for these
people do not destroy or kill solely for the sake of destroying or
killing : they kill a man for having infringed some of their laws,
and consider that he deserves to be killed; they kill sheep and
cattle for food, &c. But this matter (phrenology) cannot be dis-
cussed here. I should like to hear a phrenological paper on this
subject.
Unfortunately many of those who first come in contact with
these aborigines are rough uneducated men, who think they are
justified in treating them without any consideration whatever, as
though they were mere animals. We often see notices in the
papers headed “ Outrage by the Blacks,” &c. I think that the
police records can show greater outrages, with less reason for
their perpetration, as having been committed by their Christian
brethren.
These blacks have ground for a good case against their Govern-
ments. They are unable to plead their own cause, and compara-
tively few persons of influence have exerted themselves on their
behalf. Their hunting-grounds are occupied by sheep and other
stock, and no corresponding compensation has been awarded in
return.


I must, however, admit that so long as they can obtain intoxi-
cating spirits their case is hopeless.
Like all savages, they vanish as the white pettier approaches
and permanently occupies the country. Many of the tribes from
whom, years ago, I obtained much of the information now placed
before you are quite extinct. They readily become familiar with
the vices of their European brethren, and soon fall victims to
drink and disease, and at once succumb to pulmonary complaints
brought on by neglect and exposure.
By a recent computation these natives number, in this Colony,
about 5,000, but this number is rapidly decreasing. Near a town-
ship on the Murray River, where I happened to be a few years
ago, no less than five men and women died in one camp within a
fortnight.
Though late in the day, this Government are acting wisely in
endeavouring to preserve the remnants of these tribes ; and it is
to be hoped that the experience of the treatment of these blacks,
as well as of the Tasmanian aborigines, of whom not a soul now
remains, will serve as a lesson and a caution to those who may be
called upon to act as pioneers in colonizing any further territory
which the Crown may choose to annex.
APPENDICES.
Wilkinson, in his “ Manners and Customs of the Ancient
Egyptians,” vol. iii, p. 39, says
They do not seem to have used the bow very generally to shoot birds,
nor was the sling adopted, except by gardeners and peasants, to frighten
them from the vineyards and fields. The use of the throw-stick was very
general, every amateur chasseur priding himself on the dexterity he dis-
played with this missile, and being made of heavy wood, flat, and offering
little surface to the air in the direction of the flight, the distance to which
an expert could throw it was considerable ; though they always endeavoured
to approach the birds as near as possible under cover of bushes or reeds.
It was from one foot and a quarter to two feet in length, and about an inch
and a half in breadth, slightly curved at the upper end, and its general
form may be inferred from one found at Thebes by Mr. Burton, from those
of the Berlin Museum, and from the sculptures.
[Sketches. ]
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBB4.




t 1 " —"
A BLACKFELLOW’S ASCENT OF A TREE. Liu a X


photo-lithographed at the govt, printing office
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES


gL 7 S/ / 77 s i
jO rt*m ? 7 S & ■
PHOTO-LITHOGRAPHED AT THE GOVT, PRINTING OFFICE,
SYDNEY. NEW SO'JTH WALES.


ABORIGINAL MMHj h /?'




J?t 7/z^ZZ
Msx7/7'Zf


On rock at Kerry’s Bay


A J CCf'-j


-'■■■■> ■ -
1


