

v * < '


HORT. TRANS. V01.1.Rl 22
SECOND SERIES
S. Waits, scalp
Mi/s Drake. del


C 519 ]
LXIII. Note upon a handsome and hardy Plant , called Clianthus
puniceus. By John Llndley, Ph. D. F. R. S. fyc. Assistant
Secretary,
Read December 2, 1834.
That there exists in New Holland, a race of plants of extraordi-
nary beauty, having very large papilionaceous flowers, of a deep and
rich crimson, has been known for much more than a century, in
consequence of a figure of one of them having been published in
the third volume of the Voyage of Dampier, during whose visit to
New Holland it had been discovered, on one of the islands of the
Archipelago, bearing the name of that early navigator. Specimens,
at that time collected, and which I examined not more than six
months ago, exist in excellent condition in the Sherardian Her-
barium, at Oxford. Subsequently, during Cook’s first voyage, a
plant extremely like the first, but quite destitute of the hairiness of
that species, was found by Sir Joseph Banks and Dr. Solander in
1769, on some part of the eastern coast of the northern island of
New Zealand, or in Cook’s Strait,* and was named by Dr. Solander,
Clianthus puniceus. It was not, however, noticed in any systematic
work until lately, when Mr. George Don, first published an account
of the genus in the second volume of his edition of Miller’s Gardener’s
Dictionary; changing, however, Solander’s name Clianthus puniceus ,
for that of Donia punicea.
* Mr. Cunningham considers that as this plant does not occur among a collection lately
formed by his brother in New Zealand, and was not seen by himself in his visit to the
Northern island in 1826, it is, probably, a rare plant, and that its particular localities are
to the southward of the Bay of Islands : probably the shores of the River Thames, or at
Mercury-bay, where Cook afforded the naturalists who accompanied that voyage, oppor-
tunities of landing in 1769, and near which, viz. at Tauranga, in the Bay of Plenty, the
missionaries at this time, have stations, whence the seeds were, doubtless, transmitted.


It was, then, with no little pleasure that I recognized this most
beautiful but little known plant, in a specimen which was brought
me by William Leveson Gower, Esq. from his garden at Titsey
Place, near Godstone, in May of the present year. It had been
raised from seeds gathered by the Missionaries in New Zealand,
where it is said to be called “ Kowaingutukaka,” or Parrot’s Bill,
and to grow to the size of a large tree; in England, however,
it has not reached beyond 4 feet in height.
When planted in a peat border in the open air, where it succeeds
the best, it forms a half-herbaceous evergreen shrub, not very unlike
an evergreen Vetch, or more correctly speaking, a scarlet Colutea,
{Sutherlandia frutescens). Its leaves are smooth, pinnated, and of
rather a succulent texture, consisting of about eight pairs with an
odd one. The stem is entirely free from furrows or angles, and is
about as thick as a goose’s quill. The flowers grow in oval clusters,
hanging down from the axils of the leaves upon the lateral branches ;
each flower is rather more than three inches from the tip of the
standard to the tip of the keel; the petals are of a light bright rich
crimson, without any mottling or marking; the standard, which is
of an ovate-lanceolate figure, and much tapered to the point, is re-
flexed so as almost to lie back upon the calyx; the wings are very
much shorter than the keel, the point of which is so much prolonged
as to look like the beak of some bird, although it must be confessed
not much like that of a parrot. The flowers are succeeded by
brownish black pods, tw r o inches and a half long, seated on a slender
stipe, and convex on the upper instead of the lower edge : so that
unless attention is paid to their manner of growth, it would seem as
if the seeds grew to the lower instead of the upper edge. They are
covered all over inside with a delicate cottony down, in which lie
the small kidney-shaped seeds, of a dull yellowish-ochre colour,
mottled with small dark browm blotches and speckles.
A good idea of the appearance of the plant will be obtained from
the accompanying figure, from the pencil of Miss Drake.


From the trials thathavebeen madeof the propermode of managing
it, both by Mr. Gower and the Rev. John Coleman, by whom it was
given to the former gentleman, it would appear that it succeeds
best when treated as a hardy plant, and turned out into a peat
border; for in such a situation it has now been two years in Mr.
Gower’s garden, and the plants continue to look very healthy, with
a profusion of blossoms forming for next year. Kept in a green-
house it was sickly and did not flower in the hands of Mr. Gower’s
gardener; but Mr. Coleman succeeded in blossoming it in a large
pot in the green-house, and in inducing it to ripen its pods, one of
which is that here figured.
Considering that the climate of New Zealand is in some
places so much like that of England, that some species, such as
Edwardsia microphylla , will bear the rigour of our winters, it is not
improbable that this may also prove a hardy plant. If so its ex-
traordinary beauty will render it one of the most valuable species
that has been introduced of late years ; and even if it should be no
hardier than Sutherlandia frutescens, it will still form one of the
most important and welcome of all the modern additions to our
flower-gardens.
I am happy to complete this communication by the addition of
some notes upon the other species of this remarkable genus, for
which I am indebted to Mr. Allan Cunningham, the distinguished
traveller in Australia.
1. Clianthus puniceus.
Clianthus puniceus. Solandr. Mss. in Mus. Banks.
Donia punicea. Dons gen. syst . of gard. 2. p. 468.
This differs from the two Australian species next enumerated, in
being evidently a suffruticose plant of diffuse, but not procumbent
habit, having alternate blunt oblong smooth leaflets; flowers in


pendulous racemes; a calyx deeply toothed; and legumes entirely
smooth on the outside.
2. Clianthus Oxleyi. A. C. MSS.
Clianthus herbaceus prostratus valde villosus, foliolis oppositis ovato-lanceolatis
obovatisve, pedunculis elongatis erectis sulcatis, floribus (4 —6) umbellatis, calyce quinque-
fido, legumine sericeo.
Donia speciosa. Dons Gen . Syst. gard. 2 p. 468.
Hah. in nova Hollandia interiore: in oris sterilibus lacus Regent,
ad fluvium Lachlan. 1817. A. C.
A strong growing procumbent herbaceous plant, apparently of
perennial duration, producing rich crimson flowers in umbels
upon long upright peduncles. It is named to commemorate the
late John Oxley, Esq. Surveyor General, in whose first expedition
to the interior it was discovered.
It may be remarked to show its comparative rare existence, that
since the period of its being met with, in July 1817, on the
eastern shore of the Regent’s Lake, where it was found abundantly
in flower, it has not been observed by subsequent botanical tra-
vellers, in any other part of the internal country they have visited.
3. Clianthus Dampieri. A. C. MSS.
Clianthus herbaceus procumbens villosissimus, foliobs obovatis cuneatisve retusis (cum
mucronulo), floribus pedunculatis racemosis, calycibus quinquefidis, legumine sericeo.
Donia formosa. Dons Gen, Syst . Gard. 2p. 468.
Colutea novas Hollandiae, floribus amplis coccineis, umbellatim
dispositis, macula purpurea notatis. Woodward in Dampler s
voyage , (ed. 1729), Vol. 3, p. 111, tab. 4,/. 2.
Hah. in novae Hollandiae ora septentrionali-occidentali: in insulis
aridis sabulosis Archipelagi Dampier. 1699. Gulielm. Dampler.
1818. Allan C.
In the work last quoted, it is said of this—“the flowers
are very like to the Colutea Barbee Jovls folio , flore coccineo


Breynii .” (Sutherlandia frutescens R. Br. Dec.] of the same scarlet
colour, with a large deep purple spot in the vexillum, but much
bigger, coming all from the same point after the manner of an
umbel. “The rudiment” (adds the writer) “of the pod is very
woolly, and terminates in a filament near 2 inches long.”
As there cannot well be any doubt of the identity of the plant
Dam pier found in 1699, on one of the islands of the Archipelago,
no w bearing his name, (of which, a small specimen, without leaves,
is still preserved in the Sherardian Herbarium at Oxford), and the
above species, observed sparingly on the same arid group by my-
self, in the voyage of Captain P. P. King, R. N. in 1818,1 have
dedicated it to that very celebrated navigator, its discoverer. In
May, 1818, it was found in flower, and only with fruit in a very
young state.
VOL. I. 2nd. seeies.


LXIV. A further account of experiments upon the cultivation of
the Potatoe, made in the Garden of the Horticultural Society,
in the year 1834. By John Lindley, Ph. D. F. R. S. Assistant
Secretary .
Read January 20, 1834.
Al though the Experiments already laid before the Society*
seem abundantly sufficient to prove the advantage of planting po-
tatoes, wider apart and deeper than is the usual practice, and to con-
firm Mr. Knight’s statements of the results that he has obtained ;
yet it appeared desirable to repeat the comparison of whole tubers
and sets, and to illustrate the advantages and disadvantages of close
or distant cropping, by trials with the varieties of potatoes commonly
in cultivation among those who supply the markets of London.
With this view, a quantity of early Champion Potatoes was
purchased in the beginning of 1834, and a piece of ground on
which no potatoes had been previously grown, was selected for the
trial. No manure was employed, nor was the soil by any means
in a fertile state for garden ground.
The ground was divided into four equal parts. In one of these
the rows of potatoes were as much as two feet and a half apart; in
another two feet; in a third one foot and a half, and in the
fourth only six inches. Half of each division was planted with
whole tubers, and half with sets, cut to a single eye. The whole
were committed to the ground on the 27th of February, the tubers
or sets being, in every case, six inches apart in the rows, and nine
inches deep.
On the 24th of April the points of the potatoes had reached the
* See pages 153 and 445 of this volume.




• .
