

; i r j- 7 > .
notes' on songs and song
MAKERS OF SOME AUSTRALIAN
TRIBES.
A. W. HO WITT, F.G.S., Corr. Mem. Anth. Inst.
LONDON:
HAEEISON AND SONS, ST. MAETIN’S LANE,
Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty.
1887.


f
11' 'U’ ■ 'sv il|W
■
.
-
'
*


p > fb
A. W Howitt.— Australian Songs and Songmakers. 327
Notes on Songs and Songmakers of some Australian Tribes.
By A. W. Howitt, F.G.S., Corr. Mem. Anth. Inst.
The songs and dances of the Australian aborigines are usually
spoken of by our own people as “ corr ohorees,” and this word is also
even frequently applied to any of their social gatherings. This
application is, however, not correct, for the songs, the song and
dances, and the assemblies for social or other purposes have
each their own distinctive name. The word “ corroboree ” has
been adopted by the settlers from some tribal ’dialect in the
early settled districts, probably of New South Wales, and has


been carried by them all over Australia. It may now even be
regarded as an addition engrafted upon the English language. 1
The word “ corroboree ” probably meant originally both the
song and the dance which accompanied it, as is the meaning of
the word “ gunyeru ” in the Kurnai languages.
In these notes I purpose to speak of some of the songs which
I have become acquainted with belonging to the Woiwonmg
tribe of the Yarra Elver, the Kurnai of Gippsland, and their
eastern neighbours the Murring.
The songs are very numerous, and of varied character, and
are connected with almost every part of the social life, for there
is but little of the life of the Australian savage, either in peace
or war, which is not in some measure connected with song.
Some songs are only used as dance music; some are descrip-
tive of events which have struck the composer; some are comic
or pathetic. There is also an extensive class of songs or chaunts
connected with the practice of magic, and of these many are
what maybe called “ incantations ” —words of power chaunted
in the belief that supernatural influence is not asked but com-
pelled by them —influence for evil or for warding off evil.
Connected with this class are songs which are used at the
Initiations, and which are therefore not known to the uninitiated
or to the women.
A very large collection of songs might be made which would
have much interest. For the present I must content myself
with giving a few examples which I have gathered.
1 It is curious to note how words are carried by the settlers from one part of
Australia to another, and even by wild blacks who have visited their friends on
the frontier settlement. By-and-by these words are thought by later comers
to belong to the aboriginal dialect of the place where they are found in use,
while the blacks look upon them as part of the white man’s language. Bor
instance, I found the word “ yaraman,” as meaning horse, used by the Cooper’s
Creek blacks before their country was settled. This word had travelled from
the extreme south-east of New South Wales, where it has been supposed to be
derived from the word “ yiramtin ” = teeth, as referring to the large teeth of
the horse. lam not satisfied with this explanation. At any rate the word had
been carried to Cooper’s Creek where the Yantruwunta used it —as well as the
words “come on wiltfella,” to welcome us. In their own language they used the
word “kadli” or “ kintala,” which means dog, for a horse, as they used the
word “ warawati,” or emu, for a camel. At the stations which then formed
the frontier, bordering the so-called Lake Torrens Basin, there was at each
homestead a blackfellow whose business it was every morning to bring up the
horses which ran loose in the unfenced country. This man was called “ nanto-
shepherd.” The word nanto belongs to the language of the tribes about
Adelaide, where it meant kangaroo, and had thence been carried onwards by the
advancing settlers and their black boys, in its secondary and adapted meaning
of horse. I have found such words in vocabularies compiled for me by corres-
pondents, as for instance the word lubra = woman, which I think originally
came from one of the Yictorian tribes, if not from Tasmania, in a vocabulary
from the Darling Eiver, and which, on my questioning it, was corrected by my
correspondent.


To English ears, unaccustomed to the simple and somewhat
monotonous airs to which the words are set, there seems but
little melody in these chaunts. But with custom they grow
upon one, until at length one feels in some measure the effect
which they produce upon an aboriginal audience in so powerful
a manner.
There is a wild and pathetic music in some songs which I
have heard chaunted by a number of voices together. I
remember especially the air of the song of Ngal-al-bal as
I heard it at the Murring Kuringal, and the song of the Bat,
in which at early dawn the whole camp joined one by one in
chorus, the words describing the bats “ flitting about in the dim
light which shows between the upper boughs of the tall trees.”
The makers of the Australian songs, or of the combined
songs and dances, are the poets or bards of the tribe and are
held in great esteem. Their names are known to the neigh-
bouring peoples, and their songs are carried from tribe to tribe,
until the very meaning of the words is lost as well as the
original source of the song.
It is hard to say how far and how long such songs may travel
in the course of time over the Australian continent. I remember
hearing one song first from one of the hfarrinyeri of the Murray
Liver, in South Australia. I last heard it among the Murring
of Maneroo in New South Wales, and it was a favorite some
forty years ago with the Gewagal tribe of the Hunter Liver,
in same colony. The distance between these extreme
points is about five hundred miles in a direct line, but it by no
means gives the length of the course followed by the song in
its travels.
This song has two versions. The following is the one given
to me by Mr. G. W. Eusden, who sang it from memory as he
learned it from the Gewagal. Unfortunately I have no trans-
lation of the words
“ Mula-muU tdria-rara vannanga
Ngumberdnga y6 yandabd.
The second version is the one sung by one of the Murring,
and runs thus:—
“ Mula-muU Kuruitba tdriarard
Guialturd nangd ebermerangd!’ 1
The singer said that the words spoke of a platypus sitting on
a rock in the river, and that the song came to his tribe from
the Eichmond Eiver. Whether this statement* is well-founded
Mula-mule platypus, Kuruitba = large rock, tariarara=bend of river.


I cannot say, but the man spoke with certainty and apparent
candour.
With some songs there are pantomimic gestures or rhythmical
movements, which are passed on from performer to performer,
as the song is carried from tribe to tribe.
Such an instance is a song which was accompanied by a
carved stick painted red which was held by the chief singer.
This travelled down the Murray Eiver from some unknown
source. 1 The same song, accompanied by such a stick, also
came into Gippsland many years ago from Melbourne, and may
even have been the above-mentioned one on its return.
In the tribes with which I have acquaintance I find it a
common belief that the songs, using that word in its widest
meaning, as including all kinds of aboriginal poetry, are obtained
by the bards from the spirits of the deceased, usually their rela-
tives, during sleep in dreams. Thus the Biraark of the Kurnai
professed to receive their poetic inspirations from the ghosts
( mrart ), as well as the dances which they were supposed to have
first seen performed in ghostland. An interesting example of
such an “inspired song” is found among the Woiworung. Accord-
ing to my informant, Berak, it was composed by the headman of
that section of the Woiworung tribe which was located about
Mount Macedon, and in the males of whose family, from one
generation to the other, 2 was the custody of the quarry from
which the surrounding tribes obtained the stone for their toma-
hawks. The bard who composed this song came of a poetic
stock. His father and his father’s father before him are said to
have been “ the makers of songs which made men sad or joyful
when they heard them.” The old man who sang this song to
me was moved almost to tears by the melancholy which the
words conveyed to him as he chaunted it.
One must be struck by the existence in an Australian tribe of
a family of bards, the prototypes of the “ sacred singers ’ of olden
times. The song is a good instance of this class of compositions,
and also a good example of the belief held by these “sacred
singers ” that they were inspired by something more than mortal
when composing them. In this case it is “ Bunjil ” himself who
“ rushes down ” into the heart of the singer.
The words of the song are as follows, and in the Appendix will
be found another slightly different version. lam under very
great obligations to the Eev. G. W. Torrance, M.A., Mus.D., for
most kindly writing down the music from the lips of the singer
1 The Rev. John Bulmer tells me that he saw this performance at the
junction of the Darling and Murray Rivers.
2 I might perhaps more properly say, successively from “ paternal to filial
group,” for the brothers all participated in the custody of the quarry.


Berak, and for the most valuable remarks which he has made
upon the songs given in the Appendix and on the singers’ musical
powers. To the Kev, Lorimer Bison, M.A., my valued fellow-
worker in this part of the anthropological field, I am also
greatly obliged for the trouble he has taken in bringing about
the meeting between Dr. Torrance and the native bard, and for
writing down with such care the words of the songs.
O
Wenberi’s Song.
Nge tuigdr ngald ngibnba ngalugd
We go all (the) bones to all of them
diudirilnding nga Dulur wiluit.
shining white (in) this Dulur country,
Wa Wiindung Bunjil mameng-ngata yenin
The noise rushing (of) Bunjil father ours singing
thuldrmeik nga wUrngalUk-eik.
(in) breast mine this inside-mine.
There are other poets who composed under what may be
called natural influences as distinguished from supernatural.
Umbara, the bard of the Coast Murring told me that his words
came to him “ not in sleep as to some men, but when tossing on
the waves in his boat with the waters jumping up round him.” 1
As an example of his songs, I give one which he composed when
going down the coast in his boat to attend the initiation cere-
monies which I have described in a previous paper. 2 He sang
the song in the evening, sitting by his fire and beating the time
with two short sticks, while an appreciative and admiring
audience stood round.
Umbara 9 s Song.
Gdlagala binja buningd ngali
Capsizing me striking me
winbelow 3 jend
(the) wind blows hard
kdndubai buningd
between striking
ngali mulari
me dashing up
ngdrauan udja
(the) sea long stretched
mdlinthi buningd
hard hitting striking
binja bUningd.
me striking. 4
1 He is a fisherman and owns a good Sydney-built boat, which he manages
with the aid of his wife. In the olden times these “ sea coast men ” (katungal)
used to go out a mile or more from the coast in their bark canoes to spear fish.
2 “ Australian Ceremonies of Initiation,” “ Journ. Anthrop. Inst.,” May,
1884.
3 This is a curious instance of the manner in which English words are being
engrafted on the aboriginal languages. “ Winbelow” is really “ the wind blows.”
4 I am unable to say how it is that “binja ” and “ ngali” both mean “ me ”
in the same grammatical construction.
a 2


This may be freely but yet not incorrectly translated much as
Umbara himself explained it to me, “ Between the furious wind
and the dashing waves of the long stretched sea 1 was nearly
upset.”
I have mentioned songs which are accompanied by rhythmical
gestures or by pantomime which greatly adds to the effect. A
favorite one which I have seen describes the hunting of an
opossum and its extraction from a hollow log by the hunter, who
is the principal singer, and his assistants. Every action of
finding the animal, the ineffectual attempt to poke it out of its
retreat, the smoking it with a fire, and the killing of it by the
hunters as it runs out, is rendered not only by the words of the
song but also by the concerted actions and movements of the
performers in their pantomimic dancing.
A very favorite song of this kind has travelled in late years
from the Murring to the Kurnai. It was composed by one
Mragula, a noted song maker of the Wolgal, describing his
attempt to cross the Snowy Eiver in a leaky bark canoe during
flood. The pantomimic action which accompanies this song is
much fuller than the words, and is a graphic picture of the
pushing off in the canoe, the paddling into the stream, the gain-
ing of the leak, and after an ineffectual attempt to bale the water
out by the hand, a hurried return to shore. Then the hole being
carefully stopped with adhesive mud, the performers again push
off and paddle across.
The words are in the Wolgal language, and therefore quite
unintelligible to the Kurnai.
Mragula!s Song.
Buraburai biajdnu kumherneino wUrgdiama
Quickly talking mate his (to) looking about
ngilingud hurbundu malagud nuna.
now paddling this side (to).
Many other such songs could be given, but these will suffice to
show their character. Nor is it necessary to do more than to
point out that the comic songs all relate so far as I know to
some passing event. A favorite song of this kind with the
Murring is about “going to Melbourne in the steamer,” and I
have heard the Kurnai sing one inviting a friend to come to a
“ cool shady place with a bottle.”
As connected with magic, or rather with the supernatural,
the following song may serve as an example. It brings into
view a curious belief in some connection supernaturally between
beasts and man which is found in so many Australian beliefs
and tales.


It was composed and sung by a bard named “ Kurburu ” who
lived many years ago in the early days of the settlement of the
country by the whites, near where the town of Berwick now
stands, in the Western Port District. He was supposed to have
killed a “ native bear ,n and being possessed by its spirit ( murup )
thenceforth chaunted its song.
Kurburu's Song.
Enagurda nung ngalourma
There now cut-a-cross
barein gurukba murnein
track blood ?
burunbai nganungba
hurt myself
lilira miiringa.
chipped tomahawk (with). 2
The singer, Berak, gave me the following free translation,
“ You cut across my track, you spilled my blood, and broke your
tomahawk on me.”
Besides the men who were the bards of the tribe, there were
also men of lesser poetic faculty, who devoted themselves to
some branch of “ art magic,” and who used songs therein. The
songs which they used were rather charms, chaunted by them-
selves alone, or with others who joined in the intention of
producing some ill to another, or to alleviate or remove some
ill done by another person. In many cases these chaunts are
invocations of some supernatural being, as when the wizards
call upon “ Daramulun ” at the Kuringal, 3 or when the epony-
mous ancestors, Yeerung and Djeetgun, are called upon by the
Kurnai at their Jeraeil. 4
Such chaunts can scarcely be called songs, but they are part
of the vocal efforts by which the aborigines seek to amuse, to
benefit, to protect themselves, to injure their enemies, or to in-
cline powerful supernatural beings to their good, or to the benefit
and instruction of the young novices. I need not do more now
than notice this as I have described these matters elsewhere,
excepting in so far as to add another of the songs by which the
Bunjil Yenjin 5 of the Kurnai aided those in the olden times who
1 Phascolarctos cinereus.
2 I was not able to obtain a satisfactory verbatim translation of this song.
3 “ Autsralian Ceremonies of Initiation,” “ Journ. Anthrop. Inst.,” May, 1884,
p. 452.
4 “ The Jeraeil, &c.,” “ Journ. Anthrop. Inst,” May, 1885, p. 309.
5 As to the Bunjil Yenjin see a paper in “ Journ. Anthrop Inst.,” August,
1886, p. 409. The word “Yenjin” seems to mean “a song.” See Winberi’s
song in which, in the Woiworung language, which is allied to the language of
the Kurnai, “ yenin ” is to sing.


married by elopement. This Yenjin is in the Mukthang dialect
of the Brabra Kurnai.
Yenjin Song.
Kaidha jirai ydndu Yirung malbretung
Why cut off beard Yeerung long ago
JDjitgun- Djitgun munct betjurdnga 1
Djeetgun there girl’s sleeping place at.
The songs used by the doctors are merely spells chaunted
over and over again, in fact “ incantations ” in the old sense of
the word. Some of these chaunts are said to have been given
to their possessors in dreams. Such an one I heard at the Kurnai
Jeraeil when an old man endeavoured to cure his wife by it of
some internal ailment. My attention was drawn to it by the
extraordinary energy with which he was singing it, to a curious
tune, ending with a complete explosion of the last word. He
told me that it was a powerful charm which his “ other father ”
(breba-mungan =father’s brother) had taught him in a dream.
I give it as possibly a valuable addition to the science of
medicine.
A Charm.
Minyan bulun ma naranke.
Show or point with belly the moon to.
Finally, I may conclude these notes by saying that there are
also “lullabys” and children’s songs, of which the following will
serve as samples:—
Wa! Wa! Wal leldndu mri ngu
Stop! stop! stop! sleep eye thine.
The Woiworung had a somewhat more pretentious song, as to
which my informant said that he “ got it from his grandfather
who got it from his parents, who got it from the old people, who
got it from Bunjil.”
Bobopba N thdre thun kardngre
Baby leg (from the knee down) standing
JBobd'pba melba ngiiriijeana.
baby lean in over straight up.
When the children of the Wotjoballuk saw the new moon
they sang as follows, in the belief that it would make them grow
well:—
1 Eetjurtik is the word applied to that part of the hut in which the un-
married daughter sleeps, that is to say, at her mother’s back, and being thus
next to the bough or hark shelter, her position gives opportunity for signalling
to her from without by her youthful admirer.


Waur waur waur Galimba jera
Grow grow grow Nursing boughs
mamoreik Nurtang ngouretch bapureik.
father mine Wearing woman’s kilt mother mine.
It is to be regretted that more attention has not been paid
to the songs of the Australian blackfellow. There is something
to be learned from them as to the mental condition of the
aborigines and their intellectual status. They throw light also
upon their beliefs and upon their customs. No doubt there are
among their songs, as among those of the civilised peoples also,
some which are coarse or indecent. But these can be dis-
regarded, unless by chance even they may prove to have some
bearing upon custom or belief. As it is, the white man knows
little or nothing of the blackfellows’ songs. To most people
they are unmeaning or barbarous chaunts, and to the mis-
sionaries, who have some more knowledge of them, they savour
of heathendom, and must, therefore, be altogether pushed into
oblivion and be forgotten. Thus, it is that before long all these
songs, old and new, will be lost. As it is, a source of simple and
innocent amusement is cut off from the aborigines by, no doubt,
well meaning but very narrow minded men.
[Reprinted from the Journal of the Anthropological Institute, February, 1887.j
Harrison and Sons, Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty , St. Martin's Lane.




■
.
■
/"


