

Notes on the Coco-de-mer (Lodoicea Seychel-
larum) or Double Cocoa-nut of the Seychelles
Island .
Being a Paper read before the Royal Society of Tasmania, 14th July, 1890.
By Alfred J. Taylor.
1890








NOTES ON THE COCO-DE-MER (LODOICEA SEYCHELLARUM) OF
THE SEYCHELLES ISLAND.
TheCoco-de-mer (Lodoicea Seychellarum )
or double cocoanut, as it is sometimes
called, has become interesting of late,
owing to the many misleading paragraphs
regarding it that have appeared in the
English Press.
Thus for example, a writer in a recent
number of The Colonies and India re-
marks : “They are to be found, not
numerously, of course, but still fairly
numerous, on the west coast of New
Guinea, and it is from that coast, no
doubt, that an occasional nut reaches the
Seychelles.” As a matter of fact, the
Coco-de-mer is not indigenous to New
Guinea, and is only to be found on two
islands of the Seychelles group lsle
Praslin and Isle Curieuse.
The Seychelles Islands are situated
nearly in the centre of the Indian Ocean,
between 3deg. 40min.—5deg. 35min. S.
latitude, and 55deg. 15min. 56deg. Omin.
E. longitude the group consisting of
more than thirty islands—which are im-
portant dependencies of Mauritius.
About the nuts that grow on Isles
Praslin and Curieuse strange stories and
legends have been afloat from times
immemorial. It was believed at one time
that they grew at the bottom of the sea
on a submarine palm—as they were only
found when floating, or when cast up on
the coasts of the Maidive Islands. The
early Portuguese navigators called them
Coco-de Maldiva or Coco de Salomon.
Hooker gives the following interesting
account of the nut in his Botanical Maga-
zine, published in the year 1827 (Vol. 1,
No. 54), and it will give some idea of the
extraordinary nature of the legends and
fabulous stories above referred to.
“The nut only was found floating,”
says the writer, “destitute of its husk,
and mostly with the inner part decayed ;
it was called ‘ Callapa Laut ’ by the Dutch,
and under that appellation Bumphius has
given an historical account of it; but
fabulous as it is he tells us that many
other tales were related to him respecting
it which were too absurd for him to detail.
The double cocoanut is not, he assures us,
a terrestrial production, which may have
fallen by accident into the sea and there
become petrified—as Garcias ab Orta re-
lates —but a fruit, probably growing itself
in the sea, whose tree has hitherto been
concealed from the eye of man.
“ The Malay and Chinese sailors used to
affirm that it was born upon a tree deep
under water, which was similar to a cocoa-
nut tree, and was visible in placid bays
upon the coast of Sumatra, etc., but that
if they sought to dive after the tree it
instantly disappeared.”
The negro priests declared it to grow
near the Island of Java—with its leaves
and branches rising above the water, in
which a monstrous bird or griffin had its
habitation, whence it used to sally forth
nightly, and tear to pieces elephants,
tigers, etc., with its beak, and whose flesh
it carried to its nest. Furthermore, they
avouched that ships were attracted by the
waves which surrounded this tree, and
there retained—the mariner falling a prey
to the savage bird ; so that the inhabi-
tants of the Indian Archipelago always
carefully avoided the spot.
“With such, and many even more
strange ideas respecting its place of growth
and history,” Hooker goes on to say, “it
is not wonderful that this nut should have
been highly prized ; and in the Maldavian
Islands it was death to any man to possess
it All that were found became the
immediate property of the King, who sold
them at a very high price—or offered them
as the most precious of regal gifts. Their
value was estimated at from sixty to one
hundred and twenty crowns; but those
nuts which measured as much in breadth
as in length were the most esteemed, and
those which attained a foot in diameter
were sold for one hundred and fifty crowns.
Nay, some kings have been so greedy of
obtaining these fruits as to have given a
loaded ship for a single one.”
The nuts were esteemed a sovereign
antidote to poison. European and Asiatic
By Alfred J. Taylor.


physicians believed in their medicinal
properties hence one reason for the
enormous prices paid for them. It was
believed that water drunk out of vessels
made from them would preserve people
from all complaints, including colic,
apoplexy, epilepsy, paralysis etc., and
great men made of the shell (after cutting
off the transparent part that forms the
lid) vessels, into which they placed their
tobacco, betel, lime, and whatever else
they masticated believing that by so
doing they would be preserved from
everything noxious that could contaminate
them. The principal virtue of the nut—
according to Hooker—was believed to
reside in the meat or albumen which lines
it, and which becomes so hard and corneous
that it is preserved long after the embryo
is destroyed. This kernel was triturated
with “water of porphyry ” —whatever that
may mean—and mingled with black and
white, or red coral, ebony, and stags
horns, the whole being drunk together.
In more recent years the nut has ceased
to be an object of great value or curiosity,
and the tree and its fruit have been con-
verted to many useful and domestic pur-
poses. Hooker tells us that the trunk of
the palm, which is hard externally, is
split and made into water troughs and
used for palisades for surrounding houses
and gardens. The foliage is used for thatch-
ing houses and sheds, and even for walls
—as with a hundred leaVfe'sa commodious
dwelling may be completed even to the
partitions required. The'<#bwn attached
to the young leaves serves for filling
mattresses and pillows. The ribs of the
leaves and fibres of the petioles are made
into brooms and baskets. The young leaves
are made into hats—the unexpanded leaves
being dried in the sun—cut into longi-
tudinal strips, two or three lines in
breadth, and then plaited. The terminal
bud or “ cabbage ” of the palm is eaten,
and the jelly-like substance which the
nut contains is also edible.
Out of the shells vessels for different
purposes are made. Preserved whole,
and perforated, they serve to carry
water, one being suspended at each end
of a stick. Divided in two the lobes do
for plates, dishes, or drinking cups, which
are valuablb for their durability. Amongst
other articles Shaving dishes—black,
beautifully carved, polished and set in
silver, are made from them.
Although fabulous stories are no longer
attached to the Coco-de-mer, imagination
still loves to linger about its island home
if we may judge from the following :
The late General Gordon had a fond
fancy that one Island. (Praslin) upon
which the nut grows was the site of the
Garden of Eden. Mr. W. H. Etridge,
late Receiver-General, British Bechuana-
land, writes in the Daily News :—“ I was
at Seychelles, in the Colonial Service,
when General Gordon came there from
Mauritius On one occasion
he said he thought ‘Praslin must have been
the Garden of Eden.’ When I suggested
that if so the Coco-de-mer could not have
been the apple (the husk being some four
inches thick before one arrives at the shell
of the nut) as Eve could not have bitten
it, he remarked ‘I never thought of that.’”
The Seychelle Islands were discovered
in 1743, but we are told that the tree
yielding the nut was first discovered by
Barre, a French Officer of Engineers, in
the year 1769, and first accurately des-
cribed by Labillardiere (Ann. Mus. Paris
IX., p. 140, 113) and a plate of the palm
(for a copy of which lam indebted to
my honoured friend and correspondent
Baron von Mueller) may be found in
“ Hooker’s Botanical Magazine,” before
referred to.
We are told in Lindley and Moore’s
“ Treasury of Botany ” that the palm has
a nearly cylindrical trunk, scarcely ex-
ceeding a foot in diameter, and bearing a
crown of large fan-shaped leaves, some of
which are upwards of twenty feet long,
and twelve feet wide. They are of two
sexes, both of which have three sepals
and three petals to the flowers, those of
the female being large, thick, and fleshy.
We are also told, on the same authority,
that the shortest period before this mag-
nificent palm puts forth its flower buds is
thirty years, and that a hundred years
elapse before it attains to its full growth.
It attains its greatest beauty between the
ages of fifteen and twenty-five years
“ the leaves at this period being much
larger than they are subsequently.”
The stem in the male tree frequently
attains a height of one hundred feet, the
female being shorter. In this we have,
no doubt, an explanation of the various
estimates of the height of the tree given
by different writers and which haye varied
from fifty to one hundred feet*


“ At the age of thirty,” to quote the
exact words of the authority last referred
to, “itfirst puts forth its blossoms, the
males forming enormous catkins about
three feet in length and three inches in
diameter, while the females are set on a
strong zig-zag stalk, from which hang four
five, or sometimes as many as eleven nuts,
averaging about 401 b. weight each. From
the time of flowering to the maturation
of the fruit a period of nearly ten years
elapses, the full size, however, being at-
tained in about four years, at which time
it is soft and full of a semi-transparent
jelly-like substance.
The apparently peculiar formation of
the root portion of this tree attracted
much attention a few years since, but,
upon comparison with other palms it
seems to be explained as an extraordinary
development of a common system. The
base of the stem is rounded and fits into a
natural bowl or socket, which is pierced
with hundreds of small oval holes about
the size of a thimble, with hollow tubes
corresponding on the outside, through
which the roots penetrate the ground on
all sides—never, however, becoming at-
tached to the bowl—their partial elasticity
affording an almost imperceptible, but
very necessary, ‘ play ’ to the parent stem
when struggling against the force of
violent gales. This bowl is of the same
substance as the shell of the nut, only
much thicker, and it rots very slowly, for
it has been found quite perfect and entire
In every respect sixty years after the tree
has been cut down.”
For the specimen of Coco-de-mer that I
exhibit, I am indebted to the kindness of
L. R. Castray, Esq. The nat was given to
Mr. Castray, while at Mauritius, 28 years
ago. Being then quite fresh it took him
some time to remove the husk. As the
interior decomposed the nut became so
offensive that it had to be kept out of the
dwelling-house for some considerable time.
The hard horny kernel referred to above
remains in the shell.
When Mr. Castray learned that I was
looking up information on the subject, he
courteously offered to write to the Governor
of British New Guinea in order to settle
the point as to the nut growing in that
country. Sir William MacGregor’s reply,
which has been placed at my disposal, so
effectively settles this point besides giving
other information of importance relating
to the palm upon which it grows that I
cannot do better than give his letter as
written, and as a fitting conclusion to this
paper. It is as follows :
Government House,
British New Guinea,
18-5-90.
Dear Sir,—The Coco-de-mer grows only
on two small islands of the Seychelles
group —lie Praslin and lie Curieuse. The
latter I rented from the Government in
1874-75. The two Islands were probably
united at one time. There are not now
many hundred trees left. It takes about
30 to 60 years for a tree to reach the bear-
ing point, so that the Creoles do not care
for planting them as an industry. They
produce one leaf a year which, unfortu-
nately, makes excellent material for straw
hats, fans, etc. The result is, it is usually
cut out and the growth of the tree im-
paired. It takes about seven years to
mature a nut. I got no ripe ones from
my trees as they had for years been
stripped before the nuts were ripe, and
the central leaves had in many of the trees
been long removed. But my men used
to find many fossil nuts in the little
marshes at the foot of the steep ridges, a
stiff barren clay, much of which grew
nothing whatever. But these ridges were
covered by the cup shaped root receptacles
into which the end of the stems of these
giant palms had once fitted when the
whole island unbroken forest of
them. A descriptive paper was written
by Mr. Hentyb-Ward, Chief Civil Com-
missioner of Seychelles, probably not far
from 1870, in which you would find a full
account of all the characteristics of this
most wonderful palm. The trees grow on
only one small plantation on the lie
Praslin, which belonged to an old British
sailor who had married the Creole owner.
The other island belongs to the Govern-
ment. Specimens have been planted and
are now growing in several countries, but
it will probably soon become extinct in
Seychelles. It does not grow in New
Guinea, nor is it indigenous save in
Seychelles. I noticed in some paper
quite lately what you say about its growing
in New Guinea and being washed to
Seychelles, which naturally rather amused
me, as I had been over two years in that
group and had seen so mpchjof it.
Yours very truly,
Wm. Macgregob.


