

A &<s*-£
# V.
/V ,cy&
NOTES ON THE ABORIGINES OE NEW HOLLAND.
A,~ ,




Notes on the Aborigines of New Holland.
By James Manning.
[Read before the Royal Society of N.S.W., 1 November, lSB2d\
In 1844 and 1845 I had the privilege of taking some interesting-
notes from the blacks of this Colony on the subject of their religious
belief. Those notes were necessarily and mainly taken from the
most intelligent of those natives who frequented the neighbourhood
of my own home in the bush in those early days. At and before
that time I resided at Cumbamarro, very near the outside boun-
daries of the then location of settlers to the south, and near the
Murrumbidgee River, and for ten years prior to my taking such
notes in writing I was a resident of those parts. For the first
four or five years or more of that earliest time there was no
church south of the little one that was at Bong Bong, near Mitta-
gong. The cities and towns of Goulburn, Yass, Albury, and
Melbourne did not exist. It was a common parlance amongst the
early settlers, when travelling south, before Goulburn and Yass
townships were formed and had churches, to say that “ there was
no Sunday after crossing Myrtle Creek,” which is a stream border-
ing old Bargo Brush, a little south of Picton, and some 50 miles
only from Sydney. No missionaries ever came to the southern
district at any time, and it was not until many years later that
the missionaries landed in Sydney on their way to Moreton Bay,
to attempt, in vain, to christianize the blacks of that locality,
before the Queensland separation from this Colony took place.
These facts are advanced in proof that the notes which I took,
later on, upon the religious belief of the whole of the aborigines of
this continent are perfectly true and consistent with their own
traditions. I also desire to say that, since I penned them, in
January, 1845, I met with fresh confirmations to the general
belief of the blacks in a Supreme Being or Deity in all parts of
New South Wales, in Victoria as far west as the Grampian Hills,
and in Queensland as far north as Rockhampton. At each such place
the God of their faith was in every instance represented to me as
having his abode where the sun rises. I may further add my
conviction, without having visited the far interior of those parts
where Burke and Wills perished, that the blacks are all of the
same religious belief as those who have come under my notice and
inquiries. This conviction I maintained from the moment that I
5 h 6—83


saw in the Illustrated London News of that time the picture of
two stalwart natives of that region, who were sketched from
nature by one of the parties who went in search of those unhappy
explorers. That picture represented those two fine-looking blacks
to be minus the front tooth, which I considered had doubtlessly
been knocked out under the sacred ceremony of the so-called
“ Irangung,” the nature of which my notes fully explain.
The extraordinary though incongruous parallel between the
religious belief of the natives of this country with those of the
Hebrews or of Christian nations caused a great deal of doubt to be
cast on the originality of the statements made by me. Many of
those who read them pooh-poohed the idea of their truthfulness ;
in some instances I felt myself to have been almost insulted for
having propounded what seemed to be evidence of weak credulity
on my part. I may mention that almost the first person and
friend to whom I showed these notes was Mr. Charles Oowper,
afterwards Sir Charles. He saw them when we met in Mel-
bourne, in April, 1845. He expressed himself to be much
astonished at the revelations I had thereby made, but could not
divest himself of the idea that some missionaries, catechists,
priests, or clergymen had been tampering with or schooling my
black friends into a crude kind of trinitarian belief ■ and he
expressed his opinion that the notes needed confirmation from
other quarters than from the special parts only where I resided
in New South Wales, and from whence I obtained my earliest
and leading information. That confirmation I have since obtained
in various and widely separated places, as before stated. As Sir
Charles (then Mr. Cowper) thought of these notes, so did very
many ; but when I lent them to the late Bishop Broughton to
read, in 1851, he was so struck with the statements made, and
found them so ably and really logically supported by the singular
avowals and remarks of my chief sable informant, that he asked for
a copy of them to take with him to England, to have them printed
there through one of the religious Societies. I was at that time
under a pledge to my black informant not to publish them in Sydney
until they had been published in England, for reasons which will
appear to be just and warranted when the notes are read and
understood. I gave Bishop Broughton a full copy as he was leaving
for England in 1852 ; he died shortly after reaching home, and that
copy has never since been heard of. My original paper remained
with me for twenty years afterwards ; it was lent to various friends,
among whom was the late Bishop Barker. At last, and about ten
year ago, this original, by passing from friend to friend, also became
lost • but fortunately (as the sequel will show), among the many
who had had the notes to read was the late Lord Audley, who
had them in 1852, just thirty years ago, and whilst he was
encamped near my station. By a strange coincidence it was only


within the last three months that our worthy President (Mr. C.
Rolleston), who had heard me speak of these old and lost notes,
remarked, in conversation about them with Mr. John F. Mann, of
Sydney, that I had had and had lost such notes. Whereon Mr.
John Mann, who was Lord Audley’s brother-in-law, immediately
exclaimed, “ Why, I have them ; I took a copy of them into a
folio book whilst the notes were with Lord Audley !” Hence,
and by this extraordinary coincidence, the notes are restored to
me in their original wording, and I have now the pleasure to make
them public, there being no longer any reason for caution in
making them known, my black friend “ Andy/’’ who gave me
almost all my information, having passed away, and the whole race
of blacks in the civilised parts no longer existing in their primitive
state, and having nearly died out, as prophetically decreed.
I wish to add, in confirmation of the originality and truthful-
ness of these notes, that Black Andy was respected by all the few
gentlemen who were in my neighbourhood ; and that in my own
solitude in those days I appreciated the interchanges of thought
with this fine aboriginal, whom I used to regard in the light of- a
‘•'nature’s gentleman,” of no mean reflecting and reasoning
capacities, and who by his ready acquisition of the English,
language afforded me singular advantages in gaining the infor-
mation I did. Mr. John Mann knew this good “ blackfellow”'
very well, and will perhaps support my present attestation of his
superiority before 1 give utterance to notes which will surprise,
and will be found to give evidence of the tradition of the blacks
on their religious creed much in same way as the Old and New
Testaments contain the traditions of the Christians and Hebrews.
I may state, under my own familiarity with the subject, that the
natives of New Holland are not heathens or pagans, because they
worship no idols ; and that, so far from their being atheistic in
their belief, they are not even deistic, because they not only
acknowledge a Supreme Deity, but also believe in his providential
supervision of all creation, aided by his Son, “ Grogoragally,” and
by the second mediator, in the supernatural person of their inter-
cessor, “Moodgeegally,” and also because they believe in a day of
judgment and retribution to each man immediately after death
and resurrection, and in a future state of reward and punishment
by the fiat of their Supreme “ Boyma,” or God, as will be under-
stood on the reading of my notes.
These notes will also, and unfortunately, show that the origin-
ality and seeming implicitness of the religious belief and superstitions
of the natives of New Holland are rendered almost nugatory by
the extraordinary and debasing ignorance under which they are
bound to keep their women, through the supposed stern decree of
their great lawgiver, “ Moogeegally.” They degrade their women
worse than the Hindus do theirs.


In conclusion, I wish to say that the singular recovery of
these notes is due to the interest which Lord Audley and
Mr. John Mann took in them, so much so as to have copied
them in detail unknown to myself, and that their resuscitation
is due to the interest which Mr. Rolleston expressed about
their having existed and been lost. To these gentlemen I wish
to tender my thanks. Between us all these notes seem to
have been destined not to be irrecoverably lost; and now that
I have them again, and that as I have nearly reached the
full span of human life, I hope it may be accorded by this
meeting that no more time should be lost to place them on
permanent record, to which effect I have much pleasure in offering
them to this our Sydney Royal Society.
P.S.—The above constitutes my preface to the old notes
which I am about to read you; but since I have penned
this preface, and, indeed, only this morning, I am placed in
possession of still further corroboration of the originality of
the subject matter of my notes. I had invited Dean Cowper
to come here this evening, and, as an inducement I sent him
a press copy of my preface to the notes, which he returned to-day
with a very interesting note of his own, part of which, I am
sure, he would have no objection to my quoting. After informing
me that he regretted that professional duties would prevent him
from attending this meeting as a visitor, he gives me the following
information, which is most interesting, and gives the strongest
confirmation to all I have written and said on the subject.
Before quoting his words, I beg to say that I was perfectly
ignorant of what he informs me as having come from Archdeacon
Gunther and from the Rev. Mr. Ridley, although I knew that
they had both written on the subject of the faith of the blacks,
years and years since the date of my notes ; and as they point to
the same traditions, I shall quote them with the greatest
satisfaction.
The Dean writes me as follows : —“ Ido not know whether you
are aware that the late Archdeacon Gunther, of Mudgee, pre-
pared a grammar of the aboriginal language, which went home a
few years ago, through the Colonial Secretary, to Professor Max
Muller. In this grammar there was a special note upon the
belief of the aborigines on the being of a Deity, his providence,
and the doctrine of rewards and punishments. Mr. Gunther,
when a missionary to the aborigines at Wellington Yalley, derived
his information, he told me, from some of the oldest of the blacks,
who, he was satisfied, could not have derived their ideas from
white men, as they had not then had intercourse with them. The
language, also, was witness of their faith. There was a being to
whom they gave the name of Baime, or Bhaiame. The word is a
noun, from baio or bhaio, which means to cut or make, and


signifies maker. They applied this to Him who made all things •
they said that He lived far away, and that He would punish had
men and reward good. This news was strongly confirmed by the
Rev. Mr. Ridley, who was a missionary for about two years
amongst the Kamilaroi tribe of aborigines on the Upper Hunter
River. He also compiled a grammar, which I dare say you have
seen ; and in it he gives the same name for the Deity amongst
the aboriginals with whom he had been associated, and whose
language he had learned. I had a conversation with him one
day, in which he referred me to his grammar, corroborating what
I had heard from Archdeacon Gunther.”
With such unexpected corroboration of my own words, I end
this preface by saying that if scepticism in this matter is still to
continue, I think unbelievers would do well to peruse the notes
a second time carefully before they pronounce their judgment on
the revelations made, which were never dreamt of before I made
them public. To such sceptics I will venture the suggestion
that they should consider how easy it might be for intelligent
men to pass almost a lifetime among the blacks in any quarter of
this continent without securing that entire confidence of even the
best of the natives around them, through whom they might
possibly become entrusted with their religious secrets—secrets
which they dare not reveal to their own women at all, nor to their
adult youths until the latter have been sworn to reticence under
that terrifying ceremony which my notes describe.
I, however, claim to have been specially fortunate in my
researches, and therefore, with my confidence in the validity of
these statements, I leave it to time and the future inquiries of
others to have my notes confirmed in manner I have no doubt
they will be.
Notes on the Religious Creed, &c., of the Natives op New
Holland.
The aborigines of the southern part of New Holland have a
belief in the existence of a Supreme Being ; and, from connecting
circumstances, I am of opinion that the same creed upon religious
subjects exists throughout the whole continent of New Holland.
The God of their belief is called “ Boyma,” who, they say, dwells
at an immense distance to the north-east, in a heaven of beautiful
and supernatural appearance, where the Almighty is represented
by them as seated on a throne of transparent crystal of vast
magnitude, which has its base in the great water, and rises to a
stupendous height towards the stars. In their notion of God’s
appearance he is great beyond conception, beautiful to look upon,
and immovably fixed in this crystal rock, with only the upper
half of a supernatural human body visible. Around Boyma


jrnd his tin one are countless rays of rainbow colours, which are
desisted “ curanguerang. ” On each side of the throne are seen
a great ffi- an y beautiful pillars of crystal, handsomely carved, and
emitting prismatic colours, These pillars they designate “yamoon.”
This description of the Godhead bears a striking resemblance
to the description in 3rd verse of the 4th chapter of Revelations.
They believe in the existence of a Son of God, equal with him in
omniscience, and but slightly inferior to his Father in any
attribute. Him they call “ Grogoragally.” His divine office is
to watch over the actions of mankind, and to bring to life the
\tead to appear before the judgment-seat of his Father, who alone
pronounces the awful judgment of eternal happiness in heaven,
“ Ballima,” or eternal misery in “Oorooma” (hell), which is a
place of everlasting fire (gumby). Their belief in God’s creation
of His own Son was explained to me thus by the intelligent native
from whom I derived my chief information. “ Boyma,” on his
own creation, feeling “ lonesome,” wished for a son after his own
likeness. He observed in the firmament a liquid, resembling
blood, which, reaching with his hand, he placed in a crystal oven,
and, in a short time, the Son of God was born, a being resembling
God and man. Boyma is described as of an incomprehensible
greatness in appearance ; his Son they compare to the size of a
mountain. Grogorogally is the active agent of his Father, who
immovably presides over all nature. The Son watches the actions
of men, and quickens the dead immediately upon their earthly
interment. He acts as mediator for their souls to the great God,
to whom the good and bad actions of all are known. The Son’s
spirit they represent as being in every part of the habitable
world, spreading—as was expressed to me—over the supposed
distance of England and Sydney. He does not seem in their
belief to be co-equal with his Father; he sees and knows all t
wicked and good deeds of mankind, but is not judge of their
virtues and vices in the day of retribution ; his office seems chiefly
to be to bring at the close of every day the spirits of the dead
from all parts of the world to the judgment-seat of his Father,
where alone there is eternal day. There he acts as intercessor for
those who have only spent some portion of their lives in wicked-
ness. Boyma, listening to the mediation of his Son, allows
Grogorogally to admit some such into Ballima.
There is a third person in their belief, who is of a semi-divine,
semi-human nature, the great lawgiver to the human race. Him
they call “ Moodgeegally.” He was the first man created, and
being of the special formation of the Supreme Being, he is said to
be immortal, removed from this to an indefinite distance in a
happy region of his own, situated at the confines of the world, and
in the immediate neighbourhood of the supposed heaven of Boyma.
He, too, is perfectly cognizant of all events, and is revered by all


for his virtues. He is the avowed enemy of all wicked men ;
misdeeds of such are transmitted by him to Grogorogally, and by
the latter again to the supreme Boyma. Notwithstanding that both
Father and Son are omniscient, Moodgeegally, alone of mankind,
and himself living immortal in his own paradise on earth, has the
power of visiting the heaven of Boyma. The happy land of
Moodgeegally is supposed to be within three days’ journey
(“ nangery”) of Ballima. Beautiful plains, with numberless and
wonderful featherless emus, afford him eternal happiness in his
human occupation when not engaged in his divine mission to the
abode of God, and from thence again to the confines of this world,
which he seems to be unremittingly doing. From this blissful
region, far away to the north-east, and where land terminates, he
ascends to heaven by a high and precipitous mountain, covered
with beautiful trees. His ascent on foot is rendered easy by a
path winding round the mountain, called “ Dallambangel,” which
he ascends in a three days’ journey. A ladder or flight of steps
from the top of this mountain leads him to the entrance of heaven,
where he arrives in the presence of God to execute his mission to
the Father and Son ; and receiving from them such laws as may
seem fit to the Almighty to transmit to the human race, especially
such as relate to the changing ordinances of the sacred “corroberee.”
Moodgeegally then descends again to the earth, and publishes the
will and laws of Boyma to the northernmost tribes, and from them
all others by degrees obtain the laws.
This description of Moodgeegally on Mount “ Dallambangel ”
cannot fail to strike every reader of these notes as showing a
strange similarity to Moses on Mount Sinai receiving the com-
mandments from God, for transmission through him to the Israel-
ites. (See Exodus, chap. 19). Ballima (heaven) is represented
as being a most blissful abode for the good who have inherited
eternal happiness. The rejoicings of the blessed, I was told,
might be heard at a distance as far apart as “ Sydney to Port
Phillip.” Their existence in heaven is of a spiritual nature, with
their forms as human beings, receiving and requiring no nourish-
ment, their enjoyments constant dancing and blissful shoutings.
Grogorogally frequently visits them, and joins in the incessant
happy jubilee. He is represented to wear a brilliant belt
(“ gurungerong”) of rainbow colours, worn across the shoulder
to the side. This is of a crystal nature ; from the belt is sus-
pended a beautiful crystal sword or wand called “ gundungbillong,”
and which his Father made and gave him as a sign of his divine
authority. Hence probably the use of and veneration for the
small rock crystals which descend from father to son as amulets
of supposed semi-divine authority to act as doctors and priests.
Andy possessed one as a “doctor”—he specially prized and
protected it.


The wicked Boyma condemns to eternal fire in Oorooma.
Grogorogally then hands them over to the devils outside of heaven,
which are called “ Wawamolong.” These evil spirits are described
as being of most hideous forms, and emitting flames of fire from
the elbows, the knees, and the knuckles of the hand. These con-
vey the damned down to Oorooma, where may be heard the
frightful yells of the wicked; they are then given in charge of
lesser devils, and committed to the eternal “ Gumby” fire. These
devils are described as only half human in appearance; they have
long claws to their hands, with which they seize the unhappy
wretches committed to their care. They are monsters, having
ugly “ heads as big as a bullock.” The miseries of those suffering
eternal fire were represented to me by my informant by mock
writhings of his body. * * * This severe description of eternal
punishment by hell-fire is inconsistent with their other belief, that
Boyma is never considered by them otherwise than as a benevo-
lent, though dreaded, being. The dread of eternal punishment
acts forcibly as a restriction upon their conduct in life, and re-
strains them from murder among themselves, or from slaughtering
of their own race, unless in the spirit of united and justified
revenge, which is not punished by “Gumby.” No crimes, they
believe, are so punishable but murder, falsehood, and adultery
when committed by married men. The act of thieving among
themselves is wholly unknown, swearing is also unknown to them
in their own language. Such blasphemies as are heard from them
are entirely such as they have acquired by their intercourse with
Europeans. They admit they rob the whites sometimes, but do
not esteem this act punishable with fire. I remarked to Andy
that if I told the whites all he informed me of they would laugh
and say “ the blacks have been told all this from the whites,” to
which he hastily and shrewdly remarked, “ Why, whitefellow no
call budgery place ‘ Ballima,’ (nice place heaven), or other place
£ Oorooma’ (hell), nor God ‘ Boyma,’ nor son ‘ Grogorogally,’ only
we blackfellow think and call them that way in our own language
before whitefellow came into the country.” He seemed quite
amazed that whites might attempt to disbelieve their statement
on that ground. Their women do not go to heaven. The men
have an imperfect consciousness that there is another world for
them, but not in Ballima. The strange reason assigned for this
is, that Boyma and Grogorogally, having no wife and no mother,
will not admit the female sex into heaven, whether they be good
or evil.
I was asked by Andy if we white people thought white women
went to heaven. On my expressing my assurance of it, he ex-
pressed his surprise at our strange belief in entertaining such an
idea, Boyma having neither mother nor wife. “ But we’ll see
when we die,” was his final remark to this as to several other


pointsfin dispute. To women the grand secrets of their religious
belief are wholly unknown. They are regarded as inferior beings,
and that there is a law given them by Moodgeegally that
they should always be kept ignorant of these mysteries ;
for that, immediately upon the women becoming informed of them,
there must be an immediate end put to the whole of their race by
a general massacre, first of the women, and then each to sacrifice
the other until the last man survives to sacrifice himself. So
rigid are the men in the observance of this supposed divine law,
that in no instance has a living woman been known to have an
idea of their religious belief.
It is the dread of this necessary destruction of the whole race
that has in a great measure precluded the whites from obtaining
information on the subject. I had in the first instance the greatest
difficulty to induce the men to speak to me on these points j they
required such secrecy on my part, and seemed so afraid of being
overheard even in the most secret places, that in one or two
instances I have seen them almost trembling whilst speaking. In
one case I examined a native, and for the sake of secrecy made him
come into the house. He appeared willing to afford me informa-
tion ; but he went two or three times to the door and window to
see if any being, black or white, might by possibility overhear him,
although in this respect he was perfectly safe, yet for further
security he stood in the wooden fireplace, and spoke in a tone a
little above a whisper, and confirmed what I had before heard.
Another cautioned me to be very secret lest the station servants
might hear of it, and ask his gin (wife) something about it. This
particular man was the most intelligent of those I obtained infor-
mation from. He asked if I would publish my notes in England,
as he seemed proud to think it should be done, and did not fear
mischief through that course. He said if his wife were to hear of
it and ask him a question about it, he should immediately kill her
to save himself and the whole race, as ordered by Moodgeegally.
Having examined a civilized native from the Lower Lachlan
Hiver, who came from a distance of 300 miles, and was living with
a gentleman in the neighbourhood as servant, I had the oppor-
tunity of questioning him in the presence of my black interpreter,
who explained all I could not understand. The Lachlan native’s
statements agree fully with all the others, excepting that he
designated Grogoragally by the name of “ Boymagela,” which he
told me meant Son of God or young god—a name as applied to
Grogoragally that Andy had never heard before. The other, or
Lachlan black, was aware of the name of Grogoragally, though
not usually adopted in his country. The Port Phillip and the
Murray natives have another name for him, which I do not re-
member. The souls of the dead rise again soon after interment, by
the agency of the spirit of Grogoragally, who they say administers


“ water” to the relicts of the deceased men, which water of life
being sent from the great Boyma instils fresh life into the remains ;
and when these are brought before the throne of Boyma, they
instantly fall before his presence, when their spirits die a second
death, as if to become abased before God and to throw off their
mortal nature. Half an hour after this they suppose the souls to
rise again in a wholly new and regenerate state ; or, to use Andy’s
expression in his broken English, “ They no good first time when
come before Boyma—only all wild fellow and bail budgery (no
good), and very miserable.” After this new birth they become im-
mortal. At this period it is that judgment of God is pronounced
in command to his son Grogoragally. To those he has judged to
be good, he orders the Son to put them into heaven —“ Ballima
warrior bungandinge.” For those he judges to be wicked he pro-
nounces the judgment “ Gumly ganoo niagroo ” (“ Let him burn”).
These awards to Grogoragally are the only ones supposed to have
been uttered by God in the presence of resuscitated mortals.
The only prayer used is that at the interment of men, when all the
adult males of the tribe assemble, and having buried their deceased
friend (ordinary men in the ground, and those who possessed author-
ity in hollow trees), they all retire irregularly at a distance from the
grave, and all kneeling together clasp their hands behind their backs,
and all simultaneously utter a lamenting prayer respecting the praises
and good deeds of their friend, and imploring Grogoragally to inter-
cede for his soul that it may be admitted into Ballima. After this
prayer (which was represented to me), or just at its close, they
have a strange superstition that always at this moment the dead
man is heard to kick in his grave, which is the signal that his
soul has just taken its departure to heaven. The poor women
never kick in their grave nor rise to heaven—no prayer is offered
for them. The custom of daily prayer to God is thought absurd ;
it is supposed to be only resorted to by those who have sinned and
wish to escape punishment. As good men cannot have occasion
for such supplication, and as they say bad men cannot profit by
it, it is altogether omitted. The use of prayer among whites is
ridiculed on this ground, that men pray to Boyma and praise him,
and rise from their knees and curse and swear and commit
rogueries. Andy’s curiosity had once or twice induced him to visit
the Yass church recently, when he formed this opinion of the
lower orders particularly; but he thought “ real gentlemen ”
seemed to profit by the habit of attending churches, as he seldom
heard them swear, and he seemed to entertain a much higher
opinion of their moral conduct. Wicked men, though sometimes
unknown to men to be wicked, cannot screen themselves from the
searching eye of Boyma. They, in common with other offenders,
are supposed to have a mark set on them, such as small-pox,
coughs, &c., which, if they persist in sin, infallibly produces


death. These after death are conveyed by Grogoragally to Boyma,
who pronounces the judgment on them before mentioned, and
then they are handed over to Wawamolongs, to remain in eternal
torture in Oorooma.
Thunder and lightning are regarded as the expression of Boyma’s
wrath at some wicked deed perpetrated or being perpetrated by a
man. It is regarded with great awe by them as by all savages, or
indeed by all men who are wholly ignorant of the cause and effect.
These natives do not think that some malignant being is the cause,
as most other savages do; they regard it (that is the men) as a
powerful sound, proceeding from an angry God, who is never
considered by them otherwise than as a benevolent though
dreaded being. When any recover from sickness or other calamity,
it is supposed their guilt has not been too great for pardon, and
Boyma accordingly restores them to health and vigour after their
temporary punishment. Early death is supposed to be a sign of
Boyma’s wrath, for in the beginning, they say, all men were
gifted with longevity, but that sin cuts them off in their prime.
Old men must be good men, as Boyma would otherwise have
shortened their days. When the good old men become by their
nature infirm and incapable of enjoyment, Boyma releases them
from the world in compassion, and immediately they are trans-
ferred to the abode of the happy in Ballima.
The religious mysteries are not divulged to boys until they
arrive at the years of puberty, and not until the ceremony of
“ Irangung ” has been performed upon them, a practice which
may be regarded as a kind of adult baptism, as the boys are then
taught to know and believe in the mysteries of the religion
of their forefathers, the nature of the creation of the world and of
all things, and to believe in a future state of immortality and of
rewards and punishments. The age of puberty is adopted for
the ceremony evidently from expediency, and from a care not to
trust younger boys with those secrets which their carelessness or
their ignorance of the nature of a vow or moral obligation might
lead them to reveal. The age of the boys on whom the Irangung is
performed is about fourteen years. The blacks consider this
ceremony sacred, and to be especially sent from Boyma through
Moodgeegally. The forms of ceremony involve the necessity of
having the front tooth knocked out with sharp stone tools. At this
ceremony all the neighbouring tribes for perhaps one hundred miles
around assemble together in a secret place. The men select from
the whole body of blacks such young men as they deem fit to be
irangunged. They may find from twenty to thirty fit for the
ceremony, in proportion to the total number congregated and to
the length of time elapsed since the last similar occasion, which
only occurs at periods varying from one to three years. These


youths being selected by the older men, are painted all over with
red ochre and then formed into a ring. This being done, all the
women and all the children over two years of age are ordered to
lie down and to conceal themselves under their opossum cloaks,
which they must do at the peril of their lives. The men then
heap upon them light leafy boughs of trees, to insure their safer
concealment. Upon this being done—and no white man dare be
admitted to witness the ceremony—the grown and selected boys
are, by a signal of one specially authorized, ordered to go off into
the “ bush” in a certain direction, and are accompanied by all the
men, excepting one, who remains, spear in hand, as a guard over
the women and children, and who is the one they say is gifted
with sacred authority from Moodgeegally. Him they call a
“ Yaweyewa,” and Andy compares his office to that of our priests
or parsons. This Yaweyewa, soon after the other party is out of
sight, tells the women to rise, and directing them a contrary course
to that taken by the men and youths, accompanies them and
remains on guard all the ensuing night. The same ceremony
exists among the Darling River and Queensland blacks, where it
is called the “ Borcc,” for making youths men.
At this time all the grown boys are conducted by the men to a
most secret spot, where the ceremony of the irangung is completed.
The front tooth of each is knocked out, some ten or twenty men
standing over each youth, pointing their spears in a menacing
manner close to his person, and others holding his hair tight,
make him swear most solemnly never to divulge to the women
and children those sacred secrets about to be told him. To this
the affrighted lad is forced to consent upon pain of his being
instantly speared and cut to pieces. The solemn oath being thus
administered to each youth, the authorized priests divulge to the
youths their religious creed, and when the terrifying ceremony is
completed, they are taught a sacred song sent by Boyma through
his Son Grogeragally and Moodgeegally. This song is held in such
solemn reverence, and known under such severe secrecy, that I
found it quite impossible to make my informant reveal it to me.
My pressing him only seemed to make him impatient and angry,
and as he said he dared not do so because it was against the laws
received from Moodgeegally, I desisted from any further attempt.
He then said he was sure that I already knew more of their
secrets than any other white man did, and that he was satisfied
that no others supposed his countrymen entertained any such
religious beliefi as he and others had revealed to me. Youths
cannot marry until they have gone through the ceremony of iran-
gung, and any boy dying before this kind of baptism does not go
to Ballima, but shares the same fate as the luckless women. On
the death of a husband the survivor is forbidden by Moodgeegally’s
law to marry for a long while. Should this law be broken, both


parties are killed as soon as discovered, as it is tliought their con-
versation on the deceased man must be prejudicial to him and
would displease him.
The term corrobery is generally understood to signify a dance,
whereas it is a changing ordinance of Moodgeegally, and is sup-
posed to be transmitted from tribe to tribe from the far north-
east. I cannot clearly understand this strange mystery, but lam
aware that the ceremony is a very solemn one among the adults
when it does take place. It has for its form the most curious
painting upon a sheet of bark, done in various colours
of red, yellow, and white ochre, which is exhibited by the
“ Yaweyewa” before mentioned, who is appointed by descent from
Moodgeegally. This sacred ceremony is as secretly conducted
as the “ Irangung” or Boree of the north. A gentleman of my
acquaintance chanced to come on a tribe whilst this ceremony was
going on in a deep gully in the ranges. He had reason to apprehend
that some violence would be done to him for his intrusion, but
was saved by the intercession of one or two who knew him well. He
saw the sheet of bark, and represented it to me as being most
singularly painted, and was done so neatly as to resemble figured
oilcloth. It is consequent on these sacred occasions that they
meet and have those night dances which are ordinarily called
“ corrobery.”
To Boyma is ascribed the creation of all the heavenly bodies.
They believe the earth to be an immense plane, and fixed, the sun,
moon, and stars revolving round it to give it light. On my repre-
senting the fixed position of the sun, the rotundity of this world,
and its own diurnal and annual motions, he was quite amused at
our strange belief, and endeavoured to convince me we must be
wrong. This he did, not on the similar and false showing of Tycho
Brahe to the same effect, nor against the true system of Coper-
nicus, Galileo, Kepler, Newton, and others, but a fortiori by his
assigning his own singular reasoning, that “if the sun never moves
whereabouts is Boyma’s Ballima 1 ?” This I could not understand
until it was explained that the sun came from the neighbourhood
of God’s heaven every morning, and, after running its daily course
to give them light, passed under the earth, and returned to
Ballima for the night, causing eternal day in God’s heaven.
Nothing could induce him to regard my statement with anything
but ridicule, saying, “ I would not believe that if everybody said
so, but we will see when we die, but not before.” Knowing that
the blacks assert that Ballima is fixed in the north-east, that it
stands distinct, and that connection with the world is by their
very high “ Dallambingal” mountain, on the top of which is a
step-ladder uniting earth with heaven, I felt that this argumentum
ad hominem was too much for my logic, and consequently I beat
an honorable retreat, on which my opponent gloried very much.


I thought afterwards that Andy might, by his own reasoning,
have asked what would become of the step-ladder which connects
heaven and earth at the top of Mount Dallambangil if the sun
was fixed and the earth revolved as I stated. To Boyma is
ascribed the creation of the whole universe ; therefore they believe
him to be self-created, and that he formed everything out of
nothing. Upon this peculiar point I asked Andy how he accounted
for God’s own creation 1 He replied that he arose out of the
glassy mountain which forms his throne, and to which he is sup-
posed to be immovably fixed. I then asked him how came the
creation of the primitive crystal mountain in Ballima. He replied
that “it rose out of the great water and clouds”; but on being
again asked to account for the creation of the great water and
clouds, he replied that “ Boyma made it, he believed,” adding
significantly, and looking fixedly at me, that “he could not tell,
nor any one else—(‘ Bail me know’) —do you ?” The sun, they
believe is only the orb of light, and not the means of producing
heat, or by the greater or lesser ecliptical altitude of the earth
producing the change of seasons. In endeavouring to undeceive
my sable friend in this, too, I had the same difficulty as in the
other instance of the earth’s and sun’s motions. In again
ridiculing our assertions that the sun was the cause of all heat,
he remarked that “if the sun makes the warm weather come
in summer-time, what for not make the winter warm as it is seen
every day T The influence which produces heat, in their belief,
accompanies the Pleiades (mangudia). When the mangudia are
visible at a certain altitude above the horizon it is spring
(begagewog). When it rises to its highest altitude, it is summer,
“ winuga,” and upon this cluster of stars sinking again towards
the horizon in autumn, it is “ domda.” In winter when the
Pleiades are barely visible or lost to view altogether, it is then
winter (magur) and cold. The ordinary stars (miunga) have
no kind of influence on the seasons, but simply the Pleiades.
The constellation Mungudia is retained by Boyma near Ballima
during winter, in the same way that they believe that the sun
(Bungal) is retained by God during the night, and both are
sent to give light and heat during their respective seasons. The
clouds that obscure the sun in all seasons equally obscure the
influence of heat from the Pleiades, and therefore they have no
belief in the power of the sun’s rays to produce heat, but only
light. [The ancient Greeks determined their seed-time and
harvest by the position of the Pleiades.] The Latins designated
them vergiliae, from their being first visible in the spring, “ ver.”
The above notes comprise all that is most interesting of what I
have gathered from time to time. On further opportunities pre-
senting themselves I may gain more information. The sense of
Deity, like many other delicate senses, being in all savages faint


and obscure, it is not easy to obtain information on these points
without a great deal of premeditated questioning. These notes
are, however, sufficient to prove that, however faint and obscure
the religion and moral sense of the aborigines of this country are
as compared with that of enlightened nations, enough is shown
that, although very humble as the natives of New Holland are in
the scale of human nature, they are not without a very high sense
of the supreme Godhead, and of a moral conception of what is
right and wrong ; that their religious creed is far less erroneous
and extravagant than that of most other savages, and that above
all, their belief bears a most singular and striking analogy, except-
ing in its crudities, to the Christian and Jewish faiths. However,
notwithstanding my own improved opinion of the character of our
aborigines, I do not think it possible or perhaps desirable to con-
fuse their faith by any attempt to enlighten them in the Christian
belief. Ido not think them capable of understanding such truths,
or of being brought to believe in any other creed than in that
which was born with them and their forefathers ; and if this diffi-
culty were not enough, there would, I think, be an insuperable one
in consequence of those supposed divine laws which so strictly
enjoin secrecy on these subjects towards women and children. I
apprehend, therefore, that any pious attempt of any class of mis-
sionaries will never prove otherwise than abortive, unless perhaps
to the extent of gaining the natives to utter parrot-like and un-
meaning mockeries of hymns and prayers of no lasting moral or
religious value and effect. The natives of New Holland must, it
is to be feared, continue in their ignorance ; and those good men
who might wish to reclaim them to the Christian faith will, I
think, have to content themselves with a consciousness that those
blacks have a religion implanted in them which exercises a bene-
ficial effect upon their moral intercourse with each other; and that
the hope that if they obey the Divine laws of their God as given to
them by his Son “ Grogoragally,” through “ Moodgeegally,” their
great lawgiver, on Mount “ Dallambangel,” they will inherit eternal
life and happiness in Ballima or heaven. This latter remark, unfor-
tunately only applies to the men and adult youths. It would be well
if their women rejoiced in the same belief, and were not kept under
such strange, debasing, and superstitious ignorance. It must be
palpable to any one who has seen much of the natives of this coun-
try how very inferior the women are to the men in intellect, — an
effect which can readily be traced to the cause of their not sharing
with the men the beneficial influence of a religion which, however
strange and absurd in some respects, works for good in the de-
velopment of the men, by producing on their savage minds a
superstitious awe and reverence towards their ideal God and
the God of their forefathers.
Cumbumuzzo, Jugyong Creek, January, 1848.


Discussion.
In answer to a question from the President, Mr. Manning
related an interview he had with Goethe, the great German poet,
poet, fifty-one years ago, and just eight months before he died, at the
age of eighty-five. At that interview the question of foreign
missions had been brought up, in which Goethe showed himself
well informed, but concerning which his guest had but little know-
ledge. The conversation made an impression upon Mr. Manning,
and it was in some measure due to it that he set to woi’k in after-
life to gather information concerning the religious belief of the
aborigines of New Holland.
Mr. J. F. Mann gave very interesting reminiscences of his inter-
course with native tribes in the Colony, he having spent about thirty
years of his life in the bush. He had taken a great interest m their
customs and mode of life, but he had never met one aborigine, not-
withstanding the paper read, who had any true belief in a Supreme
Being. They sometimes spoke of a god, but upon cross-examina-
tion admitted that what they told the auditor they had learned
from a missionary or some resident in the district. With all
uncivilised tribes, as it is with not a few members of civilised
communities, curiosity is a leading trait. When the blacks were
numerous and the whites few the greatest possible curiosity was
shown by the former in the movements and actions of their “pale-
faced brothers,” and gathering scraps of information from them
they carried the news from tribe to tribe, and some of the gossips
having fully developed imaginative powers, the stories lost nothing
in the telling. From missionaries and residents they obtained a
dim insight into the Christian religion, and by this fact some of
those who had associated with the tribes and had been admitted
to the confidence of many of their members, accounted for the
wonderful revelations made by some of the blacks with regard to
their religion, which, as described by Mr. Manning in his very
interesting “notes,” has a strange relationship to that of Christians
in the belief in a Divine Being, a Son of God, a future heaven
and a hell. Messengers were occasionally sent from tribe to
tribe. One of these couriers would often travel through the
bush a distance of 100 miles. The following is a sketch of the
arrival of one of these messengers at a camp ; —“All at once the
talking ceased, and one of the tribe nodded in the direction of a
certain portion of the bush. Looking in that direction I saw
a blackfellow coming slowly through the forest. He gradually
advanced to the camp and sat down about 50 yards distant from
it. He appeared to pay no attention at all to those in the camp.
He held a sprig of a branch in his hand. Then one of the tribe
advanced, and taking up a twig lit it at the fire and held it up as
a token of friendship. The messenger then came forward, and
was warmly greeted. On his journey he had doubtless picked


up many odds and ends of news, and listening to his story the
tribe sat round the fire all night, and no doubt wove into fictitious
traditions many a story to be told in the future to the white man.”
There would appear to have been among the tribes a national or
religious custom of burying the members after death on the spot
where they had been born. In one case a dying boy had been
carried on the shoulders of his father, and accompanied by the
tribe, a distance of about 40 miles to the bank of the Hunter River,
where he died about twenty-four hours afterwards. A deep hole was
dug and lined with grass, the boy was rolled on a blanket, and placed
in the grave. Then the gins cut their heads with tomahawks in
token of their grief, and the men and women dividing, the one
class went in one direction, the other on the opposite, and, rubbing
their hands, raised a mournful song. It was stated that on one
occasion a gentleman was dining at the house of a friend, residing
near the M‘Gregor River, when the cook ran into the room and
said that there was a black man outside, who insisted on cutting
down one of the posts of the kitchen door. Going out to expostu-
late with the man, they found him very obstinate, and it was not
till the friendly medium of a bottle of rum had been produced
that he could be persuaded to desist from his attack. Afterwards
he selected a spot not far distant from the kitchen, where he
commenced digging operations, and they learned then that at that
spot had been born one of the tribe who had died, and whom his
countrymen wished to bury there. Women had also been seen
carrying about the skeletons of men wrapped in hides, and seeking
a place of burial for them, or as the narrator expressed it, “waiting
till they could stick them away.” In Queensland, upon the death
of her husband, a gin had to go in mourning sometimes for the
space of two years. During this time she was interdicted from
eating certain kinds of food—for example, anything that climbed
upon trees —and on no account could she be again married till the
time of mourning had expired. She plastered clay on her face and
mingled it with her hair. A general impression prevailed that
thunder and lightning came from the evil spirit or “ devil-devil,”
and during the continuance of a storm great respect was paid to the
manifested power of the “ bad fellow.” Once during a storm a white
man, who was assisted at his work by an aborigine, told his fellow-
worker in a loud voice to put the saw he was using under a log,
and to go under shelter. He found that the saw had been put
away and the blackfellow who had got under cover was very
indignant at his master having spoken as he had. “ What for speak
so loud 1” said he, “nowum thunder hear and know where um
saw is,” and he went out and shifted the saw to a new hiding-place.
Between the missionaries and the rum the unfortunate blackfellows
occasionally got very mixed in their newly acquired theological
doctrines. A blackfellow went up to a gentleman on a visit to a


homestead, and remarked to him, with an air of conciliation and
friendship, “White one steal peach,” The gentleman, knowing
that there was a large orchard near to the homestead, thought
some of the men had been pilfering; but upon making further
inquiry from his informant he was told, “No, no; first fellow
steal peach.” The little transaction referred to was that between
Adam and Eve. The business concerning Noah’s Ark was a very
general cause of confusion. As a rule, the aborigines were totally
incapable of remembering quantity, number, time, or space. A
pleasant little ceremony was the admission of the youth of a tribe,
on coming of age, into the participation of certain secrets and
privileges. The ceremony is related to be after this manner :b or
some time previous to the initiation, about six months, the boys
were starved down, and on the day appointed the tribe assembled
and the chief elder of the number knocked out the front tooth of
each with a stone hatchet. The secrets of the tribe were then told
them apart from the women, and they were compelled to sleep for
the night on the graves of the departed patriarchs of their families,
they being thus supposed to absorb the virtues of the deceased.
One lad who related the story of his initiation stated to the narrator
that he had trembled with fear and the perspiration had poured
from him whilst he was taking in the essence of his deceased great-
great-grandfather. The old gentleman had been a celebrated fisher-
man, and it was hoped his great-great-grandson would follow in
his footsteps. The fact that certain men who held the rank of
doctors in their tribes always carried with them a crystal, which
was supposed to be possessed of some supernatural power, was
referred to. The following anecdote was related with regard to
this matter : A blackfellow, in whom a gentleman had the greatest
confidence, once took him aside in a most mysterious manner. The
black man led him to an inner room of the house, and after looking
carefully around that no prying eyes should watch their movements
or listening ear hear their words, he said he would show the white
man his crystal, he being a doctor in his tribe. The man was
divested of all clothing except his loin cloth. The gentleman saw
the man lift his head, and then there gradually rose in his throat
a little lump which ascended slowly to the man’s mouth. He
opened his mouth and spat out a crystal amulet. He opened his
mouth again, replaced the “ fetish,” and the crystal returned down
the throat. The gentleman who told this apparently “ tall” story
assured his auditors that he in person had seen what it related,
and incredible as it might appear, it was nevertheless true, and if
the possessor had not transferred the amulet he had no doubt it
was now in the grave in the stomach of its owner. These crystal
charms were supposed to render their owners invulnerable. The
aborigines possessed a very extensive knowledge of the properties
and uses of plants, and they were ready in concocting stories which


afterwards they told to white men as traditions of their tribes,
whereas in truth they were but fictions founded on scraps of infor-
mation they had picked up from associating with the whites.
Mr. Palmer said that his experience of the aborigines of North-
ern Queensland supported what had been stated in Mr. Manning’s
notes. He was quite convinced that there existed among them a
belief in a Supreme Being. He offered to, at some future time,
embody his notes in a paper to be read before the Society.
Other members referred to the customs of the aborigines and
their religious observances.
A suggestion was made at the meeting that as it would soon be
very difficult to collect any information from the blacks, who were
so rapidly dying out that they would soon be extinct, it would be
wise to collect all the notes in the possession of those white
residents who had had intercourse and constant conversation with
the aborigines in the early days of the Colony, in order that some
record of their manners and customs might be preserved.
Mr. Manning, in reply, again expressed his full belief in the
authenticity of the information he had received from Andy, his
aboriginal informant.
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBB3.


SAff
muo
f




