

25th Battery, 7th F.A. Brigade (A.I.F.)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
[Crown copyright reserved.
NOTES FROM THE FRONT
COLLATED BY THE GENERAL STAFF,
REPRINTED BY AUTHORITY, FOR THE DEFENCE
DEPARTMENT, AUSTRALIA.
1915.
C. 10770.




[Crown copyright reserved.
25th Battery, 7th F.A. Brigade (A.I.F.)
NOTES FROM THE FRONT.
COLLATED BY THE GENERAL STATE.
C.1G770.


25th Battery , 7th FA. Brigade (A.I.F)
TACTICAL NOTES.
Notes from a General Officer at the Front,
(a) General.
1. Defensive Positions. —One of the principal lessons
of the war, hitherto, from a tactical point of view, is
the necessity for screening positions for defence from
the enemy’s artillery fire. The enemy’s artillery is
numerous, powerful, and efficient, and our infantry has
suffered much from its fire. The German infantry, on
the other hand, is inferior to our own in developing fire
effect. A short field of fire (500 yards, or even less)
has been found sufficient to check a German infantry
attack. Tactically, therefore, in occupying ground for
defence, every effort should be made to combine the fire
of our own guns and rifles against the enemy’s infantry,
while denying to the enemy the use of his artillery by
the siting of trenches in positions which it is intended to
hold on to, behind rather than on the crest line or
forward slopes.
This does not mean that advanced posts have been
found to be of no value. On the contrary, in order that
full advantage may be taken of the strength of such posi-
tions as described above, it has been found essential to
prevent the enemy’s rapid approach by the use of advance
posts supported by artillery, in order to gain time for
deployment and the reconnaissance of the main posi-
tion, and under favorable conditions for its entrench-
ment.
2. Protective Troops. —lt was found necessary during
the retreat to provide for the protection of a large body
of troops such as a corps by means of protective de-
tachments, flank and rear guards, rather than by an out-
post line only. We had not been accustomed to handle
large bodies of troops in peace time, and in the early
days relied entirely on outposts for protection. It was
found that the long range and power of the enemy’s
artillery kept the troops in constant anxiety of being
shelled in their bivouacs, and that when pressed by the
enemy in retreat the main bodies were easily brought to
action and delayed. When protective detachments at a
A 2


distance from the main bodies were employed, the troops
rested in greater security and were able to resume the
march confident in the ability of the rear guard to hold
the enemy off unless very heavily pressed. These pro-
tective detachments at a distance from the main body
have been found to be especially necessary in the absence
of protective cavalry. When this system is combined
with billeting in depth; a march can be resumed at any
moment without delay, and mobility is greatly in-
creased.
3. Passage of Rivers. —Several rivers have been crossed
both in advance and in retreat, and experience has been
gained both in forcing the passage of a river and in
delaying the enemy on a river line. In forcing the pas-
sage of a river defended by the enemy’s rear guard, it
may be useful to remind subordinate commanders that
there should be no delay in engaging the enemy at the
point or points that he is defending and reconnoitring
at once for a point of passage which is undefended.
Sometimes boats, rafts, a bridge the enemy has for-
gotten, a weir, or other means of crossing, have been
found. When a sufficient force has been passed over
by such means, the enemy, who frequently _ offers a
strong opposition at the defended points, using quite
a small force with several machine guns, can be quickly
cleared out and a bridge thrown. The Royal Engi-
neers should reconnoitre at once for the most favorable
site for a bridge, and can often find and collect mate-
rials to supplement the available pontoons. Those with
the field companies have twice been found insufficient
for the purpose, and the bridging train may not be
at hand.
In the event of its being desired to delay the passage
of a river by the enemy, it may not be out of place to
draw attention to the necessity of studying the bends
of the river and the topographical features of the banks,
with a view to ascertaining the likely points at which
the enemy will try to cross, and making tactical dis-
positions accordingly. The re-entrant bends towards
the enemy should be brought under artillery fire by
establishing observation posts from which they can be
seen and artillery fire directed upon them. The throw-
ing of a bridge may thus be prevented, or it may be
destroyed after it has been thrown. Detachments should
be posted in advance of any main position that it may
be intended to occupy, to prevent the enemy from


debouching from the necks of these bends, if he suc-
ceeds in crossing. If dispositions of this nature are
made with skill, the enemy may be delayed for a con-
siderable time, and, if desired, time can be gained to
prepare a position for defence.
4. Night Operations. —This corps has not carried out
any night attacks, but it has been attacked at night,
and it has been found that the enemy apparently makes
all his arrangements beforehand, and usually advances
in strength, dispensing wdth scouts or advanced parties.
No warning is therefore given of his attack, and to
meet it picquets must be strong and on the position
on which they intend to resist. There is no time to
rouse them and occupy trenches. If a picquet is
watching a road at night, the road should be barri-
caded and the picquet placed so as to bring fire to
bear on the road in front of the barricade, and should
never be placed in a position where it can be rushed
unprotected by an obstacle.
6. Formations when on the Move. —It has been found
that the long range of the enemy’s artillery, combined
at times with the weakness, or even the absence, of our
own cavalry, has rendered the infantry of advanced
guards particularly liable to come under artillery fire
in close formation. Not only do the troops themselves
suffer on these occasions, but the first line transport
has been found to be especially vulnerable. It is very
undesirable that the march of the main bodies should
be delayed by the constant deployment of advanced
guards to avoid casualties. It is, therefore, essential,
when the front is inadequately covered by cavalry,
that troops should be able rapidly to adopt formation
suitable when under artillery fire, and they should be
trained to adopt these formations as quickly as pos-
sible. No more first line transport vehicles than are
absolutely necessary should march with an advanced
guard, and it has been found desirable to divide first
line transport into two echelons.
When troops are fighting, first line transport, first line
waggons of artillery, field ambulances, and ammuni-
tion columns should beware of the deceptive shelter
afforded by villages. The enemy’s high-explosive shell
render villages and the vicinity of buildings especially
dangerous. Wounded should not be placed in a church
during an action. Vehicles and horses should not b?


crowded together near points that are easily ranged
upon by the map, such as barns, haystacks, and road
crossings.
6. March Discipline. —Men who have not been with
the colours during the last four or five years do not
understand the necessity for good march discipline.
It should be impressed upon all ranks, and should be
resolutely insisted upon at all training previous to arrival
in the theatre of war. There has been straggling, no
doubt in great measure due to exhaustion during the
first phase, but it is most necessary to tighten up the
march discipline again, and to prevent undue opening
out and straggling.
Horsed waggons should not be parked on the road.
Waggons should never be halted when passing through
a village.
When a halt is necessary, it should be made before
reaching or after passing a village.
Men accompanying trains should carry their rifles,
and should march in formed bodies.
Each unit should detail an officer with a small party
of selected non-commissioned officers and men to march
in rear of the unit, in order to enforce orders against
straggling, leaving the ranks for water, and so forth.
7. Concealment from Aircraft,. —The enemy’s aircraft
are numerous and efficient, and it is clear that he obtains
by this or other means excellent information as to
our movements. It has been found impossible to con-
ceal movements of large bodies of troops when on the
march from this observation, and the position of large
bivouacs can always be observed from the air. But
much can be done to conceal artillery positions and
trenches, and the use of overhead cover, as we know
from our own experience, makes it difficult to ascer-
tain from the air whether trenches and gun emplace-
ments are occupied or not. 'Troops should, therefore, be
taught to understand the necessity for concealment
from aircraft whenever the conditions admit of it.
8. Machine Guns. —Machine puns have played a very
important part in the war, and the enemy is adept in
making use of their surprise effect, which has been
found to he very great indeed. Till they are located
and engaged, machine guns play havoc with troops in
close order, but, when located, they are easily knocked
out by artillery fire, or silenced by a concentrated rifle


fire. Great care should, therefore, be taken in select-
ing the positions for machine guns, in occupying them
without attracting attention, and in reserving fire till
a suitable opportunity arrives, in order to make full use
of their surprise effect. The only way to avoid the
surprise effect of the enemy’s machine guns is by careful
reconnaissance.
(b) Divisional Mounted Troops.
9. Reconnaissance Duties. —The mounted troops al-
lotted to army corps are strictly limited in numbers,
and consist of a squadron of cavalry and a cyclist com-
pany with each division. Experience has shown that
army corps cannot always rely on receiving protection
from cavalry, nor can they be sure that information
which is essential will be obtained for them by cavalry
or even aircraft. In these circumstances, there are
many duties to be performed by the divisional mounted
troops, and if the strictest economy is not employed
they will soon become depleted in numbers, both from
casualties and exhaustion.
No reconnoitring detachment should be stronger than
is necessary for its immediate purpose, and no recon-
naissance should be sent further afield than is neces-
sary to obtain the actual information required. The
greatest care should be taken to limit the scope of
these missions, and to make instructions clear and
definite.
Mounted men should not be kept out at night if it
can be avoided.
(c) Artillery.
10. Tactical Handling of. —Our artillery has suffered
from certain disadvantages during the war so far. In
the early battles it was outnumbered, while the ground
on the Aisne has prevented its close co-operation with
our infantry, which has consequently been exposed to
a heavy artillery fire that our guns have been unable
to cope with, except with the assistance of aerial
observation. The enemy’s heavy howitzers have been
more numerous than, and superior, .as regards weight
of metal, to our own heavy artillery. The result has
been that our infantry have suffered heavy losses from
the enemy’s artillery fire, and the efforts of our own
artillery have necessarily been directed primarily to-
wards neutralizing its effect.


The conclusion has been drawn by some that this
should be its primary role. There could be no greater
mistake. It should be our constant endeavour to rectify
this position and, while developing the power of our
artillery, to improve our tactical skill in handling it,
so that it is not constantly on the defensive, and so that
we may employ its power primarily in attacking the
enemy’s infantry, and so reverse the situation. As
already indicated above the first essential to this end
in defence is the skilful use of ground. It is hoped that
the Army will soon pass to the offensive and that the
artillery will then have an opportunity of showing its
ability to support its infantry closely and devotedly in
attack. Undoubtedly one of the chief lessons of the war
has been the necessity for the closest co-operation be-
tween the two arms.
11. Concealment of. —Concealment has been forced upon
our artillery. The enemy’s fire is rapid and accurate,
and the effects of the high explosive shell from his
heavy howitzers is very damaging, not only to personnel
but to material as well. Flashes must be concealed from
the front and observation posts selected with the
greatest care, and occupied with caution. Emplacements
must, whenever possible, be concealed from aerial ob
servation by overhead cover, branches or straw.
12. Cover for. —Protection must be provided for the
detachments, and, if the situation permits, it is ad-
visable to prepare the emplacements before occupying
the position.
13. Observation by. —For accurate shooting, effective
observation is essential. Forward observation must be
used, and for this purpose telephones are invaluable,
and great care should be taken of them. Telephone wire
should be husbanded.
Visual signalling has been little used.
14. Co-operation with Aircraft. —Great strides have
been made in the co-operation between aircraft and
artillery for the purpose of locating hostile trenches and
guns and observation of fire. No battery can now be
considered really efficient that is not able to range
rapidly and accurately by means of aerial observation.
The system of coloured lights works well. The new
wireless apparatus is better.


15. Anti-Aircraft Guns. —The anti-aircraft gun plays
an important part, and if skilfully handled both tactic-
ally and as regards shooting should be able to prevent
the close reconnaissance of a specified area, or the
co-operation of the enemy’s aircraft with his artillery.
Efforts should therefore be made to develop the skill of
the personnel.
16. Ammunition. —The expenditure of 60-pr. and 4.5
howitzer ammunition while on the river Aisne has been
very heavy. New formations arriving in the theatre of
war should be especially cautioned not to waste am-
munition of these natures. In battles of position these
weapons are evidently destined to play an important
part.
17. Ammunition Columns. —Roads have often been
blocked during operations by ammunition columns.
Officers in command of these units should be cautioned
to park their horse drawn vehicles off the roads when-
ever possible.
( d .) Infantry.
18. Siting of Trenches. —Owing to the accuracy of
the enemy’s artillery fire, it is desirable that ground
which is to be held defensively or to assist further ad-
vance should be entrenched. Trenches should be com-
menced at once with the light entrenching tool and im-
proved later as opportunity occurs. They should be
deep and narrow and should show above the ground
level as little as possible, and all trenches should be
traversed at intervals of five to ten rifles. When siting
trenches it should be borne in mind that the enemy
is adept at bringing enfilade artillery fire to bear from
flank positions. At any point, such as a salient, at
which trenches are particularly liable to this form of
fire, great care should be taken as to their siting and
they should be especially heavily traversed. Where
head cover cannot be provided, cover from shell fire for
the troops when not actually using their rifles, can
readily be obtained by making recesses in the trenches
on the side nearest to the enemy. It has been found
that head-cover or anything that in any way interferes
with the rapid use of the rifle is a disadvantage in posi-
tions where the trenches have a short field of fire and are
therefore liable to be rushed. If immunity from shrapnel
fire can be obtained up to the moment of having to
resist the infantry attack, no more can be hoped for.


Communication trenches for supports and ammunition
supply are necessary, and they should be wide enough
to permit of a stretcher being carried along them so as
to facilitate the removal of wounded.
Support trenches may be close to the firing line
trenches, but should be so made that the men can lie
down and sleep. All trenches must be assimilated to
the surroundings.
Elbow rests have not generally been found useful.
Protection against high-explosive shells of howitzers
is unobtainable in field operations, but this effect can
be localized by traverses.
19. Observation by Aeroplane. —As soon as it appears
that troops have been located by an aeroplane their
position should be changed, as it has been found by
experience that batteries open fire directly the aeroplane
report has been received.
20. Enemy's Ruses. —The enemy adopts all manner of
ruses to deceive our troops, such as the use of the
white flag, or dressing up in the uniforms of the Allies.
It is important therefore that any body of troops ap-
proaching our lines should be brought to a halt at some
distance from them, and one individual only be allowed
to advance to establish their bona fides. Should they
refuse to halt, or act in a suspicious manner, they should,
irrespective of their dress or of the circumstances under
which they approach, be fired upon without hesitation.
21. Standing to Arms. —Troops in contact with the
enemy should always stand to arms before dawn ready
to move off, and should remain under arms till the front
is reported by patrols to be clear.
22. Fixing Bayonets. —The enemy’s attacks develop so
quickly that it is important that troops, and especially
protective detachments, should fix bayonets before the
final stages are reached. At night, outposts and troops
in trenches should have their bayonets permanently
fixed. When attacking at night bayonets should always
be fixed at the position of deployment.
Extracts from Letters received from General Officers
at the Front.
Cavalry. —Up to the present long distance reconnais-
sance by cavalry has been entirely replaced by aero-
planes, the cavalry work being confined to covering the


immediate front, or to being massed for operations
against a flank. The training of the cavalry with the
rifle has been invaluable, and has given them great ad-
vantage over the enemy. There have been no cases up
to the present of large cavalry charges with the arme
blanche, but the latter has been used a good deal in small
affairs.
Infantry. —The choice of infantry fields of fire is
largely governed by the necessity for avoiding exposure
to artillery fire. A field of fire of 300 to 500 yards
is quite sufficient. This indicates the necessity for accu-
rate shooting at short ranges. Insist on' the training
of scouts, and particularly on the training of non-com-
missioned officers as patrol leaders.
An advance should not be made in rigid lines, but
with clouds of skirmishers —5 or 6 yards apart—thrown
forward according to the ground and available cover.
The essential thing is to pay attention to the sound
principles on which our training has been based.
Notes received from Officers at the Front regarding the
Work of Engineers.
1. Field Companies have been chiefly employed in—
Bridge demolition.
Bridge repair.
Pontoon and trestle bridges.
Pile driving.
Making approaches.
Assisting infantry in improving field defences.
Wire obstacles.
Preparing positions in rear of fighting line,
utilizing civilian working parties.
2. The handling of explosives and pontooning (includ-
ing heavy bridge) and Weldon trestle work should re-
ceive special attention.
3. As regards permanent bridge repairs to take
mechanical transport it has sometimes been possible to
patch up the disabled bridge. Twenty-five sappers were
able, in 60 men-hours, to make four girders 75 feet long,
built of wood and iron tie rods obtained locally; these
were successfully launched on to a broken pier and the
bridge was restored for mechanical transport.


In another case a company drove in pile piers and
put up 30 wooden girders to take mechanical transport.
A Field Squadron spliced a demolished steel girder
bridge which had been cut through, but the ends of
which had not fallen in; the splicing was done with steel
bars and chains, and the bridge took mechanical trans-
port.
4. For notes regarding trench work, see under “ In-
fantry.”
5. Signal Companies. —Considerable use has been made
of the permanent lines of the country. Motor cyclists
have rendered valuable service, and have proved the
chief means of communication during movement. It is
essential that they should be expert at effecting ordinary
“ running repairs.”
The telephone detachments have been invaluable;
messages are generally sent on the vibrator. During
heavy shell fire it has been very difficult to hear the
signals, but messages are sent and received between the
bursts.
Helio’, flag and lamp have all been used effectively
on occasions; but great care is necessary to conceal the
signaller from the enemy, as when seen a heavy shell
fire is directed on him. On one occasion the reinforce-
ments of an infantry brigade were directed to the most
hardly pressed point by flag signal from the back of a
farm.
Notes from a Conversation with a Battalion Commander
who has recently been Wounded and Invalided Home.
Entrenchments. —It has been found that the best
form of entrenchment is a deep narrow trench without
parapet or headcover Parapet and headcover form too
much of a mark for the German artillery. Trenches 2
feet wide for “ fire standing,” with the earth thrown
in rear, are recommended. The difficulty of draining
trenches has not been overcome. If possible, trenches
should be dug to communicate with hollow lanes. When
the men are once ensconced in these trenches they have
little to fear. A company of the battalion under the
informant was fired on all day by all types of German
guns, and only one man was wounded. Battalions which
have not dug themselves in at once have suffered in
consequence.


Shallow trenches constructed with the portable tools
are worse than no trenches at all against artillery fire,
as they give the German artillery a better target.
When siting trenches by day it is better to occupy a
position with a false crest on the enemy’s side than
to occupy a crest with no dead ground to the front. See
Plate V., page 14.
Trenches sited at A will probably net suffer at all
from hostile gun fire. Those at B will be “pounded
with great accuracy by hostile artillery.
From A only 1,000 yards field of fire is possible. Field
of fire from B is anything up to 2 miles. Of the two
A is by far the better, and the German artillery will
find great difficulty in locating the trenches.
Electric torches have been found most useful by
battalion and company-comma.nde.rs who possess them.
In siting trenches at night it is most useful to send out
a man with an electric torch in front of the proposed
trench. The man should hold the torch some 2 or 3
feet from the ground, and should gradually move back-
wards towards the enemy. If this is not done, trenches
may be made at night with perhaps a field of fire of
only 50 yards.
Tools. —Infantry battalions have often been handi-
capped "because the battalion picks and shovels were a
long way in rear in a wagon, which has been unable to
reach the battalion.
When a battalion is sent forward to secure an im-
portant point (e.g., at the passage of a river) there
should be at least 200 picks and shovels actually dis-
tributed amongst the men before they go forward. The
small portable tools are useful, however, for improving
a bank or ditch at the side of a road.
Every effort should be made to collect tools from the
various farms in the vicinity.
It is essential that telephonic communication should
be maintained between the forward infantry and the
troops, especially the artillery, in rer.r.
It struck the informant that intercommunication be-
tween the front line and our own artillery is a matter
which should receive continuous attention.


Plate V.


Operations in Woods. —Our infantry would be much
assisted if accompanied by a few mounted troops to do
the scouting work when traversing woods. The woods
have little undergrowth and numerous cross roads and
paths.
Especially in rear-guard work the absence of mounted
troops is likely to lead to infantry being intercepted by
German machine guns and small bodies of mounted
Uhlans, who hang on to a retiring force with great
determination. These Uhlans are bold to excess and
do a great deal of dismounted work.
Operations in woods call for the most deliberate pre-
paration—a fact which is not always fully appreciated.
Outposts. —The importance of standing to arms an hour
before daybreak is by no means fully appreciated.
Naturally the exhaustion of the men is the difficulty in
this. In the forward lines quarter to half the force is on
outpost, and even in the third line back one-eighth of
the troops are on outpost duty.
Billets. —The difficulty of finding officers at night in
billets where they are covered up in straw, or on roads
must be recognised. An adjutant must know exactly
where the captain of each company is lying, so that he
can wake him up without disturbing others. In the
same way a battalion commander must sleep at a spot
where the brigade-major can instantly find him.
Advance under Artillery Fire. —Several times it has
been necessary to advance under unsubdued hostile artil-
lery fire. Small columns at 50 yards’ interval and 300
yards’ distance have been found to be the best method
of avoiding casualties. The 19th Brigade lying in the
open in this formation were shelled by two batteries for
half an hour and had only 25 casualties.
Extracts from a private Letter from an Officer
Commanding a Howitzer Battery.
#*#*#***#
1. Concealed positions are to be employed on nearly
every occasion, batteries have been obliged on occasions
to come into the open, but the result has generally been
a heavy casualty list.


2. The German fuzes are excellent, but the Germans
waste much ammunition and have a tendency to burst
too high. They go in for the moral effect of a con-
tinuous volume of fire, which certainly has the result
they aim at for a short time, after which we have got
to rather despise it.
3. I have had no opportunity of seeing much of the
French artillery personally, but a battery was in action
close to me one day. It was very quick and appeared
to be very effective.
4. To say that artillery cannot stop an infantry ad-
vance by itself is sheer nonsense. The German infantry
will not face our artillery fire, nor that of the French.
5. The Germans, I think, register a lot. They appear
to me to do very little ranging, but generally bring
effective fire to bear immediately our troops appear at
certain points which apparently have been registered,
they either “register” or else have an extraordinary
range-taker.
6. The equipment is sticking it well, the No. 3 director
and one-man range-finder much better than I anticipated.
Even the despised telephone equipment has proved far
from unsatisfactory. I have been in action now for 20
days—my observation station about 1,000 yards from the
battery—and I have been in constant communication
night and day with only two small breaks of 10 minutes
each, due to the wire being cut by German shrapnel,
a really remarkable performance. It all depends on the
knowledge the operators have of the instruments, and
I am lucky in the extreme.
7. The German infantry cannot touch ours and their
shooting is deplorable. They seem to depend entirely
on their machine guns, which are the very devil and
magnificently handled.
8. The Germans are adepts at “ ruses ” —false observ-
ing stations, bogus trenches, &c. —we cannot hold a
candle to them in this respect.
9. The Germans do much shooting by aeroplane ob-
servations with a certain amount of success. Their
airmen are very bold.


10. The German artillery would appear to consist of—
-15-pr. field gun, 3.03-inch.
A light field howitzer, approximately 4.2-inch.
A heavy field howitzer, approximately 5.9-inch.
An 8-in. mortar (?) commonly known as “ Black
Maria,”
a siege gun destined for the siege of Paris, but turned
on to us here; its effect is very local. It is wonderfully
accurate, and the Germans can put shell after shell from
it in very nearly the same position. It has a very long
range, 12,000 yards and more.
11. We did not do enough shooting by the map at
practice camps, e.g., I frequently get a order “ aero-
plane has reported a 6-gun battery in action 400 yards
south of the O in COURTECON, engage it,” but we do
not do much of this kind of shooting in camps. Map
reading strikes me as being enormously important.
12. Given a good map, a battery, the flashes of which
are visible, can be knocked out by a concealed battery ;
I am proud to say I have done this on two occasion**'.’.- 'j
13. ‘‘Battery fire 1 second” with lyddite Jb«S".a'Jjnffsi
disconcerting effect on a hostile battery, wf]J>hearly
always silence it if the been
found. Some batteries go in for a ..!<?!’(rf<Wlwoes, as also
do the Germans. •••■’ a “ft’ 9
14. The concealment 0f...-giin<f fJM waggon lines from
aircraft observations ; units which have
ignored this have ..sotferecj tremendously.
15. I had a...v€ryty|iroa series yesterday with aeroplane
communication, and am re-
g°t a hit with lyddite on a German
battery 11th round—on this point I am sceptical.
16. In my opinion, in a retirement the Ist line waggons
should remain with, or close to, the battery; otherwise
there is a tendency for them to get lost.
17. Obtaining the line of fire by magnetic bearing has
been wonderfully successful; I have used this means of
obtaining the line more than any other.
Such are my experiences for what they are worth.
I am convinced that concealment of guns is everything,
and many of our casualties are due to the non-observ-
ance of this.
ported,.
battery
C. 16770. -B


One more point has occurred to me, and that is the
importance of lowering the angle of sight when search-
ing behind a hill. Otherwise shell when they come
over the crest line are miles in the air and comparatively
inocuous.
Notes on Artillery in the present War, furnished by an
Artillery Officer attached to General Head-Quarters.
Positions Occupied. —With a few exceptions positions
are completely covered, not only from view at the target
end, but from hostile air observation. The enemy
possess large scale maps believed to be as large as
6-ineh, and, as soon as guns are located by them, a
severe fire is brought to bear immediately. It is on this
account important to avoid always conspicuous or easily-
identified points on the map. Ranging, as we under-
stand it, is as often as not dispensed with altogether.
Open and semi-covered positions possess no advantage
over covered positions. They would only be occupied
on emergency and with the knowledge that the battery
would probably be destroyed sooner or later.
Positions of readiness are only to be considered if
well concealed, but guns not required in action are
better placed safe out of range.
Observing Stations— In the open position the choice
appears to make little difference. If, however, occupied
in the dark and the battery completely dug in, the
battery commander is better on a flank clear of blast
and smoke of enemy’s high explosive shell. In covered
positions the battery commander almost invariably ob-
serves from in front no matter what nature of gun. Ihe
distance, from 500 yards up to 1,000 and more, accord-
ing to nature of operation and ground. Communication
always by telephone. This, indeed, is the only possible
means and endeavour is made to dig in the wire, perhaps
with a plough.
In the event of wire being broken, recourse must be
had to chain of orderlies. Megaphones are useful.
Obtaining the Line.— Two aiming posts seem to have
been sometimes but seldom, used. A battery a^g] e 13
sent if battery commander can see the battery; but far
more often line is given roughly in a quick series or by
compass or map in a deliberate series. Trial shots are


fired and correction made as required. With heavy guns
the method employed is either the compass or direction
given by a reference to a map placed on a plane table,
the latter the most popular. Where possible, as in the
operations on the Aisne, the 18-pr. gun may be used to
range for the 60-pr. to save ammunition. There are
many casualties to directors. The hand angle of sight
is a good deal used. Plotter never used and may be
dispensed with.
Battery Head-Quarters is too large. Signallers and
look-out men are not wanted as a rule. Patrols and
ground-scouts never— i.e., as part of the battery head-
quarters. The battery commander has battery sergeant-
major and a telephonist with him, and perhaps a director
man who will take a few notes as penciller. The range-
finder would be separately dug in, if used at all, and
two or three men possibly dug in at intervals to pass
orders on emergency. The ranging officer with the bat-
tery is dug in, probably under a limber in rear of line of
guns, with telephone man. Section commanders are dug
in close behind waggon bodies. The consensus of opinion
of battery commanders seems to be decidedly against
observation vehicles. They could only be used on certain
occasions and are difficult to drag into position without
being seen. Moreover, a battery commander does not
feel secure perched up on such a vehicle. He prefers a
tree or stack or building of some kind, or else to be
dug right in. Climbing irons or dogs, rope ladders,
&c., would be of great use. German observatories are
never seen now; they are effectually concealed if used.
Ranging. —The keynote is simplicity. Section ranging
with percussion—according to information at present
available—-is the method always used. It is not known
if collective has ever been used or not.
Objectives. —More information is necessary before a
full report can be made under this heading. Most bat-
teries have never seen any such target as troops in the
open or guns in any sort of position. There are excep-
tions, however, and guns have had to deal with infantry
columns crossing the front, infantry advancing in large
bodies—crowds—and the rush of an infantry counter
attack. In such cases the 18-pr. shrapnel is admitted on
all sides as being most efficient. Time is certainly not
the important factor that it is at practice. At the open
B 1


pitched battles as at Mons and Cambrai, situations ap-
pear to have been considerably confused, and battery
commanders were practically independent except those
close to their own brigade head-quarters. Telephone
communication broke down at once owing to the wires
being cut, and any orders that reached battery com-
manders came by mounted messenger. There appears to
have been no visual signalling.
Gun Targets.— At the battles just referred to there
were cases of guns being located and even knocked out
by shrapnel, but these seem to have been rare cases.
The covered position is the one adopted and retained to
the last. It must be clearly understood that the artil-
lery duel is very much en evidence. All arms and all
ranks agree that the artillery dominates the situation
on either side. Its effect is devastating where a target
is visible, and infantry, where the strengths approximate
to an equality, are quite unable to face it. All efforts
are consequently made to establish a superiority in
artillery. On the battle-field there is no sign of battle
bar the few bursting shell and a few strips of newly-
turned earth, which mark the infantry trenches. Not
a man or a gun is visible unless some effort be made
to test the strength of some corner of the field; even then
it will be invisible to nine-tenths of the front. The
chief effort on either side is to locate the big guns by
any means. We employ aeroplanes, but the enemy ap-
parently employ an amazingly efficient secret service in
addition. The aircraft are always at a height of about
6,000 feet if up at all, and there they appear to be
immune from fire. The big gun positions are frequently
changed—not less than every two or three days —but
ours, however well concealed, are located to a yard by
the hostile gunners, and 6-inch or 8-inch high explosive
shell dropped right on the guns or in the pits. It is
important that these big guns have alternative emplace-
ments always ready for occupation at short notice, after
dark, and these should always be irregularly placed with
big intervals up to 100 yards, and at varying ranges of
50 yards or so. Inside a wood is often a suitable posi-
tion. A megaphone in a wood carries well and assists
section commanders in these difficult circumstances.
Searchlights are hardly used at all. German balloons
are always aloft, but our authorities are not in favour
of these aids to observation, for reasons which have
been thoroughly discussed.


The shooting of the German artillery can only be
described as “ uncanny.” Occasionally great waste of
ammunition takes place from, no doubt, faulty informa-
tion, but parties of troops, whether gun teams, ammuni-
tion columns, bivouacs, billets and even head-quarters
of brigades and divisions have to make constant changes
of their position or incur the penalty of having a dozen
of the large shells dropped right into them without
warning and when least expected. Dummy batteries,
observation posts, &c., to deceive hostile aeroplanes, have
proved valuable.
Seventy per cent, of our casualties are said to be due
to artillery fire, and most of them to the high-explosive
shell. The “ error of the gun ” appears to be nearly
non-existent, and it is quite common to see four high-
explosive heavy shells dropped within 2 or 3 yards of
each other. It is difficult to find any explanation for
this, possibly the design of shell has much to do with it.
The enemy’s time fuzes are also astonishingly accurate,
particularly those of the field howitzers. Their shrapnel
is far inferior to that of the 18-pr. This is admitted
by all. There appear to be very few cases of shields
having been hit by bullets. Casualties generally result
from the backward effect of the high-explosive shell.
These will quickly destroy a battery when located, but
shrapnel from frontal fire never will.
Lay'nq. —There is no direct laying. Our methods have
well £ i vvered the test of war.
Methods of Fire. —Gun fire is evidently very rare, bat-
tery fire is the usual method. The largest number of
rounds fired by a battery in a day, according to present
information, amounts to 1,152 for an 18-pr. battery, but
the total number in the war is not double this for the
same battery.
Control of Fire. —Voice control has been employed in
some of the somewhat confused actions referred to above.
A howitzer battery on one occasion was engaged with
infantry at 600 yards, firing shrapnel full charge; voice
control was employed. Another battery, the day after
disembarkation from the train, had to cover a front
of over 180 degrees. It was shot at later from in rear
also. Voice control was naturally used, but in the
normal action it would never be considered for a minute.
Ammunition Supply. —No very definite system has
been evolved as being the best. As much cover as pos-


sible must be gained, both from overhead and from be-
hind, if possible. Sometimes both wagons may com
veniently be up, or wagon one side and limber the . °“.® 1
side of the gun. Replenishment of ammunition is nor
maUy by carriers, bu't may be effected by wagons at
night &c. Limber supply does not appear to ha
been ordered, but the limber ammunition has often been
used up. ,i
Corrector.— Officers do not sufficiently use the table
on page 164, Field Artillery Training The cardinal
fault of our shooting would appear to be bursting
shrapnel too short; the same applies to that of the
Q.F. Howitzers. —Never used in brigade at all,
often by sections. Time shrapnel ranging with the
howitzer is believed not to have been used at ail.
60-pr BL. has been invaluable. Economy of ammum
tion is' of first importance. It can sometimes be at-
oned by making use of the 18-pr. for ranging purpose^
Entrenching.— Types in Field Artillery Training of
nits, &c., are not sufficient. Pits for men must be at
least 4 feet deep and narrow, but many battery com
manders prefer the gun to be in a deep pit. It depend,
partly on P the weather. It is desirable to have a- P ar JP®*
in rear as well as in front, on account of the high
explosive shell. 'Solid overhead cover is also desirable
as far as possible. The width, 13 feet, is not excessive
in bad ground or wet weather. . .
Map Reading.— Map reading forms a very important
detail in the daily work of officers and non-commissioned
officers, and any“ work out in the open after dark and
should, therefore, be practised as much as possible.
‘ Signalling. —The amount of work and time devoted
to visual signalling have not borne fruit in this war,
but the more practice men have with the telephones and
the buzzer the better. An enormous amount is depen-
dent on the telephones. Heavy batteries go in for flag
signalling with the Observation Officers
On the whole, peace training is proved to have been
on the right lines; but, from what has been seen, much
more might be done with the advanced artillery officer.
The Germans are said to use him to a great extent
Much has also to be learnt by artillery in their work
in conjunction with aircraft. Some notes on this sub
ject will form a heading in a later communication.


Some Notes on Conversations with Wounded Royal Field
Artillery Officers at Millbank Hospital.
The German artillery at Mons was very well handled;
as soon as they had located a battery, it would be taken
on in front, and shortly afterwards would be brought
under more or less enfilade fire from batteries to a
flank.
The Germans fire high-explosive shell, as well as
shrapnel, from their field guns. Their shell is very in-
different, and did very little damage, but their fire was
very accurate. The shrapnel shells used by the British
are superior to those used by the Germans. The high
explosive shells were sometimes used with a time fuze;
the noise was terrific, but effect very local, probably
not more than 20 yards each side. Germans fired en-
tirely in bursts of fire; slow rate of fire never used.
Bursts of fire consisted of from about six to twelve
shells; as a rule, shells could be heard coming, and it
was possible to take cover before they arrived.
When the German infantry got within about 1,500
yards, and the English artillery were beginning to get
effective fire, our guns were bombarded with terrific
rate of fire. Voice control was then no good, and no
signaller could stand up. The telephone was the only
thing that was of any use.
The German fire was greatly assisted by aeroplanes;
they had a very good system of signals, and they gave
the line and got the range in a very short time. After
the first few days the English aeroplanes began to
arrive on the scene, and the German aeroplanes then
did much less.
When reconnoitring it is inadvisable to take too
many officers away from brigades. An instance occurred
of only two officers being left with the three batteries,
while the rest of the officers of the brigade had gone
off to reconnoitre positions for the guns. During their
absence a serious crisis arose, which might have led to
a serious disaster.
Always have patrols well ahead and well in touch with
the brigade. An instance occurred of a brigade ad-
vancing into a village, and meeting an ammunition column
in a narrow street, which was endeavouring to get back.
That is, the two forces met in a narrow street, going
in opposite directions. The confusion which ensued
would have been avoided had there been a patrol in
front of the brigade.


Owing to the distance batteries came into action
behind the crest, it was found advisable for the bat-
tery commander to plant his own aiming posts.
The Germans, as a rule, search about 400 yards back
from the crest—it is therefore advisable to be at
least this distance back. It has also usually the ad-
vantage of getting less dead ground. The semi-covered
position has turned out to be a bad one.
The battery commander should never use an observa-
tion limber, or have a limber for cover; a limber was
once put up on the opposite flank to where observation
party was, and drew fire from all round, so much so that
the limber was never got away. A limber for the
ranging officer at the battery is essential.
Section commanders must be as close as they can get
behind the shield of the gun nearest the battery com-
mander.
Gun pits or epaulments in the open are quite useless,
they merely serve to draw fire—behind cover they are
very valuable. Wagons must be placed v<yy close to
the guns—placed touching the guns. No space must be
left, as bullets get through. A good many casualties
were thus caused to ammunition numbers. Earth
should be piled up about 18 inches high, and a couple
of feet in front of the shield, to prevent bullets ricochet-
ing through underneath
Horses were practically never unharnessed. The firing
battery wagons should be unhooked, and not, as a rule,
unlimbered. The limber gives extra protection, and it
is advisable to have as much ammunition as possible at
the guns in case of emergency.
Loading numbers must keep the shell well covered
up until it is in the bore of the gun An instance
occurred of a fuze, before being loaded, being struck
by a shrapnel bullet, the result being that the loading
number had both arms blown off, and the rest of the
detachment were knocked out.
If possible, wagon line should be concealed alto-
gether from view under woods, avenues of trees, &c.
If this cannot be done, it is advisable to keep the
wagon line on the move as long as the ranging aero-
planes are in sight, othewise heavy fire will be turned
on them, and great losses of horses will result.


A method of arranging the ammunition supply which
was found useful was to have two first-line wagons
close to the flank of the battery, and to use them to
keep the firing battery wagons full. This can be done
by utilizing the pauses between the bursts of hre
men running up with ammunition in carriers. As soon
as these two wagons are empty, they should be removed,
the teams hooked in, and be sent back to the ammuni-
tion column to refill. It was found best to refill these
wagons, and not exchange them with those of tne
Arrangements should be made in the event of it*
being desired to open fire again after dark. A lamp
should be put well out to a flank, to be used after dark
as an aiming point, and, in addition, a lantern (in tle
nature of a bull’s-eye lantern) should be placed well
to the front of each gun, to give it its line of hre, or,
if necessary, it can be placed in rear of the gun, n
it is well hidden from the enemy. It was by this means
that the Germans constantly shelled the bivouacs after
dark.


Type of Gun Epaulment for Shielded Gun found suitable at the front.


Details.
Inside edge of parapet to be riveted with posts and
boughs from any suitable trees. The gun and trai
platform to be kept as clear as possible. .
The trench for spade is backed with any timber ava
able, in order that the thrust of the spade may have a
good bearing, and not tear up the ground and allow the
carnage the trenches should be covered with
straw or boughs, &c., in order to be comfortable for the
men at night, and waterproof sheets stretched across the
top to protect the men in rainy weather; drainage will
wagJn is unlimbered and placed as shown in
diagram, in order to afford protection from splinters,
from back blast of H.E. shell, especially when burst on
percussion. Ammunition can be served from trenches
or wagons, and an extra wagon body can be left up,
if necessary, to help close the space in rear, and the
ammunition from its limber stored in the trench while
the limber returns for more from the column.
The whole work must be cunningly concealed by
trees and branches, in order to defy location by airmen,
young Tees being’stuck in the ground in as natural
a manner as possible. „
Sacks of earth on top of wagons, parapet, &c., increase
the protection considerably.
For the above pattern of protection, the
tools of a sub-section are sufficient, provided that
they are in proper order, viz., hand saws properly set,
and axes and billhooks sharp. A light crowbar is use-
ful, if procurable.
German Tactics.
The following information was obtained from an officer
who has been at the front :
1. 3?lie German method of advance is to show a
front with cavalry, in close contact with which is a
highly mobile force of Jaegers conveyed in motor lorries,
and accompanied by machine guns. When attacked,
the cavalry calls up the Jaegers, who deploy behind the
cavalry screen. The cavalry then withdraws, and the
allied cavalry finds itself confronted by an infantry
force with quick-firers.


2. German Rearguards. —These consist of perhaps two
cavalry regiments, several batteries of artillery, motor
mounted machine guns, and 1,000 infantry on motor
lorries. Each lorry carries about 80 men.
'The infantry are rapidly transported from one place
to another by means of these lorries. This occurred in
rearguard actions, and during the fighting on the River
Aisne.
3. German batteries are distributed when in action,
the guns being posted in sections according to the lie of
the ground. The various sections are connected by tele-
phone. The range-finder is some distance to the front.
Each battery has a powerful telescope, and the officers
have 6-inch maps.
4. Machine guns in position are combined with wire
entanglements, as shown in Plate VI. (page 29).


Plate VI.


The apparent gap in the entanglement is purposely
made to draw the attacker into the field of fire of the
machine gun.
In the encounters which took place in Belgium the
Germans on several occasions brought up their machine
guns immediately behind their most advanced line of
infantry. They hid them (e.g., on the first floor of
houses) and allowed the enemy to advance past them
and then opened fire on them from the rear. Also in
defence machine guns are placed in first floor of houses.
The French were ordered to shell all villages before
attacking.
4. Aeroplanes direct the German artillery fire, par-
ticularly the fire of howitzers—our guns must be con-
cealed by branches of trees, &c.
5. Entrenchments. —The Germans since the beginning
of the war have made the greatest use of field entrench-
ments. The extent and the strength of the positions
which they have prepared entail an attack upon them
which approximates to regular siege operations.
The methods adopted in the German positions taken
up on our front are in no sense hastily improvised but
show a carefully thought out system.
The method adopted is as follows:
(a) To render the positions as inconspicuous as
possible to patrols and aircraft.
(b) To alter the natural surface of the ground as
tittle as possible, and where these trenches
cannot be concealed to prepare dummy trenches
along the whole front in order to give a
uniform appearance.
(c) To hide the trenches and gun emplacements by
means of branches, coloured canvas and
plants, taking care that such alterations are
not conspicuous to an observer.
The difficulties of reconnaissance experienced by air-
craft have shown how carefully their system has been
carried out.
The design of trench nearly always adopted is a very
deep trench with parados and traverses for protection
against shell fire and trenches in rear for supports
joined to trenches in front by deep zig-zag trenches.
Their trenches have been designed in anticipation of a
prolonged occupation with observation posts, certain


nortions sheltered from overhead fire, drainage arrange-
Kite e«av»te,l niches for rations, kit, ammunition,
mnnQ < lP3,rch*ll2fhts. stcLl* SHGIISj &C* ,
D P ummy trenches, or trenches manned by dummies, are
nse( j i n front of the true position. The trenches
actualiy occupied are concealed, and between them an
the dummy trenches are wire entanglements, swept by
fire from the former. . *
The attached plates are examples of some of the
German designs for trenches. Plates VII. to XI.
6. Wire Entanglements.— Different types employe :
(a) Very low pickets, 4 inches to 2 ft. 3 in. hig .
(b) Normal, pickets, 5 feet high.
These are placed about 50 yards from the trench,
carefully disguised and hidden by a glacis m fron .
Note -All these works are carefully covered up and
disguised with branches, straw, and grass and made to
look exactly like the surrounding country. .... ,
7 k German Artillery.— Some notes on German artillery
are attached in Appendix B.
STAFF WORK.
1 Orders. —Complaints are frequent about the delay
in obtaining receipt for orders. The best course to be
adopted, if in scattered billets, is to deliver orders y
should invariably get the receipt obtained
fpr an order brought to them by whoever delivers the
or ?ris never safe to trust to any form of verbal order
or verbalTrrangements; the most reliable messengers
hive been found to fail to deliver them or misinter-
rvrptod what was intended. „ , , . „
Starting Point.— lt has been found that troops requir
a Scat deal X marshalling to get every one into their
Dlaces at the starting point. No amount of writing
seems to do this with units large or small coming in
from various directions. ~ . ,„ OTr Tim
Energetic staff work on the spot is the only way.
starting point should .be reconnoitred on the ground
before ft is given out in orders to see there is room on
the road which will allow vehicles, being pulled out of
the way on to the side in order to leave room for the
troops to pass.


It is difficult for a brigade staff to send an officer very
often to head-quarters for orders; often nothing but a
tired horse or a borrowed signaller’s bicycle is avail-
able.
Some brigade head-quarters have found it essential
to have a guard, with sentry, to insure being wakened
at the proper time during the night or early morning
before movement.
2. Billeting. —When troops are billeted in depth and
brigade and divisional head-quarters are situated in rear
it is advisable, in order to allow the head-quarters to
get to the head of the column to fix a definite time for
the head-quarters to pass the starting point and arrange
for the fighting troops to fit in behind.
When approaching billeting areas the transport (Ist
line also) generally halts in the middle of the village
and blocks the roads. This must be prevented.
It is most important that billeting officers should
select, without delay, brigade, battalion, and company
places respectively, where the transport is to halt while
the detail of billets are being worked out.
Brigade billeting officers must rapidly select battalion
and company billeting areas before the troops arrive and
allow the latter to proceed at once into their billets
and clear the roads.
3. Demolitions. —There have been complaints from
Royal Engineer field companies that sufficient warning
is not given to prepare bridges for demolition. Prepara-
tions of this sort take time. There have been failures
in this owing to divisional orders arriving too late.
4. Supplies. —The issue of supplies, especially fresh
meat and groceries, does not seem to have worked very
well. It was understood that supplies would arrive in
mechanical transport at brigade refilling points, packed
in bulk for the brigade, and that it would there be
divided up amongst brigade head-quarters and the four
battalions. It has been found that there is a scarcity
both in men and implements at Jbrigade refilling points
to enable this to be done. This, therefore, needs very
careful arrangement.
It has been found that Army Form B 55 (Ration
Indent) was only being handed in on the same day, in


fact, at same time as supplies are drawn. This is
running things too fine, and arrangements are needed to
remedy this.
The supply, personnel and materiel has been very
overtaxed in issuing daily supplies, with the result that
wagons have been kept waiting many hours at re-filling
points, and then often have returned empty. Careful
organization is needed to prevent a breakdown.
5. Ordnance, Pay, &c « —There was at first a general
lack of knowledge as to the machinery for obtaining
cash for pay, the execution of ordnance services, remounts,
repairs, requisitions on local resources, or how payment
is to be recovered for work done by local tradesmen, &c.
Lack of previous clear-cut arrangements all adds to the
amount of written work which has to be done.
In the Ist Division the arrangement made for repairs
to wagons, &c., was as follows :
Each brigade major was given 51. imprest account.
Repairs when done by local workmen were reported to
the Assistant Director of Ordnance Services, who paid
direct in cash. If the brigades, however, were out of
touch with divisional head-quarters, such services by
local tradesmen were paid in cash and a receipt sent to
the Assistant Director of Ordnance Services, who reim-
bursed the brigade major or other individual who paid
the bill.
Units are ordered to indent on Assistant Director of
Ordnance Services for any requirements; if not imme-
diately met, these indents enable the Assistant Director
of Ordnance Services to look ahead and do the best he
can to meet urgent demands.
6. Discipline. —March discipline easily becomes slack,
straggling has to be rigidly guarded against. Men fall
out on the march into cafes, &c. March discipline must
be kept at all hazards, otherwise battalions and com-
panies get very short of fighting men.
7. Sick Horses. —Considerable trouble has been caused
by units leaving lame horses, &c., scattered about the
country. The Assistant Director of Veterinary Services
should co-ordinate the work and collect the horses in
one spot as far as possible.
8. Intelligence. —Very interesting information relating
to lines of march, order of battle, &c., may be found in


the pocket-books and personal diaries of German
prisoners, or even on the bodies of their dead.
Our soldiers should be cautioned against carrying
among their private papers any information which
might, in the event of their falling into the enemy’s
hand, afford intelligence to the latter regarding the
movements and composition of the allied armies.
9. Uniforms. —The following applies to men of all
arms and to every branch of the German Army:—
The number of the army corps, regiment, battalion and
company is marked, together with the man’s personal
number inside the lining of the tunic.
B.A. XV = Bekleidungsamt (clothing department) of
the XVth Army Corps.
Identity discs show whether a man belongs to the
Standing Army, the Reserve or the Landwehr.
R.I.R. = Infantry Regiment No. 98, Arms (rifles and
bayonets) are marked in the same manner.
10. Instructions for military police. —An example of
instructions, as issued by the sth Division for military
police, is attached in Appendix A as a guide.
11. Dress. —It has been found that men have been in
the habit of wearing unauthorized articles with their
uniform, and of giving away cap badges, shoulder straps,
&c., and also articles of equipment not required at the
moment. Orders against this require to be very strictly
enforced.
12. Courts Martial. —Many irregularities have occurred
through the difficulty of obtaining a copy of the Manual
of Military Law. It is therefore recommended that all
officers should record in their note books a few details
as to procedure, particularly as regards field general
courts martial, e.g., that it is necessary to record in
writing sufficient evidence to prove the charges.
13. Returns. —It is important that Army Form B 213
should be rendered punctually by units to Deputy-
Adjutant-General, 3rd Echelon, Base, as it is by means
of this return that next-of-kin are informed of casual-
ties. This return can only be made up accurately by
units after a roll-call. It is, therefore, necessary that
a duplicate of a nominal roll should be kept by each
company on the person, and another copy with the


baggage section of the train. The roll should be called
at the earliest opportunity and casualties reported at
once.
14. First Field Dressings. —lt is found that men are
in the habit of using their first field dressing to tie up
minor cuts, &c. Also when dressing a wounded man they
use their own field dressing instead of that on the
wounded man, and thus become deficient of their own
dressing. Special instructions appear to be necessary
to stop this practice.
15. Iron Rations. —Care is necessary to see that men
retain their iron rations intact. An impression exists
that the iron ration consists of two squares of Oxo and
a tin of groceries, and it should be made clear that the
tin of preserved meat, &c., is also part of the ration.
16. Officers’ Kits. —As the baggage section of the train
may be out of touch with units for days at a time,
officers are recommended to be independent of it as
regards some warm clothing for the night, washing and
shaving articles, &c.
17. Water. —A good deal of water is to be found in
most villages, and it is as a rule fit to drink. The
practice of filling water bottles direct from the pumps
is wasteful and should not be allowed. Mess tins or
buckets should be filled from the pump and the water
bottle filled from them.
18. Re-filling. —It is often impossible to carry out
re-filling of trains from tailboard to tailboard. It is
generally found more convenient for supply columns to
deposit their stores on the ground and for supply
sections of the train to re-fill from the heaps thus made.
By this method the supply column is able to return to
railhead immediately.
19. Local Supplies. —A scale of local charges drawn
up by the French authorities is available for inspection
at the Mairie of each village. Draught oxen have been
found very good to eat, as owing to the war they have
not been worked for some time and are in soft condition.
At least one pair should be left to work on each farm,
and as the pairs are accustomed to work together, odd
numbers should not be taken.


General Information.
1. The 3rd Infantry Brigade says “ Axol ” lamp has
proved invaluable.
2. It is recommended that all troops, both officers and
men, should carry tea and some sort of “ billy ” to boil
water in and drink out of. The food wagons often
do not come up and all that can be got is the tea made
in a “ billy ” and the biscuits that each carries in his
haversack.
3. It is dangerous to touch the heads of the German un-
exploded 10.5 cm. (4.13-in.) shell.
Note. —This probably refers to the universal shell
used in light field howitzer; see Appendix B (6).
Notes from the Diary of a private individual travelling
in Belgium during the latter part of August and the
month of September.
The Germany army as a piece of machinery has been
almost perfected. The only mistake that has been made
is that of disregarding the human element, and the
taking for granted that the one great essential for the
success of the military operations—Time—will work out
according to the pre-arranged schedule. One very
interesting and novel feature is apparent. Infantry,
regarded as infantry alone, solely dependent upon
mobility, and accurate rifle fire, initiative, and what
the French term elan, has been subordinated to mass
movements. An infantry regiment is employed merely
as a support for artillery and for the machine gun. In
the Ist and 2nd line troops I should judge that 10 to
12 Maxim guns are attached to every infantry regiment.
They are handled and transported as regimental trans-
port. A regiment of German infantry could pass through
a town, and an observer reporting on their passage
would swear that he had seen no machine guns of any
kind.
Ambulances. —The ambulance service also is most in-
teresting. On entering the towns all motor cabs or other


suitable vehicles are taken; such vehicles, including the
ordinary taxi cab, are very rapidly transformed into an
ambulance capable of carrying at least eight wounded
men. This is done by a force of carpenters and
machinists who simply remove the body from the chassis
and substitute a frame of wood covered with canvas.
The wounded are generally brought into hospitals at
night —for it is the policy of the Germans to conceal
their losses in every way, both from their own men and
from the inhabitants. (Sketch, Piute 111., attached.)
Machine Guns. —The gun as it rests on the ground
(Plate 1., Figure A) is about the height of a man in
the firing position lying down. When raised (Plate 1.,
Figure B) it is about the height of a man kneeling.
A spectator saw 50 of these guns loaded into small
two-wheeled carts and into motor trucks, which are
mentioned later; the operation of loading took less than
35 minutes. As they passed through a town no one
would have detected from any evidence that any machine
guns had been taken through the streets. The machine
gun is sometimes carried in the manner of an African
hammock on the shoulders of bearers. They move it
also carrying it as they would a stretcher (Plate 1.,
Figure C), with a blanket thrown over the gun and a
couple of knapsacks or perhaps an ammunition box;
when carried in this manner the gunners at a distance
are easily mistaken for stretcher-bearers carrying a
wounded man off the field.
Plate 11., Figure A, contains hasty sketches of the
two-wheeled cart which is fitted to transport three of
these guns. They have two men to every gun. The
driver and another man ride on the seat, and each cart
is accompanied by a mounted non-commissioned officer
or, perhaps, subaltern.
The members of this mobile machine-gun force march
light, their knapsacks, blankets, and in some cases their
rifles, being carried in the carts. The mounted men
that accompany them have a rope and leather harness,
so that the horse can be used as the leader of a tandem
in case of heavy going. The cart has strong and steady
springs. The appearance of the cart with its load of,
in some cases, bundles of forage, knapsacks, haversacks
and blankets, would attract not the slightest attention.


The guns at the bottom were absolutely hidden. The
cart is somewhat like an English butcher’s cart, only
much heavier. The tailboard drops down in the ordinary
way.
In regard to the motor vans, they carry nine guns,
placed as shown in the sketch. (Plate 11., Figure B.)
The vans have evidently a shallow false bottom. This
is very carefully concealed, so carefully indeed, that it
is said that some of these lorries have been captured
and lost without the guns having been discovered by the
captors. A small tailboard, which drops down, facili-
tates the guns being hauled out or replaced. A heavy
load is placed on top of the false bottom. The sides of
these motor vans are quite high, and in many cases
I saw machine-gun detachments of no less than 15 or 16
men carried on a van.
The use and mobility of machine guns carried in this
manner is, of course, apparent. They are always up
with the regiment, and can be taken over any ground
without difficulty to support an advance or cover a
retreat. Moreover, if necessary, they can be concealed
from falling into the hands of an enemy by digging a
shallow grave, wrapping the gun, &c., in a blanket, and
covering the whole with a few shovelfuls of earth.* The
two spikes (Plate 1., Figure D) are used to fasten down
the footplates of the machine-gun mounting. They can
be driven into the floor of buildings and into the
interstices of cobblestones, besides being used in ordinary
ground. Each pair is connected with a strap or a
chain.
The ammunition boxes are carried under the seat of
the wagon and are probably concealed somewhere in the
motor van.
The ammunition is probably carried in what appears
to be the trailer to an ordinary two-wheeled cart.
Entrenchments. —Plate IV. gives a plan of some
German trenches and the way they have arranged their
wire entanglements. These are drawn from some
examined near Lieg6, where the Germans have had
time to entrench very carefully.
* Machine guns have actually been found buried in this manner. It
is understood that the wooden cross marking their sites had a slight
distinguishing mark.


APPENDIX A.
PRELIMINARY INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE MILITARY
POLICE, 5th DIVISION.
1. General. —The usual routine police duties win be
continued at the peace station pending entrainment. The
military police will make themselves acquainted with
the names or numbers of the various units comprising
the division, and with the names and ranks (and, as
far as possible, the personal appearance) of officers of
the head-quarters of the division, and of head-quarters
of artillery and infantry brigades.
2. Command. —In the absence of the Assistant Provost-
Marshal, military police attached to the head-quarters of
artillery and infantry brigades will act under the direc-
tion of the staff captains of those brigades.
3. Duties on March. —On the march, the non-commis-
sioned officer and military police attached to the head-
quarters of the two rearmost infantry brigades will
invariably march with, and in rear of, the baggage section
of the divisional train, and will prevent straggling.
Stragglers and animals will be collected and march back
to their units at the first opportunity. Stray animals not
identified will be handed over to the nearest mounted
unit. No man except the driver is to be allowed to ride
on a wagon, unless provided with a pass signed by the
transport officer. When passing through towns and
villages the military police will march in rear of the
formations to which they are attached, collect and bring
on all stragglers.
4. Sale of Liquor. —Non-commissioned officers and men
of the division are forbidden to enter any hotel, inn, or
restaurant abroad for the purpose of buying liquor of
any kind. The proprietors of such places (which are
placed out of bounds) will be warned not to sell liquor
to the troops, and the names and addresses of any pro-
prietors or purchasers infringing this rule will be noted
and reported to the Assistant Provost-Marshal.


5. Close touch and mutual co-operation will be main-
tained between the military police attached to the head-
quarters of formations and the regimental police belong-
ing to the units of those formations.
6. Great care will be taken to protect the persons and
property of the inhabitants from any violence or plunder-
ing, and they are to be treated courteously.
7. The military police will always endeavour to get
into touch with and co-operate with the civil police in
maintaining order.
8. Illegal Requisitioning. —Only supply officers, Army
Service Corps, and ordnance officers are authorized to
make requisitions for supplies and material, &c., for
current requirements.
Indiscriminate requisitioning by other individual
officers, warrant officers, non-commissioned officers and
men and the granting of requisition receipt notes, is
strictly forbidden and will be treated as plundering
under the Army Act.
9. Sutlers. —Traders and sutlers endeavouring to
accompany and deal with the troops, unless provided
with a pass signed by the Assistant Provost-Marshal,
will be placed in custody and handed over to the civil
police.
10. Powers of Arrest. —The military police may at
any time arrest and detain for trial persons, subject to
the military law, committing offences, and are authorized
in cases of emergency to call on any troops to assist
them by supplying them with guards, sentries, or patrols.
11. Charge Reports. —When handing over an offender
to his unit for disposal, care will be taken to hand in a
charge report at the same time. A duplicate charge
report will be rendered to the non-commissioned officer
i/c of the detachment of military police and by him
to the Assistant Provost-Marshal. It is particularly
necessary that the names and addresses of all civilians
whom the military police may have to give in custody,
or call as witnesses, should be carefully noted at the
time, and also the names of the places where they may
be found. The military police will likewise take steps


to procure at the time (or within 24 hours) a charge
report duly signed for each person handed over to them
for custody.
12. Field Punishment. —When an offender is handed
over to the military police for execution of sentence of
field punishment, or otherwise, a return is to be rendered,
by the officer by whom he is handed over showing the
name and description of the offender, the offence, the
date of award of punishment, the punishment awarded,
and the name of the awarding officer. A committal
warrant is not required for a sentence of field punish-
ment. A register will be kept by the non-commissioned
officer in charge of the military police with each forma-
tion of all punishments inflicted by them and how the
offenders were disposed of after punishment. An extract
dealing with the period from Sunday to Saturday will
be sent to. the Assistant Provost-Marshal each Sunday
morning.
IS. Billeting Parties. —Two military police from divi-
sional head-quarters and one from the head-quarters of
each infantry brigade will accompany the billeting parties
daily, and will march in Tear of the advanced guard.
On arrival in their respective billeting areas they will
see that the water supply is not fouled, and will ascer-
tain the situations of hotels, liquor shops, houses of ill
repute, and houses containing cases of infectious disease,
and report them to the Assistant Provost-Marshal or
staff captains with a view to their being placed out of
bounds, and guards placed over them if necessary. They
will make themselves acquainted with the position of
head-quarters offices of the division or brigade and of
hospitals, &c.
14. Billets, Bivouacs. —The military police will patrol
billeting or bivouac areas from the time of arrival until
half-an-hour after “ lights out ” in order to maintain
order and prevent men leaving their billeting areas
without permission, or other irregularities. When billets
or bivouacs are vacated the military police will remain
behind and see that no loose papers or other things are
left behind which would give any clue to the designation
or numbers of the formations that have occupied the
billets over night.


APPENDIX B.
GERMAN ARTILLERY.
Horse and field artillery have the same 15-pr. field
gun (1896). Field howitzer batteries are armed with
a new light howitzer (1909).
(a) The Field Gun is the old 15-pr. converted and
mounted on a shielded gun-recoil carriage.
Calibre, 3.03 inches.
Range with time fuze up to 5,500 yards.
Range with percussion fuze up to 9,186 yards.
Maximum rate of fire, 20 rounds a minute.
Ammunition. —Shrapnel or H.E.
H.E. is being replaced by a universal shell.
Weight of shrapnel or H.E. is 15 lbs.
Contains 300 bullets (45 to the lb.).
H.E. shell contains 7 ozs. of nitro powder with
fulminate detonator.
Rounds per gun in battery, 132. In ammunition
columns per gun, 246.
(b) The Light Field Howitzer, issued in 1910.
Calibre, 4.13 inches.
Rate of fire, at least 6 rounds a minute.
Time fuze range up to 5,800 yards.
Percussion, 8,100 yards.
Ammunition. —Shrapnel and H.E. which are to be
replaced by universal shell as soon as the pre-
sent stock is exhausted.
Weight of shrapnel or H.E., 31 lbs.
Weight of universal shell, 31 lbs. (nearly).
A universal shell for howitzers contains 500 bullets
(42 to the lb.), 5i ozs. of picric acid with ful-
minate detonator.
When burst on percussion the high-explosive
bursters in the head and among the bullets
detonate, giving the effect of a powerful mine
shell.
Rounds per gun in battery, 91.
Rounds per gun in ammunition column, 147.


(c) Heavy Field Howitzer Battery (4 howitzers in a
battery).—ls cm. (5.9 incM heavy field howitzer is
mounted on an old type of heavy limbered carriage.
Pattern 1902. Weight behind the team about 2£ tons.
Maximum range, 8,150 yards. Effective range,
6,000 yards.
Rate of fire, 2 or 3 rounds per minute.
Ammunition. —H.E. shell weights 89 lbs.
Percussion fuzes, with or without delaying action,
are employed. Bursting charge is 11 lbs.
Rounds per howitzer in the battery, 72.
Rounds per howitzer in ammunition column, 360.
(d) 21 cm. ( 8.27-inch) Mortar Battery.—This mortar
is really a breech-loading howitzer.
Maximum range, 8,400 yards.
Ammunition. —Weight of H.E. shell, 262 lbs.
Rounds per gun in battery, nil.
Rounds per gun in ammunition column, 173.
(e) Siege Artillery
(i) 28 cm. (11-inch Howitzer). Range 12,000 yards.
It was reported in March, 1913, that there were six
batteries each of two of these howitzers, but according
to a Belgian officer who was at Namur in August, 1914,
there were 30 batteries of these guns.
Reports have also been received in 1913, of a 32 cm.
howitzer being introduced.
(ii) 42 cm. (16%-inch Howitzer).
It is reported that there are 10 of these in the German
Army and that they-are manned by Krupp’s men. Their
length is about 12 feet and the height of the shell is
5 ft. 1 in. Waggons with cement to make platforms
accompany the men.
Two of these are reported now about Lille.


PLAN OF GERMAN TRENCHES DESIGNED FOR
A BATTALION WITH EMPLACEMENTS FOR
MACHINE-GUN FLANKING FIRE.
T. Rifle trenches.
R. Trenches for supports.
M. Machine-gun emplacements.
B. Communication trenches.


Plate VIII.
DESIGN OF DEEP RIFLE TRENCHES.
NOTE.—The loose earth which is thrown behind
the Trench is covered with gras3 or straw.
(b) Traversed Trenches.
The slopes of the traverses are revetted with planks.


Plate IX.
SUPPORT AND COMMUNICATION TRENCHES.
(cl.) Trenches for Supports
(b.) Communication Trenches.
Firing Trench.
These trenches are first
made for men to use
on hand and knees and
subsequently deepened.
(C.) Combined Trenches.


Plate X.
MACHINE-GUN EMPLACEMENT.
Section at Ct b + 2-6


Plate XI.
EPAULMENT FOR FIELD ARTILLERY AS THROWN
UP DURING AN ENGAGEMENT.
M. Trench for gunners.
S. Sandbags.
C Limber.
This design is improved by lateral covered shelters.


Plate I.
SKETCH OF MACHINE GUN AND MOUNT.


Plate II
GALLOPING CART CONTAINING THREE GUNS.


Plate III
SECTION OF
BODV SHEWING
DOUBLE DECK.
TAXI CAB AMBULANCE TO CARRY 8 WOUNDED.
PLAN.
BROWN CANVAS
VENTILATION
WOUNDED TO
LIE ATHWARTSHIPS
STRETCHERS


Plate IV.
SECTION OF ENTANGLEMENTS THROUGH LINE A. B.
( SCALE SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT.)


25th Battery, 7th F.A. Brigade (A.I.F)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY
OF H.B.M. GOVERNMENT.
NOTE.
The information given in this document
is not to be communicated, either directly
or indirectly, to the Press or to any
person not holding an official position in
His Majesty’s Service.
NOTES FROM THE FRONT.
COLLATED BY THE GENERAL STAFF.
Part II.
REPRINTED BY AUTHORITY, FOR THE DEFENCE
DEPARTMENT, AUSTRALIA.
1914.
C. 16771.




FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY.
THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY
OF H.B.M. GOVERNMENT.
NOTE.
The information given in this document
is not to be communicated, either directly
or indirectly, to the Press or to any
person not holding an official position in
His Majesty’s Service.
NOTES FROM THE FRONT
COLLATES* &i' THE GENERAL STAFF.
Part 11.
REPRINTED BY AUTHORITY, FOR THE DEFENCE
DEPARTMENT, AUSTRALIA.
1914.
C. 16771.


PREFACE.
The following points are particularly emphasized in all
reports received from the front: —
1. The importance of constant practice in digging at
night. It is considered that actual practice in supplying
food and ammunition to men in the trenches at night
would be very useful training.
2. The necessity for scrupulous care of rifles in order
to ensure their smooth working during rapid fire.
3. The need of impressing upon young officers the fact
that one of their first and most important duties is to
look after the comfort and well-being of their men at all
times, and that it must be a point of honour to do so
before thinking of their own needs.
4. The importance of inculcating the doctrine that the
temporary exposure of a flank owing. a local success
on the part of the enemy should be looked upon as an
occasion for counter-attack and not for withdrawal.
Proper measures to watch the flanks should be taken and
men should be held ready to counter-attack if a flank
is threatened, but the idea that a withdrawal is always
justified merely because a flank is temporarily turned
should never be permitted to take root.
It should be a point of honour with all officers to carry
through any task confided to them without asking for
reinforcements.
5. The necessity for careful training in wood and
village fighting, especially the latter; attention is
directed to sections 141-146, Infantry Training, 1914.


25th Battery, 7th F.A. Brigade (A.I.F)
NOTES FROM THE FRONT: PART II.
I.—CAVALRY.
!• German Cavalry. —The German cavalry is always
supported by Jagers and cylists, and by infantry in
motor cars, each car bolding about 30 men. It seldom
adopts offensive tactics mounted, nor does it often hold
positions dismounted yuth any determination. Its role
seems more generally to be to draw its opponents on
under the fire of its cyclist and infantry supports. When
attacked, the cavalry usually retires, clearing to a flank
and unmasking the position held by the latter, which is
very often entrenched. On the few occasions on which
the enemy has attempted a mounted attack he has been
met by rifle fire and a mounted counter-attack and
beaten off with heavy loss.
2. Training. —Our cavalry has shown a marked
superiority over the German cavalry, both as regards
training and moral. The great importance of good
squadron and regimental drill has been apparent. Some
knowledge of brigade drill is necessary.
Too much stress cannot be laid on the service of
security, and the covering of advances or of troops in
readiness by a skilful use of ground. A high education
m courage, independence, and self-reliance is most
necessary.
3. Cavalry Patrols. —lt has not been found advisable
to lay down particular formations for patrols, but the
principles of the training manual must be followed.
Patrols should invariably carry their swords—not their
rifles—in their hands ready for immediate use. On
meeting a hostile patrol, even of superior numbers, they
should charge at once at a gallop. These tactics have
proved universally successful.
Reports from the front emphasize the importance of
the instructions in Cavalry Training, section 185 (4), as
regards the method of approaching woods, villages, &c.
The Germans often remove a tile or two. and shoot
through the roofs of houses.
A 2


4. Reports. —The necessity of drawing a clear dis-
tinction in reports between information which is certain
and that which is only presumed or inferred .has. been
very apparent, as has also the value of negative infor-
mation. All messages should be written on Army Form
C. 2121, and it is important that all ranks should
accustom themselves to the use of this Form during
peace training. Verbal messages seldom reach their
destination correctly and should be avoided.
5. Billets. —Billets are nearly always obtainable at
night, mostly in farm buildings and outhouses. It is
essential to send on good billeting parties in advance as
soon as the billeting area has been decided upon. A
suitable strength is one officer and one good non-com-
missioned officer per squadron and an interpreter. The
same men should be told off permanently as far as
possible. Horses have to be placed close together; a good
pace a horse has been found to suffice, though kicks are
apt to residt at first till horses begin to get stale. If the
horses can be fitted in there is usually no difficulty about
accommodating the men in houses, lofts, &c. It should
be the invariable rule to saddle up in the dark, ready to
move at dawn, and as soon as it is light to send out an
officer’s patrol from each squadron to reconnoitre the
immediate vicinity.
6. Led Horses. —Led horses must be carefully hidden.
If hostile aeroplanes come over and there is any chance
of the horses having been observed, they must be moved
immediately the aeroplane is out of sight, otherwise they
will be shelled before very long.
7. Machine Guns. —It has been found best always to
carry machine guns on pack when near the enemy.
8. Siqnallinq. —Flag signalling has often been found
useful by our cavalry.
9. Equitation. —A staff officer at the front draws
particular attention to the necessity for constant practice
during training in rapidly mounting and dismounting.
10. Equipment. —Rome notes by a cavalry officer on the
equipment of officers and men are given in Appendix I.
lI.—ARTILLERY.
1. Selection of Positions. —Under modern conditions
with aeroplanes the selection of positions is of the
utmost importance. Even when behind cover and hidden


from view from the enemy’s position, a battery which
is not concealed from aeroplanes is liable to be destroyed
by the enemy’s shell fire. Concealments may be ob-
tained by the selection of positions in belts of trees, on
the edges of woods, or in fences studded with trees.
Small trees may also be cut down and planted not only
round the guns but in the intervals between them, so as
to produce the effect of a natural belt of trees. Alter-
native positions should be prepared, and dummy positions
should be made use of to mislead the enemy. Whenever
it appears that the position of a battery has been located
by the enemy, a change of position should be made under
cover of darkness. In all circumstances it is important
that positions should be selected which will not be dis-
closed by the flashes of the guns. Batteries are almost
invariably in action separately, and there is a tendency
to employ sections by themselves as they can produce
great fire effect with a minimum chance of discovery. A
small definite target such as a portion of a trench, a
house said to contain snipers, or a machine gun, which
can be seen, is often most effectively engaged by a single
gun. Single guns have in some cases been dug in to
strengthen the infantry line of trenches at night. They
should be removed at dawn, and if required again the
following night should only be put back again in the same
emplacements if their positions have not been discovered
by the enemy.
2. Observation of Fire. —Very extensive use has been
made of forward observers, i.e., subaltern officers pushed
right forward with the firing line or in the advanced in-
fantry trenches and connected by telephone with their
batteries. These officers are able to send back accurate
observations with regard to the results obtained by the
guns, and their employment leads to a considerable
saving in ammunition, as the information they supply
enables batteries to bring an effective fire to bear upon
the right targets at the right time.
3. Telephones. —Telephones have proved altogether in-
dispensable, and the importance of efficient training in
their use cannot be too strongly emphasized.
It is, perhaps, too generally assumed that any man is
able to make use of a telephone without special training.
This is, however, by no means the case; satisfactory
results can only be obtained by men who have been
regularly instructed in the art of speaking through the


telephone. As many men as possible should be trained to
use the buzzer, as it has been found that communication
can often be maintained by its use when tele P llonra S
voice fails. Long distance work up to 1 or even 2 miles
&h T l LayinJ & Out Lines of Fire.—lt is most essential that
all officers should be trained in all the different methods
of obtaining the line of fire. Special attention is called
to paragraph 198, Field Artillery Training, 1914. Officers
should be familiar with all the different methods therein
described. Experience has shown that lines of fire must
often be obtained by compass bearing or from the map.
The following is a method which has proved successful
A report is received that a hostile battery has been
located by an aeroplane near a certain definite
point upon the map. The battery in question
cannot be seen from any point in our position,
but fire is inflicting considerable damage upon
our troops, and it must therefore be engaged.
The battery commander detailed to engage it takes
his map, marks off on it the positions of his
own and of the hostile battery, measures the
angle which his line of fire makes with the true
North, ascertains the angle which it makes with
magnetic North by adding the magnetic varia-
tion, measures the range, notes the difference m
level between his battery and the target by re-
ference to the contours, and works out the angle
of si<*ht. Having thus obtained the line of fire,
angle of sight and range, the battery commander
can now, by applying the procedure described in
paragraph 198, Field Artillery training, 1914,
open fire in the required direction with an ap-
proximately accurate range, and the method of
searching and sweeping may be most suitably
employed. There is obviously a considerable
element of chance in this procedure, but, though
the effect is often never ascertained, good results
are known to have been obtained) on certain occa-
sions. Fire which has been opened in this way
has sometimes been the means of indicating the
target to an observing officer, who can telephone
back the results and carry on the control of the
shooting.


5. Waste of Ammunition. —Great stress should be laid
during training on the necessity of husbanding ammuni-
tion, more especially in the case of howitzers and heavy
guns.
Continuing to fire too long at the same target is a not
infrequent source of waste of ammunition. If the range
of a hostile battery has once been obtained and if the
battery has been compelled to cease fire, it may generally
be assumed that all its personnel have taken cover, and
that a continuance of fire is only waste of ammunition.
It is preferable to register several targets and to fire a
few rounds at each of them at intervals; by this method
some of the personnel will probably be caught in the open
and will be destroyed before they can regain cover. In
cases where several targets have thus been registered, it
has been found useful to have the line of fire of one gun
laid out on each target. A few rounds can then be fired
with great rapidity on any particular target, or if a
heavy and sustained fire is required on it, the lines of
fire of the whole battery can be brought on to it by the
procedure described in sub-paragraph 4 of paragraph 198,
Field Artillery Training, 1914.
6. German Fire Tactics. —A resume of some “ Orders
for the Conduct of Artillery Fire,” issued by the German
Great General Staff, is given in Appendix 11.
7. Officers’ Equipment. —Some notes on the equipment
of artillery officers, which have been furnished by an
officer at the front, are given in Appendix 111.
111. DIVISIONAL SIGNAL COMPANIES.
(a) Summary of Remarks in a Letter from an
Officer at the Front.
1. Messages. —The first and most important point is to
keep a careful watch on all messages despatched so as
to know at the earliest possible moment whether or no
important messages have reached their destination.
There must be one man permanently on duty keeping
the register ; at least three men therefore must be trained
in the keeping of it. Practice in looking after messages
in this way is most necessary. The success or failure
of an operation may depend upon it.


Messages may go wrong in the following ways:
(1) Orderlies may be shot, lose their way, or break
down. _
(2) Messages may be sent by wire to the cable
waggon while it is temporarily out of touch
with the Brigade Commander. This can only
be discovered if the message ends “ acknow-
ledge.” All important messages should there-
fore do so, and the signal officer should add
this word if he thinks it desirable.
2. Cable Lines. —Detachments must be made to lay
cable lines safely by day or night. On nearing his
destination, it is advisable for the detachment com-
mander to go forward to choose the route for the cable
waggon. Brigade Head-quarters are often exposed to
shell fire and it may be advisable to leave the waggon
and finish the line by hand. If left down for any length
of time, lines must be constantly patrolled and made as
secure as possible.
Lines are often cut by shell fire; if a position is
occupied for any length of time, duplicate or triplicate
wires are useful. These need not necessarily run the
whole way, but only along the exposed portion, thus—
Lines are sometimes tapped by German spies, and it is
impossible to know when this is being done. It is, as a
rule, only done during darkness. Messages should there-
fore be carefully scrutinized before despatch, and any
that relate to movements timed to take place some hours
later should be sent by motor cyclist whenever possible.
Clerks should be practised in working with three or
fpur officers on the same line.
(b) Notes on Training a Divisional Signal
Company.
1. To get the best results out of a divisional signal
company it is essential that there should be the closest


co-operation and mutual assistance between the head-
quarters and the brigade sections. For example, in the
field, the lines from brigades to battalions are often
3 miles long—or even longer, if it is necessary to take a
circuitous route to avoid shell fire, and it is necessary
to assist the brigade sections by laying D 5 cable for a
portion of the distance to the battalions.
The right spirit can only be obtained by the company
being trained as a whole, and by the Commanding Officer
taking as much interest in his brigade sections as in his
cable section.
2. Taking the various portions of the company in
turn —
(a) Head-quarters. —The head-quarters provides the
signal office staff, despatch riders, any visual terminals
required, and orderlies. If, however, visual is being
used, it is necessary to apply for infantry orderlies in
addition to be detailed for the signal office. The mounted
despatch riders are usually required in wet and muddy
weather, and to convey messages across country during
an engagement. They should be able to ride their
horses over open ditches about 7 to 10 feet wide, and
their horses should be trained to leave other horses
without delay.
Motor cyclists are unreliable when the roads are
greasy, especially over Belgian pave. If they have to
go to a head-quarters which is in possible view of the
enemy, they should leave their machines under cover
and walk the last part of the way, as despatch riders
going to and leaving a head-quarters are always liable
to give away the position to the enemy. They should
not be sent out by night unless the exact position of
the unit to which they are to go is known. It is difficult
for a motor cyclist to find units in the dark unless the
exact position can be explained to him. Also he is
liable to run into the enemy.
The supply of petrol, oil, and carbide for motor
cyclists must be carefully watched.
Cyclists can often be used when the roads are too had
for motor cyclists.
They should be carefully trained in the care of their
machines. A number of machines have been broken by
horses; cyclists should therefore be taught to put their
machines where horses are unlikely to be taken.


All «irmfillers and despatch riders in head-quarters
BttSßsfS
The signal clerks and motor cyclists must, in ailditio ,
he insSted in the organization of the higher forma-
UonTof the army in the field, including cavalry
Tn billets—and divisional head-quarters are practically
In billets anau must bg kept in the signal
office 7 of the addresses of the various people to whom
messages have to he delivered, who are usually as
follows Head-quarters Divisional Royal Artillery,
Headquarters Divisional Royal Engineers, As-
2?ont Director of Medical Services, Assistant
Director of Veterinary Services, Cyclist ConuparLy,
Divisional Mounted Troops, and occasionally Head-
nuarters Divisional Tram and Divisional Supply
Officer. Record must also be kept of the exact positions
of brigade and corps head-quarters, and Corps Signals
must S informed as to the exact position of divisional
"mToo? 6 ”' possible otter going into hUlets brigade
sicrnal officers must send in a cyclist orderly to the dm
sional signal office to describe exactly where the brigade
signal office and head-quarters are situated. Valuable
time may be wasted looking for a brigade head-quarters
ii a village unless the exact situation is known. _
ih) No. 1 Section. —Operators should be instructed, in
the organization and names of the units m a division.
Owing B to the danger of German spies tapping the lines,
sneaking on the telephone should not usually be per-
mitted § Linemen should be trained to act as mounted
despatch riders, and should also be able to ride bicycles.
A lineman on a motor cycle or bicycle fault U tht
instead of a mounted man to repair quickly a fauß, the
probable locality of which is known, e.g., a place which
the enemy have been shelling. They are also more
useful than mounted men for work on permanent lines.
Cable lines should not be run out till really necessary.
The enemy ate in the habit of shelling roads, so it may


often be necessary to run the cables across country to
avoid having it continually cut. In the presence of the
enemy it is usually advisable for the cable detachment to
return to divisional head-quarters after laying a line,
thus avoiding needless risk. This is possible since, in
practice, brigade head-quarters seldom move at short
notice during an action. Cable is more often laid by
night than by day, lines having to be run out after the
division has halted for the night.
It is rarely necessary to lay cable at a trot, although at
Le Cateau cable had to be laid across open country for
2 miles at the gallop. The point which is usually most
important is to lay the cable safe from traffic. At the
time the cable is being laid, or as soon after as possible,
it should be fastened high up in trees, to houses, or to
telegraph poles, or poles for poling it may be cut in the
nearest wood. Iron staples are often useful for quickly
fixing the cable to trees, &c.; they should not be ham-
mered in too tightly. If the cable is left on the ground
• for any length of time it deteriorates and the signals
become weak. Climbers should be carried on every
cable waggon.* Permanent line should be used as much
as possible in order to save cable.
When laying cable in possible view of the enemy, a
hand barrow should be used, as a cable waggon would
certainly be shelled. The hand barrow can often be
used with advantage also for laying short lines at night,
for getting along crowded roads, and for cross-country
work. A convenient “barrow detachment” consists of
a non-commissioned officer and two sappers, dismounted,
a limbered L.S. waggon with hand barrow, ladder’
climbers, two drums of cable, and proportion of pole
crossings, &c. The waggon would be left under cover
when necessary.
(c) Nos. 2,8, Sections. —The rules laid down for
the divisional signal office should be carried out in the
brigade signal office as far as possible. The head-
quarters of the neighbouring brigades should be ascer-
tained from the divisional signal office. All the per-
sonnel in a brigade section should be imbued with the
* Arrangements have been made to include these it the equipment
of cable units.


fact that the most important means of communication
in possession of a brigade section are the telephone,
cyclist, despatch riders, and foot orderlies. All the
personnel in the telephone detachment, less drivers,
should be trained to read the buzzer up to at least
twelve words a minute with reasonable accuracy.
Sleeted men should be trained in minor repairs,
especially in replacing broken leads.
Much practice is necessary in laying lines at night,
both on roads and across country. Long lines are often
necessary as long range guns compe. h
quarters to be some distance behim * ~'
result of shell fire on lines may also render a detour of
some miles necessary, dhe most important pom
long lines are to keep telephones dry and in as good
repair as possible, and cable m good condition. D 1
cable should be raised off the ground as much as pos
sible Linemen should be trained to be very active, and
to be able to locate and repair faults quickly by day
and night. Cable may have to be abandoned, but drums
should be saved at all costs, since it is easier to replace
cable than drums. The hand carrier bar is far more
used for laying than the pack equipment. Detachments
should be instructed in tapping permanent lines and m
the use of climbers.
Bicycles must be looked after daily, like a horse and
kept clean and oiled. Cyclists and foot orderlies must
be trained to find their way across country on veibal
instructions only, though map reading is, of course, very
important. Foot orderlies have often to work unde
fire P , and should be instructed to recognise covered
approaches. All concerned must be imbued with the
idea that a message has got to get through as quickly
as possible somehow, even at serious risk to themselves.
3. Visual Signalling. —Visual signalling is often in-
valuable, but it must be concealed from the enemy. It
is of no use attempting to use it except with ex Po™,
intelligent, and experienced signallers; no others can
get messages through. The white flag can rarely be used
on service, and men under training should not be allowed
to use it- blue flag morse and semaphore read through a
telescope, and the heliograph, are far the most important
methods.


IV—INFANTRY.
1. Attack Formations. —Small columns in what are
known as “ artillery formations ” should never be ad-
hered to when there is a possibility of their coming
under close or medium range fire of infantry or machine
guns.
Troops have suffered severely from insufficient exten-
sion, and the adoption of rigid lines, and also from
pushing forward in close formations without taking the
proper military precautions. Loose elastic formations
adapted to the ground with men at 8 or 10 paces
intervals are the least vulnerable.
2. Defence. —The enemy’s night attacks are made
without scouts or advanced parties, and the advance is
made with great rapidity. Infantry in trenches must
always be ready to open a burst of rapid fire at a few
seconds’ notice; so long as this can be done there will
be no chance of a trench being rushed. Supports should
be in the cover trenches, and when the firing line is
attacked should not fire but rely on the bayonet.
Piquets should be strong at night, and protected by
an obstacle (e.g., by a barricade on a road), and the
ground on the far side of the obstacle must be under
fire from the piquet. The piquet must also be posted on
the ground on which it intends to fight, and must be
ready to open fire without moving.
3. Occupation of Villages. —Villages and farms have
been the scenes of heavy fighting. They naturally afford
good targets for artillery, and it is better to hold a
position in rear of a village, commanding the exits, than
one in front of it. Buildings are of course untenable
under artillery fire. Wounded should never be placed
in churches, as these buildings always form a target for
German artillery.
Troops or transport in rear of the fighting line should
not assemble in villages within range of hostile guns if
it can be avoided, at any rate, in the day time. Many
losses have been thus incurred from long range high
explosive shells.
4. German Infantry. —Our Infantry has proved itself
superior in every respect to that of the enemy. The
shooting of the German infantry is poor, and the men
will not face the bayonet. Unless they are supported by
a superior artillery fire, they have no chance against
British infantry either in attack or defence.


5 Care of Rifles. —New rifles are inclined to work
somewhat stiffly at first, owing to slight roughness of the
bearing surfaces of the bolt and bolt way. This can be
appreciably lessened by frequent and systematic manipu-
lation of the bolt, the bearing surfaces being well oiled.
Primary extraction (i.e., the first loosening of the fired
cartridge in the chamber) can be improved by placing a
fired case in the chamber and working the bolt lever up
and down without drawing back the bolt.
Rifles must be kept clean and well oiled, and it has
been found necessary to make an inspection daily or even
oftener. Particular care must be taken to see that the
chamber is scrupulously clean; if it is permitted to
become dirty great difficulty in extraction is likely to be
experienced.
When in trenches in wet weather every precaution
must be taken to prevent the bolt of the rifle from
becoming clogged with mud. Much care is required to
prevent this occurring.
It has also been fount! that cartridges get rusted into
their clips, and that they should be moved at _ least
weekly. Magazine springs may also become weak if the
magazine is continually kept loaded with ten instead
of five rounds.
6. Machine Guns. The German guns are usually
posted singly or in pairs, and frequently wait for an
opportunity for surprise by opening fire with great effect
at close range. The enemy display great skill in posting
machine guns on a flank so as to bring enfilade fire to
bear on the attacking troops. .
In village fighting these guns have been especially
effective; they are placed in the upper storeys of houses
and in similar positions.
In the attack on our positions these guns have been
brought forward sometimes by “ snipers ” before the
infantry advances; cases have even occurred in which
they have brought guns into farm buildings 10 or 15
yards in front of our trenches and have rendered the
latter untenable.
Machine guns are easily put out of action by artillery
fire; great care is therefore necessary in selecting posi-
tions for our own machine guns, and in occupying them
without attracting attention.
7. Musketry.— Some notes on German views on
musketry and machine guns are given in Appendix IV.


>) , Extracts from a Letter from a Staff Officer
at the Front.
r i. The Germans usually attack about 3 p.m. or at
ceisk, and then entrench during the night within 200
yards of our lines; they also take advantage of fog in the
early morning. They make a little progress occasionally
in this way, but it is slow work and they have lost
enormously. They shoot badly with the rifle, and nearly
all the damage is done by artillery fire and machine
guns.
2. As far as our infantry is concerned, there is never
any difficulty about seeing the target. Fire is seldom
opened at greater ranges than 500 yards, and when the
Germans come on in close formation rapid fire at 200
and 300 yards causes enormous casualties in their ranks.
Fire direction and control has been, therefore, a simple
matter, and the value of elaborate training in these
matters has not been apparent.
3. Cover from view has become more important than
field of fire. It is better to have a field of fire of 100
yards and to be invisible, than to have one of 600 yards
and to be an easy target for artillery.
4. Owing to the enemy’s artillery fire by day, digging
is nearly always dpne at night, and this requires much
practice. Some sort of rough cover from shrapnel and
head cover are added if time allows, and also if they can
be made without making the trench conspicuous.
5. The principal subjects of training required by in-
fantry are, in order of importance:—
(1) Entrenching, especially in the dark.
(2) Rapid fire.
(3) Cover from view of artillery for the trenches. *
(4) Bringing enfilade fire to hear on the enemy’s
trenches whenever possible.
(5) Skilful use of machine guns. Infantry must be
careful when advancing that an enemy’s
machine gun is not hidden on the flank ready
to open enfilade fire. Some regiments have
lost very heavily from being caught in this
way.


V.—ENTRENCHED POSITIONS. for'
th
(i) Organization.
1. General Line. —The general line of an entrencied
position is determined by the strategical or tactual
situation.
2. Exact Line of Defence.— The exact line to be occu-
pied is determined by a detailed reconnaissance of the
ground.
3. The entrenching of the line selected should, if time
permits, be effected by successive steps, as folhnvs: —
(a) Any well-defined locality of tactical importance
in or near the actual line should be strength-
ened by means of trenches, provided that its
position does not introduce dangerous salients
or re-entrants to the general line.
(5) As a rule a line selected for defence will contain
a sufficient number of well-defined points to
facilitate the siting of intermediate localities,
and the latter should be next entrenched.
(c) When all the defined localities have been put in
hand, the defence of the intervals should be
considered in detail.
4. The principles governing the construction of these
defended localities are laid down in Field Service Regula-
tions. Military, Engineering, Part 1., and Manual of
Field Engineering.
The following are some of the points to be attended
to; — .
(a) Each defended locality consists of a series df
trenches which enclose the area to be de-
fended, but are so dispersed that they do not
form a concentrated target for artillery.
* (b) The localities should be so chosen that the in-
terval between any two adjacent localities is
swept by the effective fire of both. The dis-
tance between two localities is, therefore, de-
termined by the nature of the ground, but 800
yards may be regarded as a maximum under
very favorable circumstances.
(c) In very close country it will be necessary to
effect the defence of the intervals by means of
a continuous line of trenches.


(d) The garrison of a locality of course depends
upon its area, but every locality should be con-
structed to acccommodate one or more com-
plete units, i.e., section, platoon, company,
&c.
(e) The works of the defended localitise should con-
sist of trenches, cover trenches, and support
trenches, and the design should follow the
lines suggested in “ Notes on the preparation
of an entrenched position.”
(ii) Preparation.
Siting of Trenches. —Whenever possible, trenches
should be sited so that they are not under artillery
observation.
This point is regarded as of great importance, and an
extensive field of fire is a secondary consideration.
Trenches should therefore be sited having regard to
possible “ observation stations ” on ground occupied bv
the enemy, and not solely with regard to the possible
artillery positions of the enemy.
In open country it is better to select “ a back posi-
tion,” behind the crest of a hill, with a field of fire of
300 or 400 yards. This compels the enemy to expose
his infantry to our rifle and shrapnel fire and affords
his guns little opportunity of observation. Such posi-
tions were held on the Aisne with slight loss to our
troops and heavy loss to the enemy. A field of fire of
100 yards is regarded as satisfactory if it cannot be
increased without loss of concealment from artillery
observation.
Design of Trenches. —Fire trenches should be of the
recessed and traversed type, as described in the Manual
of Field Engineering, whenever time permits. They
must be deep, narrow, and with low command. (See
sketches.) The rifle, when resting on the parapet, must
sweep the ground immediately in front.
Strong traverses should be provided every 6 or 8 yards
to localize the effect of high explosive shell falling into
the trench, and also to give protection against enfilade
fire.
All excavated earth must be concealed. Earth not
required for the parapet should be placed behind the
trenches to afford protection against the back blast of
C. 16771.—8


high explosive shells, provided the trenches are not
rendered conspicuous thereby. ,
Elbow rests should be either dispensed with or made as
narrow as possible. Most men, however, prefer making
their own niches for the forearm to rest against.
Recesses under parapets must be shored up. ine
bottom of the recess should be above the level of the
bottom of the trench so that in wet weather the seat so
formed will remain dry.
Head cover and overhead cover may be provided when
concealment is not sacrificed thereby, and when trenches
are not in positions liable to be rushed. They must in
no case restrict the free use of the rifle. With overhead
cover a continuous loophole is the best form.
When other types of loopholes have been used, the
tendency has been to make them too small, and, moie
especially, too narrow.
Drainage must be provided.
Hedges. —When siting trenches behind hedges, they
should be brought up as close as possible to the front
edge of the hedge; to do this the hedge should be
trimmed from behind as far as possible to the front,
without interfering with the general appearance of the
hedge as viewed by the enemy.
Cover Trenches. —A second row of trenches should be
dug in the rear of the fire trenches, to which the men
may retire during bombardment, the fire trenches being
held by as few men as possible.
These trenches may be of design somewhat similar to
that of the fire trenches, and should be connected with
them by zig-zag or concealed approaches, and can be-
quite close to the fire trenches (25 yards).
Latrines and dressing stations should also be pro-
vided in these trenches.
The use of overhead cover makes it difficult to ascer-
tain from the air if trenches are occupied or not. Over-
head cover is therefore well suited to cover trenches.
Dummv trenches are most valuable, especially if they
can be made to appear occupied to an aeroplane
observer.
Obstacles. —Barbed wire entanglements or other ob-
stacles should be from 20 to 50 yards in front of the
trench. In positions where there is a liability of the
trench being rushed sentries may be placed in rifle pits-


in the entanglements. Where woods run into the posi-
tion they should be entangled on the near side as much
as possible and the undergrowth cleared.
Field of Fire. —When the field of fire is cleared care
should be taken that trees are cut down as near as
possible to the ground, otherwise they provide cover for
the enemy, in an attack, and at night may be mistaken
for men approaching.
Visibility of Trenches from Aircraft . —Straight lengths
of trenches are the most conspicuous. When hedges
have been utilized trenches are almost invisible; those
dug across the middle of ploughed fields are easily seen.
Communication and approach trenches attract the eye
of the observer first. The position of a trench has been
disclosed on several occasions by straw, ration tins, &c.,
left lying in its immediate vicinity.
The German trenches are more visible than ours as
they are generally longer and more regular, and their
communication trenches are more elaborate.
It is very difficult to see if trenches are occupied or
not, especially the German trenches.
It is also very difficult to see if a gun is in position
in an emplacement or not, especially if hedges and trees
are utilized for concealment. German guns are fre-
quently in the open. Tracks across grass, plough, &c.,
leading up to gun emplacements are always very con-
spicuous, and if dummy emplacements are made tracks
should be made leading up to them.
General Notes. —It is essential that all men should be
taught to dig quickly with their entrenching tool, by
night as well as by day.
The great importance of a proper system of local pro-
tection whilst digging has been overlooked on more than
one occasion. In one instance, even, a battalion was
surprised while digging with arms piled and no scouts
out.
The effect of shrapnel fire against recessed trenches
provided with head cover is very slight. High explosive
shell have only a very local effect if traverses and small
parados are provided.
VI.—ARMY SERVICE CORPS.
Transport units, especially mechanical transport, are
often halted at a distance from fighting troops and have


to protect themselves. The personnel should be organ-
ized for fighting and proper measures for protection
should be taken at every halt. Particular care is re-
quired to keep the rifles free from rust and dirt in these
units, in which it has been found that these precautions
are liable to be neglected.
VII. —BILLETING.
The following procedure has been found to work well
in moving troops into billets: .
1 An area is allotted to a division, the General btaft
of which allots the areas to troops from the map and
informs the Quartermaster-General’s branch. The latter
are responsible for issuing the necessary orders to head-
quarters of brigades and divisional troops except as re-
gards protective measures which are the concern of the
General Staff. ~. . ,
It is often advantageous for the position of divisional
and brigade head-quarters to be fixed in orders by corps
and divisional head-quarters respectively.
2. The billets are usually allotted in “brigade areas,
one for each infantry brigade, with probably a held
artillery brigade and a field company attached. Ihe
remainder of divisional troops, including brigade ammu-
nition columns, field ambulances, and trains _ are
generally allotted to “brigade areas,” as convenient;
or they may be grouped in a separate area for which
arrangements can be made by head-quarters divisional
artillery. The divisional ammunition column and tram
frequently halt some miles in rear and have independent
billets. , . ,
It is advantageous to affiliate Royal Artillery brigades
and field companies to infantry brigades permanently
for billeting purposes.
3. As soon as orders allotting billetting areas have been
received, the head-quarters of each infantry brigade
sends forward its billeting officer with the billeting
parties (if possible mounted on horses or bicycles) of
all units in its area. Each Royal Artillery brigade must
send an officer to assist the infantry brigade billeting
officer in allotting billets for artillery units.
4. The procedure in billeting troops in a village is as
follows: —The billeting officer, who is accompanied by
an interpreter, proceeds to the house of the Maire, who


will give every assistance, and supplies a list of the
billets available on which the allotment is made with
as little inconvenience to the inhabitants as possible.
When in contact with the enemy, the villages will
usually be found practically deserted. In these circuit
stances it may be necessary to break open the houses - '
provide shelter for the troops, but the sternest
must be taken to prevent any wanton damage
When it is necessary to take any food, fuplf sq?, the
brigade requisitioning officer should be jrffoQired and
should authorize whatever is necessaryy/.
5. It is of great importance that ot
orderlies from all units in a “ bjrfgadeP area ” should
remain at the brigade area head-qjthtfptcjps’ for the purposes
of taking orders to their own unitsy *
6. Divisional and brigade should always
be situated in a place wjjwfre they can easily be found
and communicated witfy/ \
It should be possihKf messengers to find the head-
quarters of any either by day or night. If
near a road, best, a sentry should be posted,
and at night 4*kAnp should be placed on the road, so
that the messenger must see it as he passes. The sentry
over a head-quarters must, of course, know where the
officer responsible for receiving messages is to be found.


APPENDIX I.
A Few Notes by a Cavalry Offices.
Officers * Kits. —We none of ns carried water bottles
although the weather was very hot, and we never wanted
them.
A strong haversack is necessary; the ordinary khaki
drill haversack is not strong enough. A good cartridge
bag would be the thing.
Wire cutter very necessary. The Government ones are
good and cut the strong “ bull ” wire well, of which
there is a lot.
I spent £2 in a month and need not have spent half as
much. One should get one’s money changed as soon as
possible as they do not like taking English money.
On Horse. —Built up rope, one peg, two blankets under
saddle. Mackintosh or British warm. We carried
mackintoshes, but expect, now it is cold, British warm
would be better. In wallets—washing and shaving
things, brushes and towel, knife, fork, and spoon, mug,
pair of woolly socks, electric torch, scarf, and a spare
shirt, if there is room. Two blankets under the saddle
are essential—one for the man and one for the horse.
A dry one next to the skin will often save a sore back.
Men. —Wore their water bottles out a lot. Gave away
all their badges and numerals as souvenirs to the girls.
This is a great bore. We made them all pencil them on
with indelible pencil.
Must have a “ built-up-rope ” as most of the tying-up
is to a headline threaded breast high along the pillars
of barns, &c.
Water buckets are very useful as one has to use them
every time at rivers and canals, into very few of which
one can walk horses.
Nothing should be carried in the water buckets. We
had to have a general order to that effect. It wears
them out and increases the weight.
Stop men collecting “ trophies of the chase ”; they are
too heavy and are very easy to get as the Uhlans throw
away their lances on the slightest provocation.


Men are very apt to sit up to all hours and buck even
after a very long, hard day with an early start next
morning, with the result they are dead tired and sleepy
next day. This is a bad nuisance, and wants suppress-
ing.
The men are very fond of eating their emergency
ration when there is no need for it. This should be
stopped as supplies are good and regular, but must fail
sometimes.
Horses. —We did not carry cornsacks; the supplies
were very good even in the retreat. If the nosebag is
filled up on each opportunity it should suffice.
Shoes wear out in about a fortnight as many of the
roads are cobbles; so an adequate supply of spare shoes
and good farriers are very necessary. Ours had the
devil of a lot of work and did it most awfully well.
Most farms have hay or oat straw; the facilities for
watering are not good or frequent, and should be made
the most of.
Brand all your horses on neck or shoulder. A quick
man can do them almost as quick as they can file past.
APPENDIX 11.
Resume of “ Orders for the Conduct of Artillery
B'IRE ” ISSUED BY THE GERMAN GREAT GENERAL STAFF.
New Regulations for the Conduct of/Artillery Fire.
These are necessary because—
(l) The lessons of the war do not agree with the
methods and instructions adopted in peace
time.
(2) The maximum output of German factories can-
not supply our armies with ammunition to an
unlimited amount.


Main points —
(i) Only to fire at targets that are worth while.
To suit the projectile to the result to be at-
tained.
Nor to fire during the night (owing to the im-
possibility of locating the fall of the shell).
(ii) To concentrate fire, both as regards time and
space, so as to ensure the maximum physical
and moral effect.
To combine as far as possible frontal and en-
filade fire.
To utilize rapidity of fire; slow fire is without
effect and a waste of ammunition.
(iii) The importance of direct observation. If this
is impossible, employ aeroplanes, captive bal-
loons or observers on a bank. Avoid
“ searching and sweeping.” If this is indis-
pensable conduct it within fixed limits, other-
wise it is a waste of ammunition.
(iv.) Co-operation with the infantry is of the very
greatest importance.
Regard for co-operation must guide the artillery
in its selection of positions. Generals of Divi-
sions must ensure that this co-operation is
effective. They are responsible that it is
maintained.
In attack, to prevent the infantry coming under
the fire of hostile artillery. If concealed bat-
teries cause losses to the infantry they must
be located by aeroplanes. As soon "as the
infantry advance portions of the artillery
must turn their fire on the hostile infantry.
Develop the maximum intensity of fire imme-
diately before the assault.
Strong positions (defended villages, &c.), are
ready to be assaulted after a bombardment of
one or two hours. If the assault does not
follow immediately on the bombardment, the
latter is waste of ammunition.
In defence choose your time. A long cannonade
is a waste of ammunition.


APPENDIX 111.
Notes on the Equipment of Artillery Officers
(Furnished by an Officer at the Front).
Every officer ought to have, in addition to No. 6
or No. 8 Zeiss graticuled glasses, the following: —
A good map case —the expanding ones are best —to
carry extra maps, papers, message forms, &c.
A prismatic compass.
A wrist watch.
A spare watch.
J. H. Steward’s celluloid semi-circular protractor.
J. H. Steward’s 1/80,000 and 1/100,000 yard scales-
ivory; the wooden ones chip and break.
Two or three small note-books.
Pocket dividers.
Pencils —plain, coyping, red and blue chalk.
APPENDIX IV.
German Views on Musketry and Machine Guns.
These notes are from a recent conversation with a
German machine-gun battery commander, an expert in
both musketry and machine guns. They are the views
apparently held in the German army before the war, and
on which their training has been based.
1. Musketry.
(a) Range—The Germans consider it unnecessary to
teach men to fire at distances beyond 400 metres. The
plan of attack (see paragraph 3) is devised to get within
this range without opening fire..


(6) Fire Control. —Judging distance is practised by
officers only, and no attention is devoted to indication of
target, concentration, &c.
(c) Concentration. —To concentrate the fire of a
platoon or company on one spot at 1,000 yards range is
considered to be a great waste of ammunition. °The
nearest they do in this way is to fire by battalions on
large areas of ground, using Independent fire. On the
Aisne this officer’s machine-gun battery came under
concentrated fire of our infantry at 1,000 yards, and his
men suffered heavily from it, but they could not see our
men to "reply.
(d) British Musketry. —Our musketry, this officer
said, was marvellous. They had counted on being able
to rush us by weight of numbers (vide plan of attack,
paragraph 3), and found themselves, quite unable to do
it because our fire was “ so straight and so quick.”
(e) Rate of Fire. —When asked if the Germans went
in for rapid fire, he replied that only some of their men
were practised, and they only averaged eight to nine
rounds per minute. (Their straight bolt is not so easy
to work, nor is their clip so easy to put in.) They do
not seem to realize that we train our men to fire fifteen
well-aimed shots a minute.
2. Machine Ouns.
Each battalion has a company of four and sometimes
six machine guns. Every man in this company is an
expert in the gun. Each gun is considered to be worth
50 men or more. Their fire is considered to be the most
valuable form of discharging bullets, and an enormous
amount of time, trouble, and ammunition has been
expended on machine gun training.
Training. —The Germans never worry about different
elevations, combined sights, or traversing, and never
fire on a 30 yards’ range, which is considered useless for
training purposes.
Machine gun competitions are looked on as far more
valuable than rifle competitions.
1 actical Employment. —ln - the attack the machine
guns are brought up with supports, and, until the war
had been going on a month, it was not thought worth
while to “ dig in ” the guns, as their tactical employ-
ment was essentially with the infantry.


3. The Attach.
The following gives a rough idea of the method of
attack in the German army as explained by this German
officer —
Machine Machine Machine Machine
gun. gun. gun. gun.
Rear rank.
3rd line * * * * , ,
Front rank.
Rear rank.
2nd line _ , .
Front rank.
Rear rank.
Ist line _ . ,
Front rank.
The first line is looked on as “ cover ” from bullets for
the second and third lines to enable these two lines to
get closer with the minimum of loss.
They reckoned on their third line with their machine
guns being able to get within 400 yards. Ihey have,
however, never been able to do this over open ground
against the British, because their first line was down
too soon —sometimes at 800 to 1,000 yards. As this
officer explained, they have never had a chance against
the British.
They consider mass formation to be the only way to
get up close, both ranks of each line being close together.
If their third line is held up they have standing orders
to dig in at once, and for this purpose the third line
carries shovels and small picks.


SKETCH OF TYPE TRENCHES.


TYPE I.
Section of Eire Trench A. A.
TYPE II.
Section of Cover Trench 0.0.
(This may be covered over in places if material is available.)


TYPE III.
■ Section of Communication Teench 8.8.
Kolam lie dimneiono of Fire, Core, end Commmkation Trenehe,.
‘ w‘X»isi r&s
£% tbe °‘ turc


SECTIONS OF VARIOUS TRENCHES IN THE
AISNE VALLEY POSITION.


Type of Tike Trench near Soupir Farm.
Made on bank of sunken roab




Type of Trenches on edoe of Quarrt.




