

A/29?v
NOTES
ON THE
COAL TRADE OF NEW
SOUTH WALES.
R. A. A. MOREHEAD,
MANAGER AND GENERAL SUPERINTENDENT OF THE SCOTTISH-AUSTRALIAN
MINING COMPANY (LIMITED).
LONDON:
REPRINTED BY BRADBURY, EVANS, & CO., WHITEFRIARS, E.O.
1872.




NOTES
ON THE
COAL TRADE OF NEW SOUTH
WALES.
1 have had sent to me, “ with Mr. Brown’s compliments, a
pamphlet bearing the following title ; “ The Causes of the
Ruinous Condition of the Coal Trade in the Northern
District of New South Wales.” This production, as is stated
in the Preface, is a reprint of certain leading articles, and of a
letter signed “Argus,” which have appeared in the Newcastle
Chronicle, and is, in effect, a running attack on the management
of the business of the Lambton Colliery.
As Manager in Australia of the Company to which this
Colliery belongs, I am, as a matter of course, responsible for
the action thus commented on, or, at all events, for what has
taken place while I have been in the colony. I have not, how-
ever, hitherto thought it necessary to take any notice of the
deliveries of the Newcastle Chronicle or its correspondent, and I
do so now with considerable reluctance, being averse to appeal-
ing} as it were, to the public, and having no superfluous health or
leisure to devote to any work not clearly falling within the range
of my duties.
Few persons, I believe, of ordinary intelligence and right
feeling will fail to see that Mr. Brown’s pamphlet is, on the face
of it, a most improper production, and one that I might effect-
ually deal with in another and more summary manner. The
subject, however, to which it purports to be devoted, namely, the
state of the Coal Trade in New South Wales, is one on which
erroneous opinions are, I conceive, very prevalent, and this con-
sideration leads me, as concerned in that industry, to take notice
of what in itself I should consider quite unworthy of that atten-


tion. Though thus, therefore, having this production under my
view, I shall not think it necessary to refute many of the misre-
presentations it contains, some of those being self-refuting, while
others will be sufficiently disposed of by the establishment of facts
and general principles obviously destructive of them.
The proposition sought to be established by the writer of this
pamphlet and those who think with him is, that the action taken by
the management of Lambton has brought about what is called the
“ ruinous condition of the Coal Trade in the Northern District.”
I notice such representations at this stage of what I feel will be
an irksome and in some of its parts a painful investigation or
discussion, mainly to remark, that while, as a matter of course,
my first object in all that I have done, as conducting the business
of Lambton, has been to maintain and promote the interests of
the owners of that property, I have never been under the influence
of any desire or feeling that would have led me to inflict gratuitous
injury on any of our competitors. I would add, as respects past,
present, and future action, that its being prejudicial to others
neither has been, is, or will be a cause of satisfaction to me, but
the reverse. Not even the astounding effrontery of Mr. Brown
would lead me to lift a finger with the mere object of injuring
him.
This pamphlet conveys the representation that I stand alone,
among those acting for the Northern Collieries, in the opinion I
hold as respects a proposed combination to get up the price of
coal. I accept this statement as substantially correct, feeling, at
the same time, that it involves a certain presumption that I may
be in the wrong, there being a tendency with most people to
assume the rightness of the views of the majority. There are,
however, obvious exceptions to such a view, as for instance in
the case of a conspiracy. It cannot be maintained that, when four
people conspire against a fifth, the four are right and number
five is wrong, though certainly the former are in the majority.
Accepting, then, the position of standing alone as opposed in
views to the representatives of the other Northern Collieries, I
proceed to deal with the question at issue between us. At the
very outskirts of it, I come upon a fact or consideration which,
it will doubtless be understood, I had in my mind when, a little
way back, I spoke of the pain with which I contemplated the task
I have now in hand. My opponents have not been content to
deal with the views I have expressed (I should perhaps rather say


have indicated, for I have not sought to obtrude my opinions on
them or to interfere in any way with their management) or with
the action I have taken, and sought to controvert or counteract
these, but having regard to my position as representing absent
shareholders, they have directed their efforts to convince these
that I have been gravely wanting in my duty to them. To make
good this accusation is avowedly the main object of Mr. Brown’s
pamphlet, and, as I shall show further on, the same course has
been followed by others from whom better things might have been
expected. I shall not now speak of the unworthiness, the im-
pertinence, the indecency of thus acting with respect to what I
would call the sacred relations that exist between me and those
on whose behalf I have been entrusted with a most onerous charge
at the antipodes, and of adding to it the further accusation that 1
have wantonly injured the interests of the shareholders of other
companies ; but I would refer to these proceedings, in the present
stage of the discussion into which I am dragged, as giving a cha-
racter to it that I feel to be, at the least, extremely embarrassing,
necessitating as they do my going into matters, and assuming an
attitude, that would be out of place in an ordinary controversy,
wherein the assailant is under the restraint of those feelings which
usually regulate the conduct of honourable men. On the one
hand, I cannot treat those who are banded against me merely as
men holding, as I conceive, very erroneous views, but as great
moral wrong-doers. On the other hand, I feel that my most
effective way of dealing with the issue that is before us involves a
departure from the reserve that is usually held fitting as respects
what passes between those related as I and my Board are.
Another unpleasant task (indeed an unavoidable consequence of
the state of matters I have described) that has been entailed upon
me by the action of my opponents is having to make references
to them and their doings, that I feel ought never to have been
rendered necessary; that never would have been necessary but
for their unwarrantable intrusion on a domain upon which no
right-minded man would have entered.
The issue to be tried is, whether my views as to the fitting way
of carrying on the Coal Trade, or those represented in Mr. Brown’s
pamphlet, are the correct and sound ones, in the general interest
and in the interest of Lambton. The course I shall follow, in
dealing with this issue, is not free from objection, even according
to my own judgment, but I believe it on the whole to be the best.


It might be characterised as involving the procedure described as
“ showing one’s hand ” (by no means a bad game in my view in
the business of life, if that is straightforward), for I expect to
quote pretty freely from my letters to my Board of Directors,
altering perhaps a word here and there, when the change seems
more fittingly to bring out my meaning or the argument in hand.
The letter from which I make the first extract is dated on the 9th
of August, 1871, and was accompanied by tables, extending over
several years, showing the trade done by the Northern Collieries
during that period. I should have liked to embody all these tables
in the present publication, but am deterred from doing so by the
consideration that it will, I fear, even without these, reach some-
what unwieldy dimensions. I would remark, however, that they
showed, what all who are tolerably well acquainted with the Coal
Trade of this Colony are aware of, that- the annual trade of the
Northern Collieries has not fluctuated much for several years, and
may be taken at 750,000 to 800,000 tons.
“ The statements herewith show clearly a very considerable overproducing
power as respects coal-getting; that is a power of production materially m
excess of the demand or consumption, and what I have brought under their
notice in former communications, has satisfied the Board that there is a con-
tinuing pressure in operation seeking to further capital to colliery
working, and, therefore, to give rise to an aggravation of the present overpro-
ducing power. Now, the best, I may say the only reliable, safeguard against
the manifold evils attendant on an undue amount of capital being devoted to
an industry is found in the action of those engaged in it, who are placed in
the most advantageous position as producers, in taking care that their
capability of producing is fairly exercised, t utilised, or expended, before a
producer, with inferior advantages, obtains a footing in the business. When
the demand reaches a point that gives the producer, in the first-class position,
excessive profits, then, to come to the particular industry in which we are
interested collieries and coal-fields in the second class as regards advantages
come into operation, and so on. I have now to consider views or doctrines
very much opposed to those I have indicated, and which have been
urged so as to occasion the Board a good deal of trouble and discomfort
having been originally put forth in the reports issued by the Directors of the
A. A. Company. Had that Company, as might have been fairly looked for,
held the position I have first above indicated, we should have had no right or
reason to complain, if, when we came to open Lambton, it had taken the
course most determinedly, of holding the full amount of trade it could meet
with advantage and convenience, allowing the other collieries only to get
what then remained over. This, under the circumstances supposed would
have been really best for all; that is, would have produced the most favour-
able nett result with regard to the capital invested in collieries. The action
advocated by the A. A. Company was utterly different from what I have
spoken of; it was directed to the establishment of an agreement as to price
that would indiscriminately bolster up all collieries in existence, and foster
the further increase of such undertakings. While desirous of being on neigh-
bourly terms with this company and the other colliery owners, 1 utterly, on
behalf of Lambton, repudiated the communistic or trades-union principles


that were urged on us. It will be recollected, at the same time, that though
we might, on behalf of a new colliery and with a view to let the coal be
known, have struck in with a lower price than the others, the course actually
followed was to adopt a price that had been established by one or more of
these others —a price I may remark, at the same time, which afforded us a
good profit. Without bidding under the others, we gradually increased our
trade, until it was fairly commensurate with our powers of production, and I
would mention that I considered a plain object for us to aim at was to get as
high a price as we could obtain while doing the extent of business I have
indicated ; and, so long as that state of matters existed, there was, I considered,
no insuperable bar to the existence of an undertaking or agreement among the
different collieries as to price; but to tie ourselves up so as to be unable to
prevent our trade being taken from us by collieries that were at a disadvantage,
in comparison to us, as respects cost of production, which is what the proposi-
tion of the A, A. Company amounts to, is a position I have always refused to
take, considering it tantamount to forfeiting the birthright of Lambton. I
could consent, therefore, to no agreement that was not subject to termination,
so far as we were concerned, whenever it should appear to operate to our dis-
advantage by depriving us of what I would call our inherent claim to assert
the right to being supplied with trade in preference, I think I may fairly say,
to the majority of our brethren,-of course freely acknowledging a similar right
to the others. *********
“ From a period, then, antecedent to the time when Lambton was opened, 1
had it urged upon me by the representative of the A. A. Company, as well as
by the representatives of other coal companies, that the only way to get the
coal trade in this colony into a sound and prosperous state was for all the
collieries to agree to a paying price, and the same cry has been raised and
kept up to the present time * * or, I should say, it has now taken the
form of proclaiming that this, our company, by refusing to become a party to
« a binding ’ or ‘ stringent ’ agreement to the above effect, has prevented
prosperity to all the collieries in the colony. Now, there is conveyed in the
above cry the monstrous doctrine that the natural and necessary check on
excessive production which I have called attention to, should be altogether
ignored or set at naught. The Board, I am sure, see clearly that nothing
but disaster can attend a course of action in violation of what may be described
as a law ordained to regulate the relations between supply and demand
result cannot but be ruin to the weak, injury to the strong. *****
“ I have referred to the supposition of the A. A. Company being in the best
position as respects the power of producing cheaply. Of course this was a
mere supposition. Had it been a reality * * I think the representatives
of that company would have deemed that it was their part to take a high
hand in the coal trade, and would have asserted and enforced their right to
have what they considered a sufficient portion thereof, before allowing those
with whom they had been so anxious to enter into a ‘ stringent alliance, v to
get any portion of it, and, I repeat, in so doing they would have been sub-
stantially right; but their accounts, published from shortly after the birth of
Lambton to the present time, show clearly that at the former date this
company was far behind us, and I believe more than one of the other
colleries, in the matter of costs. Our colliery was opened at the end of 1863,
and in their report of January, 1865, the Directors of the A. A. Company say
their coal was, in 1864, ‘raised at a very diminished cost, the average rate
being 6s. 7|d. per ton against 10s. 10|d. in 1862, and 9s. 9|d. in 1863.’ I
should mention I only deal with these figures as expressing the relative costs
of this company during the periods named, not as recognising their mode
of estimating costs as correct. It is, I think, plain enough from these figures,
the costs of Lambton being under the reduced costs of the A. A. Company,
that the latter Company was, when Lambton came into operation, quite unable
to compete with us, and that therefore, without question, we were entitled
to be served first as regards trade. I think it must be allowed we secured


trade pretty much up to our producing power (though as my letters to Mr.
Young, written when I was in Europe, and from which I have sent extracts,
show no extreme action in this direction was urged or practised by me) by a
course of procedure that could scarcely have been expected to lead to such a
result, namely, following the others in lowering price, instead of taking the
lead in this action, as might have been looked for, and would have been quite
legitimate if it had been necessary.
“I shall not add much to what I have written on the subject of the ten
shilling agreement which Mr. Young tells me he allowed himself to be in a
sense forced into, * * but, in the absence of an increase in the demand
for colonial coal, the effect of this has been to aggravate seriously an' over-
producing colliery power. I think I nee'd scarcely remark that it is in a
manner on compulsion that I refer so much to the above-named company. I
cannot, however, overlook the consideration, or disregard the conviction, that
it is due to the representations conveyed in the reports of that company, that
a state of feeling exists among some of the shareholders of our company
which will occasion the Board, I apprehend, in the early future, much trouble
and discomfort. ********
“ Shortly after the receipt of this letter the Board will have to meet the
shareholders with a report speaking of reduced profits, and referring to the
immediate prospects of the coal trade as not favourable. Now, the truth is,
and of this I believe the Board are convinced as I am, that unsatisfactory as
the present state of matters is, there is no question it is much sounder than
it would have been, had the existing overproducing power been greatly aggra-
vated, as it certainly would have been had the ‘ binding ’ or ‘ stringent ’
agreement, advocated by the A. A. Company’s Board, been entered into; still,
it is in the power of complainers to say, that the present evil would not have
been, had another course been followed, and the pungency of present dis-
appointment and impending greater evil, present a contrast to the ‘ fool s
oaradise ’ of certain high profits, to be- had for the mere asking or taking, which
he A. A, Company’s representatives hold out, and accuse us of depriving our
shareholders of. It is due therefore, I consider, to that Board, that a distorted
dew has been, and I can scarcely doubt will be, taken, of the course of this
company’s business, and that difficulties and drawbacks which, but for the per-
verted representations I have referred to, would, we may fairly believe, have
leen accepted by the shareholders, as by the Board, as necessary evils requiring
,o be fought through or endured, are turned into grounds of complaint against
he management. ********
“The action of the internal management of any undertaking is, I would
ixpress it, intensely competitive. In few words, it aims, above everything, at
producing an article at once good and cheap, and these words have no
neaning except in connection with the idea of comparison, that is, unless they
nvolve the conception of competition. It will not be denied that what I have
called the internal management of a concern is in effect the management,
hat everything else is entirely secondary. Among the secondary matters
mnected with an undertaking is, or are, the relations with others engaged
m the same calling. I would describe these as, among other things, involving
or fittingly aiming at a certain mitigation of competitive action through the
agency of a fair and friendly association of the members of the craft, as
against undue exactions by, or concessions to, the consumer, to the obvious
prejudice of the producer; as, in short, the conservative, restraining element
coming in to modify the exuberance of the progressive, innovating, reforming
power. I need not repeat, however, that what I have put first must be first,
in any undertaking that is to be carried on with success. A nation must
make itself powerful, by properly developing its own inherent capability,
before it enters into conventions, &c., and the first thing for a man to set
about, if he is to play any worthy part in the world, is to fit himself for his
duties by steady hard work and assiduous self-culture; no one can do these
things for him.


THE SCOTTISH AUSTRALIAN MINING COMPANY,
LIMITED.
1, King’s Arms Yard, Moorgate Street, E.C.
London, 18 th September, 1872.
Bear Sir,
I am instructed by the Directors to make the following communication to you
In the last Keport issued by them the subject of the unsatisfactory condition
of the Coal Trade of New South Wales was fully dealt with, and explained in
a manner which, I believe, satisfied the Shareholders that the facts of the case had
been thoroughly made known to them. They did not, therefore, feel themselves called
upon to notice various anonymous articles and letters which appeared, between December
and March last, in a newspaper published at Newcastle, and which took the shape of a
virulent attack upon the management of this Company in the Colony,
It has, however, recently come to the knowledge of the Directors that the un-
warrantable step has been taken of forwarding the articles and letters in question to the
Shareholders of this Company in the form of a Pamphlet, entitled, “ The Causes of the
ruinous Condition of the Coal Trade in the Northern District of New South Wales,”
As this course appears to the Directors likely to cause perplexity and anxiety to
Shareholders of this Company, who may not have the means otherwise of making themselves
acquainted with the real state of the case, they have felt it desirable to issue a Pamphlet
which has been prepared in reply, by Mr. Morehead, the Manager, entitled “ Notes on the
Coal Trade of New South Wales,” and of which I herewith send a copy.
A perusal of this will show you how the Pamphlet first named reached your
Manager, and that it emanates from those whose interests are entirely opposed to those of
tins Company—a fact which, taken in connection with the spirit and character of the
Pamphlet altogether, will assist you in forming an opinion as to whether or not you should
allow yourself in any respect to be influenced by the statements and views, generally
antagonistic to sound principles of trade, which it contains.
I have pleasure in informing you that the high price of coal now prevailing in
this country is beginning to influence favourably the coal trade of New South Wales.
The Board have very recently been able to secure contracts for the supply of con-
siderable quantities of coal to eligible customers in this country, for the use of their steamers
and other purposes in the East, and South America, and at higher prices than, up to the date


of the latest advices, were prevailing in Australia. There seems to he every prospect that
Australian coal will to a very great extent take the place of English coal in the Eastern
markets, and the Directors, therefore, consider that there is every reason to believe that a
prosperous future is opening up for the Australian coal trade; they are, therefore, the more
anxious to see that trade conducted in a proper way and upon sound principles.
With reference to a circular recently issued by Mr. J. C. Bolton, the Board do not
think it necessary to offer many detailed remarks. The Pamphlet now sent for your
perusal will afford sufficient explanations as regards that portion of the circular which has
reference to the price of coal and the management of the affairs of the Company in
the Colony. •
As regards the proposed sale of the 1098 acres of land on the Murrumhidgee River
to which Mr. Bolton alludes, he is entirely mistaken in stating that it “is reputed to contain
good minerals. Ihe land in question affords no indication of the existence of minerals
therein. The Manager considered ATOOO a price which should be accepted for it. It must
always be borne in mind that country land in Australia is in the great majority of instances
of but little value; and at the meeting to which Mr. Bolton refers, one of his fellow-share-
holders, a gentleman from Australia, who knew the locality well, gave it as his decided
opinion that the land would be well sold for the money. Up to the date of the last received
advices the purchaser had not fulfilled his bargain by paying the purchase-money, and the
land, therefore, then still remained in the possession of the Company.
In dealing with any portion of any property belonging to the Company, the
Directors have invariably endeavoured to impart to the Shareholders the fullest and earliest
information, and to give effect to any views they may have expressed or indicated in accord-
ance with the best interests of the Company—a course from which they have no inclination
to deviate.
I remain,
Dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
C. GRAINGER,


Lambton ......
92,416
Wallsend
. say 90,000
Waratah
78,879
A. A. Company
, . 98,928
For half-year
. 360,218
Equal per annum to
. . 720,436
“ Now, what in connection with these views (in which the Board will I am
sure acquiesce) has been the action of the representatives of the A. A. Com-
pany? Before Lambton was opened, and of course before I knew what it
was, or what it could do, I was applied to by the superintendent of that
company (at that time their own reports show producing coal at a cost far in
excess of that at which we found Lambton could) to arrange for a combination
as to price, and even then an amalgamation of all the collieries in the district
was spoken of as the proper means of making the business pay. Of course 1
could only very politely decline an overture which seemed to involve
Lambton’s never attaining man’s estate at all. But the respect in which the
A. A. Company’s movements and endeavours have most grossly violated the
principles above indicated, has been that their aim and action in connection
with agreements have been, not conservative, but highly innovating and
aggressive. We have this under their own hand, in the Directors’ report of
February, 1869, quoted by me two years ago; 1 now repeat the quotation.
********< t k e a g reemen t 3 had been upheld, there is no
doubt that our expectations would have been realised, for during the first nine
months of the year our sales of coal had largely increased from 78,000 tons in
1867, to 93,000 tons in 1868/ ********
“ I need not point out that raising the price of coal could not possibly
increase the general vend, and that therefore the A. A. Company could only
extend their sales, under an agreement getting up the price, by taking trade
from other collieries. The agreement, therefore, that the Board of that
company have been so anxious to renew, was fraught with complicated evil to
our shareholders, and this the Board may perhaps think it necessary to explain
to the latter.
“ I will just call attention here to Table D herewith.* The object of this, it
will I dare say be understood, is to show that the four collieries named in it
are capable of meeting the demand for coal in this colony, as it now is and
has been for some years back, and to do something more. I may mention that,
though I have spoken of our sales as having been for a time fairly up to our
producing power, there has never been a half-year in which we could not
have put out more coal than we sold. For some time back the A. A. Com-
pany have I suppose sold about as much as they could raise. The
Board are aware of the double advantage attendant on doing a full trade.
* ** ******
“ With our trade materially invaded, and with the Board perfectly at one with
me in condemning ‘ stringent agreements,’ I feel as if it may be thought we have
erred in refraining too long from adopting a more decidedly competitive course,
in the matter of selling price, than we have yet practised. I think it better,
however, still to hold the hand, though I am satisfied that, whether we are
active or passive as respects competitive action, it must be allowed to run its
course, until some of the present producers are beaten out of the field, or some
new combination of circumstances takes place that curtails the production.
* Statement showing the maximum half-yearly vends of the undermentioned
collieries from Ist January 1866, to 30th June 1871 :
TONS.


The struggle I indicate appears to me as necessary as the recent low price of
wool. We must all regret it, but I fully anticipate that the purgation the
colliery industry will thus have to undergo will eventually be very beneficial
to us. In the meantime we should be prepared for smaller profits than we
have yet earned. For the collieries to attempt to enlarge their business by
shipping on their own account, except to let their coal be known, would only
lead to disastrous results. Everything considered, since the opening of the
Lambton Colliery, the trade has been very fairly remunerative; among the
things to be considered being an increase of collieries and little increase of
trade. If it had not been for the ten shilling agreement, as far as I can see,
the trade and the producing power would have borne a quite fairly propor-
tionate relation to one another; had that agreement been reproduced, we
should have a reproduction of the disastrous times when hundreds of
thousands of pounds were lost in the colliery trade in this colony, and this
was not very long anterior to the date I have above indicated, namely the
time when Lambton appeared on the scene. ******
“ I have written a letter, I fear tedious to the Board, and I know exhausting
to myself, and I hope it will be so far satisfactory that it will assist the
Directors in taking a strong and decided position as against ill-judged
action attempted, or erroneous views expressed. That right-minded men
will appreciate our views and actions I do not doubt, directed as these
are to the single object of the promotion of the interests of the company.
******
“ It may be that our immediate future shall be more prosperous than I
anticipate. I feel it my duty, however, to prepare the Board for the event I
consider most probable; an unlooked-for favourable eventuality we can always
bear without preparation.”
The next extract is from my letter of Ist December, 1871, in
which I announced our having reduced the price of Lambton coal
from 85. to 7s. 6d.
“ While we have been doing an amount of business, that I would describe as
fairly adequate, with reference to our powers of production, the waiting part
has seemed to me the justifiable one for us to play, but the time for this is
clearly overpast, and an active course is incumbent upon us, if Lambton is to
be maintained as a reliable source of revenue to our company. It may seem
anomalous, in aiming at the above object, to reduce the margin of difference
between cost and selling price, perhaps to annihilate it for a time, but it is
no more so than for the physician to administer nauseous potions to the
patient, apparently only aggravating his feeling of sickness thereby, or to add
the torture of a blister to the internal agony of inflammation. We know such
treatment may be the only means of restoring health, and preventing destruc-
tive lesion or death, and, were the case our own, we should submit to the
curative discomfort, and ayoid the quacks, who would deaden suffering by
narcotics, knowing that these only cloak the disease for a time, and that it
would afterwards develop itself with aggravated virulence. So, most assuredly,
would it be as respects the better class of Australian collieries, and in parti-
cular quickly so as regards Lambton, if the palliative (narcotic) of an agree-
ment as to price were now had recourse to, or I would add, if such action as we
are now taking were longer delayed, Some of the superior collieries might
fare better for a time, but it would only be for a time. What we are doing I
would remark is merely to substitute open, above board, for underhand com-
petitive action. For, ip business enterprise, competition is as much a law of
nature as gravitation in physics, and will make itself be felt one way or other.
It is unfortunate that something like a spirit of malice has been developed
among the colliery interest in the colony in the past actings of some of


our opponents. I can truly say that, notwithstanding the onslaught, par-
taking of the character of Sheffield Unionist proceedings, on the representa-
tives of Lambton in times past, I enter upon the present competitive move-
ment with no disposition to be gratified with the mere defeat of certain
competitors that may take place. I would rather view the state of matters
as that which exists, when, say, fifteen candidates are competing for ten
appointments. In such a case success involves defeat, and yet the successful
competitor cannot surely with justice be considered the malicious enemy of
the defeated. *****
“ We ought not to disguise from ourselves that a period of low or of no
profits may be at hand. Any alternative, however, to the course we are taking
does not present even a fair chance of a satisfactory amount of present profits,
while it involves, I am persuaded, certain continuing and increasing unsound-
ness in the colliery trade.”
I now quote a few lines from my letter of 29th December, 1871.
“ I see the prospect of diminished profits was causing the Board consider-
able anxiety, as likely to occasion discontent among the shareholders. This,
however, is too obviously preferable to any alternative open to us to allow the
Directors to hesitate as to the course that should be followed. The state of
matters may be described as this : an evil or state of disease is to be removed
or cured, and as stimulating, or even moderately generous, food must fre-
quently be withheld from a sick man, so must our shareholders be put on a
spare diet or possibly be subjected to absolute abstinence, as regards dividends,
if the concern is to be restored to a state of health. I need not say, what I
am supposing must be at the least as unpleasant and trying to me, I might
add to all connected with the company on this side, as it possibly can be to
the Directors or Shareholders, but I think the reasonable and right-minded
among the latter (and after all it is these that eventually carry the day) will
have little difficulty in accepting the position if it is put thus—all industrial
pursuits are liable to be visited by times and circumstances when the best
and strongest of the fraternity have to maintain their place by a sort of
warfare which teaches the weaker members that they must give way to these
others. Now, we know that, in war, even the most complete victory is not
gained without some loss to the victor. The inference to be drawn from these
remarks is, that we should not expect to pass through the present ordeal
scathless. If indeed, let me add, we consider the leading concerns in any
trade or calling—concerns that may be said to carry all before them, and as a
rule earn liberal and continuous profits—we shall find, I believe, to a certainty
that now and again they have had to pass through an ordeal of low and of no
profits. *****
“Although I have felt bound, with much fatigue to myself and possibly
irksomeness to the Board, in this and in some previous communications, to go
at length (though still imperfectly) into explanations and illustrations bearing
on the present position of the colliery business in this colony, the action
required to be taken (as is always the case either in war or in conforming to
the plain rules of political economy) is perfectly simple. We shall keep down
or lower our price until a trade is regained fairly commensurate with the pro-
ducing power of Lambton; whenever a pressure on the limit of that power arises,
we shall raise the price." *****
The following is from my letter of 30th January, 1872 :
“ These considerations show very clearly that a necessary struggle, such as
has now been forced upon us by the formidable invasion of our trade that has
taken place, can scarcely be expected to be got through without some material


cost to us. It also shows the vital importance of avoiding the repetition of
any measure like the ten shilling agreement. That, and the continued
expectation of its renewal, has fostered and kept in existence undertakings
that but for the said artifice, first in esse then in posse, would not now be
here to work evil in the trade. * * * When the diminution in the pro-
ducing power, which I anticipate as the result of the present struggle, takes
place, the remaining collieries being able each to do a business fairly adequate
to its powers of production, will be further enabled to sell their coal at a
very moderate price, and to realise at the same lime a fairly liberal amount of
profit. This utilising of existing capability will thus produce a cheapness,
resting on a sound basis, and that will give strength to the Northern collieries
as competing with those of the South in New South Wales, and with the
other coal-producing districts or places in this colony and out of it, likely
to meet us (the Northern collieries) in home or in foreign markets. This
is without question a consideration of much importance, and one entirely
overlooked by those who would, in order to keep a number of collieries most
imperfectly employed, seek to maintain by artifice a high price for their
coal." ******
I shall conclude this series of extracts a quotation from my
letter of 10th February, 1872.
“ I feel it my duty at the present time to address to you, for the considera-
tion of the Board, a special communication, in view of their having to contend
at the approaching half-yearly meeting against an effort * * * to have
forced upon them a mode of dealing with the colliery business of the company,
resting on views and principles altogether opposed to those which have hitherto
regulated the management of Lambton. These latter, which have been
accepted and maintained by the Board, have ever regarded as, I may say, of
vital importance, the guarding against the evil of an undue increase or growth
of competing collieries. While, therefore, not altogether objecting to an under-
standing among the collieries in existence when Lambton was opened, as to
the price of coal being established, after Lambton had made a good trade
pretty well up to its producing power, it was, in the interest of Lambton, felt
to be imperative that no engagement should be entered into that would sub-
ject the owners of that colliery to have its trade impaired, without those in its
management having the power to take such action as seemed fitted to remedy
such inroad on its business, and keep substantially intact the inherent advan-
tages and capabilities which that property, as managed by the officers of the
company, possessed. *****
“ The plan that has chiefly been put in juxtaposition to this, is that which
has been advocated by the A. A. Company, and which may be described as a
permanent handicapping arrangement by which a price was to be fixed, ‘ under
a heavy penalty,’ for the coal of any number of collieries, without any regard
whatever to the relation between supply and demand. Now, it is to be borne
in mind, that it has been shown, under the hand of the Board of the A. A.
Company itself, that that company’s costs for coal at the time Lambton began
to send its produce to market, were two or three shillings per ton in excess
of those incurred by Lambton, so that their scheme, as far as Lambton was
concerned, is pretty similar to what would have been involved in a proposition
emanating from the other engineers, that James Watt, when he started in the
business, should have been tied up or tied down by ‘ a stringent agreement ’
from deriving such benefit, from his power to make better and cheaper engines
than his neighbours, as he considered himself entitled to. * * * *
“ If it is truly said of the Lambton management that it prevented the price
of ten shillings per ton for coal from being maintained by the principal


Northern collieries, then I hesitate not to say, that it is due to that manage-
ment that the coal-producing power in the colony is no more in excess of the
demand than it is. Had A. A. Company’s views, as set forth in their repoits,
gained absolute ascendancy, there is no question comparatively small under-
takings would now be represented by companies having large capital, and
proportionate powers to injure Lambton, and the other collieries now in
existence. On the other hand, but for concessions made to the views of
the A. A. Company and other colliery owners—concessions not much to be
wondered at, considering the plausible grounds on which they were advocated,
however much to be regretted, and but for a want of appreciation of
the danger of allowing any action that tended to promote an undue number
of collieries, the undertakings I refer to might not now be in existence.
***** *
“ To pass, however, from these retrospective considerations to the present
and the future, I do not now speak of Lambton as far ahead of the other
collieries in the matter of costs —this change I would observe is mainly due
to its having taught some lessons in colliery working to these others, for its
powers of producing cheaply are substantially as great as they ever were—
but I am satisfied that, supposing a fair adequate trade for Lambton and the
others,‘with reference to their respective producing powers, Lambton can now
produce at the least as cheaply as some, if not all, of the most favoured of its
rivals, and as a consequence (as a matter of course) more cheaply than the
less favoured of these. We have now to meet face to face the question or
problem whether we shall contest the possession of an adequate trade in a
manner that will permanently secure to us our position. This duty seems
to be obviously thrown upon us as the sequel to the course we have followed
from the first, and we are, I consider, simply bound to pursue it as the only
means of bringing about a healthy condition of the coal trade in the colony,
and the restoration of Lambton to the position of a profitable undertaking
resting on a solid basis.”
There is a good deal in the preceding extracts, which I feel
may be considered scarcely fitting to be promulgated. It might,
indeed, I conceive, be fairly objected, with respect to them, that
they convey at once too little and too much : the former, because
they may be sometimes obscure, from being separated from the
context and from others of my letters : the latter from containing
matter not usually dealt with, except in confidential correspon-
dence, as, for instance, the remarks just quoted on the subject of
costs. It seems, however, impossible to guard against any degree
of anomalousness in dealing with words and deeds so entirely in
violation of usually recognized precedent as those I have now
the unpleasant duty of considering. I would here request that
it may be borne in mind that I do not now come forward merely
to show how those in the management of the A. A. Company,
and others, have behaved to my Company and to me, and how
erroneous are the views they have striven to carry out. I am, in
effect, replying to a manifesto, put forth at this present time, on
behalf of those whose proceedings I refer to—a publication, on the
one hand, representing me as the evil genius of the District, and,
on the other, seeking to enforce action, as respects a great industry,


most destructive of its interests, and, practically, I may say,
further seeking to usurp the management of the Company over
whose affairs I preside in these colonies. It lies with me, there-
fore, I conceive, however unpleasant the task, to direct attention
to, what I consider clear, further indications of the unfitness of
those persons to act or advise properly, either in the general
colliery interest or in the special interest of the shareholders of
my company. Before proceeding further, lam induced to say a
few additional words on the “ stringent agreement ” * scheme,
which is the one nostrum of those who have opposed themselves
to me. (1) It is obviously illegal, as in restraint of trade, and
could not, therefore, be enforced, even in the case of an undeniable
breach of its provisions. (2) I have already indicated that it
could be evaded, without discovery. (3) While I have never im-
puted to the representatives of the A. Jl. Company an intention
to evade the letter of the proposed agreement ( which agreement,
he it observed, would 'practically hand over the management of
Lambton to the majority of those entering into the compact), I con-
sider their conduct, in endeavouring to force such an agreement
on us, was about as reprehensible as if such had been their in-
tention, for it would have secured to that company, in connection
with its staiths, an advantage over Lambton, while that colliery
would have been shut out from the right of availing itself of
important inherent powers calculated to secure it in a position
of advantage in the Coal Trade : but I shall not pursue these
remarks any further ; all the objections to the proposal to put
the Coal Trade on a sound footing, by means of an agreement,
are unimportant in comparison to the grand one, that the call
for such a device (just in proportion to the loudness of that
call) indicates an evil that it will not cure, but, on the contrary,
aggravate.
I have spoken of grave violations of the rules that right-minded
men usually subject themselves to in their dealings with their
fellow-men. I now call attention to something more flagrant in
this direction than anything I have yet noticed.
In August, 1868, Mr. Matthew Young, the representative, in
my temporary absence from the colony, of this Company, finding
that several of the other companies had been acting contrary to
* “ The Superintendent says that he still considers that nothing short of a
stringent written agreement will be effectual, and as we entirely concur.” &c.—
A. A. Company's Report, July, 1870.


the spirit of the agreement then existing amongst the different
coal producers, by making speculative shipments of coal, gave
formal notice of his intention to withdraw from the agreement and
to reduce the price of the Lambton coal to nine shillings per ton
after the 31st August, Upon this the Directors, or Representa-
tives, of the Australian Agricultural Company, the Wallsend, the
Miami, and the Co-operative Companies met and agreed to the
following resolution :—“ That the Australian Agricultural, the
Wallsend, the Minmi, and the Cooperative Companies should he at
liberty to supply customers, on and after the 31s£ of August, at three-
pence per ton below the price at which the Lambton Company offer to
supply coal, it being understood that the underselling is to cease as
soon as the price is reduced to Bs. per tonf
Active steps were immediately taken to carry out the object of
the resolution. The Agents of the Australian Agricultural Company
and the Minmi Companies interrupted the Agent of this Company,
while he was engaged in negotiating sales at the wharf at Newcastle,
and intending purchasers were informed by them that the Companies
whom they represented would sell at threepence per ton below what
this Company would sell for, and this Company were in consequence
obliged still further to reduce their price. A telegram was also
sent by the Wallsend Company to a customer of this Company, at
Melbourne, informing him that the Wallsend Company would
undersell this Company. The telegram is in these words; —“ Price
eight shillings and ninepence after Monday. Will undersell LambtonT
The ground on which this outrage, as I must call it, to the
management of Lambton, above referred to, was committed, was
that Mr. Young had withdrawn from what is known as the ten
shilling agreement, under circumstances that the others did not
like or approve. I may add, here, that this combination to under-
sell this Company is set forth in the A. A. Company’s report.,of
February, 1869.
It will be seen the A. A. Company’s management and Mr, Brown
(the proprietor of the Minmi Mine) come out very conspicuously
in connection with these proceedings, and not in a way most people
would consider calculated to gain the confidence of the shareholders
of ray company, on whose behalf Mr. Brown’s manifesto purports
specially to be put forth. There was, further, a “ memorial ” ad-
dressed to the Board of my company by the same persons as were
parties to the Resolution. This was signed, first by Mr. E. C.
Merewether, then by Messrs. James and Alexander Brown, then


by the others. The aim of this memorial (which, I need scarcely
observe, my Board left entirely unnoticed) was to create a
breach between my Board and the trusted representatives of the
Company in the colonies, the manager and the sub-manager. This
proceeding, particularly on the part of Mr. Mere wether, who has
personal knowledge of the responsibility and many necessary cares,
involved in acting for a distant constituency, I leave others to
characterise.
I might say a good deal more relative to the action of the repre-
sentatives of the A. A. Company, as bearing on the interests of
the Coal Trade and of my Company, but I think this is un-
necessary in this place. It is fitting, however, I consider, that I
should no longer delay to give some explanation of certain ex-
pressions used in some of the preceding extracts and remarks,
while I have been referring to the position of Lambton relatively
to other collieries, in especial to that of the A. A. Company. It
is obvious that the success of Lambton must, in the main, be due
to what I, individually, can have no part in, namely, the practical
management of the colliery. I state nothing more than the simple
truth, when I remark, that my Company have in Mr. Croudace,
their colliery manager, a man of remarkable capacity and efficiency,
while his energy and devotedness to his duties could not be
excelled. He found what is now the Lambton Colliery a piece of
waste forest land and scrub ; he constructed the railway (a first-
class line) that connects the working pit with the Great Northern;
he has laid out the colliery, without question a first-class work in
every particular —that is, as regards ventilation, drainage, haulage
arrangements, including, generally, provision for winning and
getting away the coal economically in the face of considerable
difficulties arising from the formation of the country, the dip of
the seam, &c. To connect, now, these remarks on our colliery
manager with the early portion of this paragraph, I have to state
that Mr. Croudace, with my sanction, showed Mr. Merewether and
Mr, Winship (the A. A. Company’s colliery manager) over the work-
ings at Lambton, in particular giving them full details, and, I think,
estimates, as to the hauling arrangements, in view of their adoption
in the A. A. Company’s colliery. This system of underground haul-
age, by machinery, has since been adopted by the A, A. Company,
and noticed in their reports. I had this in view, as well as some other
things, when I spoke of Lambton having taught some lessons in
colliery working to the others. I would just add, here, that it


was a few months after the inspection I have mentioned, that
Mr. Merewether put his hand to the “ memorial ” I have spoken
of. Mr. Croudace has assisted the Wallsend Company in the same
manner as he did the A. A. Company, and in other ways. I should
not be satisfied with myself if, in addition to these remarks, in-
tended, among other things, to free me from the charge of undxie
egotism in referring to the position of Lambton, I omitted, on
behalf of my Company, to bear testimony to the highly valuable
and faithful services of Mr. Waddell, the Company’s salesman and
shipping agent at Newcastle. For the manner in which this
gentleman performs his duties in connexion with the distribution
of the coal, he is as deserving of commendation as is Mr, Croudace
for his services in producing it, and to both I feel most grateful for
the assistance which their local knowledge and great intelligence
enable them to afford me in the performance of my duties.
Were I to stop here, I think it would be held that I have amply
shown that those who have made it their special business to attack
and vilify the management of Lambton are entirely wrong in
their general views as to the policy and action that will put and
keep the Coal Trade in a sound state. Intellectually, economically,
morally wrong; and that, while their efforts have been steadily
directed to the injury of Lambton, they have taken the truly mon-
strous position of assuming to protect the owners of that property
from injury they represent as done to them by their authorised
agents and representatives. I cannot yet feel, however, that my
task is done.
Although I did not intend to do so when I commenced these
notes, I shall, before concluding them, take a running survey of
Mr. Brown’s pamphlet, conceiving it may be better thus explicitly
to dispose of some of the most prominent of its representations
and arguments, rather than simply leave these to be extinguished
by the truth I have submitted, as w r as my first intention. But I
feel I ought first to refer to two proceedings of Mr. Brown’s, which
I had specially in my mind when I spoke of his “ astounding
effrontery.” The first of these is his procedure in having got
possession of some land on the outskirts of Lambton, opened a
colliery there, and given it the name of “ New Lambton.” It
is impossible to doubt that the object of this procedure was to
deceive coal purchasers into the belief that in dealing with him
they were getting the real Lambton coal. This obvious view is
confirmed by the fact that the pit certificates of the so-called New


Lambton colliery are close imitations of ours. There is, I think it
will be allowed, a surprising combination of action here, on the part
of one writing, or compiling, a pamphlet, with the object, as he
would represent it, of saving the shareholders of my Company
from the misconduct of their Manager : for that action involves
(1) an attempt to obtain by improper means a portion of the trade
of the colliery belonging to these shareholders ; (2) a very striking
testimony in favour of the management of the Company, inasmuch
as there could be no inducement to so closely imitate the name
and pit certificate of an unsuccessful concern.
The next proceeding, on the part of Mr. Brown, which I have to
notice, I will introduce by a reference to a letter signed “ Argus,”
which appeared in the Newcastle Chronicle of the 30th March, 1872.
That letter speaks of a vend arrangement, stated to have been pro-
posed to me, and as far as Mr. Brown is concerned, the proposition
addressed to me amounts to this : “ The coal-producing power in
the Northern District of New South Wales being much in excess
of the demand, it is necessary for all the collieries in the district to
restrict their sales. If you will be content with a vend of 130,000
tons, which is 10,000 tons more than is proposed for any other
colliery, I shall engage to be satisfied with a sale of 90,000 tons.
The other collieries have all decided to share the rest of the trade
among them, in agreed-on proportions, all that is wanted is that
you should accept the proposition made to you. The price will
then be raised two shillings a ton, giving an additional profit to
your shareholders of £19,500 per annum, and you may dismiss
your salesmen, shut your Newcastle office, and give yourself no
further trouble about keeping up your connexion, or seeking for
customers.” If, now, we look at Appendix A, wo will see, in the
Prospectus of the “ Australian and Oriental Coal Company,” this
same Mr. Brown, who, 'per Argus, is representing my shameful dis-
regard of the interests of my shareholders in refusing to go into
the vend scheme, which is propounded as a cure for existing over-
producing colliery power, seeking to attract a large amount of addi-
tional capital to the Coal Trade of New South Wales, and doing
so by representing the trade of the colliery, which he proposed
should be set down, under the vend arrangement, at 90,000 tons
(and which did not roach that amount last year), in the Prospectus,
at 200,000 tons, and speaks of the two mines he proposes to make
over to the projected company (only one of which has been in work
for some years) as “ now capable of putting out half-a-million of
tons of coal per annum .” Of course, the intention of these repre-


sentations of Mr. Brown must have been to induce the belief that not
only was there an existing consumption that took off these 200,000
tons (erroneously represented as the existing trade of Mr, Browns
collieries), but the prospect of a market for the 500,000 tons
(equal to two-thirds of the trade done by all the existing collieries
in the Northern District), which, it is said (also most erroneously),
his two mines can now put out \ and all this is represented by
the man who has laid before my shareholders (in his pamphlet)
a scheme for restricting the output of all the collieries as they
are at present, and stated that this, or some similar device, is the
only means of making the coal trade remunerative. Viewing this
this vend scheme with regard to its bearing on Mr. Brown, and
on Lambton, it seems as if Mr. Brown had designed it to keep
himself in funds for a time, and to lull the custodiers of Lambton
into a state of repose, while he was carrying out a project, in
London, that would give him a very large amount for his properties,
the rest of the capital proposed to be raised by the project being
to be devoted to extending the trade of a new Coal Company. Of
course, the vend arrangement (had it been established) would
have been thrown to the winds, and an enormous aggravation of
the existing evils in the Coal Trade have taken place had this
company been established.
It is inconceivable how Mr. Brown, after the appearance in this
colony of the Prospectus I am referring to, should have promul-
gated “ Argus’s ” delivery upon the vend question, without himself
seeing that my shareholders could only exclaim, with reference to
the case put before them, “ Surely in vain the snare is set in the
sight of any bird.”
I append to the Prospectus of the Australian and Oriental Coal
Company some notes, made by one well acquainted with the
subject on which he writes.
And now, having disposed of Mr, Brown, in the character of an
adviser to the coal interest in general, and the shareholders of my
Company in particular, I proceed to notice the contents of his
pamphlet, slightly in detail.
A very important feature, however, in the article of 9th December,
and, I may say, in all the subsequent ones, is an obvious desire or
intention to incite the Lambton miners to a strike. The writer
assumes that a lowering of the price of coal must result in a re-
duction of the wages of the miners, and that that is what the
action of the Lambton management is evidently tending to. He
then goes on to speak of “ men who for long past have barely
c 2.


managed to eke out a living : ” further on, he says, “ If they have a
fancy for being ground down to the earth that others may prosper at
their expense ” (this, by the way, scarcely tallies with the repre-
sentation that Lambton management is ruining the “ others ” re-
ferred to), “ they must have imbibed it very lately. They have their
rights .” “We should most certainly not protest against any attempt
made to prevent reduction .” I will just give one further quotation
from writing to this effect, which, as I have said, pervades the
whole pamphlet; it is from the article dated 16th December : “ If,
however, the masters will have it, then let the strike be hearty and with
a will.” This is plain enough, and few people will refrain from
saying, bad enough. To attempt to produce discord between em-
ployer and employed, is pretty much on a par with doing the same,
as respects truster and trustee. While struck by the wickedness
shown by such writing as I have quoted, I have as yet felt no
apprehension of its producing the effect intended. The men know
their position too well to apprehend danger to their interests from
keen competition among employers. No doubt it may be said
that this competition may drive some of the employers out of the
trade, and there is ground for such a representation ; but the same
views that actuate the management of Lambton would recognise
a continued healthy, though moderated and honourable, competi-
tion in this supposed case, which would sufficiently protect the
interest of the miner. What the men would really have cause to
fear would be a league among the employers, such as would arise
pretty certainly out of the “ stringent agreement,” or regulated
vend arrangement, advocated by the opponents of Lambton. I
have no doubt the Lambton miners will look well after their own
interest, and I would sincerely counsel them to do so. In the
meantime, I think, they will consider themselves in the same boat
with their employers, who like four-and-a-half days’ work in the
fortnight quite as little as the men do. Ido not understand the
exact meaning of the sneering remarks, by way of in the interest
of the men, referring to “ the kindly acts of their employers ,” “ the
mess of pottage ”to be exchanged for “ their birthright ,” &c., but I
know Mr. Croudace has ever desired, in all ways, to promote the
wellbeing of the men, and that I have heartily participated in this
feeling. I consider, therefore, these insinuations particularly base.
It is scarcely worth while, but I must take some notice of the
very erroneous representation (conveyed in the most slipslop
language, and maintained by strangely incoherent logic), to the
effect that the low price of coal, and the competition now going


on, will ruin the Coal Trade, and deeply prejudice the general pros-
perity of Newcastle. There could not be a greater mistake. A
low price and the good quality of an article (which latter condition
is promoted by competition) can only tend to the extension of the
trade in that article, and to the enlargement of the business of the
community in which it is produced.
It is represented in the production I am considering, that the
Coal trade will collapse, in consequence of a general breakdown of
all the colliery owners, if the pfesent competitive action goes on.
This is a monstrous misconception. The Coal-producers, least able
to compete, will, after a time, withdraw, there not being trade for
all; then prices will stiffen, and the business will come to yield a
fair profit to those engaged in it. In the meantime, all or a por-
tion of the Coal-producers are suffering, more or less, and this is
the measure of the existing evil in the trade. It is due to
the operation of a natural law, and could only be escaped at
the cost of- a greater evil. It is altogether a fallacy to say the
other interests spoken of are suffering. A certain way of injuring,
if not of ruining, all the interests connected with Newcastle would
be to establish a high price and a monopoly in the Coal trade. The
only condition compatible with general, sound, and lasting pros-
perity in the Newcastle District, is a Coal trade that gives, under
ordinary circumstances, close upon full work to the leading collieries.
This is necessary, among other things, to do justice to the North
as competing with the South. It will give, as I have said else-
where, good profits with a low price.
I would here refer to some incomprehensibly absurd remarks on
the subject of the position of the Northern Collieries generally, as
competing with the other Coal-fields of the Colony. In sensational
language, the Newcastle Chronicle writes on the 19th of December,
“ We are leading now with a strong lead, the race is all our own.
Should we stumble, should we relax our exertions, should we once feel
the breath of our competitors on our shoidders, the task of again shaking
them off would be hard indeed." It is scarcely credible that these
thrilling representations are made on behalf of those, who seek not,
so to speak, to refresh with a drink from a sponge, or otherwise to
help on, the racer so hard put to it to keep good his headway, but
to put a heavy additional weight upon him, which, in the state of
matters described, must ensure his being ignominiously beaten. In
other words, what my antagonists attack me for is my not joining in
a movement that will add three shillings to the price of Northern


coal, which, even at present rates, finds the Southern a formidable
rival. I take occasion to observe here, that the ten shilling agree-
ment drove the custom of the Australasian Steam;Navigation Com-
pany to the South, and it has never been regained by the Northern
Collieries. I refer to our Southern brethren in no narrow jealous
spirit j but it is the simple truth that to hold our own with them,
as competitors, it is daily becoming more evident that we, of the
North, should carry on our trade, so as to make our profits out of
as low a price as is practicable. If this involves the withdrawal of
some of those now engaged in the business, their misfortune (the
result of a healthy competition) will be no cause of rejoicing to me
(any more than would the defeat of one whom I might excel in a
competitive examination), but the reverse ; and I should, in this
event, live in the hope that a future expansion of the Trade will
bring such Collieries into work again. Of course it may be said
Lambton may be among the defeated; all I can say, in reply to
this suggestion, is, that I hold it to be my duty to bring the ques-
tion to an issue. It is not usual to make such matters the subject
of public discussion, but the conduct of my opponents has set at
naught all established use and wont in controversy and in action.
The way in which the Coal purchaser is spoken of in this pamphlet
is peculiar, and not calculated, I think, to commend my antago-
nists to the very important fraternity, as I cannot but think we
Coal producers must consider them, by whose money, it may be
said, we live, w’hether we call them “our customers” or not. For
my part, in the most catholic spirit, I would so designate every
one of them. In the deliveries of the Newcastle Chronicle , however,
the most pleasant title given to the Coal purchaser is “ the
stranger,” and the one grand object aimed at seems to be “ to take
him in.” It is as if the cry were raised, and repeated again and
yet again, of “ Spoil the Egyptian.” Now, Ido not speak of doing
business merely as a matter of benevolence, but I recognise the
fact, that the Coal purchaser likes the same coal rather to be cheap
than dear : that two shillings, or eighteenpence, or even one shil-
ling a ton makes a very great difference to a large consumer, and
a material difference to a smaller one ; and I think it will be a very
great thing, indeed, for them and for us, if we can continue to save
the consumers, as a body, the .£70,000 a year (or a considerable
portion of it) w 7 hich Mr. Brown, and his friends, would like to take
from them ; and, at the same time, realise a good profit for our-
selves, I mean for the Coal Companies. This is what I mean to


try for on behalf of Lambton, if the management of its affairs re-
mains in my hands, and to this I now call the attention of the
Coal purchaser, and I respectfully request he will not make him-
self a “ stranger ” to Lambton, bearing in mind that one of the
things Lambton aims at, is to give him coal at once cheap and
good.
I must not, however, much longer protract these notes, though
I feel I have still imperfectly dealt with the subject to which they
relate. The substance of what I-have submitted is this : my anta-
gonists take a position which I conceive to be quite untenable,
namely, that no regal’d is to be paid to the number of producers
engaged in an industry, but that all in it must be rolled up into a
conjoined concern. To put my views in the mildest form . what I
suggest is, that one may reasonably decline to fraternise, or even
treat with, those whose raison d'etre one may not be satisfied of. I
should be hypocritical, however, if I referred in mild terms to
Mr. Brown’s pamphlet. Where it deals with the question of Lamb-
ton management, I consider it, in the highest degree, improper and
altogether impertinent. We gained a great trade for Lambton
without the aid of the persons whose views are conveyed in Mr.
Brown’s pamphlet. We shall seek to regain what it has recently
lost by the same power that gave us our first success, that is, our
own right arm. Whether, as our opponents have suggested, we
have now more difficulties in working the colliery or not, is our
concern.
The foolishness displayed in the pamphlet I am considering
must, I think, strike forcibly anyone perusing it. It is scarcely
possible to conceive that the leaders extracted from the Chronicle
are written by any one but a make-believe Editor. r l hey are, cer-
tainly, not penned by one who realised the responsibility of the
Editorial Office, or he would not have wielded his pen so unright-
eously. I would instance, as a strangely foolish conception, the
following combination proposed against Lambton in the last of
these leaders,* viz., “ Seeing, then, that it is demanded of us to
“ deal with the subject, in the interests of the public generally, and
“ believing that when we object to the pursuance of any system pro-
“ mising to act injuriously towards the public, we are also somewhat
“ bound to suggest some measure whereby such injury may be
“ obviated, we would submit the following proposition, which, we
* Of date 23rd March, 1872.


“ think, would have the effect of, to a great extent, neutralising the
“ selfish policy of the management of the Lambton Company. Let
<£ all the other collieries , the A. A. Company, the Co-operative, the New
“ Lambton, the Wallsend, the Waratah, and, if need be, the Anvil Creek
“ and Burwood, unite and agree not to put a single ton of coal —outside
“ already existing contracts —on board ship under, say nine shillings
“ per ton, and then select one of their number to fight the Lambton
“ Company with their own weapons, reducing, step by step, with that
“ company the price of coal, and supplying it at the same rate , any
“ loss to the selected company being made good out of the extra shilling
“ earned by the others. The profits being thus brought up to an uniform
“ level amongst those thus combining, the battle could be fought from the
“ highest vantage-ground, and the result would not long be doubtful.
In the first place, if it had injured Lambton, the parties to it would
be liable to be indicted for a conspiracy ; but it is singular how
the concocter of it could have failed to see that it would have ically
helped Lambton ; for assuming, as the scheme does, that a lower
price would gain trade in preference to a higher, the effect would
be to give to Lambton as much trade as it liked to take, at a trifle
under nine shillings per ton, the consumption of Northern coal
being, of course, largely in excess of what any two collieries could
supply.
I need scarcely point out, I think, to any one who reads it, the
remarkable contradictions in Mr. Brown’s pamphlet. The title
page bears upon it an announcement of the “ Ruinous Condition
of the Coal Trade,” and this is followed by such statements as this,
“ they have allowed one man, in an almost irresponsible position, to de-
stroy their trade, and, by destroying their trade, to work havoc to all
dependent thereon but then, perhaps on the adjoining page, we
meet with such a passage as this, —“ It would appear, then, that the
power of the Lambton Company for evil has departed from it; the
other Companies are now in a- position to treat both it and its manage-
ment with contempt .” Again, while a restricted vend is prescribed,
we are told “we cannot send our coal away fast enough to meet the
demand .” It is noticeable, as is always the case in the war between
truth and falsehood, that when my antagonists speak the truth
they help my case, and deal a blow against their own. For instance,
the triumphant references to the inroads made on our trade, which
are represented as signs of the decadence of Lambton, point to the
necessity for the very action for which so much obloquy has been
showered upon me, namely, a decided movement to regain that


trade. Had I failed to do the very thing for which these people
abuse me, I should have been grossly wanting in my duty to my
Company. The whole production is very vulgar, very stupid, and
very abusive. I have every reason for believing that it was
concocted for the express purpose of being distributed among the
shareholders of my Company.
I wish, now, to say a few words with respect to my feelings to-
wards the other Coal Companies. I think I can say, with perfect
sincerity, that I grudge them no success they can fairly attain and
hold. The A. A. Company has gone greatly ahead lately. It is
the oldest of the Companies ; has a noble property, and it ought
to flourish. lam perfectly satisfied that the views I maintain are
calculated to promote the prosperity of that Company, and I shall
rejoice to see it permanently prosperous. Although I have had
the pain of reflecting on the procedure of its two principal officers, I
cannot allow this notice of it to come to a close without a reference
to two of its Directors as gentlemen with both of whom my ac-
quaintance dates very far back, from both of whom I have never
met with anything but kindness and courtesy. I should like these
gentlemen (with one of them I had some very pleasant intercourse
on this side of the world, not very long ago) to know that I wish
nothing but prosperity to their Company, though my first duty is
to my own. I shall, no less, be pleased to see both of the local
Companies, the Wallsend and Waratah, prosper. Among the
Directors of the former are gentlemen with whom I have nothing
but agreeable personal relations, while the Board of the latter con-
tains one of the oldest and most valued friends I have in the Colony,
and a young friend, warmly esteemed for his own sake as well as
for his father’s.
I make these allusions as introductory to the remark that my
present unpleasant relations with the representatives of the other
Companies are, I believe, mainly due to the latter having got into a
wrong (a very wrong) groove. They have disregarded what I would
describe as two great truths or principles that have specially com-
manded the acceptance of the age. The first of these is the rule
of Law, and the duty that is upon us all of submitting to that rule.
This duty my opponents have failed to recognise as respects an im-
portant Law of Political Economy, and much evil has come of it, for
a breach of Law always involves a penalty.
The other truth I refer to, is the advantage of giving due effect
to Competitive action. This has been quite ignored by my oppo-


nents, and with reference to a subject to which it is undeniably
applicable ; I cannot but think they will see that another course is
preferable to that which they have hitherto followed.
Before closing, I will say a few words of a personal bearing. My
first remarks will have regard to my position with respect to those
with whom I have come in collision—entirely through acts of
aggression on their part. These gentlemen (I refer to the better
class of them) knew that, after holding a very responsible charge
for many years, it fell to me to establish and start the Lambton
Colliery (under the able professional management I have already
referred to). They knew I was not in the position of an ordinary
Manager of a Company, sent out to superintend an established
concern, but that I had organised the entire affair ah ovo. They
were moreover aware that Lambton was doing the leading business
in the trade, and that its owners were deriving greater returns from
it than the proprietors of any other Colliery in the Colony. It was
therefore specially unwmrthy in these gentlemen, under the circum-
stances described, to seek to excite discontent among those for
whom all this had been done, namely, the shareholders of my Com-
pany, and to turn them against the management which had achieved
for them the results I have mentioned.
My next reference is to these same shareholders. I have felt it
due to myself, after what has passed, to request that a meeting of
my Company may express an explicit opinion on my management.
This will decide whether I am to be held as able to show a raison
d'etre in connection with the Coal trade in this Colony (for except
as the representative of, and a holder of shares in, the Company,
I have nothing to do with Lambton) ; or whether I am to be
relieved of a very burdensome charge, but one which I would not
otherwise surrender under existing circumstances.
R. A. A. MOREHEAD.
Sydney , 1 5th May , 1872.


APPENDIX.




[APPENDIX A.]
From the “Daily Telegraph” London, lOth January, 1873.
A prospectus has appeared of the Australian and Oriental
Coal Company, with a capital of, £300,000, in shares of £lO
each. The object is to acquire the Minmi and New Lambton
Collieries at Newcastle, in New South Wales; to supply the
chief ports of India and the Eastern Seas, the Intercolonial
Ports, and those in the Pacific Ocean with Australian coal, to
meet the demand which the opening of the Suez Canal has ren-
dered necessary, and to purchase steam colliers for the use of the
company.
Messrs. Chadwicks, Adamson, Collier, and Co. are authorised to offer for Sub-
scription, 22,000 shares of £lO each in the
AUSTRALIAN AND ORIENTAL COAL COMPANY (Limited),
For supplying the ports of India, China, Japan, the Pacific, and the Austra-
lasian Colonies, from the Company’s collieries at Newcastle, New South
Wales. Capital £300,000, in 30,000 shares of £lO each. The shares to be
paid as follows; —£1 per share on application, £2 per share on allotment, £2
Ist April, £2 2nd June, 1872, and the remainder as and when required.
The present issue of 22,000 shares will be entitled to priority in dividends to
an aggregate of 50 per cent, within the first five years, or 10 per cent, per
annum consecutively, before the remainder of the Company's capital receives
any dividend.
DIRECTORS.
Peter McLagan, Esq., M.P. (Director of Queen’s Insurance Company),
Chairman.
Sir Seymour J. Plane, Part., C.P. (late Secretary to the Viceroy of India),
Victoria-square. S.W., and the Pastures, near Derby.
Major Trevenen Holland, C.R., Tremayne, Upper Norwood.
William Chadwick. Esq., 3, Pembroke-gardens, Kensington, W.
William Carleton L’Estrange, Ksq., Upper Norwood.
Joseph Jee, Esq., C.P., The Manor House, Market Deeping, Lincolnshire.
Alexander Prown. Esq., Colliery Proprietor, Newcastle, New South Wales.
Solicitors —Messrs. Ashurst, Morris, and Co., ti, Old Jewry, E.C.
Pankers— London and County Pank, 21, Lombard-street, E.C., and branches;
the Consolidated Pank (Limited), Manchester.
Auditors—Messrs. Chadwicks, Adamson, Collier, and Co., 65, Moorgate-
street, E.C.
Offices—6s, Moorgate-street, E.C.
Prospectus.
1. This Company is formed for the purpose of acquiring the Minmi and New
Lambton Collieries, at Newcastle, in New South Wales, and for supplying the


chief ports of India and the Eastern Seas, the intercolonial ports, and those in
the Pacific Ocean with Australian coal, to meet the demand for coaling facilities
which the opening of the Suez Canal has rendered necessary, and also for ac-
quiring steam colliers for the use of the company.
2. The demand is being further augmented by the extension of railways and
gas companies in India and other eastern countries. The rapid increase of the
populations of Australia and New Zealand, and the natural development of
those great colonies, will also add materially to the consumption of coal, and
proportionally increase the local trade of the collieries.
3. With these objects a contract has been made for the purchase of the two
extensive coal mines at and near Newcastle, New South Wales, which are now
disposed of in consequence of the intended dissolution of partnership of the
proprietors. From information obtained by the Board, these mines are now
capable of putting out half-a-mUlion tons of coal per annum, of excellent quality
for steam and gas purposes, and now used for the latter purpose by the Bombay,
Singapore, and other Gas Companies. The vendors have carried on the busi-
ness for twenty years, and the present plant and machinery is estimated to be
capable of raising and shipping the before-mentioned quantity, and which can
at any time be considerably increased.
4. The larger of these two properties, known as the Minmi Colliery, pos-
sesses freehold coal lands to the extent of about 2,/ 25 acres, covered with
valuable timber, wfith four principal seams-of coal from six to ten feet in thick-
ness, the deepest of which is within sixty fathoms of the surface. It is situated
about ten miles from the shipping port of Newcastle, with a private railway
of six miles, which joins the main line, carrying its coal to the wharf for ship-
ment. The plant of this colliery embraces locomotives, coal-waggons, stationary
steam-engines, and everything necessary for the perfect working of the mine.
There are also cottages for the miners, residences for superintendents, work-
shops, sheds, stabling, and clerks’ offices, constituting altogether a large village.
5. The New Lambton Colliery is situated at Newcastle itself. It has a rail-
way to the shipping wharf, and comprises about 906 acres of freehold land,
with a complete plant, a seam of coal only twenty fathoms from the suiface,
of 8 feet 10 inches in thickness, and of valuable quality, is now in full work.
On this colliery also several seams of coal exist of similar thickness and rela-
tive depths as at the Minmi Colliery, and on the property the English and Aus-
tralian Copper Company have constructed works for the smelting of copper
ores, and by special agreement are bound for twenty years, from 1870, to con-
sume its small coal, at a price which will yield a considerable income from that
source. These facts are shown by a special survey, now in the Company’s
possession, made in the month of October, 1870, for the late Sir William
Denison, formerly Governor-General of Australia.
6. The quality of the Australian coal for steam purposes bears a high
reputation in India. China, and the Eastern countries generally. Its value for
such purposes has been proved by experiments carried out at Woolwich, as
shown by a repoit in the Company’s possession. With respect to its quality
for gas and coke making, Mr. Able, chemist to the War Department, has
reported as follows :
“ 'The quantity of volatile matter furnished by the coal amounted to 71 per
cent., and per cent, of a light and very porous coke were obtained. The coal is
therefore of a highly bituminous character, aud would probably be found ex-
cellently adapted for the manufacture of gas.”
7. 'The port of Newcastle is situated on the eastern shore of Australia, at the
mouth of the River Hunter, sixty miles from Sydney. It possesses a secure
harbour, with extensive wharfs for the shipment of coal, fitted with steam
cranes and all necessary appliances.
8. The price of the two collieries, including the six miles of railway, build-
ings, and lands, is £130,000. The plant, both fixed and movable, is to be
paid for at a valuation, which is not in any event to exceed £50,000. In
payment for both collieries and plant the vendors agree to accept for the


purchase-money £BO,OOO in deferred shares, and the balance in cash. Such
deferred shares not to rank for dividend till 10 per cent, has been paid on the
ordinary shares for five consecutive years, or an aggregate of 50 per cent, with-
in a less period.
9. In order to ensure constant employment to the collieries, it is proposed
to purchase or build four screw colliers, capable of carrying 1,500 tons of coal
each, and to work them in connection with the collieries in the intercolonial
trade. That trade now amounts to half-a-million tons per annum, of which
these four colliers will supply at least 200,000 tons. This work is now most
imperfectly done by small sailing craft, of from 50 to 100 tons, and so uncer-
tain is the supply at Melbourne during the winter, that the price of coal
there occasionally goes up from the ordinary wholesale price of 21s. to 60s. and
upwards a ton, while the screw colliers could land it at 21s. a ton at a large
profit to the Company. The Directors cSn speak with much confidence of the
great advantages to be derived from the employment of the proposed steam
colliers. Indeed such vessels constitute a necessary part of the undertaking;
for with two extensive collieries, one having shipping appliances of its own on
the river—not subject to any interruption from the public,—and the other
having constant access to the Government steam cranes at Newcastle, there
can be no occasion whatever for delay in loading and despatching the vessels.
The estimated annual returns from the two collieries, when the screw colliers
are in full work will be as under ;
200.000 tons, being the present average out-put from the collieries
(sold at the shipping price of Bs.), at a net profit of Is. 9d.
per ton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... £17,500
200.000 tons in addition, it is calculated, will be shipped to the inter-
colonial ports by the Company’s colliers at a net profit of
7s. 6d. per ton, including the profit on the colliers (but take
it at ss. per ton) ... ... ... ... ... ... 50,000
50,000 tons to the India, China, and other, foreign ports (under the
lowest estimated quantity), at a net profit of only 3s. 6d.
per ton ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,750
450,000
Estimated net income from small coal to Copper Company (as per
agreement mentioned par. 5 above) ... ... .. ... 5,000
Estimated total net annual income ... ... ... £81,250
10. The information obtained as to the capacity and value of the mines
is of a very satisfactory character. Surface land adjoining the New Lambton
Colliery is selling at £l2O per acre for building purposes, and adjoining the
Minmi at £SO per acre; it is, consequently, only reasonable to assume that
the possession of freehold estates of nearly 4,000 acres in the great mining
district of New South Wales, having, in addition to their large surface value,
proved seams of coal, each containing upwards of 20,000 tons, or an aggregate
of 80,000 tons to the acre, affords an ample guarantee to the shareholders
against any possible loss of capital. Indeed, as a coal-field, these estates are
practically inexhaustible.
11. The above calculations were made by the late Sir William Denison, to
whom these properties were well hnown , and at whose instance a special survey
and report were made, under the immediate supervision of the Government Coal
Examiner of New South Wales. Sir William Denison, up to the time of his
death, acted as chairman of the meetings convened for the organisation of this
Company.
12. The difference in the prices at which coal can be laid down at the ports
of the East from Australia and from England respectively is so much in favour


At Shanghai
... 44
0
per ton.
54
0 per ton.
,, Hong Kong
... 34
0
99
37
6 „
„ Batavia ...
... 25
0
99
33
6 „
„ Singapore
... 28
()
99
34
0 „
A
,, Bombay
... 33
0
99
41
o
„ San Francisco ...
... 40
0
99
44
o „
„ Calcutta
... 24
0
99
27
0 .,
„ Galle
... 26
O A
0
A
99
30
0 >.
n
of Australia (averaging indeed about 7s. a ton), that it is not unreasonable to
assume that a large share of this trade must eventually lie with Australia.
It will be a special object to secure continuous contracts with the regular
steam lines in the Eastern seas, as well as with the Indian Railways and Gas
Companies. . , , ~, _ ,
13. The annual consumption of English and Australian coal at the Eastern
and Pacific ports, by reason of the opening of the Suez Canal, will, it is believed,
be increased from one million to a million and a half tons. Of that quantity
this Company contemplate supplying upwards of one hundred thousand tons
by means of arrangements which they fully expect to realise, although they
have put only 50,000 tons in their estimate.
14. The cost of raising and shipping the coal at the New Lambton Colliery,
according to the special reports obtained, every expense counted, is 6s._ 4d. a
ton - but at the Minmi Colliery, which uses its own railway and shipping
appliances, only ss. fid. a ton. The present shipping price is Bs. Comparing
these rates with the prices of coals at the Colonial, Indian, and China ports,
this Company cannot fail to make large profits.
15. The articles of association, and contract of purchase, plans, valuations,
and surveys of the estates and mines, as well as a plan of the port of New-
castle, and of borings exhibiting sections of the coal measures, can be seen
and prospectuses and forms of application for shares obtained at the offices of
Messrs. Chadwicks, Adamson, Collier, and„Co., 65, Moorgate-street, London,
E.C., and 64, Cross-street, Manchester. Should no allotment be made the
deposits will be returned without deduction. No promotion money will be
paid to any person in connection with the undertaking.
A contract has been entered into between James Brown and Alexander
Brown, of Newcastle, New South Wales, of the first part, and the Australian
and Oriental Coal Company, Limited, of the other part, and dated January,
9th, 1872.
Appendix.
The following are the cost prices at which coal can be laid down at the
undermentioned ports from Newcastle, New South Wales, and from England
! Company’s Collieries, Newcastle, From England.
New South Wales. d. s. s. d.
respectively -
From the Company’s Collieries, Newcastle,
” j apan 34 0 ~ ... 54 0 „
The cost of insurance is included in the above prices.
[APPENDIX B.]
A FEW NOTES TOUCHING THE AUSTRALIAN AND ORIENTAL
COAL COMPANY, LIMITED.
In reference to clause No. 2 of the Prospectus, who can say what the future
may bring forth ? During the past seven or eight years, I have heard sundry


remarks as to what the trade was to be each year; the idea of the demand
being equal to the supply has not yet been realised in fact.
No. 3 carries with it the first information to this side of the world of the
dissolution of partnership between James and Alexander Brown; then comes
the statement, that “these mines are now capable of putting out half-a-million
tons of coal per annum. New Lambton is now only doing a trade of about
90,000 tons per annum, and it would tax its utmost powers to produce 160,000
tons per annum; whilst Minmi has been utterly abandoned for the last three
or four years, owing to the influx of the waters from the main creek, which
flooded the whole of the workings, even to the pit’s mouth, and led to the rum
of the Minmi Melbourne Goal Company, to whom the Browns had just pre-
viously sold it. Then we have, “ the vendors have carried on the business for
twenty years, and the present plant and machinery is estimated to be capable
of raising and shipping the before-mentioned quantity, and which can at any
time be considerably increased.” I should imagine the plant and machinery
must be considerably depreciated after such wear and tear.
In clause 4, it is stated, “four principal seams of coal” occur ‘from six to
ten feet in thickness.” There is only one workable seam, the other three are
bad and useless, and have never been worked. The plant formerly belonging
to Minmi can now be seen principally at New Lambton, so that an immense
quantity of new plant would be required for M inmi. Cottages, workshops, sheds,
stabling, &c., still exist at Minmi, reminding one of Goldsmith’s deserted village.
Clause 5. New Lambton is not at Newcastle. It is about five miles from
Newcastle by railway, three miles of which is the Government Railway, and
only two miles belonging to New Lambton. A seam of coal, “8 feet 10 inches
in thickness” may exist, but certainly not of good quality, for the Messrs. J.
and A. Brown have found it desirable to work on the top of the jerry, which
lies about 2 feet 6 inches from the thill, or bottom, owing to the bottorn coal
being so inferior; the average actual thickness of workable coal is about 5 feet
6 inches. At this colliery, the same as at all the collieries in the Newcastle
District, there is only one workable seam of coal— and only one worked.
The English and Australian Copper Company have not erected works on
the New Lambton property, but on a small piece of laud about a mile and a
quarter distant from this property. .. , . ,
Respecting clause 6, I believe it will be found that Australian coal is equal
to the average of English coal.
No. 7. The port is fairly good—might be made better.
No. 8. The modesty of the vendors, in asking such a low figure as £IBO,OOO
for these collieries, is really very striking ! ! .
No 9 Screw colliers, of 1500 tons, could not possibly go up the river to
Minmi shoots, for there is not depth of water. Then there are places both in
Sydney Melbourne, Adelaide, New Zealand, &c., that they could not discharge
at The vessels trading to the intercolonial ports are really fine vessels, running
from 350 to 900 tons. There are also some very good screw colliers, carrying
from 600 to 850 tons—for instance, “Blackbird,” “Hero,” “You Yangs,”
“ Dandenong,” and “ Macedon.” For the last ten years I have only once
known the price of coal, in Melbourne, go up to somewhere about 405.; that
was owing to contrary winds, and may not happen again for a life-time.
No 10 Value of land at Minmi; I have known an allotment, one quarter
acre and house, unsaleable at £s—the place may be said to be abandoned. As to
an aggregate of 80,000 tons of coal to the acre, I have already stated that the
onlv workable seam in the whole district is of about an average thickness of
5 feet 6 inches of workable coal at New Lambton. Then, taking the ordinary
calculation of 1510 tons to an acre of coal, 1 foot thick, and multiplying by 54,
we have 8305 tons to the acre; of which, probably, with very careful manage-
ment, 6000 may be extracted. I fancy there is a slight difference between
80,000 and 6000 tons per acre ! >
No. 11. I imagine Sir William Demson was misinformed, otherwise he
never would have made such calculations.
n


Nos. 12 and 13. I would remind the proposed A. and 0. Coal Company that
there are other coal-owners in the Newcastle District to compete with them in
the supply of coal.
[APPENDIX C.]
The following letter from Mr. Morehead was published in The
Sydney Morning Herald, of Saturday, July 13 th, 1872 :
THE COAL TRADE.
On the 15th of last month, being the day on which the English
mail closed, there appeared in the Sydney Morning Herald a com-
munication with the above heading, and having appended to it by
way of signature the words “ One Interested.” The object of this
communication is to controvert views put forth by me in a pamphlet
issued a month previously. Although Ido not consider that I have a
very formidable antagonist to deal with in this writer, nor indeed that
much more is necessary than to refer him, or any reader of his, back
to the document he criticises for the refutation of his arguments and
representations, I would make the passing remark that in my view a
fair opponent would not have chosen the day I have mentioned for
writing against a representative of an English Company, thereby
shutting out such representative from putting before those for whom
he acts any rejoinder he might desire to make to the animadversions
that had been passed upon him. Nothing but an urgent pressure to
meet an attack, and a very limited measure of time for marshalling
the matter to be dealt with, could, I conceive, justify such a procedure,
and neither of these conditions existed in the present instance. It so
happens, however, that the breach of right feeling which I have
referred to is of little practical importance in the case under considera-
tion. It has indeed been a question with me, if there was a call on
me to notice in any way the delivery of “ One Interested,” seeing that
the public may have had enough of this coal trade question, while for
myself, I should be only too glad to be left to devote myself to my
daily work without being called on to notice ‘ Interested ’ or other
critics, counsellors or misrepresenters. But having decided that it is,
on the whole, best that I should, as a final dealing with the question
as a subject for public discussion, go over seriatim the arguments or
representations that have been urged by the writer I have referred to
in contravention of the views I have expressed, I thought it well in
the first place to ask that gentleman to inform me in what respect a
statement contained in my pamphlet, and characterised by him as
only “ half the truth,” was defective. After a delay of more than a
a fortnight I have received a lengthy manuscript addressed to me per-
sonally by way of a rejoinder to my inquiry. I shall give what I
consider due attention to this communication when I come to the
part of the delivery I am about to consider that relates to it. I


refer to it now to account for the delay that has taken place in
the issue of this counter-delivery, a delay most annoying to me,
for it entails on me an irksome and disagreeable task, just as
mail time approaches, when most of us find enough to employ us
in the discharge of our ordinary duties. But to proceed with my
unpleasant duty.
This writer commences by referring to my pamphlet as a defence
of my policy in reducing the price of coal. It would be more correct
to describe it as an attempt to combat very erroneous views that had
been promulgated as to the conduct of the coal trade in the colony,
and which had recently been embodied in a scandalous publication
expressly directed against me. - The great end aimed at in this
production, and most unscrupulously pursued, was to prevent me
from carrying on the business of the Lambton Colliery in the manner
that I considered most conducive to the interests of its owners, and
this certainly did involve a recent open lowering of the price of
Lambton coal.
The writer then proceeds (I presume towards refuting the views I
had expressed) with the following statement, the application of which
is far from obvious ; —“The price of coal in England has lately made a
great advance, yet contemporaneously with this, the price in the
colony has fallen.” It might with equal truth have been said recently :
“ The price of beef and mutton in England has lately made a great
advance, yet contemporaneously with this, the price in the colony has
fallen.” In both cases two facts are stated of a similar character, why
should they be differently dealt with, for it has not yet been pro-
pounded that there should be a combination to “get up” the price
of sheep and cattle in the colony ? or, to confine our consideration
simply to the ad captandum jingling antithesis which I have quoted,
why should not coal be dear in England at present and cheap in the
colony, if the relations between supply and demand respectively in the
two places give rise to this state of matters ?
Then, it is said “the local producer gets none of the benefit,” &c.
This is mere absurdity. Why or how should the colonial producer,
for I suppose he is meant, receive benefit from a demand pressing on
the supplying power in England ? There are two facts plain enough;
a rise in England from an increased demand, a fall in the colony from
a short demand relatively to the supplying power. These are inde-
pendent facts resulting from clear definite causes. If the cause now
affecting the price of coal in England comes into operation here, we
shall have a smilar result to that now showing itself in England, and
vice versa. It may, indeed, be, that as in the case of beef and mutton,
He high price of coal in England may lead to an increased demand for
colonial coal and give it an additional value, but this change must be
allowed to develop itself, and would bo retarded and not promoted by
any attempt at a combination with its accompanying degradation.
The gain or loss of the shipowner next referred to is a matter I con-
consider it unnecessary to deal with here. “ One Interested ” next
says, “ The price of wool has lately risen, so has the price of copper
and that of tin.” Then comes this very unnecessary question : “ Sup-
pose the colonial producers of these articles had gained none of the
benefit, would the colony have been in its present prosperous con-
dition ?” Then the further question, “ Why should our coal woners
alone be condemned to forego the prospects of profit ?” No answer is
n 2


given by the writer to either of these exclamatory queries, but what
is meant to be conveyed can only be this : Wool and copper and tin
having risen greatly in price (in consequence of an increased demand)
to the great benefit of the sheep-farmer, and the owners respectively
of copper and tin mineswhy should our coal owners who produce an
article for which there is a short demand be condemned to so different
a fate? Surely the reply is easy_ enough—indeed, I have un-
avoidably, in putting the question in shape, indicated the flagrant
non sequitue involved. It is because the industry the coal owner
has devoted himself to is at present subject to different circumstances
or conditions from those which affect the others. To go into the
matter a little further —it is not pretended that the prosperity of the
flourishing industries specified is due to combinations or binding
agreements —the cure prescribed for the unprosperity of the coal
owner —on the contrary we know well these prosperous industries are
carried on in a free competitive spirit. Let us begin with wool-
growing. Is it not the constant effort of the sheep-farmer to produce
wool at once good and cheap ? Does he not send his wool to market
to compete with the produce of other flocks ? Looked at carefully, a
wool sale is more a competition between., producers than purchasers.
When the supply goes ahead of the demand, this competition entails
loss on the sheep-farmer who has inferior country and inferior stock,
and we know as a sad truth that within the last few years sheep
stations have been abandoned, and their owners ruined, because of
the unremuneratiye price of wool; as far as they were concerned, or
to put it in a different way, because they could not compete success-
fully with flock-owners possessing advantage over them. Yet I have
not heard the latter class of producers vilified as having sought the
ruin of their brethren. Wool-growing has recently become generally
remunerative, mainly by the agency of an increased demand, but the
same result would have been brought about (indeed was in course of
being so) had that increased demand not arisen, by a diminution in
the supply, or a checking of the increase thereof, so as to keep it in a
fair state of parallelism with an advancing consumption. _ In other
words, only sheep stations that would pay, by the sale of their produce
in the open market, would have continued to be carried on. Coming
to copper, we have a similar story to tell. Some years ago, a fall in
the price of this metal set in, from the usual cause —an excess in the
supply relatively to the demand. This fall continued from year to
year, and one copper mine after another ceased to be worked. I sup-
pose'“ One Interested” would put it that the owners of these were
ruined by their surviving brethren. Very recently, as we all know,
copper has come into increased demand; the price has risen, and mine
after mine, previously abandoned, is coming to be worked, and new
ones are being opened. As respects tin, a similar change to that
which has affected wool and copper has taken place, except, I believe,
that tin had not been previously subjected to so great a depression in
price. Most assuredly the price was not “got up” by a stringent
agreement among tin producers who could not find by open trade a
remunerative market for their produce. ,
What I have to say, therefore, to this writer, in reply to his illogical
reference to flourishing and unflourishing industries, is that there is
no royal road (so to speak) for an industry in the latter position to
prosperity, but that it must attain this, even as the industries he has


cited as flourishing have reached it, first meeting adversity as they have
met it.
1 have dwelt lengthily, and yet hurriedly, on the short and absurd
paragraphs with which “One Interested” commences his delivery; but
this will enable me, I think, more easily and briefly to dispose of what
follows. ' . ~ ,
I have now reached paragraph 3, and it is not difficult to dispose
of. It commences with a reference to the ten-shilling agreement, and
then goes on to speak of the reduction to 7s. by Lambton, repeating
very much, but in more courteous language, the representations there-
upon that were conveyed in the pamphlet which I have dealt with.
The writer then proceeds to remark that the reduction in price had
not stimulated consumption. Had he stated that it had not materially
done so, he would have been right; but the same remark would have
applied in the case of the fall in the price of wool, which took place
some years ago. The writer is certainly wrong in what he says with
reference to foreign markets, and to cases when orders are given re-
quiring that coal, if shipped at all, should be laid down at not more
than a specified cost. The writer represents, correctly, that the de-
mand for freight is greater than the supply. This being the case, it
is obvious a fall of 2s. or of ( , 3s. in the cost of coal at the of
export would enable a shipper or intending shipper to tempt ship-
owners with a higher freight to that extent. The result would, there-
fore, be that more vessels would be chartered, and more coal shipped
when coal was cheaper; for it cannot be doubted that in some cases two
or three shillings will turn the scale as respects the inducement to
take or decline a charter. But all these considerations have really
little bearing on the question at issue. _
Paragraph 4 commences: “It is a very pertinent question,” &c. I
am tempted to suggest that a little prefix to one of the words I have
just quoted would aptly characterise the greater portion of what
follows in the communication I am considering, inasmuch as this
writer may be said to haul “ Mr. Morehead ” oyer the coals for his
management of the business of the Lambton Colliery, in the interests
apparently of the owners thereof. I will not, however, just yet deal
with the writer’s qualifications for the office of protector of these
interests. I would first state that I certainly refuse to adopt the
doctrine he apparently holds, that lowering the price of coal is the
one unpardonable crime; on the contrary, I consider it a very
proper proceeding under certain circumstances. I deem it equally
proper, under fitting circumstances, to maintain or raise the price.
The occasions on which Lambton lowered the price of coal are not
correctly stated in the paragraph lam now considering. I would re-
mark in particular that the reduction to Bs. 3d. first mentioned was a
following of suit on the part of Lambton from a price previously in excess
of that charged by the other collieries in the case of a material portion
of their business. These are questions, however, of comparative un-
importance to the main issue, which I think I may fairly state to be,
whether’l am right or heinously wrong in maintaining that in the
coal trade the same rules and principles should be recognized as are
found fitting in other branches of business.
My critic has an apparent advantage over me in being able to quote
expressions used by me that might have been justly viewed as objec-
tionable and boastful, had they been gratuitously put forth, and not


rendered necessary (as any candid person must admit) under the cir-
cumstances disclosed in my pamphlet. I hold, indeed, that even the
distorted and offensive statement of the case given by “ One Interested
fully justifies the action taken by Lambton, so far as the principle
involved is concerned. As regards this, it will stand justified even in
the event of there being ground for the imputation that those in the
management of Lambton have formed an overweening estimate of that
colliery, I would add here, as an indication of my sincerity in the
views I have expressed, that I can quite recognise the possibility of a
state of matters existing which would make it my duty to close a
colliery under my charge, and withdraw from the field. I by no means
expect that “ One Interested” will agree with me as to what are the
“ inherent powers ”or what the birthright of Lambton. I would state,
however, that one right I must maintain on hex’ behalf is that of being
managed by her own people, and not coerced by “ strangers,” and all I
have sought of those connected with the other collieries is, that they
should limit their attention to their own affairs. It appears to me I
am here called upon to be a little specific in referring to the competitive
action I have felt it my duty to take. One of the competing collieries
in the Newcastle district is that known as the Co-operative Mine, so
called in consequence of its having been opened and worked by a body of
miners on the co-operative principle. The speculation, however, failed,
and the mine passed into the hands of the mortgagee, who now pos-
sesses and works it. I acknowlege that I have felt with regard to this
undertaking, that if it were a question between it and Lambton
which was to have a fairly adequate trade, I was bound to contest the
point on behalf of Lambton, a colliery nearer the port, and started and
fully equipped by a company specially formed to carry on mining in
Australia. I have felt all the more called on to say, with regard to
this colliery “ rather Lambton than it ” —because I bear in mind that,
soon after my last return to the colony, our late coal salesman in-
formed me that a customer of ours had had the co-operative mine
brought under his notice as soon to be “ turned into a company,” as the
expression is; he was at the same time told that very great profits
would be earned by the proposed Company, as the only obstacle to the
getting up of the price of coal to a highly remunerative rate was the
refusal of Lambton to become a party to a combination to effect that
end, and that the management of that colliery would be forced to join
this combination. I have felt, therefore, that there was another colliery,
in addition to Mr. Brown’s, ready on the smallest encouragement to
be developed into increased power of production; the existing colliery
power being already, as we all know, excessive. I should be sorry
indeed to interfere in a gratuitous manner with the efforts of any one
to make the most of his property ; but it was surely my duty to do the
opposite of helping on the gentleman I have alluded to in the develop-
ment of his colliery, particularly when the Lambton trade came to fall
off in a marked manner. It falls in my way here, I conceive, to state
the fact that has been authoritatively communicated to me, namely,
that the gentleman who has written under the signature of “ One In-
terested” is the owner of the co-operative mine. I consider this is a
circumstance I am entitled to put forth as plainly as this gentleman
has published his criticisms on Lambton management.
Indeed, it seems due to my directors and shareholders, and to the
public, that J should put them in possession of this knowledge, to be


taken along with the above criticisms. lam not personally acquainted
with this gentleman, but I like to reckon among my friends some con-
nections of his. I think Ido not say too much when I add here that,
everything considered, some of the remarks that “One Interested ’
has published may fairly be characterised, to use a familiar expression,
as somewhat “ cheeky.” Ido not think it fitting to comment on what
this writer says as to the comparative strength and the comparative
costs of the various collieries. These are subjects to consider, so far
as lam concerned, with my Board. It cannot but be unpleasant to
me to be represented as a cause of injury to anyone. I feel, however,
that the writer to whom I am replying is not entitled to much con-
sideration in the character of an exponent of the general interests of
the coal owner, and I am perfectly satisfied that the views I maintain
will lead to a minimum of evil to those interests, or to a maximum of
good, according as we may think fit to put the case. “ One Interested ”
suggests that Lambton may be the eventual sufferer in the process
now going on. All I have to say in reply is, that this result would, I
conceive, in no way invalidate the soundness of the above views. I
will just add here —(1.) A colliery may be eliminated or mitigated as
a competing power, without this involving ruin or anything like it to
the owner. (2.) It may be, on the other hand, that a colliery may be
closed and not opened again for a considerable period, there being
“ no other hands ” willing to take it over at any price in order at once
to work it again, as seems to be assumed as a matter of course by this
writer.
“ One interested ” commences paragraph 6 by saying “ Mr. More-
head complains that when selling at the same price as others,” &c.
Now, it is erroneous to say that I ever took this complaining tone.
The true account of what is referred to is that action was taken such
as was conceived to be for the interest of Lambton, and immediately the
Lambton management was attacked, and the special accusation brought
against it was that what was done was prejudicial to the interests of
the owners of Lambton. This theme is enlarged upon in the para-
graph lam considering. There seems something almost ludicrous in
the notion of this writer seeking to persuade my shareholders and
directors that he can show them a “ more excellent way ” of managing
the business of the company than I follow. I certainly do not feel
called on, for the edification of this gentleman, to enter into a minute
justification of the course that has been followed, or to traverse in
detail his representations and references. An intelligent reader, how-
ever, might, I think, from the facts and figures given by this self-
appointed adviser in the affairs of my company, deduce the following
conclusions : When Lamb ton’s trade was at the highest, “ absolutely
and relatively,” the management was content with the status quo, and
naturally sought for no change, and certainly felt no call to reduce
the price of coal; neither, however, was it willing to be trammelled
by any agreement that would curtail its power to hold the trade it
had won in the open market, for it felt that a time might arrive when
action —independent action—would require to be taken to maintain the
colliery in the position that the management thought it was entitled
to. I acknowledge most freely that “ One Interested ” and I are pretty
certain to join issue on the question last indicated; but I scarcely
think he will be considered by my Board a more reliable authority and
adviser than lam on this point. Such a time as had been appre-


bonded as possible did in fact arrive, andLambton s prosperity having
been invaded, what was considered the fitting action to restore it was
taken. The fallacy involved in the mode in which “ One Interested
deals with the position consists in his transposing the cure and the
disease. He evidently does not like the course we have adopted, but
then I did not expect he would, and I quite differ with him in the
view I take of the prospective result of this action in the interests ot
Lambton. I scarcely think he will satisfy my Board that he is more
likely to get back for my Company the trade he and others have taken
from us, or in any other way to restore the prosperity of Lambton,
than I am. I have the same remark to make with regard to the
criticisms on my Company’s business contained in a late number of
the Newcastle Chronicle, which I have just hurriedly looked at. The
tabular statements which accompany these, exactly indicate the call
for the action that has been taken. _
The writer, however, is too impatient for results. A quotation
which I subjoin, and shall refer to more fully before concluding, shows
that the great English authority on the coal trade, Mr. Nicholas Wood,
speaks of collieries undergoing a curative process being worked for
some time without any profit, as by no means a formidable in
connection with the establishment of a sound system of conducting
colliery business. This indicates a patient spirit that it may be our
duty to imitate in the hope of fairly secured and lasting future profits.
It may be I feel that renewed prosperity, and of a more general
character than could reasonably have been looked for a short time
ago, may not be far off for the colliery interest in New South
Wales. Of course, sound prosperity can never come too soon. What
we have to guard against, it is ever to be borne in mind, is a fool’s
paradise—a mock prosperity, as unstable as a pyramid poised upon
its apex. , ... ,
I now come to the statement (paragraph 7), that the case submitted
to Sir James Martin contained “ only half the truth.” After perusing
the papers that have been sent me, with others that I have access to in
this office, and which have already been before the public, I am quite
satisfied there is no just ground even for the provocation ” spoken of,
if the expression involves anything approaching a moral charge against
Mr. Young; but, anyhow, the whole question involved is entirely
outside the case, and the fact remains simply as I have put it, that
Mr. Young withdrew from the ten-shilling agreement in a manner that
the others did not like or approve of.
“One Interested” uses an expression that most aptly conveys
my feeling in respect to a union such as was attempted in the ten-
shilling agreement —that is, a compact intended to smother or choke
down the legitimate operation of competitive action under circum-
stances tending specially to call it forth, when he speaks of it as “ab-
horrent ’’tome; and 1 make this remark with no intention of exacer-
bating bitter feelings, but the reverse. I refer to it now in connection
with the unpleasant subject I have just had to notice, to remark that,
evil in itself, such a union induces unworthy action in people who
ordinarily would not act unworthily. I cannot but believe that most
of those who combined against Mr. Young —a gentleman, it will be
admitted, just as unlikely to do an unfair act as anyone in the com-
inunity, and against Tjambton—feel now tbat they acted against the
views of their better selves.


I hope and expect that the idea of a restrictive union or a regulated
vend will be generally abandoned by the intelligent members of the
oal-producing fraternity in the colony. The objections to the latter
device, as to the former, are many and obvious. The vend proposal
would to a certainty lower the character of our coal by removing the
present pressure to send it out clean, and otherwise in the best state and
form. It is grievous to think that so noble an industry as the coal-
trade should be so depressed and demoralised as it is with us at pre-
sent. I trust, indeed, an improved state of matters is not very far off
with regard to so great an element in promoting the advancement of
man as coal—the material basis of the domestic hearth, the source,
the creator, it may be said, of that grand mechanical power which
enables us to subdue the world in a material sense.
I take occasion to observe here that the keen competition that has
prevailed for some years in the coal trade has not been without mate-
rial good results. Our coal was never better than it is now, from the
great pains taken to send it out clean, and no doubt the low price has,
to some extent, enlarged the market for it, while the general cost of
getting it has been much reduced by improved appliances and arrange-
ments in working. I think it will be allowed that the Manager of
Lambton took the lead in these. I make this remark without the
slightest intention to give offence to any of the other colliery managers,
some of whom, I am sorry to find, have considered some remarks in
my pamphlet as intended to be disparaging to them.
Since writing what precedes, I have received, sent to mo with Mr.
Brown’s compliments, a copy of the Newcastle Chronicle, containing the
last attack, referred to a little way back, on the Lambton management
—I may say generally on the management of the Company I represent.
This leads me to say a few further words thereupon. The writing in
this renewed onslaught shows improvement, but not the moral nor
intellectual capacity to deal properly with the subject. Indeed it is
patent that the writer is under ‘ interested ’ influence discreditable to
a public journalist. The matter is of little importance; but I may
observe that I see, in a statement of the comparative trade of the
different colonies that might have been made up from the data
dealt with, an arrest of the inroad on Lambton’s business that set in
at the end of last year; but I cannot condescend to discuss my
Company’s business and position with this writer, whose representations,
or misrepresentations, can have no weight whatever, lam aware that
several hundred copies of the pamphlet on ‘ 1 The Ruinous State of the
Coal Trade ” have been sent home for distribution among the share-
holders of my company, but I feel they will be perfectly harmless.
The disgraceful efforts to stir up the Lambton miners referred to in my
pamphlet have led to action on the part of the miners generally that
sought to place the Lambton men in a most unwarrantable position
with respect to their employers. Our men, however, refused to play
the invidious part sought to be imposed upon them, as was to have
been expected. I am moved to remark here that recent unworthy
action and feeling towards Lambton elicited from a gentleman in a
prominent position in the coal trade, but with whom I am not at present
in communication, an expression of opinion and protest on behalf of
Lambton, I should say, in the cause of right and justice, that I feel
to be greatly to his credit. I do not feel it to be out of place to add
that I have ever sought, as far as possible, to avoid cause of personal


difference with those connected with other collieries, and that one of
the many objections to stringent agreements, in my view, is the
certainty that they will lead to painful and degrading dissensions
among the parties to them.
“One Interested,” concludes his letter hy rather a condescending
expression of regret that I am not so wise as he is. In an earlier
portion of it he speaks of the competition as a law of modern com-
merce. I append an extract from the ‘Penny Cyclopaedia,’ which
contains evidence given before a committee of the House of Commons,
hy Mr. Nicholas Wood, it may he said almost in the dark ages of free
trade, as a great fact—that is, long before the abolition of the Corn
Laws. It will he seen, Mr. Wood, who is about the first authority in
England on the subject of the coal trade, thoroughly condemns an
arrangement as to vend then in existence among the Tyne collieries,
and propounds exactly the views I have given expression to as to the
manner in which the coal trade should be carried on. I take, of
course, little credit to myself for having expressed my adherence to
these sound views in the present advanced days.
I think Mr. Wood will he considered to speak with more authority
than your correspondent who has sought to gainsay the above
views.
The extract runs as follows :
“ The regulation made hy the Committee for the Year 1828 fixed the
prices too high; the consequence of which was an immediate influx of coals
from Scotland, Wales, and Yorkshire into London; so that when the
engagement was entered into for 1829, the price was fixed Is. per chaldron
lower. Had this reduction been made at first, it might have prevented the
competition which, having been once created, still exists, and has been
constantly increasing. The existence of competitors who are continually
creating greater facility of communication with the great London market
must in time altogether break up the monopoly which the coal owners of
Durham and Northumberland are attempting to perpetuate. The manner
and degree in which the consumers, and especially the London consumers,
of the coals of Durham and Northumberland are affected hy the regulation
of the vend, and the impolicy to the coal owners themselves of its continuance,
may be understood from the evidence of Mr. Wood, the managing partner
in an extensive Colliery, given before a Committee of the House of Commons,
in June, 1836. Mr. Wood is of opinion that the effect of the regulation is
that an inferior coal is sold at the price a better one would be supplied at in
open trade ; that by abolishing the regulation, the present price would be
reduced Is. 6c?. per ton by the coal owner, and many of the inferior scrts,
in that case, could not. be worked at a profit; there would consequently be a
larger proportion of good coals, and not so much risk of admixture as at
the present time ; that there are no peculiarities in the coal market to prevent
ito adjusting itself to an open trade ; no peculiarity in the application of
capital in the coal trade to prevent a regular and ample supply ; that an
open trade would urge to economy in working; and as a case in point, he
states that the manager of a colliery who, in 1827, thought that the price
of 245. per Newcastle chaldron was the lowest at which he could supply
them, now sells the same coals at, 17s. 6c?.; that in fact a low steady price
tvoul’d be ultimately better for the coal owner than the great changes which
have taken place. Under an open trade, he doubts whether there would be
any profit for some, time; but it would settle down to a remunerative price,
as all other trades do, and the supply would then be made hy those who


could sell the "best coals cheapest; that the best effects would follow from the
most unrestricted and free exercise of every man’s discretion in conducting
his own trade, both at the place of purchase and of sale; and that the
present prices leave an extravagant profit to the coal owners —more than a
fair remuneration
I have now done with the subject, and mean this as a final delivery
upon the matter.
E. A. A. MOEEHEAD.
BRADBURY, EVANS, AND CO., PRINTERS, WHITEFRIARS.


