

MTO AUSTRALIA ' -
A JULIR:
■ -JL V i-1 . *- V' , ’V : ' ~
’V/ V. l|V
.
>
.




NOTES
A JOUENEY TO AUSTEALIA
ROUND THE WORLD.
BEING A
LECTURE
DELIVERED IN THE MEMORIAL SCHOOL, AT HIGH CROSS
ON FRIDAY, NOVEMBER sth, 1875.
ARTHUR GILES PULLER.
G. PRICE, WARE.


NOTE.
The original sources from which the materials of the following
paper are drawn, are a private Journal kept during the
time of my journey, and Mr. A. Trollope’s work on
Australia and New Zealand. To any one acquainted
with Mr. Trollope’s hook it is not necessary to point out
by means of brackets or inverted commas the sentences
and passages which have been extracted entire from
that entertaining work.
A. G. P.


fDhr ~7~?
NOTES
A JOURNEY TO AUSTRALIA
AND ROUND THE WORLD.
Mr. Chairman, —
It is, I believe, known to most, perhaps to all, who
are present here this evening, that in tbe course of
last year it was my good fortune successfully to carry
out a project which I had revolved and thought
over for some time previously, and that during an
absence from England which lasted seven months I
made a complete tour of this globe on which we live,
and spent three months out of the seven in that vast
new world, —island, if we regard the fact that it is
surrounded by the sea, —continent, if we consider its
boundless extent, —which has received the name of
Australia.
In endeavouring to bring before you some account
of what I saw during my journey, I propose to take
the different places in the order in which E visited
v ;
fijgjv v _/ g


them, but not to confine myself only to my own ex-
periences and to remarks suggested by them, but
rather to make the journal which I kept at the time
a central thread on which may be hung both in-
structive information and interesting anecdotes, if I
can collect any, from other sources. And here I
may at the outset warn any who expect a thrilling
account of hairbreadth escapes from shipwrecks by
sea or from wild beasts on land that they will be
disappointed. Such adventures as did happen to me T
will make the most of, but no one, I think, would
thank me when the hour was over if they had spent
it in listening to a series of impossible and incredible
adventures, or a string of stories and anecdotes of
which the only object would be to create a laugh.
I left England on Tuesday, February 24th, 1874,
reached Paris the same evening, and after twenty-four
hours rest, continued my journey to Turin. Just before
leaving Paris, I was witness of a very interesting
parting scene between Princess Clotilde, a daughter
of Victor Emmanuel, the present King of Italy, and
her husband Prince Napoleon, a cousin of the late
Emperor of the French, Louis Napoleon, and most
astonishingly like the great Emperor in face and figure.
The Princess and her attendant ladies were in deep
mourning (no doubt for the late Emperor). As she
conversed with her husband I had an excellent view
-of her face and form from the window of the ad-
Ssm 111 u m


joining carriage. She was pale, and her countenance
showed traces of suffering, but seemed cheerful, un-
affected, and winning. As the train moved off, I saw
distinctly the last pressure of the hand given, and as
Prince Napoleon’s eye caught mine I took off my cap
and saluted, whilst the suite made a lowly reverence,
the ladies exclaiming in chorus, “ Bon voyage,
Madame.” I had for a companion during the first part
of the journey a young cavalry officer, who had fought
against the Germans at Sedan, where the Emperor
Napoleon and the whole of his large army were made
prisoners; he conversed with me freely about the war
and about politics in France, and amongst other things
said that he looked forward with confidence to an early
restoration of the Empire under the Prince Imperial
as Napoleon the Fourth. It is quite possible that his
anticipations may before long be fulfilled. And here
I, may observe that the route by which I was
travelling had only during the last few years be-
come the recognized highway for mails and pas-
sengers between England and the East; for more
than thirty years after the opening of what is
called the Overland Route across the Isthmus of
Suez, passengers from England to Alexandria in Egypt
had their choice between going by sea through the
Straits of Gibraltar, and so touching at Malta, to
Alexandria, or by crossing the channel from Dover to
Calais, they might travel by land across France to the


port of Marseilles, where they embarked on board a
vessel which conveyed them direct to Alexandria; and
it was by this latter route that the mails were con-
veyed until, about four years, ago a tunnel nearly
eight miles long was completed under Mont Cenis,
and the system of railroads already constructed in
Italy was joined to that of France. This is not
the time or place to enter into the details of this
wonderful work, which took fourteen years to complete,
and the whole length of which I traversed in less
than half an hour; enough if I now direct your at-
tention to the fact that by means of it the stream
of mail and passenger traffic is diverted from Mar-
seilles, and passing through Turin, the ancient capital
of Sardinia, carries the traveller on through Bologna
and Ancona to the port of Brindisi, which I reached
late on Saturday, February 28th, having rested
twenty-four hours on my way at Turin. Here I
spent Sunday, March the Ist, and in the evening
went on board the P. & O. Steamer Sumatra ,
which w r as timed to start at daybreak the next
morning, as soon as the train conveying the mails
which had left London on the previous Friday
evening arrived. The voyage was rough, and I may
pass over rapidly the first three days of it; but on
Thursday the sea was calmer, and the run into
Alexandria enjoyable and delightful. I got away
from the Sumatra in advance of my fellow-pas-


sengers, engaged a dragoman, and in half an hour
sped away in a carriage to see what I could of
Alexandria. Some remarkable relics of antiquity
called Pompey’s Pillar, and Cleopatra’s Needles, are
curious and interesting; and after visiting them I
drove out by the Rosetta gate, and passing one of
the Khedive’s palaces, I got out and walked in the
royal garden, where I saw for the first time a banyan
tree, and some magnificent fig trees. After visiting
the Mahometan cemetery, which was of great extent,
I returned to the city, and drove for half an hour
about the streets of Alexandria; and here many strange
sights met my eye for the first time camels used
as beasts of burden, with young children riding
and driving them, young women carrying large
jars of water balanced on their heads, Arabs com-
pletely enveloped in white bernouses, Moorish ladies
with their faces shrouded by white veils pierced with
holes for them to see through. The Egyptian and
Syrian bazaars through which I afterwards drove
presented a rare scene of life and animation, and
at each moment a collision with some one on foot
seemed to be inevitable. The next day (Friday,
March 6th), after a pleasant breakfast with eight
fellow-passengers, I started at 2 p.m. by train for
Cairo, having paid off my dragoman at the station
I was greatly struck by the richness and fertility
of the country traversed, which an old Turk explained


to me was due to the flatness of the soil, the abundance
of water, and the heat and power of the sun, adding
that very little tillage or cultivation was necessary.
And now that I have arrived at Cairo, the capital
of the ancient country of Egypt, I will give two or
three brief extracts from my journal illustrating
scenes within the walls of Cairo itself, just glance at
the Great Pyramid and the buildings near and around
it, and devote the remainder of the short time which
can be spared to considering some of the circum-
stances affecting the past and present condition of
this deeply interesting country, Saturday, March 7th,
Off in a carriage at 9 a.m. for a drive about Old
Cairo, now a heap of ruin and rubbish, the road dusty
but full of life and animation, the patient camels
following each other in long strings, the “ coveted ”
ass trotting along without bridle singly or in
droves, the crows, the vultures, of which I counted
more than thirty visible at the same moment, the
hundreds of masterless dogs which in Eastern cities
act the part of scavengers, lit up by a bright sun
in a clear atmosphere, form a lively and exhilarating
scene. After visiting an ancient mosque and some
Coptic churches with mosaic representations of apostles
and saints, I reached the most interesting object in
the drive, namely, the Nilometcr on the island of
Roda, by which the height of the Nile is measured
during the annual inundation of that sacred and


mysterious river ; and tlie view from the terrace at
the south point of the island I shall never forget.
The Nile is here seen in its full width and grandeur,
and the eye can follow its course for some distance
south. To the right are magnificent palm groves
stretching for miles along the plain, and behind
them on the edge of the desert rises a long line
of Pyramids, reaching from Geezeh to Dashoor. And
so I pass on to Monday, March 9th, —a memorable
day both in this journey and in my life, for during
this day I spent four hours upon, in and near the
Pyramids of Geezeh. The climb to the summit of
the Great Pyramid along the north-east angle is
nowhere dangerous, but may fairly be called diffi-
cult, as some of the steps are over four feet in
height. On the platform at the summit I found
a young American officer engaged in laying down
a meridian line to be used in making an ordnance
map of the country. What struck me most when
on the summit was not the colossal pile on
which I stood, nor the minarets of Cairo, nor
the green and fertile valley of the Nile between,
but the vast and limitless desert on the confines
of which the Pyramids stand, and which, then
seen by me for the first time, recalled many
a scene in novels and books of travel and poems,
such as Southey’s Thalaba, in which the oasis,
the simoom and the sirocco, the camel and the


caravan, furnish subjects and contribute incidents to
the story. Still the colossal pile may well claim a
few lines ere we pass by it and leave it for ever.
It is certainly the oldest building in’ the world.
Previous to the battle in wbicb be defeated the
Mamelukes, Napoleon the First addressed bis army
in these words: “ Soldiers, from the summit of the
Pyramids forty centuries look down upon your deeds! ”
Many students of the Old Testament believe that
the Israelites during their stay in Egypt were em-
ployed in the building of the Pyramids, and there
are not many places in the world wbicb excel or
equal their site in interest; and if the outside is
marvellous, so is the interior remarkable for the
precision and architectural completeness with which
the passages and chambers are constructed, for the
adjustment of the angular and linear measures, for
the proportion between the different parts and the
whole. And when the Great Pyramid is at length
quitted, the other buildings and ruins on the plat-
form on wbicb it stands will well repay one for
some hours spent in investigating and admiring them.
The second Pyramid and Sphinx I forbear to de-
scribe ; but what sent a thrill and glow of excitement
through my whole frame was the Temple Tomb of
Xing Sbafre, excavated by Mariette Bey, and wbicb
stands at the bead and front of all the results with
wbicb Egyptian Archaeology has been enriched


within the last half century. There can be no doubt
that it was built as a place of sepulture, but built
more after the Syrian than the Egyptian manner, for
the latter gave each defunct king a house to him-
self, while the former had large chambers where one
king went down after another to join the ghastly
council of his predecessors. The building is in a
wonderful state of preservation ; no pillar as yet has
fallen or is to the eye even sensibly inclined, and the
enormous stones which form the beams, and which
stretch horizontally from pillar to pillar, have always
been decomposed or fissured at the point of con-
tact. It is a remarkable fact that on no part of
the building can the smallest trace of hieroglyphic
carving or engraving be found, “Not one ornament,
not one sculpture, not one letter.” I have dwelt at
some length upon this Temple Tomb of King Shafre,
because its size and grandeur, coupled with the
finish and perfection of its passages and chambers,
and the remarkable state of preservation in which it
now exists, made a great impression upon me at the
time ; and I can only hope to interest, and if it may
be make an impression upon you who are willing to
listen to this paper by reflecting and transmitting faith-
fully my own feelings as I pass on from point to point.
And now for a few words upon the past history
and present condition of Egyyt. There are many
reasons for thinking that the science of Geometry,


by which portions of the earth’s surface can be re-
presented in a map or plan, owes its origin to the
annual inundation of the Nile obliterating the bound-
aries of neighbouring properties, and thus requiring
a map or plan to be made by means of which each
owner of land might identify his own particular plot
after the water had subsided ; and passages might
be quoted from ancient Greek and Roman authors
which prove that in their time Egypt was con-
sidered to have produced the earliest astronomers,
and both unite in attributing this priority to the
clearness of the Egyptian sky in summer, and the
consequent facility of observing the risings and settings
of the stars.
Of the part which Egypt plays in Old Testament
history, owing to the proximity of the Holy Land,
and the sojourn of the Israelites while yet an infant
nation in the land of Goshen, this is not the time or
place to speak at length, further than to remind you
that the dawn of all history commences with the
night when the Jewish nation, laden with the spoils
of the Egyptians, commenced their march towards the
Red Sea.
As regards the present condition of Egypt, as far
as my observations go, the civilized portion of the
country is confined to the Valley of the Nile, the
deserts which border the valley on both sides being
inhabited only by Arabs and Bedouins, who have


indeed Sheikhs whom they obey, which Sheikhs are
responsible for their good behaviour, but who under
ordinary circumstances do not come into contact with
the officers of the law, unless some serious offence
against life or property has been committed, when a
party of soldiers enters the offending village, and
numerous arrests are made, until a sort of rude justice
is arrived at. In passing from the savage desert
tribes to the more civilized inhabitants of the Yalley
of the Nile, I will say at once that the feature which
struck me most in the political condition of the
country was the personal character of the Yiceroy’s
or (as he is now called) the Khedive’s government.
I may instance three points which bear out this view.
First, the number of palaces both built and building
in the neighbourhood of Alexandria, Suez, and Cairo,
which are the property of the Khedive or his sons.
Secondly, the fact that the railways of Lower Egypt are
the private property of the Khedive, and the guards,
porters, clerks, etc., not only in name but in reality
his servants, as much as our soldiers and sailors are
the servants of our Queen. And lastly, that owing
to there being no representative chamber, the so-called
Ministers of Justice, Foreign Affairs, etc., are in a
very doubtful and subordinate position, and can only
countersign and carry out the decisions of their Lord
and Master, who can dismiss them from his service
on any day if it pleases him to do so. The Khedive


also can impose what taxes he pleases upon the in-
habitants, and no subject of his, whether a Minister,
or filling any other position, has any control oyer
the expenditure of the amount so collected, or can
check or restrain the amount of debt which the
Khedive may incur if he can get credit, which, by
paying a high rate of interest, he always can. But
I must not detain you too long dwelling on the
politics of modern Egypt, and will therefore quit
Cairo, as I did on Thursday, the 12th of March, and
travel across the desert to Suez. This in former days
used to be accomplished in about twenty-four hours
by means of what were called the “ desert vans,”
and by all accounts there could be no trial of a
traveller’s patience and good temper greater than to
perform this journey with disagreeable companions,
added to the heat, sand, mosquitoes, and length of
the journey. Now it is accomplished easily in a few
hours by train; the one by which I travelled was of
enormous length, and made unreasonably long halts
at small stations, whilst not sufficient time was given
in the middle of the day to partake of a moderate
luncheon. The corn-fields on each side of the line
were cultivated with great care and neatness, every
weed being removed by hand labour. After reaching
Ismailia, the railway ran alongside the Bitter Lakes
and the Suez Canal, and as in the clear night air I
looked up at Draco, Ursa Major, and other well-known


constellations, I could not help reflecting that these
same stars must have looked down upon the Israelites
4000 years ago, and must have witnessed the destruc-
tion of Pharaoh and his pursuing host in the waters
of the Red Sea which I was then approaching. I
ought not, I think, to pass alongside of the Suez Canal
without saying a few words about it. Although it will
afford incalculable advantages to the nations of Europe,
and to England most of all in promoting our com-
mercial intercourse with India, China, and Australia,
yet there is no doubt that its completion has inflicted
a severe blow on the commercial prosperity of Suez,
and in a less degree on the port of Alexandria and
the whole of Southern Egypt. Now, large ships laden
with cargo pass in two days from the Red Sea to the
Mediterranean, whereas formerly their cargoes were
unloaded at one port, and, after transit through the
country, loaded again on a fresh vessel at the other
port. On the other hand, the possession of both ends
of the canal, and the whole length of it, cannot fail
to give to Egypt increased political importance,
especially if by a new phase in the Eastern question
the country should hereafter shake off the titular
sovereignty of the Sultan of Turkey, and become
really as well as nominally an independent power.
And so the progress of my journey has brought me
to Suez. But before quitting the Isthmus, by which
the continent of Africa is tacked on to Europe and


Asia, I will narrate a short anecdote which happened
to a friend of mine named Admiral Jones, or, as he
then was called, Captain Jones, R.N., who crossed the
Isthmus in October, 1857, at the time that the railway
across the desert was being made. He says, “At last
we arrived at the terminal station about twenty-three
miles from Suez, and there in a large single tent, so
thin as scarcely to give any shade, we found a luncheon
laid out, but which at first sight appeared to be nothing
but swarms of flies of different sizes and shapes, for
literally they were so numerous as entirely to hide
the viands upon which they were feasting. Many of
the more delicate passengers were dreadfully disgusted,
and put off their feed; but neither cockroach nor fly
can heat an old midshipman, so in company with some
others of the more hardened class we set to, and after
brushing off our predecessors, discovered chickens as
small as sparrows, and lumps of beef or camel for
what I know, which washed down with a capital glass
of bitter beer made an excellent repast for a desert
meal.”
After a time they began to prepare the vans which
were to take us to Suez; but whilst they are
harnessing the mules, a glance at the encampment
may be amusing. On approaching it you see all
baggage, goods, cargo, and boxes of specie spread
out on the ground and covering half an acre, with
hundreds of Arabs and people sorting, arranging, and


pulling the things about in all manner of directions.
But though there were articles there, as I was told, to
the amount of a million sterling (that is, half a million
in specie, and nearly the same amount in jewellery,
besides many other things of value in great and small
packages), yet they are all safe, for there has been only
one theft since the traffic began ; and then, when it was
traced to a village, the Pasha destroyed not only the
thief, but every one in the village also—Eastern justice,
to be sure, which, though not in accordance with our
notions of right and wrong, has certainly had the effect
of converting the greatest thieves in the world into
honest men. Indeed in the East they reverse our
maxim “ that it is better that ten rascals should escape
than that one honest man should suffer,” for theirs is,
“ that it is better that ten innocent men should die
than that one rogue should get off.”—At Suez I dined
with two pleasant young Englishmen, who were just
commencing a journey to Mount Sinai, and the next
morning, Friday, March 13th, finished a letter to
England and saw it safely posted, and between 9 and
10 a.m. ran down in a special train to the docks, and
went on board the P. & 0. Steamer Bokhara, where
for three hours the work of loading the cargo went
on. About 1 p.m. we cast off, and commenced our
voyage down the Bed Sea a little behind our consort
ship the Gwalior, proceeding to Bombay, and in the
most perfectly calm and ultramarine blue water passed


over the identical spot where in all probability the
Children of Israel made their passage.
I propose now to read a few extracts from my
journal during the voyage from Suez to dalle in
Ceylon, which lasted 15 days. Monday, March 16th:
Passed at 8 a.m. an Arab vessel carrying pilgrims
to the port of Jiddah en route for Mecca. After
breakfast the Captain showed me the position of the
Bokhara on the chart, and I had some talk with him
about latitude and longitude. We are now running
down the coast of Abyssinia, and to-morrow shall be
off that part of it where our troops landed in the
Abyssinian war. A meeting of passengers is called to
discuss the question of getting up private theatricals,
which resulted in a Corps Dramatique being formed
and two pieces to be acted being selected, namely,
‘Twenty Minutes with a Tiger,’ and ‘The Trial of
Bardell versus Pickwick’ from the Pickwick Papers,
I undertaking to act Sergeant Buzfuz in the latter,
and to write a Prologue, which will appear hereafter.
Tuesday, March 17th : Attended rehearsal wrote
prologue —and put into a lottery to be decided by the
moment of entering the Port of Aden. Wednesday,
March 18th: As we approached Aden I was very
much struck by the volcanic character of the region,
and also by the pointed forms of the rocks and hills
(which reminded me of the few Swiss Dolomites in
the Upper Engadein with which I am acquainted).


As we approached the port and the pilot boat was seen
coming out to meet us, great excitement prevailed
amongst the passengers respecting the moment at
which the lightship would be in line with the battery-
flagstaff. The result proved that I had drawn the lucky
number, and the proceeds of the lottery (£3 155.)
were handed over to me two minutes later. In the
meantime the steamer was surrounded by young Arabs
in canoes, who showed their white teeth and shouted
‘ Have a dive, Sir ! ’ and on my throwing a rupee into
the sea, some eight or ten plunged into the water, of
which one only secured the prize. In the evening I
and three other passengers went ashore and chartered
a carriage to see the tanks about four miles from the
port, the road passing through a very savage natural
defile, with a masonry arch thrown across it. The
tanks, which have been constructed to keep the
garrison supplied with fresh water, are of great extent
and capacity, and, I was told, are filled on the average
once in every three years. Afterwards we drove to
the Post-Office, where I despatched a letter to England,
and to the principal store, where we purchased some
articles of dress for the approaching theatricals, and
returned on board about half-past 9 p.m. Coaling went
on all night, and the next morning, Thursday,
March 19th, the Bokhara quitted the port of Aden,
and commenced an eastward course towards the island
of Sokotra, which is the next point before reaching


Galle in Ceylon; tlie wind freshening but without
causing any roughness of the sea. And now I think
I must ask you to take the remainder of the voyage
between Aden and Galle for granted, with the excep-
tion of the evening of Wednesday, March 25th, when
the Bokhara Theatricals were performed, and of this
I can only try to bring the outline before you by
reciting the prologue to the two pieces, ‘Twenty
Minutes with a Tiger/ and ‘The Trial of Bardell
versus Pickwick/ I may remind you that the two
most recent events, before we left England, had been
the Trial of the Tichborne Claimant, and the General
Election in February, 1874, and so, without further
preface, I will commence my Prologue to the Bokhara
Theatricals, on March 25th, 1874 :
Pair Dames, whose arm-chairs grace in goodly row
The ample bulwarks of the P. & 0.,
Whose waving locks, stirred by the whispering breeze,
Shine brighter, mirrored by these Southern seas, —
To you, as judges, we appeal to-day :
And to your court, where justice has fair play,
Claimants we come, though not of land or pelf;
Each actor is a Claimant for himself;
Not Claimants for the Tichborne land or prize,
We still are Claimants, though of smaller size.
And if our acting should an hour beguile,
You may reward us by a gracious smile.
If our weak efforts should your heart rejoice,
You may vote for us with applauding voice ;


And though no ballot box before you stands,
You can return us by the show of hands.
A truce to compliments ! fair words begone !
By acts, not words, the actor should be known.
To two short pieces on our boards to-night,
Your looks and your attention we invite.
In one short week, if fav’ring breezes play,
Our good ship, cleaving through the waves her way,
Will land us safe on Ceylon’s spicy isle,
Where tigers roam through many a wild defile.
Let not our thoughtful manager be blamed,
If he should offer you a Tiger tamed;
’Twere better so to meet one, if at all,
Than travel with a Tiger in Bengal.
We also hope to play without a flaw
A Trial in a well-known Court of Law,
Where Sergeant Buzfuz will with force expose
The tale of Mrs. Bardell’s wrongs and woes,
And Justice Stareleigh will with sternness fit
Reprove Sam Weller’s levity and wit.
And if, whilst mirth and cheerfulness prevail,
Your plaudits should encore each well-told tale,
And jocund sounds of laughter should arise,
Perchance will come from Ocean’s depths replies.
If from the sea you hear the cry, “ What Larks !”
’Twill be an exclamation from the sharks :
Whilst drawn together by the joyful sound
From depths unknown for many a league around,
Octopi, serpents, mermaids, many a bird,
Forming one chorus o’er the ocean heard,
Cock up their tails, and cry, “ Full well we know
Some Lark’s afloat upon the P. & 0. ! ”


Before quitting the Bokhara, which I must now
prepare to do, I will quote one more short copy of
verses, which I addressed to my fellow-passengers
on the afternoon of Friday, March 27th:
“Farewell to the Bokhara.”
Farewell’s a word that’s often said
By many a bursting heart,
When the last clasp of hands is laid
On friends about to part.
Truly Bokhara’s guests may say
They have fared well whilst here !
The well-dressed table laid each day,
The social nightly cheer.
And now that Ceylon’s isle’s in view,
And all those hours are past,
That fatal word for me and you
Must be pronounced at last.
On Saturday, March 28th, the Bokhara entered
dalle harbour, and the sight of the green vegetation
of the beautiful island of Ceylon refreshed our eyes
wearied with gazing for ten days upon nothing but
sea and sky. The harbour is considered a dangerous
one to enter in rough weather, the entrance being
guarded by rocks, over which the heaving swell causes
the sea to foam and roll. What with coaling, hoisting
out luggage from the hold, feeing servants, and leave-
taking between the passengers, the deck of the vessel
presented a rare scene of confusion, and those who


were going on by other ships to China and Japan,
those who like myself were going to remain for a
while in Ceylon, and equally those passengers who
were going on in the Bokhara to Madras or Calcutta,
were glad to go ashore for a day and enjoy the
freedom of a walk or a drive after the close confine-
ment on board ship. The fresh fruit also, limes and
bananas, and the Galle prawns, which are of enormous
size, both fresh and curried, were much appreciated
by the new arrivals.
The following sentence from the pen of a gentleman
who made nearly the same journey as myself in the
preceding year gives the impression made upon him
by the Oriental Hotel at Galle: “ The singularity of
the place is this: Standing out in the ocean, Galle
receives the flying visits of all nations. During the
last week we have had a steamer arrive from Madeira,
another from Rangoon, two from China, one from
London, one from Bombay, and one from Australia,
so that in the verandah and at dinner there was the
most wonderful mixture of nationalities, Dutch,
French, German, Italian, and English,—all uniting
to make a most inharmonious discord; but it was very
pleasant.” The day after we landed my fellow-passen-
gers and I parted company, they going their different
ways to Calcutta and Madras, China and Japan,
whilst three or four remained like myself at Galle;
but I scarcely met any of them again, as I started the


same evening by coach for Colombo, and during this
journey a nocturnal adventure occurred to me. It was
between 8 and 9 p.m. that I was roused from a state of
thinking with my eyes shut by the pace being rapidly
increased, the coach swaying from side to side of the
road, and the sound of heavy blows of the whip being
applied to the horses, to which they responded by
galloping at full speed for five or six minutes before
they were pulled up. As soon as the coach stopped
to change horses, I got out and questioned the driver
as to what had happened, and he made the following
reply : “As I was driving along at my usual pace,
suddenly six rogues come out of the jungle, and throw
stones at the coach, and try to catch hold of the horses’
reins. I never allow any one to stop my coach, so I
flog my horses, and gallop, gallop, gallop away until
I get clear of them.” Without further adventure I
reached Colombo about daybreak, and remained there
a couple of days, being at once made a member of the
Club, and receiving great kindness and hospitality
from those to whom I brought letters of introduction.
But I see clearly, if I were to give at full length
an account of the fortnight which I spent in Ceylon,
that I should not leave sufficient time to speak of
Australia, which was the main object of my journey,
and I must therefore ask you to be content with a
bare outline of where I went and what I saw in the
Island of Ceylon. Colombo itself is a bustling busy


place on the sea-shore, with a good esplanade and a
large lake of 500 acres, which adds very much to its
appearance. The business part of the town, public
buildings, Government House, etc., are all contained
within the fortifications. Quitting Colombo by train
on Tuesday, March 31st, in a few hours, by means
of a remarkable incline, I reached the elevation of
Kandy, the ancient native capital, 1600 feet above
the level of the sea. Besides being the old political
centre, Kandy is the centre of the coffee-planting
district, which is the staple industry and principal
source of wealth of the island; from Kandy the coffee
is carried down by train to Colombo, from whence
it is conveyed by ships to Hamburgh, Liverpool,
London, and other ports of Europe and America.
After a stay of a day and a half, I sped away one
evening at 10 o’clock with a gigantic negro, belonging
to the hotel, who was to act as my servant and inter-
preter, and travelled nearly 100 miles into the interior
of the island as far as Damboul Best House, and
leaving my carriage and negro attendant here, I
walked in the early morning of Saturday, April 4th,
12 miles through dense and luxuriant jungle accom-
panied by four native coolies, who carried on their heads
my gun, rifle, carpet bag, provision box, etc., as far
as a native village called Sigariya, where Mr. Thomas
Blakesley, a son of our old neighbour Canon Blakesley
of Ware, and now Dean of Lincoln, was engaged in


making a plan of an enormous ancient reservoir, at
least 1200 or 1300 years old, which the Government
hoped to make use of, by storing up in it water during
the rainy season, and with the water so stored up
irrigating a large extent of country at a lower level
during the dry season. Mr. Blakesley’s horse had
broken loose at night and lamed itself only a short
time before, he supposed through terror of some wild
animal passing near the yard in which the horse was
confined; and by his advice I lay out the whole of one
night on the brink of a pool of water in hopes of large
game coming down to drink, but with no result, as the
night passed away without anything being seen or
heard. Returning to Kandy, I set out, after a halt of
an hour or two, by coach in another direction, and
late in the evening reached the house of Mr. Gregory,
the Governor of the Island, at JNewera Elba, which
is the mountain retreat of the English colony during
the intense heat of a tropical summer. Mr. Gregory
entertained me as his guest for two days, during which
took place some races, followed by a large dinner party
and a ball, which was certainly in one respect a
singular and remarkable one, as there were only eleven
ladies present in the ball-room, and nine of them were
married, and one engaged to he married, whilst the
eleventh was so elderly and so sunburnt, that it seemed
doubtful whether she ever would be either married or
engaged. And so the time came for me to return to


Colombo, and after a short stay there, to Galle, and
after a cheerful luncheon at the Oriental Hotel with
those who were about to become my fellow-passengers,
I went on board the P. & O. Steamer Pera about 4 p.m.
on Sunday, April 12th. About midnight the ship
weighed anchor, and my voyage to Australia com-
menced. And at this point of my journey, as I am
quitting Galle Harbour, it seems only right to devote
a few lines to the progress of the Company which has
done so much to facilitate intercourse between England
and her possessions and dependencies in the East.
The Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation
Company, or as it is sometimes called more shortly
“ The P. & 0.,” was originally a company formed for
trading between Cork and Bristol. It afterwards ex-
tended its operations to Lisbon, and was then called
the Peninsular Company. A few years after the
opening of the Overland Route by Lieutenant Wag-
horn, the Company placed a certain number of vessels
on the other side of the Isthmus of Suez, and com-
menced running from Southampton through the Straits
of Gibraltar to Alexandria in Egypt, from whence
the travellers found their way to Cairo by water, and
from thence by vans across the desert to Suez. After
the railway system in France was completed, they
established a line from Marseilles to Alexandria, and
when, by the opening of the Mont Cenis tunnel, it
became possible to travel by railway to Brindisi, the


line from Marseilles to Alexandria was given up, and
tlie existing line between Brindisi and Alexandria was
established. Without tracing minutely their gradual
extension on the eastern or further side of Suez, they
have now four distinct lines running regularly in the
following order; —One every week from Suez to
Bombay; one every fortnight from Suez to Galle, and
on to Madras and Calcutta ; and in connexion with this
a line running once a fortnight from Galle to Singa,-
pore on the Malay Peninsula, and from thence to China
and Japan ; and lastly there is a line running once
every month from Galle to Adelaide and Melbourne in
Australia, and to this last line, I need hardly say,
belonged the good ship Pera, which was my home for
nearly three weeks, and in which I traversed more
than 4000 miles. And now I will suppose that more
than 3000 miles of this distance has been accomplished,
and that the Per a is running into King George’s
Sound, at the south-western corner of Australia (as
was the case), with a heavy sea, a drenching rain, and
a fresh breeze, which amounts almost to a gale, urging
her onward at a furious pace, and I find on reading
over again a letter written at that time the following
passage : “It strikes me as a startling proof of the great
distance over which I have travelled, that although
at this moment the Pera (in which I am writing),
which carries the London mail of March 20th, has
not yet sighted the Australian coast, yet the P. &O.


steamer which carries the following London mail of
April 17th, left Suez three days ago, and has at this
moment completed more than half her voyage down
the Red Sea. And not to enlarge too much on the
ideas which this journey has suggested to me, the
intervening space which separates the Peru’s mail
from its pursuing mail has compelled me to realize,
in a way which I never could have done before, the
(not limitless but) not to be reckoned magnitude of
‘The great and wide sea, in which are things creep-
ing innumerable, both small and great: there go the
ships, and there is that leviathan whom Thou hast
made to take his pastime therein.’ ” In a voyage such
as that which I am now describing, one day differs
very little from another, as far as external things are
concerned; the meals (I forbear to give a list of
them) succeed each other in unbroken regularity, and
with military, or rather with naval, punctuality.
Every day, at a few minutes after noon, the captain
posts at the head of the staircase the latitude and
longitude, or, as it is called, the position of the ship,
and there is a little excitement with respect to the
number of miles run in the previous twenty-four
hours, which, taking the average of several days to-
gether, generally amounts to about 240 miles, giving
a speed of ten miles per hour ; in the evening, after
the tables have been cleared, a great many rubbers
of whist are played in the cabin, and those who are


not card-players assemble on the quarter-deck and
entertain eacb other with recitations, songs, and music.
The daylight hours hang, perhaps, the heaviest, and
during this voyage, in order to beguile the time, my
fellow-passengers and myself organized a Court of
Inquiry, of which the motto was, “ Justice is done
on board the P. & 0.” A naval captain presided as
judge, and I officiated as barrister. One gentleman
was tried for being too long in the bath-room, con-
trary to the law of the P, & 0. in that case made
and provided. Another passenger was indicted for
perjury; and for both of these, who were my clients,
I succeeded in obtaining a verdict of acquittal. The
third and most serious case was one of assault, and
in this case I was retained for the prosecution, and,
without mentioning names or entering into details,
the judge summed up in my client’s favour; the jury
returned a verdict of guilty against the defendant,
and he was fined two guineas in champagne, which
the judge, jury, parties, and counsel drank together
amicably at dinner-time. On Monday, April 27th,
the Pera reached King George’s Sound, where the
few passengers on board whose destination was the
colony of Western Australia went ashore. The colony
is not in a very flourishing condition at present, and,
though one of the earliest of the Australian Colonies
founded, has not progressed as much as the others
have. This may be accounted for in various ways,


partly by the great distances which intervene between
the settled districts and the absence or insufficiency
of the roads connecting them, partly by the small
number of population compared to the vast area in
which they are contained, and last, though certainly
not least, to the convict taint which pervades what
population there is, and deters many intending
colonists from making it their home. I did not set
foot in the colony, but surveyed the town and harbour
of Albany from the deck of the Fera, and therefore
think I ought not to dwell longer upon its history,
institutions, present conditions, and prospects, since
I have no personal experiences of my own to relate
respecting it. On Tuesday, April 28th, the Fera
steamed out of King George’s Sound, and in three
days the shores of South Australia, which was my
destination, were in sight. On the last evening,
Friday, May Ist, the naval officer who had been the
judge of the court of inquiry proposed my health
in a complimentary speech, and the other passengers
having toasted me, I made them a speech in return,
and wound up with a copy of verses, of which I will
give only the concluding stanzas :
And not less well in Courts of Law,
Where prisoners catch it hot,
And where, undimmed by speck or flaw,
Unsullied by a spot,


The judge’s ermine guards the weak,
And counsel’s practised voice,
To those who aid from justice seek,
Bids innocence rejoice.
And now methinks you’ll say
My verse becomes too long,
And yet how can I stay
The flowing tide of song ?
Friendship demands a line,
Feeling requires a tear;
I may not, must not, pine
For pleasures enjoyed here.
Yet memory free may range
O’er thoughts so hard to tell,
Which Time can never change,
So, “ Per a ! ” fare thee well.
The next morning, Saturday, May 2nd, I took a
hearty farewell of my fellow-passengers, and landing
at the port of Glenelg, touched Australian soil, and
soon reached Adelaide, the capital of the colony of
South Australia. Adelaide is a pleasant prosperous
town, standing on a fertile plain about seven miles
from the sea, with a line of hills called the Mount
Lofty Range forming a background to it. It is re-
markable for the number of its churches, for the
grandeur of its banks, for the size and splendour of
its public buildings, and also for the regularity and
order which has been shown in the founding and con-


structing of the city; and perhaps there is no town
in Australia which embodies more fixedly the idea
that Australian colonization has been a success than
does the city of Adelaide. But although a well-built
and magnificent capital is a very good thing for a
country or a colony to have, yet, without any argument
or explanation, it is obvious that a colony must have
something besides its chief city to rely upon, if it is
to be a prosperous and flourishing colony. Now the
wealth and prosperity of South Australia is due to
three principal sources, its minerals, its wool, and its
wheat. In minerals it is a copper colony, whilst its
Australian rivals are pre-eminently golden. Wool is
considered by South Australians to be their principal
or staple produce, but that is partly because it has
been their principal export, and the produce of a
country which is exported always attracts more atten-
tion than what is consumed at home. But what South
Australia does devote her energies to in a special
manner is to the production of wheat, that is of flour,
which is the form in which it is exported and sold.
In the year 1871 the value of the flour exported
from the colony exceeded a million and a quarter,
whilst the value of that consumed at home amounted
to about half that sum. It must not be supposed,
however, that this large production of wheat is the
result of good or high farming. On the contrary,
the South Australian farmer is a very bad farmer.


The nickname by which he is called is “ Cockatoo/’
and it has been given him as a reproach which has
been well deserved; it signifies that he does not till
his land, but only scratches it as a bird does. But
there is one very good reason why he is a bad farmer,
and that is, that hitherto he has been able to make
a living by bad farming. In England the most ap-
proved rotation of crops requires the land to give
wheat only once in four years. But the cockatoo
knows nothing of the word “fallow,” and attempts
to produce nothing but wheat. Year after year he
puts in his seed upon the same acres, and year after
year he takes off his crop. He never attempts to
collect manure or to give back to the land anything
in return for that which he takes from it. He ploughs
his land, sows it, and then takes off his crop by a
machine called a stripper, which as it passes over the
land drags the corn out of the ear, leaving all the
straw on the ground, so that the corn is as it were
threshed as it is taken off the ground, and with the
smallest possible amount of labour; and then he often
burns the stubble on the field. The effect of this
system of farming is injurious both to the farmer
and to the land, and although at present he draws
from the land sufficient to live independently, yet,
unless the next generation alter their ways, the land
which their father now ploughs will cease to give
them the plenty which they will require. Leaving


the subject of wool to be considered in connexion
with the colony of New South Wales, the third source
of wealth which South Australia possesses is the
Copper Mines at Moonta and Wallaroo, and these
mines I was able to visit during my short stay in
the colony. Previous to the year 1860 Wallaroo
was a station for sheep, and even for that purpose
was by no means encouraging. As a spot to be in-
habited by men and women, nothing could be more
dreary and unfortunate. There was no water, and even
the wells when dug gave forth water so brackish that
it could not be used. The vegetation was stunted and
miserable; the ground was sandy and barren. Here,
on the 17th December, 1859, a shepherd found a piece
of copper, and brought the tidings to his master, and
behold the result. A little more than fifteen years
later than the date given above, the manager of the
Moonta Mines told me that he was then paying wages
at the rate of £12,000 per month, or nearly £150,000
per annum, besides the expenses of plant, buildings,
etc., and in addition to the profit of the mine, which
amounts to between £60,000 and £70,000 per annum;
and all this wealth, which gives employment to some
thousands of people, is derived from an area of land
which fifteen years ago was nothing but a sheepwalk
supporting a few hundred sheep. The trip to Moonta
and Wallaroo, with the return to Adelaide, occupied
three days, and the remainder of my stay in South


Australia was spent at Adelaide, wliere I received a
great deal of kindness and hospitality from many
whose names I forbear to mention.
I find in my journal for Tuesday, May sth, that
I attended the morning service at St. Paul s Church,
and heard Bishop Short read his Pastoral Charge, and
afterwards in the afternoon attended a meeting of the
Diocesan Synod or General Assembly of the Church,
and sat on the Bishop’s right hand, whilst he delivered
a second charge on the local events of the past year.
The Bishop constantly conversed with me in the most
gracious way, and explained to me the proceedings of
the Synod, standing orders, etc. One of the Bankers
of Adelaide also introduced me as an honorary member
to the Adelaide Club, and on Saturday, May 9th,
drove me out to his country place at Mount Lofty,
10 miles from Adelaide, where I spent the day and
enjoyed myself very much; and so the time came for
me to hid farewell to Adelaide and to the colony of
South Australia, and on Tuesday, May 12th, I em-
barked at Port Adelaide on board a coasting steamer,
and in a prosperous voyage of two days reached Mel-
bourne, the capital of Victoria. As during the whole of
my stay at Melbourne I was the guest of a near
relative in whose house I lived, I will say but little
of my own movements, but will endeavour to bring
before you some of the impressions made upon me by
this, one of the youngest but the most enterprising,


and at present the leading or most predominating of
the Australian Colonies. To begin with some account
of Melbourne, the capital, named after Lord Melbourne,
the first Prime Minister of Queen Victoria after her
accession to the throne. The early history of the
colony, including the founding of Melbourne, is deeply
interesting, and I regret that I cannot give it to you
at full length in the words of Mr. Anthony Trollope.
“In the year 1838 the young settlement had all the
healthy roughness of youth. Melbourne consisted of
a few huts, and looked like an Indian village. There
was a wooden church with a bell suspended from a
tree; there were two little wooden public-houses.
Kangaroos were eaten because mutton was still scarce.
In a newspaper published in manuscript there is an
advertisement for a ferry between Melbourne and
Williamstown, which is now the port of Melbourne:
‘ Parties from Melbourne are requested to raise a
smoke, and the boat shall be at their service as soon as
practicable.’ The stumps of trees still stood in the one
or two streets which were already in course of for-
mation. That such should have been the condition
of the young town is not perhaps remarkable; but that
it should so lately have been the condition of a city so
great as Melbourne now is, is very remarkable indeed.
This was in the year 1838, a period not very remote,
and now Melbourne is one of the most successful cities
upon the face of the earth. The cause of that success


is known wherever on the face of the globe the name
of Australia is known. What might have been the
future of Victoria, if the success of the colony had
depended only upon the simple products of the soil,
it is useless now to speculate. In growing wheat
South Australia, in producing wool New South Wales,
in bearing fruit and vegetables Tasmania, are each and
all superior to Victoria, and there are no special gifts
or natural advantages such as fine harbours to com-
pensate for deficiencies in other directions. But in the
year 1851 Gold was struck at a place called Ballaraat,
and it was soon apparent that the entire condition of
the colony was changed by the success of the gold
finders. The working of other industries was deranged
for a time, but after the earthquake had passed, the
causes which had created it had filled the land with
wealth. Many had been ruined. There had been
terrible suffering, crushing disappointment, broken
hopes and wasted energies. But a people had been
established and a land had been enriched. This in a
few lines is the early history of the colony of Victoria.”
Before I pass on from Melbourne to a journey
through the interior, I will say a few words about
the rates of wages prevailing there. There is perhaps
no town in the world in which an ordinary working
man can do better for himself and his family with
his work than he can at Melbourne. There are
perhaps places, in America for instance, where wages


are higher; but then the necessaries of life are dearer,
and the comforts of life less easily obtained. There
are other places where living is cheaper than at
Melbourne, but there also wages are lower, and the
means of living comfortably less easily obtained.
With meat at 4 d. a pound, tea at Is. Qd. a pound,
and coals at 28s. a ton, the following were the rates
of wages in July, 1872 artisans and mechanics,
such as blacksmiths, carpenters, masons, and brick-
layers, received 10s. a day, or £3 per week ; gardeners,
£2 10s. per week; and common labourers about 365.
a week, or 6s. per day. Men so paid by the week
have to provide their own food, or rations, as is the
phrase in use there. Servants living in the house,
whose food is provided for them, receive wages ac-
cording to the following scale ; —a cook can earn from
£35 to £45 per annum; laundresses, from £3O to
£4O; other maidservants, from £2O to £3O. The
ordinary wages of a housemaid are 10s. a week; and
menservants in the house can earn £5O, and some-
times even £55 per annum. And now, as I have
alluded to the wages of the maidservants, I will say
one other word about them before I leave Melbourne,
and that is, that whereas in the adjoining colonies of
South Australia and New South Wales the colonists
have retained more of the John Bull attributes of
the mother-country, in Victoria they approach nearer
to the American than to the British type, and this


Americanism is visible quite as much in the women
as in tbe men, and is equally true of all ranks of
society ; tbe maidservant in Victoria bas a pertness,
an independence, a mode of asserting by ber manner
tbat tbougb sbe brings you up your bot water, sbe
is just as good as you, —and a good deal better if sbe
be younger, —wbicb is not met witb in England, but
is not uncommon amongst American “ helps.”
During my stay at Melbourne I was fortunate
enough to witness the opening of Parliament by tbe
Governor, Sir George Bowen, and listened to bis
speech, and to a portion of the debate on tbe address
in reply to it in tbe Legislative Assembly, wbicb cor-
responds to our House of Commons, as tbe Legislative
Council does to our House of Lords, tbe Governor
representing tbe Queen. I was also introduced to
tbe Speaker, and whilst in tbe House of Assembly bad
various present and past Cabinet Ministers pointed
out to me. During my stay at Melbourne I made
an excursion about fifty miles up the country, and
stayed twenty-four hours at tbe bouse of a Victorian
wine-grower ; but it being mid-winter, tbe process
of making wine was not going on. On Whit-Monday,
May 25tb, I attended a levee of tbe Governor Sir
George Bowen, and in tbe afternoon witnessed a review
of tbe Victorian army, comprising a troop of cavalry,
three batteries of artillery, eight infantry regiments,
and a naval brigade, and tbe impression left upon me


when the review was over was, that this large force
was more likely to be used for attack on a neighbour-
ing colony than for defending Victoria herself, and it
is quite possible that at some not very remote day a
district of New South Wales, called the Paverina, may
furnish a cause of dispute between Victoria and New
South Wales, and civil war be the result.
Towards this very Riverina I now turned my steps,
and having sent my heavy luggage round by sea to
Sydney, and having bade farewell to my kind and
hospitable entertainers, I started by train in the after-
noon of Tuesday, May 26th, and the same day reached
Albury on the Murray River, which is the frontier
between Victoria and New South Wales. Having
rested a day at Albury, which is evidently the capital
of the surrounding district, and will at some future
day be a populous city and an important place,
I commenced on the following day (Thursday, May
28th) one of the most unpleasant and disagreeable
journeys which it has ever been my lot to make.
Starting at quarter before 6 a.m. I travelled con-
tinuously for forty-one hours, reaching Goulburn,
the terminus of the railway from Sydney, at 11 p.m.
on the following day, having traversed by mail coach
nearly 250 miles of road in the most terrible condition,
and at some places almost impassable on account of
pools of water, ruts, stumps, and trunks of dead or
living trees. I will quote here a passage from Mr.


Trollope’s book giving his experience on this subject.
He says : “ The badness of the roads is remarkable
throughout Australia, —and it is equally remarkable
that though the roads are very bad, and in some places
cannot be said to exist, nevertheless coaches run and
goods are carried about the country. An Australian
coach with six or perhaps eight horses, in the darkness
of the night, making its way through a thickly tim-
bered forest at the rate of seven miles an hour, with
the horses frequently up to the girths in the mud, and
with the wheels running in and out of holes four or
five feet deep, is a phenomenon which I should like
to have shown to some of those very neat mail-coach
drivers whom I used to know at home in the old days.
I am sure that no description would make any one of
them believe that such feats of driving were possible.
I feel that nothing short of seeing it would have made
me believe it. The passengers, of whom there are
nine inside, are terribly shaken and horribly soiled by
mud and dirt. Two more sit upon the box outside,
and when seated there I found myself fairly com-
fortable, as soon as I could overcome the idea that
I should infallibly be dashed against the next gumtree.
And though I made many such journeys, I never
suffered any serious misfortune.” I may add that for
this journey of 241 miles I paid in Melbourne £6 for
my fare, being almost exactly 6d. a mile. The rate of
progress when moving was seven miles an hour; but so


much, time is lost at the halts for meals and when the
horses are changed, that the speed at which the whole
distance is traversed is reduced to six miles an hour.
Passing over the six hours’ railway journey from Goul-
burn, I reached Sydney in the evening of Saturday,
May 30th, and meeting at the Australian Club a
gentleman who knew of my coming being expected,
he at once carried me off to his residence at Point
Darling, where I soon recovered from the fatigues of
my long journey. Sydney is the capital of New South
Wales, and has a greater age than any other city in
Australia, though even now less than 90 years old.
In the year 1787, in accordance with the advice of
Captain Cook, an attempt was made to form a penal
settlement for convicts at Botany Bay, a few miles
south of Sydney Harbour. But the site chosen was
found to be altogether unfitted for the purpose, with
no fertile land around it, and no sufficient supply of
water; and Commodore Philip, the first Australian
Governor, sailed northward, entered Port Jackson, —
as Cook had already called it, —and founded the new
settlement on the site where the town of Sydney now
stands. Some of the difficulties which Commodore
Philip and the three or four next Governors who
succeeded him had to encounter may be summed up
as follows; Convicts, black men, rebellious settlers,
famine, floods, and drought. The convicts would rebel
and run away, and when they were caught and brought


back, underwent a great deal of barbarous punishment,
without which, however, they would perhaps have got
the better of their governors ; the aboriginal blacks
killed the cattle of the settlers, if they happened to
stray away; and perhaps the worst of all difficulties
was caused by a military body called the New South
Wales Corps, the officers of which soon became
dominant in the colony, and in the third year of his
government Governor Bligh was arrested by the com-
manding officer of the very troop which was supposed
to be at hand for his support. His government was
brought to an end, and the New South Wales Corps
was sent home. Of the other difficulties mentioned,
famine was the most serious, and frequently stared
them in the face. But enough of the early history of
Sydney. The town, independently of its suburbs and
harbour, is pleasant and interesting; but the harbour
is so lovely that it makes a stranger ask himself
whether it would not be worth while to remove from
England to Australia, in order to live within sight of
it the remainder of his life. It is easy to say that
it is lovely, but it is difficult to paint its loveliness.
The sea runs up in various bays or coves, indenting
the land all around the city, so as to give a thousand
different aspects of the water, —and not of water broad,
unbroken, and unrelieved, but of water always with
jutting corners of land beyond it, and then again of
water, and then again of land. On Saturday, June 6th,


in company with Mr. Wolfen, of Sydney, I made an
excursion in a steam-launch about the harbour, visiting
the mail-ship Tartar on the point of starting with
the Californian mail, the batteries which had been
hollowed out of the solid rock at great expense in
order to defend against a hostile fleet the entrance of
Port Jackson, and lastly the precise spot where the
Duke of Edinburgh (then Prince Alfred) was shot
by the Fenian O’Ferrall in the year 1867. Besides
hospitality from private friends whose names I forbear
to mention, I was present at a magnificent ball given
by the officers of H.M.S. Pearl, and one evening dined
at Government House with Sir Hercules and Lady
Robinson, to whom I brought a letter of introduction ;
and during the whole of my stay at Sydney, I was an
honorary member of the Australian Club, a most hos-
pitable institution, where one is taken in, lodged, and
fed at a cheap rate, and there I made the acquaintance
of many members of the Legislative Council and
House of Assembly, as well as of some of the prin-
cipal merchants and squatters of the colony. To a
stranger visiting the colony as I did for a few weeks
only, a liberal and hospitable club, which opens its
doors to him as the Australian did to me, is an in-
estimable benefit and advantage. I also made some
excursions by rail to Paramatta and to a wonderful
piece of engineering called the Zig Zag, by which
the railway crosses the Blue Mountains, and by steamer


to Newcastle, at the mouth of the Hunter Paver, from
whence come coals sufficient to supply Australia, India,
China, and America; but in order to keep within the
limits of the time allowed will say no more about
them. And so on Saturday, the 13 th of June, my
pleasant fortnight at Sydney came to an end, and
having bid farewell to some of those who had enter-
tained me so liberally, and done so much to make
my stay in their city an enjoyment at the time, and
a pleasant memory to look back upon, and armed
with numerous letters of introduction to the colony
of Queensland, which was my next point, I embarked
on board the Tom Morton, a fine steamer bound for
Singapore and China, and during the next three days
we ran northwards along the eastern coast of Australia,
generally about twelve or fourteen miles from the
mainland, but with rocks and small islands, amongst
which our course wound in and out, so that the voy-
age was anything but dull. And now that I have
got to Brisbane, the capital of Queensland, which
has no early history of its own, having been separated
from New South Wales only sixteen years ago, I
propose to vary the treatment of the subject, and
instead of giving a list of the many kind friends
from whom I received much hospitality and kindness,
I will give an extract from a letter written before
leaving Brisbane to one of my brothers in England,
which will give some of the impressions made upon


me by a fortnight’s stay in Queensland: “ Since my
last letters were despatched, I have spent a fortnight
in Queensland, principally at Brisbane, but not alto-
gether so, as I have spent five days in going up to
a town named Warwick, on the Darling Downs, and
paid a visit to a Mr. E. Grace, at a station called
Franklyn Yale, to whom I brought an introduction
from friends of his at Sydney. I have also, whilst
in Brisbane, dined with the Governor, Lord Nor-
manby, listened to a debate, and witnessed a division
in the Legislative Assembly, and have made ac-
quaintance and conversed with members of both Houses
of Parliament at the Queensland Club, where I resided
during my stay in Brisbane. I have therefore had
opportunities of making some observations on Queens-
land and the Queenslanders, and hope that I have not
altogether neglected them. And in the first place
I would observe that, as in South Australia, I was most
impressed by the copper-mines and wheat - growing
character of the district near Adelaide, and in Mel-
bourne by the American go-a-head style of the inhabit-
ants, due to the influence of the gold-mines at Ballaraat,
and in Sydney by the influence which the vicinity
of the vast and splendid harbour has upon the minds of
men; the movements of the men-of-war, the arrival
and departure of the mail steamers, and the loading
and unloading of commercial vessels belonging to
the neighbouring colonies. So in Queensland the


one subject or idea which engages the attention of
-every permanent resident is Land, its possession, tenure,
occupation, cultivation, treatment, etc. ; and as an
accessory to Land, the stock which are fed upon it,
and which form one of the principal sources of the
wealth of the colony. Any one coming out to settle in
Queensland will have to decide whether he will take up
a free-selection of a comparatively small extent of ground,
at the price of ten shillings an acre, the payment of
which to the Government he will be allowed to spread
over ten years, or whether he will occupy a much larger
extent of ground called “a Run,” as tenant under a
lease from the Government, who will resume the Run
at the expiration of the lease. Another subject which
has lately occupied the attention of the Legislature is
the prevention of absenteeism, or as it is called here
Dummyism, and a clause has been inserted in a
Land Act, which has lately become law, prevent-
ing any one from taking up a free-selection, unless
the purchaser or a son of his over seventeen years
of age intended to reside upon it. These and similar
questions could not of course arise in an old country
like England, and the nearest approach to “ Free
Selections ” which occurs to me is the Enclosure of
Commons and the allotment of Plots of Land to
different owners. And now perhaps I have said
enough respecting land in the Colony of Queensland,
and will say a few words on the subject of the Queens-


landers. They are, as a rule, covered with hair on
the face, and sunburnt as much as they possibly can
be. Open and free in manner, and extremely hos-
pitable, and with an air of patience and resignation
on their countenances, which contrasts strikingly with
the busy preoccupied air of the Sydney merchant,
or the Yankee inquisitiveness of Melbourne. They all
seem to be strongly impressed with a present sense
of the future greatness of Queensland, and any new
comer who intends to settle in the colony is welcomed,
if he be a master, for taking up land and bringing
capital into the colony ; if he be a servant or labourer,
for bringing a pair of strong hands, and assisting to
work and develope land which has already been taken
up. In fact, Queensland is as active as any of the
Australian colonies in giving free and assisted passages
to intending immigrants, and in offering them land in
any part of the colony where they may wish to settle.
Improvement of roads and extension of railroads will,
more than anything else, accelerate the progress and
development of Queensland.” Omitting all personal
details of my stay at Brisbane, in the afternoon of
Monday, June 29th, I embarked on board a coasting
steamer, and in three days reached Port Mackay, at
the mouth of the Pioneer Piver, and in an hour’s drive
from thence reached Alexandra Plantation, the resi-
dence of my cousin, Mr. John Ewen Davidson, which
was to be my home for the next fortnight. And here


again I feel some reluctance to make public the names
of some of those kind and hospitable friends who did
so much to make my stay in their neighbourhood
pleasant and enjoyable, and when I find myself at their
houses must be content with a general reference,
omitting special mention of individuals. My cousin is
the first person who has proved by actual experiment
that the soil and climate of North Queensland are
favourable to the growth of the sugar-cane, and by
importing native labourers from the South Sea Islands
in the Pacific, he has been enabled to make the culti-
vation so profitable that many others have followed his
example, and a pleasant circle of sugar-planters, form-
ing a little society of their own, have established them-
selves in the valley of the Pioneer Piver. Hitherto all
over the world the growth of the cane, which is a
purely agricultural employment, has been joined with
the two manufacturing trades of making sugar and
distilling rum. At first it seemed to be necessary that
this should be done also in Queensland, but gradually
the old idea is passing away, and small men—free
selectors and others—are growing cane for sale to the
owners of the mills. The future success or failure of
the sugar-planting interest in North Queensland de-
pends upon the question of labour. At present the
cane is cultivated by natives imported from the South
Sea Islands, but it is quite uncertain whether the
planters of Queensland will be allowed to import them


much longer. The philanthropists of Exeter Hall are
doing what they can to prevent the introduction of
what appears to them to be a new form of slavery, and
there is also a certain party in the colony who desire to
protect white labour, and to increase the wages and
improve the position of the labourer who belongs to
their own race, and they think that this can best be
accomplished by preventing the use of cheaper labour,
and between the philanthropist and the protector of
white labour an alliance has sprung up for the further-
ance of their common cause. I will only add that the
islanders whom I saw at work at my cousin’s plantation
appeared to be in the enjoyment of health and happi-
ness, and that some who had served three years and
then gone back to their native islands had returned of
their own accord to serve for a second period of three
years, which does not look as if they were ill-treated.
I will now give a few extracts from my journal during
my stay at Alexandra Plantation.
Friday, July 3rd.—This morning was spent in going
over the sugar-mill, and following the juice from the
time when it is crushed out of the cane as liquid
through the different processes of boiling, skimming,
clarifying, cooling, boiling, evaporating, and crystal-
lizing, until the liquid juice has become solid sugar
and molasses, the former ready for export, the latter
for the distillery where rum is extracted from it,
greatly to the profit of the sugar planter.


Tuesday, July 7th—This day was given up to a
long ride, during which we visited several stations on
the other side of the Pioneer River, and for the first
time I saw a sugar-mill in full work. What pleased
me most was the working of the centrifugals by which
the crystallized sugar is separated from the molasses.
The ride through bush, swamp, and river was very varied
and interesting. Once we forded the Pioneer, and once
swam the horses behind a boat which turned up handy.
Tuesday, July 14th.—This day was spent in a
delightful picnic on the Pioneer River, about five
miles above Pleistowe, the residence of the lady and
gentleman who gave the party, which consisted of
two ladies and three gentlemen, besides my cousin and
myself. The weather was fine and beautiful, and the
luncheon all that could be desired; and after it was
over my cousin and I set out on the other side of the
Pioneer River to stalk an alligator, and we were suc-
cessful. An ambush was found about sixty yards
from an alligator basking on a rock, and the rifle
aimed and fired by me lodged the bullet about half an
inch above the eye. A second shot struck the side of
the face, and prevented the possibility of an escape.
Returning to the party, I was duly congratulated. And
then the two ladies expressed a wish to see the slain
monster, which they succeeded in doing, with the as-
sistance of four of the gentlemen, who took the boat
in which they were down the rapids, by standing up


to their middle in the water, and lifting the boat over
rock after rock in succession. The alligator was towed
to shore, and in due time I hope to receive its head,
and to place it as a trophy in the hall at Youngsbury.
Soon after this event my visit to Port Mackay came
to an end, and after a week spent on board coasting
steamers, I reached Sydney on the 22nd of July, ten
days before the date fixed for the departure of the
Pacific Mail Steamer, in which I had secured a passage
to San Francisco. And whilst these ten days are
passing away, I will rapidly glance at a few subjects
which the pressure of time and space has compelled
me to pass over unnoticed. In speaking of South
Australia, no mention was made of the Northern
Territory, of which Port Darwin is the capital, nor of
the line of telegraph 1700 miles in length which con-
nects them, and by means of which Adelaide is placed
in direct communication with London, a gigantic work
the successful execution of which reflects great credit
on the enterprise and good judgment of the Govern-
ment of South Australia. When passing through
Victoria, I have barely mentioned the gold-mines, to
which the colony owes its rapid rise, and its present
wealth and prosperity, and looking back to an earlier
page, I find recorded a promise, that when I reached
New South Wales, some account should be given of
wool, which was the earliest source of Australian
wealth, and is even now the chief production and the


main export of tlie colony of New South Wales, and if
I am to complete the account of my journey within
the limits of a lecture, this promise must he allowed
to pass unfulfilled. But in connexion with the subject
of wool, one of the most eminent merchants in Sydney
has set on foot a scheme, which, if successful, will be
of incalculable benefit to those who live in Australia, and
equally to us who live in England. When the sheep has
been shorn, the principal object for which he has been
horn and lived has been attained, for the price of mutton
being as low as 2cl. a pound in Melbourne and
Sydney, it would not be worth w r hile to keep sheep
at all, if it were not for the value of the wool. But
whilst mutton is 2 d. a pound in Australia, in London
its price has risen to Is. 2 d. a pound, and is likely to
rise still higher. Now the scheme, which Mr. Thomas
Mort (the gentleman alluded to above) has set on foot,
is to send meat home in ice, or more correctly to send
meat home in a chamber, the temperature of which
shall always be kept below the freezing-point by the
use of ice. The process I will not attempt to describe;
but should it succeed, the meat will reach England in
the shape of joints, as we are accustomed to buy them
in the butcher’s shop. Mr. Mort hopes that meat thus
prepared may be sold in England for Qd. a pound.
The meat when received will simply want thawing
before it is cooked, and if this plan should be success-
fully carried out, there is no reason why the carcases


of all the sheep and oxen in Australia not required
for the food of those living there should not find their
way to the English market, where they will be as
welcome and acceptable as they are superfluous and
redundant in the Australian market. And now I must
bid farewell to Sydney and to Australia, as it was my
lot to do on Saturday, August Ist, Between 11 a.m.
and noon I went on board the Mail Steamer Mikado.
Soon after noon the anchor was weighed. At a quarter
past 1 p.m. the ship was outside Sydney Harbour, and
before night the coast of Australia was no longer
visible. During the first three days of the voyage
the wind blew almost a gale, roughening the sea
unpleasantly ; but during the rest of the voyage per-
fectly calm weather prevailed, and on the whole our
run across the Pacific in four weeks and one day was
a prosperous and successful one. On some mornings
I observed flying fish skimming gracefully along
the surface of the waves, and some' that flew on
deck, and were cooked and eaten, proved to be about
the size of sardines. A few days after leaving Sydney,
the Mikado passed within sight of Norfolk Island,
formerly a penal settlement, but now a college for edu-
cating as Christians the rising generation of the South
Sea Islanders. And then the next point was Kandavau,
one of the islands in the Eiji group, where there is a
very safe and sheltered anchorage. The harbour was
enlivened by the presence of two men-of-war, of which


one proved to be the Challenger , on a sounding and
exploring cruise which will last five years. During
our stay, wbicb lasted two days, I went on shore, and
whilst walking on the beach I fell in with a Wesleyan
missionary, who told me that the Fijians during the last
ten years had almost entirely relinquished cannibalism,
which was mainly due to their coming into contact with
civilization and associating with whites. He also
told me that the only way in which there would be any
hope of converting the natives to Christianity was by
training and preparing native teachers, who would
reside there permanently and penetrate into the recesses
of the islands, whereas no Europeans could stay there
long on account of the climate affecting their health
injuriously. Some of the natives came on board, and
they appeared to be a cheerful, laughing, inoffensive
race, and outwardly remarkable for the thick and mat-
ted covering of auburn hair with which their heads
are covered. One of the passengers who came on board
at Kandavau had lately been the prime minister under
the native King named Cacobau, and he told me a great
deal about the political deadlock which occurred last year,
the Fijians refusing to be annexed to England unless
certain conditions were agreed to, and Lord Carnarvon,
the Colonial Minister, refusing to annex the islands
except unconditionally. As this question has been since
happily settled by the islands being annexed to the
British Crown, I need not say more about it.


The day after leaving Kandavau a remarkable event
occurred, and one which may never occur to me again
in the course of my life. The Mikado passed the
meridian of 180° from Greenwich, and the longitude,
which had hitherto been reckoned East, began to
he reckoned West. The consequence was that an
additional day was intercalated, and the following
day, instead of being called Tuesday, August 11th,
was counted as Monday, August 10th, over again.
I had often heard and read of a day being gained
by sailing round the world to the East and lost
by sailing to the West, but not the less did it
strike me as a very remarkable circumstance when it
actually occurred to me. Passing over the next ten
days, I now come to Honolulu, the capital of the Sand-
wich Islands, as the Mikado did on the morning of
Friday, August 21st. One especial feature of the
Sandwich Islands is their volcanic character, which is
everywhere apparent. The sharp pointed hills termi-
nating in the steep slopes in which lava always consoli-
dates. Numerous extinct craters —reminding one of
the Monte Nuovo, near Posilippo—being scattered about,
and the solid lava itself lying on the surface of the
ground, though perished and decomposed by the action
of the weather. I went on shore between 9 and 10 a.m.,
and proceeded on foot to the residence of Bishop Willis,
to whom I brought a letter of introduction. The Bishop
and Miss Willis received me very kindly, and after an


hour’s conversation, the Bishop drove me up to the top
of a pass six miles off, from whence there was a view
over the other side of the island. There was also an
historical interest attaching to the spot, as it was over
this pass that Kamehameha I. drove his enemies pell-
mell, and established his authority over the island, all
those who did not go over the precipice being ruthlessly
slaughtered. After luncheon I was shown over the
College, where the Bishop is educating twenty young
natives, by means of whom he hopes in time to effect
some improvement by raising the standard of education
and also of moral conduct throughout the islands. At
present the natives are in a very degraded state, and
their numbers are diminishing very rapidly ; in conse-
quence, the commercial prosperity of the islands suffers,
and in all human probability they will ultimately be
annexed to the United States of America. The Church
establishment for the whole group of islands consists
(besides the Bishop) of two priests and three deacons,
so that the Bishop is constantly travelling about in
small fishing smacks to assist the other clergy, and
especially the deacons, in the services of the Church,
He labours under one great disadvantage in the fact
that the American Congregationalists and the Roman
Catholics were already established before the Church of
England obtained any footing in the islands, and there-
fore he can hardly help coming into collision with them.
Kamehameha 1., whom I mentioned above, was living as


a young chief at the time of the death of Captain Cook,
which took place on the neighbouring island of Owyhee
about 100 years ago. About 4 - 30 p.m, the Mikado slowly
steamed out of the harbour of Honolulu, and before
8 p.m. was clear of the group. The remaining eight
days of the voyage I will pass over in one line. Early
on Sunday, August 30th, we reached San Francisco,
and about ten o’clock set foot on American soil, in
the world-renowned State of California. For many
reasons I think I shall be acting wisely if I omit
entirely all mention of my short and rapid journey
across America. The following are some of the
principal ones : —First, the enormous extent and varied
nature of the country occupied by the 39 States of
the American Union. Secondly, the very small part
of it which came under my observation. Thirdly, the
short time which I spent there, and the rapid pace
at which I travelled. Fourthly, the length to which
this lecture has already extended, and the necessity
which I feel of bringing it shortly to a close. And,
lastly, if at some future time it should be my lot
to revisit America, and to make a more lengthened
stay, and to travel more leisurely through its stately
cities and its majestic scenery, I should hope to be
able to prepare an account which would occupy an
hour at some future time, and in which the few
observations made during this journey would find a
place more fitly and more appropriately than they


would at the end of a lecture which has been devoted
to scenes and institutions differing widely from those
which are met with wherever the American flag floats,
and where so-called freedom is enjoyed beneath its
shade. And so Mariposa with its giant trees—California
with its boundless wheat-fields and productive gold-
mines—the Pacific Railway, which in one short week
transports the traveller across the Rocky Mountains
from one sea to the other—Chicago, which has risen
like a fairy palace, at the touch of an enchanter’s
wand, after having been laid low in ashes by a monster
conflagration—Niagara, with its magnificent fall of
160 feet, over which the waters flowing from a chain of
lakes precipitate themselves in one unbroken mass—
and New York, the centre of that commercial life and
activity which has associated with the name of
American the idea of go-a-head throughout the world
—must remain to-night unspoken of and undescribed.
On Tuesday, September 22nd, I embarked on board
the mail steamer Wyoming , and having passed on the
27th an iceberg 40 feet high, which at the distance
of nearly a mile caused the temperature of the sea
to fall two degrees, and when we passed it was slowly
moving southward at the rate of about a mile a day,
I landed at Liverpool on Saturday, October 3rd, reached
London early the following morning, and Youngsbury
in the afternoon of Monday, the sth of October, in
perfect health, after an absence of little more than


seven months, during which the line of travel laid
down before starting, and the programme of countries,
places and individuals proposed to be visited, had been
carried out with fair success.
And now I should like to detain you yet a few
moments more, whilst I say a few parting words on
the future of that great country which has occupied
the lion’s share of our attention this evening. At
present the different colonies of Australia in matters
of legislation act towards each other as though they
were various nations, each with varied interests. The
two great sources of public revenue in each colony are
the Customs duties on articles imported and exported,
and the sale and lease of public lands. Whatever
changes may take place in the future, it is probable
that the use of public lands will be applied by each
colony to such purposes as may best suit its own wants •
but the Customs duties, from which the greater propor-
tion of the public revenue is derived, will, it may be
hoped, some day be collected throughout the Australasian
group under one tariff, and by one uniform arrange"
ment, for the joint purposes of all the members of the
group. At present they charge duties on each other’s
produce, and each one endeavours to benefit itself by
commercial injuries inflicted on the others. If this
state of things should be brought to an end, and a
Customs union be established, such as existed in
Germany for many years, the transition from a


Customs union to a Federation similar to the North
German Confederation, or to the Federation which has
lately bound together our North American Colonies,
will not be a very violent one. It is quite likely that
the existing colonies will first be still further sub-
divided; that the Northern Territory of South Australia
will have a seat of Government at Port Darwin, instead
of depending for legislation and justice upon Adelaide,
which is nearly 2000 miles distant; that the Iliverina
district will be separated from New South Wales, and
North Queensland form an independent colony which
will be known as Albert Land, or Cook’s Land, or
under some other name. But when these sub-divisions,
and possibly still further ones, shall have been carried
out, the Federation of the different colonies into one
united nation, of which each and all will be proud to
be reckoned as component parts, must precede separa-
tion from England and self-government independent of
the mother-country. And it may fairly be hoped and
expected that as Australia becomes older, and the
number of her leading politicians who are Australian
born becomes greater, and the tendency to lean upon
the mother - country becomes slighter, the newer
patriotism will increase in strength, and with the
feeling of Australian pride will grow the conviction
that Australia to be great and strong should be one
united nation.
O. PRICE, PRINTER, WARE.








