

v *•
& i ' .' '•*>;
F# i - «
tel, /
BKr •
...
•s. H
* *




Vu strati an ||luseum, Sydney
JtJ-emoirs |)° 2, 3yord
' vjsiandj its Zoology YcN
V. ~ ~
Sydney 1889,
No. 2.
NOTES ON THE OOLOGY OF LORD HOWE ISLAND.
A. J. NORTH.
a-(2)
FlsCikt&




f .'S
NOTES ON THE OOLOGY OF LORD HOWE
ISLAND.
Our knowledge of tlie nesting and eggs of the Lord Howe Island birds is very-
limited, and until an excursion, fitted out by the Trustees of the Australian
Museum, in September, 1887, very little had been done towards recording
authentic information relative to the breeding season, or the eggs of the birds
found there. Of the sixty species recorded in Dr. Ramsay’s “ List of birds
found in Lord Howe Island,” only eleven are strictly peculiar, and of only
one of these is the nest and eggs known; much remains therefore to be done,
and it is to be hoped that any one favourably situated for acquiring further
information, will not fail to make notes on this interesting subject.
Halcyon vagans, Lesson.
Mr. E, H. Saunders, who has lately returned from Lord Howe Island,
states that he found this bird breeding freely during the month of November,
1887, in the hollow limbs of trees. The eggs, five in number, for a sitting,
are rounded in form, and of a beautiful pearly-white tint. The dimensions
of a set are as follows ; —Length, (A) IT4xo92 inch (this specimen is somewhat
sharply pointed at one and ; (B) LOB x o'9l inch ; (G ) IT2 x 091 inch ; (D)
IT x 09 inch ; (E) LOS x 092 inch.
Aplonis euscus, Gould.
According to Mr. Saunders, the nidification of this bird is entirely different
from that of the allied genus Calornis , of the Australian continent, resorting
to the hollow branches of trees to construct their nests ; several were found
with young birds, but only one containing eggs. In every instance these nests
were built of dried grasses, and placed in a hollow at the end of a branch.
Eggs, four in number, for a sitting, varying somewhat in form even in the
same set; two eggs of this set are swollen ovals, being thickest at the centre,
and slightly pointed towards each end, the other two are long ovals, slightly
tapering at one end only ; in colour they are of a pale bluish green, freckled
with markings of a reddish and wood-brown tint, equally disposed over the
surface of the shell, some of the markings are very indistinct. Length, (A)
L 97 x 0-78 inch; (B) LO6 x 077 inch (thick ovals; (C) IT4 x 076 inch;
(D) M 2 x 0-75 inch.
Chalcophaps chrysochlora, Wagler.
The nest of this bird is composed of a few thin twigs placed crosswise on the
horizontal branch of a tree, not far from the ground. The eggs are two in
number, oval in form, of a light creamy-white colour, and give the average
measurement of of L 47 inch x 08 inch.


This bird, previously plentiful upon the island, has already become very
scarce and will probably soon be exterminated with other species by the
Islanders.
Sterna fuliginosa, Gmelin.
This bird was found breeding on the rocky ledges and flat parts of the cliffs,
but more often on the bare sand; little or no attempt was made at forming
a nest, except in a few instances where a little debris was found scraped
around the single egg laid by this bird for sitting. Mr. Saunders, who visited
the island during the breeding season, collected a large number of the eggs
during November. In a series of over one hundred eggs examined, there is a
great variation in the size, colour, and disposition of their markings. The
predominant form is oval, tapering slightly towards the thin end, the colour a
dull white, some being nearly devoid of markings, others uniformly freckled
and spotted over the whole surface of the shell with reddish-brown markings,
others have large iiTegularly-shaped confluent blotches of purplish-red and
slaty-grey, the latter appearing as if beneath the shell, these markings pre-
dominating in some towards the larger end of the egg, and a number have
rounded spots of rich-red evenly distributed over the surface of the shell. In
comparatively few instances do the markings assume the form of a zone.
Length, (A) 2T3 inches x 1*42 inch.
(B) 2 „ x 1-45 „
(C) I*Bs „ xl-4 „
(D) 2*15 „ xl-45 „
(E) 2-11 „ xl-4 „
(F) 2-04 „ xl-34 „
(G) 2-02 „ x 1-47 „
(H) „ x 1-48 „
Angus stolidus, Linnceus.
This bird was found breeding during October and November. Its single egg
is deposited on a nearly flat nest of sticks, twigs, and seaweed, placed upon
low bushes. The eggs, usually oval in form, are slightly pointed at one
end, and vary in colour from white to creamy-white, some being minutely
spotted all over with brownish-black, others being largely blotched, more
particularly towards the larger end, with blood-red markings, and nearly
obsolete spots of the same colour appearing as if beneath the surface of the
shell. Two average specimens measure as follows:—Length, (A) 2-03 inches
x L 45 inch ; (B) 2-18 inches x L 47 inch.
A NOTTS CINEEEUS, Gould.
This species was found breeding in the early part of September, also during
the month of November. The eggs were rather difficult to obtain. For the
purposes of breeding this bird usually resorts to almost inaccessible ledges of
rocks, but sometimes deposits a single egg on the bare sand. In form the eggs
are nearly true ovals, being but slightly tapered at one end, of a dull creamy
white ground some colour, being sparingly freckled and spotted with faint
reddish-brown and slaty-grey markings, the latter colour predominating in
some instances, and appearing as if beneath the surface of the shell others
have short, thick, wavy markings, resembling ill-shapen letters and figures,


equally distributed over the surface of the shell, which although not thickly
disposed, yet, are in some places confluent, and more indistinct than usually
found on other Terns eggs. There is very little variation in their size and
shape, two average specimens measure as follows: —Length, (A) 1-63 x IT6
inch ; (B) L 67 x L 2 inch.
PIJPFINUS SPHENUEUS, Goilld.
During the months of November and December, this bird was found
breeding in great numbers, and like most of the Procellariidce, they dig a
long tunnel or burrow in the sand or the soft earth, many of these burrows
are several feet in length, and a single egg is deposited at the extremity, which
when fresh, is snow-white, but soon becomes stained and soiled. There is
great variation in the shape and size, true ovals, lengthened and swollen ovals
predominating, some terminating abruptly at one end, others being sharply
pointed.
Length, (A) 2-35 inches x I*7 inch.
(B) 2-45 „ x 1-6 „
(C) 2-45 „ x 1-68 „
(D) „ xl-64 „
Necteis beevicaudus, Brandt.
This bird was likewise found breeding in great numbers, during the months
of November and December. The mode of nidification is so precisely
similar to that of the preceding species, that a separate description is not
necessary. Like all Petrel’s eggs they have a peculiar musky odour, which
they always retain, even when emptied of their contents and kept for many
years. Only one egg is laid for a sitting. Six specimens measure as follows :
(A) 2'63 inches x D7B inch.
(B) 2-8 „ x 1-73 „
(0)2-78 „ xl-8
(D) 2-65 „ x 1-81 „
(E) 2 - 82 „ xl-72 „
(E) 2-87 „ xl-81 „
Phaeton eubeicauda, Bodd.
This bird is found breeding during November and December, its single
egg is laid under the shelter of projecting ledges, of almost inaccessible rocks,
on the face of cliffs, and are consequently very difficult to procure. The eggs
are oval in form, being thickest at the centre, and tapering slightly at one end,
of a dull reddish-brown colour, which is nearly obscured by minute freckles and
spots of purplish-brown and grey, in some instances they are blotched and
smeared, not unfrequently on the smaller end. Two specimens obtained are
nearly white, and entirely devoid of markings.
Length, (A) 2-6 inches x DB5 inch
(B) 2-65 „ x 1-9 „
(C) 2-78 „ xl-95 „
b-(2)


Sula cyanops, Sundevall.
The Masked Gannet was found breeding from September to December;
little or no attempt is made at forming a nest, the eggs, two in number,
usually being deposited on the bare ground, when nearly laid, they are of a
pale greenish-white colour, which in most instances is covered with a thick
coating of lime ; after being sat upon for a few days, the eggs become soiled
and assume a dirty brown hue. In form they vary from short to long ovals.
Length, (A) 2-47 inches x I‘B4 inch.
(B) 2-62 „ xl-78 „
(C) 2-47 „ xl-9 „
(D) „ x 1 *Bl „
(E) 2-6 „ x 1-87 „
(F) 2-57 „ x 1-9 „
A. J. NORTH.
Sydney: Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lBB9.




Eig. 1. —Phaeton rubricauda, Bodd.
Eig, 2.—Sola cyanops, Sundevall.
Eig. 3. —Halcyon vagans, Lesson.
Eig, 4. —Anous cinereus, Gould.
Eig. s.—Aplonis fuscus, Gould.
Eig. 6.—Sterna fuliginosa, Gmelin.
Eig. 7.—Anous stolidus, Linnaeus.
The figures are all of the natural size.
EXPLANATION OE PLATE I.


Lord Howe Island : Report ,
Plate 1
6. H. Barrow, Be/ e / ////>
fSe 2S-88. J


m ; fj,
. .
[folk**• *?**
0- •
rf Y -* • y'-C'M •*;
i > ~ -
; plf k I
r . ,
i
h
if .
k ; ■
r ■'
% ■
I 10
■ # W
, . 1 ' .
tC ■ ■'••■ ■
BR»* •- ■' ’/ ) ■ i
■ •• • \
