

Mason, Firth Sr 1 APCutcheon, Printers, Melbourne.




[FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.]
NOTES
HOLIDAY TOUR
ROUND THE WORLD
Jn 1883-4.
(WHITTEN FOE THE GRATIFICATION OF PERSONAL FRIENDS
AND ACQUAINTANCES.)
B. COWDEROY.
MASON, FIRTH & M‘CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
Flinders Lane West.
1 8 8 4.




Across the Pacific
Through America
Across the Atlantic
A Trip to Holland, Belgium, the German Rhine Provinces,
Paris, &c.
London to Australia, via France, Switzerland, Italy, Egypt,
and Ceylon
Appendix
's\-.
" N
S <--Uv -'«2 I


■V


EOUND THE WOELD
AGEOSS THE PACIFIC.
It was in the month of May, 1883, that we took farewell of home
and friends to embark at Sydney in the “ Zealandia” for San Fran-
cisco. Our experiences in Sydney were those of all travellers who
are cumbered with many belongings. Cabmen, draymen, boatmen,
and porters seem to be all in league to relieve you as much as
possible of the contents of purses and pockets ; but—after many a
struggle and contention—at length the steam is up, and the ship
is upon her course. The last farewells have been written and said
by us, but still we find more to read from far-off homes—for they
follow us to the last moment, “ warm with the breath of affection,
and moist with the tears of regret.” At the start our “ State
cabin” resembled a baggage-room, but in a short time order was
brought out of chaos ; and with the ingenious contrivances provided
by the forethought of the ladies, such a transformation was effected
that our little home upon the sea was furnished with all the conveni-
ences and comforts of shipboard life.
We passed out of the Harbour with a fair wind, a clear sky, and a
beautiful sea. The natural regrets that accompanied the last linger-
ing looks at that fading land which held most of our hearts’ treasures
were soon almost forgotten in the busy work of.“ shaking down,”
and then taking stock of our surroundings, as well as of the ships’
officers, and our fellow-voyagers. No signs of the mol de mer
appeared to spoil the pleasure of our start, and the ladies were able
to • enjoy the sight of the bright sea glistening beneath the moon-
beams far into the evening. Committing ourselves and all our dear
ones to that gracious Hand that holds the waters, as well as sustains
the earth, “and all that therein is,” we retired, weary and fatigued,
to enjoy the first night’s rest in our ocean home. Fine weather
favoured us on the morrow, and although a few bad sailors among
the ladies were a little qualmish, another day dispelled their maladies,
and “ all went merry as a marriage bell.” Captain Webber, one of
the most genial commanders that ever trod a deck, strove to shed
brightness all around him ; and as we sat next him at the head of
his table—and one, at least, of our young ladies was a match for
most people at fun and banter—things got lively at meal times ;


while the early discovery of much musical taste and talent, including
an accomplished violinist, provided a good deal of social enjoyment
in the intervals between. Our first Sunday at sea was a delightful
day. The ocean was calm and peaceful around us, and the muster
of the crew on deck—Europeans and Asiatics —in their Sunday
attire was a pretty sight. The Europeans, or at least the Protestant
portion of them, filed down into the saloon, and occupied the two
sides, while the rest of the space was filled by the passengers. The
captain’s and chief officer’s seats were converted into reading-desk
and pulpit, and the Church of England service was conducted by
the Rev. Mr. Sharp, a passenger. The responses—the chants and
hymns—were all effectively rendered, and it was altogether a gratify-
ing service. In the evening we had hymns and sacred pieces.
Early on Monday morning we found ourselves off the North-
west Cape of New Zealand, and as we kept all day within sight of
land, we had some fine views of that striking coast line. Rounding
the north-eastern shore we made for Auckland in a southerly
direction. In the cruise down the coast we passed some remarkably
fine islands and headlands —mutably the Bay of Islands and its
cliffs and promontories, Cape Butt standing out conspicuously.
Then we passed “ The Poor Knights,” and later on Moro Tiri and
Taranga, both extremely bold and broken, the latter especially, with
its pinnacles and castellated eminences. There were multitudes of
rocks and islands lying near the ship’s course, which seemed to
suggest a dangerous navigation.
We experienced a change of weather at Auckland, and landed in
rain. After exploring the town, and posting letters to our friends,
we drove up to the public gardens, from which a fine view is obtained
of the town and harbour ; and thence to Mount Eden, a lofty
eminence, which commands not only Auckland and its bay, but the
entire isthmus on which Auckland is built, and the numerous islands
and headlands around. The extinct volcanoes of this distriet
number about seventy, and most of them are visible from this Pisgah
top, which is itself an old crater, though now covered with a rich
sward of green. The famed hot springs of this northern island of New
Zealand are evidences of the rather unpleasant proximity of internal
fires and gases, of which there are also disagreeable reminders in the
frequent terrestrial disturbances. Hence a peculiarity about the
town of Auckland, which the visitor cannot but notice —namely,
the prevalence of wood and iron in the construction of houses,
churches, and public buildings.
The weather at Auckland was premonitory of something rough
outside, and as we met an easterly swell, which caught the “ Zea-
landia” on the beam, along her whole length of nearly 400 feet, she
took to rolling, which made matters lively, and sent most of the new
arrivals, and some of the other passengers, to their berths. At
dinner especially the din and clatter of plates and glasses, with the
talk and laughter over occasional “ spills,” kept the saloon very


noisy. In a day or two all was again pleasant. The new arrivals
fraternised with the old, and as we were on the eve of the Queen’s
birthday, a committee was formed to arrange a programme of amuse-
ments, in celebration of that auspicious event. We were not only
approaching the Queen’s birthday, but the 180th meridian, or exact
antipodes of Greenwich. While west of this line we are east of
Greenwich, and therefore in advance of Greenwich time. At mid-
night here it is noon at Greenwich; but as we cannot go on beyond
the twelve hours without breaking into another day, we adjust
matters by repeating one day (which happened to be the royal anni-
versary birthday), and then we start at twelve hours later than
Greenwich, which difference is lessened day by day as we proceed
eastwards.
The second of the two 24ths being the Queen’s birthday on
the English side, we observed that day, and it was done right
loyally. A salute was fired in the early morning. The day was
proclaimed a holiday, and the tars were all in Sunday togs. There
were foot races, hurdle races, potato races, obstacle races, and
donkey races (the donkeys being splendidly got up by the
sailors). There were also “cock fights” by some of the leading
passengers, and “ tugs of war,” in which the passengers were ulti-
mately victors as against the crew, and otherjsports; and the seamen
got up a great display, accompanied by the chorus of the drowning
of the “ dead horse.” The meaning of this ceremony is that all the
advances made to the men in port extended only to the wages due
to them up to this day. The “ dead horse” earnings, therefore, were
ended, and from this time they would have wages to receive. The
day closed with an evening concert. Bright and pleasant weather
accompanied us all through the Pacific, and the heat of the tropics
was greatly tempered by the trade winds, while the deep blue of the
wide ocean was an unceasing pleasure to contemplate. We passed
“ Tutuila,” one of the Samoan, or “ Navigator, Group” of Islands,
in our course. Almost every day was a gala day, for our committee
of pastimes provided an abundance of amusement in the shape of
games on deck, concerts and balls, conversaziones, &c. On the
occasion of “crossing the line” the ship’s crew got up a very sensa-
tional and grotesque celebration, in which Neptune and his wife, and
a host of minor marine deities, amphitrites, &c., were personated.
There was a grand procession, a stately court was held, and there
were many arrests made of suspected new-comers into the sacred
precincts of the “ line,” and much shaving and ducking (of course,
this rougher part of the entertainment was confined to members of
the ship’s crew). It was all so admirably conducted that a good
collection was made among the passengers, and presented to the
performers. Even here, in mid-tropics, the unconquerable love of
dancing among young people, especially Australians, had to be
gratified, and a ball kept the saloon alive until after midnight.
n 2


Amongst the passengers were some professionals, who contributed
occasionally to the amusement of their companions de voyage. Con-
tributions were levied at some of our fetes for the Shipwrecked
Mariners’ Association, and the total result at the end of the
voyage was an addition of £5O to their funds.
At about eight in the morning of 3rd June we began to make
out the dim outline of the peaks of Oahu, one of the Sandwich
Islands or Hawaiian group. Soon after noon we were alongside
the wharf of its chief town, Honolulu, and by one o’clock we were
sitting down to luncheon in a very pretty specimen of a tropical
hotel, surrounded by the lovely verdure and rich foliage of this
prolific clime. The heat is tempered by the many contrivances in the
structure and arrangements of the building, and by the many aids
to nature’s rich resources. Taken altogether, with the refreshing
fruits and other delicacies on the tables, the hotel had an air of
luxurious enjoyment. But Honolulu has other attractions for
visitors. Every one must visit the Pali. A pleasant drive of six or
seven miles (it would be more pleasant if the road was not in places
so villainously bad) up a gorge or valley between conical peaks on
either side, brings you to an elevation which suddenly reveals a
precipice descending abruptly some 1200 feet to a plain below,
beautifully grassed and partially cultivated, but hemmed in by lofty
peaks and ranges on the right and left, and fringed in the open
distance by the white foam of the ocean breakers. The view from
this summit is almost awe-inspiring. It was here that a great
massacre occurred in the last war of the islanders, when a thousand
of the inhabitants were driven over the precipice by the conquering
foe.
The slaughter at the Pali took place when “ Kamehamea the
Great,” the first of the kings of that name, fought for the sovereignty
of the isles. There is a legend amongst the Kanakas (or, as they
prefer to be called, “ Haweians”) which is most touching. It is of
a grand young chief who had been conspicuous in this slaughter,
and who subsequently visited the district in the retinue of the king,
and fell in love (at first sight) with a maiden, the flower of the tribe.
Another chief also sighed for her, and the two warriors engaged in
deadly strife for the prize. Our young hero conquered, and carried
her off. Her father, however, a wily chief, vowed that the slayer of
his tribe should not possess his daughter, and the tragic story, which
ends in the lovers sleeping together in death in an ocean cave, is
extremely pathetic, but too long to repeat. This is what the legend
says of the young chief:—
“ Kaaialii had raged in the slaughter of Maunalei, Lanai’s last
bloody fight. With his long-reaching spear, wielded with sinewy
arms, he urged the flying foe to the top of a fearful cliff, and,
mocking the cries of a huddled crowd of panic-scared men, he drove
them with thrusts and shouts till they leaped like frightened sheep


into the jaws of the deep, dark chasm, and their torn corpses strewed
the jagged stones below with a gory mass of mangled flesh and
bones.”
The town of Honolulu is very interesting, the houses about the
outer portions standing in their own grounds, with avenues of palms,
and ornamented with tropical plants and flowers. The female por-
tion of the native population know nothing of the ills of tight-lacing,
but dress in loose flowing gowns extending from the neck to the feet;
rich blue appeared to be the fashionable colour.
Our visit was rendered extremely agreeable from discovering an
old friend and neighbour in Mrs. Pfluger, the wife of the agent for
the Steamship Company, whose hospitality and attentions we can-
not forget. In her company, too, we paid a very pleasant visit to
the house of the Princess Miriam Like-Like (the king’s sister), to
whose husband we had an introduction from Australia. Their little
daughter is the heiress apparent to the throne. She is a charming
little girl, then seven and a half years old, and her names and titles
are—“ Her Royal Highness the Princess Victoria Kawekiu-Kaiu-
lani-Lunalilo-Kalaninuiahilapalapa.” The Court was then mourn-
ing the death of the Princess Kulikolani, the last of the Kameha-
mea royal race, whose body was awaiting in ice the arrival of the
only wood which is permitted to be used for the outer coffin of the
royal dead before being placed in the mausoleum of the kings.
In the Princess’s garden, amongst other tropical trees, is a specimen
of the banyan-tree of India. It was imported from thence about
eleven years ago, and already many of the pendent branches have
struck their extremities into the ground, become rooted, and are
giving forth other branches which have the same tendency, so that
one of these trees might in time become of itself a small forest,
giving refreshing shade beneath its pillared walks. The King Kala-
kaua and his Queen, Kapiolani, are popular, and take an active part
in all good and useful movements. In so hot a place European and
American ladies do little walking, but the telephone is laid on in
every house, and the ladies give their household orders by telephone
as well as arrange with their friends about calls and visits. They
have light American carriages, which are shady and comfortable,
and Honolulu society, though limited, appears to be very enjoyable.
The other islands of the group appeared to be composed, in the
main, of lofty hills rising to 3000 and 4000 feet. Hawaii (or
Owyee) is by far the largest of the group, but it has the largest
portion of unproductive territory. There is one volcano in the
group still occasionally active, but most of the old volcanoes have
become extinct. The loftiest mountain in these islands is said to
be 14,500 feet high.
In the remaining stage of our voyage to San Francisco we had
variable weather, with a tolerable amount of “ sea but in spite of
all such difficulties the amusements went on daily, and concerts,


minstrel entertainments, sports, and even dancing (though under great
difficulties) enlivened the days and evenings. Each day became
cooler, and daylight rapidly extended. On the eighth day alter
leaving Honolulu we sighted the American land. With strained
vision and the aid of all the field-glasses and telescopes on board we
scanned each changing aspect of the coast line until we neared the
« Seal Rocks,” and soon afterwards entered the “ Golden Gate,
steaming steadily up the harbour and anchoring off the principal
wharf. We thus concluded a pleasant and rapid run of about 7400
miles between Sydney and San Francisco in twenty-five days, includ-
ing stoppages. The history and incidents of the voyage are duly
chronicled in the Comet , a daily newspaper, published (in manuscript)
during the voyage, and subsequently clothed in more enduring type
with an appropriately illustrated cover. Its able editor was a dis-
tinguished member of the literary staff of a Melbourne morning
journal.


THEOUGH AMEEICA.
We landed at San Francisco on the evening of Monday, the 11th
June, amidst the most perfect Babel of hotel touters and railway
scouts that ever saluted mortal ears. Handsomely got up advertise-
ments of railway routes to everywhere were tossed about and almost
thrown at every passenger. We and our baggage—that is, the
mere handbags and valises that were not retained for special scrutiny
by Customs officers—were hustled into a coach belonging to the
“ Palace,” and how the driver managed to get us through the crush
of horses, drags, coaches, waggons, and omnibuses that filled the
depot was a marvel. We were not long, however, before we alighted
in the court of the famed Palace Hotel, and in a few minutes, after
writing our names in the hotel register, we were ascending in the
elevator to our apartments, while negro waiters were bringing our
belongings after us. As soon as we had taken a look at our rooms,
and gone through the preliminaries of settling down, we walked out
on to the grand balcony in front of our parlour to listen for a short
time to the strains of the band, which was discoursing sweet music
below in the “ grand central court,” where we had recently alighted
from the coach. This band plays on Monday evenings and special
occasions. At the same time we could survey the handsome propor-
tions of this “ palace” indeed, lighted as it was with scores of gas-
burners and several electric lights, which made the gas look dim and
yellow. This is one of the finest hotels in the world, and in some
respects has no equal. It covers about three acres of ground, and
has streets on all its four sides. In the basement below the street
level are the kitchens, laundries, bakery, confection-rooms, water-
works, steam-engine, and appliances for raising water, working the
elevators, &c., in which you find a small army of French, American,
and Chinese. The ground floor contains the office, reception-rooms,
dining-hall and breakfast-rooms, hairdressers, and a considerable
number of shops ; while above these rise six stories of apartments,
with attic rooms in the roof. There are about 1200 rooms in the
hotel altogether. It is built of brick and stone, with iron wrought
bands. Externally tier rises upon tier of bay windows. Within
the appearance is very chaste, being all of white marble, or imita-
tion of marble. Four artesian wells supply the great reservoir
of 630,000 gallons, and the roof tanks hold 130,000 gallons
more. Electric bells and pneumatic letter-tubes connect all the
rooms with the central offices. The dining-hall is a grand apartment,


lighted at night with electric lights, which are reflected from all sides
by enormous mirrors, and the guests are attended by a posse of
negro waiters, who are kept up to their work by a head waiter and
two or three assistants, who also politely receive guests as they enter,
and hand them to their allotted seats. The bedrooms are attended
to by negresses. There are spacious and handsomely furnished
parlours and drawingrooms, and all the grand balconies have velvet-
cushioned settees at short distances. The bill of fare includes every
luxury of the season, and the whole cost of living in this palatial
home is less than that which would be paid for board and residence
in a second-class house in Melbourne, Sydney, or Adelaide. The
Baldwin is another celebrated hotel in ’Frisco. It is not so spacious
as the Palace, but excels it in the splendour of its internal fittings.
It is said to have cost Mr. Baldwin three million dollars.
San Francisco has a history like that of Melbourne, and it is
difficult to say which is the more remarkable of the two. It is only
thirty-five years since its population consisted of 500 souls ; now it
numbers a quarter of a million. Its bustling streets, in which tram-
cars are running in every direction ; its telegraph and telephone
arrangements, and all its appliances for promoting business, impress
you with the spirit and energy everywhere visible. Its rough stone-
pitched or ‘‘cobbled” roadways are abominable, except on the car-
tracks. The most remarkable of its provisions for street locomotion
is the wire-rope railway, by which cars are taken up and down even
the steepest gradients in the city, one of them being as sharp in
places as one in five. It is found, however, to be superior to the
horse-tram system, even for level running, and was about to be
brought into operation for one of the principal routes. ’Frisco has
suffered greatly from fires, and a very considerable proportion of the
city being built of wood the precautions adopted for suppressing fires
are very complete. There are fourteen or fifteen fire brigade stations
in the city, and two of the “ patrols,” as they are called, are sup-
ported by the insurance offices for preventive and salvage operations.
An example of their utility occurred during our visit. A fire broke
out in a large ■ tobacco manufactory—fortunately in the top story.
The insurance brigade men swarmed into the building as soon as the
alarm was given, and covered up with tarpaulins and indiarubber the
whole of the stock in the floor beneath the fire ; then they set to
work with each of the other stories, and by making openings in the
floors all the water poured by the other brigades on to the fire above
found its way to the street below without wetting a box of cigars,
and thus 40,000 dollars’ worth of stock which would have been
spoiled by the water was entirely uninjured. The perfection of the
arrangements at the stations of these “ patrols” is admirable. Horses
as well as men are so thoroughly trained that on a telegraph signal
of a fire—which rings a bell—by night or by day, the horses are
harnessed to the vehicles and the men in their seats in a few seconds,


and off to the scene of the fire. In the harbour all the appliances
are equally wonderful. The great ferry-boats convey hundreds of
passengers at a time, with horses and vehicles, and some of them
railway trains of twelve or fourteen cars. Our stay was all too short.
Our limited time compelled us at the end of three days to start on
our great transcontinental journey, and we wei’e obliged to decline
many proffered hospitalities.
After a deal of confusion at the railway station, owing to the
large number of travellers starting on various routes, whose “bag-
gage” had all to be checked for the destination of each parcel, we
got off, but only as the great ferry started were we ready. In this
most commodious and comfortable conveyance we were taken five
miles, and then introduced to our “ drawingroom” at the end of one
of the large sleeping-cars. This was to be our home for two nights
and part of three days. The run for the first 140 miles is a
pleasant one, through farms and orchards, vineyards and orange-
groves ; and the hay harvest having commenced, the evening breeze
brought to our grateful senses ever and anon the welcome fragrance
of the new-mown hay. It was too late to see much of Sacramento,
the capitol of California State, and a town of 25,000 inhabitants.
After leaving Sacramento the country gradually changes in cha-
racter. The rivers and pretty towns, surrounded by farms and
plantations, give way to rugged heights and ravines, and we rise
rapidly into the romantic mountain region of the great Sierra
Nevada. Although daylight had departed, we had the benefit of a
moon nearly at the full, and could appreciate the grandeur of the
scenery as we passed up the gorges and canyons—the overhanging
cliffs, the deep descents, and the rushing mountain torrents. We
stayed up late in order that we might not miss “Cape Horn,”
where the railway track is a mere ledge cut in the face of the moun-
tain, and you look down from it 2000 feet to the rushing of the
American River in the gorge below. Long before this our sleeping
berths had been arranged by our coffee-coloured conductor, and we
turned in for the night. Up, and still upward, however, our iron
horse was ploughing his way; and before day broke I was so cold
that I had to get an opossum rug for an extra covering—and well
I might, for we had reached an elevation of 7200 feet above sea-
level. On turning out in the morning the snow-clad mountains of
the Sierra stretched away from us with more or less of imposing
grandeur, while the peaks and rugged summits immediately above
and around us had snow-streaks wherever there was partial protec-
tion from the sun’s rays. A very long stretch of snowsheds had
been fortunately passed while we were asleep. In these mountains
the trains would be frequently blocked in winter but for these long
galleries built of stout pine logs, which catch>the drift snow and
avalanches from the mountain tops above, and thus enable the train
to run through with 15 or 20 feet of snow piled over the


sheds. In other parts miles of snow fences are placed near the
track to intercept the drift snow. In the Sierra mountain country
the necessity for these contrivances was recognised from the first;
but in the Rocky Mountains, as we afterwards discovered, very many
miles of sheds and fences have had to be constructed more recently
in consequence of the stoppage of trains—an event which the
authors of the line did not anticipate. After passing many
places of more or less interest, stopping occasionally at roadside
houses, from which in most instances there is communication with
some mining camp, we descend to the White Plains—a hot and
disagreeable stretch of country, although still 4000 feet above the
sea level. Leaving these dusty plains we again ascend, and some por-
tions of the ride become vastly more interesting. One incident of
the journey created interest and amusement for the passengers. At
most of the stopping-places parties of Indians joined us, the
railway people allowing them to travel free, huddled up in
crowds on the platforms between the baggage-cars. They were
gathering for a great muster of the tribe—the Utas, or Piutes—
at Winnemucca (a small town named after one of their chiefs),
which was to be held a day or two later. There were old
and young of both sexes, and the young people especially were
fashionably decorated for the meeting in red and white paint, some
of their faces being very quaintly striped. The women, with
papooses at their back like little mummies, with only their little fat
faces visible, were the objects of most attraction. Some of them
had unslung their charges, and had got the poor infants covered up,
demanding “ two bits” to show them to us. Two bits would be
about equal to an English shilling. After passing over much
desolate country with an oasis or two on the way, the land generally
growing nothing but sagebush, we come to a point which now has a
great historical interest, as being the point of junction of the two
great railway lines which together connect the railway systems of
the Atlantic with the Pacific coasts. The story of the construction
of these two lines is a most interesting one, but too long for me to
repeat here. The Central Pacific Company own the line from San
Francisco to Ogden (883 miles), and the Union Pacific own the
next 1033 miles to Omaha, on the Missouri. The proposal to con-
struct these 1900 miles of railway over such country as the Rocky
Mountains and the great Sierra was deemed at first utterly futile.
Even the navvies refused to go on to portions of the work unless
paid beforehand. By a great and united effort, however, both com-
panies surmounted all difficulties, and in little more than six years
the “railway wedding” was celebrated with great triumph.
Descending into the valley of the Great Salt Lake we began to
exchange the desolation of the desert for the verdure of cultivated
fields. We were in the Mormon country. After an early breakfast
we exchanged trains at Ogden, and proceeded to Salt Lake City.


The rich fields of the Mormon farmers, the lake, and the surrounding
snow-capped mountains made the trip under a brilliant sky a most
enjoyable one. We were armed with introductions to the proprietor
of the two principal hotels, and had been led to expect the greatest
attention and assistance from him. The town, however, was full to
overflowing. It was the height of the season. Two opera companies
were there and a Cook excursion party. Our train also brought two
or three hundred, and we were driven to seek quarters in a second-
rate house only opened a few days previously. We were very com-
fortable, however. It being Saturday I had the opportunity of
going amongst the farmers, who, with their wives, were in from the
country in crowds ; and I also visited the principal business places.
On Sunday we went in the afternoon to the one service in the
Mormon tabernacle. They have a great deal of music, which is
well rendered. On account of the unusual number of visitors, two
of the chief “ apostles” spoke, and in each case the address —very
lengthy—was little more than a defence of Mormonism, Apart
from the polygamy question, there seems to be very little difference
between the errors of Mormonism and those of the “ Latter Day”
Church at Melbourne. The latter have their “ apostles,” while the
Mormons have theirs ; and they also believe that Joseph Smith was
a truly inspired prophet. They believe that the law which sanc-
tioned a plurality of wives in the patriarchs is a very good law
still. The new temple in white marble is gradually rising to its
intended height, but nobody knows how the funds stand. The
president is treasurer, and he renders no account. As the
building is rising before their eyes he expects the brethren to
be satisfied. The city has grown rapidly of late, and the “ Gen-
tiles” are gaining ground on the Mormons. It must be said, how-
ever, in common fairness, that the doctrine of good works preached
to the Mormon people by their elders and apostles is not preached
in vain, for Gentiles admitted to me that they could always trust a
Mormon, and that, as a rule, they were scrupulously honest and
honourable. This Zion is a beautiful town. Nearly all its streets
are avenues of trees, then in their richest green. ' The drives around
are very pretty, and some of the views, especially of the overhanging
snow-capped mountains, very imposing. Boiling sulphur springs
bubble out from the bottom of one of the hills. There is a
fort on a hillside commanding the town, with its array of field
pieces, and there are about 200 soldiers in garrison. The officers’
quarters are most charmingly situated, and a military band plays on
certain afternoons, when the fashion of Salt Lake City muster in
their carriages. The horses are remarkable for their beauty. Even
the farmers’ horses are of a very fine breed. There are a good many
mules used. The tram-cars are drawn by mules. Of course, all
visitors go to places of special note connected with the Mormons
and their leaders, and are shown the houses in which the late Brig-


ham Young and his several wives lived. Brigham Young’s grave
is one of these objects, and its condition is a reproach to his widows
and numerous offspring, as well as to the church of which he was
the head.
But we cannot linger at Salt Lake, Eastward ho ! is our cry,
and we start on another three and a-half days’ stage by rail, over
mountain and prairie, to the phoenix city of Chicago, the first short
stage being from Salt Lake City to Ogden. Thence we had secured
sleeping berths to Council Bluffs, on tbe east side of the Missouri.
Leaving Ogden, we were soon away from the cultivated fields of the
Mormon farmers and ascending mountain gorges, crossing torrents,
and getting familiar again with the snow-streaks in the clefts of the
rocks about and above us. The finest of these ravines was the
Weber canyon, with its roaring, dashing mountain stream, which
we crossed and recrossed several times. As we mounted higher and
higher, we passed in succession many quaint and famous natural
rocks, such as the devil’s slide, the pulpit rock, the hanging rock,
&c. In the upper plains we found a well-grassed country, on which
large flocks and herds are depastured. Sheep-shearing was going
on in two places near the line, the graziers being able to use
the snow fences for their temporary drafting yards, and
the natural stream of the prairie country before it became too
much broken by the great fall in the canyon. In these parts
we started the first wild deer and antelopes. We saw some fine
specimens of them afterwards, but the buffalo seems to have disap-
peared from the part of the prairies through which the railway runs.
We passed a contrivance worth mentioning on our journey over the
plains as an instance of American ingenuity and enterprise. The
mining, grazing, and other occupations, on this sparsely-settled
country are enough to create a demand for timber, but not a tree is
to be found within a dozen miles. In the ranges at that distance
there is an abundance of pine, and there are also fine mountain
streams. They have, therefore, built a flume, supported on timbers
of varying heights, according to the level, and the enormous box
channel for the water forms a small canal, down which the pine logs,
cut to the requisite lengths, are floated to the points where they are
wanted, and there toppled out for use. Even charcoal-burning is
carried on in this way close to the railway, and thence sent to
market. For mining purposes these big streams are also used, the
water being caught in enormous pipes at the end of the flume, and
with a nozzle which greatly increases the force of the outflow large
walls of rock are brought down and reduced to a condition for
yielding up their golden contents. It is the sluicing of the Beech-
worth mines on an American scale. Over miles upon miles of
prairie we pursue our way. The verdant landscape and the blue
sky, with the fine bracing air of this elevated region, tend to make
the ride enjoyable, and at every stopping-place there is some new


object to interest or amuse us. The eating-houses on the road,
which not long since had a bad reputation, have greatly improved-
A good meal of three or four courses can be had at most of them,
and the uniform charge now (apart from liquor) is three-quarters of
a dollar (about 35.). You would wonder how in such remote, out-
of-the-way places a large party of travellers could be supplied daily
with fresh fish, fruit, milk, and meat. Bread and rolls made in
various ways are supplied, and made dishes, which seem to be
popular with Americans, although not exactly suited to English
tastes. The highest point reached during our Entire journey is
near a little hamlet called Sherman, and there they have just com-
pleted a stone pyramid by the side of the railway at an altitude of
8200 feet above sea level. The pyramid looks at least 80 or 90
feet high, is built of a light sandstone, and on a large block on one
side is cut in profile a portrait of General Sherman, after whom the
place is named. As we gradually descend we pass several towns
and villages, where we see a few Indians of the tribes that formerly
held the lands and hunted the deer and the buffalo, but now rapidly
disappearing, as well as their former game. One of the towns at
which we halted was Cheyenne —pronounced Shienne—from which
a branch line goes south to Denver, through some very fine romantic
country. This being on the border of the prairies, there is a good
business done, and there is a rather fine clubhouse, supported by
English as well as American capitalists, who have invested in the
large cattle and sheep ranches into which the great plains of the
prairie country are divided. Another rather nice town is Sidney,
but it had been visited by a heavy storm the day before we arrived,
and the streets were almost impassable. There were also some
little towns along the route in which we could not help taking con-
siderable interest. These were the villages of the saucy little
marmot, or prairie dog, as he is called. He is about the size of a
kangaroo rat, and not unlike one, only a little lighter in colour, and
round-headed, with whiskers, and sharp little ears ; and as he sits bolt
upright on his hind legs to ask you whether you mean mischief or
not, you can’t help laughing at the pert little rogue. They burrow
very near each other, and are quite little communities, having appa-
rently watchers perched on the higher mounds to warn the village of
an approaching foe.
On the morning of the third day we awoke to find ourselves in
new country. The mountains w r ere only visible in the remote dis-
tance, and the far-stretching prairie, with its occasional mounds and
cliffs and watercourses, had given way to cornfields and groves of
various kinds of trees. The crops were much more backward than
those on the Pacific slope, but they were rich in promise of an abun-
dant harvest. For miles it was observable that no fences divided the
land, and were only used for stockyards. The dividing lines between
the farms were narrow, unfenced roads, and each farmer has to send


a man or boy with any of his horses or cattle to prevent their tres-
passing upon his neighbours’ crops. We were in the valley of the
North Platte, and the same rich soil and well-watered country con-
tinued on to the Missouri River and far beyond. There was, how-
ever, too much water in places, and the flood of storm water of which
we had seen traces at Sidney had come down upon this valley, and
done considerable damage. Prom Kansas and St. Louis, further
down the Missouri, came news of much more serious mischief, crops
being swept away, and breaches made in railway embankments,
which had obstructed the traffic. The great Missouri, where we
crossed at Omaha, had only risen 5 or 6 inches, but the water was
very turbid. On the east side of the river, at Council Bluffs, we had
to change from the Union Pacific Railway to the “ C. B. and Q.”
line—that is, the Chicago, Burlington, and Quincy; or, as
agents put it, the “ cheapest, best, and quickest.” Here we first
enjoyed the advantage of dining cars. The cooking and serving
were both good, and the coloured waiters as deft and attentive as in
a first-class hotel. The charges, too, were very reasonable. On
the morning of the fourth day we rose early. We had to cross the
grandest of rivers, the mighty Mississippi, at seven a.m., and as we
did not retire very early overnight, we had charged our conductor to
wake us early. This, however, was unnecessary, for we had a deal of
shunting to do at Burlington, on the west bank of the river, and the
clanging of bells by ours and the other engines moving about the
station was enough to wake the soundest sleeper. At last we moved
slowly over the bridge, which is about a mile in length. Here we
saw some of the big river steamers of which Mark Twain has made
a good deal, but they were not so fine as those we afterwards saw on
the St. Lawrence and the Hudson, and about New York. The
water was not so turbid in the Mississippi as in the Missouri. The
land all along this route is exceedingly rich. On the flats maize is
the principal crop. Wheat and rye, however, are largely grown,
and all were fine and promising. Most of the land is capable of
carrying from thirty to forty bushels of wheat to the acre. As there
is scarcely any natural timber in the valleys, the Government allowed
certain privileges to the selectors who planted trees ; hence you see
clumps of the oak, elm, chestnut, maple, cotton-tree, and others,
which serve as shelter for the farmers’ stock, and greatly beautify the
face of the landscape. The towns are at very short distances apart,
and are rapidly rising. Most of the houses are built of wood, but of
very tasteful designs. Owing to the newness of these places and
the richness of the soil, the grass was growing on all the streets,
leaving only a track in the centre. At last all the small towns had
been passed, and we were conscious of being in the presence of a city
—we were entering Chicago. Encountering the usual bustle and
noise at the station, we were soon driven off to our hotel, the
“ Grand Pacific,” and preparing for a better acquaintance with this
wonder of cities.


A volume is needed to describe the marvellous Chicago—the real
Phoenix. It is only half a century since it was a mere village.
After an unparalleled growth of nearly 40 years it was razed to the
ground by the great fire of 1871, when 17,450 buildings were
consumed, and three years later 800 more were burnt. Now
Chicago is grander than ever, and vastly more substantial ; the
second city of the continent in her commerce if notin her population.
Situated at the south-west corner of Lake Michigan she is the
natural depot for all the produce of the more fertile tract of country
in the Union. She receives about 9,000,000 head of stock yearly
into her markets, and in one year 5,000,000 hogs were slaughtered.
In one establishment 20,000 can be slaughtered and packed in one
day ! The process by which poor piggy is turned into sausage meat,
or “ packed” in about twenty minutes, is the admiration of all
visitors to Chicago. The Grand Pacific Hotel is itself a wonder,
but the Palmer House, though a little smaller, is more sumptuous in
its appointments. The Tremont House is almost as fine, and there
are half a dozen other grand hotels to choose from. The Grand
Avenue, Lincoln Park, and the Boulevards constitute perhaps the
finest set of drives in the world. The new water-works which are on
the shore of Lake Michigan, have two large engines of nearly 3000
horse-power between them, by means of which the water, brought
through a tunnel constructed from a point far out in the lake, is
forced up a tower to a height, if necessary, of 157 feet, from which
the city is supplied by gravitation. But I cannot describe Chicago !
The author of “ American Pictures” gives a Chicago man’s own
account of it. He said—“ Our city is the biggest thing in the
planet. We’ve had the biggest fire. We lifted the city five feet
out of the mud. We made a river run up-hill, and it’s the only
city on earth every inch of which is covered three inches deep in
mortgages.” Very much more might be said about Chicago, and I
would gladly have given more time to the inspection of its many
attractions and the evidences of its marvellous development,
but a start had to be made for Niagara. Comfortably located
once again in a Pullman’s sleeping car, we passed through
Detroit late in the evening, and crossed the neck of Lake St. Clair,
the connecting link between Lakes Huron and Erie, In the morn-
ing we had to change cars at Buffalo Junction, and in a short time
were skirting the Niagara Eiver and the upper rapids. Alighting
on the Canada side we were driven to the “ Clifton,” from the door
of which a full view of both falls is obtained. After seeing our
apartments, we were on the balcony gazing at the grand spectacle
before us. The first impression is not quite so awe-inspiring as
most travellers expect, although somebody remarked that it was
“awfully” fine. It is so truly majestic a sight, however, that its
grandeur grows upon you, and to me it seemed more impressive on
the second day than on the first. Apart from the two great catar-


acts, there are portions of the river both above and below the falls
that are extremely interesting ; in fact the place abounds with
romantic and beautiful bits of scenery. You can stand on rocks
and ledges, with the rushing rapids just about to leap from your
foothold over the great precipice ; and you can even go under, or
rather behind, the enormous sheet that pours down from above into
the foaming abyss below. This may be done rather easily at one
end of the great Horseshoe Fall, but we—two young ladies and one
other gentleman beside the writer—were beguiled into venturing
under the worst of the three. Neither of the party would care to
repeat the performance. Clad in a suit of oilskin and baptised with
Niagara appears to have a good deal of romance about it, and so it
has ; but holding on for very life, and gasping for breath amidst the
dashing spray, and within arm’s length of the mighty column of
a descending river, is not without its elements of danger, and we
were not sorry when the guide had helped us to clamber up the last
rock and put us again on terra Jirma. The suspension bridge
which connects the American and Canadian shores is a very fine
structure. The river below has some striking points where the
rapids contend with the rocks, and the waters are tossed in clouds
of spray, or where, as at the “ whirlpool,” the stream appears to
take a downward course and then to come boiling and surging to
the surface again, winding and curving in eddies that nothing can
withstand. (It was here that the too rash and daring swimmer
Captain Webb shortly afterwards perished.) But even charming
Niagara cannot detain us, and we must hurry on to Lake Ontario
and the St. Lawrence Eiver.
By rail to the mouth of the Niagara River, we there embarked on
a lake steamer, which took us across to Toronto. Thence our course
was through the lake eastwards, calling at several ports on the
Canadian side. On the following morning we were astir early, as
we had entered the St. Lawrence, and commenced the charming and
romantic voyage among the Thousand Islands. Some of these
islands are mere small rocks, but trees and verdure find root-hold
somehow* and with all their varied forms and sizes everyone has a
beauty of its own. Some are good-sized islands, with handsome
summer retreats ornamental pagodas, boat-houses, and the luxuries
which only wealth can provide. Some have farms upon them, some
grand hotels and boarding-houses. Even small islands of half an
acre have their cottage more or less pretentious, and one is compelled
to ask how the butcher and the baker gets to them. There are,
however, many little steamboats flitting about, and during the
summer months they get ample employment, while in winter they
are not wanted, as the river is frozen over and most of the inhabi-
tants are away. An excursion party of about 200 had come on
board in the early morning at Kingston, so that our decks were
rather crowded. The inconvenience was most felt as we approached


any place of special interest, notably when we were about to shoot
the rapids. There are several of these ; but the feat of shooting
most of them is but a mild sort of a sensation, When, however,
our Indian pilot comes on board to conduct us into Montreal harbour,
after shooting the last of the rapids, there is the height of expectation.
This veteran, it is said, has never failed to take in the lake boats for
a single day for nearly thirty years. Well, the last of the rapids
was certainly rather sensational, the channel through the rocks was
not only narrow but tortuous, while the water foamed around us and
broke upon the reef, but the Indian with admirable skill guided the
vessel and we glided safely through. Before us now stretched the
great Montreal bridge over the St, Lawrence, two miles in length,
beneath the centre arch of which we made our way, and were soon
at the wharf, from whence we were driven to our hotel.
Lower Canada, as everybody knows, was for many years in the
possession of the French, and has often been the battle-ground of
the contending armies of France and England. This will account
for the fact that of the population of Montreal over two-thirds are
either French or of French extraction, although now loyal Cana-
dians. The farmers and country people for miles around are almost
all French, and at Quebec the same state of things is observable ;
in fact, Quebec looks French in nearly all the streets. In both
towns, however, all the great enterprises that give prominence and
prosperity to the trade and business of the place are started and
managed by Englishmen. Montreal has a fine Catholic cathedral ;
and our first day in the town, being the feast of St. Peter and St.
Paul, was observed as a holiday by the French inhabitants after
early morning services at the cathedral. In the various places of
public resort about the outskirts of the city picnic parties were en-
countered whose nationality was evident from the lively chatter
audible at a distance. Royal Mount is a fine eminence at the rear
of the city. On one of its slopes is the cemetery, one of the pret-
tiest I have ever seen. Its chief walks and drives, as they wind
about the hillside, are ornamented with the most lovely flower-beds,
and flowers adorn most of the graves. Thither a great number
resorted on this saint’s day—not to mourn for the dead, but to find
enjoyment for the living. Still ascending, above and beyond the
cemetery, we come at last to the top of Royal Mount, where an
observatory is erected several flights in height, to which, of course,
we ascend, and we are well repaid. With a powerful field-glass we
take in not only the whole city of Montreal lying at our feet, but
the country around for miles and miles. We trace the St. Lawrence
up the course down which we came on the previous day, with a good
many of the Thousand Islands, and a very distinct view of the
latest and greatest of the rapids that we shot in our great river
steamer. This French Catholic holiday being on Friday, and the
great national holiday, Dominion Day, coming on the following


Monday, there was a holiday feeling pervading the population on the
Saturday, and the trams were filled with excursionists paying visits
to their country friends. It seemed odd, however, as I sat in the
train for Quebec without a companion (for the rest of my party had
gone on to New York) to hear nothing hut French all around me,
and everything on the journey—farm-houses, fields, mode of culti-
vation, and the general habits of the people—all indicative of a
French province ; for the time, in fact, I felt as if I were really in
France. Quebec is a city of marvellous interest. Its situation is
almost unrivalled, and it is perfectly unique in being the only walled
city on the American Continent. It has been so often the scene of
conflict in our wars with France that its forts and defence works are
very complete. From the fortifications the most commanding views
are obtained not only of Quebec and its harbour, but of the St. Law-
rence and St. Charles Eivers, and many miles of the Dominion
territory on the south side of the St. Lawrence. A very fine town
has grown up on that side of the river, between which Quebec ferry
steamers are always plying. Further away along the country above
the river stretches a town of one street, four miles in length. One
of the most charming of promenades or esplanades (it is called here
The Terrace) was opened not many months ago by the Marquis of
Lome and the Princess. It is floored with wood, is of great breadth,
with seats and summer-houses about it, and winds round the steep
ascent on which the principal part of the city is built. Prom it you
overlook the shipping and the two rivers at their junction, a long
stretch of the southern shore to the American border, and the Lower
St. Lawrence as it winds about towards the sea. The drives and
objects of interest—natural and historical —are numerous. The
town itself contains many relics and mementoes of the old struggles.
An obelisk at a little distance beyond the wall has taken the place
of the original pillar erected to the memory of General Wolfe, On
one side you read—“ Here died Wolfe, 1759.” On
you have —“ This pillar was erected by the British army in Canada,
a.d. 1849, His Excellency Lieutenant-General Sir Benjamin
D’Urban, G.C.8., K.C.H., K.C.T.S., &c., Commander of the Forces,
to replace that erected by Governor-General Lord Aylmer, G.C.8.,
in 1832, which was broken and defaced, and is deposited beneath,”
There are also other military monuments. Being so largely French,
of course Quebec is largely Catholic, and abounds in Catholic
churches and religious houses. The principal church is the Minor
Basilica, which the late Pope caused to be enriched with paintings
of a high order and a very imposing altarpiece with most elaborate
gilding and carved ornamentation above. Everything about the
church, in fact, is gorgeous, and the singing and chanting are done
by a splendidly trained choir. The English Cathedral presents a
perfect contrast to the other. The style is severely simple, and so
are the services. The whole were conducted on my visit by a pale-


faced, intellectual and gentlemanly looking' clergyman, with shaven
face and a moustache. The sermon was short and, as far as it
went, very good. Here, as at all the towns visited, I had to regret,
my want of time to look into many of the local institutions.
Returning by rail to Montreal at night, I took another train early
in the morning by the Grand Trunk, and after crossing the St,
Lawrence had a ride through very fine country along the shores of
Lake Champlain, with the Adirondack Mountains on the other side
of the railway line. By four p.m. we had reached Saratoga. This
is a place for an idler and a man of fashion, and still more for a
woman of fashion, to gush over. Those who spend their summer
holidays among excited crowds go either to Newport on the seacoast,
or to Saratoga Springs inland—the springs being, like the waters
of Bath and Cheltenham, the ostensible excuse for going there, but
the real attractions being the pleasure-seeking crowds, and the end-
less amusements and entertainments provided for them. There is
not another spot on the American continent (or anywhere else) where
the eye can take in at once such buildings as are to be seen in a
group on the Broadway at Saratoga. Here are two of the finest
hotels in the world facing each other, with a third equally magnifi-
cent within eyeshot of the same spot, while almost within another
stone’s throw are the most fashionable of pleasure-grounds, with
their pavilions, fountains, grottos, arbours, walks, and lounges, lighted
in the evening with the electric light, and a' band discoursing sweet
sounds. It is during the season a scene of gaiety unsurpassed,
where probably eight or ten thousand people come together for no
other purpose than to be amused and to lead a life of luxurious
pleasure. Each of the grand hotels has its garden and walks,
piazzas, terraces, fountains, and shrubberies, all lighted brilliantly in
the evening by electricity ; and each has its band of music, so that
concerts, garden parties, balls, &c., are always going on at some one
or more of them. There are also beautiful drives and rides, where
at the fashionable hour splendid equipages and well-bred horses and
riders of both sexes may be seen. All this fever of fashionable
excitement is, however, but a brilliant flash which appears for three
short mobths and then dies. That is to say, the great hotels and
many of the places of entertainment open in June, expect to fill by
the middle of July, but begin to lose their patrons in September,
and the twilight of fashion’s days is but brief ; after which the
doors close, and all this magnificence goes into the hands of care-
takers, painters, cleaners, and decorators, until June comes round
again. From Saratoga it is but a comparatively short ride by rail
to Troy, on the Hudson River. Troy is a large and busy town.
Many important and extensive manufactories are established there,
and a great quantity of produce arriving from the interior by canal
is shipped there for New York, as it is also at Albany, which is only
a few miles further south. The latter town is also the political
c 2


capital of the State of New York, and the new capitol for the local
legislature is there in course of building. Though not nearly so
large as the national capitol at Washington, it is a grand pile, and
rising high above the rest of the buildings is a conspicuous object
from all the city’s approaches. I had no time to inspect the Uni-
versity, Museum, and other places of interest, as I was due in New
York, so on the morning after my arrival I was on board the palatial
river boat which was to convey me down the Hudson to “ the Empire
City.”
Not having then seen the Rhine, I was not able until later to com-
pare it with the Hudson. They are somewhat alike in places, substi-
tuting, however, modern buildings for ancient castles, and thriving
young towns for the old burghs and cities of Western Europe. In
some respects the Hudson must carry the palm. These great “ day-
boats,” as the monster steamers are called, ply up and down the
river for 150 miles. Hundreds of passengers are conveyed, by them,
enjoying luxurious saloons, richly furnished and carpeted, or, if they
prefer it, seats or chairs on either of the open decks, where they can
view the ever-changing panorama as the vessel glides silently along
at the rate of eighteen miles an hour. In the airy dining saloon—
nearly all windows, to enable the passenger to feast his eyes and his
palate at the same time—a first-class dinner can be had (by the
carte ) at reasonable prices ; and the cooking and attendance are all
that can be desired. The river widens and narrows and winds about
and opens into lakelike expanses, with sloping wooded hills here
and towering rocks a little further, pretty towns or busy ports ap-
pearing at intervals ; grand overhanging or bold rounded hills (like
those on the lower Clyde) varying the scene, and ever and anon the
wooded hills revealing the most beautiful villa residences or palatial
mansions owned by New York millionaires. At short distances,
averaging about a mile apart, we came upon huge buildings on the
river bank, which are far from being ornamental, with long slides
reaching from the top of the building to the water’s edge at the
wharf in front. These are icehouses, in which the ice of the river
is collected in the winter and stored for summer use. These stores
will hold from ten to sixty thousand tons of ice, and the article is
conveyed to the city in barges constructed for the special purpose.
The consumption in New York alone during the hot weather must
be enormous. Everybody drinks iced water, and a great deal of it.
Nor is the habit confined to New York ; everywhere ice is to be had
in abundance. Over ten millions of tons of ice are consumed in
America during the summer months ! In New York the price is—
for large establishments, 80s. per ton ; small consumers are charged
from 4s. to ss. per week, according to the quantity taken daily.
Along the banks of the river are many places rendered memorable
by the events of the war of independence, and which are pointed out
with natural pride by Americans. The famous Catskill mountains


form the background of the scenery for some miles. Among these
hills is laid the scene of that twenty years’ sleep of poor Rip Yan
Winkle, which is one of the most popular of modern legends.
These hills rise to a height of 3000 feet and upwards. An inter-
esting sight in the trip down the river is a flotilla of canal barges
lashed together, and tugged by steamers. These barges contain
every variety of merchandise, which has come across the lakes from
Chicago (nearly 1400 miles away), and been brought through the
canals to the River Hudson. These large flotillas, dotted all over
with little deck-houses, look like water villages. As the boatmen
and their families have a leisure time of it, advantage is taken of
the opportunity for a general wash-up, and the linen is flapping in
the wind from many a clothes-line. Immense quantities of mer-
chandise reach New York and the seaboard by these barges, so that
large numbers of flotillas of various sizes are seen on the trip down
the river.
New York is reached at last, and we get into a conveyance to
take us to the “ Windsor” Hotel. This ride impresses us with the
magnitude of the place, for it takes us forty minutes to reach the
Windsor. It is the evening before the Fourth, when we know that
all New York will be en fete in honour of the nation’s independence.
On the morning of the great day I inquired anxiously for the
places where some of the popular orators might be heard, but was
disappointed to find that the old “ spread-eagleism” of this annual
celebration was at an end, and there was to be no “ orating.” The
people, in fact, kept holiday just as they do in Melbourne or other
Australian cities, and the outing was enormous, I took the elevated
railway to the principal wharves, from whence excursion boats were
sailing with their thousands of holiday-makers. But it was pleasure-
seeking under difficulties, with the thermometer at 94 in the shade,
and something fearful in the sun. After surveying the holiday
crowds I took another “ elevated,” and rode five miles through the
city on a route different from the one already traversed, and after
seeing as much as was to be seen returned to dinner. In the evening
we had a ride round the Central Park, which is the favourite resort
of the fashion in the afternoon. There are beautiful drives of about
eight miles in length, with lakes and bowers and many pleasant
nooks and objects of national interest. Amongst the latter is the
Egyptian obelisk, which was brought from Egypt at an enormous
cost to the country. It was the gift of the Khedive to the United
States, and after being contemplated by successive generations of
the Coptic and Semitic races for thirty-five centuries, it is now the
object of daily interest to the people of this new and busy world.
The evening of the Fourth was rendered lively by the fireworks,
with which the whole city seemed ablaze.
New York, the empire city, cannot be described in such brief
notes as these. It is a lively, though a lesser, London. Its hotels


are palaces. Its clubs are perhaps the most English-like of its
institutions. Its public parks and reserves and its public buildings
are all handsome. Its countless tramcars plying in every direction,
and its aerial railways running over the street traffic, are evidence or
the stir and movement ever going on between the different parts of
the city; while the crowded Broadway and several others ox the great
arteries of traffic give still more striking proof of its busy life, io
these must be added the great markets, busy, but dirty, and with
cobbled roadways that are execrable ; the wharves and steamboats,
the gigantic ferries constantly plying between New York proper and
Brooklyn, Jersey City, and other suburbs, and the crowds arriving
and departing. The elevated railways are a specialty of New York,
as the underground lines are of London. The “ elevated aie the
property of two separate companies, but both are worked by a third
company, called the “ Manhattan Railway Company.” There are
thirty-two miles of railway in operation. They carry more than
eighty millions of passengers annually, and their yearly receipts
amount to a million and a quarter sterling. To see further into the
business activities of the place it is necessary to go to the exchanges,
of which there are some half-dozen. The corn exchange, for
example, is the scene of enormous transactions, all the sales
being effected by sample. The brokers in several of the ex-
changes conduct their sales in such a noisy fashion that a
stranger would imagine from their shouting and gestures that they
were all quarrelling and challenging each other. Jhe trade in
petroleum is so large that it has an exchange all to itself, besides
being dealt in at some of the others. It is an example of the
wondrous enterprise of the New York people. The oil is obtained
at places distaxxt some 800 miles from New York. The railway
people objected to have anything to do with its conveyance for
several reasons, and the overland transit would be costly in any
case. The enterprise of the oilmen, however, overcame all
difficulties. They laid 800 miles of pipes through mountains
and rivers, and the oil is thus poured into New \ork.
Some 340,000 gallons of oil are always on the way in the pipes.
The producer delivers a certain quantity at the head of the pipeway,
for which he gets his certificate. These certificates are posted to
New York and sold. When the holder of a certificate wants
delivery he goes to the depot at New York and gets it. Of course
there is an immense business always doing in refining, canning, and
shipping the oil to all parts of the world. The suburbs around New
York contain together a larger population than the city itself. There
is Brooklyn, famed for its cemetery, which is one of the finest in the
world ; noted also as the scene of the labours of Henry Ward Beecher,
its great preacher and orator. There are also Jersey City, Newark,
Long Island, Williamsburgh, &c. The aggregate population of the
combined cities is about three millions. New York abounds in


churches, and most of them are very highly ornamented and decorated
internally. In the Fifth Avenue, from the balcony of the Windsor
Hotel, may be seen some ten or a dozen spires, more or less hand-
some, while close by is the unfinished R. C. Cathedral of white
marble, which, when completed, will be one of the finest churches in
America. Its newspaper offices are conspicuous by their loftiness
and the number of their windows. In every one of the traffic
thoroughfares the lager-beer houses are so numerous as to challenge
attention. In the hot thirsty weather of this season the consumption
is doubtless very great, although there are but few signs of drunken-
ness in the streets. It is said there are some 4000 lager-beer
houses, and a still larger number of other liquor-shops. Of the
habits and peculiarities of the people I cannot speak here. They
have been the subject of extravagant caricatures on the part of
Englishmen, but they are undoubtedly the cleverest and most
enterprising people in the world.
Although we had accomplished the feat of crossing the continent
from west to east, and had seen some of its most interesting scenery
and its most important centres of population and trade, we had still
seen only a small portion of America. Of its railways—now more
than a hundred thousand miles in length—we had only traversed a
little over five thousand ; of its rivers and lakes we had seen only a
part, and by no means a large part. Of its southern states, the
ancient seat of slavery, we had seen nothing. Moreover, we had
not visited its ancient metropolis or its present political capital. I
determined, therefore, to take a run down south to Philadelphia,
Baltimore, and Washington. This I did alone, for the heat in New
York was too oppressive for the ladies of our party, and they, with
other friends and fellow-travellers, left for England in advance of
me. In Philadelphia I expected to find traces of its original
character as “the Quaker city,” but beyond a very few old cottage
bonnets I was disappointed. It is a busy city, with unmistakably
’fine public buildings, well laid-out streets, numerous tramways, and
attractive parks and places of resort. Fairmount Park, where the
International Exhibition was held, is an extensive domain with
pretty drives, and the more substantial portion of the exhibition
buildings remains, and is converted into a museum containing many
objects of great interest. The new city hall and buildings, when
completed, will be amongst the handsomest buildings in the States.
The Delaware River, which runs around the city, gives water com-
munication with the sea, and a large shipping trade is carried on.
All the external vestiges of Quaker life have disappeared, and the
existence of any remains of the grand old settlers would not be
suspected but for their meeting-houses. In the principal hotels a
list of places of worship is exhibited in the hall, and these meeting-
houses of the Friends catch the eye. If any of the mannerisms of
the Quakers are to be found still amongst men of business, I did


not come in contact with any of them. Baltimore is a substantial,
business-like, and rapidly growing city, with many signs of pros-
perity, but fewer public buildings and objects to interest strangers.
It is, therefore, seen to disadvantage after the more showy towns
previously mentioned.
Washington astonished me. I had expected to find a quiet town,
with the White House of the President (which I thought would be
severely simple) and the Capitol. It is not a mere quiet town but
a most beautiful city. Its public buildings, taken altogether, are
equal to those of any city in the world, and its avenues and streets
radiating in every direction, and lined with trees, which were then
in all the beauty of their summer verdure, gave such an air of pure
freshness to the view, that, look where you would, the sight was
quite enchanting. The Capitol, with its dome rivalling that of St.
Paul’s, and its great wings and colonnades approached by lofty flights
of steps, and all of white marble, is a most imposing structure. It
is of the Corinthian order of architecture, and occupying, as
it does, the finest position about the city, it not only commands
the most extensive and comprehensive view of the town, the sur-
rounding hills, and the Potomac River, which winds round portions
of the town, but is itself one of the most conspicuous objects from
the country around, as well as from portions of the city. This
grand edifice is upwards of 750 feet in length. The great extent of
front has a tendency to dwarf the building to the eye, although the
height is really in full 'proportion to the other dimensions ; either of
the wings alone or the centre alone would be an imposing building.
The two chambers in which the Parliament assemble are rather dis-
appointing after so grand an exterior. The rotunda under the
dome has some fine national paintings and statuary, and the library
is extensive. There are many objects of great interest about the
building. Since it was commenced, in 1800, it has cost fifteen
million dollars. The park and grounds about it are well laid out,
and well kept. I can do little more than mention some of the
other public buildings, as any description would convey but a very
imperfect idea of their character. The White House, which is the
official residence of the President, is scarcely equal to the Govern-
ment houses provided by the Australian colonies for their respective
Governors. It is, however, a very nice building, standing in
grounds comprising about 80 acres, laid out in walks and drives,
and ornamented with fountains and shrubs. The great reception-
room is 80 x 40, and 22 feet high. There are three other state
rooms—the green room, the blue room, and the red room \ the
colour of the last is that of terracotta. The view from the win-
dows at the rear of the house is extremely pretty. When a large
ball is given, some other building has to be used. Near the White
House is a magnificent pile not quite finished, containing the offices
of the state, war and navy departments. It is about 580 feet long,


by a width of 340. On the other side of the White House, and at
no great distance, is the Treasury. It is of the Grecian-lonic
order, with porticos, grand pilasters, and massive granite termi-
nations to the wings. The outer courts are very beautiful. The
Patent Office is built in the Doric style of architecture. Its fine
central portico is approached by a massive flight of steps, and
its bold but plain projecting wings give the whole a majestic
appearance. There are also the city hall (a very fine building),
the post-office, the Howard University, the agricultural department,
the National Museum, the Smithsonian Institution, the great con-
servatory, the botanical gardens, the arsenal, the navy yard, several
hospitals and similar institutions, and several beautiful parks and
monuments. The greatest monument of all is the column now in
course of erection in honour of Washington. It is an immense
obelisk, and when finished will be 550 feet in height. The contents
of some of the buildings I have mentioned have more interest
attaching to them than the buildings themselves. Here every relic
of the great struggle for independence is preserved. There are
appropriate tributes to the memory of those who fell in the disastrous
conflict between the south and the north, but of course everything
that would tend to keep open the old sore is kept out of view. The
battle-grounds of that sanguinary contention will long tell of its
triumphs and defeats, but the fewer memorials of it presented to the
eye the better. As to the great war of 1812, the pride of the
Americans over its achievements is perfectly natural and allowable,
and they find a mode of expressing that pride which does them
honour. If ever hero-worship was excusable, it is so in the case of
General Washington. He was the truest patriot known in history,
and one of the noblest specimens of our race. The devotion of this
people to his memory is really touching. Upon his monument is
inscribed: “ Greatest in war —greatest in peace—greatest in the
hearts of his countrymen and so he is. The very garments that
he wore—his sword, his gloves, his camp utensils, his tent, the
furniture of his house—are all to be seen in the museums. More
than that, I had the pleasure of looking over in the State depart-
ment a long series of volumes, in which are' bound up every scrap
that could be collected of his writing—not only the letters of
his manhood, his generalship, and his statesmanship, but the lessons
of his school days, his earliest attempts at surveying and sketching,
his diary and accounts of daily expenditure, for so methodical and
conscientious was he that from these autograph records you may not
only read his whole life-history, but also make up an account of all
the money that he ever spent. Where are to be found the records
of another life (merely human) that can bear so fierce a light ? I
left Washington with more regret than I had felt at leaving any
other place in the States.
My visit to the south did not complete my programme, but I had.


arranged to visit Boston (where friends were ready to welcome me),
and to take the fashionable Newport on my way. There were, how-
ever, so many things yet to be seen and done in New York that I
had’at last reluctantly to give up Boston. Amongst the things
engaging my attention in New York was the electric lighting, and
I had the gratification of making the acquaintance of that wonderful
genius, Mr. Edison, and was permitted to see through his works at
Newark. It was to me intensely interesting. There are upwards
of forty different inventions connected with the Edison lamp, and
collaterally over 200 processes.
I may say generally that in my visits to all the great centres
my time was largely occupied in gathering information, and my
reception by public officials of all classes, especially at the head
establishments at Washington, always was most courteous and
cordial. If time had permitted I could have learned a great deal
more, but I must console myself with the conviction that I can give
a good account of the thirty-eight days devoted to “ seeing America.”
I was fortunate in being able to secure (with my friend and fellow-
traveller, Major Flood Page) a cabin on board the a Servia, Cunard
steamer (the finest of the fleet), leaving New T ork for Liverpool on
July 18.


ACEOSS THE ATLANTIC.
On Wednesday, 18tli July, the Cunard steamship “ Servia” slipped
her moorings at the company’s wharf, New York, and was towed
out into the fairway by three of the harbour tug-boats. At six she
passed out to sea by “ Sandy Hook,” and thus commenced her run
across to Liverpool, Queenstown being taken on the way. The
“ Servia” is not an ordinary ship ; apart from the “ Great Eastern,”
she is the largest commercial steamship afloat. It is not many years
ago (when the graving-dock at Melbourne was about to be com-
pleted) that I ascertained, for the information of the Chamber of
Commerce and the Government, that ships were then on the slip in
some of the shipyards of England and Scotland exceeding 400 feet
in length. The “ Servia” measures, over all, 580 feet. Her breadth
is 52 feet, and her depth 40 feet 9 inches ; her'gross measurement
is 8500 lons ! and her indicated horsepower is 10,500 in the aggre-
gate ! This giant steamship is built entirely of steel, and her
engines and cylinders are, of course, of the most perfect modern
construction. She is lighted throughout with the electric light.
The “Servia,” in short, marks the advanced point in the scientific
progress of the century, and its application to the commercial inter-
course of the world. On her trial trip she made an average speed
of knots an hour, and has often performed the run between
Liverpool and New York and vice versa in eight days. Westerly
gales and rough weather had prevailed in the Atlantic during the
preceding week or two ; but the four hundred and odd saloon
passengers, and their poorer companions in the steerage, started in
high spirits, and in full confidence that the grand ship would behave
well under any circumstances. The weather was hot and oppressive
when we left New York. It was not much cooler out at sea, and
the second day was warmer still ; on the third day, however, a
bracing wind dissipated the mugginess of the atmosphere, and the
decks became extremely enjoyable. The few bad sailors who cannot,
under any circumstances, escape a taste of the mol de mer, were by
this time getting over their trouble, and the decks and saloon were
crowded. The spacious dining-saloon, which extends the whole
width of the ship, and is about 75 feet long, with five rows of tables,
cannot accommodate all the passengers at once, so we had two
dinner parties, one at five, the other at a quarter-past six. The table
was scarcely up to my expectations. We had a mixed lot of


passengers ; most of them, however, were Americans visiting the-
British dominions on business or pleasure. There were men of
letters and men of business—authors, clergymen, merchants, specu-
lators, judges, the commodore of the American fleet, the Bishop of
Huron (Canada), and M. du Chailu, the gorilla catcher. The con-
sumption of tobacco was enormous, and I was rather surprised to
find American ladies so much addicted to suppers. We had a few
musical people, and every evening there was more or less music.
On Sunday, the fourth day out, we had a full morning service, and
an admirable sermon from the Bishop of Huron, with hymns, &c.,
in the evening. Each succeeding day brought a repetition of fine
weather and a quiet sea. At times there was sea enough on to dis-
turb the equanimity of an ordinary sized vessel, but the “ Servia”
disregarded it entirely, and went on her even way. When the wind
allowed it we had mounted some sail; but the canvas did not pro-
bably add a knot in twelve hours to the ship’s speed, though it helped
to keep her on an even keel.
We made the port of Queenstown, near Cork, at about four
o’clock in the morning, and the mails were landed there, whence
they went by rail to Dublin and across to Holyhead. A consider-
able proportion of the passengers landed at Queenstown, so that the
Lakes of Killarney and Blarney Castle had no doubt an unusual
number of visitors during the few days following. The evening
preceding our arrival off Queenstown was rendered very agreeable by
a parting concert and dramatic readings. The steam up the Irish
Channel was very enjoyable under a brilliant sky ; and on the
evening of Friday, 27th July, we landed in Liverpool, and after
a run of less than eight days (allowing for the difference in time
between Liverpool and New York) we were once more in dear old
England.


A TRIP TO HOLLAND, BELGIUM, THE GERMAN RHINE
PROVINCES, PARIS,
It was in the first week of September, 1883, that I left London for
a run to the Amsterdam Exhibition—to which I was an honorary
commissioner for Victoria—and to such other places of interest as I
could visit in a three weeks’ tour. An evening ride by rail to
Harwich brought me to the steamer which was to convey me across
the Channel to Rotterdam, and by about midnight I was snugly
berthed, and was soon sleeping and dreaming as pleasantly as one
can be expected to sleep and dream over a grinding propeller and
within an enclosed shelf 6 ft. x 2 ft. There was a calm sea, and
between seven and eight the next morning I was on deck taking a
look at the “ Hock van Holland,” at the mouth of the River Maas
(or, as the French call it, the Meuse). The two hom-s which are
spent in steaming up to Rotterdam are very agreeably occupied in
observing the great variety of the craft, large and small, that are
sailing or steaming or being towed up or down the river ; as also
the canals and towns on either side, and the dams and dykes
erected along the river side for the protection of the low-lying lands,
which constitute a large portion of the interior. One of the towns
passed is Brielle, a small fortified place. The Customs officer comes
on board from this place, and the baggage is all examined before
reaching Rotterdam. Holland, as everybody knows, is a very flat
country, with “water, water everywhere.” Very little of the land
is seen, therefore, from the river. Occasional glimpses of spires,
chimneys, and windmills alternate with the small towns and ports.
Schiedam is the largest of these. A forest of chimneys rises from
its 200 distilleries, scores of windmills aid in the operations, and
hundreds of barges line the banks of the canal which runs through
the town. Here is manufactured the “ Hollands” and “ schnapps”
which are intended to lubricate the throats of millions in both
hemispheres, not always in as innocuous a condition as that in
which it leaves the Maas. While the liquor supplies the demands
of human topers, the refuse grain is said to maintain 30,000 pigs,
Rotterdam. —The landing-quay at Rotterdam is not very
unlike those of other ports, and I was rather surprised to
find that part of the town very like ether continental towns.
The quaint and antique style, which I had always thought


to be the prevailing characteristic of the place, is really the-
exception. There is undoubtedly a certain peculiarity about the
architecture, which is more striking to an arrival from
England than it would be to a traveller from the chief
European cities. The one thing that does command special
notice is the number and extent of the canals. Rotterdam is in
that respect an exaggerated Venice, and yet it is unlike Venice.
Every canal has a street on one side of it, and in many cases on
both sides. The locomotion, therefore, is on land, and not, as in
Venetian gondolas, on the water. There are, however, canal barges,
and these may be numbered by the hundred, if not by the thousand,,
and a numerous population live entirely upon them. The women on
these barges appear to be always very busy during the earlier part of
the day, cleaning, washing, or cooking. They seem to have a passion
for scrubbing, as indeed do the Dutch women on shore also, I had
opportunities of studying the boat population from my window,
which overlooked a canal ; and I observed that, like ladies in other
walks of life, the barge women dress for dinner, or immediately after
dinner, and appeared on their short decks in quite gay attire. The
city contains a few fine buildings, but not many. The cathedral is a
heavy-looking structure. There are picture galleries, and an arcade,
which is one of the prettiest in Europe, but very small. At the
“ Zoo” there are some fine animals, and I was pleased at recognising
a number of my countrymen. There were dingoes and marsupials,
parrots and budgeregows, as well as Australian shrubs, and a giant
specimen of a tree-fern from Victoria. The dress of the ordinary
people is similar to that of other Europeans. The “ balloon” con-
tinuations of the traditional Dutchman are nowhere to be seen, but
there are some quaint and picturesque costumes among certain
classes of the women.
The Hague is the most charming place in Holland. It is the
Washington of the Netherlands. The “ Hotel du Vieux Doelen,”
where I stayed, is an old-fashioned but aristocratic and extremely
comfortable house. About a hundred visitors were in the hotel with
me, most of whom were English, and the rest were not distinguish-
able from English until they began to talk. The Hague has its
squares full of shady walks and attractive lounges; its park, or, as it
is called, the “ Bosch,” which sounds most inappropriate to English
ears, for it includes a pretty deer-park, and two or three miles of
forest, with the most perfect Gothic avenues, chiefly elms, some
single, some in double lines, some triplicated, but all “long drawn,”
sometimes a mile in length, “ high over-arched, and echoing walks
between.” These are often intersected by fish-ponds and small
canals with swans and water-fowl. There is a large pavilion in this
wood where music and refreshments are provided as attractions to
the townspeople, and tramcars run through to Leyden and Scheven-
ingen. The latter is the fashionable seaside resort. It is a charm-


ing place, reached by a twenty minutes’ car ride, and has numerous-
restaurants, cafes, &c., at some of which bands of music perform
during the afternoon and evening. The cafes al fresco are quite
French-like— ct la Champs Elysee. And to see the people taking
their pleasure at these places and along the beautiful esplanade is
enough to divest our minds at once of that ideal Dutchman whom
in imagination we have known from our childhood. The fashionable
part of Scheveningen is the east or north-east end, but at the other
end the fishermen have their homes, and these fisher people (like
their class in many other parts of the world) are very conservative
in their dress and habits, and are an entertaining study. The little
girls of five years and upwards are little women in appearance,
their dresses extending to their feet and hands, with quaint muslin
or linen caps coming almost down upon their shoulders, and both
sleeves and petticoats are expanded like barrels. The women wear
the most curious head-gear. Those who can afford it have planished
silver skull-caps, fitting closely all round the head, with translucent
caps of lace or muslin over the silver. Some of the more aristocratic
of this class indulge even in bright gold helmets instead of silver,
and some have large gold or silver pins extending horizontally from
the head, and from which glittering ornaments are suspended.
The churches at the Hague are not conspicuous for their beauty.
I attended the cathedral —a very plain building—and heard an
eloquent preacher, evidently a natural orator, although I couldn t
understand a word of what he said. At the English Church, a
pretty structure, there was but a small congregation, and I wished
the preacher (whom I could understand) had possessed a little of the
fervour and eloquence which had been to me but a dumb show in the
cathedral. There are some fine collections of paintings in the
palaces and private galleries at the Hague, and the interiors of some
of the palaces are well worth inspecting. During my stay I saw a
review of six thousand infantry by the commander-in-chief.
Amsterdam. —A fine city is Amsterdam. Like Rotterdam, it
abounds in canals, but not quite so largely in proportion to the
houses and- streets. It is by far the most populous and wealthy city
of Holland. It has two rivers, the Amstel and the Y, the latter
being an offshoot of the Zuyder Zee. It has four principal canals—
the Prinsen Gracht, Keizers Gracht, Heeren Gracht, and Singel—but
it has hundreds of smaller canals, which cut up the city into scores
of islands, connected by drawbridges. It is said to have no less than
330 bridges. It possesses some beautiful parks and promenades, a
botanic garden and Crystal Palace, with some handsome churches,
banks, markets, exchanges, &c. A peculiarity of Dutch houses is
the large amount of their window-light. There is a greater portion
of window than brick in a house front. The chief centre of attrac-
tion during my visit was the International Exhibition, which I
attended as a commissioner. It was a great success, and was vastly


more attractive than I had expected to find. France, Russia, Bel-
gium, and the Dutch colonies were largely represented ; England
very little. The colonies of Victoria and New South Wales made a
small show. They were good as far as they went, and attracted
much notice. Our Victorian exhibits carried off a full share of
prizes and medals. I was greatly astonished at the magnitude of
its collection of paintings and works of art. Several hours were
required for even a comparatively hasty glance at the contents
of the various rooms and galleries, and amongst the exhibits were
many very valuable works. One portion of the Exhibition was
quite unique. It was the comprehensive illustrations of life in
Netherlands-India. A part of the Exhibition grounds was divided
off into enclosures by fences of a peculiar kind, mostly of bamboos,
and within the enclosures were houses of various kinds, also for the
most part of bamboo, just as they are to be seen in Java, with
native residents following their ordinary occupations and mode of
life. In some places were the vehicles in use by the natives of Java,
with their agricultural implements and their horses and oxen. On
the miniature lakes and canals were boats of the country, with
native boys working them, and giving illustrations of their modes of
fishing, &c. In a kiosk not far from the cane houses were a native
band of Javanese musicians going through some rather dreary per-
formances, while dancing girls and men postured to the slow time of
the minstrel players. Sometimes a single girl, in her richly bordered
dress, and with her Indian scarf of many colours, would exhibit her
rather graceful steps and gestures after the manner of the Indian
nautch-girl. All their dances, however, were slow, and the scarf
with the females, and other corresponding accessories on the part of
the male largely to the action of each. In
addition to these living and full-sized representations outside, there
was an extensive building filled with models and figures, large and
small, of everything connected with life in Java, and the industries
and productions of the country.
The most entertaining part of this exhibition to such a visitor as
myself was undoubtedly the sight of the people who flocked into
the place in a living stream on each of the days I was there, in all
the glory of their holiday attire. My old acquaintances of Scheven-
ingen, with their silver helmets, were there ; but as each province or
town has its own peculiar head-dress for its women-folk, there were
great varieties of this kind of skull-cap, and many of the young
people carried their dowries upon their heads in gold and silver
ornaments. Some of them wore horns of black ribbon projecting
from the gold plates, and others had hats of fearful and wonderful
build, some very much resembling an old-fashioned coal-scuttle,
but brown, or some dark colour, with the larger concavity down-
wards. The ornaments in some cases were exceedingly curious—
spiral gold wire standing up on each side of the head, or glistening


drops depending from projecting bars of gold or silver, or enormous
pins, with ornamental heads or ends. Some of the women wore
simple muslin caps, while there were others who (as in some parts of
France) wore nothing at all. They evidently trust to the natural
protection of their, ample hair, and appear to believe in the axiom
that “ beauty unadorned’s adorned the most.” The men were
almost all dressed in dark blue cloth—evidently their best —but in
different styles of tailoring. Here, and here only, one caught a
glimpse of the (modified) knickerbocker of the traditional Dutch-
man, and which are still worn by the intensely conservative people
of the island of Harken. (A chapter might be written about the
peculiarities of these and other island Dutch, but I cannot find room
for it here.) The whole of the peasant peoples, whom I saw coming-
in from the provinces, carried with them the evidences of frugality,
simplicity, and plodding industry. They live upon very small
incomes, and yet the able-bodied appear to regard as a first charge
on their earnings the support of the aged and helpless of their own
households. Amongst the peculiar uniforms of the city I ought
not to omit mention of the dresses of the “orphans.” Amsterdam
is distinguished by its numerous orphanages, and similar benevolent
institutions. Troops of these orphans are therefore met daily in
their rather quaint costumes.
One of the great features of Amsterdam is its diamond-cutting
establishments. A very large capital must be embarked in this
peculiar trade, and it is said that one-half .of the diamonds imported
into Europe annually find their way to one establishment in
Amsterdam for cutting and polishing. It was here that the
Koh-i-noor was polished.
Amongst the wonders of Amsterdam should be mentioned the
great North Sea Canal, which was commenced about twenty years
ago, and was opened in 1876, and now connects the port with the
ocean. It has to a great extent diverted the traffic from the grand
Ship Canal of North Holland. It is only about sixteen miles in
length, while the older canal is over fifty miles long. It is about
200 feet wide, and will accommodate vessels drawing 28 feet of
water. Its cost was two millions sterling. The very existence of
Amsterdam, however, is dependent on its great earthworks and
sluices for keeping out the sea and regulating the water communi-
cation ; for at high water the level of the outer ocean is considerably
above that of the river Amstel and the Y. Hence it has been
necessary to construct many miles of banks for the protection of the
principal canals connecting the port with the sea.
Interesting and unique as is this curious old city to the visitor
and the excursionist, with its many waters, its high-peaked gables,
its tree-lined and shaded streets and wharves, its campaniles and
clock-towers, its gardens and groves, bridges and embankments, yet
it is not a desirable place of residence. The difficulty of preventing


the numerous canals from becoming stagnant and the receptacles
of sewage, detracts to a great extent from the salubrity of the atmos-
phere, and the inodorous exhalations suggesttoo favourable conditions
for the generation and spread of some dread epidemic. There is
fortunately one counteracting influence which pervades this and most
of the Dutch towns, namely, the scrupulous cleanliness of the inha-
bitants and their houses. In some instances it is a perfect passion
with the women. At the little town of Broek, on the North Hol-
land canal, the care of each housewife to prevent the introduction of
anything into the house which would soil even the floor becomes
almost a burlesque. There the best parlour is a bijou. _ Every
article is arranged with scrupulous care, and the room is only
used for weddings or funerals. The visitor on entering a house must
leave his boots at the door, and put his feet into clean slippers. The
houses are kept clean painted inside and out, and the little forecourt
is paved with encaustic tiles. The family china and the linen may
be seen in the cupboards, carefully arranged, but not a soiled article
is visible. Smoking in a house is, of course, prohibited, and the
very cowhouses are tiled and drained, so that nothing offensive is
allowed to remain.
In traversing the country one soon gets to understand the chief
conditions of rural life in Holland. You see very few roads, and
scarcely any vehicles employed in the transit of heavy goods
but you perpetually find yourself crossing or running parallel with
canals on which the carrying business of the country is conducted.
Most of these canals are above the level of the adjacent lands, which
are for the most part low and flat, and would be very uninteresting
but for the clumps of timber which dot the plains, from amidst
which you generally see spires and chimneys, indicating a small
population, while in every direction windmills are seen, which are
employed, some for raising the waters of the low-lying lands which
are discharged into the higher canals, and some are mills for flour
and meal. The farmhouses do not look like desirable places of
residence, being mostly built upon slightly raised ground, but having
in their immediate surroundings more attractions for ducks and geese
and the wading herons than for land animals or bipeds of the human
species. The drains and dykes that intersect the country every-
where show that if the land has not been reclaimed from the water
it is only saved from inundation by an elaborate system such as no
other country possesses—because there is no other country which
exists under similar conditions.
Into Germany. —From Amsterdam I took the railway for
Cologne, passing through some rather interesting towns, such as
Arnhem, Wesel, and Diisseldorf. The latter is at the junction of
the Diissell and the Ehine, and is one of the prettiest of the
Rhenish towns. From thence it is but a short journey to
Cologne.— Here in the Hotel Hollnnde I found myself looking-
down from my window on to the flowing Rhine, with the river


steamers lying immediately below me, and a little on the left the
Bridge of Boats, by which, as well as by an iron bridge beyond it,
you can cross to the large suburb of Deutz, on the opposite side.
This ancient town of Cologne possesses many objects of interest.
Until lately it was celebrated not only for the famous eau de
Cologne of Johann Maria Farina, but for its other odorous eau of
the sewers. Coleridge was not the only detector of these malodours,
for his lines have been used a thousand times to describe them and
some other of his impressions of the place. He said :
In Coin, that town of monks and bones,
And pavements fanged with murderous stones,
And rags and hags and hideous wenches,
I counted two and seventy stenches,
All well defined and genuine stinks.
In quoting Coleridge’s lines at this time of day, however, it should
only be for the purpose of saying that they have lost nearly all their
application, for the old town has undergone many improvements in
recent years, notably in the matter of drainage. Its “monks” are
not particularly conspicuous, although in two or three of the old
churches are still preserved large collections of “ bones”—some of
them of supposed martyrs—arranged fantastically and ornamented in
some cases elaborately. The “ murderous stones” are still there,
although perhaps less “fanged” in the better parts of the city; and
as for its “ hags” and “ wenches,” though they may appear “ hideous”
to some fastidious foreigners, they (particularly the market women)
are considered picturesque by others. The great sight of Cologne is
the Cathedral, which is one of the world’s wonders. Commenced in
the thirteenth century, it may be said to have been only recently
finished, for while some of the older work has been restored, some
additions have been made, to give complete effect to the design of
the original architect. The whole of the exterior commands uni-
versal admiration for the exquisite beauty of its details, while the
two towers, surmounted by open-worked spires, are the highest in the
world. The interior is rich in sculpture and fresco-mosaics ; but its
chief glory is its wonderful windows of stained glass, representing
scriptural subjects in extremely quaint designs, most of them very
ancient and very unreal.
Some of the other churches boast of relics of great value. For
example, in the Church of St, Ursula a portion of the building is
decorated with the bones of the ten thousand virgins said to have
been murdered with the saint; and it has also ajar which is said to
have been one of the vessels used at the marriage feast at Cana of
Galilee, when the water was turned into wine !
Many of the public buildings of Cologne testify to the antiquity
of the place. For example, the Rathhaus bears on one of its fronts
restored inscriptions, acknowledging the benefits bestowed on the
town by the Emperors Julius Csesar, Agrippa, and others. In the


Hanseatic Hall of this building are some very curious old sculp-
tures, representing the worthies of the Old Testament ; and in the
portal are figures of lions, commemorating, it is said, the wicked-
ness of one of their bishops, who invited the burgomaster to
dinner, but had a lion in the room to devour him. The clever
burgomaster, however, thrust one arm down the lion’s throat, while
with the other he drew his rapier, and stabbed the beast through
the heart.
There is a very fine monument to Frederick William 111. in
one of the market places. It is a colossal equestrian statue, and
around the pedestal are the most celebrated of the warriors and
statesmen of Germany of the last generation.
The ride from Cologne to Bonn by rail is more interesting than
that by water, and it takes only a third of the time. Some curious
old towns are passed on the way, including Eheindorf, with its
peculiar church of two stories. Why so built nobody seems able
to explain. It is eight centuries old.
Bonn has a history which dates far back into that of the Roman
Empire, and connects it with many a conflict from those days ex-
tending all along the centuries. Its walks and avenues are very
pretty, and many of its public buildings are handsome. In the
Cathedral-square is a statue of Beethoven, which was unveiled in
the presence of our Queen Victoria in 1845.
The Rhine. —The beauties of the Rhine scenery may be said to
commence here. This glorious river is so well known in these
days of travel, and has been so abundantly illustrated, that I shall
only refer to some of its more striking objects, and that very
briefly. Nevertheless, lam impelled to give utterance to the deep
and pleasurable impressions which, in common with almost every
visitor, I experienced on my first trip up the Rhine. Its beauties
have inspired many a bard before Byron, but he seems to have had
the happiest mode of expressing the English excursionist’s feeling.
He describes the river as
A blending of all beauties ; streams and dells,
Fruit, foliage, crag, wood, cornfield, mountain, vine,
And chiefless castles breathing stern farewells
From grey but leafy walls, where ruin dwells.
The first great attraction on the left side of the river is “ the
castled crag of Drachenfels,” frowning from its rugged elevation of
a thousand feet. This eminence is reached from the charming
little town of Kbuigswinter. It is associated with several very
romantic legends.
On the opposite bank, a little further on, is a pretty little place
called Rolandseck, and on the hill above it is a ruin, which is all
that remains of its ancient castle. The legend attached to it (for
these ruins have each and all their separate legends) is so touching
that I am half tempted to find room for it. Up as far as Unkel,


on the left side, the river widens, and the views of its lake-like
expanse, with its islands and riverside villages and the receding
drachenfels, charm the traveller exceedingly. After passing a
bend in the river at Unkel, the steamer reaches on the right side
the ancient little town of Remagen, but a little before arriving off
Remagen we pass the now famous spring from which the Appol-
linaris water is obtained. It is not many years since this spring
was occasionally resorted to by the people of the neighbourhood
for the purpose of presenting to their friends small samples of its
mineral water. A well-known public man in London partook of
a bottle of it one day at the house of a friend, and was so greatly
struck with its quality that he inquired as to the whereabouts of
the spring. A few weeks later he astonished his friend at a
return dinner by asking his opinion of a bottle from his (the
host’s) own spring ! He had in the meantime been to Germany and
purchased the spring. As the reward of his enterprise a com-
pany is now employing large numbers of hands, a fleet of boats,
with horses, carts, and, I believe, bottle-works for the supply of
the world’s demand for Appollinaris water.
Opposite to Remagen is Erpel and its cliffs, and a little further
the ruined castle of Ockenfels, and further on is the handsome
modern castle of Arenfels, From this point we get a glimpse of
the castle of Rheineck, partly ancient and partly modern. Its
situation is a very charming one, commanding extensive views.
Other ruins are passed, and presently we are off the ancient and
interesting town of Andernach, with its old fortifications and its
many attractions. “ The legend of Andernach” is a grotesque
invention of the old priests, but much too long for these notes.
A little further on is Neuwied, in the neighbourhood of which is
a settlement of those devoted men, the Moravian Brethren. I
must hasten by several miles of interesting sights and land at
Cobleniz, which is at the confluence of the Moselle and the
Rhine,
Coblentz fronts the Rhine on the east side, the Moselle on the
north, and is protected by fortifications on the west and south.
It has a fine palace, some other good buildings and churches, a
beautiful promenade, and some picturesque views about both
rivers. It is the great centre of the Rhine and Moselle wine
trade, and I was indebted to the hospitable attentions and friendly
offices of the heads of the great house of Deinard and Company
for much interesting information concerning this great industry,
and whose underground town of vaulted cellars, with their count-
less stacks and hogsheads, constituted one of the most striking
objects seen in my travels. I had, moreover, the advantage of
seeing the careful and skilful processes by which the wines of the
district are here prepared for the markets of the world.
From the opposite side of the Rhine the famous fortress of


Ehrenbreitstein, one of the most perfect strongholds in Eui'ope,
frowns down upon the town of Coblentz. It is built upon a
rocky height, which rises precipitously for nearly 400 feet from
the river bank. It may well be called the “ Gibraltar of the
Rhine,” and to a civilian appears simply impregnable.
Of the other riverside castles and towers I must speak in
describing my return down the Rhine from Mayence, for I left
Coblentz by rail, crossing the river by a high-level girder bridge,
and following the eastern bank as far as Riidesheim, nearly oppo-
site to Bingen. I took this journey, at the suggestion of my
Coblentz friends, for a double purpose —to see the great national
monument “ Germania,” then near completion, on the heights of
the Niederwald, and to visit the principal vineyards in this the
most important district of the wine industry. It is here that it
may, indeed, be appropriately said of the u winding Rhine” that
Her breast of waters broadly swells
Between the banks which bear the vine,
And hills all rich with blossom’d trees,
And fields which promise corn and wine.
From Riidesheim, after passing through its quaint, narrow
streets, I was driven up the steep zigzag roads ascending the slopes
of the Niederwald. Some of the finest of the Rhine vineyards were
passed on the way, but this particular drive had special attractions,
for it brought me to the grand colossal monument, “ Germania,”
which the Emperor was to unveil a week or two later in the
presence of all the magnates of the nation. It was then receiving
its finishing touches. The view from it up the river is very
extended, but a much finer view down the river is obtained from a
ruined tower, which crowns a hill at a distance of a mile or two
from the monument. After returning to Riidesheim, I took train
to Geisenheim, a very ancient and quaint town, where I had friends
to conduct me through the chief vineyards of the famed slopes of
Johannisberg. The castle (as it is called, though it is not a cas-
tellated building) was for several years the residence of the late
Prince Metternich, and the Princess usually spends several months
of the year there still. The most costly wines of Germany are
some of those that are grown in the vineyards of the castle, and of
German families of distinction in the immediate neighbourhood.
A splendid view is obtained from the garden balcony in front of
the castle, which commands the Rhine all the way up to Mayence.
After re-descending the slopes and spending a few hours with my
friends in Geisenheim, I took train for Mayence, which I reached
late at night.
Mayence (or, in German, Mainz) is a strongly fortified town.
Coming from peaceful England, and still more peaceful Australia,
the sight of a nation armed to the teeth is a novelty. It is not one,
however, which suggests pleasurable reflections. Instead of learning


the art of loving one another after nearly nineteen centuries of
Christian teaching, here are enlightened peoples devoting their
energies to the attainment of the highest arts of mutual slaughter.
Throughout France and Germany this is more or less observable,
but at certain strategic points—the keys of provinces—it is im-
possible to avoid being struck with it. Such a point is Mayence,
The town bristles with defensive works, and stores filled with war
material. Over its very portals the German eagle appears to be brood-
ing over nests of cannon balls built amid piles of guns and mortars,
while at every turn sentinels are pacing, and small detachments
of military are marching and countermarching. The town is con-
nected with the opposite shore of the Rhine by a bridge which has
a fortified tower at each end, but the bridge in general use is a
bridge of boats, 600 yards in length, which can be separated into
detached pieces at a very short notice. The town of Kastel, facing
Mayence, is more a fortress than a town. While the old castles
and fortified hill-tops of the Rhine tell of wars and conflicts in the
past, this modern Mayence, faced and flanked as it is with bastions
and bulwarks, moats and fosses, tells of the mutual hate and
the lust of power of modern rulers and people. The German
military officer is a great dandy, and very proud of his uniform ;
such, indeed, is the passion for uniforms that every fourth man in
Mayence appears to wear some official dress. The town itself is
very much like other German towns. Its cathedral is a ponderous-
looking structure, and very ancient. The Church of St. Stephen,
also very old, but much smaller, is nevertheless a much more
attractive building, and occupies a very fine position. Some of the
streets are so nari’ow that you might get from the upper windows
of one house to those of the one facing it by means of a plank.
From Kastel it is only a short and easy ride by rail to the
Cheltenham of this part of Germany—the lovely Wiesbaden.
This is the resort of thousands of visitors in search of health or
pleasure. In addition to its hot springs and baths, it has its parks
and promenades, its ornamented and handsome streets, its squares
with bright fountains, and its grand hotels. The great centre of
attraction and of the fashionable life of this most fashionable of
German resorts is the Kursaal. This magnificent pile has its great
banquet hall; its ball-rooms, reading-rooms, gambling-rooms ; its
colonnade of shops and cafes ; its beautifully ornamented gardens
and fountains; and near it the Kurgarten, where, in front of its
miniature lake, you may stroll or recline under shady trees while
listening to the strains of a fine band, which plays every afternoon
beneath a beautiful kiosk.
The most conspicuous building from the outside of the town is the
Protestant Church, a modern Gothic building of red brick, with
five high spires. Its interior is chaste, and it has one very
beautiful window. Its chief peculiarity is that, instead of an altar,


and crosses, and candles, and paintings, as in the Catholic churches,
it has a plain communion-table, at the back of which stands a
stone figure of the Saviour with outstretched arms, as He may be
supposed to have stood in the temple when He cried, “ Come unto
Me;” while on each side are statues of two of the evangelists, each
of the four by some appropriate gestures directing the attention
of the people to the central figure. They are all of heroic size
Above the town is the hill of the Neroberg, rising some bOO
feet, on which is a cafe and other places of resort, and from
which grand views are obtained of the town below and the Rhine
valley stretching away in the distance.
Returning down the Rhine, after having travelled for a portion
of the distance upwards along its shores, was quite a new sensa-
tion, and the weather was perfection. From Mayence the Rhine
takes a westerly course to its next great bend at Bingen, and foi
the whole distance spreads out into lakelike expanses, with
numerous islands, mostly narrow and elongated, stretching along
its course. On its banks are several small towns, some of them
very interesting. There is Eltville, once the capital of the Rheingau,
with its old Castle, Erbach, with the chateau of Reinhartshausen ;
Sckierstein, with Frauenstein Castle in its vicinity ; the Hill of
Strahlenberg, with its vine-clad slopes, from which the famed Mar-
cobrunna wine is produced; Winkel and Mittelheim, which
adjoin each other, and stretch along the river bank. Then we had
a good view of the Castle of Johannisberg, which I had visited on
my way up, and the quaint little town of Geisenheim. Between
Riidesheim and Bingen the river narrows, and you look up to the
great monument on the Niederwald, which had been visible foi
several miles. Near here is the Mouse Tower, or Custom House
Tower, on a rocky island, and the ruined Tower of Ehrenfels on-
the mainland nearly opposite. Further on is the town of Assmans-
hausen, famous for its red wine, and the Rossel Tower on the
heights above. On the opposite hill is the picturesque Castle
of Rheinstein, set off by a well-wooded background, and a little
further the ruins of the Reichenstein. Before losing this
we get a good view of the restored and beautiful Castle of booneck
(or *Sonneck), and the ruin of Heimburg. The ancient town of
Torch is at the mouth of the Wisper, which here flows into the
Rhine, and near it is the ruined Castle of Mollingen, with the fine
ruin of Fiirstenberg on the opposite side. A curious looking,
weird place is the Pfalz—a sort of miniature Chillon, on a rocky
island in midstream ; and further down we get sight of the Castle
of Gutenfels, looking down upon the town of Caub; while on the
opposite side, and at no great distance, is to be seen the luins of
Schonburg Castle, on the heights near Oberwesel, one of the pret-
tiest towns to be seen on the banks of the Rhine. A bend in the
river at this point brings us to the celebrated rocks of Loielei (oi


Lurlei), rising grandly for 450 feet. At the foot of this bold
eminence is the whirlpool which is the foundation for the well-
known legend of the syren who bewitched the boatmen to her
rocky cells and grots below, expressed in Mendelssohn’s “ Loreley”
and the English “ Lurline.” A little way inland is the interesting
ruin of Reichenberg. Then we come to the town of St. Goar on one
side, and that of St. Goarshausen on. the opposite side. Near St.
Goar is the most extensive and interesting of the ruined castles of
the Rhine—that of the Castle of Rheinfels. Some distance further
we approach Bornhofen, on either side of which is a ruined castle—-
the one is Sterrenberg, the other Liebenstein, and they are known
as “ The Brother’s.” Boppard is a considerable town on the west
bank, and then comes a tortuous bend in the river, and villages,
castles, and towers are visible at every turn. The principal of
these castles are those of Lahneck, above Oberlahnstein, on the
one side, and the Castle of Stolzenfels on the other. Both have
been restored, and our Queen was entertained at the last-named by
the then King of Prussia about forty years ago. Shortly after
this we arrive at Coblentz. From thence to Cologne we enjoyed
under a bright sky and warm sun the second view of the
Drachenfels and others of the Rhine’s beauties, which we had
seen from a different outlook on our way up stream. Of course
it was impossible to pass through such enchanted ground
as this without carrying the imagination back to the remote
times when mailed warriors held the numerous castles and
towers, of which the ruins are visible to-day. The weird
legends connected with them, and the tales of chieftans, monks,
and dragons, hapless maidens and gallant heroes, do not
satisfactorily reveal the manner of life of those days among these
Rhine hills and the adjacent valleys, with their towns and villages,
nor is there time or space in such a sketch as this for going into
the question ; but no intelligent excursionist, after looking upon
them, can fail to desire a better acquaintance with their history.
I must not leave the Rhine without another word or two about its
vine-clad slopes and terraces. In some of these the soil is excel-
lent and of a great depth ; but what strikes the traveller most is not
so much the extensive vineyards, covering hundreds of acres, but
the poor man’s patches. On the rocky hillsides, wherever a ledge
or level piece occurs with a sunny aspect, they have been covered
with mould carried up from below, and in many cases the earth is
protected by stone walls, so that each little patch of a perch or
two is a miniature vineyard; and the puzzling question is how
many of them are reached or the grapes brought down after they
are gathered. The vintages on the Rhine are very late. There is
one early gathering in September of a special grape used for
blending purposes only, but the general ingathering does not take
place until November. When I was through the vineyards in


September the grapes were green and mostly hard ; but they
usually reckon upon about a fortnight of warm, sunny weather in
that month, which expands the berry and the saccharine ; then it
goes on ripening until the cold, wintry weather compels the
vigneron to get in his harvest in November. Those sunny days
had commenced before I left the district, and my vine-growing
friends were in cheerful spirits.
Mulheim —On my second visit to Cologne I saw somewhat
more of the city and its surroundings, and paid a special visit
to Mulheim. Having an introduction to the head of the great
firm of Felton and Guilleaume, the manufacturers of wires of
every description, from submarine cables to the delicate wire
strings of musical instruments, and even finer than these, I was
received most courteously by that gentleman, as well as the
managers of the works, and spent a great part of a day in examin-
ing the various processes and obtaining information as to the German
system of telegraph and telephone wires and the underground
telegraph cables, which now connect all parts of the empire instead
of the aerial wires, which are a disfigurement and a source of
danger in English and Australian towns.
On returning to Cologne I found at my hotel a party of friends
from Melbourne. On the following morning they started up the
Rhine, while I took train for Belgium. On this, as on other
occasions, I was grieved and mortified at being compelled to
content myself with a mere glance at such towns as Aix-la-
Chapelle and Lidge, which I took on my way to Brussels. The
former was the birthplace of Charlemagne, and there he died, after
becoming the master of Europe, There, too, some of the principal
diets, councils, and congresses of European Powers have been held.
It has some interesting manufactories ; but, like all great centres in
Europe, it is famous for its churches and relics. The great silver
shrine at the cathedral contains —or rather is said to contain—the
cotton robe of Mary worn at the nativity, the swaddling clothes of
the Divine Infant, the scarf worn by our Lord at the crucifixion,
&c. There are also (almost as a matter of course in so important
a cathedral) portions of the true cross, as well as rarer objects,
such as a piece of Aaron's rod that budded, a lock of the Virgin’s
hair, and the sponge that was filled with vinegar at the crucifixion !
Liege is a very large town, and may be correctly styled the Bir-
mingham of Belgium, The forests of chimneys that rise from its
numerous ironworks remind one very much of a part of Birming-
ham. Several streams converge at Liege, and the scenery in some
of the adjacent valleys is extremely picturesque and beautiful.
My first visit to Brussels was limited to one day, and then I went
on to
Antwerp. —From the Hotel de I’Europe, in one of the principal
squares (where I had taken up my quarters), to the great Cathedral


was a walk of three or four minutes only, so my first attentions
after breakfast the next morning were devoted to that very
interesting pile. The music of its sixty bells I had become
familiar with from the first hour of my arrival, for they ring out
their beautiful carillon at very short intervals. The spire is one
of the finest in Europe, and one of the loftiest anywhere, being
over 400 feet high. The exquisite tracery of its external sculp-
tures is such that it has been compared to Mechlin lace. The
interior is full of objects of surpassing interest in painting, sculp-
ture, and stained glass. Among the first of these objects are the
two masterpieces of Rubens, “ The Elevation of the Cross and
“ The Descent from the Cross.” Among the carvings and sculp-
tures may be mentioned a very curious wooden pulpit, carved by
Verbruggen , with symbolical life-sized figures representing the four
quarters of the globe, and strange specimens of the feathered
tribes. Some confessionals, carved by the same artist, are also
wonderful for beauty of detail. The high altar is one of the most
gorgeous in Europe, The ascent of the tower is fatiguing, but is
well repaid by the delightful views that burst upon you from the
upper gallery, commanding, as it does, on one hand the River
Scheldt with its forest of masts and funnels, and all around the
quaint, tall gables of the houses and public buildings, the numerous
spires and pinnacles, and the far-stretching plains of Belgium and
Holland beyond. In my descent I found the belfry open and the
ringers preparing to ring out a dirge for a great man who had just
departed this life. I accepted an offer to inspect the bells, fox I
had a strong desire to see that famous piece of mechanism, the
keyboard and connecting wires by which tunes can be played upon
these cathedral bells as upon an organ. The ringers, however,
played a practical joke upon me, which I shall not soon fox get.
They began by ringing one of the smaller bells, the sound of
which was musical without being overpowering, and I watched it
with pleasure. "While doing so one of the big monstexs burst
forth into a terrific WONG, and then a second followed. My
conductor snatched ray hat and umbrella, so as to relieve both
hands for stopping my ears, while I gladly scrambled through
beams and timbei’S to get to the turret steps. On reaching the
belfry again I found that those two bells took each four men to
ring them, while (( Old Carolus, ’ the largest of all, xequixes six
men to ring it. It weighs 16,000 lbs.
Antwerp abounds in Catholic churches. One of the most
curious is that of St. Paul. You approach it through a yard and
cloisters, with statues all ai’ound it, and a most grotesque piece of
rockwork, intended to represent Calvary. It is surmounted by an
image of the Saviour on the cross, while figures of the Virgin and
apostles are placed on the descending ledges or terraces. At the
foot is a rude representation of the sepulchrp, with our Lord inside;


and at the back and sides of this cave are representations of purga-
tory, with life-size figures of unhappy people encaged behind iron
bars, and in the midst of torturing flames. Painters were at work
at the time of my visit adding (with their brushes) new fuel to the
fires by horrid dashes of red and yellow.
Although Antwerp is now so thoroughly Catholic, we must not
forget that Protestantism owes much to the reformers of that city
for the early translations of the New Testament, and their print-
ing by Raimond, Tyndale, and Fryth, The city is rich in works
of art. Rubens is its chief presiding deity. You meet him every-
where. The band played at the foot of his statue in front of my
hotel each evening. In the museum you see his arm-chair in a
glass case! It has also given birth to some others of the great
painters whose works are the glory of European galleries. The
Spaniards once held Antwerp, and hence you find a Spanish air
among the females, whose rich mantillas are more like those of the
Peninsula than of Belgium,
Brussels. —Returning to “ the lesser Paris,” I took up ray
quarters at the Hotel Belle-Yue in the Place Royale, and adjoin-
ing the King’s Palace. From this centre the greater and lesser
boulevards were easy of access; the grand pare was close at hand,
and all the great institutions of the city could be reached by tram-
car, cab, or on foot.
The old town, like other continental cities, has its narrow,
crowded thoroughfares; while the more modern and fashionable
portions of the city contain spacious streets, magnificent walks and
buildings, and all the luxuries and conveniences of Paris and
London. Its cathedral is much inferior to that of Antwerp, but
I witnessed some very imposing ceremonies in it. Its museums
are full of instructive objects, and many of its public buildings are
remarkable for their beauty. One of the most massive and im-
posing buildings in Europe is the new Palace of Justice, which was
not quite completed at the time of my visit. It is said to have cost
sixty millions of francs. I have not space to refer to the numerous
other attractions of this one of the most attractive of European
cities.
Waterloo, —One cannot speak of Brussels without remember-
ing the events of which it was the scene on that memorable eve,,
when—
There was a sound of revelry by night,
And Belgium’s capital had gather’d then
Her beauty and her chivalry, and bright
The lamps shone o’er fair women and brave men ;
A thousand hearts beat happily ; and when
Music arose, with its voluptuous swell,
Soft eyes look’d love to eyes that spake again,
And all went merry as a marriage bell;
But hush ! hark ! a deep sound strikes like a rising knell


Ah ! then and there was hurrying to and fro,
And gathering tears and tremblings of distress,
And cheeks all pale which but an hour ago
Blush’d at the praise of their own loveliness ;
And there were sudden partings, such as press
The life from out young hearts, and choking sighs
Which ne’er might be repeated; who would guess
If ever more should meet those mutual eyes,
Since upon night so sweet such awful morn could rise ?
And there was mounting in hot haste ; the steed,
The mustering squadron, and the clattering car,
Went pouring forward with impetuous speed,
And swiftly forming in the ranks of war ;
And the deep thunder, peal on peal, afar ;
And near, the beat of the alarming drum
Roused up the soldier ere the morning star :
While throng’d the citizens with terror dumb,
Or whispering with white lips, “ The foe ! They come ! They come 1”
At an early hour I sallied forth over the same route as that
taken by the mustering battalions on that eventful morning, and
arrived at the village of Waterloo, thence pressing onward to the
actual battle-ground. Joining (in imagination) Napoleon and his
columns at Quatre-bras, and following the Emperor to the farm-
house known as La Belle Alliance, I crossed to the Chateau d’Hou-
gomont, where the fighting commenced, and around which it raged
until three thousand dead encumbered its courts and grounds ; then
stood by our own Wellington, and watched the varying complexion
of the field; saw with my mind’s eye the opportune arrival of
Blucher with his Prussians ; realised the great mistake of Napo-
leon in supposing that these were his own reserves ; watched the
effect of his after-discovery of the real truth; then went through
all the thrilling excitement of the last desperate dash of the French
at our centre; saw the heaps of slain covering the field till not a
clod was visible (thousands of gory corpses, with arms and accoutre-
ments, covered the few acres whereon that desperate encounter
took place); then I saw the guards rise up from their ambush, and
rush in to decide the mortal fray; and then the final defeat of the
French troops, and the last decisive blow struck which terminated
the great European war and the career of France’s imperial com-
mander. All this exercise of the imagination was greatly aided
by the marvellous descriptive powers of our guide, whose dramatic
action and passionate enthusiasm held us spellbound while he
described each successive event, pointing our attention to the
various spots whereon each occurred. From the summit of the
Montague du Lion —a pyramidal mound of earth 200 feet high,
surmounted by a colossal bronze lion, and beneath which lie the
bones of thousands of the slain, conquerors and conquered,
mingling in one common grave—the whole field can be taken in
with the assistance of a field-glass. Descending from this mount
to an hotel near its base, we are enabled to examine a large col-


lection of arms and mementoes of the great battle, and to obtain
photographic and other illustrations of the scenes. Two of the
finest monuments erected on the battle-field are those of General
Gordon and of the Hanoverians, The Prussians have also a
beautiful Gothic monument; and if you will take the trouble to go
to the spot, near at hand, you may see the grave of the Marquis
of Anglesea’s leg —a burlesque termination, it must be admitted,
to so tragic a story.
From Brussels to Paris the journey is interesting chiefly on
account of the opportunity afforded to notice the habits and mode of
culture adopted by the French farmers in the northern provinces.
Paris.— During a four days’ sojourn in the gayest and grandest
of European cities an industrious sightseer may accomplish much,
I had the advantage of an excellent cicerone, in the person of a
relative who has been resident in Paris for many years, and whose
place of business is close to the Place de la Concorde, He drove
me through the Bois de Bologne at the fashionaole hour, pointing
out all the celebrities, also to the Trocad6ro and several outside
places, as well as others within the city, Paris, in great
central Boulevards, was to me a new city, as I had not seen it since
the great changes effected under the regime of Napoleon 111, The
new Opera House and other buildings visible hereabouts are very
handsome. Of course, there was a pleasure in revisiting such
places as the old Boulevards, the Champs Elysees (they are pro-
posing to spoil the beautiful A.rc de Triomphe by placing an
equestrian group upon the top of it, robbing it of its majestic
simplicity), the Pantheon, the Luxembourg, Notre Dame, the
Palais Royale, the Louvre, the Bourse, the numerous monuments,
the Invalides (which now contains the bones of Napoleon I. in a
grand sarcophagus), and inspecting such buildings as the new
Hotel de Yille, the Sevres porcelain works, &c., &c. One of the
most attractive of the modern sights of Paris is the panorama of
the siege of Paris and its defence against the attacks of the
German armies during the 132 days. The central point of this
grand panorama is the Fort of Issy, upon which the German
batteries rained their projectiles during the latter part of the
siege. The fort itself, with all its details of fortifications and
armaments, is beneath the spectators feet, and around and on all
sides are very vivid representations of the German positions and
the operations of the siege, made up of numberless details. Theie
is also a diorama showing what was passing in the stieets the
effects of the shells falling in the bombarded quarter, the terror
and flight of the families, ambulances, and all the incidents of that
tragic situation. As I was in Paris on a Sunday I had another
opportunity of attending one of the great services at the Madeleine,
visiting rather hurriedly several other churches, and attending,,
also, a service at the English Episcopal Church.


Homeward Bound. —From Paris I went by rail to Dieppe and
steamer to Newhaven, tbence to Lewes and Brighton, and after a
brief stay at the latter place to note the many changes since my
former visits —its extended sea beach and esplanade, its aquarium,
and other attractions —I took train to London, and was gladly
received once more into the bosom of my family, who were then
located for the time at Hampstead Heath.
[My English experiences would fill a volume. I therefore omit
any attempt to give particulars of them, except what may be
obtained from my address to the Melbourne Chamber of Com-
merce, which is printed herewith as an appendix.]


LONDON TO AUSTRALIA, VIA FRANCE, SWITZERLAND,
IT/ILY, EGYPT, AND CEYLON.
The mail route from London to Australia, as everybody knows,
is by way of the Suez Canal and the Red Sea. The steamers sail
from the Thames, and passengers can either go from thence or can
start from Venice or Brindisi by a steamer which goes direct to
Alexandria, from whence a special train proceeds through Egypt
overland to Suez, there overtaking the steamer which had sailed
from the Thames. This latter route is the one chosen by passen-
gers desirous of seeing something of Europe on the way, and the
following are notes of a journey by a party of four (two ladies and
two gentlemen), who took in their way Paris, Basle, Lucerne, the
Alps by the St. Gothard Tunnel, Como, Milan, Venice, Florence,
Rome, and Naples.
The start was made from London at ten o’clock on a mild
morning in February. Dover was reached without incident, and
the Channel was crossed in moderate but damp weather, so that
our last, long, lingering look at the white cliffs of Britain was
neither sunny nor sentimental. Whatever of emotion accompanied
it was kept all to ourselves, especially as unpleasant qualms were
interfering with the personal comfort of more than one of the
party. Paris was reached in the evening. Of Paris it is needless
to say much. All the world knows more or less of this brightest
and gayest of cities. To two of our party it was comparatively
new. The writer, however, had but recently explored its ways,
seen some, at least, of its sights, and enjoyed some of its society.
The other three did much of Paris by themselves, while the writer
paid a visit to friends at Epernay, the great centre of the cham-
pagne district, only a few hours’ journey by rail. Having not
long since been over the principal vineyards and some of the
largest cellars in the district of the Rhine and Moselle, it was
pleasant to be able to compare them with these celebrated vine-
yards, which supply the grapes for the Moet and Chandon, the
Wachter, and the Cliquot champagnes, and to see some of these
large establishments, and inspect the various processes and stages
in the maturing of their far-famed productions. An opportunity
was also afforded of enjoying for a brief space the hospitality and
society of an old and valued friend. After rejoining the rest of
the party, and making the most of such time as remained for


Parisian sight-seeing, a start was made by an early morning train
for Lucerne, by way of Basle, at whicli last-named town
we stopped one night. It was a pleasure to look out once
more from one’s bedroom window in the Hotel “ Trois Hois” on
to the flowing Hhine. There is nothing of especial interest about
old Basle, so after a drive around its quaint thoroughfares,
and a hurried inspection of some of its churches and public build-
ings, we were on our way to the more attractive Lucerne. The
interest of this journey rapidly increases. The railway ascends
through a romantic valley bordered by lofty hills, with enchanting
glimpses between. The hillsides are dotted with pretty chalets
and churches, and the character of the country is becoming pal-
pably Swiss. At Olten, about midway between Basle and Lucerne,
we change trains. For some distance we are on a plateau of
verdant country, which would be quite English but for the chalets
and groups of Swiss-like houses here and there. The snow peaks
of the Alpine mol*untains also come more and more into view until
we get very near the snow—in fact it begins to lie about us, and
in the hollows around, while peak after peak comes looming up
like “ Pelion on Ossa piled.” In the open patches of country we
pass, the numerous cattle-sheds tell of the difficulties of the moun-
taineer when the land is all under snow, and his poor beasts have
to be penned in under cover and fed. The snow-covered ground
becomes more and more glaring under a brilliant sun, but in the
outlook the fierceness of this white light is mitigated by the dark
shadows of mountain peaks and the dark foliage of occasional
pine forests. As we glided down to Lucerne we were enchanted
with the first sight of its suburbs and outskirts. Beautiful villas
on the hill sides, the spires of the cathedral, the battlemented town
wall and towers, all came rapidly into view, and then a glimpse
of the glorious lake ; and, lo !we were at the station. I ought
not to omit mention of the lovely lake of Sempach, which we pass
before reaching Lucerne, The little town of the same name is on
the opposite shore of the lake, and the perfect reflection of the
town, its spires and roofs and trees, on its mirror-like surface,
charmed us exceedingly. At Lucerne station we expected to en-
counter the Custom-house officers, for although we had been led to
expect rather more than the average trouble with these gentry, our
baggage had been registered, and sent through from Paris with-
out examination. As an official was particularly anxious to possess
himself of my portmanteau, I was equally importunate in my
endeavours to persuade him to inspect the contents there and
then, and, keys in hand, was carrying on a controversy (in bad
French) with my tormentor, until, amid the laughter of my fellow-
travellers, I was told that the official was our hotel porter,
who merely wished to relieve me of further trouble with my
belongings.


Surely Lucerne was never seen to greater advantage than on the
day of our arrival. What a coup d'ceil ! The amphitheatre of
mountains, all covered with recent snows, encloses the town and
lake on three sides. From our hotel we had the lofty Rigi in
front, Mount Pilatus on one side, and the interval and back-
ground filled up with peak upon peak in long-stretching variety of
form, but all glistening in spotless white. Contrasted with all this
was the placid bosom of the blue lake at our feet, reflecting (but
in a deeper, richer tone) the clear blue sky above. Lucerne has a
fine esplanade, and some charming resorts. The chief among the
local objects of interest is “ the lion of Lucerne,” cut in the solid
rock by Ahorn, under the direction of Thorwalsden, in honour of
the Swiss soldiers who fell in Paris in 1792. Two covered wooden
bridges with antique paintings are also well worth a thorough in-
spection. Three out of our four were Australians, and as the
English winter had been to us something of a fraud—no colder in
fact than we could have shown English visitors in elevated posi-
tions such as Ballarat—the tempation was very great to handle the
snow as it lay two or three inches deep along our paths. Of course it
needed but little provocation to proceed to snowballing on a mild
scale. Many years had elapsed since one at least of the party had
indulged in such a sport. One of the sensational incidents of a
visit to Lucerne is the ascent of the Rigi, 5400 feet high, by its
marvellous railway, worked up and down the precipitous incline by
an engine with powerful cogs. This surprising piece of engineer-
ing, however, has not patrons enough to employ it in the winter,
so we could not go through the sensation. We could only look at
the railway at its base at Yitznau, and imagine the rest with the
further aid of photographs. We determined on leaving Lucerne
to take the lake steamer instead of the railway (which everybody
should do). The trip down to the other end of the lake at Fluelen
is one of the most charming lake trips in the world. Several small
towns are passed on the way, and chalets and Swiss-like
buildings dot the hill sides in such marvellous ways that one
wonders how the occupiers can reach them. Among
the objects of interest seen on the banks of the lake is
William Toll's chapel. Tradition says that when the Austrian
tyrant, Gesler, sailed up this lake he took Tell with him, com-
pelling him to pilot the boat. A storm having lashed up the lake
into fury the governor wished to land, and Tell, having run the
boat to shore, leaped on land, and with a powerful push of his foot
sent the boat back into the angry waves, and made his escape.
This chapel commemorates the event. On the other side of the
lake is the Mythenstein, a rock rising perpendicularly from the
water, on which in letters of gold the cantons have had engraved
an inscription to Schiller, the poet of Tell. Near to the mythic
stone is the meadow or paddock in which the three Swiss heroes,


Walter Flirst, Werner Stauffacher, and Arnold Melchthall, met at
night, and took the mutual oath to deliver their country, or die;
and at the little town of Brunnen opposite is still shown an old
house in which these patriots held, a year later, the first con-
vention which laid the foundation of Helvetic liberty. Along the
shore of the lake is the famous Axenstrasse, a capital road cut for
the most part out of the solid mountain side. The lake terminates
at Fluelen, a curious little place of about a thousand inhabitants,
with a quaint hotel, from which we looked out upon the principal
thoroughfare and the church. From this place we paid a visit to
Altorf, the little capital of the canton, a very quiet little town,
full of romantic interest as the scene of the early struggle for
liberty and of the heroic deeds of William Tell. Here is a colossal
statue of Tell, erected by his countrymen—a tower and chapel and
a fountain on the spot where it is said the lime tree grew against
which Tell’s son leaned when his father shot the apple from his
head. Tell’s birthplace, the spot on which Gesler was shot by
Toll's arrow, and other memorials of the time, are shown in the
neighbourhood. From Fluelen we started by an early train on
our ascent of the Alps by way of the St. Gothard tunnel.
It rained when we commenced our journey, but the rain soon
became snow; and as we rose rapidly amongst precipitous hills
and deep gorges the heavy flakes were covering the ground, and
bending with their weightlhe horizontal branches of the mountain
pines. Grand views opened up as we proceeded ; sometimes along
mere ledges of the mountain side, with deep dangerous ravines
below us ; sometimes crossing tall viaducts or winding round the
sides of hills, passing dark tunnels and emerging to look down
upon a railway beneath us, over which we had passed a quarter of
an hour before. At other times the mountain torrent was rushing
its headlong course along by our side, while at intervals the
graceful silvery cascades of 50 or 100 feet fell in one white line
from over a mountain ledge, or a miniature torrent tumbled and
leaped from shelf to shelf of a rocky gorge. It was indeed
A land of streams; some like a downward smoke,
Slow dropping veils of thinnest lawn, did go ;
And some through wavering lights and shadows broke,
Rolling a slumbrous sheet of foam below.
As we approached the St. Gothard tunnel the road became quite
romantic in its windings, describing in its course a squab-shaped
letter S. The last station in Switzerland is Goschenen, soon after
leaving which we entered the tunnel, said to be the longest in
Europe—being miles. It is also a very remarkable one, as
dividing Southern Europe from northern, and Switzerland from
Italy. Emerging on the Italian side, the train soon brings us to
Airolo, a township of considerable size. We are struck with the
large dimensions of the houses ; but they are all of a different cha-


racter to those we had left on the other side of the tunnel—either ia
villages or perched about in all sorts of inaccessible-looking places
on the mountain sides. Here, too, the Swiss spires gave way to
Italian campaniles. The names and signs, and the language, were
all Italian. The town has a very new look, it having been
mostly rebuilt after a great fire which destroyed 200 of its houses
a few years ago. The change even extended to the weather, which
was the reverse of that in Switzerland. Instead of falling snow we
had an almost clear sky. The mountains were less white. On
one side would be a hill still snow-clad, but on the opposite side of
the valley where the sun had reached, the hillside would be green
or brown. The mountains, too, were more rounded in form,
although snowy peaks were visible above and beyond these. We
also notice that the river (the Tessin), which occasionally ran
beside us, or passed under bridges beneath us, ran in the opposite
direction to those on the other side. On this side, however, as on
the Swiss side, we came upon beautiful cascades, as well as
evidences of the effects of glaciers and avalanches. In one place
the rocks brought down from above had crushed several houses,
and these messengers of destruction were still lying upon the ruins.
Descending through tunnels and romantic defiles, and skirting
some fertile-looking valleys, we came upon the first signs of the
vine culture, and the patches of valley and terraced hillsides under
vines and fruit trees rapidly increased, until whole valleys appeared
to be dependent upon them. The descent on this side, like the
ascent on the other, is frequently by serpentine courses, in which
we compass the distance in a direct line only by “ doubling” and
r-edoubling. Looking down upon a line of rails immediately
below us, and proceeding in the same direction, we enter a tunnel
or a defile, and presently look up to see over our heads the line
we had just traversed. The vineyards hereabouts had a very
peculiar appearance. The vines were all trained up supports five
or six feet high, in squares, and trellised over the top. The sup-
ports were in some cases timber, but in many others granite or a
hard sandstone (with both of which the hills abound). One of
the largest towns on the route is Bellinzona, a picturesque place,
with castellated and embattled forts on the heights above it.
Passing from the town the hillsides, where the aspect is favour-
able, are covered with vines, every available patch being cultivated,
as on the banks of the Rhine. They are also staked here in the
ordinary way.
From points near here some fine views are obtained of the
receding Alpine peaks on the one hand, and the fertile plains of
Lombardy on the other. A branch line leads off through the
valley of the Tessin to Locarno and Lago Maggiore. Our time
did not admit of this diversion, and we proceeded along the main
line to Lugano and Como. After re-ascending about a hundred


metres along the mountain side, we emerge at an elevation which
reveals to us the outskirts of Lugano. We have not time to give
expression to our admiration of the picturesque villas and hand-
some buildings scattered about the slopes of a most enchanting
valley before we discover that the buildings increase in number and
magnitude, with spires and campaniles, until the town of Lugano
lies immediately below us. A little interruption to this charming
view, and lo! the Lake of Lugano bursts upon us in its quiet
but enchanting loveliness. What a delicious sight ! The train
stops long enough to enable us to gratify our ravished vision for
some minutes, and then the line gradually descends to the lake-side,
along which it winds, enabling us at every turn round the project-
ing hillsides to see it in some new aspect, the hills rising abruptly
on every side, and the town with its white buildings, its foliage,
and its towers, stretching away up one of the sweetest valleys in
Italy. Here is a realisation of Claude Melnotte’s poetic picture
and worthy site of such a palace as that with which the gardener’s
son filled the imagination of his inamorata—“ A deep vale, shut
out by Alpine hills from the rude world, near a clear lake mar-
gined by fruits of gold, glassing soft skies, cloudless, save by rare
and roseate shadows.” Midway down the lake a grand viaduct
crosses it, by which the train passes to the opposite side. The
lower end of the lake is less beautiful than the upper, but the
scenery around is still very fine as far as Capolago. Thence to
Como the journey presents nothing very striking. Our first view
of Como was obtained under less favourable circumstances than
that of Lugano, It was after sunset, and the view from the rail-
way is not nearly so good as from other points. We therefore
made for our hotel in the Grand Square, and reserved our inspec-
tion of the lake scenery for the morning. Even then our impres-
sions were much less exciting than those occasioned by the sight of
Lugano, although if Como had been seen first, and for the first
time from some point of vantage under a bright sky, the ecstacy
would have been as great as that we experienced when Lugano
burst upon our view and imprinted itself indelibly upon our
memories. The Lake of Como, however, is not to be seen by a
visit to the town of Como only. It has an extent of some thirty
miles in a north-easterly direction, and then there is a south-
easterly branch turning off midway to Lecco, so that it has some-
thing of the shape of a “ wishing-bone” with an exaggerated
shank. Excursions may be made over it by steamer, but our time
was limited, and, moreover, we had been feasting on lake scenery
for four consecutive days, and could be content with the beauties
of Como’s south-western wing.
Milan.— Arriving at the famous city of Milan at mid-day, we
were driven to our quarters at the Hotel de I’Europe, in the Corso
Vittorio Emanuele, near the cathedral. The length of our drive
to this, the very heart of the city, gave us an idea of its magnitude.


It is said to contain 220,000 inhabitants, including the military.
It was the capital of the Cisalpine Republic, and under Napoleon
I. was the capital of the kingdom. It was afterwards ceded to
Austria, but since the battle of Solferino it has been part of the
united kingdom of Italy. Immediately after lunch we sallied
forth to see what we could of famous Milan. As we were near
the cathedral, of course we made direct for the grand Piazza, and
surveyed from various points that wondrous pile
Tis only in the land of fairy dreams
Such marble temples rise ;
How bright! how beautiful 1 the turrets peep
In snowy clouds, while statues crown their heights.
It is a marvellous structure: the largest Gothic church in the
world, covering about double the space occupied by Canterbury
Cathedral. In richness of detail, too, it has no rival. Statues
and bas-reliefs occupy apparently every niche and space, but
although they number some 3000 it is said there is still room for
many hundreds more. Facing one side of the cathedral is the
Royal Palace. In an opposite direction is the grand front of the
Galleria Vittorio Eraanuele. It is the handsomest building of its
kind in. Europe. The front to the Piazza del Duomo consists of a
fine colonnade, beneath which are some of the most fashionable
shops ; thence a magnificent arched arcade extends from this piazza
to the other piazza of the Scala, and it is in the form of a cross
with an octagon in the centre, adorned with frescoes. A splendid
glazed cupola covers this centi'e, and rises to a height of 180 feet.
It forms a delightful promenade, especially when illuminated in the
evening with its numberless jets of gas. The best shops and cafes
in Milan are here. Facing the principal front of the cathedral,
but towards the other side of the piazza, was a grand kiosk oi
pavilion, the sides and covering of canvas, but adorned with flags
and ornaments of the gayest colours. Its floor was at a consider-
able eleAmtion, and approached by grand flights of steps. This
was intended to play an important part in the demonstiations of
the carnival (which was to commence next day), and its pastimes
were already being anticipated by an <xl fresco ball, the admission
to the floor being under the direction of richly-clad flunkies, with
silver-headed staffs. Engaging a vetturino, with a smattering of
English and a trifle more French, we drove to the principal sights
of the city, taking a hasty view of its principal palaces, piazzas,
and portas (of which latter there are eleven), and a drive along
the great Corso, planted on each side, and forming the Hyde Park
of Milan. Amongst other objects visited Avere the castle (only a
huge barrack) ; the Piazza d’Armi, an immense open square, like the
Champ de Mars in Paris; a very fine triumphal arch, called now
the Arco Della Pace, which forms in fact the Porta del Semplone,


as the Simplon-road passes under it. It is surmounted by a bronze
figure of Peace, in a car drawn by six horses, and is covered with
historical bas-reliefs and inscriptions. In the same neighbourhood
is the arena, an oval amphitheatre, built like many other Italian
amphitheatres, something- upon the plan of the great Colosseum.
It is said to accommodate thirty thousand people. It is used for
races, fireworks, &c., and can be flooded for miniature regattas.
One of the sights of Milan is its cemetery. The buildings con-
nected with it are handsome, but the arrangement of the ground
is too stiff and mechanical. We saw a great many funerals of
children and young persons, from which the mourners were
returning in a very light-hearted frame of mind. The processions
were mostly composed of women and girls, the majority of whom
wore white lace veils and mantillas stretching to their knees. The
children were rather proud of them, and gambolled about, while
the women indulged in gossip and chit-chat. We visited only a
few of the churches. Of coui’se the Duomo (as the cathedral is
called) is by far the most magnificent. Its forest of pillars,
statues, stained windows, bronze pulpits, richly-carved stalls, &c.,
as well as the immense height of its vaulted aisles, is very impres-
sive. Beneath the church is the shrine of San Carlo Borromeo,
who was a great reformer of abuses when he was bishop, and
was nearly assassinated for his pains, at the instance of the priests.
His body—at least the poor shrivelled and decayed remains of it
—are kept in a shrine of gold and silver, and arrayed in gorgeous
robes. They are dimly seen by visitors who are willing to pay for
the privilege through a glazed screen. One other church I must
mention : it is that of Santa Maria Della G-razie, though not for
the sake of the church itself, but for the refectory near it, which
contains one of the best known paintings in the world—namely,
“ The Last Supper,” by Leonardo da Yinci. The figures are
larger than life, and the painting covers a wall at one end of the
refectory 28 feet long. It is incomprehensible how such a painting
should have been so badly cared for in a country like Italy. The
monks have actually been allowed to cut a doorway through the
wall, which has destroyed the feet of the central figures. The wall
itself is affected by damp, and the picture has been so touched up
by different artists that it is probably very unlike its original self,
though still beautiful and a very intex-esting study.
The carnival is to be seen to the greatest advantage at Milan.
At Venice the absence of horses and carriages necessitates the cele-
bration being on foot, and chiefly in the Grand Piazza. There,
too, as well as at Naples, Rome, Florence, and other cities, the pro-
ceedings terminate before the commencement of Lent; but how-
ever sacred a duty the observance of that solemn season may be
considered, the Pope does not hesitate to grant to the Milanese the
special privilege of encroaching upon the great fast by five days of


rampant fun and folly. This enables the more enthusiastic of the
mummers and mirth-seekers to come from other carnivals and
swell the local ranks. On the evening of Ash Wednesday a great
concourse of masqueraders arrived by special train from other
cities, and a grand procession was formed by them and the Milanese,
which paraded the chief thoroughfares to the Cathedral-square.
Some were on foot, others on horseback, in carriages, cars, and in
every variety of vehicle. The Corso Emanuele, in which our hotel
was situated, was illuminated for the occasion, and innumerable
lamps and torches were also borne along in the procession. As we
had a balcony placed at our disposal we saw it to great advantage.
All these masquers attended the great ball which was afterwards
held. The second day was a much more lively one than the first.
The real fun in fact then commenced. Visitors poured in during
the morning from all parts, and by two o’clock the principal
thoroughfares were densely crowded. Most of the balconies along
the Corso were decorated with flags or hangings. In some of
them were people in carnival costumes, mostly white, set off with
blue or red. Waggon loads of sacks of flour and lime were piled
wherever there was a convenient recess, and many of the balconies
were supplied with a good stock of it. As, however, the occupants
of the great majority of the balconies were in ordinary dress, and
mostly dark, they, as a rule, had little stores of bonbons, comfits,
coloured paper balls, and bows, and such like innocent missiles—
(for they were all collected for the pelting that was to follow). As
men or women appeared among the crowd in fancy costume they
got a shower from above. Indeed some of the thoroughgoing
carnivalians began very early to pour out shovelsful of flour and
lime upon the crowds below them. The {(recession, which started
from the Cathedral-square up our Corso at about two o’clock, was
made up of numberless vehicles of the ordinary kind, but filled
with people more or less disguised, many of them in really pictur-
esque dresses. At short intervals came bands of music,
some on foot, but mostly in large cars elaborately built up and
decorated. A band of reed instruments, played by men in Pan-
like costumes, were nearly at the head. They were
followed by a band of gigantic lanterns, each lantern
having a man inside it. Then a tasteful car full of men and
women in elegant blue and white costumes, the women pelting the
balconies with flowers and comfit balls. Shortly afterwards came a
band in an enormous car, the players being in all sorts of bright
colours, yellow predominating, and a colossal figure standing in
the centre carrying bells, which- jingled with the motion of the
car. Next was a walking band of Tyrolese in green, and, a little
afterwards, a band of grasshoppers. A gigantic car came soon
afterwards, with men in cocked hats and particoloured dresses; and
from a great wooden trench surrounding the car they continually


shovelled out flour and lime upon the crowds below, making an
occasional assault upon some of the lower balconies. Another
small party of a canine character was headed by a leader with an
enormous dog’s head and a giant dog in a kennel, followed shortly
afterwards by a procession of white dogs and a fancy car drawn
by a donkey. Then came an immense car of Italian farmers and
their wives—very pretty costumes. The hinder part of the car
was thatched over as if it were part of a farm building, and around
it were sheaves of corn, while on the floor in the centre they were
continually threshing with their flails, and the pretty wives were
busy with their shovels tossing out the corn (a very good imita-
tion) as hard as they could throw it at the crowds. One of the
most imposing affairs in this part of the procession was a colossal
car representing an embattled house with band inside (all wind
instruments), and the men outside working with might and main
as they chai’ged the balconies or the crowds from their large stores
of flour. This was drawn by eight richly caparisoned horses with
five outriders. Another car, drawn by horses in red with out-
riders to match, contained a band dressed as Arabs and Italian
fishermen. In the centre of the car was mounted a giant soldier
coming out of a sentry-box, who by an ingenious contrivance was
made to take two or three steps in advance, and as he immediately
became the butt of numberless flour balls or comfits (we succeeded
in hitting him on the nose) he then turned round, marched to the
sentry-box as if entering, and then suddenly faced about again to
go through the old performance. The next large car received,
deservedly, a good deal of applause from its admirable get-up. The
outriders, the men who rode the horses drawing the car, and the
band of musicians in the car were all gigantic rats ; and, raised
high in air above the centre, was a platform, on which was a
colossal cat under a colossal rat-trap. Next was a band of frogs
and toadstools, the horses being ridden by snails and caparisoned
in sky-blue. Not many paces behind came a great oigan. An
artist with an immense shock of hair played on the keys in
front, but the music was from a band concealed within. At
the rear was a grotesque figure about twelve feet high,
worked by a man inside, which danced and postured to the
tunes, and received showers of missiles from all sides. After
this followed a kind of tower, with a crowd of men in long
conical black caps and mysterious instruments, with which
they enacted something probably understood by the Milanese,
but it was all dumb show to us. Then there was a sort of palace
on wheels, with a beautiful three-cornered area of bright green in
front. The retainers in their uniform were busy dusting the crowd
or throwing flowers and comfits at the balconies. Next was a rail-
way engine and carriages. After this followed an imitation brick-
work kitchen with the inscription, “ Cuisine economiche. Cooks


were apparently preparing viands, which the women dispensed by
throwing plates-full at the people. The most showy of the cars in
the procession was Neptune’s. The marine deity was seated high
on a coral throne, brilliant in gold, and surrounded by attendants.
His musicians were fishes in brilliant glistening silver scales. The
horses of the car and of the outriders were covered with cloths of
the same glistening hue, and the riders were all fishes. Altogether
it was extremely beautiful, and was conspicuous in the sunlight
half a mile away. Soon after Neptune came a car of canaries.
The band inside the car were an enormous nest of young birds
with their open throats upraised for food—of course the balconies
threw them plenty—while the parent birds rode the horses in front.
A car full of policinellos with caps and bells followed the canaries.
Their dresses were very gay, and high in the centre was a female
on a fanciful seat, richly attired, but provided with a good heavy
head-dress of wool to protect her from the missiles. A very effec-
tive car was one of lobsters. It was a castellated structure, with
an enormous lobster on the top. The horses were draped in red,
and the outriders and those on the car horses were lobsters, the
heads forming a sort of helmet, and the back joints and tail
spreading along the horses’ backs. There were minor shows, and
many omnibuses and vehicles were prettily decorated, but the fore-
going were the most attractive and conspicuous. The procession
occupied nearly four hours in passing. There were what may be
termed full-dress balconies, hung with white, set off with other
bright colours, and occupied by men in carnival costume. There
were two not far from us, and the pitched battles that were per-
petually going on between them and passing cars filled the air with
clouds, and were quite exciting. Even the quiet balconies like our
own could not altogether escape the general excitement. A stray
flour-ball or two (they were made up in tinfoil with coloured paper
shavings) found their way among us, and began to whiten some of
our dresses. They came from another balcony of our hotel not far
from ours. Young British blood could do nothing less than
retaliate, and in the intervals between the passing of the more
attractive objects in the procession, the warfare waxed hot between
ours and the neighbouring balcony, until we were all white as
millers. When at the close of the afternoon the enemy came over
to us, and we fraternised on our balcony, all the balconies around
were in an ecstacy of admiration. Our Italian friends (or foes)
were anxious to renew the fight next day, but were disappointed
exceedingly on hearing that we were to leave Milan that night.
They, however, drank to our healths, and wished us very heartily
bon voyage. After dinner we visited the piazza, and went out to
one of the portas, which was a centre of attraction. Cafes, booths,
shows, and ail the accessories of a great fair were there, and the
street leading to it was festooned and illuminated There were not


many fancy dresses out at night, as they were all wanted for the
remaining days of the carnival, which was to be kept up for four
days longer, culminating on the Sunday !
Venice. —Leaving the music and mummers, the gaiety and glare
of the carnival, we ensconced ourselves in railway sleeping car-
riages a little before midnight. After many efforts to compose
myself to sleep I succeeded at length so well that it was with some
difficulty I was after a while induced to unroll myself from my
'possum rug and submit to be dragged, baggage and all, down a
long platform to a large flight of steps, and at the bottom of them
into a dark, mournful-looking boat, with a lofty jagged prow and
two boatmen with long oars, which they plied in a fashion quite
their own. The first streaks of dawn were only beginning to be
visible, but even they were lost in a few seconds as we glided
silently along among piles and under small bridges, and looking up
at the stars between tall houses. At that early hour no lights
were visible, and all was a dead silence except that, as we went
from one watery street to another, we encountered an occasional
barge with some living occupants, who muttered some low sound,
or perchance passed another black boat returning the melancholy
note of warning of our gondoliers as we turned some sharp corner.
But still, on we quietly stole through streets and lanes, until at
last we found ourselves at the foot of another flight of steps, and
a dismal conversation of some sort passed between our boatmen
and the man on the steps, which eventuated in our baggage being
handed up, and we ourselves led into and through some strange
passages, halls and staircases, galleries and corridors, until at last
we were located each in a separate room. The surroundings
were novel in the extreme. From my window I could see in the
gradually increasing light innumerable tiles and gables, with
cupolas and spires beyond ; but being still only half awake I
determined (and so did we all) to snatch a few more winks before
the rest of that island world should be awake, and breakfast
should reward us for the discomforts of an almost sleepless night.
Having after this by a little effort found our way back to the
main floor and discovered the breakfast-room, the noi’mal condi-
tions of hotel life seemed to return, and by the aid of an English-
speaking waiter of superior manners, we not only fai’ed well as far
as our bodily requirements were concerned, but gleaned some infor-
mation of practical utility. The water-street by which we had
entered our hotel was not the only mode of entrance. Making our
exit by another hall and doorway we found ourselves in a narrow,
busy street, just 7 feet wide, with modern-looking shops on either
side, and after a turn or two emerged beneath a colonnade, which
opened into the finest square in Europe (as the Venetians do not
hesitate to assert). This is the Piazza San Marco. It is a hand-
some, irregular quadrangle, averaging nearly 600 feet in length


by about 270 feet in width. There is a continuous arcade run-
ning round three sides of the piazza, supported by 130 arches,
under which are the principal shops and cafes in Venice. Looking
from the point at which we entered, the great campanile, stand-
ing by itself, rises high toward the right. Beyond is the Church
of St. Mark, with its curious domes, its wonderful fagade, and its
bronze horses. On the left is the great clock tower, richly deco-
rated and surmounted by a great orb of blue and gold ; while two
bronze giants stand hammer in hand, with which they sound the
hours upon the sonorous bell before them. Turning to the right
is the smaller square or piazetta. On one side of it is the Doge’s
Palace, on the other are the mint and public library • and beyond,
the molo and the canals with their gondolas and sailing vessels.
In front of the molo are the tw T o famous monolith columns, one
surmounted by the winged lion, the other by a figure holding a
sword in his left hand and a shield in his right. Prom the top
of the campanile (which is ascended, not by a long flight of
steps, but by inclined planes rising up on each side, with a
low step only at each corner), Venice and its principal canals,
as well as the Adriatic and the distant Alps, are seen to
great advantage. But this is all enchanted ground. Be-
tween those monolith columns how many a head has been
rolled on the cold stone by the sword of the executioner !On
that clock tower the dial plate shows the twenty-four hours, the
signs of the zodiac, the phases of the moon, &c. Above this sits
the Madonna in state, with a sort of semi-circular platform in
front and a door on each side. On certain festivals the door on
one side opens, and an angel walks out blowing a big trumpet and
making obeisance to the Madonna. After the angel, come three
Eastern figures, representing the wise men of the East, or the
three sacred kings. These bow in succession before the Madonna,
pass in to the left-hand door, and then it is all closed up as before.
But the Doge’s palace! What a fascination hangs about that
wondrous old pile, still grand in age and decay ! As we ascend
“ the Giant’s Staircase” how the doges and councillors and rulers
of this old mistress of the waters rise again in our imagination,
ascending and descending those marble steps. Wandering through
the now vacant halls of state, we still see on its gigantic canvas
the memorials of the old victories which subdued states and com-
pelled submission to the winged lion. If we ask why has all this
glory departed, the answer seems not far to seek. Look at those
slits in a stone wall. They were once the mouths of stone lions,
and into them were dropped in the dead of night denunciations of
men more innocent, probably, than their denouncers. Go then
to the council-room where the denounced were examined, and out
at the door through which the condemned passed; descend then,
torch in hand, to the horrid cells—dark, dismal, awful—with


neither light nor air except through a hole in which the light of
a torch was seen for one half-hour. One of these dens is that in
which no man remained for more than twenty-four hours. There
in that terrible wall and its murderous apertures are the evidences
of the nightly strangulations. Stoop, then, to that low door out
of which the heavy sack was conveyed, with its contents yet warm
with recent life, down to that dark water which looks still guilty
of its complicity in those fearful deeds. Out into the sea the dark
boat floated, until the sack was sunk where net is never cast on
pain of death. All that dread past comes up, sickening the very
soul as you explore the vaults and passages in that “Bridge of
Sighs,” and remember, also, those fiendish contrivances still visible
at the Arsenal with which tortures were inflicted too appalling to
describe. Think of a state of society in which no man’s life was
secure for a single day. Once denounced, the man was missed from
his family, who dared not inquire his fate. He was gone, whither
the Ponte dei Sospiri or the Bio Orfano alone could tell—
The thunderbolt
Falls heavy, and the hand by which ’tis launched
Is veiled in clouds.
The strange fascination which hangs around those chambers of
secret councils tempts one to take another look at the chamber of
the ten, then at the room of the still more powerful and mysterious
three and their surroundings. When you have recovered from
this nightmare you may walk through the halls and galleries, and
seek relief and repose by a contemplation of the magnificent works
which still adorn their walls. The portraits of the Doges are to be
seen along the frieze of the great hall of scrutiny where the ballot
was taken which resulted in the choice of a Doge. In the hall of
the great council, a grand apartment 175 feet long and 85 broad,
are some wonderful frescoes and paintings, both on walls and
ceilings, as well as portraits of all the Doges save one; over his
place is a black veil, with an inscription intimating that Marino
Faliero had been decapitated for his crimes (a conspiracy to over-
turn the commonwealth). The largest painting in the world
occupies the wall at the east end of this room. It is “ The Glory
of Paradise,” by Tintoretto. It is a marvellous production, but,
like most of the old pictures of such subjects, is very unreal—
happily for those who hope to share that elysium, or they would
find themselves uncomfortably crowded in not altogether congenial
company. But I must not commit myself to criticisms on the
great painters or sculptors; suffice it to say that in the Doge’s
Palace, its halls and galleries, and grand museum, there is a wealth
of these glorious productions.
Beneath the high altar of St. Mark’s the bones of the evangelist
are said to rest. Whether there be any truth in the tradition or


not, does not much matter; but the wondrous pile which has risen
over this venerated spot is something not likely to be forgotten by
the dullest memory. In front the four bronze horses (supposed
to have been taken from a triumphal arch of old Rome) weigh
each two tons, and are of beautiful workmanship. The fa«jide is
brilliant with mosaics. Metal doors, inlaid with silver, lead into
the church. Within there is a dim, religious, rainbow light com-
ing down in softened rays from its richly stained windows, while
the walls in gold and alabaster reflect the light of many lamps
ceaselessly burning. The immense structure, with its Saracenic
arches and domes, its pillars of porphyry, jasper, and verd-antique,
is richly ornamented with mosaic and wonderful marbles from all
parts of the world; but its vast heights and distances are dimmed
with the smoke of incense, which gives to the whole a dreamy
aspect. Next to St. Mark’s among the churches is that of Santa
Marie della Salute , a noble structure, with a handsome dome,
adorned with nearly a hundred statues, and approached from the
Grand Canal by a flight of seventeen marble steps. Some 250
years ago a visitation of the plague earned off 60,000 of the
inhabitants. The Doge made a vow to ei’ect a memorial in honour
of the Virgin as soon as the plague was stayed, and although it was
then at its height, it ceased instantly on the vow being made. It
must be true, I suppose, for a group of statuary on the high altar
represents the Yii’gin in the act of banishing the demons of the
plague in recognition of the Doge’s pious pledge ! In the church
of Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari is the famous monument of
Canova. It was designed by himself for Titian’s tomb, but was
used by his pupils for his own. But of the churches of Venice a
volume might be written. Churches, however, abound all over
Italy, while Venice can alone boast of her canals and gondolas.
In one of these you glide by churches, palaces, memorials of her
tyrants, courtiers, soldiers, merchants, and priests, laving the
foundations of their houses as you pass, or plashing the lower
steps of their marble approaches. In the Grand Piazza at the
fashionable hour the beauty and fashion of the city may be seen
promenading beneath the Colonnade (there are no carriages in
Venice), while a band discourses sweet music. Venice, as a whole,
is perfectly unique in character, and in the mystic romance of her
past history one cannot contemplate her without repeating in
dreamy fancy—
I saw from out the wave her structures rise,
As from the stroke of the enchanter’s wand ;
A thousand years their cloudy wings expand
Around me, and a dying glory smiles
O’er the far times when many a subject land
Looked to the winged lion’s marble piles
Where Venice sat in state, throned on her hundred isles.


“ The same, and yet how changed I” If that winged lion from
his elevation in the piazetta were but sentient, how he would
droop his head and his rigid tail at the evidences of the mighty
change which has come over his once wide dominions. The roar
of the lion has been literally changed into the mild cooing of the
“ sucking dove.” That “ the old order changeth and giveth place
to the new,” is nowhere more manifest than in the Grand Piazza,
where the winged creature which holds sway is no longer the lion
but the “ sacred pigeon.” A cloud of these pretty birds is always
sweeping around, and when the giants of the clock tower strike the
hour of two they fly with a rush to their feeding-place for their
daily meal. As they are never shot (and it is the popular belief
that none are ever killed) they are perfectly tame. On our first
visit a young lady of our party, who has a passion for pets, invested
some coppers in little paper bags of maize always ready at hand
for such like visitors, and in another minute we had the birds upon
our hands, arms, and shoulders, taking the food from us with the
utmost confidence. They are held to be sacred to St, Mark, and
penalties attach to killing them; but, of course, theirincrease has to
be checked, or St. Mark’s Piazza would soon be insufferably dirty,
and its pigeon-keeper might do a good business in guano.
From the historical to the practical is an easy transition, and
the visitor to Venice finds great pleasure and some instruction in an
inspection of the factories for mosaics and lace respectively. In the
first you see a great deal of beautiful work in glass and porcelain,
and a magnificent stock of choice ornaments, from which Austra-
lian visitors have of late made rather extensive purchases, as
almost any man of taste with ample means must be tempted to do.
The same may be said of the lace factory, although this possesses
interest for ladies almost exclusively.
That the world is but a small place, and Australia already loom-
ing large, we had proof enough in Venice (as well as other cities).
In our hotel we met a South Australian gentleman and his family,
with whom we could talk about mutual friends whom they had
recently seen. As we entered the mosaic works we met an old
Melbourne friend and his family coming out, and our inspection of
the Doge’s Palace was made in the company of a gentleman who
was all the while talking of mutual friends of long standing in
Melbourne.
From Venice we started for Rome, vid Florence, We had on our
way from Milan passed through Verona and Padua, That we
should be in the town of the Oapulets and yet unable to see it was
mortifying. We might without much loss of time, perhaps, have
seen the stone trough that does duty for the tomb of Juliet (but
we could afford to miss that). Verona’s great Roman amphi-
theatre, however, would have been worth stopping for ; but it was
night. On leaving Venice we returned again to Padua “ the


learned,” having crossed the great bx-idge of two and a quarter
miles, said to be the longest in the world ; and although unable to
stay beyond the brief detention of the train, we had a glimpse of
its campaniles and cupolas, noting especially the eight domes of
St. Antonio, more like those of a Mohammedan than a Christian
temple. Between Padua and Bologna we crossed several well-
known Italian rivers, and passed through some beautiful and
fertile country, several of the places being associated with import-
ant events connected with the wars of the ancient Romans.
Bologna itself is a fine town, pleasantly situated at the foot of the
Appennines. It abounds in churches and towers, many of the
latter detached, and several of them out of the perpendicular ; none
of them particularly handsome. Passing out through the fortifica-
tions we began to -ascend the dividing range, crossing and re-
crossing the Reno and other streams, and passing through tunnel
after tunnel, rising to a height of between two and three thousand
feet before we descended on the other side into the plains of
Tuscany, about Pistoja. In this passage of the Appennines we had
more tlxan once to traverse the same space twice over', but at
different levels, in our rapid descent, and had gone through forty-
six tunnels. From Pistoja to Florence the line runs parallel with
the western side of the mountains, but we saw very little of the
country, except the mountain tops in the moonlight. Late in the
evening we arrived at Florence. After an early breakfast next
morning we looked about upon the piazzas, palaces, and streets of
Florence, “ the city of fair flowers and flower of fair cities,’’ and
our inclinations prompted the mental exclamation—■
I pray you let us satisfy our eyes
With the memorials and things of fame
That do renown this city.
But the disability under which we lay in having barely time
enough for Rome and Naples deprived us of the opportunity of
investigating its art treasures, inspecting its cathedral and its
towers, especially Giotto’s, which Ruskin declares to be “ the
model and mirror of pei’fect architecture.” Here are yet to be
seen the houses and the tombs of Michael Angelo, of Dant6, of
Galileo, of Gilberti, and of the great voyager Amerigo Yespucci,
who gave the name to the great transatlantic continent, of which
he claimed to be the discoverer. Here the Inquisition held its
iniquitous tribunals for five centuries, and here the first thunders
of the coming Reformation began to roll over Catholic Europe
when Savonarola “shook the city to its centre, and swayed the
minds of princes and people as no other man had done.” That
illustrious precursor of the reformers died at the stake in the heart
of Florence, but Martin Luthei', a few years later, following in his
footsteps, shook the whole Roman Church. No greater disap-


pointment occurred to us in our travels than to be compelled to
leave so many unexplored treasures as we had to do in Florence;
but we had to hurry on to Rome. For the entire distance we had
the chain of the Appennines in view, the country varying in its
aspect, but occasionally disclosing romantic bits of scenery—hills
capped with towers, and rocky eminences carrying stone-built towns
upon their crag-like summits. In the afternoon of the same day
we began to look for evidences of our approach to the city of the
Caesars and the Popes, and after crossing the open country known
as the Campagna our eyes were gratified with the sight of portions
of ancient aqueducts and such-like monuments as satisfied us of
our whereabouts, and we were soon alighting at Rome’s imposing
railway station. From the station to our hotel was only a very
short walk across the handsome Piazza di Termini, and a few
minutes later found us ascending in the elevator to our apartments
in the Grand Continental Hotel.
ROME ! What place is there in the world that can compare
in interest with the “ Eternal City 1” How its old histories
were drunk in by many of us in our school days (and
perhaps driven into us); and what a fascination has hung
about all that early-acquired knowledge as we have traced
the evidences of Roman enterprise and power in our own and
other lands ! A first visit to Rome is therefore to most educated
people the great sensation of their travels. Our time was all too
short for a thorough exploration of its rich remains and magnifi-
cent memorials, but by dint of untiring industry during the very
few days at our disposal wecompassed a great deal ; and while
revelling amongst the wrecks and ruins of the quondam mistress of
the world upon her seven hills, imagination could not but be busy
with her past. The Csesars of the Empire and the Triumvirs of
the Commonwealth lived again ; the temples and palaces, the
Forum and Capitol, were retrodden by the heroes of our youth;
while marbles and fountains, columns and catacombs, of which the
remains lay scattered about, spoke silently but eloquently of those
grand old times. It would only be foolish and vain to attempt to
describe Rome as seen to-day. As, however, these notes are
intended for the eyes of friends who may take an interest in our
travels, I will mention some of the objects and places of interest
specially visited—not only those connected with the worship of
the Pantheon, but those of the more recent days of ecclesiastic
Rome and the Papacy.
Foremost in interest, and therefore amongst the earliest sought
for, were the Colosseum and the Great Forum and its surroundings.
There are several Forums, but this is the “ Foro Romano,” the
great focus and centre of public life in the days of the Empire.
We first visited the Colosseum (so named from the vastness of its
proportions). It is nearly half a mile in circumference, and was
made capable of accommodating 87,000 spectators. Its extreme


length is about 630 feet, and its greatest width 530 feet. The
height was 165 feet. Further description is scarcely necessary,
as no building in the world has probably been made more familiar
in pictures and photographs than the Colosseum. Visitors can
mount to the third of the four divisions of seats from which ihe
ancient Romans viewed the gladiatorial combats or the sanguinary
games enacted in the arena. Nine thousand animals are said to
have been slain at the first opening of the building (then but half
completed) by Titus, in the year 80 a.d. ; and who shall count the
thousands of men and martyrs who have since that date lost their
lives and left their bones in that great charnel-house !
Almost adjoining the Colosseum is the arch of Constantine,
consisting of a large central arch and a smaller one on each side.
The reliefs upon it are still very well preserved. Further on,
ascending the ancient Via Triumphalis, is the white marble arch
of Titus, erected in honour of his conquest of Judaea and Jerusalem.
On one side under the arch the reliefs represent the Roman
soldiery carrying off the spoils of the temple. It was restored not
many years ago. Near this arch recent excavations have revealed
large portions of the old palace of the Caesars. The excavations
are still proceeding. On the left is the Palatine Hill, the site
of the original city, which, according to tradition, was founded by
Romulus. Various temples, baths, and public buildings have been
traced within this area, including the ancient Basilica, in which it
is said Paul was brought before Nero. Here also are remains of the
aqueduct which supplied the Palatine, and also what once consti-
tuted portions of the House of the Augurs, or, as some say, the
Temple of Cybele. Descending to the Forum there are remains of
one of the Temples of Vesta (the one in which the recent excava-
tions were made), also the Temple of Julius, Some columns are
still standing of the Temple of Castor and Pollux. Near at hand
is the Temple of Antoninus and Faustina, partly used in the con-
struction of a modern church. Two marble balustrades stand in
the adjacent area, having in excellent preservation sculptures in
alto-relievo on each side. Near this are the old Rostrum and the
column of the Emperor Phocas, nearly thirteen centuries old; and
beside it is the Basilica Julia, completed in the reign of Augustus
Caesar. The arch of Septimus Severus, built in 204 a.d., is one
of the most perfect of the ancient monuments in and about the
Forum. It consists of a large central and two smaller side arches.
The statue of the Emperor and the brazen chariot with six
horses, which once surmounted the arch, have long since
disappeared. The Via Sacra, a favourite resort of the Roman
literati, led from this arch through the Forum. The other
remains of antiquity still traced in and near the Forum are
the Temple of Saturn, of which eight lonic colums are still to
be seen ; part of the portico of the diiconsentes leading to the


ancient offices of the notaries and lawyers ; the Temple of
Vespasian, of which three columns are standing. Near this is the
Tarpeian Hock, from which Roman criminals were flung. The
approach to the Capitol from the Forum is barred by a number of
modern buildings, and the visitor has therefore to reach that
famous eminence by a drive round several streets. Approached
from the north-west (the opposite side to the Forum) the hill is
ascended by a zigzag drive leading up to what is now called the
Piazza di Campidoglio. At the entrance is a pair of colossal
horses held by colossal men, and in the centre of the square is the
bronze equestrian statue of Marcus Aurelius. This was brought
from its old site in the Forum. On the three sides of the piazza
are buildings designed by Michael Angelo—the Senate House, the
Conservation, and the Capitoline Museum of Sculpture. The
latter contains a fine collection of originals, many of them of world-
wide fame. Proceeding northerly through two or three streets, we
come to the Foro Triano, or Trajan’s Forum, with the famous
Trajan column of marble, covered with sculpture in bas-relief.
The column is now surmounted with a statue of St. Peter, which
has been substituted for that of the Emperor—an absui’d anomaly,
considering that the bas-reliefs beneath the apostle’s feet are all
commemorative of the war of the Romans with the Dacians. The
Forum has been sufficiently cleared of the accumulations of ages to
show the position of the buildings which stood within its area, and
a considerable collection of antique statuary is also exhibited,
more or less broken and mutilated. Of the piazzas, or squares,
with which Rome abounds, I can only mention a few of those
visited. The Piazza di Pietra has on the left side, as you enter
from the Corso, the front columns of the ancient temple of Neptune,
now built into the walls of the Custom House. From this square
the Via del Muratti leads to the fountain of Trevi, one of the
handsomest of the public structures of modern Rome. The
statuary is all colossal, the design very impressive, and the effect
of the whole truly grand. The water is supplied by the ancient
aqueduct “ Aqua virgine,” built by Agrippa in the year 27 B.C.
The Piazza di Monte Citorio has an obelisk in the centre, and the
building now used by the Chamber of Deputies is on one side of
it. (I had hoped to see the House sitting, but was requested to
come again at an hour which proved inconvenient.) The statue
of Pompey, at whose base Csesar fell, is in the Palazzo Spade. The
Piazza di Venezia has on one side of it the Palazzo (palace) di
Venezia. It is a very fine palace, built of stones taken from the
Colosseum, and it is now occupied by the Austrian ambassador - .
Scattered about the city are various memorials of the old Roman
times; for example, the three temples of Hope, Juno Matuta, and
Piety (now partly appropriated by a church) ; the temple of Fortuna
Virilis, said to be the most ancient temple in Rome, now converted


into the Church Santa Maria Egiziaca. One of the best known
pictures of Roman remains is that of the little temple of the Vestas.
As a memorial of the past it is vastly interesting ; but the interior
is completely spoiled by the tawdry paintings and tinsel of a
Brummagem kind of altar, by which it has been converted into a
church. The Pantheon has also (as everybody knows) been con-
verted into a church. This grand pile is nineteen centuries old.
It was used as a temple of Jupiter, and when all the bronze adorn
ments of the interior were in position must have been a magnificent
temple. Of all these costly ornaments, however, the Pantheon was
despoiled by some of the popes, and the bronzes used for beautify-
ing St. Peter’s, or for casting guns with which to fight the Pope’s
enemies. In return for these valuables, however —said to have
been 450,000 lbs. weight of bronze—Pope Urban VIII. brought
twenty-eight cai’tloads of bones (supposed to be of Christians
and martyrs) from the catacombs, and buried them under the high
altar. The body of Raphael lies in a wall near one of the altars,
and that of the late Victor Emanuel is at present in semi-state
on the opposite side of the church. A royal attendant keeps a book
in which distinguished visitors sign their names ; the number of
signatures was increased by four as the consequence of our visit. The
Castle of St. Angelo and the bridges over the Tiber, the numerous
palaces with their picture galleries and statues, the fountains and
obelisks, the public gardens, the Corso and other prominent places, I
cannot stop to describe. The catacombs are, of course, objects of
interest to all travellers. Those we visited were the catacombs of
St. Caliptus and St. Sebastian, in the Appian Way. Here many
thousands of the ancient Christians were buried, and in some of
the recesses of these places they often met for worship. There are,
it issaid, twenty miles in length of these ghastly places around Rome.
On this Appian Way (the Via Appia), which extends from the
city to the Albine Hills across the Campagna, are very many objects
of interest, such as remains of aqueducts, baths, temples, and tombs,
as well as spots now rendered famous by childish traditions and
inventions of the Romish Church. It was by the Appian Way
that St. Paul entered Rome, a fact very interesting in itself ; but
even this is perverted into stories of Peter and Paul meeting and
separating, and certain supernatural appearances—footprints ot
Christ, who, it is asserted, reproved Peter for not going into the
city to be imprisoned and persecuted, and impressions of Peter’s
knees on a rock, where he is said to have knelt to pray for help
against Simon Magus.
One is met at every turn with these puerilities of Romish
superstition, but I have not referred to them before, as I
endeavoured all through to separate them in my own thoughts
from the grand old memorials of the empire and the com-
monwealth. Want of space, however, in such a brief sketch as
this will now necessitate my taking the ecclesiastical churches


and structures of the Papacy. Chief of these are, of course,
St. Peter’s and the Vatican. St. Peter’s occupies the site of Nero’s
circus, where many of the early Christians were martyred. It is
also said to cover the grave of St. Peter; but as there is no evidence
that Peter ever visited Pome? this must be ranked with the rest of
the fables with which his name is associated. Raphael and
Michael Angelo were amongst the designers and decorators of the
church; but a considerable number of architects were employed, as
it took about 180 years in building, extending through the reigns
of 28 popes. Almost everyone is familiar with the front elevation
of St. Peter’s, as seen from the piazza, with its two semicircular
colonnades, each consisting of four rows of equidistant columns.
On the balustrade of this colonnade are statues of bishops and
saints, to the number of 236, each being 10 feet high. In the
piazza are two handsome fountains, and an Egyptian obelisk
brought to Rome by the Emperor Caligula, and erected by Nero in
his circus. The dimensions of the church are: Length outside, 651
feet; inside, 619 feet; width across ti’ansepts, 450 feet ; width of
nave, 89 feet; aisles, each 21 feet wide and 207 feet long ; the
cupola is 140 feet in diameter, and the height from the ground to
the cross 470 feet. St. Peter’s is the largest church in the world,
and its area is double that of St. Paul’s in London. The cost of
erecting this magnificent building, with its rich variety of marbles,
alabasters, and precious stones, its chapels, colonnades, porticos,
and accessories, it is impossible to estimate ; but beyond all the cost
of construction there is the incalculable amount expended in
paintings, frescoes, mosaics, statuary in stone and bronze, altars,
shrines, monuments, crosses, canopies, and the endless ornamenta-
tions, some of which appear to be in themselves of priceless value.
The statues are mostly colossal, although only proportioned to the
immensity of the area of the church. One group, for example, is
composed of figures 16 feet high, upon pedestals of 11 feet.
The high altar is not at the end of the church, but under the dome,
and over it is a magnificent bronze canopy called the great Baldac-
chino. It is supported on four spiral bronze columns 96 feet in
height. This was made from a portion of the bronze removed from
the Pantheon. It is said to weigh 116,390 lbs. Beneath the
high altar is the so-called tomb of St. Peter. What would the
bluff old fisherman have said if he had been told that thousands of
men and women in the generations to come, including pontiffs and
kings, would kneel before a shrine enclosed behind richly gilt
bronze gates, and surrounded by marble and gold and a hundred
lamps perpetually burning, in the belief that they would be doing
homage to his poor bones'? A beautiful marble statue of Pius VI.,
by Canova, in a kneeling posture before the shrine, as he knelt
in life, is excellent as a specimen of the great sculptor’s art.
I cannot describe here the various chapels, altars, and shrines,


with their great pictures, mosaics, and sculptures; but I must just
mention the great Chair of St. Peter, which is said to contain
within its costly exterior the plain wooden chair in which the
apostle sat. There are also around what is called the Tribune
(for St. Peter’s is a basilica, and all the basilicas were either once
judgment-halls or have been built on the ancient plan of judg-
ment-halls) tablets commemorative of the great event of 1854—the
promulgation by the late Pope of the dogma of the Immaculate
Conception. At the upper end of the nave is the famous bronze
statue of St. Peter, seated on a throne of white marble. The right
foot projects a little over the pedestal, and the devout worshippers
—the female portion of them especially—kiss the brazen toe
and place their heads under the projecting foot. The toe is, of
course, very much the worse for the homage which has been
paid to it, being nearly half kissed away. There are some memo-
rials of the proclamation of the Pope’s infallibility, but they are
not thrust prominently forward—the less made of them perhaps
the better
The Vatican adjoins St. Peter’s. As everybody knows, it
is the palace of the Pope. It might have been expected
that the professed descendant of St. Peter would have been satis-
fied with a modest home, but the Vatican is the largest palace in
the world. As a grand museum of art it must command the
homage of the educated of all nations. Some of the chef d'oeuvres
of the greatest masters in painting and sculpture, from Raphael
and Michael Angelo downwards, occupy the ceilings, walls, cor-
ridors, and courts of the palace, and fill the visitor with wonder
anti admiration. There is much in the conceptions of the old
masters which of course we cannot commend. They are
too material in their delineations of supernatural subjects.
Michael Angelo’s famous fresco of the Last Judgment is a case in
point; so also are those of Perugino (Raphael’s master). Others
of them are disfigured by the representations of miracles or some
superstitious legends. The Sistine Chapel is one of the principal
halls ; but there are numerous others filled with exquisite treasures
of art, and the museum of sculpture contains half a dozen halls
full of statuary, mostly antique. It cannot be said that all the
sculptures in the Vatican collection are equal, or that all are meri-
torious, for many of them must have found a place there simply
because they are ancient. The late Pope, notwithstanding his
complaint of poverty, must have spent a large sum on his palace.
One statue of Hercules is said to have been purchased by him for
£IO,OOO. The Vatican, however, is only one, though the largest,
of the Roman palaces which contain valuable collections of paint-
ings and sculpture.
In a building adjoining the Lateran Palace is the holy staircase
(Scala Santa). It is composed of twenty-eight marble steps, said
to have belonged to the house of Pontius Pilate in Jei’usalera, and


to be the identical staircase which our Lord descended after leaving
the judgment-seat. Above the staircase is a chapel, and within
some bars over the altar are preserved some ancient relics, also
supposed to have been brought from Jerusalem. These stairs must
not be ascended on foot; but the devout frequenters of the place
clamber up them on their knees, look through the bars on the
altar-piece above, and then walk down one of the side staircases
(exactly resembling the centre one), which are not sacred. A more
than ordinarily devout worshipper now and then will repeat the
pei formance, but most of them find one ascent enough at a
time, especially as many consider it proper to rest at almost every
step to count beads or repeat prayers.
Returning once more to the churches, we find St. John
Lateran (San Giovani Laterano), which is the cathedral church
of Rome, and therefore, according to the claims of the church, the
head of all churches in the world. Apart from this pretension it
is a grand edifice. The great facade is very impressive. The
figures which surmount the cornice are of colossal dimensions—
that of the Saviour is 22 feet high, and those of the saints and
apostles are 20 feet. It contains ten chapels, each possessing some
valuable woi-ks of art; and the church is even more wealthy than
St. Peter’s in that peculiar species of wealth upon which the Papal
Church sets so high a value—that is to say, ancient relics. The
faithful are taught to believe that amongst the articles kept here
are the top of the table at which the Last Supper was celebrated
by our Lord, an altar made from bronzes brought from the temple
at Jerusalem, portions of the manger in which our Lord was born,
the shirt and seamless coat made for him by the Virgin Mother
with her own hands, some of the barley loaves and small fishes
with which the five thousand were fed, the linen cloth with which
our Lord dried the apostles’ feet, Aaron’s rod that budded, and
Moses’ rod with which he smote the Red Sea and the rock. They
have also a tabernacle which is said to contain the heads of St.
Peter and St. Paul. One of the monuments, too, is rather
unique, for the bones of Pope Sylvester 11., which are beneath it,
are said to rattle in their coffin when any one of his successors is
about to die. Rome, however, abounds in relics ; and of churches
it is said there are 365 in Rome, so that, if named after the days
of the year, each day might have a church to itself. As places of
worship most of them are comparative failures. At the hours of
service you may find frequently half a dozen women and still
fewer decrepid old men upon their knees, while the teeming
thousands outside scarcely ever enter the church doors, except in
the Holy Week and some of the great festivals, when crowds are
attracted by the ceremonials. Next to St, Peter’s, one of the most
beautiful of the interiors is that of St. Paul’s, outside the walls.
It is a basilica, and is quite modern, being, in fact, still incomplete,
the former church having been destroyed by fire sixty years ago.


The harmonious proportions and colours strike the visitor on
entering as approaching perfection. The area is, of course, less
than that of St. Peter’s, nor can it compare with that grand struc-
ture in the richness of its paintings or the costliness of its shrines.
It has, however, the richest display of malachite to be seen any-
where in altar-pieces and monuments (the malachite was mostly a
present from the late Emperor of Russia). It also possesses
columns of the most beautiful marbles and alabasters, and among
its statuary two colossal figures of St. Peter and St. Paul. There
is also along the frieze a set of medallion portraits (heroic size) of
all the popes.
I must not omit to mention the Mamertine Prison. It consists
of two dungeons, one below the other, cut out of the Tarpeian
Rock, near the Capitol ; and here it is said St, Paul was confined
before his execution. As, however, the Apostle Peter is dragged
into every possible (and impossible) event of the apostolic days, it
is asserted that the two were imprisoned here together. Miracles,
of course, are attributed to them, one of w hich was that they con-
verted their gaolers, and then caused a miraculous spring to flow
from the rock, in which the converts were baptised. The cells are
horrible dens, bearing on the walls the undoubted evidences of
chains and strangulations. In a door leading down to the lower
prison is an iron grating, much the worse for wear and age, but
some marks upon it are said to be the impression of St. Peter’s
face as he pressed against it to speak to his friends. In a sort of
shrine, with iron bars in front, are two carved heads, representing
St. Peter and St. Paul. Over this prison a church has been built,
named “ San Giuseppe de Falegnami” (St. Joseph of the Car-
penters).
On the eastern side of the city drives and walks extend to
numerous places of interest, stretching from the very walls far out
into the Campagna. Here may be seen roads whose pavement lias
borne the wear of centuries ; towers commemorating the great
struggles of remote ages; tombs of the noble and wealthy of old
Rome, and all mixed up with little chapels, crosses, and images,
many of them memorials of deeds of violence in more modern
days. The Yia Appia and the remains of the ancient Via Latina
are rich in these remains, and from them are obtained fine views
of the Albine Mountains on the one hand, and the Sabine Moun-
tains on another side, with the world-famed Tivoli, beauteous in
decay, and once the resort of those old Greeks who were the
world’s masters before Rome had a name.
But I must take a reluctant farewell of Rome, the “ eternal,”
its forums and temples, its columns and obelisks, its palaces and
piazzas, its fountains and monuments, its churches and theatres
and streets, and its greatest monument of all—the Colosseum.
While in Rome I found a little time to look into the arrangements


in progress for supplying the city with telephonic communication.
One company has been for some time in existence, and has a long
list of subscribers. A new company has been only a few months
at work, but it seems likely to take the lead, as it is adopting the
newest and most perfect inventions of the day. If its anticipa-
tions are realised this ancient city will soon be ahead of all
modern cities in the completeness of its application of the latest
discovery of practical science.
Leaving Rome, whence the railway line for a time follows the
course of the ancient Via Latina, we pass through some grand
scenery, all rich in old associations. Towns, towers, and monasteries
crown the adjacent heights, and old ruins strew the plains. We
pass through tunnels and over viaducts, touching at numerous
places of historic note. Velletri, an ancient city of the Yolscians,
was a rival of Rome for centuries before the Christian era. It
was fortified by Coriolanus, and within it Augustus was born. Near
here some more modern battles have also been fought. Leaving
Velletri we enter a valley with mountains on each side, rising to
heights of three and four thousand feet. Alatri (the ancient
Aletrium) is another place that challenges our attention, with its
stupendous fortifications, castle, and aqueduct. Some few miles of
fertile country, abounding in vineyards and olive plantations, bring
us to the frontier of what used to be the papal dominions—a
place once notorious for its brigands. After this we get again into
more broken country, and the heights near us and projecting
ridges of the Appennine Hills are crowned with towns and citadels.
A little further on we were discussing the wars of Hannibal, who
in this neighbourhood was encamped with his army, and also the
birthplace of Thomas Aquinas, near at hand, when suddenly the
train came to a standstill. By this time it was dark, and we could
only gather from the guards, who were rushing about with lighted
lanterns, that there was something wrong with the engine. Another
engine was telegraphed for from the nearest station, and at length
we w 7 ere released from our detention, but arrived in Naples two
hours behind time, only reaching our hotel considerably after mid-
night.
Naples.— Probably there is no city in Europe that can com-
pare with Naples for the beauty of its position. The romantic
hills that enclose it like an amphitheatre sloping down to the
verge of its beautiful bay, the grand sweep of its shores round
southward to Castellamare, Sorrento, and the Island of Capri, and
noithward by Pozzuoli Procida, and ever-interesting but unfortu-
nate Ischia, constitute together a picture that can only be under-
stood by actual inspection, and which once seen can never be for-
gotten. The best view of Naplts and its surroundings is from the
sea. For the purpose of enjoying this grand panorama we took
boat at the quay of St. Lucia, near our hotel, and shaped a course


for Sorrento, crossing the bay obliquely, which at about mid-
distance placed us in the centre of the great amphitheatre. The
one essential of a clear sky, however, was wanting, so that we had
only flitting glimpses until after we landed at Sorrento. From
thence, however, we saw almost the entire sweep of the bay
under a brilliant sun and with all the conditions favourable for
thoroughly appreciating it. It is indeed a scene of surpassing
loveliness. We had opportunities afterwards of contemplating it
from other points—notably from Vesuvius, where the view changed
at every stage of the ascent and descent of the mountain • and
from the eminences at the back of the town we saw the whole
picture from another standpoint—the bay beneath our feet, and its
two horns receding from us on the right and the left. Naples is a
large city, with half a million of inhabitants. Like Rome, it
abounds in churches, of which there are no less than 350, some of
which contain beautiful works of art in sculpture and painting.
The church of the Gerolomini has the finest paintings of any we
visited, two especially of Guido’s. One of the chapels attached to
the Cathedra], which is dedicated to St. Januarius (or San Gen-
naro), contains some highly valued works and relics. There are
paintings and bronzes and marble statuary commemorative of
the raising of a dead man at the saint’s tomb, of a sick man cured
with oil taken from a lamp at the same tomb, the curing a
demoniac by the saint, and San Gennaro leaving the fiery furnace,
into which he had been cast by the Praetor of Galerius. On the
saint being thrown into the flames sweet music was heard; and
on the door being opened the flames leaped out and slew the
Praetor’s soldiers, but the saint and his deacons walked out
unharmed ! He was afterwards decapitated, and two phials full of
his blood—dried up, of course, fifteen hundred years ago—are kept
behind the altar of this chapel, and they miraculously liquefy on
certain days every year, when exhibited (under certain conditions)
to the wondering gaze of the faithful. This exhibition, like that
of the weeping pictures, must have an immense influence in pro-
moting the piety of the Neapolitans ! There are two royal palaces
in Naples each worthy of a visit, and several private palaces
which may be very well passed over; two castles, the one now a
prison, the other a barrack. There is an excellent aquarium,
tor, although small, it contains perhaps the best collection of
z >ophytes in Europe. The National Museum is well deserving of
its title. It has a wealth of statuary and remains from Ancient
Rome, Pompeii, and Herculaneum; sculptures,frescoes and mosaics,
marbles, bronzes, medals, coins, and sarcophagi; mummies from
®gyp fc ; glass and terra-cotta ornaments, jewellery, and plate ;
ancient curios in infinite variety ; and a splendid library of 200,000
volumes, besides a rich collection of old manuscripts and auto
graphs. Two large wings of the building are filled with paintings


by celebrated masters, admirably arranged in suites of rooms dis-
tinguishing the various schools of painting. It is not, howevei*, in
its churches or its catacombs, its museums, palaces, or theatres, that
we see the characteristics of Naples. All these are to be seen in
other cities, but in its street life Naples is unique. Its teeming
population appear to live out of doors or in doorways. There is
one beautiful thoroughfare—the Chiaja (pronounced kiaia)—which
is the fashionable carriage drive. It is bounded by an ornamental
plantation and walks called the Villa Reale, and parallel with the
latter is a sea wall of the great bay. The Chiaja, however, is quiet
and aristocratic. The great business street is the Strada di Roma
and its continuation, which is the famous Toledo. The latter con-
tains many of the public buildings, but the Strada is full of shops,
and that and the narrow streets branching off from it are densely
thronged during the business hours of the day by people who are
pursuing their callings, and during the evening by promenaders.
How the vehicles thread their way through the moving mass
seems surprising. Here the street cries are heard contributing
greatly to the general din ; but to hear them at their loudest you
must go to the markets, especially that in the Largo del Mercato,
on a market day. (It was in this square that Masaniello excited
the people to revolt.) We also saw a great deal of this marvellous
street-life every day along the quays, as our hotel was between
them and the Chiaja ; and in our drive to and from Vesuvius, in
the streets next the bay, and extending along it for miles, pages
would be needed to describe the numberless peculiarities of this
restless, noisy people, and the occupations carried on in streets and
doorways.
The ascent of Vesuvius is one of the feats that an Australian
traveller feels bound to perform. We started after breakfast in
the usual style for the ascent—namely, in a landau, drawn by
three horses abreast, their bells jingling, and our jehu perpetually
cracking his whip to warn the pedestrians crowding every street
(for in most of them there are no side-walks, or these walks are
occupied by working traders or vendors of various commodities,
and the crowds spread themselves all over the thoroughfares).
Following the shores of the bay for about thi’ee miles, we arrive at
Portici, and then at Resina, mere continuations of Naples, passing
numerous macaroni factories, in front of which large quantities of
the farinaceous delicacy (?) were suspended on long poles or rods.
At Resina we left the bay side, and began to wind upwards
through vineyards and gardens until we reached the first of the
lava fields. Here the roadway has been made in zigzag fashion
over and across the brown rugged masses, some portions jagged
and crested like the waves of an angry sea, others in serpentine,
tortuous shapes, as if the molten flood had only just cooled, and
glossy in patches with the iridescence of its mineral elements. At


2000 feet above the sea we arrive at the observatory on the
shoulder of the mountain. Thence a road still gradually ascend-
ing leads to the foot of the cone and the railway station, from which
visitors may now ascend, at a gradient of about one in two or three,
if they will trust themselves to be lifted almost perpendicularly up
the mountain side, instead of dragging their weary way through
ashes and pumice-stone on foot, or being carried on horses or
donkeys. We chose the railway, but dared scarcely look below us
as we were drawn up by the wire rope, so dizzy did it look with
Naples and the bay spread out beneath us, and the ships and craft
like mere specks on the blue water. We were glad to step out at
the upper station, and to feel our feet, although the ground here-
about is not very firm, for a few paces bring us on to scoriae and
pounded pumice, with volcanic rocks and mineral fragments.
Having secured the services of a guide, we found ourselves fol-
lowed by a crowd of would-be attendants, some with chairs, in
which they wished the ladies to ride, upborne by four carriers
(price only fifteen irancs); others with straps and loops, and
similar contrivances, to assist us in clambering up the precipitous
and broken ground. We beat them off for a time, but as there is
a confederacy among these men to plunder every foreign visitor,
the professional guide took care to lead us into a nasty bit of the
road where the smoke and sulphur were suffocating, and nothing
could be seen through the cloud coming over us from the
where he insisted that we could not go further without assistance
(the charge for which was only three francs for each person). As
far as the ladies were concerned, it was only prudence to yield ,
but the importunity of the still unemployed guides became per-
fectly exasperating, as they seized an arm, or pressed one’s back, or
thrust their straps and loops almost into one’s hand, I beat them
off with my stick as well as I could, for although there were diffi-
culties and obstructions to be overcome, and hot sulphur beds to be
escaped, I felt that if these men (and some of them were old men)
could get over them, so could I ‘ and I was the only member of
our party who persisted in being independent of them. But the
crater ! At last we got to the windward side, and clambered to
the edge of this awful gulf. Beloyv the fiery fluid mass was bel-
lowing and thundering, while every other minute the explosive
forces shot up fire, and steam, and rocks, and scoriae. This was the
culminating sensation. Two of us had together undergone the
baptism of Niagara in the cave of the winds beneath the American
labs. Here we had the antithetical experience of a “ baptism of
fire the molten sea of the earth’s centre roaring beneath us, its
expectorated fire and fragments shooting far above our heads, and
clouds of steam and sulphurous gases rising about our feet, I
would have lingered long to look upon this awful sight, but the
ladies were somewhat alarmed, and the shouting of the guides


drew me away. The black lava and x’ocks and ashes around were
set off with patches of sulphur, and minerals of the most brilliant
colours; and the guides—ready at every turn to make money out
of us—were picking up pieces of soft lava and inserting copper
coins in them, which, as the lava hardened, became palpable evi-
dence of its once plastic condition. We now descended over rocks,
ledges of lava, and pumice, until we had completed the circuit of
the cone and returned to our starting point. Dismissing our
guides, we re-entered our oddly constructed railway car, the seats
being in tiers, rising terrace-like one above another. Having
acquired a little confidence in the ascent, we could look out more
serenely in the descent to enjoy the magnificent prospect below us
—the graceful curve of the bay, the long winding shore, the rocky
heights and headlands about Sorrento and the Island of Capri on
the one hand, and Ischia and Procida on the other, Naples itself,
with its gay suburbs, forming the head of the semicircle. It was
worth all the toil of the ascent, even if it had been much more
toilsome than it was. This railway is worked by a stationary
engine, which keeps a wire rope running over drums, and to which
two carriages are attached, one of which is at the bottom of the
incline while the other is at the top, and they balance each other
while the one is going up and the other down. The cars are
peculiar ; instead of being horizontal, they are almost perpendicular,
the seats rising one above the other. Resuming our carriage at
the lower station, where there is a museum and a restaurant, we
rattled down the mountain side, getting ever-varying views of
the lava fields, the great campagnas, the distant hills, and the city
and its lovely bay. There are many roadside places where, both in
the ascent and descent, the excursionist is urged to partake of
some lachryma Christi, the wine for which the slopes are famed,
but none of it was captivating enough in appearance to tempt our
palates. We regained our hotel as the table d’hote bell was ring-
ing, after a day’s outing which can never be forgotten.
Sorrento —not that of Port Phillip, but the Sorrento from
which the other was named by Sir Gavan Duffy—is one of the
most charming of the many pretty places near Naples. As you
approach it from the sea it looks like a fortification, with its per-
pendicular rocks and immense walls, surmounted by some fine
hotels, villas, and picturesque buildings. On reaching the summit
you find yourself amongst orange and lemon groves and gardens,
and extending your rambles you find that ravines and gorges
almost insulate the town. These ravines, however, are' rich in
golden fruits and romantic in their broken forms, so weird-like in
the gloaming and moonlight that the superstitious people light
tapers in the little chapels and oratories perched on the rocks and
hillsides to keep away the hobgoblins. Where nature’s hand has
scattered beauties so lavishly, and all around is pleasing, it is


mournful to see a townfull of beggars. We were followed every-
whereby men, women, and children, with outstretched palms ; and
the Yetturinos with their landaus (some of them ragged and
dirty) would have run us down and become themselves a mixed
mass of locked wheels if we had not found a policeman to drive
them back. The olive grows to such perfection about these hills
that mementos of the place are manufactured at several shops in
the principal street out of these and the lemon tree. Beautiful
ornaments and articles of utility are made, in which you can have
your initials inlaid or some piece of ornamentation that may strike
your fancy. These were about the only places that appeared to
be doing any business, except the hotels (which are very good).
The promontory which divides the Bay of Naples from the Bay of
Salerno is intersected longitudinally by a rocky, mountainous
ridge, and the country on either side is broken and beautifully
romantic, stretching down to each shore. The drive from Amalfi
to Salerno on the one shore, and that from Sorrento to Castella-
mare on the other, are two of the most charming in the Italian
Peninsula. We took the latter on our way from Sorrento to
Pompeii. Soon after leaving Sorrento and its beautiful gardens
and olive groves we emerged upon a road cut for some distance in
the rocky hillside, and from every wind and turn of which we had
the most delightful views of the bay and its winding shores, of
Naples and its hilly background, and of the islands which termi-
nate the two horns of the bay. As the day was a bright and
lovely one the white sails on the blue water helped to make up
that ravishing picture upon which visitors to Naples delight to
descant. Several little villages lie scattered amongst the rocks and
hillsides on the way, with pretty churches, and convents, and
castles on rocky eminences and projections. These are heightened
in beauty and contrast by winding roads and ravines crossed by
viaducts, and rich valleys of deep green, dotted with the golden
clusters of lemons and oranges. Castellamare has been built on
the site of the ancient Stabies, destroyed in the great eruption
which overwhelmed Pompeii and Herculaneum. Its castle
occupies a romantic position, and the town and its suburbs are
overshadowed by the Monte St, Angelo, which rises at the back of
it to a height of over 4000 feet,
Pompeii,— Of Pompeii what can be said in such a superficial
sketch as this ? Books have been written, and will continue to be
written, about the revelations and the relics of this disentombed city
once the resort of emperors and nobles of old Rome, and famed
in their time for its baths and gladiatorial displays. The remains
ai’e shown you of fifty places of special interest, either public or
private, and whole blocks of streets and houses are laid bare.
From these it is evident that land must have possessed a high
value, and been estimated, like the building land of London, at so


much per square foot, for there are very few feet in some of the
blocks that were not covered by houses or their accessories. In
some of the better class of houses and in the public buildings the
frescoes are still fresh, as if painted only a few years ago instead
of two thousand years. It was in the year 63 a.d. that the first
warnings were given of the coming catastrophe. The beautiful
La Somma, then a vine-covered mount of some 2000 feet high, in
that year was shaken to its centre, and many of the buildings in
Pompeii were laid in ruin. Even Naples itself suffered greatly
from the shock. The tyrant Nero was at the time conducting a
grand musical entertainment, in which we are told that five
hundred voices were assisting in a great cantata of the Emperor’s
own composition, when the building reeled under the effects of the
earthquake. Nero would not allow even an earthquake to stop
the performance, and forbade any one leaving until the singing was
finished. Many persons were consequently buried in the ruins of
a portion of the building which fell. Nero himself (unfortunately)
escaped, though very narrowly. Seventeen years afterwards, when
the alarm of the first warning had subsided, sudden destruction
came upon the doomed cities, and in two days Herculaneum,
Resina, Aplonte, Tagranum, Taurania, Pompeii, and Stabies were
buried out of sight. It was not until the middle of the last cen-
tury that the work of disentombment commenced. The results
visible to-day constitute one of the world’s marvels. We see from
the domestic utensils, furniture, paintings, and works of art how
the people of Pompeii lived, and (although the spectacle is a
ghastly one) we see how many of them died, for their contorted or
prostrate bodies, or casts of them, formed by the debris from the
mountain, are there before the visitor’s eyes. Pompeii, though
not a first-class city, must have been a place of some importance,
with its two theatres and its great amphitheatre, its Forum and
Basilica, its extensive public and private baths, its numerous
temples, its columns and marbles, its choice paintings, and its
numberless sculptures and works of art in stone and bronze. How
profoundly impressive is the thought, as we tread the streets and
squares and temples of the city to-day, that the people who crowded
those streets eighteen centuries ago trod the same flags and pave-
ments —that after its deathlike torpor of all that long interval it
comes up again to our gaze unchanged in its main features as they
inhabited it, but silent, roofless, deserted, an awful reminder of
man’s impotence in the face of nature’s gigantic forces, and of the
living burial which may annihilate whole citiesfull of men and
women in a single night !
We left Naples at four in the morning for Brindisi, which place
we reached late in the evening of the same day. In crossing the
peninsula from the Mediterranean to the Adriatic we had again to
traverse some rather steep gradients to surmount the extension of


the Appennine mountains which lay in our way. They are crossed,
however, at a lower altitude than in the north of Italy. Some
rather fine country is to be met 'with among the hills, and the
country bordering on the Adriatic through which we passed from
Foggia to Brindisi is extremely fertile ; mile after mile of olive
groves extend along the sea shores, some of them evidently of great
age from the gnarled trunks of the olive trees. The towns become
more Eastern in character, the houses being mostly square, with
fiat roofs.
Brindisi (the ancient Brundusium) is rather a dirty and
uninteresting town, but very old. It was for a time the harbour
from whence the Homan fleets sailed to Greece or the East ; and
it was the scene of a great siege by Julius Caesar’s army, against
whom it was held by Pompey.
General Observations. —There are many things we could not
fail to take note of in the small towns, villages, and country dis-
tricts of Italy through which we passed. Some of them it may be
worth while to refer to briefly.
Italy is a country of fruits. Forests of olives and miles of vine-
yards are seen in many parts, and the latter must have largely
increased in number and area of late, or the want of a wider
market for its surplus wines (of which I heard a great deal in Lon-
don) would have made itself felt long ago. The wines are not very
popular in northern Europe at present, but we met with some good
samples of them in the south of Italy, notably some varieties of the
“Inferno” and another wine resembling the Australian Frontig-
nac. One peculiar mode of training the vines I have already
referred to, where in the north of Italy tall stone posts or pillars
are used on which to train the square trellises over head. Simi-
larly trellised grounds were noticeable further south, with stakes
or posts of wood. In many places, however, the vines are cut low,
and creep almost along the ground. The most striking vineyards
and gardens are those in which trees are planted in squares, and a
vine is planted near each tree, and trained up it, the branches
being trained off at right angles at a height of five or six feet to
the next tree, so that when all are in full leaf the trees must look
as if garlanded in green, and clasping hands each with his neigh-
bour ready for a dance all down the field. As we saw them denuded
of foliage, the appearance, though quite as peculiar, was not so
pretty.
In the matter of national costumes we were rather disappointed.
The Italian women are doubtless fond of brilliant colours, and in
some country places we saw these pretty well displayed. So in
Milan, at the carnival, amongst the arrivals from the country were
some dresses of distinctive character ; but the regulation suits, as
seen in picture galleries, are about as exceptional in Italian towns
as the Highland kilt is in Glasgow or Edinburgh.


Italian towns are not so well supplied as English or Australian
towns with water for domestic purposes. The water-carriers are,
therefore, still a distinct class, and ply their trade after the manner
of their predecessors, whatever that particular manner may happen
to have been. In some of the northern towns, for example, the
water is carried from the public fountains by the women in copper
vessels. Hence, I was not surprised to see in one of the large
picture galleries an admirable painting of Christ and the woman
of Samaria at the well, in which the “ water-pot” was a copper
vessel such as the Venetian painter was familiar with. In the
southern towns kegs and skins were the “water-pots/' and these
were carried by men. I saw one or two asses’ skins, but most of
them were the hides of what must have been very bloated hogs,
and when filled and hauled over the man’s shoulder by the tail
they have a most uuromantic resemblance to a dead pig with dis-
tended body, but without head or legs.
I don’t know whether there are any soap-boiling establishments
in Italy. Among the variety of smells, neither faint nor few, by
which our olfactories were assailed, we did not detect that par-
ticular stink. My private opinion, as the result of extended obser-
vation, is that Italy is not a good market for the celebrated
productions of Kitchen and Sons or any other promoters of clean
skins. Still, however, washing has to be done, and from my
limited experience it can be fairly done (if more than fairly paid
for), but the life of a linen shirt must be a short and troubled one
in these parts. Where there are rivers, long, barge-like con-
trivances line the shore for a considerable distance, on which the
women carry on their laundry work ; where there are no rivers
public tanks are provided ; but in either case the article to be
purified is treated as an enemy, and an unfair advantage is taken
of its defenceless condition by banging it with clubs or stones
until the laundress has sufficiently gratified her vindictiveness. I
did not see the after process. My shirts, however, were quite
satisfactory in appearance when returned to me, except that the
button-holes, made purposely for small studs, had gaping mouths
and lips as if the laundress had worked them up with some imple-
ment —perhaps her little finger—from behind.
In connection with female employments, I could not but be
struck with the manner in which I saw several women (and I
suppose it is a common custom) dispose of their infants. The little
creatures are bound and swathed like the “ papoose” of the Ameri-
can Indian squaw, and can be held like a toy pulciuello by the
projecting stick at the feet, or laid on their back on a table or shelf,
or hooked up against a wall; and the little projecting head at the
top of this miniature mummy smiles and seems quite happy. Such
is the force of habit, even in its earliest stage, unless Italian
children are to this “ manner born,” and take to it as to a law of
their nature.


As to the vehicles of the Italians, I wonder how they would
regard an American buggy 1 Perhaps with as much want of
appreciation as the Yankee farmer would exhibit for the Italian
waggon. The latter is an extremely primitive arrangement, and
you may often see examples of them which you may well believe
to have survived the ruins of the Empire, but to have degenerated
in the survival. The peasant farmer finds more use for his cow
than does the British or Australian husbandman, for he yokes her
with his donkey to the primitive, narrow, elongated waggon, to
take his produce to market or bring home his purchases from town.
Perhaps the best of all the Italian towns for seeing the national
vehicles in their greatest variety is Naples. In the streets
diverging from the principal markets and the great thoroughfares
leading to the suburbs skirting the bay, you see them to per-
fection. Some of the single horse-carts (the poor animal orna-
mented with tufts and tassels of red and yellow) are passenger
vehicles for the peasants, a sort of cheap omnibus on which a
pyramid of fourteen or fifteen people are often piled ; and you
expect every instant to see the whole affair collapse, crushed under
its excessive weight, or to see the lean and limping animal drop
from sheer exhaustion. In these and all the public vehicles the
horses, or mules, or donkeys are adorned with bells, which fill the
air of the thoroughfares with the sound of their endless jingle.
The private waggons and carts also have bells generally; but as a
rule the poor animals are very unequally yoked —a cow or an ox
is seen by the side of a horse or a mule or a donkey j in fact, the
changes are rung by varying the nature of animals all round. The
colours and character of the ornaments on the heads and shoulders
of the animals differ also, and when three donkeys or mules are
run abreast—a very common team —the centre one has a most
elaborate contrivance on his shoulders by which the three are
reined together, English tourists mostly travel on a sort of
“ Brett” or “ landau,” drawn by one, two, or three horses, accord-
ing to distance and number of passengers. The veturino, or driver,
has to be very smart, and his whip is cracking all the way through
the thronged streets as the foot passengers spread themselves
across the thoroughfares.
Another peculiarity of the Italians is the indifference mostly
shown to the remains of the dead. In the cemeteries attached to
the large cities large pits are provided, which are the common
graves of the poor, a whole crowd of bodies being placed in each
day’s separate pit, and another being prepared for the
next day’s dead. The bodies are, as a rale, placed in the slen-
derest of coffins, or mere cases, and taken to a church set apart for
the purpose, from whence they are carted to the cemetery at night.
In other cases the relations hand over the body to a society, who,
as an act of piety and self-denial, undertake the melancholy duties


which the deceased’s relatives perform in English communities.
These professional attendants wear priestly black gowns, and over
these (covering head, shoulders, and generally to the knees) white
muslin sacs, with holes for the eyes and mouth. I have already
mentioned some children’s funerals at Milan, conducted somewhat
in this fashion by women and little girls. In the case of the
wealthy, however, the funerals are sometimes as imposing as most
other Catholic ceremonies. Sometimes a sham sarcophagus is
erected in a church, and covered with a pall, over which are placed
the memorials of the dead, if he is a well-known man, and his
friends are invited to the church to take part in some religious
services. I saw one grand funeral in Naples of a nobleman’s
daughter. The church was half filled with priests and mourners
with lighted tapers, and after the service the coffin was placed in
a hearse with glass sides, through which it was seen, covered with
wreaths and lighted candles, and thus, drawn by six horses, and
followed by a great crowd on foot and a long line of carriages
(mostly empty), it was conveyed to the family mausoleum.
From Brindisi to Alexandria by steamer (ours was the “ Surat”)
there is, of course, very little to be seen but sea and sky. Never-
theless, that little possesses some interest. We steam out into the
“ Blue Adriatic” opposite the coast of the ancient Illyricum, and
not far from the borders of the modern Montenegro. After sight-
ing Otranto, on the “ heel” of the Italian “ boot,” with its old
castle, full of romantic interest, we pass on the opposite side Corfu
and the hill country of the Corea, at the back of which lies the
mainland, called in Scripture history Epirus and Macedonia. On
the second day we pass the lonian Isles—the latter held by Britain
for many years, but now ceded to Greece. Some of these are
scarcely discernible; but we get a good view of Cephalonia, then of
Zanta (the old Zacanthus), and later on we are within sight of the
last bit of Europe on which our eyes will rest. It is Cape Mata-
plan, the south-westerly projection of the mainland of Greece
(called in the New Testament Achaia). We get also a glimpse of
the island of Cerigo, the ancient Cytherea. By-and-by the rugged
mountainous country of the south-west corner of Crete comes into
view, and we sail beside it for a considerable distance. Not far
from us, although beyond the range of our view, is the old har-
bour and town of Phenice, mentioned in the Acts as possessing a
good harbour for trading vessels of that day to winter in. After
almost losing sight of the Cretan Hills we come upon the island of
Clauda, which lies in front of that part of the Cretan coast whei’e
the port mentioned in St. Luke’s account of the voyage of St. Paul
as the “ Fair Haven” is situated. We are told in the 27th of the
Acts that at Myra, a city of Lycia, the centurion in charge of
Paul and other prisoners, finding a ship of Alexandria (a cornship,
doubtless) sailing to Italy, transferred his prisoners to her. After


a tedious coarse of “ many days” they came upon the eastern
extremity of Crete at “ Salmone,” and “ hardly passing it, came
into a place which is called the Fair Havens, nigh vvhereunto was
the city of Lasea.” The bad season had set in, and Paul, with his
prophetic eye, saw disaster ahead, and advised them to winter
there. The skipper, however, thought he knew better than a mere
landsman, and he preferred pushing on for Phenice, which was well
sheltered, and, in his opinion, the best winter quarters. Taking
advantage of a moderate southerly breeze, they put out to sea, but
very soon the wind stiffened into a gale, known at that season and
in those parts as Euroclydon,” and they had to let the vessel run
before it until they came under the island of Clauda, above men-
tioned. They appear to have had only one boat, which was in tow
of the ship, and they had much trouble to get it on board; and
fearing quicksands they “ undergirded” the ship. Next day they
resorted to the first act of jettison on record (except that of
Jonah), and lightened the vessel of part of her cargo. On the day
following passengers as well as crew went to work and “ cast out
the tackling.” The trouble lasted for fourteen days, at the end of
which time the ship went to pieces on the coast of Melita (Malta),
but crew and passengers—276 souls in all—were miraculously saved.
After wintering in Malta Paul and his party were put on board another
Alexandrian wheat-ship bound for Italy (the “ Castor and Pollux’’).
After sundry stoppages the apostle and his companions were landed
at Puteoli (now Puzzeoli), in the Bay of Naples. The circum-
stances and manner of their landing may be easily conjectured
from known facts. The “ Castor and Pollux” was doubtless one
of the first wheat-ships of the season, and her approach would be
known as soon as she rounded the island of Capri (the southern
horn of the bay), for cornships were allowed to come up under all
sail, while other vessels had to strike their topsails. By the time
the vessel had arrived at the pier at Puteoli, in the north-eastern
portion of the bay, the townspeople would be assembled in con-
siderable numbers; but how little wot they of the man who, with.
Luke and Aristarchus, was stepping ashore on that landing-place,
the massive blocks of which still strew the shore ! And Paul, too,
what must have been his emotions as he reached that land of
Italy I Fair, indeed, was its first aspect. The shore, as seen
under a bright sky from all the points of that oblique course of the
“Castor and Pollux” across the beautiful bay, is loveliness itself.
Vesuvius was then a quiet green hill, called La Somma, not more
than half the height of the present volcano, and its slopes were
covered with gardens and vineyards, studded here and there with
Roman villas. At that time the eruptive forces of the district
were finding vent in Ischia and Solfatara, and Paul would little
think that at the foot of that green hill in one short year from that
time the princess with whom he had lately held converse while a


prisoner in Palestine would, with her child, he overwhelmed in
that fatal wave which was about to sweep down upon the doomed
city of Pompeii. St. Luke, in the Acts, tells us how Paul and his
fellow-travellers stayed a whole week among friends and country-
men at Puteoli, in the Tyrian quarter, after which they proceeded
overland to Rome.
Alexandria. —We entered the harbour of Alexandria at six in
the morning, and expected to be carried off across the desert by
the railway immediately after breakfast. An unexpected detention
till the evening, however, afforded us the opportunity of getting a
glimpse of Egyptian life. Having secured a dragoman, or guide,
the morning was utilised for a visit to the fortifications, where the
effects of the bombardment by the British fleet were still fresh.
Although the walls of the fortress and buildings are thick, and
have a substantial look about them where they have not been
touched by our shells, the openings and breaches made in every
direction revealed a rotten style of buildings, which the missiles of
modern warfare convert into rubbish heaps with perfect ease. We
found a small British force at the barracks, and a posse of painters
and repairers in possession of the Khedive’s palace. Thq Grand
Square (or what was the Grand Square before the insurrection and
massacre) presents nothing but masses of ruin on all its sides,
except where rebuilding has commenced. It must have resembled
on a small scale portions of Paris after the incendiarism of the
Communists. The streets we traversed were full of novelty. The
bazaars and their owners, the Eastern character of the goods and
their mode of display, the costumes of the people, the veiled
women, the camels and camel drivers, the donkeys and their drivers,
and in some cases their riders, were all to us a new revelation of
human life, habits, and customs. Of vehicles there were not a
great variety ; tramcars, however, run in one or two directions.
The open carriage, drawn by one or two horses, is the principal
one for males ; but for Egyptian women and children long waggons
are provided, on which they ride by themselves under charge of
one man, or sometimes two men. The milch cows are of the
buffalo species, rather ungainly creatures, of a dun colour. Most
of the streets are narrow, and as they are not provided with side-
walks the foot passengers have to step into bazaars or doorways
very frequently to avoid the carriage wheels going over their toes
or crushing them against a wall. We visited some of the bazaars,
but our transactions were very limited. The Egyptians were
“ spoiled” once, and they can’t, apparently, forget it. Knowing
the impossibility of avenging themselves on their spoilers, they
seem to consider the English a legitimate substitute. As the
ladies found their morning’s work sufficient for the day, I sallied
forth after luncheon, and did a good deal of exploration on my
own account. After penetrating through many curious streets and


thoroughfares I visited the markets, accompanied by a guide.
They are very narrow and crowded, but it is interesting to see
how the various callings are allotted their separate rows of bazaars
and stalls. Meeting an Englishman, with whom I got into con-
versation (and found he had a brother in Melbourne), I gathered
some useful information, and profiting by a hint of his I called on
the Governor of the city, and introduced myself. He was smoking,
surrounded by friends or officials, two or three of whom I found
spoke English as well as himself. He offered me coffee and cigars,
but as I don’t smoke I declined. After a little conversation, and
the offer by His Excellency of any assistance he could render me
to add to the pleasure of my visit, and an exchange of courtesies,
I withdrew. Outside the large room in which this interview took
place was a spacious hall, and in different parts of it were clusters
of men waiting either £m seats or on the ground, but I could not
make out what they were waiting for, although my guide treated
it as the ordinary thing. Having seen the city pretty well, 1 drove
outside to see Pompey’s Pillar and the great Mohammedan ceme-
tery. The latter is very crowded, but very peculiar. The graves
of men (except those of the poor) are surmounted by a kind of
monuntent on three tiers. At one end of the slab which covers
the upper tier is an upright stone with inscriptions, and it is sur-
mounted by a kind of stone turban, like a man’s, with a smaller
stone, lozenge-shaped, at the other end. Over the women’s graves,
which are flatter, there is the lozenge-shaped stone only. Pompey’s
Pillar is a very ancient monolith, and there are broken remains
lying all around, showing that atone time the square in which the
column stands had other monuments and some heroic statuary.
From an eminence near here I had a good view of the Nile near
one of its mouths. On returning to town I took a boat and went
round the harbour, which is a fine one, and thus regained the
“ Surat.”
From Alexandria to Suez by rail is not a very interesting
ride. One cannot help, however, making some faint attempts to
realise the idea of the great caravan of the Israelitish people, with
their flocks and herds, traversing a portion of the ground on their
way to the Red Sea. If Goshen was in the Delta of the Nile,
that immense multitude must have had trouble enough in covering
the great stretch of desert leading to beyond Suez before Pharaoh
overtook them. It is more reasonable to suppose that three
thousand years ago there was no need of a Suez Canal, and that
the Red Sea was continuous to the Mediterranean. The crossing
must then have been made at some more reachable point on or
near the line of the present canal. If, however, they travelled the
whole distance to the south-east of Suez, where tradition indicates
the place to have been, it must have been a hard journey, not only
for the Israelites, but for their pursuers. Some of the stopping
places along the route are thoroughly Arabic in character, and the


men about them would pass for sheiks of some of the desert tribes.
An occasional glimpse of a small line of laden camels and their
drivers adds to the characteristics of the country, as do also the
Arab tents and mud-built villages. Suez is a small Egyptian town
in which some of the features of life in Alexandria are repeated,
but it possesses others peculiar to its thoroughly provincial
character. The vendors of chairs, fans, puggeries, necklaces, and
other trifles, are rather more noisy and importunate than are their
class in Alexandria, and the boys seemed to me decidedly smarter.
The air with which one lad saluted me in pressing upon me the
superior qualities of his donkey was quite edifying. This animal
was “a masher” and “a grand oldman.” Nevertheless, I declined
to mount him.
The news of General Graham’s victory over Osman Digna’s
forces reached us by telegram before leaving Alexandria. The
critical condition of matters in the Soudan, and the place occupied
by the Littoral of the Red Sea in the minds of all Englishmen,
and indeed of civilised Europe, gave an unwonted interest to the
journey from Suez to the Straits of Bab el Mandeb, although we
encountered none of the vessels employed in the service, nor did
we approach within eyeshot of either of the towns on the Red Sea
shore. We found amongst our fellow-travellers from Brindisi only
a very few young officers going to the Soudan on active service.
Some of the islands we passed were interesting, notably “ The
Twelve Apostles’’ and “ The Brothers.” In passing through the
straits we saw two small steamers on the rocks, one of them in a
hopeless condition. As we had not to call at Aden we took a
direct course for Colombo, and reached there in a few hours over
five days from Suez. The port of Colombo would be an open
roadstead but for the breakwater (made apparently of concrete
blocks), within which the shipping rides safely at anchor. No
sooner was our anchor down than we were the centre of a most
exciting scene. A crowd of applicants for your washing salute
you, with testimonials in English from former travellers. They
don’t always know what the testimony of the writer is, for a while
ago it is said that in one case this highly-prized document described
the presenter of it as the greatest rogue in the place. Then there
are vendors of all sorts of fancy goods, catamarans and boats of
various kinds, full of nude men, wearing only a cloth about the
loins, all clamouring to take you to the shore. Amphibious boys
and men are shouting to you from the water to throw down a
silver coin, which they fetch from the bottom with great ease.
These coffee-coloured men and boys are mostly well formed, have
muscular frames, and are evidently capable of laborious work.
Their employment, however, must be very precarious. It appears
to be eked out on the part of the catamaran owner by fishing off
the coast.


Colombo impresses the visitor very favourably on landing. The
portion of the town first reached consists for the most part of
rather handsome buildings, interspersed with patches of rich tropi-
cal foliage. Beyond the first rows of bazaars and places of business
are the military quarters —extensive buildings, open and airy, with
successions of arched colonnades, surrounded by grass compounds,
or by belts of trees and shrubs. Our hotel, the “ Galle-Face,” is
situated at the end of a most charming drive and esplanade, called
the “ Galle-Face walk,” with the sea breaking at its side for the
whole distance. The hotel is fitted admirably for a tropical climate.
Through the entire building the sea air circulates so freely that
punkahs are not needed, and you sit about in cane chairs under
its colonnades sniffing the cool breeze. You are, however, sur-
rounded by an importunate crowd of itinerant merchants, jewellers,
drapers, vendors of elephantine and other local mementos, photo-
graphs, &c.
A considerable party of our fellow-travellers left Colombo at
seven in the morning on a railway excursion to Kandy, which is
four hours’ ride. The scenery is described as very fine; but as
our stay in Ceylon was to be limited to a day and a half, I pre-
ferred seeing Colombo to Kandy. In the morning we visited the
post-office, and obtained letters and papers which had not been
sent to us on board the “ Rome.” The principal bazaars occupied
the attention of the ladies for some time, and after another pleasant
drive we returned to luncheon. As I had calls to make, I took a
carriage by myself in the afternoon, and drove to some of the
principal public places and through the crowded thoroughfare of
the native town, where I could see the people in their homes and
occupations as they swarm in their matted, thatch, or tile-covered
huts, shops, or dwellings, many of them destitute of the commonest
conveniences. Some of them were mere sheds and outhouse-
looking places, lying amongst palms, cocoanuts, and other indi-
genous trees a little off the thoroughfares. In these, the least
commodious and civilised of their dwelling-places, the children
were the most numerous. Scores of little bronze creatures trotted
about naked, and those above six or seven years of age with only
scant apologies for covering—all, however, as merry and blithe-
some as the happiest and most highly favoured of their race. Of
course, they beg like their elders, or run after the carriage for a
mile if they see any hope of getting a silver threepence for a flower
or two. When I had occasion to stop and alight I soon found
myself the centre of a crowd of these little ones, clamouring with
upturned faces like an enormous nest of young blackbirds crying
for the good things brought by the parent-bird. Some of these
children are really beautiful, and none that I saw were other than
interesting. Amongst the girls of twelve or thirteen I frequently
saw samples of exquisite beauty, with tine full eyes, good figure,


and stately walk. These were sometimes heightened- in their
effect by a tasty dress of bright colours. There is not much that
is distinctive in the dress of the women ; and as to the men, they
wear apparently what they can get, and that is sometimes very
little, unless they belong to some particular order.
In addition to the Dagobas and Yeharas, or, as we should call
them, temples of the Buddhists, there are Catholic and Protestant
churches, the former being the more prominent, for they have
secured some of the best sites for their churches and schools here as
elsewhere. In a population of Buddhists the aggressive opera-
tions of Christian missions are necessarily slow and partial,
requiring an amount of patience and perseverance which nothing
but the promptings of a true Christian devotion can inspire. The
Buddhist creed is professed by a larger number than any other
creed in the wide world. It challenges, therefore, an attention
and investigation which few English people find leisure or inclina-
tion to give it, unless brought face to face with it in these eastern
lands. Being here in the midst of a Buddhist people, I deter-
mined to learn a little about their faith, and visited the principal
temple to which Europeans are admitted. The central apartment
is occupied by a colossal reclining figure of Buddha (the past
Buddha), while at one end is a smaller figure representing, in
a standing posture, the coming Buddha. Around the room are
paintings and carvings of devas (a sort of superior beings, but not
divine). Among these I was surprised to find an image of Yishnu
and others, known or always regarded as Indian divinities. There
are also many emblematical devices, which take a deal of explain-
ing and interpreting, without, after all, enlightening the visitor
very much. The devotees, of whom I met a considerable party
coming out (they were all women and girls), cari'y a flower into
the temple, and lay it before the colossal figure, not, as the priestly
attendant informs us, as an act of worship, but as a recognition of
their indebtedness to the best man who ever lived, and who by his
wisdom and beneficence shed a light upon human life and destiny
by the following of which each individual may work out his or
her own salvation. At the same time they x'epeat certain dogmas
or precepts which they pi'ofess their desii’e to follow’, as enjoined
by their great teacher-. A sort of cori’idor surrounds the central
room, and the walls of this corridor are covex’ed with paintings
and carvings. On one side is a long series of x’epresentations, in
four rows, illustrative of the life of Buddha. There are also repx-e-
-sentations of the sun ; also of the evil spirits, a troop of whom, of
most ludicrous forms, ai’e following an elephant ; bxxt on the
elephant passixxg Buddha, who is seated on high in the centre of
the picture, he turns round, falls on his knees, and appears to kick
all his evil followers away into perdition. It is impossible,
however, to describe fully the contents of this extremely


curious Dagoba, or temple of Buddha. Buddhism is less
a religion than a philosophy ‘ nevertheless it holds the place of
a religion among nearly five hundred millions of our race, or
considerably more than a third of the whole. It has, of course, its
sects and divisions. The two main sections appear to be those of
the north and the south, Thibet being the great centre of the
former, and Ceylon that of the other. The particulars given to me
express, therefore, the views of the southern division. The Bud-
dhists claim affinity to the Positivists of London, Paris, and
Berlin, because they hold the theory of the eternity of matter and
force, but without a God. Their system assumes “the universal
operation of the law of change by which all things, the worlds and
all forms animate and inanimate upon them, are governed.” As to
such questions as the origin of things and the existence of a Law-
maker, they think it a waste of time to speculate about them.
While, however, European ci-devant philosophers may be in accord
with the atheists of the East upon questions of universal law and
a principle of evolution, they are not likely to go with Buddhists
in their theories of the method and direction of this evolution.
The former contend that man is the result of a law of development,
always working from a lower and imperfect to a higher and more
perfect condition. The Buddhists may contend that they say the
same thing, inasmuch as their development consists in a succession
of rebirths, and a gradual evolution of the perfected man in the
form of a Buddha; but seeing that they deny the existence of
souls, or the transmission of an independent personality, it involves
a deal of metaphysical reasoning and apparent contradiction to
argue that the perfected man (if such a being can be developed)
can be identified with any, much less all, of the string of births
through which he must have passed in the long chain of “ vital
undulation.” It is admitted that memory departs with the man
at the end of each form of being, but that his peculiar character-
istics will survive, so that a bad life will lead to a change to an
inferior being, and an amount of suffering proportioned to his
demerits. How this descension in the scale is to be reversed I
could not learn. The priests and interpreters of the sacred books,
however, explain to their own satisfaction that perfect justice is
the result of the natural working of the universal law ; that
every man gets under its operations exactly that reward or punish-
ment which he has deserved, no more and no less ; that no good deed
or bad deed, however trifling or secret, escapes the evenly-balanced
scales of this self-operative law. Still, however, the question occurs,
How is the thoroughly renewed and perfected man to be the end and
outcome of all these changes. The gospel, according to the great
Sakya, is, work out your own salvation—that is, salvation from
the miseries of the present existence, and from the possibly worse
miseries of rebirths—by self-control, the repression of all bad


desires, and the conquest of ignorance by learning wisdom—all
of which is to be done by faithfully following the precepts of the
sacred books. The moral precepts contained in these books are
doubtless admirable; but how a man of evil life, who has been
reborn into a degraded form of existence, and perhaps into another
world in which his bad passions would find their natural gratifica-
tion, is to rise from the degradation and to return to the path that
leads to happiness, it is impossible to comprehend. There are
many rules of life and conduct laid down ; many forms of creed
to be repeated, and many maxims to be professed, by the devout
Buddhist; but as he recognises no God, he cannot be said to
pray. The summum bonum, the ultimate goal of all just living,
the conquest of all unholy desires and bad passions, and the
attainment of wisdom, or a full acquaintance with man’s nature
and destiny, is “ Nirvana.” This is described as a state of perfect
rest, where the individual will be subject to no more changes, no
more rebirths, but the total obliteration of all those physical con-
ditions, desires, illusions, sorrows, &c., which had rendered rebirth
necessary. It is a miserable gospel, however, that condemns each
believer, not to one purgatory, but to numberless purgatories in
the form of rebirths, which the teachers admit may go on through
cycles of a thousand generations before “ Nirvana ” is reached.
Christian missions have been long established in Ceylon, and the
missionaries have schools for the instruction of the native childien.
Amongst the adult population it is not an easy matter to get them
to unlearn the puerile part of the creeds in which they have been
reared (the philosophical side of their moral code is not understood
by many of them) ; and the substitution of Roman Catholic legends
about the Virgin, and saints, and miracles, and so forth, is not
calculated to win the more intelligent and acute among the men,
while the masses fail to distinguish between one set of professedly
Christian teachers and another. Amongst the educated and well-
to-do people there is a movement in favour of a wide extension of
education for the children, and a national fund has been opened
for the erection of schools, in which the rising generation shall
be taught not only in secular subjects but in the principles of
Buddhism. , . „
After paying my visits to the temples and gathering such infor-
mation as I was able, I drove out to the house, a little out of town,
occupied by Arabi Pasha, the exiled leader of the great Egyptian
rebellion. I was fortunate enough to find the pasha at home.
His companions in exile were leaving the gate as I approached it.
On introducing myself I was received very cordially, and requested
to take a chair under the shade ot some palms and cocoanut-trees
in the garden in front of the house. A Singhalese gentleman was
also present, fortunately, for the pasha’s English is very imperfect ;
and by the aid of this gentleman our conversation was well sus-


tained for about twenty minutes. During that time coffee was
served to us, and the conversation turned partly, of course, upon
Egypt and the latest news from the Soudan, and partly upon Aus-
tralia. Arabi spoke intelligently about Melbourne, of which he
had evidently heard a good deal before. Egyptian matters were
rather delicate ground, and not being a reporter, or having any
special mission, I avoided painful questions. It was evident, how-
ever, that Arabi considered the Mahdi a formidable difficulty for
the Egyptian Government to deal with, and that the fighting was
not yet over, notwithstanding General Graham’s defeat of Osman
Digna’s forces. As to his own position he was reticent, but he
was evidently not displeased when his Singhalese friend expressed
to me the hope entertained by all the pasha’s friends that the time
was not far distant when he would be restored to position and
favour at Cairo. The house at present occupied by Arabi and his
attendants is a commodious one, though not so large as the one at
first assigned him. He left that on account of damp in the walls,
while the present house is on a well-drained eminence, charmingly
secluded, and surrounded by varied and beautiful foliage. As I
sat looking into that not very swarthy face in friendly chat, ray
mind wandered to Alexandria and Cairo and Tel-el-Kebir. Arabi
has none of the characteristics of a hero. He has not the natural
force of character which you would look for in a military com-
mander or a great political leader. But there he was—the man
who had led an army against the forces of England, and had only
been beaten at a great cost of blood and money. He might have
been (as some still think he should have been) sent to the gallows
as a rebel, but he lives to be treated as a defeated leader in an
honourable war, enjoying the comfort and courtesies of a very en-
durable exile in an Eastern paradise.
The drives around Colombo are very pretty, and the Ceylon
scenery mostly very beautiful. Many of the tropical shrubs, in-
cluding the lettuce trees, crotons, and other variegated plants, are
gorgeous in the rich variety of their colours. The Cinnamon
Gardens were to us a slight disappointment, and the “spicy
breezes” that, according to Bishop Heber, “ blow soft from Ceylon’s
Isle,” were not particularly noticeable (except in one of the densely
crowded parts of the town, where I found them decidedly “ spicy”).
In saying that “ every prospect pleases,” however, the bishop, as
far as rural scenery is concerned, was undoubtedly right. On the
second morning I paid a visit to our old friend, Mr. Fergussou, the
commissioner for Ceylon at the late International Exhibition in
Melbourne ; also to the Chamber of Commerce, and discussed some
international questions, especially that of direct trade between the
Australian colonies and India, after which I had to join my party
and re-embark on board the “ Beme,” which was once more under
steam soon after midday.


Our life iu the “ Rome” had heeu up to this time rather dull.
To us it presented a striking contrast to our experiences in cross-
ing the Pacific. There the captain was the most genial man of his
class with whom we had ever sailed, the officers were very pleas-
ant and gentlemanly, and the first-class passengers worked together
harmoniously in promoting the general enjoyment. Every day,
therefore, was a gala day. On the “ Rome” it was far otherwise.
Some of the officers were agreeable enough, and so were many of
the passengers; but there was scarcely any co-operation, and
therefore very little general enjoyment. Matters were not im-
proved after leaving Colombo, as far as we were concerned, for a
young lady of our little circle was taken ill of what was thought
to be chicken pox, but was later pronounced to be a case of modi-
fied small-pox. Of course she had to be isolated, and on our
arrival at Australia an attempt was made (under a strong pro-
test from me) to put her ashore. The West Australian authorities,
however, refused to take charge of her—very naturally—and she
had to proceed to Melbourne. Some very unpleasant incidents
arose out of this misfortune, which it is not worth while to par-
ticularise; but suffice it to say she was convalescent by the time we
reached Adelaide ; and as we had engaged a female attendant for
her we stayed at Adelaide, as we had previously intended, and
with the other passengers for South Australia had to go into
quarantine.
Purgatory. —There are very few conditions, probably, under
which any one would go into quarantine as a matter of choice in
preference to going straight to their homes or their friends. But
the conditions may and do vary greatly, as was proved in the case
of the “ Rome.” In one instance the unfortunate passengers may
be subjected to the miseries of a state of purgatory ; on the other
their compulsory detention may be made an agreeable piece of
rustication. These widely differing experiences, without much
exaggeration, may be said to have been those of the quarantined
passengers at Melbourne and Adelaide respectively. Fortunately,
those who had the most to endure were subjected to the shorter
term of endurance, while the better treated could only complain of
their longer detention. We were amongst the latter. Our com-
panions in misfortune were mostly less inconvenienced by the loss
of time, and a fortnight’s detention was not to them at all unen-
durable under the circumstances. We found on arrival at the
station on Torrens Island that every provision had been made for
our reception. The buildings constitute a small village, capable of
accommodating three hundred people; and as we were a small party
of thirty only (children included), we had an abundance of elbow-
room, and, with the willing attentions of the superintendent and
his staff of subordinates, had a very pleasant initiation into
cottage life, for we were distributed among the four-roomed cot-


tages, of which there are thirty on the reserve, besides the larger
piles of buildings for young men and young women, hospitals,
convalescent houses, kitchens, dining-halls, &c., &c. If we had
gone to the island for a holiday, and taken a staff of servants and
ample stores of provisions, we should probably have adopted
exactly the routine of daily life which we were permitted to do by
the South Australian authorities. We had a large hall for our
meals—breakfast at nine, tiffin at one. Most of the ladies got up
afternoon tea at four, and we dined at half-past six. The occupa-
tions of the day were agreeably diversified. After breakfast
everybody was busy finishing their correspondence for the post, or
for friends ashore, which, after being duly fumigated, were sent by
the steam launch, which visited us at about eleven. This welcome
visitor brought us our letters, the morning journals and other
literature, and fresh supplies of all sorts. It was usually a very
interesting occasion to portions of the detenus , as friends of some
of us were almost always on board, and they anchored for half an
hour within speaking distance. Of course, our correspondence
and the newspapers filled up the interval till tiffin time. In the
afternoon various sports engaged the attention of the gentlemen—
shooting, fishing, tennis, cricket, &c.—and the ladies enjoyed their
strolls and their books. Reading, writing, and social intercourse
occupied the evenings, which, however, were short, as we dined
rather late and retired early. Altogether it was a very easy kind
of life. We were released at the end of fourteen days.
Testimonialising is rather overdone in these days, but we felt
on leaving Torrens Island that while gratifying our own inclina-
tions we were but doing the commonest justice to Mr. W, Lewis,
the superintendent of the station, as well as to his subordinates,
to make a presentation to them—which we trust was acceptable
in recognition of their unfailing attention to our wants and our
enjoyment.
After enjoying the society of relatives and friends in Adelaide
for a brief space, we went on to our final destination at Melbourne,
and with thankful hearts were enabled to say, after our twelve
months’ wanderings through the four quarters of the globe—
HOME AT LAST!


APPENDIX.
THE SECEETAEY’S EEPOET.
TO THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT, AND COMMITTEE
OF THE MELBOURNE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE.
Gentlemen,
I have the honour to submit to you some particulars
of matters to which I was able to give attention during my recent
travels through America and Europe, and which matters appeared
to have a bearing more or less direct on the trade interests and
general progress of this colony. On most of these subjects I had
opportunities of addressing the Acting Secretary from time to time,
so that to you, gentlemen of the Committee, I have little to com-
municate that is new, but am honoured by your request to re-state
my experiences in writing, in order that they may be recorded for
the information of the members generally.
TELEGRAPHIC AND TELEPHONIC COMMUNI-
CATION.
At the first foreign port of call in the Pacific—viz., Honolulu—
I was astonished to find that the main thoroughfares presented the
“ bird-cage” appearance of Flinders-lane, and that the wires were all
telephone wires. Every house of any importance has its telephone.
It is a necessary part of the domestic equipment. Ladies give
their orders to the tradespeople by telephone ; the doctor is sent for
or consulted by telephone; visits are arranged, and all sorts of little
social matters conducted amongst ladies without the necessity of
their leaving their homes, to say nothing of the frequent communi-
cations between the man of business and his family and between
business houses and public offices. The saving in time to masters,
mistresses, clerks, and servants, and here, where everybody rides or
drives, of horses and carriages, as also in letter writing and messen-
gers, is enormous, and must well repay the cost of the telephone.
Of course, this is all the result of American enterprise, for the
Americans have, very naturally, secured the commercial control of
the place ; but I could hardly feel otherwise than humiliated at the
thought that oh the little island of Oahu, out in the Pacific, its
town of less than twenty thousand inhabitants was in advance


of the metropolis of the Australias. (I am, of course, aware that
since that date telephonic communication is much more largely
employed in this city.) In San Francisco the telegraph and tele-
phone lines are in the hands of private companies, but some of them
have agreed upon such a division of labour that business is thereby
greatly facilitated. For example, they have a “ stock and gold”
division of the system. I was all over one of their establishments,
and was interested in observing how, by concentrating their attention
upon their special business, the information in regard to all trans-
actions in stocks, shares, exchange, &c., not only local, but national
and foreign, was distributed in every direction almost as soon as
received ; and this proves an immense relief to the working of the
general business of the other offices. There is, however, a great
deal more information in regard to “ stock and gold” made public
every day in San Francisco than in Melbourne. As to the tele-
phones, they have here, as at other places, some recent improve-
ments ; and the applications of both telegraph and telephone wires
to daily general wants are more varied than are dreamt of amongst
us.
American telephones are largely available outside the list of sub-
scribers. Any one may step into one of the offices open for the
purpose, and for 25 cents may hold five minutes’ conversation with a
distant subscriber, or a public official.
While the telephone has been undergoing such rapid development
and extension in America, the telegraph has been surprisingly ex-
tending in England. I obtained much interesting information on
this subject from Mr. Preece, the chief telegraph engineer to the
London Post Office, and other gentlemen connected with telegraphy,
I was also shown over the whole of the telegraph establishment in
St. Martin’s le Grand, and made acquainted with the preparations
then in progress for meeting the large additional demands which it
was certain would be made upon the head office and all its branches
throughout the kingdom on the intended reduction of the telegraph
charges to fid, for twenty words.
TRAMWAYS.
A Yictorian landing in either Europe or America meets at once
with ocular proof of the one palpable instance in which Melbourne
lags behind all other centres of civilisation—namely, street tram-
ways. Even the neighbouring colonies are in advance of us in this
matter. At San Francisco 1 found the two systems of horse trac-
tion and the endless wire-rope in use. The horse cars were
running on most of the level lines, and the wire-rope was used on
others, especially those of the streets which have steep inclines. In
one of these streets the gradient in some parts is as steep as one in
six, and yet the cars travel up and down with as much steadiness as


on a level There were five rope tramways at work in San Francisco
belonging to one company. The greater economy in the working of
these lines has been demonstrated, and some of the level lines were
being converted from horse to wire-rope railways at the time of my
visit. I had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of Mr. A. S.
Hallidie, the gentleman who matured the wire-rope system, and
of examining the works of the principal line. Several improve-
ments have been effected in the apparatus since the construction of
the first of these lines ; but the system may be described generally
as an ordinary railway laid along the street, beneath the centre of
which railway is a tube or subway in which the wire-rope runs over
rollers placed at certain distances. Above this tube or tunnel, for
its entire length, is a groove or slot, through which passes the iron
rod of a gripper attached to the driving carriage above, and which
is called a “ dummy.” An assistant rides in this ‘‘dummy,” and
works the carriage by a lever, which enables him to grip or release
the wire at pleasure. A powerful brake enables him to bring the
cars to an immediate stoppage when required. The rope is in con-
tinual motion, and is worked by a stationary engine erected near the
centre of the line, and passes over large drums at each terminus, or,
in some cases, by an engine at each end. The “ dummy” carries
passengers, and usually has one or more passenger carriages
attached. The same kind of street tramway is in use in Chicago,
owned by the Chicago City Railway Company, and on which I
travelled four miles and upwards. It had a train of several carriages,
ran very comfortably, and pulled up at the cross streets at the end
of every alternate block to take up and set down passengers. Its
rate of speed is from five to six miles an hour. The advantages of
the system are obvious in the matter of cleanliness and the health
of the public, as there are none of the offensive and hurtful effects
in a warm and dusty city from horse droppings or the increase of
dust from horse traffic, the track does not get out of repair, and the
cost of working is found to be little more than half that of horse
trams. The system is rapidly extending in the States, and I heard
of a company in London which was about to introduce it there. (By
the kind courtesy of Mr. Hallidie and other gentlemen _ I was
enabled to obtain much information concerning the construction and
working of these lines, and have the pleasure of including amongst
the documents I collected an illustrated descriptive account of them.)
The best steam tramways that came under my notice were those
lately introduced into Birmingham, and now running between towns
and rural places in the midland counties. The engine is a small
and compact boxed vehicle, with a small chimney, and has no terror
for timid horses. It is fitted with an air-condensing apparatus,
emits scarcely any smoke or steam, and is practically noiseless. I
was so much struck with its apparent adaptability to some of our
more remote suburbs, and to sparsely populated districts, that I


wrote to the makers, Messrs. Kitson and Co., of Leeds, who cour-
teously supplied me with information as to cost of engines and
carriages, working expenses, and every detail required. They appear
to be admirably adapted to work short country lines as feeders to
our existing railways.
THE WHEAT INDUSTRY.
I collected all the information possible, in addition to that deriv-
able from personal observation during my journey through America,
as to the state of the wheat crop and the probable outcome of the
then approaching season in relation to its effect upon the Mark-lane
quotations, and, as a necessary consequence, upon the prospects and
interests of the great wheat-growing industry of Victoria and South
Australia. I was very courteously supplied with all the official
information collected by the State Department at Washington,
which has the machinery for collecting returns from all parts of the
States, and communicated these returns to this Chamber. As,
however, the information thus obtained could only be of value for
the year now passed, I need not go into details.
SUPPRESSION OF FIRES.
Our fire-insurance offices might get a wrinkle or two from the
practice of the American fire brigades. At San Francisco they
have no less than fourteen engine-stations and two separate and
distinct brigades, or “ patrols,” as they call them. The duty of
these latter two is not the suppression, but the prevention of fires
and the saving of life and property, and they are supported entirely
by the insurance companies, or “ fire underwriters.” While the
other “ patrols” are smothering the fire by water or carbonic acid
gas, these men are covering up stock and looking after salvage.
While I was staying at the Palace Hotel a large tobacco factory,
near the hotel, was found to be on fire in the uppermost story.
The underwriters’ patrol swarmed immediately into the building,
with their indiarubber and tarpaulin covers, and, commencing with
the floor immediately beneath the one on fire, they covered up the
stock on each of the stories down to the bottom one. At the same
time holes ■were bored in the floors, and the deluge of water poured
upon the fire thus found its way to the basement of the factory, and
it was said that 40,000 dollars worth of stock was thereby saved
from destruction. The cost of maintaining this brigade for a whole
year is under 24,000 dollars.
The arrangements and discipline of these patrols are simply
perfect. In one minute from the ringing of an electric bell (which


indicates at the same time the block where the fire has broken out)
the patrol can be in the street, and at full gallop, notwithstanding
that the men may have been in their beds. Slides are connected
with their dormitory, upon which they descend instantly to their
carriage, and the horses, which always stand ready harnessed, rush
from their stalls to their places on each side the pole, and are
hitched on in a twinkling. The captain mounts the box with the
driver, and they are off into the street with all their necessary
appliances with a celerity that is perfectly amazing.
AMERICAN DUTIES ON AUSTRALIAN WOOLS.
You, gentlemen, are aware that this matter has exercised the
minds of wool-growers and of the Australian Chambers of Com-
merce for some years past. Before I left Melbourne we had
intelligence of a reduction in the duty to the extent, it was said, of
18 per cent. On my arrival at the East Coast I made inquiries
about it, and, from the information gathered at New York and at
Washington, I found that although a slight amelioration of the
tax had taken place, it was not enough to be of much service to
these colonies. I obtained, however, a volume containing the new
Customs Act and Schedule of Duties, which I forwarded to
Melbourne. I found that the new Tariff Act was but a reluctant
concession on the part of Congress to the public demand, and that
the Tariff Commission, which (like ours) had been sitting for a year
making inquiries, appeared to lack the courage necessary to give
expression to the logical conclusions deducible from the evidence.
The slight concession made appeared to have whetted the appetite
for a more substantial reform in the direction of Free-trade. In the
clubs and commercial circles the expression of opinion in favour of
a change was very strong, and general.
The newspapers in New York furnished daily evidence of the
prominent position occupied by the tariff question ; the gieat
political parties, who were about to commence the struggle for the
next presidential election, were compelled to regard it as one of the
great questions of the day; and among leading citizens I found the
opinion prevalent that the Democratic party would have to abandon
their opposition to the Free-trade sentiment, fearing lest the large
secession from their ranks on that one ground might give an easy
victory to their opponents, the Republicans. Although these
opinions emanated from mercantile men, some of them were men
who, but for this tariff question, would vote with the Democrats.
There was an influential organisation then in contemplation, having
for one of its objects the extension of trade relations with other
countries, including these colonies, and the reduction or abolition of
the wool duties would be a part of their programme.


POSTAL MATTERS AND POST OFFICE ARRANGE-
MENTS.
Private Letter Boxes. —Prior to my leaving Melbourne a dis-
cussion had taken place in the Chamber Committee as to the
possibility of reviving the waning popularity of the private-box
arrangement by the Post Office authorities here supplying to the
holders of those boxes keys which would enable them to call or send
at all hours for their letters. I found on visiting the American
post-offices that the plan so proposed was then in general operation.
A man of business calls or sends his clerk, and opens his box at any
hour, whether officials are available or not; and the merchants would.
he very unwilling to surrender the advantage, while the officials
regard it as a natural and necessary part of the system. These
remarks apply equally to the Canadian offices.
Postal Rates between America and Australia.— The
single-letter rate between the States and England is 5 cents.
It is the same to South Australia, Western Australia, and
Tasmania ; but to Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland, and
New Zealand it is 12 cents. The new arrival in San Francisco
from the West is told by hotelkeepers and others that the postage to
England and ‘‘Australia” is only 5 cents; and thus, unless the
stranger takes the trouble to go to the post-office and inquire there,
the chances are that letters to his friends in Victoria or the Eastern
colonies will never reach them ; for by the postal regulations of the
States any letter which bears less than a full single rate (which to
Victoria, &c., is 12 cents) is not sent on ; and, as the writer is
travelling, and cannot be very well reached, the letter goes after a
time to the Dead Letter Office at Washington, and is dead to
all intents and purposes, however important its contents may
be to the parties interested. This fate befell some of my own
letters. I recovered one when at Washington, and others were
sent to me in England by the kindness of the head of the
department, who had a special watch kept upon letters coming into
the “ dead” branch from post-offices in the West. In Canada the
same practice prevails. They adopt the differential rates of the
States plus their own local charges. At all the post-offices the
officials expressed to me their great annoyance and trouble over these
discrepancies. I discovered this state of things at Chicago, and
wrote thence to the authorities at Washington and Ottawa on the
subject ; but it was only when I arrived at Washington that I
found these higher rates to be the result of a special convention
entered into in January, 1874, between the States and the colonies
I have named. The two western colonies and Tasmania are not in
the convention, and they get the benefit of the lower rate (5 cents),


and escape all the dangers of misconception or mistake which con-
sign so many letters for the other colonies to the postal cemetery.
Even at Washington the authorities are alive to the necessity of a
removal of the existing grievance, and have proposed to the Sydney
Post Office to adopt the Postal Union rate of 5 cents, and all the
other details applicable to countries in the Union ; but, strange to
say, the offer was declined. If, therefore, we are still subjected to
the existing annoyances and exceptionally high rates of postage
with America, it is from the deliberate choice of the colonies, or their
post-office authorities.
The Parcels Post. —This system, as you, gentlemen, are
aware, exists in several countries, and has been for some time in
operation in India. I was surprised, however, to find that although
parcels under this system were sent by the Indian Government to
England the London Post Office was no party to the arrangement,
and that the parcels on arrival depended more on the P. and O.
Company than on the post-office for their distribution. In August
last the parcels post came into operation for the first time in Eng-
land. I was desirous of seeing how it was being worked, and after
it was about a fortnight old I called, and was taken by the head
of the parcels branch through that part of the post-office and its
appurtenances which had been appropriated to this particular busi-
ness, The system was working with perfect ease and smoothness,
and so it appeared on a later occasion when the work had greatly
increased. The staff at first seemed unnecessarily large, but the
men were learning their duties, and when the pressure came they
were fully equal to the work. The increase was not so great at the
end of the first six months as the officials had anticipated, but there
can be no doubt of its immense convenience to the public, of which
I had many proofs both in London and the provinces.
I ventured one day to ask the Acting Secretary of the post-office
how soon we might hope for an extension of the system to the
colonies, but I was entreated not to suggest such a thing until
they had had time to thoroughly master the work of applying it to
the home country.
The character of some of the articles sent through the parcels
post in England would astonish most people; but the condemned
articles which I saw at the American Post Office at Washington
surpass in strangeness anything I heard of at St. Martin’s le Grand.
They included human skulls and anatomical preparations, the most
uncommon specimens of the animal kingdom, birds, beasts, and
fishes, as well as reptiles, including a fine rattlesnake (which had
been posted alive and addressed to some one in Germany). A col-
lection of these curiosities, only two or three years old, forms
already quite an interesting museum. The machinery of the parcels
post appeared to me so easily manageable that the only difficulty 1


can anticipate in its introduction in this colony is the want of
sufficient space at the head office—a difficulty which confronted the
authorities at St. Martin’s le Grand, but which they have managed
to surmount.
BOARDS OF TRADE.
Chambers of Commerce have undergone a great change in
America during the past few years. From out of them, or beside
them, have sprung up commercial organisations under the title of
“ Boards,of Trade.” They appear to have arisen out of the necessity
for some permanent body to protect the general interests of merchants
in cases of insolvency. Gradually their functions have expanded,
until they have taken up abstract questions and matters of a pressing
and practical character, some of which had scarcely come within the
recognised province of a Chamber of Commerce. Hence in some
cities I found the Chamber of Commerce a mere piece of machinery
for collecting and publishing commercial statistics, while mercantile
activities found a channel of operation in the Board of Trade. In
other cases the Chamber of Commerce provided the buildings
required for the co-operative agencies of the mercantile community,
while the Board of Trade and the Exchange divided the work.
The topics discussed by the Boards of Trade are often of much
wider significance than those which we are in the habit of including
within the scope of Chambers of Commerce. It is pretty certain,
however, that, viewed as a whole, the modern American system
would be ill adapted to the wants of such a community as ours.
ELECTRIC LIGHTING.
As the electric light will be the light of the future, it claimed
much of my attention. All the large hotels in America use it, as
well as many other places of business, factories, &c. The grand
new hotels in London have adopted it, and so have the principal
hotels in Paris and other continental cities ; and, as you are aware,
gentlemen, many steamships are now lighted throughout by elec-
tricity. At Chicago I had* the opportunity of examining the
various inventions, as there was an extensive display of them in the
Great Exhibition Building, where was being held a “ national
exposition of railway appliances,” including every conceivable thing
connected with railways. In New York I made the acquaintance of
Mr. Edison, and was privileged by a private view over the whole of
his establishment at Newark for the manufacture of his electric
lamps. When in London I was permitted to see over the large
works of Messrs. Siemens, and of the Eastern Telegraph Company,
and others ; and at the Fisheries’ Exhibition was another large


display of the various applications of electricity to lighting. Any
one having seen all these exemplifications of the practicability of
lighting by electricity, and the extent to which old difficulties have
been surmounted, must see that the time is rapidly approaching
when a city like Melbourne must avail itself of the many advantages
to health and comfort which the new light presents.
THE ASSOCIATED CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE OF
THE UNITED KINGDOM.
Having accepted an invitation from the Association of Chambers
of Commerce of the United Kingdom to attend their annual autumnal
meeting at Derby during the first week of October, I had the plea-
sure of being present, and shared with them the profuse hospitalities
of the Derby Chamber, the municipal authorities, and the manu-
facturers and magnates of the district.
The Masonic Hall at Derby was filled each day of the gathering
by nearly two hundred merchants, manufacturers, and representa-
tives of the principal Chambers.
Ihe official programme embraced twenty-eight subjects, some
of which were new to me ; some were of purely Imperial concern,
but others had more or less of interest for us in these colonies, and
were mostly old acquaintances, as they had previously occupied the
attention of this Chamber. I may mention a few examples. As to
the progress of Bills in Parliament, it was submitted by the Derby
and Leeds Chambers, and agreed to—“ That the Executive Council
be requested to give all the support possible to the following motion,
of which Mr. E. Clarke, Q.C., M.P., has given notice for next
session: ‘ Bills in Progress.—That it is desirable that the practice
of the House of Commons should be so amended that the con-
sideration of Bills which have passed a second reading, but have not
become law, shall be resumed in the succeeding session of the
same Parliament at the stage of committee.” Members of this
Chamber will probably consider that practical legislation in this
colony would be facilitated and cheapened if the practice of our
Parliament could be amended in accordance with this resolution.
On the subject of the decimal sjstem, the resolution adopted at
the instance of the Leicester Chamber was— u That in the opinion
of this Association the establishment of a complete decimal system
of weights, measures, and money would confer a great boon upon
tlm commercial classes of this country, and that it is highly
desirable the teaching of such a system should be introduced into
all public elementary schools. That this Association recommends
the metric system of weights and measures now in use by nearly
every continental nation, and a decimal currency, based upon and as
nearly as possible approaching our present coinage, and requests


the Executive Council to bring this resolution before Her Majesty's
Government.” By the invitation of the President, I explained "to
the Conference the steps that had been taken by this Chamber
in past years to introduce the decimal system here, commen-
cing, as vve proposed to do, with the selling of grain and pro-
duce by the cental, and how the movement broke down in the
auction-rooms. The opinions expressed were generally in favour
of legislative action, allowing sufficient time for all classes of
traders to familiarise themselves with the tables. As to the
decimal coinage, I can add my testimony of that of all others
who have been through the continents of Europe and America as
to the vast superiority of such a simple system over the complex
and unequal divisions of the British coinage. The London Chamber
submitted a resolution upon the urgent necessity which existed, in
the interests of Anglo-Colonial trade, that these colonies should join
the Postal Union as soon as possible. I had an opportunity of
explaining what the various Australian Chambers had been doing,
and the results of the Postal Union Conference at Sydney. The
resolution was amended at my suggestion, and its full text as passed
is given in the Committee’s Report. The following resolution, sub-
mitted by the South of Scotland Chamber, is in consonance with the
opinions of the Chambers here, viz.;—“That a deputation be
appointed to represent to Her Majesty’s Postmaster-General—(l)
The necessity of cheapening and facilitating foreign and colonial
telegraphic communication ; (2) That the principal lines of wires,
especially in towns, should be conveyed underground.” Resolutions
were also adopted in favour of a reduction of the rates charged for
telephonic communication, the telephone being in England under
the control of the Post Office. It was also affirmed, on the motion
of the Bradford Chamber, “ That this Association desires to confirm
its previous vote, to the effect that, while maintaining their prefer-
ence for efficient tribunals of commerce, this Association recom-
mends as a step in the direction towards the attainment of that
desideratum that the more important county courts be made courts
of first instance for all commercial disputes, without limit as to their
amounts, subject, of course, to all proper regulations for removal and
appeal ; and that in all important cases the judge should be assisted
by competent assessors, and that the Council be directed to use
every available means to obtain such an extension of the county
court’s jurisdiction in the course of next session of Parliament.”
I am bound to state that, as the representative of this Chamber,
I received the most marked attentions throughout the five days in
which I mingled with the delegates from various parts of the
kingdom. Both manufacturers and merchants were eager to know
more about us, and appeared to be so much gratified by our personal
intercourse that I was asked by some of them to formulate a scheme
by which the Colonial Chambers of Commerce should be associated


with those of the home country, and there could be regular inter-
changes of thought and action upon matters of mutual concern. I
hope the time is not distant when something of this sort may be
done; and I may be permitted to suggest to members of this Chamber
that they may be doing good service when visiting Europe if they
will put themselves in direct communication with the London
Chamber and the Associated Chambers, for I am sure that the
more frequent and intimate the intercourse between the old country
and the colonies becomes, the better it will be for colonial interests.
SPECIAL COURTS FOR COMMERCIAL CAUSES.
This has been almost a standing question with this Chamber, as
it has been with the British Chambers for some years past. The
desirableness of either establishing special tribunals, or of adapting
the county courts to the settlement of trade disputes by the addi-
tion of mercantile judges or assessors, has been frequently affirmed
by the Chamber, and among its records are several papers of my
own on “ Tribunals of Commerce.” Naturally, therefore, I gave
special attention to the subject. In France, Belgium, Germany,
and Italy I received only confirmatory evidence of the useful-
ness of the commercial tribunals in those countries. In Ant-
werp, where there is one branch of trade of special import-
ance' to the port —that in hogs’ lard and salt provisions—
the principle of special tribunals for special interests is carried
so far that I found a distinct court of arbitration for the
settlement of disputes in that particular trade ; and one of the
principal judges of the court gave me some interesting particulars of
its successful working. It is a surprising fact that only among
English-speaking communities is the natural yearning for a simple
and inexpensive method of settling differences between merchants
and traders still unsatisfied. Even in America the legal processes
are in many cases very costly. ' Courts of arbitration have, how-
ever, been established in some cities. That of New York, -which
was established by Act of Congress in 1875, is called the “ Court
of Arbitration of the Chamber of Commerce of the State of New
York.” Its forms are simple and its fees almost nominal as com-
pared with those of our Supreme Court. In London the Chamber
of Commerce, soon after its formation, sought to give some practical
effect to the common desire for a simple commercial tribunal, and
have initiated a system of arbitration ; but, of course, it is only
voluntary, and differs but slightly from that which will be found
appended to the Rules of this Chamber. There are other courts of
arbitration in commercial centres in England, but they all lack the
essential element of legislative sanction, and are therefore non-
compulsory.


THE WINE INDUSTRY.
The future of our Victorian wine industry is a matter of such
moment to the colony that I devoted a good deal of attention
to matters which seemed to have a bearing upon it. In California
some very fair wines are produced, but they do not appear to be
popular in the Eastern cities, which constitute the natural market
for the surplus produce of the West. The Californians complain
that when their natural wines reach the Eastern States they are
adulterated with glucose and spirit and water, and hence the concoc-
tion labelled Californian wine is sold at prices lower than those at
which the genuine article can be sold in San Francisco. The wine
sent from California in the year before last amounted to about three
million gallons, and was valued (at the port of shipment) at about
one and a-half million dollars. The wine of America, unlike its
corn, may be left out of the calculation in estimating the prospects
of our Australian wine in the English market.
In London I sought for information from practical business men
identified in any way with our wine trade as to its position, its pros-
pects, its facilities, and its obstacles. I did what little I could to
draw attention to our wines, and received gratifying proofs of the
rapidly disappearing prejudice and the increasing favour with which
the products of our vineyards are now regarded. There can be no
doubt, however, that the future of this industry depends largely upon
the judgment and discretion of our winegrowers and merchants. If
the London merchants who are seeking to promote this trade can be
supplied with good natural wines, thoroughly matured, at reason-
able prices, the demand must increase, but if “ fortified” wines are
sent, or such as for want of proper treatment up to maturity turn
sick on the voyage, the establishment of a steady, permanent, and
remunerative trade will be retarded. It is indeed a critical juncture,
and if our principal winegrowers would grasp the situation they
might, by association among themselves, do much towards assuring
the results which they, as well as all good colonists, must desire.
In connection with this wine question there is much to be said
which I cannot say in this brief report, both about the trade and
the manufacture. As to the latter, lam not an expert ; but I had
the opportunity of seeing the processes of maturing wines in the
great centre of the German wine industry on the Rhine and Moselle,
as well as in the great French champagne district in and around
Epernay. In both countries I could not but contrast the patient and
persevering skill and care exercised by the wine producers in nursing
their wines up to maturity with what I have seen in our own wine
cellars.


BILLS OF LADING.
Going to Europe, as I did, with a knowledge of the sense of
injustice which pervaded the minds of the importers of Melbourne
in consequence of the position in which they were placed by the
stipulations introduced of late into bills of lading in the interest of
the steamship companies, and having, also, in my mind the efforts
which this Chamber had been making for a long time past to pro-
mote the unification of mercantile law, and especially the establish-
ment of uniformity in the law of affreightment by the adoption of a
common form of bill of lading, I went, immediately on my landing
at Liverpool from America, to see the President of the Chamber of
Commerce, Mr. Richard Lowndes, who had taken a great interest
in the question, and had written upon it. I was Unable to see Mr.
Lowndes, but had an opportunity of discussing the matter with the
Secretary. From him I learned that, although the Liverpool
Chamber had appointed representatives to the Conference, whose
labours had greatly contributed to bring about the adoption of the
form of bill of lading which the Law of Nations’ Society at their
Liverpool meeting in 1882 recommended for general acceptance, yet
the merchants and shipowners of Liverpool were still divided upon
the question, and that bill of lading was only very partially accepted.
Subsequently, I went into the matter with the General and Legal
Secretaries of the Association of Chambers of Commerce, but found
that there was no probability of- the Council of that body succeeding
in any efforts to bring about an agreement between the shipowner
and the shipper as to the limitation of mutual liability, although
the two interests were about equally represented in the Association.
While conferring with merchants in the city and with the Secretary
of the London Chamber of Commerce on the same subject, I found
that the Australian Chambers had appealed to the London Chamber
for assistance in obtaining relief from the unreasonable exemptions
inserted by steamship owners in the bills of lading. I then arranged
with Mr. Murray, the energetic Secretary of the London Chamber,
that I would obtain evidence to put before the Sub-Committee, to whom
the Council of the Chamber proposed to refer the matter, and accord-
ingly I looked up the particulars of recent cases in Adelaide and else-
where, and saw Dr. Stubbs, the Hon. Secretary of the Association
for the Reform and Codification of the Law of Nations, who was
very willing to attend, and undertook also for Sir Travers Twiss that
he would give evidence before the Committee. I also held myself in
readiness to be called. The Sub-Committee, however, appeared to
come at once to the conclusion that there was no possibility of their
agreeing, as the merchants and shipowners were equally represented,
and they evidently deemed it useless to hear representatives of the
Australian Chambers, or to call for evidence of any kind. The


Council of the Chamber, however, again requested that the Austra-
lian representatives should be heard, and the Sub-Committee was to
make the necessary arrangements. These were not complete when I
left London, and I have not yet heard what has since been done.
Ihe fact is, gentlemen, that the shipowners are a powerful body,
perhaps the most powerful organisation in England. They are
perfectly agreed to carry merchandise only on their own terms. In
my opinion, the merchants who meet them in the special Committee
of the London Chamber of Commerce are powerless to influence
them, and have no means of coercing them. The combination
of shipowners is only to be met by a combination of shippers.
The shipowner, in consequence of the combination, can insist upon
any form of bill of lading he pleases, and the shipper, in the absence
of union, is compelled to accept it j but if the shippers 'will also
combine, insist upon a reasonable protection against losses
which should in the nature of things fall upon the shipowner, they
will be likely to obtain it. If the importers of Melbourne will asso-
ciate themselves together for this special object, and induce those of
the other principal Australian cities to do the same, and then by the
weight of their united influence enable a corresponding body of
merchants and shippers in London to meet the shipowners
organisation against organisation—the present complaints of the
merchants may be removed. If, however, the shipowners should
then be inexorable, the remedy is easy. There will be no difficulty
in starting another line of steamers who would take the Liverpool
bill of lading, or one which would be even more acceptable to the
merchant and shipper.
THE CONDITION OF ENGLAND COMMERCIALLY,
AND POPULAR SENTIMENT IN RELATION TO
THE COLONIES.
The colonies have never probably occupied so large a place in
men s minds in the old country as they do at the present time.
Much has been done of late to familiarise the British public with
colonial affairs, notably the successful Exhibitions at Sydney and
Melbourne. Nothing, however, has done so much for the average
British citizen in the way of improving his geography as the New
Guinea resolutions adopted by the Sydney Conference and the sub-
sequent discussions on the recidiviste question. “ The admired
audacity, as it was termed by one journal, of these colonies in
seeking to take charge of New Guinea and resisting the convict
policy of France created a real sensation in England, and brought
maps and atlases into unusual requisition. There are, however, other
and deeper causes at work drawing men’s thoughts towards the


colonies. British trade is not in the flourishing condition that
manufacturers and merchants desire. Old markets are failing them,
and competition is cramping them. They cast about for a remedy’
and their eyes are naturally turned in the direction of England’s
colonies. Many of the large manufacturers of the northern counties
are barely able to keep their mills going. Some of them told me
that they were not making 2 per cent, upon their capital, and I was
seriously consulted by one as to the transference of his large business
to this colony. Hence, at mercantile gatherings, civic banquets,
and on every platform where the leaders of public opinion are heard’
the colonies have a prominent place. We are the “younger Eng-
land,” the “ Greater Britain,” and, with a gush, “ our brethren in
the colonies.” The farming interest, too, is in a very unsatisfactory
condition. Wheat-growing does not pay at present prices, and,
although large breadths of land have been laid down in grass, the
results, from various causes, have not been up to expectation. Many
of the farmers are therefore coveting “ fresh fields and pastures
new.” The retail traders complain of excessive competition, and I
found some selling off with a view to settling in one of the colonies j
and many others asked me about the openings for their capital and
energies amongst us. The domestic servants, a class whom we
greatly want,appear only to need a little help and some satisfactory
arrangement to get them out in twos and threes (for they naturally
shrink from starting alone), and an abundance of good English
domestics would come out. In almost every place where we stayed,
even for a short time, the servants asked my wife to bring them out
to Australia. Of Victoria, as distinct from those colonies which
have adopted a system of assisted immigration, and which have their
agents, their placards and pamphlets in ail the large towns, too little
is known. Before I left Melbourne, the Hon. Mr. Sargood had
arranged for the printing and transmission to the Agent-General of
a thousand copies of the pamphlet entitled “ Essay on the Colony
of Victoria,” which had been specially prepared at the instance of
the Commissioners for the Amsterdam Exhibition. On my arrival
in London I found that there was not a scrap of printed informa-
tion which the assistants in the Agent-General’s office could hand to
inquirers ; and as none, save the Agent-General himself, had any
personal knowledge of Victoria, you-, gentlemen, can imagine for
yourselves the amount of enlightenment that the British public
might be expected to get on the subject of this colony through its
only agency in England. Mr. Murray Smith, before he heard of the
pamphlets, determined to furnish his clerks with something about
the colony, and he had this card-map prepared, and upon it he
endorsed the numbers of the population of each of the Australasian
colonies. You will probably think that it is not a very great
enticement to an intending emigrant to see that Victoria is crowded
into that little southern excrescence of the continent, and to find


that its population exceeds that of any of its larger neighbours.
Without a good deal more information than the card conveys, he
might be disposed to turn his attention to a colony with more elbow
room.
On visiting the Amsterdam Exhibition as an Honorary Commis-
sioner, I found two thousand of the pamphlets I have mentioned, in
English, which were of no earthly use to the Dutchmen and other
foreigners who thronged the courts, and who were well supplied with
copies of it in German and French. As our Agent-General was
there at the same time, I arranged at once for the transfer of the
English pamphlets to London, and during my subsequent travels I
always took a parcel of them with me, and found everywhere that
they were received with avidity, and, no doubt, extensively read. In
this way I distributed several hundreds ; and at my suggestion
copies were sent to several public offices and institutions connected
with the colonies.
DIRECT TRADE WITH ITALY.
Since the Melbourne International Exhibition of 1881 corre-
spondence had passed between the Chamber and several of the
Italian Chambers of Commerce on the subject of opening up direct
trade between Italy and these colonies, and it was expected that the
Italian Government would be willing to subsidise a direct line of
steamers if sufficient justification could be shown for asking them to
do so. I therefore visited the Chambers of Commerce at Milan,
Venice, Rome, and Naples, but found that the matter had been
allowed to drop out of consideration for some time. I was referred,
however, to the Directors of the National Steamship Company of
Italy, who have ships running through the Canal to the East.
These steamers leave from Genoa monthly, and I found that they
are now arranging to send a steamer every third month to these
colonies. Until lately Italian producers and manufacturers had to
send their goods to London for shipment to Australia, but if this
tri-monthly service is established by way of the Ligurian Sea, in
addition to that of the Orient steamers from the south-west, the
Messageries Maritimes from Marseilles, and the P. and 0. steamers
from Venice and the Adriatic, there will be no lack of facilities for
any trade that is likely to be established with these colonies.
THE CHAMBER’S ENGLISH FRIENDS.
You are aware, gentlemen, that during the last few years this
Chamber has availed itself of the friendly offices of the Association
of Chambers of Commerce of the United Kingdom, and its obliging


Secretary, Mr. Hole. Nor is it possible for members of past com-
mittees to forget the ready and willing service often rendered to us
by Mr. William Westgarth. That gentleman must still be re-
garded as one of the best friends, not only of this Chamber, but of
the colony. He is ever ready in person and in purse, by effort as
well as advocacy, to advance the welfare of Victoria in every possible
way, and this generous devotion to our interests I had the benefit
of on several occasions. A new friend we may recognise in the
London Chamber of Commerce, whose President, Secretary, and
Council have shown every desire to assist this and the other
Australian Chambers in any way possible. We may also reckon
amongst our British associates the Royal Colonial Institute and its
active and enthusiastic Hon. Secretary, Mr. Frederick Young.
Although the scope of the Institute is a wide one, embracing the
whole of the British colonies, there is a constant desire shown by
Mr, Young and the gentlemen connected with the office to con-
tribute to the well-being of any and each of the colonies as questions
affecting them come up for discussion. The Institute is doing real
service to the colonies. Last, though not least, we have an Agent-
General whose sympathies with this Chamber and its objects are
not begotten of yesterday, and who is ever ready to assist the
Chamber in any way not incompatible with the duties of his
important position.
POSTAL AND RAILWAY MATTERS.
Having been honoured with introductions from the Minister of
Railways and the Postmaster-General to heads of corresponding
services in other countries, I was enabled to collect some information
regarding the work of those departments. In the pursuit of this
information I visited some of the great railway workshops in England
and Wales, as well as ironworks, where the modern steel rails are
manufactured, I had opportunities of seeing the manufacture and
preparation of wires for both telegraph and telephone purposes in
England and Germany, especially the latter, as the German system
of telegraph cables, laid throughout the empire underground, con-
stitutes by far the most perfect of any existing national system.
PRINTED DOCUMENTS.
Finally, gentlemen, I may say that the handsome introduction
with which you favoured me secured for me in all great commercial
centres the most courteous reception, and, as a consequence, I have
been able to obtain some valuable additions to your library. Many


of these, I hope, are but first instalments, as at some of the places
visited, especially the State departments of Washington, I was
promised a regular supply of certain annual volumes, which must be
of value as works of reference in the library of an institution like this.
In all these matters I trust that my efforts will have tended to
the advancement of the interests not only of this Chamber but of
the colony.
I have the honour to be, Gentlemen,
Your very obedient servant,
B. COWDEROY.
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon. Printers, Flinders Lane West, Melbourne,




