

/ Wvl.
V
[Proc. Rot. Soc. Qd. Yol. 11., P^;2, 1885.
NOTES ON A
Smt Sfeitatimi of ilats
IN THE
NORTH AND NORTH-WESTERN PLAIN
COUNTRY OF QUEENSLAND,
/
IN 1869 AND 1870.
By E. PALMER, M.L.A.
BRISBANE :
PIUNTED AND PUBLISHED BY WARWICK & SaPSFORD, EaGLE-ST
1886.




NOTES ON A GREAT VISITATION OP RATS
IN TUB NORTH AND NORTH-WEST-
ERN PLAIN COUNTRY OP QUEENS-
LAND, IN 1869 AND 1870.
B. PALMER, M.L.A.
(Bead on December 4, 1885.)
In the case of feral animals, the number of a particular kind
frequenting any one spot seems to be subject to periodical varia-
tion. It is as if the latent force of over-reproduction, inherent in
the lower forms of animal life, only demands that the checks be
removed or loosened, and when this has happened immediately
the power asserts itself. In illustration of this statement I will
describe what, in so much as it has happened recently, is perhaps
well-known to many, the extraordinary and sudden increase in
numbers of an indigenous rat in the western and north-western
plains, from the heads of the Flinders and Cloncurry northwards,
in the years 1869-70.
Where these rats came from is a mystery. About the middle
and towards the end of 1869 they were first noticed ; principally
by the action of the black-boys in going out on the plains and
bringing in scores of them, in an hour or two, for roasting as
food. January and February, of 1870, were months of continu-
ous rain, ending in the largest floods ever known —the waters
covering the country for many miles.
As a result of this exceptional season of 1869-70 there was an
exuberance of vegetation generally, and the presence of the pea-
bush, (Seshania cegyptiaca), all over country where it had
not been known before. This plant attained to a height of eight
to ten feet, and grew so close that it was almost impossible to make
one’s way through it ; indeed so dense was it that frequently


the leaders of a team could not be seen from the waggon. The
stock were uncommonly fond of and fattened on it. The flowers
were both yellow and lilac. After a few months the stems
dried and the plants fell.
Moreover, immediately after the waters, occasioned by the
excessive rain, had subsided, the plague of rats increased to an
extent that would scarcely be credible. They covered the plains
in every direction ; when riding at night they could be heard
squeaking everywhere fighting with each other; they swarmed
into the huts and gnawed everything they could get at. Flour,
meat, and leather articles had to be stored in galvanized iron
rooms or safes, built expressly for the purpose. When camp-
ing out, every article had to be hung in a tree, and the hobbles,
made of green hide, have been known to be gnawed off the
horses feet during the night. Dogs and cats got surfeited with
these rodents and at last took no notice of them; if a hundred
were killed round the hut at night there appeared no diminution
of the number of visitors on the following night; and for months
in succession the same slaughter could be kept up. It would be
impossible to estimate numbers; for hundreds of miles along
the Flinders and its tributaries traces of these rats were to be seen
the grass looked as if it had been cut down, or flocks of sheep
had been over it; saplings of white-wood (Atalaya hemiglauca)
six inches in diameter were bitten through, and the bark of
other trees gnawed off. Fifty thousand square miles occupied
by these animals, and one rat to every ten square yards in each
mile would not represent anything like their numbers. The
large open plains appeared to be their favourite resort, and,
strange as it may appear, very seldom were any young ones dis-
covered, although their nests were occasionally found, showing
that they bred in the country.
Towards the end of 1870 they decreased in numbers, and in
the following year disappeared. Had the rats continued to
multiply or even maintain their number, the countrv would


have been uninhabitable; even as it was, while the plague lasted,
they were a source of great annoyance and loss to the settlers.
The rat, whose description seems most nearly to approach that
of this indigenous rat, is the brown rat (Mus decumanus), said to
be imported into Europe from the north of Asia. It is similar
also to it in itß habits, being a ground animal given to burrowing,
wherever it cannot appropriate any burrows or cracks already
made. It is of a greyish brown colour, not much more than six
or seven inches long in the body, with a short thick bare tai]
three inches long; the fur is close and short, the hody thick and
strong, the ears short and stiff. These rats are nocturnal and om-
nivorous, at times even carnivorous, very partial to fat or meat,
and even devouring one another.*
As a consequence of such an abnormal state of things as the
sudden increase in numbers of a particular animal, changes are
also produced affecting other animals associated with them in the
same district. The balance of nature has to be kept in some
way or other; and if a race of animals increases at a very rapid
rate, unless disease checks its growth, another race to prey upon
these will appear on the scene; so it was in the present case.
In conjunction with the increase of rats, an almost correspond-
ing increase in their natural enemies—native dogs, snakes?
hawks, and owls occurred. Snakes became very numerous, a
large brown snake in particular was to be met with any day
*This rat of periodical occurrence is not to be confounded with another
animal which is a permanent resident of the country, and known as the
bushy-tailed “rat.” This is a much more interesting little fellow, a
lively, handsome, delicate formed animal, with erect rounded ears and
wide spreading whiskers. The fur is softer, the eyes large and more
expressive, the whole animal smaller with the exception of the tail, which
is longer than the body, and ends with a tuft or brush of long black hairs.
It is essentially a climbing animal, and very rapid in all its motions.
It comes into the houses and sometimes makes its nest in a box of books
or clothes, cutting everything to pieces. Moreover, it is not very com-
mon nor anywhere numerous. Both of these varieties of so-called rats
seem to be indigenous to Australia, as they are familiar to the blacks,
who, however, recognize the difference between them.


on the plains in scores, resorting to the deep cracks or fissures
for hiding places. These snakes could follow the rats into their
nests, and there was no escape from such an enemy; owls were
always plentiful, and very active agents in destroying the vermin.
Almost simultaneously with this visitation of rats, an ex-
traordinary flight of grasshoppers passed northwards in a
compact body about a mile in width and occupying a whole
day in passing. These insects altered the look of the country
over which they passed, and so great was their number that at
night the branches of the trees on which they rested were
broken down by their weight. Their daily stage was three to
four miles; and they left nothing green in their line of march.
There was evidence that the same country had been subject
to a similar visitation years before —in the fact that hollow trees,
in which owls had lived for years, were filled with the bones and
skulls of millions of rats; and great heaps of such remains lay
around the base of some of these large old hollow trees, when
the settlers first occupied the country five years before the
occurrence now related.*
It is also interesting to notice that other countries have
suffered in a similar manner. In the Gazeteer of the “ Bombay
Presidency,” there is a description of rat plagues in Ahmed-
nugger, a district north-west of the Hyderabad State —of
an area of 6,666 square miles, and a population of 751,228.
“ This district is subject to visitations of famine and other
calamities, of which the most striking and singular is the plague
of rats. Generally the rainfall in June suffices, by filling the
holes and fissures, in destroying them in large numbers and
preventing a plague. But when the rain is late or does not
come, then the number of rats is always excessive. In the last
* Instances are not uncommon of parts of Australia “ being subject to
an infliction of over-production in animal life;” amongst others it is
reported that Cooper’s Creek, and the far western country, were visited
many years ago by multitudes of mice—a visitation similar, in point of
numbers, to that of the rats in the Gulf Co ntry.


sixty years three have been known as rat years. These were
1826, 1835, and 1879. On the last occasion, fields of grain
were eaten up in a few hours as if by a flight of locusts. A
reward of one rupee, reduced at a later period to half a rupee,
was offered for every hundred dead rats, and it was estimated
that not fewer than 1,768,000 rats were killed and paid for.
Although the people were the sufferers, popular superstition
does not seem to have approved of this slaughter, for reports
were spread that the rats were the spirits of those who died in
the famine of 1876-7, and the people refused at last to partici-
pate in the efforts made for their extermination. Locusts and
famines have proved scarcely less formidable to the agricultu-
ralists of ‘ Ahmednugger ’ than rats.”
The question arises; What causes contributed to the produc-
tion of such a sudden development of animal life, and as suddenly
almost to its extinction ? The generally received opinion is that
the increase of rats was due to congenial surroundings, shelter
in the natural cracks of the plains, exuberant herbage and an
unstocked country —coupled with a then scarcity of their
natural enemies; even the tribes of blacks* had withdrawn
from the plain country and occupied only the mountainous
parts, hundreds of miles away, dhis may account for the rapid
increase of the rats on the Flinders River; but the opposite reason
is given in the case of the rat plague in Ahmednuggei
where, if the rain does not come in June, or fails—the rats
become excessively numerous, and spread over the country.
The two reasons point to similar conclusions, though from
opposite views.
Their disappearance is not so much a mystery, and can be
accounted for by various considerations. Increase of their natural
* Where marsupials have increased beyond nature’s limits, it can be
shown that this is due to the fact that the disturbing influences of the
Aborigines and dingo having been removed, the race has room to develop
unchecked.


enemies, the dryness of the grass and herbage towards the
end of the season, and their own voracity —leading them to
devour each other at all times and more particularly when
pressed by hunger. This is a propensity that all the rat tribe
are given to, and is no small factor in decreasing the numbers
under such circumstances as I have narrated.
Warwick & Sapsford, Eagle Street Brisbane.
