

NOTES ON THE NURSING
OF DIPHTHERIA
BY
HILDA M. LOXTON
Formerly Sister in Charge of the Diphtheria Ward at the
Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children, Sydney
WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
W. F. LITCHFIELD
Hon. Assist. Phys., R.A.H.C., and Hon. Assist. Path., R.P.A.H.


Printed by W. C. Penfold & Co.
183 Pitt Street, Sydney


INTRODUCTION
BY
W. F. LITCHFIELD
Hon. Assist. Phys., S.A.H.C., Sydney; Hon. Assist. Path.,
8.P.A.H., Sydney.
These notes on the nursing of diphtheria were written
by Miss Loxton at my request for the use of the nurses
in the diphtheria ward of the Royal Alexandra Hospital
for Children, but they seemed to me worthy of a wider
circulation, and the authoress readily consented to their
publication.
Success in the treatment of many diseases depends
as much on the nurse as on the doctor, and in no instance
is this more true than in that of diphtheria. The doctor
has to make the diagnosis, determine the dose of anti-
toxin, perform intubation or tracheotomy when necessary,
and outline the general plan of treatment; but the nurse
has to keep the child recumbent for fear of heart failure,
and to attend to the after treatment and feeding. These
are often highly technical matters, as after intubation
and tracheotomy; and the nurse must not only under-
stand them thoroughly, but she must be able to detect
and cope with such dangers as paralysis, heart failure,
and accidents to the tracheotomy or intubation tubes, if
unable to secure medical advice in critical situations.
These notes embody the practice that obtains in the
diphtheria ward of the Roybal Alexandra Hospital for
Children —a practice the result of twenty-two years’
continuous experience, during which time many methods
have been tried and only the best retained. Many'
changes have been witnessed during these twenty-two


years. First came the bacteriological diagnosis, and
later the use of diphtheria antitoxin; later again intuba-
tion supplanted tracheotomy as a routine method of re-
lieving laryngeal obstruction. The introduction of anti-
toxin in the treatment of diphtheria, magical as has been
its influence, has not done away with the necessity of
skilled nursing; rather has it enhanced it, for now there
is hope in every case, whereas there was previously none
at all in too many.
Undoubtedly the best way to learn the nursing of
diphtheria, or any other branch of medical treatment, is
to practise it, but to those nurses —and there are many
of them —who have not had the opportunity to do so this
little book should be of the greatest value. I am not
aware of the existence of any other notes on the subject
so complete and so practical, and I shall not be surprised
if they are also found useful by general practitioners.


NOTES ON THE NURSING OF DIPHTHERIA
I.—GENERAL.
Diphtheria occurs in a variety of forms and may be
considered under the following heads : Pharyngeal
Diphtheria—Pharyngeal and Laryngeal Diphtheria—
Laryngeal Diphtheria —Malignant Diphtheria—Wound
Diphtheria —Diphtheria of the Eye, and of the Nose,
and of the Ear.
The Sick Room.
In nursing a case of diphtheria regard must be had
to the choice of a room. It should be large, airy, and
well lighted; the floor should not be covered with carpets
or linoleums, and the plain boards should be well scrubbed
with some dilute disinfectant at least once a day; as few
patients as possible should be nursed within a limited
space; there must be no overcrowding; windows should
be open from the top to ensure a continuous current of
air through the room or ward; weather permitting, the
windows may be open from the bottom, and it may be
remembered that if a steam cot is used the curtains pro-
tect the patient from draught.
A steam cot may be arranged from an ordinary
child’s cot, by placing an upright post at each of the
four corners, connected at the top by cross-bars, over
which a canopy of blanket or canvas is placed, drawn
tightly and pinned smoothly on the inner side to form
a perfectly smooth and taut canopy. Any loose ends
or sagging in the centre will become saturated as the
steam condenses and will soon start to drip. Curtains
may then be placed around the cot, or if not obtainable


may be improvised by using sheets or thin blankets.
Commence by pinning the sheet from the centre of one
side of the cot round the head and ending at the centre
of the other side; then pin two smaller sheets from each
side to meet at the centre at the foot, of the cot, allow-
ing a space for the spout of the kettle to pass through.
The kettle is arranged at the foot of the cot on a stand,
and kept boiling at an even rate by means of a gas ring,
or an oil lamp, care being taken that the curtains are
securely pinned to the legs of the cot to prevent them
from being blown into the flame.
When preparing a steam kettle it should be filled a
little more than half only, and replenished when necessary
with boiling water so as to keep up a continuous supply
of steam, which escapes better if the kettle is not full.
On no account should the spout of the kettle be turned
inside the tent until the water has boiled and is steam-
ing at an even rate, for when commencing to boil the
water may spurt over the patient and scald him. The
tent should be frequently wiped down inside with a cloth
to prevent moisture from collecting as the steam con-'
denses, and the curtains should be changed and dried
about every four hours and the canopy at least once in
twenty-four hours. The openings on either side of the
cot should allow of free access to the patient. The cot
should also be placed in a position to ensure plenty of
light by day and night. No utensils, clothes, or furni-
ture should be used for the patient unless they can be
well boiled, scrubbed, or thoroughly disinfected during
the illness and afterwards.
PRECAUTIONS TO BE TAKEN TO PREVENT THE INFECTION
Spreading.
Gowns, shoes, caps, or outside clothing worn in the
sick room should on no account be worn outside the room
until they have been thoroughly disinfected and washed.


The hair should be kept covered when nursing a trach-
eotomy case. All utensils should be well boiled as soon
as used. All bed clothes, patients’ and nurses’ clothing
should be thoroughly fumigated either by sulphur (two
pounds to a room ten feet square) or by an alformant
lamp, containing four or five tablets of formalin to the
same sized room. They should be hung up and well spread
out so as to allow the fumes to penetrate the) folds, and
afterwards well boiled ; articles unable to be boiled
should be hung in the sun and thoroughly aired.
A nurse cannot be too careful of her hands after
attending to a patient, and should scrub them well with
a disinfectant, such as carbolic acid lotion 1 in 60, or
lysol solution 2 per cent., before taking food. The nails
should also be kept cut short, and no food should be
eaten by the nurse in the patient’s room. If membrane
or discharge happens to be coughed on to a nurse she
should immediately wash the part with a disinfectant;
when possible it is better to stand to one side and not
directly opposite the patient while he is coughing. A
nurse should gargle her throat once or twice a day with
Sanitas, and before leaving the infectious block or house
a warm bath containing some disinfectant should be
taken, the hair washed, and the clothes changed.
Any sore throat should be reported at once. In in-
fectious disease hospitals it is customary for nurses to
have their throats examined periodically for the
diphtheric bacillus by means of a swabbing as described
later. If the case is a very virulent one the nurse may
have a protective dose of antitoxin injected under her
skin.
In a private house, when the patient is free from
infection, his room should be thoroughly fumigated for
twelve hours and afterwards scrubbed out —walls and
floor —with some disinfectant ; the walls may be re-
papered or kalsomined again; the furniture and bed


steads should be scrubbed and the bedding either des-
troyed or sent to be baked. After preparing a body
for the mortuary it should be wrapped in a sheet wrung
out in carbolic acid lotion 1 in 20, to prevent the in-
fection spreading.
II. —PHARYNGEAL DIPHTHERIA.
On admission into hospital or upon a nurse taking
charge of a case of diphtheria, the patient should be un-
dressed, rolled in a blanket, and given a hot bottle to
his feet. His clothes should be made into a bundle
labelled with hie name, a note having been made of the
articles contained therein, and they should be thoroughly
fumigated as soon as convenient. If very soiled or worn,
or not needed for future use, the clothes should be
burnt at once; this is by far the safer plan. The
patient is usually given an enema of soap and water on
admission, followed twelve hours later by an aperient
or another enema, as seems most advisable.
The patient should have his temperature, pulse, and
respirations taken and entered on a chart four-hourly. If
his condition is not critical he may be well sponged all
over, being kept strictly lying down, from the beginning,
and dressed in a warm nightgown and covered with
light, warm bed clothing. A soft low’ pillow may be
given, and when he is warm and comfortable the hot
bottle may be removed.
In hospital a swabbing of the throat is usually
required on admission. To do this the patient is held
firmly so that he is unable to move his head, a tongue
depressor is inserted into the mouth, passed well over the
back of the tongue, causing the mouth to become widely
open, and the swab, consisting of a small piece of sterile
wool wrapped round the end of a w 7 ire stick, is then
passed to the back of the mouth, care being taken that


nothing is touched until it reaches the tonsils. If not
covered with membrane the tonsils are rubbed with the
wool; if they are covered with membrane the swab must
be passed under or through it to ensure a satisfactory
swabbing; and the same care must be taken in withdraw-
ing the swab-stick from the mouth as in introducing it.
The inoculated swab is then smeared lightly over the
surface of a specially prepared culture tube. If true
diphtheria membrane be present it is very difficult to
dislodge and adheres firmly to the mucous membrane of
the throat or part infected, and when torn off leaves a
raw, bleeding surface. After antitoxin has been given
some hours, the membrane dissolves and disappears of
itself, or becoming loose is easily coughed up. It is
useless to take a swabbing for some hours after the
throat has been treated with an antiseptic. A swabbing
will take twelve hours, and in some cases a longer
period, after it has been placed in the incubator before
it becomes fit for examination; it should therefore be
taken as soon as possible after admission. Unless the
case is positively diagnosed by the doctor as diphtheria,
three swabbings on successive days are usually taken.
The same rule is observed before the patient is dis-
charged as free from infection.
Antitoxin.
Antitoxin should be given as soon as possible after
being ordered, as it takes from twelve to twenty-four
hours before much benefit is derived from it. An
urticarial rash is often the result of an injection, and
is noticed in a more or less marked degree over the
body, limbs, and sometimes even the face and head of
the patient, causing him to become very restless from
the irritation which is occasionally most distressing.
In some cases the rash may not appear at all, in others
it appears one or two days after the injection, and


sometimes as late as three or four weeks after. The
extreme irritation may be partially allayed by the appli-
cation of calamine lotion, ammonia and water in equal
parts, or lotion of carbolic acid 1 in 60 or 1 in 80;
tepid sponging may also give relief.
The requisites for the injection of antitoxin are a
large antitoxin syringe and two needles, one large and
one finer, all of which have been kept immersed in pure
lysol; antitoxin serum; a bowl of 2 per cent, iysol lotion;
three sterile towels, or three towels wrung out in 1 in
20 carbolic acid lotion- two kidney trays; a jar of wool
swabs; turpentine; ether; absolute alcohol; and Meade’s
strapping cut into coin shaped pieces the size of a
shilling.
The method of injecting the serum is as follows:
The patient’s skin, preferably that of the abdomen,
to one side of and a little below the umbilicus, is well
washed with soap and water, then thoroughly* cleansed
with a weak solution of lysol, swabbed with turpentine,
and finally rubbed over with ether; the sterile or car-
bolised towels are then arranged around the prepared
part. The syringe and needles are thoroughly rinsed
in the sterile water, some of which is afterwards drawn
into the barrel and syringed through the needle several
times; finally absolute alcohol is syringed through the
needle. The bottles of antitoxin are opened by snapping
off the tops; the large needle is then fitted on the
syringe for drawing up the fluid and the finer needle
afterwards adjusted for injecting it, care being taken
that all air is ejected by holding the syringe in a per-
pendicular position and syringing a little fluid through
the needle. The patient is held firmly by an assistant,
the skin and tissue of the abdomen lifted and held
firmly between the thumb and fingers of the left hand,
the barrel of the syringe being firmly held in the palm
of the right with the index finger on the lower part of


the needle to give force and prevent bending. The
needle is inserted right through the tissue and not just
under the skin, or it will cause a bruise, besides being
mure painful. The injection is given slowly, and if the
dose is very large it may be divided and given into the
opposite side. Before the needle is withdrawn the
surrounding parts are well dried with a swab and the
strapping affixed; pressure with a dry swab for a
minute or two will prevent oozing.
The patient usually sleeps for some hours after an
injection; if later he complains of pain at the site of
the injection, hot towels may be applied.
If the throat is very dirty and the tonsils, fauces,
and uvula covered with membrane, unless it greatly
distresses the patient it is usually swabbed out with Liq.
Sod. Chlor. 1 in 4, which is also a deodorizer- and useful
if the breath is offensive; in milder cases, Lotio Pot.
Chlor. or Lotio Acidi Boracis may be used. For swabbing
the throat sterile wool wrapped round and caught
between the points of long sinus forceps is most
effective, care being taken that the points are well
covered; brushes are not used, as they cannot be properly
sterilized. All swabs used for any discharges, or for
the patient’s throat, should be burnt, and trays and
instruments boiled at once in lysol solution.
The diet should consist of fluids and milk foods until
the patient is convalescent. The pulse should be felt
frequently and a record of it kept for some time, irregu-
larity being watched for, and on no account must a
patient, be allowed to sit up or exert himself in any way
until permission is given by the doctor. Arm straps
are the most useful for keeping the patient flat in bed,
and for preventing him from sitting up or turning over.
They consist of two armholes, connected by a strap
across the chest, and another long strap passing through


them at the back and securely tied to each side of the
bed. A specimen of urine should be saved for testing
every second day.
III.—LARYNGEAL DIPHTHERIA.
Laryngeal diphtheria may exist with or without
pharyngeal symptoms. It causes laryngeal obstruction
due to the presence of false membrane in the larynx,
which may spread to the trachea, bronchi, and lungs,
and may be complicated by pneumonia.
The child has a croupy cough and is cyanosed, with
recession above and below the sternum and in some cases
at the sides of the chest, dyspnoea, and a peculiar
crowing sound on inspiration called stridor. He also
sweats profusely, is very restless, and is inclined (to
become cold. If these symptoms are present to a
marked degree the child will need surgical relief, and the
nurse should notify the doctor without delay. It is to
be remembered that as the child grows older his chest
becomes more fixed and consequently the recession is less
than in a younger child. The main points to be guided
by are therefore cyanosis and restlessness.
When a patient is wakeful and struggles to sit up or
get out of bed, not a minute should be lost in sending
for the doctor, and if he is not immediately available
he should have been sent for some time before, as in-
tubation or immediate tracheotomy may have to be per-
formed. The pulse also is an indication, as it becomes
weaker and more rapid. When the case is not so urgent
simple remedies may be tried such as steam inhalation
to which Friar’s Balsam 4 drachms has been added,
which sometimes relieves as it diminishes the tendency
to spasm, and assists the coughing up of loose membrane.
Hot fomentations frequently applied round the throat
are sometimes effectual; ipecacuanha Avine may be


ordered to cause vomiting if it be an early case with a
short history; hot baths to soothe and a hypodermic
injection of atropine to relax spasm may also be ordered.
Strychnine is seldom ordered when dyspnoea is present,
as its tendency is to increase spasm; brandy is usually
ordered as a stimulant, and should be diluted with water
and not given mixed with food unless the child is unable
to take fluids.
If the respirations are rapid and accompanied by a
continuous high temperature we may guess that
pneumonia is a complication. Oxygen for inhalation
should be held in readiness, as it may be ordered after
intubation or tracheotomy if the child is not totally
relieved.
Intubation.
The patient should be rolled mummy-wise in a
blanket securely pinned with three large safety pins, the
clothes well turned down over his shoulders in case
tracheotomy should be necessary, and a towel tucked
over the blanket across his chest in case of vomiting.
The requisites for intubation are O’Dwyer's Intro-
ducer and tubes of different sizes, a gag covered with
rubber to protect the teeth or gums, vaseline, two towels,
two trays, and a bowl of swabs. Care should be taken
when preparing the tube for the doctor that the tube
and introducer fit exactly. The end of the introducer
and tube should be smeared with a little vaseline and
care taken that the tube is freshly threaded with a
twofold linen thread; if silk is used it is apt to shrink
and pull the tube out of position. A nurse seated on a
chair facing the light should take the child on her
knee, holding his legs firmly between her knees, with
his head just above the level of her left shoulder. The
assistant nurse should then insert the gag on the left
aide of the child’s mouth, opening the same to its fullest


extent, and holding the head firmly forward with her
right hand as the operator introduces his finger into the
mouth. When the tube is in position the child should
be laid down, with the thread tied around his left ear
and secured with a piece of strapping.
On his return to bed the blanket should be taken off
and kept in readiness, together with the pins, for future
use. Unless ordered to the contrary, the steam should
be turned off, and the child’s hands secured by means
of bandages to the sides of the cot, or the arms
bandaged to short splints until he realises the value of
his tube. This he soon finds out, and his arms may then
be left free, as he is far happier and rests better pro-
vided he does not turn on his face.
If troubled with much mucus the throat will have
to be swabbed out frequently. This is easily done in a
young child by placing the thumb of the left hand on
the chin and inserting the forefinger of the right hand
(round which wool has been wrapped) and swabbing
round the top of the tube. It is done more easily with
the finger than with forceps, as care can be taken not
to pull on the string. The hands afterwards should be
thoroughly disinfected with 2 per cent, lysol or 1 in
40 carbolic acid lotion.
The tube may be coughed out of position, but this
can be easily remedied by pushing it back into position
with the forefinger of the left hand. If the tube be
coughed right out of the larynx, the operation of in-
tubation will have to be performed again by the doctor
if necessary. When the tube is coughed partly out of
the larynx or up behind the back of the soft palate,
the child becomes restless and partially cyanosed, and
has recession and dyspnoea, which symptoms disappear
when the tube is pushed back into position.
If the patient should become suddenly cyanosed with
dyspnoea, or stop breathing, the tube should be


immediately pulled out, as it may be blocked with
membrane, or the obstruction may be below the tube,
and the doctor should be notified, as tracheotomy may be
necessary. In some eases casts of membrane are
coughed up with the tube. The patient may need
immediate help at any time, so should not on any
account be left alone.
When finally the membrane disappears there may
be some difficulty in leaving out the tube, and frequently
the patient needs re-intubation owing to oedema of the
larynx, apasm of the glottisv or nervousness. When
the tube is removed, if there is any recession, steam may
be given with benefit, but great patience is often needed
in nursing and taking up a child’s attention until he is
used to being without his tube. If the thread tends to
cut the corner of the mouth, or the child persists in
biting it, it may be threaded through with about three
inches of fine rubber tubing, or it may be loosened; but
the latter is not always wise as the patient is apt to
wind the thread round his tongue and so pull the tube
out of position. If the patient has bitten the thread
through, the doctor may consider it advisable to ex-
tubate. The operation of extubation is performed in
exactly the same manner as intubation, with the excep-
tion that an extubator is used instead of an introducer,
and another tube the same size will need to be ready
threaded to replace it if necessary. If the tube should
become suddenly blocked before extubation can be
performed, the child should be held up by the feet face
downwards and slapped on the back between the
shoulders so as to jerk the tube out.
Feeding of Intubation Cases.
Benger’s B'ood made thick is usually given to all
cases after intubation, but sometimes children do
not care for it. Some eases take fluids quite easily if


fed by spoon; others may need the head lowering;
bottle-fed babies may sometimes still continue to take
their food by bottle if it be given slightly thickened.
In every case frequent sips of cold water should be given
as the thirst is most distressing, and a sip at a time
very seldom causes coughing, while it greatly relieves
the child’s suffering. If the patient is not very sick
and his temperature is normal he usually is allowed
and enjoys milk foods, soup thickened with bread,
bread and butter, biscuits, and later on potato and
gravy. A nurse must remember never to leave a child
when eating, in e'ase his tube becomes blocked or
coughed out, either partly or altogether.
If membrane is present on the tonsils, the throat is
not usually painted, as any struggling or coughing may
cause the tube to become dislodged. One of the chief
duties of the nurse is to endeavour at all costs to keep
the tube in position, unless it becomes blocked, as by
doing so the patient may be saved much distress and
possibly even his life. Note should be taken of the
pulse, irregularity being watched for, as it denotes
heart trouble; and the patient should be kept in a
recumbent position until ordered by the doctor to be
raised, but a soft low pillow may be allowed.
A specimen of urine should be saved every second
day, for if the case is severe the kidneys may be
affected. If the child is very restless and has a high
temperature, tepid packs, sponging, warm baths or com-
presses help to soothe him. Rashes should be carefully
watched for and reported, as diphtheria is sometimes
accompanied by scarlet fever or measles.
Tracheotomy.
When intubation fails to give relief, or for some
reason is not advisable, tracheotomy is performed.


The requirements for the operation are: —A high
deal table facing a good light and covered with a
blanket, over which a sheet is spread; a sand bag
across the top of the table, over which a dressing
mackintosh covered with a sterile towel is placed; straps
or bandages to secure the patient firmly to the table;
one sharp scalpel; two pairs of dissecting forceps; six
pairs of Spencer-Wells artery forceps; one pair of
curved scissors; one pair of straight scissors; one sharp
hook; one pair of retractors with narrow blades; two
pairs of tracheal forceps; one tracheotomy tube chosen
by the doctor, threaded with tape, the inner and outer
tube to be separated and both well vaselined; surgical
needles; catgut; horsehair; vaselined lint collars for
the tube; bibs for the child’s gown to prevent soiling;
small safety pins to fix the bib; one blanket for rolling
the child in and three large safety pins; one small sheet
to cover the patient while on the table; six sterile
towels or the same wrung out of carbolic acid lotion 1
in 40; a good supply of wool swabs moistened with
carbolic acid lotion 1 in 40 to prevent them from sticking
to the wound; a bowl of boracic acid lotion to wash up
the patient after the operation; and three kidney trays.
If there is time the skin of the neck should be pre-
pared in the same way as for an injection of antitoxin
already described. The instruments should be kept
cleaned, sterilised, and in order, in a square enamelled
tray covered with a sterile towel for immediate
use, and when needed simply covered with a warm
carbolic acid lotion 1 in 40; scissors and knives, which
should be kept immersed in pure lysol, need rinsing in
sterile water only. Anaesthetics, mask ready covered,
gag and tongue forceps should be ready, although an
anaesthetic may not be given. Everything should be
kept in readiness as they may be needed at a moment’s
notice.


A hypodermic syringe filled with a £ per cent,
solution of strychnine should be on hand, also brandy
and a stock of strong coffee, as an enema of coffee and
brandy in the proportion of ounces coffee and £
ounce brandy is almost always ordered after operation.
The patient is prepared as for intubation, the arms
being well strapped to the sides, as no movement must
be allowed; he is placed on the table with his head just
over the top edge, the neck and shoulders resting on a
sand bag; a towel is pinned round the head to protect
the hair; hot bottles are placed to the feet and the
patient covered with a sheet and towels spread around
the site of the operation.
After the operation is performed and the child is
breathing comfortably, the tube is inserted and the tapes
tied firmly but not too tightly, on one side of the neck.
The way to thread a tube is as follows: Cut a
lengthwise slit in one end of each tape, one tape being
longer than the other, thread the tape through the hole
provided in each side of the tube, draw the end of the
tape through the slit in the opposite end, and draw tight.
The collar, the plain side of the lint being already
vaselined, is drawn under the tape and around the tube,
the opening meeting at the top. To make collars, a
circle little larger than half a crown is cut out of lint,
and a cut made from one side of this into the centre
where a piece the size of a sixpence is cut out. A bib is
made simply of a plain piece of linen nine inches long
and three inches wide, nicked along one side and slit in
the centre on the other side to fit the gown, which is
arranged V-shaped from the shoulders. The bib is
turned over the gown and tucked inside on the plain side,
the nicked side remaining outside, pleated to fit in the
centre, and pinned with three small safety pins.
The patient is placed in a ready warmed steam tent
as soon as possible; steam is usually allowed for some


hours if the weather is cold, or if the cough is very dry,
but is often not given if the weather is very warm, and
the cough is moist. A soft low pillow is usually given,
and if the tube is needing much attention the head is
usually placed over the pillow, the neck and shoulders
resting on it. The hands should be securely tied until
the child is quite used to his tube.
By his bedside immediately after the operation
should be arranged a similar tube to that which he is
wearing, ready threaded, a pair of retractors, two pairs
of tracheal forceps, two pairs of artery forceps, a piece
of wire for cleaning the tube (usually a hairpin), a
bowl of carbolic acid lotion 1 in 40 for clearing the
tube of mucus or membrane, a bowl of wool swabs, two
kidney trays, a pair of scissors, vaseline, bibs and collars,
pins, tape, and a bowl of hot water for standing a spray
containing a solution of bicarbonate of sodium in.
These should never be removed while the tube is being
worn.
A patient must never be left alone as he may
become suddenly cyanosed and choked to death without
making a sound, owing to obstruction by membrane
either in or below the tube, to haemorrhage, or to a
collection of inspissated mucus or vomited material in
his tube. In such an emergency the doctor should be
notified at once, but if he be not on the spot the nurse
must act on her own responsibility. She should roll up
the pillow and place it under the shoulders, allowing the
head to fall back, so as to stretch the neck; then re-
move the inner tube and, if no relief be obtained, cut
the tape and remove the outer one and insert the retrac-
tors one on each side, making quite sure that they are
in the trachea. She should then cut all bandages and
remove the stays so that he may be removed without
delay to the table if necessary. If the tube has simply
slipped out of position owing to some movement or to


coughing, the air will be heard hissing through the
trachea when it is held open, and the child will quickly
regain his colour; but if the breathing has stopped
artificial respiration must be resorted to. If, on the
other hand, the tube be found in its proper position, the
obstruction will have to be looked for lower down; in
this case the tracheal forceps should be inserted until
the obstruction is met with and an endeavour made to
withdraw the offending material; if this be not success-
ful the wound should be kept open and artificial
respiration used until the doctor arrives. No feathers or
wool should be used inside the trachea, as detached
pieces may cause pneumonia, or a piece of wool may
come off the forceps and cause obstruction itself.
If the cough is very moist and the child is coughing
up a great deal of mucus, it will need swabbing away
continually, for if allowed to collect it will become dry
and cause obstruction. Tincture of belladonna may be
ordered to help dry up the secretion, and the inner tube
may be removed frequently and cleansed by passing
small pieces of wool through it in the carbolic acid
lotion.
To remove the inner tube place the thumb and first
finger of the left hand, the hand towards the chin, one
on each side of the outer tube, holding it back towards
the neck, and firmly pull out the inner tube by means of
the thumb and first finger of the right hand. Replace
it as soon as cleansed in somewhat the same manner,
only holding the outer tube forward to prevent it being
pushed back, and scraping the trachea while inserting
the inner tube which should be smeared with a little
vaseline each time. If the inner tube does not slip in
easily or does not fit exactly into the outer tube when
in position, or if the outer tube is raised up with a
tendency to come out of the wound and does noit lie
flat and easily in position, or if any difficulty is found in


inserting it, something must be wrong; either the tube
lias slipped into the tissue and not into the trachea at
all, or one side of the bi-valvular tube has been caught
on one side of the trachea. No force or pressure what-
ever should be used, as damage may be done to the
trachea. It is often difficult to find the incision into
the trachea if lost soon after operation, but it is easier
after the tube hasi been worn for a day or two, as it is
easily seen and does not close for a short time after the
tube is left out.
If the cough is inclined to be dry, steam may be
needed, also judicious spraying with a solution of sodium
bicarbonate, 10 grains to the ounce, but the latter should
not be used if it can l>e avoided for at least twelve
hours after operation. The spray should not be poured
into the tube in a stream, but when warmed by standing
in hot water, the collar, bib, and inner tube having been
removed; and the instrument having been tried and found
working well, it should be made to impinge from a short
distance on to the outer tube. When the trachea is
thoroughly moist, which usually causes a great deal of
coughing, a more expulsive force may be given to the
cough if a swab be held over the tube for a second or
two and then quickly removed. All mucus should be
wiped away as quickly as coughed up. Spraying will
probably have to be repeated several times until the
membrane becomes soft and loose enough to be coughed
up. If the child bo unable to dislodge the membrane by
coughing aided by spraying, both tubes will have to be
removed and the tracheal forceps inserted into the
trachea.
The tubes must be taken out at least once a day and
the wound swabbed up with Lotio Acidi Boracis. If the
wound becomes septic, hot boraeic acid foments may be
applied round the tube and changed frequently, or
moist pads of Liq. Sod. Chlor. 1 in 8, applied, swabbing


out the wound when changing them with Liq. Sod. Chlor.
1 in 4. When changing the tube the patient is usually
placed on the table as for operation.
If the patient is suffering from palate paralysis, and
saliva or food is being coughed through the tube, the
foot of the cot may be raised to guard against inspira-
tory pneumonia due to food or septic matter being
drawn into the lungs. In such cases nasal feeding is
often ordered four-hourly, the cot being lowered
during feeding.
The patient is usually fed two-hourly by day if he
be inclined for it, and when he wakes at night four-
hourly. It is not wise to force him, as he may vomit
or struggle and do himself harm. To keep the head
lower than the shoulders is a safe plan if he be inclined
to vomit while wearing a tracheotomy tube, and while
being fed the tube should be lightly covered with a
cloth. Fluids only or Benger’s Food made thick are
usually given for a few days, but as the patient improves
he will readily take any light nourishing diet, including
potatoes and gravy in small quantities, and he may be
fed by cup or spoon as suits him best.
Some difficulty may be experienced in leaving out
the tube. In some cases the tube can be taken out and
left out, boraeic acid foments being applied and the
neck bandaged. In others the wound has to be left
open until it gradually closes, being covered with a
single piece of dry gauze only at first, though afterwards
boracic acid ointment may be applied followed later by
aristol powder. With others the tubes have to be con-
tinually reinserted, being left out for longer or shorter
periods as found advisable. In such cases the patient
must be closely watched as he may become gradually
distressed or suddenly cyanosed owing to oedema of the
larynx, granulations, spasm of the glottis, or closing of
the wound.


A patient may be breathing quietly through his
mouth and suddenly become frightened, lose his breath,
and become cyanosed or even stop breathing. When
this happens the tube must be reinserted at once. He
will have to be trained to breathe through his mouth if
he has worn the tube for long; he may be allowed to
blow out lights, to blow' trumpets or whistles, being
helped and amused the while, and blow feathers or thin
pieces of wool held over his mouth. He should also be
encouraged to try and use his voice, which he often
loses for a time after having tracheotomy perfomed.
To find out if he is using his nostrils or mouth at all
after his tube has been left out, a fluffy feather or thin
shred of wool should be held to his lips or nose.
A scalpel should be added to the instruments by the
bedside when the wound is almost healed in eases in-
clined to give trouble of this sort, as the wound has
sometimes to be reopened suddenly. A specimen of
urine should be saved every second day, for, if the
attack is at all severe, the kidneys will most probably
be affected.
IV. —MALIGNANT DIPHTHERIA.
lii this form of the disease, the throat is covered with
thick dirty membrane which grows very rapidly, spread-
ing from the tonsils and fauces to the uvula or soft
palate, and in some cases even to the hard palate,
and the breath has a very foul odour. There
is a profuse thin serous nasal discharge, the
nostrils in some cases being blocked with membrane that
can be seen, the glands of the neck are very swollen and
tender, and the pulse is very rapid; the temperature is
not as a rule very high. On admission to hospital the
child is often very collapsed, and he should straight


away be placed in a warm bed, rolled in blankets and
packed round with hot bottles, given stimulants as
ordered, and allowed to become thoroughly warm and
quiet before being undressed, and no pillows should be
allowed unless almost quite flat. As soon as possible the
dose of antitoxin ordered should be given, which is
usually a very large one and will probably have to be
injected into more than one part. When the child
seems revived and warm he should be quietly and slowly
undressed, care being taken that he is moved as little as
possible, and never out of the recumbent position.
■Without hurry to frighten or excite him he should be
washed all over with hot water, swabs of wool being
used to wipe up discharges and immediately thrown
away. If old enough the child must thoroughly rinse
out his mouth with some disinfectant, the teeth, gums,
and tongue being cleansed with glycerine and borax or
other mouth wash ordered. The throat is usually
swabbed frequently with Liq. Sod. Chlor. 1 in 8, but
if inclined to haemorrhage or the child is struggling,
this is not done. The nose, which discharges continually,
must be constantly swabbed with boraeic acid lotion and
dried and syringed two-hourly with the same or other
lotion as ordered by means of a glass syringe, turning
the child's head on one side to allow the fluid to run
into a kidney tray, and taking care not to raise his
head or allow- him to exert himself in any way. Sheets
wrung out of carbolic acid lotion 1 in 20 may be pinned
around the cot if the smell is very offensive, as a pro-
tection to the nurse or other children in the ward. In
some cases there is a great deal of haemorrhage from
the mouth, nose, edges of the eye-lids, punctures where
antitoxin has been injected, and mucous surfaces, and the
body may become covered with a purpura rash or
become bruised if touched. Vomiting often sets in, and
becoming persistent is a bad sign; and the tonsils


in some eases become so swollen that tracheotomy is
necessary.
The main points to be remembered in nursing such
cases are that the patient must be kept absolutely quiet
and not excited in any Why, and kept lying quiet and
flat in bed, given a very light diet to prevent vomiting,
and turned from side to side without exertion to him-
self. Great care must be taken in nursing malignant
diphtheria as it is a most deadly form of the disease,
and very infectious. The child is frequently very rest-
less and difficult to keep covered, so he must be pinned
loosely in a blanket, as he becomes cold very quicjkly,
and takes time to get warm again; warm packs help to
allay the restlessness. If the throat is very swollen and
painful, hot foments may give relief.
Diet.
Fluids only are given until the throat improves, and
they are best given with a spoon. If there be a tendency
to vomit, Mellin's Food and whey, or whey only, may be
given; nasal feeding may be necessary.
The urine must be measured and saved each day for
examination; albumen is usually found in these cases,
and the urine is generally scanty. Haematuria is some-
times present, and suppression of urine is a fatal sign.
As paralysis is a serious and frequent complication
of diphtheria it should be carefully looked for any time
after the first week of the illness and reported at once.
The symptoms of paralysis are difficulty in swallowing,
coughing on taking liquids, regurgitation of fluids
through the nose, a nasal tone of voice, loss of power in
the limbs, strabismus, and heart failure.
The pulse rate should be taken frequently and re-
ported ; a sub normal temperature associated with a
rapid pulse denotes danger. In some cases the pulse is


very rapid before death, but in others it becomes very
slow. The symptoms of heart failure are usually a very
slow pulse, persistent vomiting, cold extremities, great
restlessness, cyanosis, and in some cases diarrhoea.
V. —WOUND DIPHTHERIA.
The nursing of wound diphtheria is much the same
as for an ordinary ease of pharyngeal diphtheria. The
patient must be kept strictly lying down, and the pulse
carefully watched as in every other case. After anti-
toxin has been given, the wound, which is usually covered
with membrane, is treated with foments of Liq. Sod.
Chlor. 1 in 8, or foments of any other antiseptic ordered.
If there is a cavity it is usually syringed out with a weak
solution of an antiseptic, the same care being taken with
swabs and utensils as in other cases.
Light, nourishing diet is given.
VI .—DIPHTHERIA OF THE EYE.
Diphtheria of the eye is treated in the usual manner,
with small doses of antitoxin given subcutaneously. The
eye infected is bathed frequently with a Aveak solution
of an antiseptic, usually boracic acid, the eye being
Aviped with a separate swab each time, and care being-
taken that the sivabs are destroyed at once. Drops or
the painting of the lids may be ordered. If only one
eye is affected the other should be covered with a
Duller’s shield. The child’s hands should be secured so
that he cannot rub his eye or spread the infection.
VII.—CHRONIC NASAL DIPHTHERIA.
The symptoms of this form of the disease are a
more or less profuse blood-stained nasal discharge con-
taining the specific germs, and nasal obstruction Avith


out general symptoms. It is usually treated with small
doses of antitoxin, and frequent nasal douches with a
weak solution of some antiseptic. The same precautions
against infection should be observed as in more severe
cases, the germs being virulent and capable of causing
a very severe attack in another person.
VIII.—AURAL DIPHTHERIA.
The symptoms of aural diphtheria are similar to those
of nasal diphtheria—a more or less copious discharge
containing the specific germs, but without general
symptoms. One or both ears may be affected.
It is usually treated with small doses of antitoxin,
given subcutaneously, and by frequent syringing of the
ears with a weak solution of boracic acid or carbolic
acid lotion, or any other antiseptic ordered. The syringe
must be able to stand boiling, and an ordinary glass one
is generally used. If the child is inclined to struggle
he should be rolled mummy-wise in a blanket, and the
nozzle of the syringe should be protected with a small
piece of rubber tubing. A small dressing mackintosh
covered with a towel having been placed around the
patient’s neck, he should be turned towards one side,
leaving room to place a tray under the ear which is to
be syringed. The temperature of the lotion should be
about 95 degrees.
In applying the lotion take hold of the affected ear
with the left hand and draw it gently backwards and
upwards; then, after filling the syringe and expelling
all the air, place the nozzle just within the opening of
the ear, depress the handle so as to direct the flow of
fluid upwards, and inject slowly and gently. When the
returned fluid is quite clear, the ear should be well dried
with a small piece of absorbent wool wrapped round a
probe, or, better still, round the end of a wooden, match,


which may be destroyed. A drop or two of rectified
spirits is then often dropped into the ear, the patient
lying the while on the opposite side. The
opening should be tightly packed with absorbent wool to
absorb any further discharge. If the child is inclined
to pick the wool out of his ears they should be covered
with a bandage or his hands secured. The usual pre-
cautions against infection must be observed.
W. C. Penfold & Co.. Printers, 183 Pitt Street. Sydney.
